Leaders in Homoeopathic Therapeutics
E. B. Nash
Leaders in Homoeopathic Therapeutics. Philadelphia: Boericke & Tafel, 1899 (second edition).
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/b20409497).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

LEADERS


IN


Homoeopathic  Therapeutics.


BY


E.  B.  NASH,  M.  D.


PHILADELPHIA  :
BOERICKE  &  TAFEL.

The  HOMCEOPATHIcfl^UBLISHmG  Co.,

12.WARV/1CK  LANE,  LONDON.  E,C


V

/


COPYRIGHT

BY

BOERICKE;  &  TAFEIv.
1898.


T.  B.  &  H.  B.  COCHRAN,  PRINTERS,
LANCASTER,  PA.


WELLCOMF  INSTITUTE

LIBRARY

Coll.

welMOmec

Call
No.

I" To  My  Wife,

My  lyOVING  AND  FaITHFUIv  Co-IyABORER,

Sympathizing  with  Me  in  Triai,,
Rejoicing  with  Me  in  Success,
I  Gratefully  Dedicate
this  Book.

E.  B.  nash.


PREFACE.


For  offering  this  book  to  the  profession,  I  have  no  apology
to  make,  for  I  claim  my  right  to  do  so  ;  and  if  anyone  finds
imperfections  in  it,  remember  I  lay  no  claim  to  perfection.  I
can  offer  severe  criticism  myself.

I  will,  however,  state  in  brief  my  object  in  writing  as  I
have.

First. — To  fasten  upon  the  mind  of  the  reader  the
strongest  points  in  each  remedy.  Good  off-hand  prescribing
can  be  done  in  simple  uncomplicated  cases  if  we  have  fixed
in  our  minds  for  ready  use,  the  charaderzstzc  sym-ptoms.

The  elder  I^ippe  was  remarkable  for  such  ability.

Second. — To  try  to  discourage  the  disposition  to  quarrel
over  Symptomatology  and  Pathology.  Neither  can  be  ruled
out,  and  it  is  foolish  for  our  school  to  divide  on  such  a  bone  of
contention.  Every  symptom  has  its  pathological  significance,
but  we  cannot  always  give  it  in  words  ;  but  the  fact  that  it
has  such  meaning  is  sufiicieut  reason  for  prescribing  on  the
Sympioni  or  Symptoms  without  insisting  on,  or  trying  to  give,
the  explanation.

Third. — To  insist  on  the  fact  that  the  question  of  dose  is
still  an  open  one,  and  so  I  have  taken  pains  to  give  the  dose
I  have  found  best,  not  insisting  that  anyone  is  bound  to  give
the  same  ;  but  it  is  fair  to  say  that  if  they  use  a  different  one
and  fail,  they  must  blame  themselves,  not  me.

Fourth. — To  condemn  the  abuse  of  drugs,  both  in  the
old  school  and  ours.

If  there  is  any  one  point  in  the  Homceopathic  system  of
Therapeutics  that  recommends  it  before  that  of  the  old  school,
it  is  that  we  have  discovered  a  law  by  which  we  are  able  to


6  PREFACE.

apply  remedies  for  the  curing  of  the  sick  without  entailing
upon  them  drug  effects,  often  more  serious  than  the  original
disease.

No  honest  man  of  either  school  ought  to  object  to  such
an  improvement  in  the  science  of  therapeutics.

Fifth. — I  have  hoped  to  so  write  as  to  induce  any  old
school  ph'ysician,  who  could  overcome  prejudice  so  far  as  to
read  any  or  all  of  this  book,  to  experiment  along  the  lines  I
have  indicated,  believing  that  any  such  physician,  of  sound
head  and  honest  heart  will  be  irresistibly  led  to  give  Homceo-
pathy  a  large,  and  perhaps  finally,  the  largest  place  in  his
confidence  and  practice.  Finally  to  express,  after  nearly  forty
years  of  consciencious  experimentation,  my  firm  and  confirmed
belief  in  the  Similimum,  the  single  remedy  and  the  minimum
dose.

Thanking  the  profession  in  general  for  their  help  to  me,
I  reciprocate  by  offering  my  humble  contribution  to  an  already
valuable  homoeopathic  literature.

E.  B.  N.

Courtland,  N.  Y. ,  November  ^th,  1898.


INTRODUCTION.


To  My  Colleagues^  Young  and  Old:

I  desire  in  this  form  to  put  on  record  things  new  and
old  in  the  practice  of  medicine,  as  I  have  found  them,  in  a
professional  career  of  over  thirty  years.

In  my  younger  days  I  found  great  pleasure  and  profit
in  reading  the  writings  of  Hering,  Dunham,  Wells,  Lippe
and  others,  who  have  now  ceased  from  their  labors  and
gone  to  their  well-earned  rest.

I  have  carefully  tested  their  teachings,  and  now  that  my
own  hair  begins  to  grow  frosty,  I  desire  to  leave  some  tes-
timonial to  the  truth  of  those  teachings.  My  aim  is  not  to
write  a  complete  Materia  Medica,  nor  yet  an  exclusive
work  on  practice,  though  it  may  partake  of  the  character
of  both,  but  rather  facts  and  observations  in  practice  and
principles,  which  I  have  abundant  reasons  for  believing
true  and  reliable.

While  I  may  not  hope  always  to  instruct  those  of  my  pro-
fessional brethren  who  are  contemporaries  and  abreast  with
me  in  professional  attainments  and  experience,  I  do  hope
not  to  tire,  but  rather  to  entertain  them,  at  least  a  part  of
the  time  ;  and  still  more  do  I  hope  to  be  a  real  help  to  the
beginner,  even  as  I  myself  was  helped.

I  do  not  propose  to  adopt  the  usual  way  by  beginning

with  Aconite  and  ending  with  Zincum^  but  to  follow  the

bent  of  my  inclinations,  or,  as  it  is  sometimes  expressed,  the

movings  of  the  spirit ;  and  may  I  not  here  invoke  the  aid

of  the  spirits  of  the  immortal  Hahnemann,  Boenninghausen
2


6


INTRODUCTION.


and  the  galaxy  of  bright  names  that  adorn  the  fair  page  of
the  history  of  Homoeopathy  to  help  me.

Finally  I  desire  in  every  chapter  to  write  something  use-
ful to  somebody,  and  if  in  any  part  of  this  work  I  should
give  expression  to  anything  wrong  I  here  declare  once  for
all  my  entire  willingness  to  be  forgiven.

E.  B.  Nash,  M.  D.,

Cortland^  N.  Y.


LKADERS  IN

Homoeopathic  Therapeutics.


NUX  VOMICA.

Among  the  symptoms  called  characteristic,  as  given  by
Constantine  Hering,  are  these  :

"  After  aromatics  in  food  or  as  medicine,  particularly
ginger,  pepper,  etc.,  and  after  almost  any  kind  of  so-called
"  hot  "  medicines  (Goullon)."  Also,  "  will  also  benefit  per-
sons who  have  been  drugged  by  mixtures,  bitters,  herbs
and  so-called  vegetable  pills,  etc. — (B.)."

This  is  putting  it  in  too  wholesale  a  fashion.  It  would
be  true  if  said  that  Nux  vomica  will  often  benefit  such
cases.  The  fact  is  that  it  will  benefit  those  cases  in  which
the  use  of  such  drugs,  aromatics,  pills,  etc.,  has  brought
about  a  condition  that  simulates  the  symptoms  produced
in  the  provings  of  Nux  vomica^  or  in  cases  to  which  it  is
homoeopathic,  and  no  others.  Another  fact  is  that  these
things  often  do  produce  such  a  condition,  and  that  is  one
reason  why  so  many  physicians  are  almost  invariably  pre-
scribing Nux  vomica  the  first  thing,  in  cases  coming  from
allopathic  hands,  without  even  examining  the  case.  But  it
is  unscientific.  We  have  a  law  of  cure,  and  there  are
cases  in  which  the  Nux  vomica  condition  is  7tot  present
but  another  more  similar  remedy  must  be  given. It  does


8


NUX  VOMICA.


not  alter  the  case  to  say,  "  Well,  I  did  not  know  what  had
been  given,"  for  Nux  vomica  will  neither  antidote  the  ef-
fects of  the  drug  poison  nor  cure  the  disease  condition
unless  it  is  homoeopathically  indicated,  especially  if  given
in  the  dynamic  form.

Here  are  two  more  of  Hering's  card  symptoms,  in  which
are  given  the  temperaments  that  are  most  susceptible  to
the  action  oi  Ntcx  :

"  Over-sensitiveness,  every  harmless  word  offends,  every
little  noise  frightens,  anxious  and  beside  themselves,  they
cannot  bear  the  least,  even  suitable  medicines. — (B.)."  And,
"  For  very  particular,  careful,  zealous  persons,  inclined
to  get  excited  and  angry,  or  of  a  spiteful,  malicious  dis-
position."

This  is  a  graphic  picture  of  what  is  called  the  "Nervous
temperament,"  and  practice  corroborates  the  truth  of  the
value  of  these  temperamatic  indications  for  this  remedy  ;
but  there  are  a  number  of  remedies  that  have  as  markedly
this  so-called  nervous  temperament,  such  as  Chamomilla^
Ignatia^  Staphisagria^  and  others.

So  no  physician  would  be  justified  in  prescribing  Nux
vomica  on  temperament  alone,  be  the  indication  ever  so
clear.  The  whole  case  must  come  in.  There  seems  to  be
another  kind  of  condition  belonging  to  this  nervous  group,
of  Nux  vomica  that  has  not  so  much  of  the  excitable  in  it.
"Hypochondriasis,  with  studious  men,  sitting  too  much  at
home,  with  abdominal  complaints  and  costiveness."

Now,  if  you  take  a  second  look  at  these  cases,  you  will
find  that  a  very  little  irritation  will  arouse  this  kind  out
of  their  hypochondriac  gloom  and  make  them  angry  or
irritable  similar  to  the  first  condition,  so  that  on  the  whole
the  first  proves  to  be  the  predominant  one.

If  the  gloomy  or  hypochondriac  condition  of  mind  per-


NUX  VOMICA.


9


sists,  we  will  more  likely  have  to  look  to  such  remedies  as
Aurum^  Nat.  7nur.^  etc.,  to  find  the  true  simillimum.  These
nervous  symptoms  of  mind  or  body  are  wonderful  leaders
to  the  selection  of  the  right  remedy.

Frequent  a7td  ineffectual  desire  to  defecate  or  passi^ig
but  small  qiiaiitities  of  fcEces  at  each  attempt.''''

This  symptom  is  pure  gold.  There  are  a  few  other
remedies  that  have  it,  but  none  so  positively  and  persist-
ently.

It  is  the  guiding  symptom  in  the  constipation  to  which
Nux  vomica  is  homoeopathic,  and  in  my  experience  will
then,  and  then  only,  cure.

Carrol  Dunham  wrote  over  twenty-five  years  ago  on  this
symptom.  He  said,  in  eflfect — while  Nux  vomica  or  Bry-
onia are  equally  remedies  for  constipation  there  was  never
any  reason  for  confounding  them,  or  for  alternating  them,  as
they  were  so  different.  The  Nux  vomica  constipation  was
caused  by  irregular  peristaltic  action  of  the  intestines,
hence  the  frequent  ineffectual  desire;  but  the  Bryonia  con-
stipation was  caused  by  lack  of  secretion  in  the  intestines.
There  was  with  Bryonia  absolutely  no  desire,  and  the
stools  were  dry  and  hard  as  if  burnt.

And  the  above  symptom  is  found  not  in  constipation
alone.  "  It  is  always  present  in  dysentery.  The  stools,  though
very  frequently  consisting  of  slimy  mucus  and  blood,
are  small  and  very  unsatisfactory.  Dr.  P.  P.  Wells  pointed
out  the  very  reliable  additional  symptom  for  NtLx  vomica
in  dysentery — that  the  pains  were  very  greatly  relieved  for
a  short  time  after  every  stool.  This  is  not  so  with  Mer-
cury^ but  the  pain  and  tenesmus  continues  after  the  stool,  as
it  is  sometimes  well  expressed  as  ''a  never-get-done"  feel-
ing. But  it  makes  little  difference  whether  the  patient  is
afflicted  with  constipation,  dysentery,  diarrhoea  or  other


lO


NUX  VOMICA.


diseases,  if  we  have  this  frequent  ineffectual  desire  for
stool  present  we  always  think  of  Nux  vomica  first,  and
give  it.  unless  other  symptoms  contra-indicate  it.

"  Catamenia  a  feiv  days  before  the  time^  and  7'ather  too
copious^  or  keeping  on  several  days  longer^  with  complaints
at  the  onset ^  which  remain  until  after  it  is  over^

This  is  also  an  oft-verified  symptom  of  Nux  vomica.  Of
course  there  are  many  other  remedies  for  too  early  or  too
copious  menstruation.  Calcarea  ostrearum  is  one  of  them,
but  the  temperament  of  the  Calcarea  patient  is  not  at  all
like  Nux  vomica.  I  have  found  that  patients  that  required
Nux  vomica  for  this  condition  could  hardly  ever  take  Pul-
satilla for  anything.  For  instance,  if  the  patients  had  a
green,  bland,  thick  discharge  and  you  gave  them  Pulsatilla
it  would  often  bring  on  too  early  and  profuse  menstruation.
In  such  cases  I  had  to  give  Sepia^  which  would  act  like  a
charm  on  the  catarrh  and  not  aggravate  the  menses.

These  cases  calling  for  Nux  vomica  often  occur  in  young
girls  or  women  at  the  climacteric.  We  often  have  the
characteristic  rectal  troubles  also  present.  The  pains  are
pressing  down  and  extend  to  the  rectum  and  sometimes
also  to  the  neck  of  the  bladder.  Inefficient  labor  pains^
extending  to  rectum,  with  desire  for  stool  or  frequent  uri-
nation, are  quickly  relieved,  and  become  efficient,  after  the
administration  of  a  dose  of  Nux  vomica  200.

If,  in  addition,  your  menorrhagic  patient  is  costive,  has
gastric  troubles,  and  especially  if  generally  <  in  the  morn-
ing, we  have  an  almost  sure  remedy  in  Nux  vomica.

''''Feels  worse  in  the  morning.,  soon  after  awaking.,  also
after  mental  exertion;  after  eating  and  in  cold  air.^^  If
Boenninghausen  had  never  done  anything  but  give  us  his
incomparable  chapter  on  aggravations  and  ameliorations,
this  alone  would  have  immortalized  him.


NUX  VOMICA.


II


It  seems  to  me,  after  profiting  by  them  in  a  practice  of
over  thirty  years,  it  is  impossible  to  over-estimate  them.

But  some  one  will  say,  perhaps — there  are  twenty-eight
remedies  in  Allen's  Boenninghausen^  in  large  caps,  that  are
worse  in  the  morning.  That  does  not  seem  like  coming
very  close  to  a  choice  of  the  single  remedy.

But,  when  we  look  at  those  that  are  worse  in  the  even-
ing, we  find  thirty-eight  remedies,  and  only  eight  of  them
occurring  under  both  morning  and  evening,  and  these  eight
are  worse  not  generally^  but  rather  in  some  especial  symp-
toms. For  instance,  in  Rhus  the  loose  cough  is  worse  in
the  morning,  the  tight,  dry  one  in  the  evening.

So  you  see  that  we  are  quite  on  the  way  to  making  a
choice  after  all.  But  now  take  all  the  aggravations  of
Nicx  vomica  as  regards  time,  mind,  gastric,  temperature,
etc.,  where  can  you  find  the  combination  so  prominently
under  any  other  remedy  ?  Of  course  those  physicians  who
are  not  able  to  appreciate  anything  but  pathological  symp-
toms have  not  much  use  for  these  modalities.  But  one
thing  is  certain,  they  cannot  do  as  good  homoeopathic
work  without  as  with  them.

"  Great  heat^  whole  body  burning  hot^  especially  face  red
and  hot^  yet  the  patient  cannot  move  or  uncover  in  the  least
without  feeling  chilly.''''  This  condition  of  feverishness  is
of  common  occurrence  and  yields  to  Nux  vomica  with  a
promptness  that  would  delight  the  heart  of  a  Lippe.  It
makes  no  difference  what  the  name  of  the  fever,  whether
inflammatory,  remittent,  or  fever  accompanying  sore
throat,  rheumatism,  or  any  other  local  trouble,  if  we  have
these  indications,  we  may  confidently  give  this  remedy
and  will  not  often  be  disappointed  in  the  result.  It  took
me  years  to  learn  the  value  of  this  symptom,  because  I
was  a  routinist  and  thought  that  Aconite,  Belladonna,  or


12


NUX  VOMICA.


both  in  alternation,  must  be  given  in  all  cases  where  high
fever  was  present.  So  I  have  some  sympathy  for  young
physicians  now,  who  from  false  teachings  have  been  led
into  the  same  error.  But  let  me  say  here,  for  the  benefit
of  all  such,  that  there  is  a  much  better  way  :  namely — to
closely  individualize,  which  is  not  always  difficult ;  give
the  single  remedy  in  the  potentized  form,  giving  it  time
to  act,  and  waiting  for  reaction  before  repeating.

Of  course  low  potencies  will  often  cure,  and  that  in
spite  of  alternation,  over  dosing,  and  frequent  repetition.
But  they  will  often  fail,  and,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases,
will  not  accomplish  anything  like  the  satisfactory  results
of  the  true  simillimum,  the  single  remedy,  and  the  mini-
mum dose.

''''After  eating;  sour  taste^  pressure  in  the  stomach  an
hour  or  two  afterwards^  with  hypocho7tdriacal  mood^
pyrosis^  tightness  about  waist ;  must  loosen  clothiitg^  con-
fused^ cannot  ttse  mind  two  or  three  hours  after  a  meal^
epigastrium  bloated^  with  pressure  as  from  a  stone  in  the
stomach.''''

This  is  a  group  of  symptoms  as  given  in  "Guiding
Symptoms."  There  are  so  many  symptoms  given  under
the  digestive  organs  that  it  shows  that  Nux  vomica  has
really  a  very  wide  range  of  action  in  gastric  troubles.  And
there  are  no  really  characteristic  and  peculiar  symptoms  to
mention,  unless  it  be  the  peculiar  aggravation  of  stomach
symptoms  ^^an  hour  or  two  after  eating instead  of  imme-
diately after,  as  is  the  case  with  Nux  moschata  and  Kali
bichromicum.  The  pressure  as  from  a  stone  occurs  also
under  Bryonia  and  Pulsatilla.

More  stress  may  be  placed  upon  the  causes  of  the  stom-
ach, liver,  and  abdominal  complaints  for  which  Nux
vomica  is  the  remedy. For  instance,  coffee,  alcoholic


NUX  VOMICA.


13


drinks,  debauchery,  abuse  of  drugs,  business  anxiety,
sedentary  habits,  broken  rest  from  long  night  watching,
too  high  living,  etc.  So  we  find  that  Nux  vomica  is
adapted  to  complaints  arising  from  these  causes,  which  is
abundantly  verified  in  practice.

One  thing  is  very  apt  to  be  present  in  these  cases  ;
namely — the  very  characteristic  rectal  symptoms  already
noticed.

We  ought  not  to  leave  Nux  vomica  without  speaking  of
its  great  efficiency  in  headaches  and  backaches.

The  headaches  often  occur  in  conjunction  with  the
gastric,  hepatic,  abdominal  and  hsemorrhoidal  affections.
Here  also  the  modalities,  more  than  the  character  of  the
pain,  decide  the  choice.  The  aggravations  are :  from  mental
exertion,  chagrin  or  anger;  in  open  air  (opposite  jR?//^^3!/27/a),
on  awaking  in  the  morning,  after  eating,  from  abuse  of  coffee
or  spirits,  sour  stomach,  in  sunshine,  on  stooping,  from
light  and  noise,  when  moving  or  opening  the  eyes  [Bry-
onia)^ from  coughing,  high  living  or  highly  seasoned  food,
in  stormy  weather,  after  drugging,  from  masturbation,
from  constipation  or  hseuiorrhoids.

These  headaches  may  or  may  not  localize  in  any  parti-
cular part  of  the  head.

The  patient  is  just  as  apt  to  say  in  one  part  of  the  head
as  another,  and  will  often  say,  in  no  particular  part,  "it
feels  badly  and  aches  all  over."

The  pains  in  the  back  are  more  peculiar.  The  patient
is  apt  to  have  the  backache  in  bed,  and  must  sit  up  to  turn
over ;  or  turning  or  twisting  the  body  when  standing  or
sitting  is  especially  painful.  The  pain  is  mostly  located  in
the  lumbar  region,  though  it  may  be  in  the  dorsal,  and  is
often  in  connection  (like  y^scuhts  hipp.)  with  haemorrhoids.
^sculiLs  is  especially  <  from  walking  or  stooping.  Back-


14


PULSATILLA.


ache,  caused  by  masturbation,  finds  one  of  its  best  remedies
in  Niix  vomica.  We  might  here  launch  out  into  a  descrip-
tion of  the  general  action  of  Nux  vomica  upon  the  spinal
cord,  including  the  motor  and  sensory  centers,  etc.,  but
that  can  all  be  found  in  other  works.  So  now  we  will
leave  ISux^  except  as  we  refer  to  it  in  comparison,  while
writing  of  other  remedies.  In  reviewing  what  we  have
written,  we  are  impressed  that  some  may  be  led  to  think
that  we  have  narrowed  down  the  sphere  of  this  truly  great
remedy  too  much.  I^et  us  say  here,  that  it  is  not  our  aim
in  this  work  to  write  exhaustively  upon  any  remedy,  but
to  point  out  a  few  of  the  chief  virtues  and  characteristic
symptoms,  around  which  all  the  rest  revolve.

To  write  exhaustively  would  be  to  write  a  complete
Materia  Medica.

In  actual  practice  there  are  two  kinds  of  cases  that  come
for  with  great  certainty  of  success  on  the  symptoms  that
are  styled  characteristic  and  peculiar.  (Organon,  §  153.)
The  other  is  where  in  all  the  case  there  are  no  such
symptoms  appearing;  then  there  is  only  one  way;  viz.,  to
hunt  for  the  remedy  that,  in  its  pathogenesis,  contains  what
is  called  the  tout  ensemble  of  the  case.  The  majority  of
the  cases,  however,  do  have,  standing  out  like  beacon
lights,  some  characteristic  or  key-note  symptoms  which
guide  to  the  study  of  the  remedy  that  has  the  whole  case
in  its  pathogenesis.

PULSATILLA.

The  disposition  of  Pulsatilla  is  almost  the  opposite  of
that  of  Nux  vomica.  Nux  vomica  is  called  the  man's
remedy  and  Pulsatilla  the  woman's  remedy. This  means


PUIvSATlLLA.


15


simply  that  the  complaints  of  one  are  found  oftener  with
men,  while  those  of  the  other  are  found  oftener  with  women.

Now  to  call  attention  to  another  of  Hering's  characteris-
tics, and  I  know  of  no  one  who  has  expressed  them  better,
we  have — Mild ^  gentle  and  yielding  disposition;  cries  at
everything  ;  is  sad  and  desponding ;  weeps  aboiU  every-
thing; can  hardly  give  her  syinptoms  on  account  of  weep-
ing?^ And  again:  '•''Sandy  hair^  blue  eyes^pale  face^  inclined
to  silent  grief  with  submissiveness.'^''  Here  we  have  a  de-
scription of  the  Pulsatilla  temperament  as  near  as  words
can  express  it,  and  it  is  a  fact  that  when  you  find  it  in  a
patient,  no  matter  what  the  pathological  condition,  Pulsa-
tilla will  almost  surely  help.  There  are  few  exceptions.  So
we  learn  not  to  put  too  much  stress  on  pathological  states
to  the  neglect  of  symptomological  conditions.

Pulsatilla  is  a  remedy  of  wide  range  of  action.  Far-
rington  mentions  its  use  in  seventy-three  different  affec-
tions, and  has  not  by  any  means  exhausted  them  all  ;
if  you  study  Pulsatilla  in  Hughes'  Pharmacodynamics  you
will  notice  that,  although  he  recommends  it  in  many  dis-
eases, he  does  not,  and  evidently  is  not  able  to  talk  as
much  from  a  pathological  standpoint,  especially  from  the
provings  of  the  drug,  as  he  does  of  many  other  reme-
dies. It  seems  to  me  like  folly  to  undertake  to  pose  as
either  an  exclusive  pathologist  or  symptomatologist.  Both
pathology  and  symptomatology  are  valuable  and  insepar-
able ;  neither  can  be  excluded.

There  is  another  condition  of  Pulsatilla  which  may  be
considered  characteristic,  and  which  Hering  does  not  men-
tion in  his  cards;  viz.,  changeableness  of  symptoms.  All
that  Hering  said  was  "  wandering  pains  shift  rapidly  from
one  part  to  another^  also  with  swelling  and  redness  of  the
joints^ Now  if  this  occurs  in  rheumatism,  and  espe-

1*


i6


PULSATILLA.


cially  if  in  the  Pulsatilla  temperament,  we  may  perform  a
miracle  of  curing  with  this  remedy.  But  this  shifting  or
changeableness  is  not  confined  to  the  pains,  which  may  be
either  rheumatic  or  neuralgic,  but  is  found  in  the  disposi-
tion. The  patient  is  now  irritable,  then  tearful  again,  or
mild  and  pleasant ;  but,  even  with  the  irritableness,  is  easily
made  to  cry.  The  haemorrhages  flow,  and  stop,  and  flow
again  ;  continually  changing.  The  stools  in  diarrhoea
constantly  change  in  color;  they  are  green,  yellow,  white,
watery  or  shiny ;  as  Guernsey  expresses  it — "  no  two  stools
alike."  This  is  often  found  in  the  so-called  cholera-infan-
tum  or  entero-colitis  of  children  in  hot  weather.

We  sometimes  have  patients  come  into  the  office,  and
find,  in  trying  to  take  their  case,  no  "  head  or  tail  "  to  it.
It  is  mixed.  The  suffering  and  pain  is  now  here,  now
there.  The  symptoms  are  contradicting,  as  we  term  them.
This  condition  should  always  call  attention  to  Pulsatilla
and  it  will  often  clear  up  and  cure  the  case.  Ignatia  also
has  these  ever-changing,  hysterical  and  contradictory
symptoms.

Pulsatilla  like  Nux  vomica  is  a  great  remedy  for  dis-
orders of  digestion.  Symptoms — '^Bad  taste  in  the  jnouth^
especially  early  in  the  niorniitg^  or  nothing  tastes  good^  or  no
taste  at  ally

"  Great  dryness  of  the  mouth  in  the  morning,  without
thirst.  Stomach  disordered  from  cakes,  pastry ,  rich  food  ;
particularly  fat  pork:'  (I  would  say — fat  meats  gen-
erally.) These  are  reliable  symptoms,  as  given  in  Hering's
cards,  and  are  not  very  much  like  the  symptoms  of  Nux
vomica,  which  is  not  disturbed  by  fats,  but  on  the  contrary
likes  them  and  they  agree.

The  bad  taste  in  the  mouth  is  persistent  and  the  loss  of
taste  is  frequent,  as  is  also  the  loss  of  smell. How  peculiar

f


PULSATILLA.


17


that  Pulsatilla  should  have  dry  mouth  and  no  thirst,  while
Merairius  should  have  characteristically  moist  mouth
with  intense  thirst.

I  do  not  know  that  I  could  give  a  satisfactory  pathologi-
cal reason  for  this.  Is  it  not  a  good  thing  that  we  do  not
have  to  give  the  pathological  explanation  for  such  a  symp-
tom before  we  can  use  it  to  cure  our  patients  ?  To  be
sure  there  is  always  a  reason  for  these  things,  but  we  do  not
need  know  what  it  is  before  we  can  utilize  the  symptom.

The  merest  tyro  in  prescribing  could  hardly  mistake
the  symptoms  of  Pulsatilla  for  those  of  Nux  vomica^  and
yet  I  have  found  physicians  prescribing  these  remedies  in
alternation,  at  intervals  of  two  or  three  hours.

Having  called  attention  to  the  action  of  Pulsatilla  on
the  digestive  organs,  which  are  lined  with  mucous  mem-
branes, we  now  wish  to  notice  that  it  has  a  peculiar  action
on  mucous  surfaces  generally.  This  peculiarity  consists  in
the  character  of  the  discharges  from  them.  They  are
thick^  bland  and  yellowish  green.  These  is  found  in  nasal
catarrh ;  leucorrhoea ;  expectoration  ;  gonorrhoea  ;  in  ulcers ;
from  the  ears  and  eyes  ;  in  short,  from  every  mucous  outlet
of  the  body.

The  expectoration  of  Pulsatilla^  which  is  thick,
green  and  bland,  tastes  bitter,  while  that  of  Sta7i7ium  is
sweet  and  that  of  Kali  hydriodicum  and  Sepia  salty.
One  of  Schuessler's  tissue  remedies  {Kali  sulphuricuni)
greatly  resembles  Pulsatilla  in  the  character  of  its  dis-
charges, and  not  only  that,  but  also  in  its  wandering  pains,
evening  aggravations  and  ameliorations  in  cool,  open  air.
Kali  hydriodicum  is  also  ameliorated  in  open  air  and
worse  in  a  warm  room.  Now  that  we  are  on  the  subject
of  greenish  discharges,  especially  the  expectoration,  we
will  mention  also  Car  bo  veg.^  Lycopodimn^  Paris  ^  Phos-


«


i8


PUI^ATlLlwA.


phoriLs  and  Sulphur.  Of  course,  the  otlier  symptoms
must  decide  the  choice  between  several  remedies  having
one  symptom  in  common.

A  certain  physician  in  Albany,  N.  Y.,  was  called  in  con-
sultation on  a  so-called  case  of  phthisis  pulmonalis.  The
case  was  in  allopathic  hands.  After  carefully  examining
the  case,  he  was  asked :  "  What  is  your  diagnosis,  doctor?"
"  Stannum,''  said  the  doctor.  "  What  !  "  "  Stanniim,''  re-
plied the  doctor.  Stan7ium  was  the  diagnosis  of  the  rem-
edy, not  the  disease. It  was  given  and  cured  the  patient.

Now  we  come  to  the  curative  action  of  Pulsatilla  in  af-
fections of  the  female  genital  organs.  The  fact  that  it  has
such  a  decided  action  upon  these,  added  to  the  womanish
disposition  of  this  remedy,  is  additional  reason  why  it  is
called  the  woman  remedy,  as  we  said  when  writing  upon
the  disposition  and  temperament.  Catamenia  too  late  and
scanty,  or  suppressed,  particularly  by  getting  feet  wet,^^
and  "  Painful  menstruation  with  great  restlessness,  tossing
in  every  possible  direction,"  and  we  have  already  men-
tioned the  changeable  characteristic  in  the  flow  of  the
menses,  viz.,  they  stop  and  flow,  stop  and  flow  again,  etc.
So,  also,  the  menorrhagia.

In  these  menstrual  troubles  of  Pulsatilla  the  wetting  or
chilling  of  the  feet  is  of  prime  importance,  and  acting
upon  it,  you  may  save  your  patient  from  consumption  as  a
result  of  such  exposure  and  suppression.  Now  don't  pour
down  mother  tincture  of  Pulsatilla  by  the  ten-drop  doses,
as  is  the  manner  of  those  who  do  not  believe  in  potentized
remedies.  You  may  give  Pulsatilla  in  the  high,  higher,
and  highest  potencies,  and  confidently  expect  the  best  re-
sults. I  have  often  seen  the  delayed  menses  of  young
girls  of  Pulsatilla  temperament  appear  promptly  and  nat-
urally under  the  M.  M.  of  Swan  and  c.  M.  of  Fincke.  So


it


#  PULSATILLA.


19


have  I  seen  them  restored  after  suppression,  by  the  same.
Now  if  you  should  try  one  of  these  very  high  potencies  in
a  case  of  menstrual  difficulty,  and  it  should  not  succeed,
don't  jump  to  the  conclusion  that  I  have  been  mistaken,
for  Pidsatilla  is  not  the  only  remedy  for  such  cases.  Ho-
moeopathy is  too  often  blamed  when  the  blame  lies  in  the
more  cases  of  painful  menstruation  than  Pulsatilla^  and
that  is  not  a  cure-all,  either. Study  up  yoitr  case.

But  after  all,  the  prime  characteristic  of  this  wonderful
remedy  lies  in  its  modality.  "  Better  in  cold  air  and  from
cold  applications y  The  patient  is  not  only  better  gener-
ally in  the  open,  cool  air,  and  worse  in  a  warm,  closed
room,  but  local  affections  also,  as  for  instance,  the  vertigo ;
pain  in  head,  eyes,  ears ;  itching  of  eyelids ;  roaring ;
coryza ;  pain  in  face ;  toothache ;  colic ;  labor  pains ;  sci-
atica ;  ulcers,  are  all  better  in  open  air.  ^

Warm  applications  aggravate,  warm  room  oppresses ;
heat  of  bed  aggravates  itching  {Mercurius)  and  chilblains ;
cold  drinks  retained,  warm  vomited.

Other  remedies  have  aggravations  from  heat,  but  Pulsa-
tilla leads  them  all.  The  relief  from  cold  and  cool,  open
air  is  as  positive  as  that  of  warmth  or  heat  is  for  Arseni-
cu7n.

Now  to  close  our  remarks  on  Pulsatilla  we  will  give  a
few  choice  symptoms  without  any  particular  comments
upon  them.

"  Affections  consequent  on  the  abuse  of  Irony  "  Chronic
affections  following  cases  of  badly  managed  measles."
"  Pressure,  or  tying  up  tightly,  relieves  the  headaches."
"  Increased  inclination  to  micturate,  <  whe7t  lyingy
"  Metastasis  of  gonorrhoea  to  testicles."  "  Chilliness,  with
pains,  yet  wants  cool  room." "  One-sided  sweats." "  In-


20  BRYONIA  AIvBA.

flamed  parts  bluish."  "  Pulsations  through  the  whole
body."  "Metastasis  of  mumps  to  mammae  or  testicles."
In  any  of  these  local  affections  we  should  expect  to  find  the
mind  and  modality  of  this  remedy  present  or  not  be  very
confident  of  a  brilliant  cure.


BRYONIA  ALBA.

As  in  Pulsatilla^  so  in  Bryonia^  the  leading  characteristic
lies  in  its  "modality."  Three  words  express  it — aggrava-
tion from  motion.

What  is  aggravated  on  motion  ?  Sufferings  of  almost  any
and  every  kind.  We  will  not  undertake  to  enumerate
them.  All  that  Hering  says  in  his  cards  on  that  line  is —
Joints  red^  swellings  stiffs  with  stitching  pain  from  slightest
motio7i^''''  and  this  so  far  as  it  goes  is  genuine,  but  it  is  only
the  beginning  of  all  the  ailments  that  are  <  on  motion.

Look  in  "  Guiding  Symptoms, "  under  "Motion,"  and
see  the  long  list  of  symptoms  aggravated  by  motion,  and
even  these  do  not  cover  all.  Now  we  begin  to  realize  the
value  of  this  modality.

It  makes  no  difference  what  the  name  of  the  disease,  if
the  patient  feels  greatly  >  by  lying  still  and  suffers  greatly
on  the  slightest  motion,  and  the  more  and  longer  he  moves
the  more  he  suffers,  Bryonia  is  the  first  remedy  to  be
thought  of,  and  it  must  be  very  strong  counter  indications
along  other  lines  that  will  rule  it  out.

Nor  does  it  make  much  difference  what  organ  or  tissue
is  the  seat  of  the  disease,  mucous,  serous  or  muscular,  the
same  rule  applies.

Another  very  valuable  modality  of  Bryonia  is  again  ex-
pressed in  three words  —  amelioration  from  pressure.


BRYONIA  ALBA.


21


This  is  the  reason  the  patient,  much  to  the  astonishment
of  the  nurse,  wants  to  lie  on  the  pai7iful  side  or  part.

No  one  can  realize  the  value  of  these  two  modalities
until  he  has  often  met  them  at  the  sick  bed  and  witnessed
the  prompt  relief  from  the  use  of  Bryonia.

When  writing  upon  Pulsatilla^  we  noticed  the  character-
istic action  of  that  remedy  upon  the  mucous  surfaces.
Here  Bryonia  acts  just  as  characteristically,  but  it  is  so
different.  With  Bryonia  it  is  excessive  dryness  or  lack  of
secretion  in  them.  It  begins  in  the  lips,  which  are
parched,  dry  and  cracked,  and  only  ends  with  the  rectum
and  stools,  which  are  hard  and  dry  as  if  burnt.  The  same
condition  is  undoubtedly  present  in  the  stomach,  which  is
evidenced  by  the  excessive  thirst ;  which  can  only  be  satis-
fied by  large  drafts  of  water ;  a  little  does  not  satisf)'.

The  same  condition  obtains  in  the  lungs  and  bronchia,
which  causes  hard,  dry  cough  with  little  or  no  expectora-
tion, and  with  soreness  and  pain  in  the  chest  when  the
patient  coughs.  The  urine  is  scanty  and  only  exception-
ally (or  as  I  would  express  it  reactionally)  copious.  We
must  remember  that  every  remedy  has  a  dual  action.
These  two  actions  are  termed  primary  and  secondary.  I
think  that  the  so-called  secondary  action  is  only  the  re-
action of  the  organism  against  the  first  or  primary  (so-called)
action  of  the  drug.  For  instance — the  real  action  of
Opium  is  to  produce  sleep  or  stupor,  the  reaction  is  wake-
fulness; oi  Podophyllum^  Aloes.,  etc.,  catharsis,  the  reaction
constipation,  and  I  think  that  the  truly  homoeopathic  cur-
ative must  be  in  accord  with  the  primary  (so-called)  effects
of  every  drug  in  order  to  get  the  best  and  most  radical
cure,  but  if  given  for  the  secondary  (so-called)  symptoms,
the  primary  ones  having  passed  by,  we  should  carefully  in-
quire for  all  the  symptoms  which  have  preceded  those


22


BRYONIA  ALBA.


which  are  present ;  and,  taking  both  past  and  present,  let
them  all  enter  into  the  picture  whose  counterpart  is  to  be
found  in  the  drug  which  is  to  cure.  Any  other  method  is
only  palliative  and  not  curative.

Bryonia  has  also  a  very  decided  effect  upon  the  serous
membranes.  It  is  very  useful  in  the  second  stage  of  in-
flammation, after  the  stage  of  serous  effusion  has  set  in.  In
most  of  these  cases  the  first  stage  has  been  attended  by
symptoms  calling  for  the  exhibition  of  such  remedies  as
Aco7iite^  Belladonna^  Ferrum  phos.^  etc.,  but  not  always;
and  right  here  let  me  call  attention  to  the  most  character-
istic pains  of  this  remedy.  They  are  stitching  pains.
Now  observe,  the  characteristic  pains  of  inflammatory  affec-
tions of  the  serous  membranes  are  stitching  pains ;  this  is
the  reason  why  Bryonia  comes  to  be  such  a  regal  remedy
in  pleuritis,  meningitis,  peritonitis,  pericarditis,  etc.  The
subjective  symptoms  corresponding  to  the  remedy  must  go
down  before  it,  and  the  objectives  must  as  surely  follow.
Only  one  remedy  can  equal  Bryonia  for  stitching  pains,
viz..  Kali  carbonica.  And  there  is  this  difference  between
them:  The  Bryonia  stitches  come  on  or  are  aggravated
by  the  least  motion,  while  those  of  Kali  carbonica  will
occur  whether  the  patient  moves  or  not.  But  in  both
remedies  they  cry  out  sharply  with  the  pains.  Apis  has
pains  which  cause  the  patient  to  cry  out  sharply,  but  they
are  stinging  pains — like  a  bee  sting.  All  these  three  are
o-reat remedies  for effusions  into  serous cavities,  and

o

Sulphur  precedes  and  follows  equally  well  either  one  of
them.

A  word  right  here  in  regard  to  interpolating  Sulphur^
when,  as  we  express  it,  "  the  seemingly  indicated  remedy
does  not  act."  Some  would  stumble  over  that,  and  ask —
as  they  would  have  a  right  to  do — how  about  your  similia.


BRYONIA  ALBA.  23

etc.,  in  such  a  use  of  Sulphurl  I  answer — Sulphur  is  a
remedy  of  wide  range  of  action,  and  covers  more  perfectly
those  conditions  and  symptoms  which  are  the  outgrowth
of  psora  than  any  other  remedy  ;  so  it  does  meet  the  case
complicated  by  psora  very  often,  and  either  cures  it  or  re-
moves the  complication  so  that  the  other  remedies  may  act.
But  remember  it  will  not  always  do  it,  and  other  anti-
psoric  remedies  must  be  chosen.  It  must  be  the  similli-
mum  for  the  psoric  condition.

Bryonia  stands  along  side  of  Nux  vomica  and  Pulsa-
tilla for  disorders  of  alimentation.  All  three  remedies  have
a  sensation  as  of  a  stone  in  the  stomach,  Bryonia  and
N21X  vomica  more  so  than  Pulsatilla.  Bryonia  leads  in
thirst,  Nux  vomica  less,  and  Pulsatilla  little  or  none.  All
have  bad  taste  in  the  mouth ;  Bryonia  and  Pidsatilla  bitter
and  Nux  vomica  sour.  All  have  nausea  and  vomiting;
Bryonia  worse  on  motion,  as  rising  up,  Ncx  vomica  in  the
A.  M.  and  after  eating,  Pulsatilla  in  the  evening  and  also
after  eating.

The  gastric  derangements  of  Bryo7iia  often  occur  as  a
result  of  dietetic  errors  especially  when  warm  weather  sets
in  after  cold.  Those  of  Nux  vomica  more  from  continued
over-eating  and  inactivity,  the  abuse  of  drugs,  coffee,  to-
bacco or  alcoholics ;  Pulsatilla  from  too  rich  foods,  pastries,
fat  foods  and  ice  cream  (in  excess) ;  a  little  ice  cream  feels
good  in  the  Pulsatilla  stomach,  but  much  overdoes  the
matter,  because  it  is  too  rich.

All  three  remedies  have  attacks  of  diarrhoea,  although
constipation  is  most  characteristic  of  Bryonia  and  Nux
vomica,  and  is  only  exceptionally  found  under  Pulsatilla.

Bryonia  diarrhoea  is  worse  in  the  morning,  on  movement,
and  often  occurs  as  an  effect  of  over  heating  in  the  heat  of
summer. Nux  vomica  diarrhoea  is  also  apt  to  be  worse  in


24


BRYONIA  ALBA.


the  morning,  is  mostly  caused  by  over  eating  and  is  apt  to
put  on  the  dysenteric  type.  The  Pulsatilla  diarrhoea  is
more  apt  to  occur  in  the  night,  from  causes  above  men-
tioned, and  is  attended  with  great  rumbling  of  the  bowels.

All  have  white,  sometimes  very  thickly  coated  tongue,
but  taking  into  account  the  causes  of  these  gastric  and
bowel  troubles,  temperament  and  modalities  there  should
not  be  much  difiSculty  in  choosing  the  right  remedy  for
any  case.

So  far  as  temperament  is  concerned,  Bryo7tia  is  like  Nux
vomica^  but  Bryonia  has  much  more  of  the  "  rheumatic
diathesis."  Both  are  easily  irritated  or  angered,  and  are
oftenest  found  indicated  in  spare,  dark-complexioned  sub-
jects. Both  are  aggravated  generally  on  motion,  but
Bryonia  very  much  the  more  so,  while  Pulsatilla  is  some-
times like  Rhus  toxicode^idron  relieved  by  motion.

Now  a  few  special  indications  for  Bryonia  and  we  will
leave  it :

"  Bursting  headache,  as  if  it  would  split  the  head  open,
aggravated  by  stooping ;  coughing ;  ironing ;  opening  or
moving  the  eyes;  moving  any  way  in  hot  weather.  Nausea
and  faintness  when  rising  up,  relieved  when  lying  still.

"Epistaxis  instead  of  menses  (vicarous  menstruation)
also  blood  spitting.

"  Mastitis  ;  breasts  pale,  hot,  hard,  heavy  and  painful.

"  Suppression  of  lochia  with  bursting  headache.

"Suppression  of  milk,  menses,  measles  or  rash  of
scarlatina,  or  where  all  these  are  slow  in  appearing;  of
course  the  other  Bryonia  symptoms  must  be  present.

"  Frequent  desire  to  take  a  long  breath;  must  expand
the  lungs.

"Cough  dry,  <  after  eating,  sometimes  with  vomiting;
<  moving ;  <  coming  from  open  air  into  warm  room.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.


25


"Cough  hurts  head  and  chest,  holds  them  with  hands."

These  are  some  of  the  peculiar  symptoms  which  cannot
be  ranged  under  any  general  head,  and  are  excellent  lead-
ers to  the  consideration  of  Bryonia^  all  and  each  of
which  will  be  found  associated  with  the  more  general  char-
acteristics already  noticed.

The  dominant  school  do  not  know  what  they  have  lost
in  not  being  acquainted  with  the  virtues  of  this  remedy,
as  developed  in  our  provings  and  clinical  use,  but  we
know  what  we  have  gained.


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.

This  remedy,  like  the  three  of  which  we  have  been
writing,  has  a  strong  affinity  for  the  alimentary  canal.  Its
leading  characteristic  is  in  its  thickly  coated^  white^  very
white ^  white  as  milk^  tongue.

Many  remedies  have  white  tongue,  but  this  one  leads
them  all.  It  is  also  a  great  stomach  remedy,  and  in  dis-
orders of  this  organ  arising  from  over-eating,  where  there
is  much  nausea,  distress,  and  especially  the  characteristic
tongue,  it  is  to  be  thought  of  before  either  of  the  three  of
which  we  have  written.  It  is  especially  to  be  considered
if  the  gastric  derangement  is  of  recent  date.  The  process
of  digestion  is  hardly  under  way ;  the  eructations  taste  of
the  food  as  he  ate  it,  and  the  sufferer  feels  as  if  he  must
"  throw  up  "  before  there  will  be  any  relief.  In  such  a  case
a  few  pellets  of  Antimo7tium  cruduni  on  the  tongue  will
often  settle  the  business,  save  the  loss  of  a  meal,  and  all
further  suffering.

Diarrhoea  may  often  follow  these  dietetic  errors,  espe-
cially during  the  heat  of  the  summer  season,  and  then  the


26


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.


stools  are  peculiar  in  that  tliey  are  partly  solid  and  partly
fluid,  showing  that  digestion  has  been  only  partially  per-
formed in  the  whole  length  of  the  canal.  Antimonimn
crtLditm  and  Bryonia  sometimes  present  about  equal  claims
in  a  case  of  summer  complaint ;  but  the  case  in  its  entirety
must  decide  the  choice  between  them.

There  is  a  form  of  diarrhoea  which  alternates  with  con-
stipation, oftenest  found  with  old  people,  where  Antimon-
ium  criidum  is  the  only  remedy.  Then  it  is  also  one  of  the
best  remedies  for  mucous  piles ;  there  is  a  continuous  oozing
of  mucus  staining  the  linen,  very  disagreeable  to  the  pa-
tient.

There  are  some  mind  symptoms  that  are  very  peculiar  ;
"  the  greatest  sadness  and  woful  mood  with  intermittent
fever;"  again,  "sentimental  mood  in  moonlight,  ecstatic
love,"  and  again,  '•''child  cannot  bear  to  be  touched  or  looked

aty

Of  the  first  two  symptoms  I  can  say  nothing  from  ex-
perience or  observation,  but  of  the. last,  that  it  is  a  gem.
Many  times  in  cases  of  gastric  or  remittent  fever,  for
which  Antimoniitm  crudum  is  a  very  excellent  remedy,  I
have  been  led  to  its  use  by  this  very  condition  of  the  mind :
the  child  is  cross,  but  not  like  Cha7noniilla  wants  to  be  car-
ried and  soothed,  but  will  scream  and  cry,  and  show  temper
at  every  little  attention.  Another  thing  that  I  have
noticed  in  many  of  these  cases  is,  that  the  fever  runs  higher
at  night  and  is  accompanied  with  great  thirst ;  the  white
tongue  is  almost  always  present.  Such  children  are  quite
apt,  even  when  around  the  house,  to  have  sore,  cracked
and  crusty  nostrils  and  corners  of  the  mouth,^^  and  so  this
may  appear  when  sick.

There  is  a  peculiar  constitutional  condition  found  in
some  people  which  calls  for  this  remedy. It  is  found  in


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.


27


the  extremities  ;  finger-7iails  grow  in  splits^  like  warts,
with  horny  spots ;  and  if  by  accident  one  becomes  injured
or  split,  it  does  not  repair  as  it  should,  but  grows  out'  of
shape.  Then  the  toe-nails  are  brittle  and  grow  out  of
shape  also,  or  shrivel  up  and  do  not  grow  at  all.  The  feet
are  covered  on  the  soles  with  corns  and  collosities  which
are  VERY  TENDER,  can  hardly  walk  on  them  on  account  of
this  tenderness.  Some  of  the  worst  cases  of  chronic  rheu-
matism have  been  cured  by  this  remedy,  guided  by  the
excessive  tenderness  of  the  .soles  of  the  feet.  Horny  ex-
crescences anywhere  on  the  skin  make  one  think  of  Aiiti-
monium  crudttm.  This  remedy  is  oftenest  found  indicated
in  the  extremes  of  life,  in  children  and  old  peopler

Now  the  peculiar  modalities  which  deserve  particular
mention  are  :  First,  the  troubles  are  often  caused  or  aggra-
vated by  heat,  and  especially  by  the  heat  of  the  sim.  The
patient  feels  exhausted  during  warm  weather ;  the  gastric
troubles  come  on,  or  are  worse,  such  as  nausea,  vomiting
and  diarrhoea.  The  .cough  is  worse,  and,  like  Bryonia^  is
worse  on  coming  into  a  warm  room  from  cold  air.  These
affections  are  particularly  worse  in  sunshine,  but  also
from  radiate  heat  of  the  fire,  so  that  Antimoniuin  crudum
takes  a  high  rank  as  a  hot  weather  remedy.  Second,  cold
bathing  aggravates  or  causes  trouble.  "  Child  cries  when
washed  or  bathed  in  cold  water.  Cold  bathing  causes
headache,  cold  in  the  head,  gastric  catarrh,  diarrhoea,
suppressed  menses,  toothache,  etc."  When  any  case  of
long  standing  comes  to  us,  and  the  patient  dates  the
beginning  of  the  trouble  to  going  in  swimming  or  fall-
ing into  the  water,  we  think  of  Antimonium  crudum  and
examine  for  further  indications  for  the  drus;.

Now  a  few  scattering  symptoms  that  have  found  their
remedy  in  Antimonium  criLdum\  "Copious  hemorrhage


28


MERCURIUS.


from  the  bowels,  mixed  with  solid  faeces;  chronic  redness
of  the  eyelids;  toothache  in  decayed  teeth,  worse  at  night ;
gastric  trouble  after  acids,  sour  wine,  vinegar,  etc."


MERCURIUS.

As  in  Antimonium  crudum^  so  in  Mermrius^  the  leading
characteristic  is  found  in  the  mouth,  or,  I  might  rather
say,  characteristics,  for  the  gums  are  swollen^  spongy^  some-
times bleeding ;  the  tongue  is  also  swollen^  flabby^  taking
the  imprints  of  the  teeth^  generally  moist,  yet  with  intense
thirst ;  the  whole  mouth  is  moist  with  salivation  which  is
soapy  or  stringy,  and  the  odor  from  the  mouth  is  very  of-
fensive ;  you  can  smell  it  all  over  the  room.  No  remedy
has  this  condition  of  mouth  in  any  degree  equal  to  Mer-  '
cury.  It  is  found  in  very  many  complaints,  and  if  any-
thing corroborative  of  the  truth  of  "similia,"  etc.,  were
desired  the  curative  power  of  Mercury^  when  indicated  by
these  symptoms,  ought  to  be  satisfactory.  Many  a  time
have  I  given  great  relief  to  my  patient,  and  great  credit  to
Homoeopathy,  by  brilliant  cures  of  that  painful  affection,
quinsy,  guided  by  these  symptoms.  Of  course,  in  addi-
tion to  the  above  symptoms  the  tonsils  were  greatly  swol-
len and  often  apparently  on  the  verge  of  suppuration.
Right  here  let  me  warn  against  giving  Mercurius  too  low^
for  if  you  do,  it  will  hasten  suppuration  instead  of  aborting
it.  If  anyone  is  skeptical  as  to  the  efi&ciency  of  the  very
high  potencies,  I  invite  him  to  a  test  in  just  such  a  case.
Give  a  single  dose,  dry  upon  the  tongue,  or  if  you  must
seem  to  do  more,  dissolve  a  powder  in  four  tablespoonfuls  of
water  and  give  in  half  hourly  doses.  Then  wait.  I  have
done  it  many  times  and  am  convinced. If  the  patient


MERCURIUS.  29

has  that  other  strong  characteristic  of  Mercurius;  viz., pro-
fuse perspiration,  without  relief  oi  the  suffering,  success  is
doubly  sure.

I  wish  right  here,  as  perhaps  the  most  appropriate  place,
to  disclaim  being  an  exclusive  high-potentist.  The  ques-
tion of  dose  is,  and  I  believe  must  remain,  an  open  one  as
long  as  different  degrees  of  susceptibility  are  found  in  dif-
ferent diseases  and  persons.  I  have  experimented  along
the  whole  line  and  know  that  both  the  high  and  the  low
are  efficacious  in  certain  cases.  The  preponderance  of
evidence,  however,  is  greatly  in  favor  of  the  high  and  the
highest.  This  is  my  opinion.  You  may  differ,  and  are
welcome  to  do  so.

The  fever  symptoms  of  Mercurius  are  notable,  espe-
cially in  the  sweats.  The  chill  also  is  peculiar  as  I  have
observed  it.  It  is  not  a  shaking  chill,  but  is  simply  creep-
ing chilliness.  Often  when  this  creeping  chilliness  is  felt,
it  is  the  first  symptom  of  a  cold  that  has  been  taken,  and,
if  left  alone,  the  coryza,  sore  throat,  bronchitis  or  even
pneumonia  may  follow ;  but,  if  taken  early,  a  dose  of  Mer-
curius may  prevent  all  such  troubles.  This  chilliness  is
felt  most  generally  in  the  evening  and  increases  into  the
night  if  not  removed  by  Mercury.  It  also  alternates  with
flashes  of  heat;  first  chilly,  then  hot,  then  chilly,  etc.,  like
Arsenicum.  It  is  often  felt  in  single  parts.  Then  again
it  is  felt  in  abscesses  and  is  the  harbinger  of  pus  forma-
tion. If  pus  has  already  formed,  especially  much  of  it,
the  only  thing  Mercury  can  do  is  to  hasten  its  discharge ;
but  if  little  or  none  is  actually  formed  a  dose  of  Mercury
high  will  often  check  the  formation  and  a  profuse  sweat
often  follows  with  a  subsidence  of  the  swelling  and  rapid
cure  of  the  disease.

Now  the  sweats. They  are  very  profuse  and  do  not  re-


30  MERCURIUS.

lieve  like  the  sweats  of  inflammatory  diseases  generally
do,  but  on  the  contrary  the  complaints  increase  with  the
szveat.  .  In  what  diseases  is  this  condition  found?  It  may
be  found  in  almost  every  disease :  In  sore  throat,  bron-
chitis, pneumonia,  pleuritis,  peritonitis,  abscesses,  rheuma-
tism, etc.,  to  the  end  of  a  long  list.  In  short,  in  any  dis-
ease in  which  this  profuse  and  persistent  sweating  without
relief  is  present  Mercurius  is  the  first  remedy  to  be  thought
of.

Woj^se  at  nighty  and  especially  in  the  warmth  of  the  bed  is
another  strong  characteristic  of  Mercurius.  There  is  a
long  list  of  remedies  that  have  aggravations  at  night,  but
not  so  many  from  warmth  of  the  bed.  I  have  cured  many
skin  diseases  of  various  names  guided  by  this  modality.
The  glands  and  bones  also  come  strongly  under  the  in-
fluence of  this  remedy.  The  glandular  swellings  are  cold,
inclined  to  suppurate,  having  these  chilly  creepirigs  afore-
mentioned. These  with  the  bone-pains  in  the  exostoses
and  caries  are  all  aggravated  at  night  in  the  warmth  of
the  bed.

The  mucous  membranes  are  everywhere  affected  ;  the
discharges  from  them  are  at  first  thin  and  excoriating,  even
from  the  catarrh  of  the  nose  to  the  diarrhoeic,  or  dysenteric,
discharges.  Afterwards  they  become  thicker,  or  more
bland,  like  the  Pulsatilla  discharges.  These  are  worse  at
night  also,  even  the  leucorrhoea.

Hahnemann  ranked  Mercury  for  syphilis  as  he  did
Sulphur  for  psora  and  Thuja  for  sycosis,  and  no  doubt
justly  so,  for  Mercury  in  its  various  forms  symptomologi-
cally  covers  more  cases  of  that  disease  than  any  other
remedy.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  Mercury  is  no
more  a  panacea  for  syphilis  than  is  Sulphur  for  psora  or
Thuja  for  sycosis,  else  there  would  be  no  truth  in  similia


MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.


31


similibus.  The  case  in  hand  must  simulate  Mercury^  or
that  remedy  is  not  "  in  it"  but  some  other  remedy  is.  Ex-
perience abundantly  corroborates  this  and  proves  the  truth
of  the  law,  Similia  Similibus  Curantur.


MERCURIUS  CORROSIVUS.

While  we  are  on  the  subject  of  mercury  we  may  as  well
notice  the  various  combinations  of  this  drug.  Mercurius
solubilis  and  vivtcs  are  so  nearly  alike  that  with  the  same
indications  some  use  one  and  some  the  other  preparation.
It  is  claimed  by  some  that  the  vivus  is  better  adapted  to
men  and  solubilis  to  women.  I  have  not  observed  it,  but
do  think  that  the  solubilis  works  better  in  skin  troubles.
Of  Mercurius  corrosivus  we  have  to  say  that  it  leads  all
other  remedies  for  tenesmus  of  the  rectum.  This  tenesmus
is  incessant.  Stool  does  not  relieve  it,  and  this  is  what  de-
cides between  it  and  Nux  vo77iica  in  dysentery.  It  has
also  severe  tenesmus  of  the  bladder,  and  may  here  vie  with
Cantharis^  Capsicum  and  Nux  vomica^  especially  in  dysen-
tery.

Other  symptoms  must  decide  the  choice.

This  severe  tenesmus  may  begin  in  the  rectum  and  ex-
tend to  the  bladder  or  vice  versa.

It  is  a  very  efficient  remedy  in  gonorrhoea,  in  the  second
stage,  when  the  greenish  discharge  has  set  in  and  the
burning  and  tenesmus  continues.  It  seems  to  have  gained
some  reputation  in  Bright's  disease.  I  have  no  experience
with  it  here,  but  would  expect  it  to  do  good  if  it  were  in-
dicated.

It  seems,  according  to  the  testimony  of  others,  to  be  a
useful  remedy  for  catarrhal  affections  of  the  eyes  and  nose.


32


MERCURIUS  CYANATUS.


Here  also  I  have  no  testimony  to  offer,  but  would  not  cast
doubt  upon  it  for  that  reason.  I  do  not  desire  to  place  my
own  experience  ahead  of  that  of  others.  We  are  co-labor-
ers. IvCt  each  add  to  the  general  store  of  medical  knowl-
edge, that  all  may  draw  freely  from  it  as  occasion  demands.


MERCURIUS  CYANATUS.

Dr.  Von  Villiers  (I  think  it  was)  first  brought  this  rem-
edy to  notice  as  of  great  value  in  that  much-dreaded  dis-
ease, diphtheria. He  claimed  to  have  had  astonishing
success  with  it  in  Germany,  losing  only  two  per  cent,  (if  I
remember  correctly)  of  the  cases  treated  with  it.  He
recommended  the  30th  potency,  but  others  have  used
the  6th  and  claim  equally  good  results. There  are,  so
far  as  I  can  find,  no  very  marked  characteristic  symp-
toms by  which  to  choose  it. It  seems  to  spread  its
action  all  over  the  buccal  cavity. Dr.  T.  F.  Allen  pub-
lished a  good  cure  with  it, and  then  claimed  that  he
chose  this  preparation  of  Mercury  on  account  of  the  re-
markable prostration  which  he  attributed  to  the  cyanogen
element  in  it. This  looks  reasonable. But  I  think  we
must  investigate  further  to  bring  out  its  true  characteris-
tics. There  is  a  chronic  condition  of  the  throat  in  which
I  have  found  it  very  efficacious. It  is  in  case  of  public
speakers. The  throat  feels  raw  and  sore,  and  examination
reveals  a  broken  down  appearance  of  the  mucous  mem-
brane bordering  on  ulceration. It  is  not  granulated,  but
looks  raw  in  spots,  as  if  denuded  of  membrane. I  have
helped  this  kind  of  throat,  so  that  the  patient  wanted  me  to
remember  what  it  was  I  gave  him  so  that  I  could  repeat
the  prescription  if  the  trouble  returned. I  forgot  to  state


MERUCRIUS  PROTOIODIDK.


33


that  it  hurt  the  patient  to  speak,  and  there  was  also  hoarse-
ness with  it.  This  is  all  I  know  of  this  remedy,  but  I  be-
lieve it  well  worth  further  proving  and  study.


M5RCURIUS  PROTOIODIDE

is  a  preparation  that  has  a  very  reliable  and  prominent
characteristic.  It  is  :  "  Tongue  coated  thickly^  yellow  at
the  base:'  The  tip  and  edges  may  be  red  or  pale  and  take
the  imprints  of  the  teeth,  like  the  other  Mercitrius.  Of
course,  other  remedies  have  a  yellow-coated  base  of  the
tongue  like  Kali  bichromicum  and  Natrum  phos.^  so  that
this  symptom  would  not  indicate  Merairius  protoiodide  to
the  exclusion  of  all  others,  but  I  think  I  am  safe  in  saying
that  this  remedy  has  it  in  the  greatest  degree.

In  diphtheria  the  swelling  of  the  throat  and  the  forma-
tion of  membrane  begins  on  the  right  side,  like  Ly co-
podium^  and  the  fetid  breath  and  flabby  tongue,  showing
imprint  of  teeth,  are  generally  present.  Now  if  you  have
the  thick  yellow  coating  at  the  base  of  the  tongue  you
need  not  hesitate  to  give  this  remedy.  In  regard  to  dose,
I  have  seen  good  results  from  the  3d  trituration  to  the  C.
M.  potency.  For  myself  I  prefer  the  high,  and  have  had
abundant  opportunity  to  test  all  the  different  potencies.
If  you  are  so  prejudiced  that  you  cannot  give  anything
above  the  12th  because  you  cannot  discover  the  drug  with
the  microscope,  don't  give  it  too  long ;  withdraw  it  after
a  few  doses  and  give  the  powers  of  reaction  a  chance.

But  diphtheria  is  not  the  only  disease  in  which  the  yel-
low base  of  the  tongue  is  an  indication  for  the  use  of  this
remedy.  Stomach  and  liver  troubles  often  produce  this
appearance  of  the  tongue. It  is  also  a  good  remedy  for


34  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

Hunterian  chancre,  and  no  secondary  symptoms  follow  its
proper  use. Here  it  must  be  given  high.

CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

This  remedy  is  used  by  both  schools  tf  medicine  for
conditions  of  great  weakness  and  debility.  The  old  school,
general  principles,  under  the  name  of  tonic. It  remained
for  Homoeopathy  to  indicate  its  exact  place  here.  Hahne-
mann expresses  it :  "  Debility  and  other  complaints  after
loss  of  blood  or  other  fluids,  particularly  by  nursing  or
salivation, bleeding, cupping,  etc.,  or  whites,  seminal
emissions,  etc." I  would  add  profuse  suppurations  and
long-continued  diarrhoea. If  the  depletion  has  been  sud-
den, as  from  a  haemorrhage  from  the  womb,  lungs,  bowels  or
nose,  there  will  be  faintness,  loss  of  sight,  ringing  in  the
ears,  etc. For  this  state  of  things  we  have  a  "friend  in-
deed "  in  Ckzna,  and  it  should  be  given  in  frequently  re-
peated doses,  not  too  low,  until  reaction  is  established,  then
at  longer  intervals,  as  occasion  demands. If  the  debility
is  the  effects  of  a  slow  and  long-continued  drain  the
symptoms  that  might  indicate  it  must  be  sought  in  the
Materia  Medica;  our  space  forbids  trying  to  note  them
here,  but  prominent  among  them  are  pale,  sallow  face,
sunken  eyes  with  dark  rings  around,  throbbing  headaches,
night-sweats,  and  sweats  easily  on  least  motion  or  labor.
It  is  always  well  when  a  patient  comes  to  us  in  a  very  de-
bilitated condition  to  think  of  Ckma,  and  to  make  careful
inquiry  for  some  debilitating  waste  that  would  account  for
it ;  for  if  it  is  a  lady,  she  may  be  suffering  from  a  very  pro-
fuse leucorrhoea,  which  from  delicacy  she  will  not  mention,


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  35

or  if  a  young  or  even  married  man,  he  may  be  suffering
from  seminal  losses,  of  which  he  would  not  speak  if  not
encouraged  to  do  so.

Again  this  remedy  has  its  sphere  of  usefulness  in  dis-
orders of  the  alimentary  canal.  It  has  loss  of  appetite,  but
canine  hunger  is  more  characteristic.  It  is  a  great  flatu-
lent remedy,  the  choice  often  remaining  between  it,  Carbo
veg.  and  Lycopodium.  H.  N.  Guernsey  expresses  it  about
right  in  these  words — "Uncomfortable  distension  of  the
abdomen,  with  a  wish  to  belch  up,  or  a  sensation  as  if  the
abdomen  were  packed  full,  not  in  the  least  relieved  by
eructation."  Such  patients  are  troubled  with  slow  diges-
tion, and  as  they  express  it :  sometimes  it  seems  as  if  the
food  all  turned  to  gas.  They  feel  so  full  and  oppressed
they  can  hardly  breathe  and  still  will  feel  hungry  at  meal-
time.

That  the  process  of  digestion  is  seriously  impaired  is
shown  by  a  tendency  to  diarrhoea,  especially  from  eating
fruit.  The  stools  are  watery,  yellow,  brownish,  or  light
colored  and  undigested,  and  what  is  not  generally  found
under  other  remedies  they  2X^painless.  The  stools  are  also
accompanied  with  large  discharge  of  flahdence.  This  is
in  accord  with  the  windy  condition  of  the  bowels  generally.
This  condition  of  abdomen  with  attending  diarrhoea  is
often  found  in  children,  and  the  child  is  weak,  pale,  with
dark  rings  around  the  eyes.  Here  China  is  the  remedy,
not  Cina  on  the  theory  of  "worrums,  "  and  it  is  astonish-
ing what  improvement  follows  in  a  short  time.

Now  as  to  this  remedy  as  an  anti-periodic.  The  popu-
lar use  of  it  by  the  old  school  and  the  laity  under  their
instruction  in  this  sense,  or  as  a  panacea  for  all  so-called
malarious  diseases,  is  a  curse  to  the  race.  That  it  is  a
great  remedy,  when  indicated  by  the  symptoms,  for  period-


3 6  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

ical  affections,  whether  of  malarial  origin  or  not,  is  true,
and  so  it  is  true  of  Eiipatorium  perfoliatiim^  Ipecacuanha^
Natrum  muriaticum^  Arsenicum  albu7n  and  a  host  of  other
remedies.  Affections  that  do  not  come  strictly  under  the
head  of  malarial,  if  they  are  worse  every  other  day,  should
call  attention  to  Cmchoita.

I  remember  a  bad  case  of  inflammatory  rheumatism,
which  had  been  treated  by  an  eclectic  physician  with
local  applications  until  the  disease  had  been  driven  to  the
heart,  which  I  quickly  relieved  by  China,  being  led  to  its
choice  by  this  every-other-day  aggravation  of  the  symp-
toms. Of  course,  there  were  other  indications  for  the
remedy,  but  this  was  the  key  that  helped  to  unlock  the
case.

Those  who  depend  on  China  or  its  alkaloid  as  a  general
cure-all  for  intermittents  will  meet  with  disappointments
all  along  the  way,  for  while  it  may  have  the  power  to  sup-
press the  paroxysms  in  many  cases  it  has  the  power  to  cure
in  comparatively  few.  I  have  seen  a  case  suppressed  time
and  again  with  it  to  return  as  often  for  over  a  year  and  a
half  that  I  cured  with  a  single  prescription  of  Eupatorium
perfoliatum.  And  so  w\\hNatrtini  muriaticum  and  Arsen-
icum album.  With  all  its  vaunted  power  over  malarial  af-
fections, especially  intermittent  fever,  the  indications  for  its
use  are  not  so  clear  cut  as  for  many  other  remedies.

I  once  had  three  cases  of  intermittent  fever  in  one
family,  living  in  the  same  house  and  exposed  to  the  same
influences.  Quinine  failed  to  cure  any  one  of  them,  and  a
different  remedy,  as  indicated  by  the  symptoms  according  to
the  homoeopathic  law  of  cure,  was  required  for  each  case
and  promptly  cured  it.  The  respective  remedies  were
Eupatorium  perfoliatum^  Ignatia  and  Capsicum.  Now


CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.  37

any  good  homoeopath  can  tell  you  the  leading  symptoms
for  all  three  remedies.
That  is  Sciefice.

I  once  knew  a  druggist  who  told  me  that  he  had  at
last  discovered  one  thing  that  mothers-in-law  were  good
for.  Of  course  I  asked  him  what  it  was.  I  wanted  to
know.  He  answered,  to  try  patent  medicines  on.  She
died  (the  mother-in-law)  shortly  after.  Well,  there  is  one
thing  that  quinine  in  the  hands  of  the  average  old  school
physician  is  good  for,  and  that  is  to  make  patients  for
homoeopaths,  for  we  find  more  patients  to  treat  coming
from  its  abuse  than  we  find  calling  for  its  use  as  a  curative,
and  from  a  purely  business  standpoint  we  are  greatly  in-
debted to  them  (the  allopaths)  for  a  good  bit  of  practice.
But  how  in  the  name  of  gratitude  we  can  ever  pay  them
out  of  the  poisonous  results  of  our  little  pill  practice  I
don't  know.

Now  what  are  the  best  remedies  for  what  is  called  the
Quinine  cachexia  ?  Here,  as  ever,  we  must  answer,  the  indi-
cated one.  Ipecac^  Arsenicum^  Nati^um  mur.^  Pulsatilla  and
Ferrum  are  often  indicated,  but  they  do  not  cover  all  cases
any  more  than  does  Hepar  sulph.^  Nitric  acid  or  Kali  hy-
driodicum^  all  cases  of  chronic  mercurial  poisoning.  It  is
nonsense — worse  than  nonsense — it  is  old-schoolism  to  say
I  gave  Ntcx  vomica  because  the  patient  had  taken  pepper
tea,  or  Pulsatilla  for  Quinine^  or  Kali  hydriod.  for  Mer-
has  fever  (the  old-school  does),  but  because  the  patient  has
with  the  fever  other  symptoms  which  enable  us  to  choose
between  Aconite  and  many  other  remedies  that  have  fever
also,  and  this  to  the  exclusion  of  all  the  rest.  This  is
science  again.

China  is  one  of  the  best  remedies  in  chronic  liver  trou-
4


3^  CINCHONA  OFFICINALIS.

bles.  There  is  pain  in  the  right  hypochondria,  and  often
the  liver  may  be  felt  below  the  ribs,  enlarged,  hard  and
sensitive  to  touch.  The  skin  and  sclerotica  are  yellow,  the
urine  dark  colored  and  stools  light,  lacking  the  color  due  to
a  proper  secretion  of  bile.  Now  if  in  addition  to  all  this
we  have  in  part  or  whole  the  abdominal  symptoms  so
characteristic  of  this  remedy  China  will  do  excellent
service.  It  is  equally  good  in  splenic  diseases  which
closely  resemble  the  splenic  troubles  resulting  from  the
abuse  of  Quinine.  I  have  found  the  200th  do  better  than
lower  in  these  troubles.

I  wish  to  say  in  addition  to  what  has  already  been  said
of  China  for  haemorrhages,  that  the  bleeding  may  come
from  any  or  every  outlet  or  orifice  of  the  body.  Carbo  veg.^
Ferrum^  Crotalus  horridus^  Phosphortis^  and  Sulphuric
acid  also  claim  attention  here.

China  has  excessive  sensitiveness  of  the  nervous  system.
The  special  senses  seem  too  acute ;  the  mind  is  unpleasantly
affected,  and  nothing  is  more  characteristic  of  this  remedy
than  its  extreme  sensitiveness  to  touch.  It  affects  the  skin
all  over  the  body,  even  the  hair  feels  sore  (so  says  the
patient),  because  moving  the  hair  hurts  the  sensitive  scalp,
and  in  addition  to  this,  one  peculiar  thing  is  that  while
the  lightest  touch  will  increase  to  an  extreme  degree  the
pains  of  the  diseased  part,  hard  pressure  relieves.  That
seems  impossible,  but  is  true  nevertheless.  This  sensi-
tiveness is  so  extreme  that  a  current  of  air  blowing  on  the
part  will  cause  great  pain  and  suffering.

Plumbum  also  has  this  excessive  hypersesthesia,  and  I
once  cured  a  very  obstinate  case  of  post-diphtheritic
paralysis,  being  led  to  its  administration  by  this  symptom.
Capsicum  also  has  it.  The  patient  can  hardly  bare  to  be
shaved  on  account  of  it.


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.


39


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.

In  our  remarks  upon  China  we  said  that  for  flatulent
conditions  the  choice  lay  often  between  it,  Carbo  veg.  and
Lycopodium.  Carbo  vegetabilis  also  ranges  alongside
China  for  debilitated  states.  The  weakness  of  Carbo  veg-
etabilis is  not  surpassed  by  any  other  remedy.  This,  with
Arsenicum  and  Muriatic  acid^  form  a  trio  of  remedies
which  according  to  well-known  indications  has  snatched
many  a  patient  from  the  very  jaws  of  death.  Picture  of
Carbo  veg.:  Vital  forces  nearly  exhausted,  cold  surface,  es-
pecially from  knees  down  to  feet ;  lies  motionless,  as  if
dead ;  breath  cold ;  pulse  intermittent,  thready ;  cold
sweat  on  limbs.  This  is  truly  a  desperate  condition.  Then
add  to  these  symptoms,  blood  stagnates  in  the  capillaries,
causing  blueness,  coldness  and  ecchymoses;  the  pa-
tient so  weak  he  cannot  breathe  without  being
constantly  fanned.  Gasps:  "  Fan  me !  Fan  me !"
Carbo  veg.  has  saved  such  cases.  This  is  a  picture  of  a
case  of  typhoid  fever,  and  in  one  case  we  saw  added  still  to
this,  hemorrhage  of  dark,  decomposed,  unclotted  blood  ;
could  not  clot  on  account  of  its  broken  down  condition  ;
blood  oozing  from  gums  and  nostrils,  and  an  indescribable
paleness,  not  only  of  the  hippocratic  face,  but  also  the  skin
of  the  whole  body,  yet  Carbo  veg.  restored  to  health,  and
in  an  aged  woman  at  that.  I  have  here,  as  faithfully  as  I
can,  portrayed  the  wonderful  power  of  this  remedy  in  such
a  desperate  case.  Of  course  no  remedy  can  raise  the  dead,
no  matter  how  strong  the  indications  before  death  ;  but  no
remedy  can  come  nearer  than  this  and  the  dominant  school
know  little  or  nothing  about  it,  and  never  can  until  they


40


CARBO  VEGKTABILIS.


will  consent  to  use  it  in  the  homoeopathic  form  and  ac-
cording to  homoeopathic  indications.

The  sphere  of  this  remedy  is  not  by  any  means  limited
to  low  or  weakened  states  in  connection  with  acute  dis-
eases. To  give  an  idea  of  its  use  when  indicated  by  the
symptoms  in  chronic  ailments,  I  can  do  no  better  than
quote  from  Henry  N.  Guernsey:  "No  truer  remark  was
ever  written  than  that  Car  bo  vegetabilis  is  especially
adapted  to  cachectic  individuals  whose  vital  powers  have
become  weakened.  This  remark  is  made  particularly
clear  when  considered  in  the  light  of  those  cases  in  which
disease  seems  to  be  engrafted  upon  the  system  by  reason  of
the  depressing  influence,  of  some  prior  derangement.
Thus,  for  instance,  the  patient  tells  us  that  asthma  has
troubled  him  ever  since  he  had  the  whooping  cough  in
childhood ;  he  has  dyspepsia  ever  since  a  drunken  debauch
which  occurred  some  years  ago ;  he  has  never  been  well
since  the  time  he  strained  himself  so  badly;  the  strain
itself  does  not  now  seem  to  be  the  matter,  but  his  present
ailments  have  all  appeared  since  it  happened ;  he  sustained
an  injury  some  years  ago,  no  traces  of  which  are  now  ap-
parent, and  yet  he  dates  his  present  complaints  from  the
time  of  the  occurrence  of  that  accident ;  or  again,  he  was
injured  by  exposure  to  damp,  hot  air  and  his  present  ail-
ments result  from  it.  It  will  be  well  for  the  physician  to
think  of  Carbo  vegetabilis  in  similar  cases  which  are
numerous  and  may  present  very  dissimilar  phenomena,  as
these  circumstances  being  suggestive  of  Carbo  veg.  it  in  all
probability  will  be  found  to  be  the  appropriate  remedy,
which  the  agreement  of  the  other  symptoms  of  the  case
with  those  of  the  drug  will  serve  to  corroborate."  ^  This  is
and  I  feel  justified  in  quoting  it  entire.


CARBO  VEGETABILIS.


41


This  remedy  seems  to  affect  deeply  the  whole  alimentary
tract,  and  the  same  broken  down,  weakened  condition  ap-
pears. The  gums  break  down,  become  spongy,  bleed  on
touching  or  sucking  them  or  become  retracted  from  the
teeth,  lower  incisors,  and  are  painfully  sensitive  or  sore  on
chewing  or  even  pressing  the  teeth  hard  together.  The
stomach  also  becomes  weak.  Acidity  and  pyrosis  is  fre-
quent; the  plainest  food  disagrees,  fat  foods  especially.
Here  Carbo  vegetabilis  succeeds  when  Pulsatilla  fails.

The  most  marked  and  valuable  place  for  this  remedy  is
in  its  power  to  relieve  complaints  from  excessive  flatulence
in  the  stomach.  "Great  accumulations  of  flatulence  in  the
stomach."  "Stomach  feels  full  and  tense  from  flatulence."
Great  pain  in  stomach  on  account  of  flatulence,  worse
especially  on  lying  down  should  always  call  attention  to
this  remedy.  All  this  may  occur  in  different  affections
ranging  from  a  simple  dyspepsia  to  incurable  cancer  of  the
stomach.  In  the  latter  case  and  even  in  cases  not  so  seri-
ous, we  may  have  added  burning  in  stomach.  This  flatu-
lence is  also  generated  in  the  abdomen  but,  in  the  Carbo
vegetabilis  cases,  is  most  troublesome  in  upper  part;  yet
may  extend  so  as  to  cause  great  meteoristic  distension,  es-
pecially in  typhoid  fevers,  dysenteries,  etc.  It  is  a  remedy
of  inestimable  value  in  haemorrhage  from  any  broken
down  condition  of  mucous  membranes.  This  action  upon
the  mucous  membranes  does  not  stop  with  the  alimentary,
tract,  but  attacks  those  of  the  respiratory  tract  also.  Be-
ginning with  the  larynx,  it  causes  and  cures  great  hoarse-
ness, which  is  characteristically  worse  in  the  damp  air,  es-
pecially of  evening.  It  may  be  very  bad  even  (if  the  air
is  damp)  in  the  morning ;  but  morning  hoarseness  is
oftener  reached  by  Causticum.  This  condition  may  go
on  extending  and  increasing  until  it  reaches  the  bronchia.


42


LYCOPODIUM.


This  is  particularly  true  in  case  of  elderly  people  of  broken
down  constitutions,  venous  system  predominating.  It  is
a  great  remedy  for  the  bronchitis  of  old  people ;  also  for
asthma  of  the  same,  in  very  desperate  cases  where  the
patient  appears  as  if  dying.  Here  the  choice  must  be
sometimes  made  between  this  remedy  and  China.

In  the  chest  there  is  sometimes  "burning  as  from  glow-
ing coals,"  and  again,  "weak,  fatigued  feeling  in  chest,"
where  the  choice  may  fall  between  it  and  Phosphoric  acid^
Stamium  and  Sulphur.  It  has  been  found  very  efi&cacious
in  desperate  cases  of  pneumonia,  and  comes  in  quite  nat-
urally after  Tartar  emetic  has  failed  to  assist  the  patient
to  clear  his  lungs  of  the  great  quantities  of  loosened
mucus,  when  cyanosis  and  paralysis  threaten  from  weak-
ness. Its  sputa  then  is  apt  to  be  fetid  with  cold  sweat  and
breath  and  the  characteristic  want-to-be-fanned  condition.

Before  we  leave  this  remedy  I  want  to  emphasize  its
power  over  haemorrhages,  which  may  occur  from  lungs,,
nose,  stomach,  bowels,  bladder  or  any  mucous  surface.  No
remedy  can  take  its  place  in  broken  down,  greatly  debili-
tated constitutions  where  the  surfaces  from  which  the  blood
oozes  seem  too  weak  and  spongy  to  hold  the  blood  in
them.  Their  vitality  is  gone  with  the  patient's  nervous
vitality.  The  patient's  face  and  skin  is  very  pale.,  even
before  the  haemorrhage  has  occurred.  China  and  Carbo
vegetabilis  are  decidedly  complementary.


LYCOPODIUM.

This  remedy  with  Sulphur  and  Calcarea  form  the
leading  trio  of  Hahnemann's  anti-psoric  remedies.  This
makes  a  good  starting  point,  as  the  boy  said  when  he  set


LYCOPODIUM.


43


a  pin  in  a  vacant  chair.  They  all  act  very  deeply.  Each
finds  its  affinity  in  a  certain  class  of  people  or  tempera-
ment. Lycopodium  acts  favorably  in  all  ages,  but  partic-
ularly upon  old  people  and  children.  It  acts  upon  per-
sons of  keen  intellect,  but  feeble  muscular  development ;
lean  people,  leaning  towards  lung  and  liver  troubles.
Such  people  are  apt  to  suffer  from  lithic  acid  diathesis,  for
which  this  is  also  a  great  remedy.  The  Lycopodium  sub-
ject is  sallow,  sunken,  with  premature  lines  in  the  face ;
looks  older  than  he  is.  Children  are  weak,  with  well-de-
veloped heads,  but  puny,  sickly  bodies.  They  are  irrita-
ble, and  when  sick  awake  out  of  sleep  ugly  and  kick  and
scream  and  push  away  the  nurse  or  parents.  These  tem-
perament remedies  are  not  always  appreciated  by  those
who  do  not  understand  the  true  spirit  of  our  own  art  of
healing ;  but  when  appreciated  the  skillful  observer  can
often  see  the  picture  of  the  right  remedy  in  the  face  and
build  of  his  patient  before  he  speaks  a  word.  A  remedy
must  not  only  be  well  proven,  but  extended  clinical  use
and  observation  is  necessary  to  develop  it  and  indicate  its
true  sphere  of  usefulness.  I  have  known  temperaments  so
intensely  Aconite  or  Belladonna  that  they  could  not  take
these  remedies  except  in  the  high  and  highest  potencies,
and  then  only  in  single  doses  at  long  intervals.  Why
should  this  be  thought  incredible?  Carpenter,  in  his
Physiology,  tells  of  a  person  who  was  so  susceptible  to
Mercury  that  she  was  salivated  by  sleeping  with  her  hus-
band, who  had  taken  Mercury.

This  is  one  of  the  leading  trio  of  flatulent  remedies,
Carbo  veg,  and  China  being  the  other  two. With  Lyco-
podium  there  seems  to  be  an  almost  constant  fermentation
of  gas  going  on  in  the  abdomen,  which  produces  a  loud
croaking  and  rumbling.  Remember,  while  China  bloats  the


44


LYCOPODIUM.


whole  abdomen  Carbo  veg.  prefers  the  upper  and  Lyco-
podium  the  lower  parts.  With  Lycopodium  this  flatulent
condition  is  very  apt  to  occur  in  connection  with  chronic
liver  troubles.  Again  this  rumbling  of  flatulence  is  often
found  particularly  in  the  region  of  the  splenic  flexure  of
the  colon  or  left  hypochondria.

A  feeling  of  satiety  is  found  under  this  remedy  which
alternates  with  a  feeling  of  hunger  of  a  peculiar  kind.  The
patient  sits  down  to  the  table  very  hungry^  but  the  first
few  mouthfuls  fill  him  right  up  and  he  feels  distressingly
full;  in  a  Pickwickian  sense  "too  full  for  utterance."
This  alternation  of  hunger  and  satiety  is  not  so  markedly
found  under  any  other  remedy.

Constipation  predominates  under  Lycopodium^  and  like
Nitx  vomica  there  may  be  frequent  and  ineffectual  desire
for  stool,  but  while  that  of  Nux  vomica  is  caused  by  irregu-
lar peristaltic  action  that  of  Lycopodiitm  seems  to  be
caused  by  a  spasmodic  contraction  of  the  anus  which  pre-
vents the  stool  and  causes  great  pain.

Lycopodium  should  be  thought  of  in  anal  troubles  as-
sociated with  chronic  liver  troubles,  especially  if  with
much  flatulence.

Lycopodium  is  of  use  in  right  sided  hernia.  It  has  cured
cases  of  long  standing  without  the  aid  of  a  truss.

The  liver  troubles  of  Lycopodium  are  more  apt  to  be
of  the  atrophic  variety,  while  those  of  China  are  hyper-
trophic, both  being  equally  useful  in  their  sphere.

Lycopodium  has  almost,  if  not  quite,  as  marked  action
upon  the  urinary  organs  as  upon  the  liver.  It  is  the  chief
remedy  for  "red  sand  in  the  urine."  This  is  not  simply
the  reddish  sediment  which  is  generally  termed  "brick-dust
sediment,"  and  which  is  found  under  many  remedies,  but
is  an  actual  sandy,  gritty  sediment  that  settles  at  the  bot-


LYCOPODIUM.


45


torn  of  the  otherwise  perfectly  clear  urine.  Unless  this
condition  is  removed  we  have  sooner  or  later  renal  calculi,
or  gravel  forming,  and  terrible  attacks  of  renal  colic.  In
children  this  sand  is  sometimes  found  in  the  diaper  after
severe  crying  spells,  and  in  adults  much  pain  in  the  back
in  region  of  kidneys  which  is  relieved  after  the  discharge
of  urine  containing  this  sand.  No  one  remedy  helps  these
cases  more  promptly  or  permanently  than  Lycopodium.

Lycopodium  is  also  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  impo-
tence. An  old  man  marries  his  second  or  third  wife  and
finds  himself  not  "equal  to  the  occasion."  It  is  very  em-
barrassing for  the  whole  family,  A  dose  of  Lycopodium
sets  the  thing  all  right  and  makes  the  doctor  a  warm  friend
on  both  sides  of  the  house.

Young  men  from  onanism  or  sexual  excess  become  im-
potent. The  penis  becomes  small,  cold,  and  relaxed.
The  desire  is  as  strong  as  ever,  and  perhaps  more  so,  but
he  can't  perform.  I  have  known  apparently  hopeless
cases  of  the  kind  cured  by  the  use  of  this  remedy,  high
single  doses  at  intervals  of  a  week  or  more.  Give  it  low,
however,  if  you  want  to  but  do  not  blame  me  if  you  don't
succeed.

Lycopodium  affects  the  right  side  most,  or  at  least  the
troubles  begin  on  the  right  side.  Swelling  and  suppuration
of  the  tonsils  I  have  aborted  more  than  once  in  old  quinsy
subjects  by  an  early  dose  of  this  remedy.  In  fact,  I  have  had
such  success  with  Lachesis^  Lycopodium^  Lac  caniniLfn  and
Phytolacca  that  some  who  employ  me  for  nothing  else
come  for  those  powders  that  "  break  up  quinsy''''  so  quick.
In  diphtheria,  if  the  disease  begins  in  the  nose  or  right
tonsil  and  extends  to  the  left  you  will  think  of  Lycopodium^
but  remember  that  Mercurtus  protoiodide  also  begins  on  the
right  side,  but  there  is  no  difficulty  in  choosing  between


46


LYCOPODIUM.


the  two.  Pains  in  the  abdomen,  ovarian  and  uterine
regions  also  begin  in  right  side,  running  from  right  to  left;
right  foot  gets  cold  while  the  other  remains  warm,  erup-
tions begin  on  right  and  travel  across  to  left  side.  Sciatica
the  same ;  any  complaint  that  begins  on  right  and  goes
to  left  makes  me  think  of  Lycopodium.  The  "sides  of  the
body"  subject  is  of  more  account  than  some  imagine.
Drugs  have  an  affinity  for  particular  parts,  organs  and
even  sides  of  the  body.

Upon  the  respiratory  organs  this  remedy  also  has  a
strong  influence..  It  is  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  chronic
dry  catarrh  of  the  nose,  which  becomes  completely  closed,
so  that  the  patient  has  to  breathe  through  the  open  mouth,
especially  at  night.  Here  the  choice  often  lies  between
this  remedy,  A^nmojiiiim  carb.  and  Hepar  sulphur^  other
S3^mptoms,  of  course,  deciding  the  choice.  In  infants
Sa^nbucus  comes  in  for  a  share  of  attention.

Lycopodium  has  often  saved  neglected,  mal-treated  or
imperfectly  cured  cases  of  pneumonia  from  running  into
consumption.  It  may  even  come  into  the  later  stages  of
the  acute  attack  itself,  and  here  as  usual  the  disease  is  apt
to  be  in  the  right  lung,  and  especially  if  liver  complica-
tions arise.  The  disease  has  passed  the  first  or  congestive
stage,  and  generally  the  stage  of  hepatization,  or  is  in  the
last  part  of  this  stage,  and  is  trying  hard  to  take  a  favor-
able turn  into  the  breaking-up  or  third  stage,  the  stage  of
resolution.  Just  here  is  where  many  cases  die,  neither  free
expectoration,  nor  perfect  absorption  of  the  disease  product
taking  place.  There  is  extreme  dyspncea,  the  cough
sounds  as  if  the  entire  parenchyma  of  the  lung  were
softened,  even  raising  whole  mouthfuls  of  mucus  does
not  afford  relief,  the  breath  is  short  and  the  wings  of
the  nose  expand  to  their  utmost  with  a  fan-like  motion.


LYCOPODIUM.


47


Now  is  the  time  when  Lycopodiuni  does  wonders.  Again,
even  when  this  stage  is  imperfectly  passed,  and  the  patient
still  coughs  and  expectorates  much  thick,  yellow,  purulent
or  greyish  yellow  purulent,  (sometimes  fetid)  matter,  tasting
salty,  with  much  rattling  in  the  chest,  Lycopodium  is  indis-
pensable. Here  the  choice  may  have  to  be  made  between
this  remedy  and  Sulphur^  Kali  hydriod.  or  Silicea.  The
characteristic  aggravation  as  to  time,  of  this  remedy,  is  from
4  to  8  o'clock  p.  M.  Colocynth  has  4  to  9  aggravation  of
abdominal  pains,  and  Helleborus  niger^  of  the  headache,
with  coryza but  the  4  to  8  aggravations  of  Lycopodiuin
are  general,  not  confined  to  any  one,  or  any  one  set  of
symptoms.

Lycopodium  profoundly  impresses  the  sensorium.  We
see  by  studying  its  pathogenesis  that  it  depresses.  This  is
found  particularly  in  typhoid.  The  patient  lies  stupid,
eyes  do  not  re-act  to  light ;  lower  jaw  drops ;  apparent  im-
pending paralysis  of  the  brain.

This  condition  may  also  be  found  in  the  advanced  stage
of  many  different  acute  diseases,  such  as  cerebro-spinal  men-
ingitis, typhoid  fever,  pneumonia,  etc.  Now  if  you  get  the
4  to  8  p.  M.  aggravation  this  remedy  surely  comes  in.  But
this  depression  of  the  sensorium  is  also  found  in  chronic
form.  You  remember  what  was  said  of  this  remedy  in
the  impotence  of  old  men.  If  you  find  corresponding
failure  in  the  sensorium  of  old  men,  the  memory  fails,
they  use  wrong  words  to  express  themselves,  mix  things
up  generally  in  writing,  spelling,  and  are,  in  short,  unable
to  do  ordinary  mental  work  on  account  of  failing  brain
power,  remember  Lycopodium.  Here  again  Anacarditcm^
Phosphorus^  Baryta  or  Opium  may  come  in  for  compari-
son.


48


SULPHUR.


Many  more  things  might  be  written  of  this  wonderful
polychrest,  but  I  have  given  the  most  important.  Its
strongest  curative  powers  are  not  developed  below  the
1 2th  potency,  hence  neither  the  old  school  nor  the  hom-
oeopaths who  confine  themselves  exclusively  to  the  low
preparations  know  much  about  it.  Like  Car  bo  vegeiabilis^
Silicea  and  Sulphur  its  best  powers  are  only  developed  by
Hahnemann's  peculiar  process  of  potentiza.tion ;  "prove  all
things;  hold  fast  that  which  is  good."

SULPHUR.

I  now  come  to  an  attempt  to  give  some  idea  of  the  cura-
tive sphere  of  Hahnemann's  king  of  anti-psorics.  I  do  not
in  this  place  feel  it  incumbent  upon  me  to  enter  into  a
a  defense  of  Hahnemann's  psora  theory  against  those  who
discard  it  because  they  do  not  understand  it.  With  those
who  do  understand  and  profit  by  it  there  is  no  need  of
such  defense.  The  truth  stands  confirmed  (with  those  who
have  put  to  the  test  Hahnemann's  rules  for  the  use  of
Sulphur^  that  it  has  power  to  meet  and  overcome  certain
obstacles  to  the  usual  action  of  drugs  when  indicated  by
the  symptoms,  or  at  least  seemingly  so.  That  is  the  reason
why  the  indication  as  laid  down  in  the  books  reads:
"When  seemingly  indicated  drugs  do  not  cure,  use  Sul-
phur," because  psora  is  the  obstacle  to  be  overcome.  If
you  now  ask  me,  what  is  psora?  I  answer  in  true  Yankee
style,  what  is  scrofula?  Perhaps  psora  is  scrofula,  or
scrofula  is  psora.  Call  it  either  or  neither.  Yet  it  is
present,  a  something  named  or  unnamed  which  must  be
recognized  and  complicates  so-called  acute  diseases.  Now
there  is  nothing  so  very  remarkable  about  this.  Syphilis
does  the  same. Once  contracted  or  inherited,  no  matter


SULPHUR.


49


what  ordinary  acute  disease  appears,  we  are  at  times
obliged  to  turn  aside  from  its  treatment  to  give  a  quietus
to  the  old  enemy  before  we  can  overcome  the  acute  affec-
tion. So  it  is  with  Sidphiir  and  psora.  Theorizing  and
philosophizing,  no  matter  how  wise  they  sound,  must  go
down  when  facts  oppose  them.

Now  upon  this  symptom — "When  carefully  selected
remedies  fail  to  act  favorably,  etc."  as  we  said  when  writ-
ing of  a  certain  group  under  Nux  vomica — this  is  putting
it  in  too  wholesale  a  fashion.  Let  no  one  understand  that
Sulphur  is  the  only  remedy  capable  of  removing  psoric
complications,  but  simply  that  Sulphur  will  be  likely  to  be
oftener  indicated  here,  because  it  oftener  covers  the  usual
manifestations  of  psora  in  its  pathogenesis  than  any  other
remedy.  There  are  anti-psorics,  like  Psorinum^  CaiLsticum^
Graphites^  etc.,  which  may  have  to  be  used  instead  of  Sul-
phur. And  we  know  which  one  by  the  same  law  which
guides  us  in  the  seletion  of  the  right  remedy  any  time.
Another  thing  must  not  be  forgotten.  All  the  anti-psoric
remedies  have  their  own  individual  sphere  of  action  outside
their  anti-psoric  powers ;  and  often  a  close  study  of  the  case
in  hand,  where  other  remedies  have  failed,  as  we  had  sup-
posed, on  account  of  psora,  will  reveal  that  the  anti-psoric
remedy  was  the  true  similimum  from  the  start,  independent
of  any  psoric  element.

To  undertake  to  go  over  the  whole  range  of  action  of
Sulphur  would  be  simply  to  give  its  whole  symptoma-
tology. That  is  not  the  object  of  these  notes,  but  we  can
notice  only  the  red  line  indications  which  lead  the  careful

One  of  the  chief  characteristics  of  this  remedy  is  found
under  the  head  or  rubric  of  sensation,  viz.,  that  of  Burning.
Burning  on  vertex  (outer  and  inner  head);  burning  in  eyes.


50


SULPHUR.


painful  smarting ;  burning  water  from  nose  ;  burning  in
face  without  redness ;  burning  pain  in  tongue  ;  burning
vesicles  in  mouth  ;  sore  throat  with  great  burning  and  dry-
ness, first  right  then  left ;  burning  in  stomach  ;  burning
and  pressure  in  rectum  ;  burning  and  itching  in  haemor-
rhoids; burning  in  anus  ;  burning  in  urethra  ;  burning  in
vagina,  scarcely  able  to  keep  still ;  nipples  burn  like  fire  ;
burning  in  chest,  rising  to  face  ;  burning  between  scapulae
{Phos.  and  Lycop.) ;  burning  of  hands ;  burning  of  feet,
puts  them  out  of  bed  to  cool  them ;  hot  flushes  and  burn-
ing all  over ;  burning  skin  of  whole  body ;  itching  erup-
tions burn  after  scratching.

After  reading  such  a  list  of  burning  in  the  cured  and
characteristic  symptoms  of  Sulphur  one  does  not  wonder
that  hell  is  represented  as  being  heated  by  this  substance,
for  it  seems  by  its  pathogenesis  as  though  it  were  eternally
burning.  Arsenicum  alburn^  Phosphorus  and  Sulphur  lead
the  list  in  our  Materia  Medica  for  burners.  These  burning
sensations  are  found  in  both  acute  and  chronic  diseases.  Of
course  there  are  several  other  remedies  that  have  this
symptom  in  an  intense  degree,  and  must  be  chosen  if  the
other  symptoms  come  in  to  complete  the  picture  of  simi-
larity. Among  these  of  first  importance  may  be  named
Aconite^  Agaricus^  Apis^  Bellado7t7ta^  Cantharis^  Capsicum^
Carbo  animalis  and  Phosphoric  acid.  I  think  Arseiticum
leads  all  in  acute  diseases,  while  Sulphur  leads  in  chronic
affections.  We,  as  homoeopathists,  do  not  yet  fully  ap-
preciate the  value  of  sensations.

The  action  of  Sulphur  upon  the  circulation  is  to  cause
and  cure  local  congestions  and  a  chronic  tendency  thereto.
In  other  words,  it  seems  to  have  the  power  of  equalizing
the  circulation  in  persons  subject  to  such  local  congestions
and  inflammations. These,  either  acute  or  chronic  conges-


SULPHUR.


51


tions,  may  manifest  themselves  in  boils,  swellings,  felons,
abdominal  or  portal  congestions  and  inflammations,  and  here
it  is  especially  indicated  if  caused  by  suppressed  haemor-
rhoids ;  congestions  to  the  head  may  result  from  the  same
cause ;  the  chest  becomes  congested,  when  there  is  great
difficulty  of  breathing ;  feels  so  oppressed  that  he  wants
doors  and  windows  open.  This  rush  of  blood  seems  to  fill
the  whole  chest,  the  heart  feels  as  if  "too  full,"  palpitates
and  labors,  as  if  trying  to  rid  itself  of  a  burden.

The  orifices  of  the  body  are  red,  as  if  pressed  full  of
blood.  The  lips  are  red  as  vermillion  ;  ears  very  red  ;  eye-
lids red,  anus  red,  urethra  red.  All  these  are  manifest  in-
dications for  Sulphur.  Especially  is  this  true  if  these
symptoms  follow,  or  are  consequent  upon  the  suppression
or  retrocession  of  some  eruption  or  skin  trouble.  If  in-
ward affections  work  outward  towards  the  surface  there  is
not  usually  cause  for  alarm,  but  if  they  go  the  other  way
look  out  for  breakers,  there  is  shipwreck  ahead.  No  one
need  tell  me  that  there  is  no  relation  of  skin  to  internal
troubles.  I  have  seen  too  much  of  it,  and  have  cured  many
cases  of  that  character,  where  a  restoration  of  the  skin  dis-
ease relieved  the  internal  which  had  followed  its  retroces-
■  sion  or  suppression.

There  is  one  thing  about  Sulphur  that  is  often  under-
estimated by  the  profession  in  general,  viz.,  its  power  of
absorption.  It  is  after  the  stage  of  effusion  has  set  in  or
even  later  when  this  stage  is  passed  and  the  results  of  the
inflammatory  process, is  to  be  gotten  rid  of;  like  the  en-
largement of  the  joint  in  rheumatism,  exudations  into
serous  sacs,  pleura,  meningeal  membranes,  peritoneum,  etc.
Bryonia  is  one  of  the  remedies  first  thought  of  in  these
cases,  and  we  have  another  remedy  that  is  making  a  record
for  itself  here,  viz..  Kali  muriaticum ;  but  when  the  case  is


52


SULPHUR.


complicated  by  psora  and,  especially,  when  the  character-
istic burnings  stand  out  prominently  Sulphur  is  almost
sure  to  be  needed  before  the  case  is  finished.  Bryonia  and
SulphiLr  complement  each  other ;  but,  of  course,  the  symp-
toms must  decide  and  may  decide  in  favor  of  neither  of
them.  Right  here  it  may  be  well  to  speak  of  that  power
possessed  by  Sulphur  of  arousing  or  exciting  defective  re-
action. Your  former  remedy  was  well  chosen  and  seemed
to  help  the  patient  in  a  measure,  but  the  case  relapses,
lingers  or  progresses  slowly  to  perfect  recovery.  It  is  on
account  of  a  depression  of  the  vital  force^  as  Hahnemann
would  call  it.  It  may  be  on  account  of  psora  or  not.
Now  give  a  dose  of  Sulphur  and  let  it  act  a  few  hours  if
in  an  acute  case,  or  a  number  of  days  if  chronic.  Then
you  may  return  to  your  former  remedy  and  get  results
which  you  could  not  before  the  Sulphur  was  given.  It
clears  up  the  case  and  prevents  it  becoming  chronic  or  a
lingering  unsatisfactory  convalescence.

No  remedy  has  more  general,  positive  and  persistent
action  upon  the  skin  than  Stdphur.  With  or  without  erup-
tion, itching  and  bitrning^  are  the  characteristic  sensations
attending  the  skin  symptoms.  If  any  one  doubts  the  itch-
producing  power  of  Stdphur^  let  him  work  a  day  or  two
in  the  bleaching  room  of  a  broom  factory.  I  have  tried
the  experiment,  and  we  all  remember  the  fact  that  our
mothers  and  grandmothers  used  to  cure  or  rather  over-cure
itch  with  it.

So  strong  is  this  affinity  of  Stdphur  for  the  skin  that  it
seems  bent  on  pushing  everything  internal  out  on  the
surface.  Especially  is  this  true  if  it  is  something  that
naturally  belongs  there.  Over  twenty-five  years  ago  I  had
a  case  that  illustrates  this.  A  lady  (maiden)  bad  been  an
invalid  for  fourteen  years. Her  trouble  seemed  to  center  in


SULPHUR.


53


her  stomach.  So  that  for  all  that  long  period  of  time  she
could  eat  nothing  but  a  little  Graham  bread  and  milk,
hardly  enough  to  sustain  life,  and  in  the  earlier  part  of  her
sickness  for  a  long  time  was  able  only  to  take  a  teaspoon-
ful  of  milk  at  a  time.  She  was  an  almost  literal  walking
skeleton.  I  found,  after  much  questioning  and  several
failures  to  relieve  her  much,  that  about  fifteen  years  before
she  had  with  an  ointment  suppressed  an  eczema  of  the
nape  and  occiput.  She  boasted  that  she  had  never  seen  a
vestige  of  it  since.  I  gave  that  lady  SulphiLV  200th  and
in  three  weeks  from  that  time  had  that  eruption  fully
restored  and  her  stomach  trouble  completely  relieved.
The  deacon  of  her  (Presbyterian)  church  exclaimed  as  she
came  walking  up  a  long  hill  to  service — here  comes  Susan

F  ,  who  has  been  dying  for  the  last  fourteen  years  and,

lo  and  behold,  she  is  the  biggest,  fattest  one  among  us !
Now  how  about  the  relation  of  skin  to  internal  trouble?
I  can  report  a  number  of  as  convincing  cases  in  my  own
practice  cured  with  Sulphur^  Arseniciun^  Causticum  or
other  remedies.  One  thing  must  be  recognized  and  never
lost  sight  of,  viz.,  that  symptoms  weigh  whether  we  can
give  the  pathological  interpretation  of  them  or  not.  Here
are  a  few  of  that  kind  from  the  pathogenesis  of  Sulphur  :

"Particularly  efficacious  with  lean,  stoop-shouldered  per-
sons, who  walk  or  sit  stooped ;  standing  is  the  most  un-
comfortable position."

"Dirty,  filthy  people,  prone  to  skin  affections."

"Children  cannot  bear  to  be  washed  or  bathed."

"  Voluptuous  itching ;  scratching  relieves ;  after  it  burn-
ing.''^

"Complaints  continually  relapsing."
"Congestion  to  single  parts."


5


54  CAI.CAREA  OSTREARUM.

"Scrofulous  (psoric)  chronic  diseases  that  result  from
suppressed  eruptions."

"Discharges  from  every  outlet  acrid,  excoriating  and
reddening."

"Offensive  odor  of  body  despite  frequent  bathing."

"  Hot  flushes  with  spells  of  faintness,  or  debility  passing
off  with  a  little  moisture,  faintness  or  debility."

"Weak,  faint  spells  frequently  during  the  day."

"Burning  in  feet,  wants  to  find  a  cool  place  for  them;
puts  them  out  of  bed  to  cool  them  off."

"Feels  suffocated;  wants  doors  and  windows  open,  par-
ticularly at  night."

Diarrhoea  after  midnight;  painless,  driving  out  of  bed
early  in  the  morning,  as  if  the  bowels  were  too  weak  to
retain  their  contents."

"Weak,  empty,  gone  or  faint  feeling  in  stomach  about
II  A.  M."

"White  tongue  with  very  red  tip  and  borders."
"Bright  redness  of  lips  as  if  the  blood  would  burst
through."

"Heat  on  crown  of  head;  cold  feet;  frequent  flushing."

Every  true  homoeopath  knows  the  value  of  these  and
many  more  symptoms  of  this  remedy.  No  one  else  ap-
preciates them.  Again,  none  but  those  who  use  the
potentized  Sulphur  can  ever  know  what  it  is  capable  of
curing.

CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.

This  is  another  of  Hahnemann's  constitutional  remedies
which,  as  Farrington  says,  "may  come  into  use  in  almost
any  form  of  disease."  We  say  may  come  into  use,  because,
it  may  be  on  account  of  certain  idiosyncrasies  which  come


CALCARKA  OSTREARUM.


55


under  the  remedial  power  of  Calcarea  that  the  disease,
whatever  it  is ,  is  made  less  amenable  to  ordinary  treatment.

The  temperament  of  Calcarea  is  altogether  different  from
that  of  Sitlphur.  You  remember  the  lean,  stoop-shouldered
Sulphur  subject.  Calcarea  is  on  the  contrary  what  cannot
be  better  expressed  than  in  the  term  used  by  Henry  N.
Guernsey,  viz.,  Leucophlegmatic  temperament.

The  Calcarea  patient  is  constitutionally  fat,  over  fat,  or
strongly  inclined  to  obesity.  The  color  of  the  skin  is  white,
watery  or  chalky  pale.  Of  torpid  disposition  (especially
children)  sluggish  or  slow  in  its  movements.  The  Sulphur
is  almost  the  exact  opposite,  quick,  wiry,  nervous,  active.
There  is  none  of  the  bilious,  swarthy,  yellowish  appear-
ance in  Calcarea  that  we  find  in  Lycopodium.  These
three  remedies,  Calcarea^  Stdphur^  Lycopodium^  are  a  trio
that  find  each  their  counterpart  in  many  persons  the
world  over.  Of  course  we  find  the  tendency  to  obesity
under  other  remedies,  as,  for  instance,  under  Graphites^  but
with  this  obesity  we  almost  always  find  accompanying  it
the  peculiar  skin  troubles  of  Graphites.  Sometimes  we
seem  to  find  a  condition  that  seems  to  simiiate  each
remedy  in  some  one  feature,  for  instance  the  obesic  tem-
perament of  Calcarea  and  the  eruptive  tendency  of  Sul-
phur. This  may  combine  so  as  to  make  a  case  that  will
be  covered  by  Hepar  sulph.  Such  cases  are  more  difii-
cult  to  cover  with  a  perfect  similimum.  But  when  we
do  find  a  purely  Calcarea^  Sulphur  or  Lycopodium  sub-
ject the  fact  is  inestimable  as  a  help  to  a  brilliant  result  in
many  cases.

Mal-nutrition  is  one  of  the  disorders  calling  for  the  ex-
hibition of  this  remedy.

"Tardy  development  of  the  bony  tissues  with  lymphatic
enlargements."


56


CALCAREA  OSTRRARUM.


"Curvature  of  the  bones;  especially  spine  and  long
bones."

"Extremities  deformed,  crooked."

"Softening  of  the  bones;  fontanelles  remain  open  too
long  and  skull  very  large."

These  symptoms  are  quoted  from  "Herring's  Guiding
Symptoms,"  and  show  the  lack  of,  or  imperfect,  nutrition
of  bones.  They  are  nourished  irregularly,  or  unevenly.
One  part  of  a  bone,  the  vertebrae  for  instance,  is  nourished,
while  the  other  is  starved.  While  all  this  irregular  bone
development  is  going  on  the  soft  parts  are  suffering  from
over-nutrition.  Thus  we  have  recorded  in  the  patho-
genesis: "Tendency  to  obesity,  especially  in  children  and
young  people."

"  Nutrition  impaired  with  tendency  to  glandular  enlarge-
ments."

"Granular  vegetations;  polypus  (in  nose,  ear,  bladder,
uterus,  etc.)."  .

This  is  a  fair  picture  of  the  general  or  constitutional  use
of  Calcarea  ost.^  and  it  remains  to  give  some  of  the  char-
acteristic'or  peculiar  symptoms  guiding  to  its  selection.

When  writing  of  Sidphur  we  called  particular  attention
to  the  sensation  of  burning  under  that  remedy.  Calcarea
has  characteristically  the  opposite,  viz..  Coldness.

"Cold,  damp  feet."

"Sensation  in  feet  and  legs  as  if  she  had  on  cold,  damp
stockings."

"Coldness  of  legs  with  night-sweats."

"Internal  and  external  sensation  of  coldness  of  various
parts  of  head  as  if  a  piece  of  ice  were  lying  against  it ;  with
pale  puffed  face."

"She  feels  a  sort  of  inward  coldness."


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.


57


"Aversion  to  open  air,  the  least  cold  air  goes  right
through  her."

All  this  is  so  directly  opposite  to  Sulphur  that  any  con-
fusion between  them  seems  impossible.

Sensations  of  coldness  in  single  parts  should  always  call
to  mind  Calcarea^  as  well  as  general  coldness.

If  Calcarea  has  one  symptom  that  not  only  leads  all  the
rest,  but  also  all  other  rernedies,  it  is  found  in  the  Profuse
sweats  on  the  head  of  large-headed,  open-fontanelled
children.  The  sweat  is  so  profuse  that  during  sleep  it  rolls
down  the  head  and  face,  wetting  the  pillow  far  around.  Many
a  little  child  has  been  saved  from  dying  of  hydrocephalus,
dentition,  rachitis,  marasmus,  eclampsia,  cholera  infantum,
etc.,  where  this  sweating  symptom  was  the  guiding  symp-
tom to  the  use  of  Calcarea.  It  is  also  especially  indicated,
other  symptoms  agreeing,  in  sweats  of  male  organs,
nape  of  neck,  chest,  axilla,  hands,  knees,  feet,  etc.  Partial
Sweats.  It  is  also  a  remedy  for  night  sweats  generally,
when  they  occur  in  connection  with  consumption  or  other
debilitating  diseases.

In  all  these  sweatings  of  Calcarea  the  surface  is  charac-
teristically cold  at  the  same  time,  and  especially  would  we
find  the  lower  extremities  cold.

Calcarea  has  characteristic  symptoms  in  the  digestive
tract.  One  is  that  everything  in  the  whole  length  of  the
the  tract  seems  SOur.  Eructations  sour  ;  sour  vomiting  of
large  curds  {^thusa) ;  sour  diarrhoea.  And  then  there  is
a  sour  smell  of  the  whole  body.  This  is  not  like  the  of-
fensive odor  of  the  body  that  Sulphur  has.

Then  there  is  a  peculiar  symptom  of  the  appetite  that
has  often  been  verified — "lyonging  for  eggs,  particularly
in  children,  in  sickness  or  during  convalescence,  even
before  they  are  able  to  swallow. The  stomach  externally


58


CALCAREA  OSTREARUM.


is  swollen  or  seems  distended,  standing  right  out  like  an
inverted  saucer.  Abdomen  is  also  much  distended  from
hard  and  swollen  mesentery,  even  when  the  rest  of  the
body  is  emaciated."

The  diarrhoea,  which  may  vary  as  to  color  and  con-
sistence, instead  of  being  aggravated  in  the  morning,  like
Sulphur^  is  worse  in  the  afternoon.  The  patient  is  gen-
erally better  when  constipated.

Calcarea  has  not  so  positive  and  unvarying  action  upon
the  skin  as  Sitlphitr^  but  is  indispensable  in  skin  affections
which  seem  to  depend  upon  some  constitutional  dyscrasia
that  it  covers  in  its  general  action,  for  instance,  in  eczema
capitis  or  milk  crusts  in  children  of  the  Calcarea  type.  .
Here,  of  course,  no  remedy  can  take  its  place.  Indeed  all
skin  troubles  in  Calcarea  subjects  disappear  when  through
its  action  the  system  is  set  right,  showing  that  the  skin
troubles  after  all  were  only  secondary.  The''  skin  of  the
Calcarea  subject  is  generally  Qold,  soft  and  flabby.

We  must  not  omit  to  notice  the  action  of  Calcarea  ost.
on  the  respiratory  organs,  for  the  reason  that  it  is  -  of  great
importance  in  its  use  in  that  dread  disease,  pulmonary  con-
sumption. Whether,  as  Professor  Bennet  believes,  this
disease  be  essentially  one  of  faulty  nutrition,  or  as  Virchow
believes,  one  of  inflammation,  or  if  Professor  Rind-flesch's
theory,  relegating  it  to  the  class  of  diseases  known  as
infectious,  be  true  or  whatever  its  primary  cause  may  be,
we  know  that  Calcarea  ost.  is  one  of  the  most  effective
agents,  if  indicated  by  the  temperament  and  symptoms,  in
the  cure  of  this  malady,  and  if  applied  at  a  stage  when  a
cure  is  at  all  possible.

Very  many  cases  in  the  incipient  stage  come  within
range  of  Sulphitr  or  Calcarea. As  we  have  already  given


CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.


59


the  leading  indications  of  Sulphur,  we  will  now  give  some
of  them  for  Calcarea:

"  Leuco phlegmatic  temperament."

"Middle  and  upper  portion  of  right  lung."  {Sulph.^
upper  left.)

" Chest  painfully  sensitive  to  touch  and  on  inspiration."
"  Shortness  of  breath  on  walking,  especially  on  ascend-
ing."

"Painless  hoarseness,  <  in  the  morning."

"Especially  in  women  who  have  always  been  top  early
and  profuse  in  menstruation,  and  who  have  habitually  cold
feet  to  the  knees."

"Tendency  to  looseness  of  the  bowels,  <  afternoons."

"Appetite  failing  and  emaciation  progressing."

Here  are  a  few  of  the  prominent  indications,  and  on
them  many  a  case  has  been  cured.  Of  course  there  is
generally  c6ugh,  and  it  may  be  tight  or  loose,  yet  the  case
rests  mainly  on  the  symptoms  outside  the  cough.  This
remedy  in  this  disease  and  the  success  attending  its  use  is
one  of  the  illustrations  of  the  soundness  of  Hering's  advice
when  he  says  "treat  the  patient  not  the  disease. "

CALCAREA  PHOSPHORICA.

While  on  the  subject  of  Calcarea  we  may  as  well  notice
this  other  combination.

The  Phosphorus  element  in  this  preparation  seems  to
change  the  temperament,  for  while  it  retains  its  wonderful
remedial  power  over  tardy  bone  development  it  acts  best
in  spare  subjects  instead  of  fat.  So  that  if  we  find  a  sickly
child  with  fontanelles  remaining  open  too  long  or  reopen-
ing after  once  closed,  the  child  being  spare  and  aenemic,
we  think  of  this  remedy.


6o


SIIvICEA.


We  would  also  think  of  Silicea  in  one  of  these  poor  sub-
jects, but  in  the  Calcarea  phos.  the  sweaty  head  is  not  a
prominent  symptom,  while  with  Silicea  it  is  markedly  so.
Calcarea  phos.  also  has  a  very  peculiar  desire,  the  little
patient  instead  of  wanting  eggs  wants  "ham  rind,"  a  very
queer  symptom  but  a  genuine  one.

Diarrhoea  is  very  prominent,  and  the  stools  are  green
and  "spluttering;"  that  is,  the  flatulence  (of  which  there  is
much)  with  the  stool  makes  a  loud  spluttering  noise  when
the  stool  passes.  I  have  made  some  very  fine  cures  in
such  cases  where  there  seemed  little  hope  for  the  child  and
hydrocephaloid  seemed  impending.  The  little  patients
were  shrunken,  emaciated  and  very  senemic.

Calcarea  phos.  is  an  excellent  remedy  for  broken  bones
where  the  bones  refuse  to  knit.

I  have  found  Calcarea  phos.  very  useful  in  the  headaches
of  aenemic  school  girls.  Here  we  sometimes  have  to  choose
between  it  and  Natrum  miir.

SILICEA

Is  another  of  our  invaluable  constitutional  remedies,  and
also  one  which  is  of  little  or  no  use  except  as  developed  by
Hahnemann's  process  of  potentization.  Like  Calcarea^  it
is  especially  useful  in  sweaty  headed  children  with  defective
assimilation.  It  is  not  in  the  fat,  torpid,  obesic  patients;
over-nourished  in  one  part  and  insufficiently  so  in  another,
like  Calcarea^  that  Silicea  is  indicated,  but  the  over-sensi-
tive, imperfectly  nourished  (generally),  not  from  want  of
food  but  from  imperfect  assimilation.  The  Silicea  child  is
not  larger  anywhere  than  natural  except  in  its  "big  belly,"
which  is  due  to  diseased  mesentery.  Its  limbs  are  shrunken,
its  eyes  sunken  and  its  face  pinched  and  old  looking.  It  does


SILICEA.


6i


not  increase  in  size  or  strength,  learns  to  walk  late,  in  short,
if  not  actually  sick  in  bed,  everything  seems  to  have  come
to  a  standstill  so  far  as  growth  or  development  is  concerned.
Now  if  this  state  of  things  continues  the  bowels  become
very  constipated,  and  a  peculiar  constipation  it  is
too.  The  little  fellow  strains  and  strains,  the  stool  partly
protruding  and  then  slipping  back,  as  though  the  general
weakness  of  the  patient  affected  the  expulsive  power  of  the
rectum,  or  else  the  bowels  become  very  persistently  loose,
especially  during  dentition  or  the  hot  weather  of  summer.
The  stools  are  changeable,  but  Pulsatilla  does  no  good,
almost  every  kind  and  color  of  loose  stool  appearing.  The
child  takes  nourishment  enough,  but  whether  vomited  or
retained,  goes  on  emaciating  and  growing  weaker  and
weaker  until  it  dies  of  inanition,  unless  Silicea  checks  this
process.  Many  such  cases  have  I  saved  with  this  remedy
and  made  them  healthy  children.  I  have  always  used  the
30th  and  upwards,  hence  cannot  speak  of  the  lower  prepa-
rations.

Silicea  ranks  among  the  first  of  our  remedies  for  inflam-
mations ending  in  suppuration.  It  seems  to  make  no
particular  difference  whether  the  suppuration  takes  place
in  the  soft  or  hard  parts,  for  it  is  equally  efficacious  in
glandular  or  bony  ulcerations.  It  seems  to  come  in  at  a
later  stage  than  Hepar  sulphitr  or  Calcarea  sulphide^  which
expedite  the  discharge  of  pus  already  formed,  while  Silicea
comes  in  for  healing  after  the  discharge  has  taken  place.
Cellular  tissues  with  deep-seated  suppurations,  including
tendons  and  ligaments  also  come  within  the  range  of  its
healing  powers.  In  these  cases  the  constitution  of  the
patient  has  an  important  bearing  in  the  selection  of  this
remedy.  The  Silicea  subject  is  weakly,  with  fine  skin,
pale  face,  lax  muscles. Even  the  mind  and  nervous  symp-


62


SILTCRA.


toms  come  into  the  general  picture  of  "weakness."  He  is
nervous  and  irritable,  weak,  faint-hearted,  yielding,  giving
up  disposition,  "grit  all  gone."  In  such  a  case  Silicea  is
grand.  I  hate  to  use  the  term,  but  as  the  old  school  would
say,  "it  builds  them  up,"  and  so  it  seems,  for  under  its
action  the  patient's  spirits  rise,  hope  revives,  the  weakness
and  depression  give  way  to  a  feeling  of  returning  strength
and  health.  It  makes  no  difference  whether  the  ulcera-
tions are  in  the  tissues  already  named,  in  the  lungs,  in-
testinal tract,  or  mammae,  or  elsewhere,  the  effect  is  the
same,  and  the  improvement  in  the  local  affection  generally
follows  the  general  constitutional  improvement.  This
condition  of  weakness  seems  to  attack  the  general  nervous
system,  affecting  the  spine,  and  so  we  get  those  cerebro-
spinal headaches,  or  headaches  beginning  in  the  nape  of
the  neck  and  running  forward  over  the  head  to  the  eyes,
for  which  Silicea  is  so  useful.

There  seems  to  be  lack  of  nerve  power  to  resist  outward
depressing  influences.  He  is  cold,  or,  as  Hering  puts  it,
there  is  "  want  of  vital  warmth,  even  when  taking  exercise."
He  is  sensitive  to  cold  air,  takes  cold  very  easily,  especially
when  uncovering  the  head  or  feet.  On  the  contrary,  he  is
relieved  by  "wrapping  up  the  head,"  or,  in  other  words,  by
supplying  artificially  the  warmth  that  he  lacks  naturally.

I  have  several  times  found  a  Silicea  child  suffering  from
epileptiform  spasms  which  were  always  worse  at  new  moon.
A  few  doses  of  Silicea  200th  set  them  all  right.

Silicea  subjects  are  often  afflicted  with  offensive  foot-
sweats,  which  are  easily  suppressed  by  getting  the  feet  cold.
Such  suppression  must  be  remedied,  the  sweat  restored  and
cured  by  proper  medication  or  serious  results  often  follow ;
such  as  convulsions  and  other  spinal  troubles,  even  loco-
motor ataxia. Silicea  is  the  remedy  to  restore  and  cure


ACONITUM  NAPELI.US.  63

such  sweats  by  correcting  the  conditions  upon  which  the
sweats  depend.

The  Silicea  patient  desires  to  be  magnetized  and  is

relieved  thereby.

This  is  one  of  the  remedies  of  which,  like  Sepia,  Lachesis,
Lycopodmm  and  others,  the  old  school  knows  little  or
nothing,  because  their  chief  virtues  are  only  developed
in  potencies  above  the  12th.


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.

We  will  now  take  up  what  I  call  the  trio  of  restless  reme-
dies, viz.:  Aconite,  Arsenicum  and  Rhus  toxicodendron.

All  are  equally  restless,  yet  all  are  so  very  different  that
there  is  no  difficulty  in  choosing  between  them.  The
Aconite  restlessness  is  oftenest  found  in  a  high  grade  of
synochal  or  inflammatory  fevers.  There  is  no  better  picture
in  a  few  words  of  the  Aco7iite  fever  than  is  given  by  Her-
ing — "  Heat,  with  thirst ;  hard,  full  and  frequent  pulse,
anxious  impatience,  inappeasable,  beside  himself,  tossing
about  with  agony."  ,

The  custom  of  alternating  Aconite  and  Belladonna  in
inflammatory  affections,  which  so  widely  prevails,  is  a
senseless  one.  Both  remedies  cannot  be  indicated  at  a
time,  and  if  a  good  effect  follows  their  administration
you  may  be  sure  that  the  indicated  one  cured  in  spite  of
the  action  of  the  other,  which  only  hindered  ;  or  that  the
patient  recovered  without  help  from  either.  There  are
many  cases  of  this  kind  where  the  doctor  is  congratulating
himself  on  a  cure  which  was  only  a  recovery,  for  which  he
deserves  no  credit  at  all.  Let  us  look  for  a  moment  at
some  of  the  diagnostic  differences  of  these  two  remedies.


64


ACONITUM  NAPEIvLUS.


Both  have  great  heat  of  the  skin,  but  Aconite  has  char-
acteristically dry,  hot  skin  and  no  sweat ;  Belladonna  has
even  greater  surface  heat,  but  sweats  on  covered  parts.
Aconite  tosses  about  in  agony  with  great  fear  of  death ;
Belladonna  oftener  has  semi-stupor  and  jerks  and  twitches
in  sleep.  Aco7iite  has  greater  distress  in  heart  and  chest ;
Belladonna  everything  seems  to  centre  in  the  head.
Aconite  fears  death,  without  much  delirium  ;  Belladonna
fears  imaginary  things,  with  delirium.  Thus  we  might
continue  to  give  points  of  difference.  No  man  who  un-
derstands the  homoeopathic  art  of  healing  will  ever  alter-
nate these  two  remedies.

Aconite  is  also  a  great  pain  remedy.  If  we  were  to
name  the  three  leading  remedies  in  this  respect  it  would
be  Aconite,  Chamomilla  and  Coffea.  The  Aconite  pains
are  always  attended  by  the  extreme  restlessness,  anxiety
and  fearfulness  of  this  remedy.  The  patient  tosses  about
in  agony,  "cannot  bear  the  pain,  nor  bear  to  be  touched,
nor  to  be  uncovered."  Well,  you  say,  all  remedies  have
pain.  Not  all,  and  not  many  so  intense  pain.  Opium
and  Stramonium  have  painlessness  oftener  than  pain.
The  Aconite  pains  are  intolerable  and  generally  wor.-e  in
the  evening  or  at  night.  Then  we  have  often  alternating
with  or  sometimes  even  in  conjunction  with  the  pains
numbness,  tingling,  or  formication.

In  this  it  resembles  Rhus  tox.,  but  with  Aconite  the
pains  predominate,  while  with  Rhus  tox.  the  numbness,
with  dull  aching  and  soreness,  leads.  The  pains  of
Aconite  are  tearing,  cutting  pains,  which  drive  the  patient
to  desperation.  Right  here  we  may  as  well  speak  of  the
leading  characteristic  of  this  remedy,  for  it  is  almost
always  present  when  Aconite  is  clearly  indicated.  Just
one  word  expresses  it :  YQZX—fea.r  of  death  especially,  but


ACONITUM  NAPELIvUS.


65


fear  to  cross  the  street,  fear  to  go  into  society,  fear  some-
thing is  going  to  happen,  ever  present,  undefinable,  un-
reasonable fear.  No  remedy  has  it  in  such  a  degree  as
this  one.  It  is  the  fear  as  much  as  the  pain  that  makes  the
patient  so  full  of  that  agonized  restlessness.  The  Arsenic
restlessness  goes  with  extreme  prostration  and  reduced
vitality.  Rhus  tox.^  on  account  of  the  aching  pains,  which
make  him  want  to  move  for  the  temporary  relief  he  gets
from  the  movement.  Arse^iic  wants  to  move  from  place
to  place,  but  is  not  relieved.  Neither  Aconite  nor  Arsenic
get  such  relief  from  movement,  nor  does  Arsenic  fear  like
Aconite^  or  at  least  in  any  such  degree.  Aconite^  as  a
fever  remedy,  has  been  greatly  abused.  Even  the  old-
school,  astonished  at  the  results  of  homoeopathic  treat-
ment, so  superior  to  their  so-called  anti-phlogistic  treat-
ment, and  finding  Aconite  so  highly  recommended  and
frequently  used  in  inflammatory  affections,  concluded  in
accordance  with  their  usual  way  of  reasoning  that  Aconite
could  be  squeezed  into  their  pathological  livery  and  made
to  do  service  in  all  kinds  of  fever  simply  because  it  was
fever.  But  they  soon  found  that  however  useful  it  might
be  in  some  cases  of  inflammatory  fever,  it  was  of  no  use  in
typhoids.  Thus  was  generalization  from  a  pathological
standpoint  again  doomed  to  disappointment,  as  it  always
must  be.  Now  many  so-called  homoeopaths  have  fallen
into  similar  error  by  concluding  that  because  Aconite
did  quickly  cure  in  some  cases  having  a  high  grade  of
fever,  that  therefore  it  was  always  the  remedy  with
which  to  treat  cases  having  high  fever.  They  even  fell
into  the  routine  habit  of  prescribing  this  remedy  for  the
first  stage  of  all  inflammatory  affections,  and  follow  it  with
other  remedies  more  appropriate  to  the  whole  case  further
on. If  Aconite  were  the  only  remedy  having  inflamma-


■


66


ACONITUM  NAPELLUS.


tory  fever,  perhaps  we  could  do  no  better  than  to  zig-zag
the  case  to  a  cure  this  way.  Dunham  writes  :  "  Aconite
is  never  to  be  given  first  to  subdue  the  fever  and  then
some  other  remedy  '  to  meet  the  case,'  never  to  be  alter-
nated with  other  drugs  for  the  purpose,  as  is  often  alleged,
of  '  controlling  the  fever.'  If  the  fever  be  such  as  to  re-
quire Aconite  no  other  drug  is  needed.  If  other  drugs
seem  indicated,  one  should  be  sought  which  meets  the
fever  as  well,  for  many  drugs  besides  Aconite  produce
fever,  each  after  its  kind."

True  words,  and  as  one  reads  them  who  has  proved
their  truthfulness  and  remembers  their  great  author  he
feels  like  exclaiming,  "  Being  dead,  yet  speaketh."
Aconite  has  two  very  important  modalities,  viz.,  fright
and  dry  cold  air.  We  have  already  noticed  the  value  of
the  fear  of  Aconite  as  a  symptom,  connected  with  acute
inflammatory  ailments.  It  is  no  less  a  remedy  for  ail-
ments brought  on  by  fright,  either  immediate  or  remote.
The  patient  has  received  a  fright  in  the  dark  and  is  al-
ways afraid  in  the  dark  afterwards.  From  fright  vertigo
comes  on,  or  fainting ;  trembling ;  threatened  abortion,  or
suppressed  menstruation.  Jaundice  may  be  induced  by  it,
and  become  chronic.  There  are  other  remedies  for  fright,
prominent  among  which  are  Opium^  Ignatia^  Veratrum
albuin^  etc.  Now  in  regard  to  the  dry  cold  air.  No
remedy  has  more  prominently,  acute  inflammations  aris-
ing from  dry  cold  air.  Nineteen  out  of  twenty  cases  of
croup  arising  from  exposure  to  dry  cold  air  will  be  cured
by  Aconite.  I  live  in  a  locality  where  croup  abounds  and
have  had  abundant  opportunity  to  verify  this.  Pleurisy,
pneumonia  and  rheumatism  also  come  under  this  head,
and  they  are,  as  would  be  expected,  almost  invariably  ac-
companied by  the  high  fever,  anguish,  restlessness  and  fear


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


67


SO  characteristic  of  this  remedy.  Any  local  congestion  or
inflammation  coming  from  sucli  exposure  also  comes  under
the  same  rule,  always  providing  the  other  symptoms  cor-
respond. The  other  leading  dry  air  remedies  are  Bryonia^
Causticum^  Hepar  sulph.  and  Nux  vomica.  Here  are
some  wet  weather  remedies,  Dulcamara.,  Nux  moschata.,
Natrum  sulphziricum  and  Rhtts  toxicodendron.  Such
things  are  well  to  remember  for  one  positive  indication  is
worth  two  or  three  vague  ones.

ARSENICUM  ALBUM.

No  remedy  is  more  restless  than  this  one.  The  Aconite
restlessness  comes  in  the  earlier  stages  of  inflammatory
diseases,  with  fever  of  a  high  grade.  Arsenicum  in  the
latter  stages  after  the  patient  has  become  greatly  reduced
in  strength,  or  in  low  grades  of  fever  like  typhoids.  The
Aconite  patient  tosses  to  and  fro  in  agony  and  fear.  The
Arsenic  patient  is  too  weak  to  toss  as  the  anguish  and
restlessness  would  incline  him  to.  He  cannot  move  him-
self around  as  he  desires,  but  wants  to  be  moved  from
place  to  place,  or  bed  to  bed,  while  the  least  exertion  on
his  own  part  exhausts  terribly.  He  has  fear  of  death,  but
not  like  the  Aconite  fear,  but  rather  an  anxiety  and  a  feel-
ing that  it  is  useless  to  take  medicine  for  he  is  going  to
die  ;  he  is  incurable.

The  mental  restlessness  is  as  great  as  the  bodily.  He
has  attacks  of  anxiety  that  drive  him  out  of  bed  at  night.
Even  when  there  is  no  pain  at  all  he  wants  to  be  con-
tinually changing  place,  walking  about  if  strong  enough,
without  any  other  reason  than  that  he  can't  keep  still.
Often  the  first  beneficial  effect  to  be  observed  in  cases  call-
ing for  this  remedy  is  that  the  anxiety  grows  less,  the


68


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


patient  lies  still,  his  pain  is  not  so  much  less,  but  it  does
not  make  him  so  restless  ;  he  can  bear  it  better.  This
is  a  good  sign  and  is  generally  followed  by  amelioration
of  all  the  symptoms.  It  makes  little  difference  what  the
disease,  if  this  persistent  restlessness  and  especially  if  great
weakness  is  also  present,  don't  forget  Arsenic.

Arsenicu7n  leads  all  the  remedies  for  burning  sensation,
especially  in  acute  diseases.  It  is  not  by  any  means  con-
fined to  acute  diseases,  but  is  often  found  in  chronic  affec-
tions especially  of  a  malignant  character  or  tending  to
malignancy.  I  think  perhaps  Sulphur  outranks  it  gen-
erally for  burnings  in  chronic  affections.  There  is  hardly
an  organ  or  tissue  in  the  human  system  where  these  burn-
ings of  Arsenic  are  not  found.  This  burning,  strange  as
it  may  seem,  is  greatly  ameliorated  by  heat.  Hot  applica-
tions if  they  can  be  gotten  in  contact  with  the  part,  also
heat  of  a  warm  stove  or  warm  room.  This  is  the  exact
opposite  of  Secale  cornutum.^  for  while  the  part  is  objec-
tively cold,  it  still  burns^  but  hot  applications  are  intoler-
able ;  they  cannot  even  bear  to  have  it  covered  ;  with
Arsenicum.,  in  throat  complaints,  in  connection  with  acute
catarrh,  the  burnings  in  throat  and  from  the  excoriating
nasal  discharge  are  ameliorated  by  hot  applications.  The
burning  in  throat  is  better  from  eating  or  drinking  hot
things.  This  is  the  chief  modality  which  enables  us  to
choose  between  this  remedy  and  Cepa  and  Mercurius^  for
all  three  have  fluent  coryza.  I  once  had  a  case  of  very
severe  gastralgia  caused  by  suppression  of  eczenia  on  the
hands.  I  knew  nothing  of  the  suppression,  but  ^^r^-
scrih&d  Arseniczi?n  because  the  pains  came  on  at  midnight,
lasting  until  3  A.  M.,  during  which  time  the  patient  had  to
walk  the  floor  in  agony,  and  there  was  £-reai  buritijig  in
the  stomach. She  had  but  one  slight  attack  after  taking


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  69

Arsenicum,  but,  said  she,  when  I  visited  her,  "  Doctor,  would
that  remedy  send  out  salt  rheum."  Then  I  found  out  about
the  suppression  which  had  been  caused  by  the  appli-
cation of  an  ointment,  and  told  her  that  she  could  have
back  the  pain  in  the"^  stomach  any  time  she  wanted  it,  by
suppressing  the  eruption  again. She  did  not  want  it.

Arseniatm  is  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  fevers  of  a
typhoid  character.  So  useful  is  it  that  Bsehr  says — "  Since
Arsenic  is  more,  than  any  other  remedy,  adapted  to  the
worst  forms  of  infectious  diseases  it  seems  wrong  to  delay
its  administration  until  the  symptoms  indicating  it  are
developed  in  their  most  malignant  intensity,"  and  further,

our  advice,  therefore,  is,  that  Arsenic  should  be  given
more  frequently  than  has  been  customary  from  the  very
beginning  of  the  attack,  and  that  we  should  not  wait
until  the  disease  has  fully  developed  its  pernicious  char-
acter." I  do  not  think  this  is  sound  reasoning  or  good
advice,  for  I  have  never  found  any  rule  by  which  I  could
decide  from  the  beginning  that  a  case  would  later  on  de-
velop into  a  case  of  the  pernicious  or  malignant  character
which  would  ever  call  for  the  exhibition  of  Arse7iic.
While  we  need  not  wait  for  a  case  to  develop  to  that
^'  most  malignant "  intensity  which  calls  for  Arsenic,  we
would  not  on  the  other  hand  be  justified  in  giving  Arse7iic
or  any  other  remedy  in  anticipation  of  a  condition  which
might  never  come.  Arsenicum  \^  not  the  only  remedy
capable  of  curing  these  malignant  cases,  and  how  do  we
know  after  all  that  it  may  not  be  Muriatic  acid  or  Carbo
vegetabilis  that  will  be  the  remedy  after  the  case  is  devel-
oped. There  is  no  safe  or  scientific  rule  but  to  treat  the
case  with  the  indicated  remedy  at  any  and  all  stages  of  the
disease,  without  trying  to  treat  expected  conditions  or

future  possibilities. It  would  be  out  of  place  here  to  give
6


70


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


all  the  indications  for  Arsenic  in  typhoids,  as  it  would
take  too  much  space  and  they  can  be  found  in  Raue,
lyilienthal  or  any  good  work  on  practice.  Arsenic  is  also
one  of  our  best  remedies  in  intermittents,  especially  after
the  abuse  of  Quinine.  Close  individualization  is  necessary
here  as  elsewhere.

Arsenic  profoundly  affects  the  alimentary  canal  from
lips  to  anus.  The  lips  are  so  dry  and  parched  and  cracked
that  the  patient  often  licks  them  to  moisten  them.  The
tongue  is  affected  in  various  ways.  It  may  be  dry  and
red,  with  raised  papillae  ;  or  red,  with  indented  edges  ;  or
white  as  chalk  or  white  paint ;  or  lead  colored  ~  or  dry
brown  or  black,  especially  in  typhoids.  The  mouth  is
dry  or  aphthous,  ulcerated  or  gangrenous.  The  throat
the  same.  The  thirst  is  indescribably  intense  and  pecu-
liar, in  that  notwithstanding  its  intensity  the  patient  can
take  only  a  little  water  at  a  time.  The  stomach  is  so  irri-
table that  the  least  food  or  drink  causes  distress  and  pain,
or  immediately  excites  vomiting,  or  stool,  or  both  together.
Cold  drinks,  ice-water,  or  ice-cream  particularly,  disagree
and  create  distress.  Vomits  all  kinds  and  grades  of  sub-
stances, from  water  or  mucous  to  bile,  blood,  and  coffee
ground  substances.

The  pains  in  stomach  are  terrible  and  aggravated  by
the  least  food  or  drink,  especially  if  cold.  The  abdominal
pains  also  are  intense,  causing  the  patient  to  turn  and
twist  in  all  possible  shapes  and  directions.  Diarrhoea  of
all  kinds  of  stools,  from  simple  watery  to  black,  bloody
and  horribly  offensive,  and  finally  the  end  of  the  tract  is
reached  and  we  have  hemorrhoids.  Now  in  every  one  of
these  affections,  ranging  along  the  whole  length  of  the
canal,  and  from  the  lightest  grade  of  irritation  to  the  most
intense  inflammatory  and  malignant  forms  of  disease,  we


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.  71

will  be  apt  to  find  everywhere  present  the  characteristic
burnings  in  greater  or  lesser  degree,  of  this  remedy ;  and
the  not  less  characteristic  amelioration  from  heat,  and  also,
though  not  quite  so  invariably,  the  midnight  aggrava-
tion.

ArseiiiciLm  also  has  its  sphere  of  usefulness  in  diseases
of  the  respiratory  organs.  First,  for  acute  coryza  it  stands
in  the  front  rank,  the  choice  often  having  to  be  made
between  this  remedy,  Cepa^  and  Mercurius.  Arsenicum
has  the  fluent  discharge  which  corrodes  the  lip  and  wings
of  the  nose  and  more  burning  than  '^the  other  two  reme-
dies. It  often  follows  well  after  Mercurius^  if  that  remedy
only  partially  relieves.

Arsenicum  is  particularly  efficacious  in  many  affections
of  the  lungs,  where  the  breathing  is  very  much  oppressed.
Respiration  is  wheezing,  with  cough  and  frothy  expectora-
tion. Patient  cannot  lie  down;  must  sit  up  to  breathe,
and  is  unable  to  move  without  being  greatly  put  out  of
breath.  The  air  passages  seem  constricted.  It  is  espe-
cially useful  in  asthmatic  affections  caused  or  aggravated
by  suppressed  erupti  )ns,  like  pneumonia  from  retrocedent
measles,  or  even  chronic  lung  troubles  from  suppressed
eczema.  I  remember  a  case  of  asthma  of  years'  standing
to  which  I  was  calhd  at  midnight,  because  they  were
afraid  the  patient  would  die  before  morning.  Found  that
her  attacks  always  came  on  at  i  A.  m.  Gave  Arsenicum
alb.  30th,  and  she  was  completely  cured  by  it.

The  symptom  by  Rollin  R.  Gregg,  "  Acute,  sharp,  fixed
or  darting  pain  in  apex  and  through  upper  third  of  right
lung,"  is  a  gem,  and  has  enabled  me  to  cure  a  number  of
cases  of  obstinate  lung  troubles.  In  the  last  stage  of
pneumonia  of  old  people,  with  gangrenous  expectoration,
if  the  other  symptoms  correspond,  this  remedy  has  often


72


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


saved  life.  The  burning  is  often  found  here  as  elsewhere.
Arseniai7n  is  also  one  of  our  best  remedies  in  pleuritic  ef-
fusions.

Arsenicitm  also  affects  profoundly  the  nervous  system.
To  the  characteristic  restlessness,  of  which  we  have  said  so
much,  is  added  great  prostration.  This  prostration  is
present  in  most  diseases,  both  acute  and  chronic,  where
Arsenic  is  indicated.  For  instance,  in  typhoids  there  is
no  remedy  that  prostrates  more.  Carbo  veg.  and  Muriatic
acid  equal  it,  the  difference  being  that  the  Arsenic  patient
wants  to  move  or  be  moved  constantly,  while  with  the
other  two  remedies  there  is  almost  utter  absence  of  any
such  show  of  life.  Even  if  not  confined  to  the  bed,  in
acute  or  chronic  diseases  the  patient  is  so  weak  that  he  is
"  exhausted  from  the  slightest  exertion  ;  "  must  lie  down.
Sometimes  this  extreme  degree  of  prostration  comes  on
very  rapidly.  »

Here  is  a  picture  that  shows  a  condition  of  things  in
chronic  troubles  calling  for  this  remedy.  "  From  climb-
ing mountains,  or  other  muscular  exertions,  want  of
breath,  prostration,  sleeplessness  and  other  ailments."
This  shows  how  weak  the  patient  is,  and  this  weakness
may  be  coupled  with  various  forms-  of  disease.  You  may
say  it  is  common  for  sick  people  to  be  weak.  True,  but
the  Arsenicum  patient  is  weak  out  of  proportio7i  to  the
rest  of  his  trouble,  or  apparently  so  ;  and  it  is  a  general
prostration^  not  local  like  the  sense  of  weakness  in  the
chest  of  Phosphoric  acid^  Staimum  and  Sulphur  ;  or  in  the
abdomen  like  Phosphorus  ;  or  in  the  stomach  like  Ignatia^
Hydrastis  and  Sepia.  Now  I  do  not  see  how  I  can  make
plainer  the  value  of  prostration  as  an  Arsenic  sy\n^\.om.

When  we  come  to  the  tissues  we  find  our  remedy  almost
universally  present.


ARSENICUM  ALBUM.


73


It  attacks  the  bloody  causing  septic  changes,  exanthe-
mata, echymoses,  petechise,  etc.

It  attacks  the  veins  ;  varices  burn  like  fire,  <  at  night.

It  attacks  the  serous  membranes,  causing  copious  serous
effusions.

It  attacks  the  glands,  which  indurate  or  suppurate.
It  attacks  the  periosteum.

It  attacks  the  joints  ;  causing  pale  swellings,  burning
pains,  etc.

It  causes  inflammatory  swellings  with  burning  lancinat-
ing pains.

It  causes  general  anasarca;  skin  pale,  waxy  or  earth
colored  ;  great  thirst  {apis  none.)

It  causes  rapid  emaciation  ;  atrophy  of  children.

It  causes  ulcerations,  constantly  extending  in  breadth.
The  ulcers  burn  like  fire,  pain  even  during  sleep,  discharge
may  be  copious  or  scanty,  the  base  blue,  black  or  larda-
ceous.

Anthrax  burning  like  fire  ;  cold  blue  skin  dry  as  parch-
ment, peeling  off  in  large  scales.

"  Sphacelus  ;"  parts  look  black  or  burn  like  fire.

"Gangrene;"  better  from  heat  (worse,  Secale.)

"  Parchment"  like  dryness,  or  dry  scaly  skin.

The  skin  troubles  of  this  remedy  are  mostly  dry  and
scaly,  and  almost  always  burning.  It  is  one  of  our  best
remedies  for  affections  caused  by  retrocedent  or  suppressed
exanthemata,  also  for  suppressed  chronic  eczemas,  etc.

But  it  is  impossible  and  without  ihe  scope  of  this  work
to  mention  by  name  all  the  affections  of  the  tissues  in
which  this  remedy  is  useful.

Notwithstanding  this,  Arsenic  is  not  a  panacea.  It
must,  like  every  other  remedy,  be  indicated  by  its  similar


74


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.


symptoms  or  failure  is  the  outcome.  Its  great  key  notes
are  Restlessness,  Burning,  Prostration,  and  Midnight  Ag-
gravation.

RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

This  is  the  third  remedy  of  our  so-called  restless  trio.
This  restlessness  of  Rhus  is  on  account  of  the  aching
pain  and  soreness  which  is  temporaril)'  relieved  by  move-
ment. There  is  also  an  internal  uneasiness  which  is
purely  nervous,  which  causes  the  patient  to  want  to  be  on
the  move,  even  when  there  is  no  particular  pain  present ;
but  nearly  to  the  degree  that  we  find  it  under  Aconite  and
Arse7iicum.

As  in*  Bryonia^  so  in  Rhus^  the  leading  characteristic  is
found  in  its  modality.  The  aggravation  on  movement,  in
the  former,  is  no  less  marked  than  the  aggravation  when
quiet,  of  the  latter.  The  patient  tosses  and  turns  from  side
to  side  with  Rhus  the  same  as  with  Aconite  and  Arseni-
cum. With  Rhus  the  change  relieves,  while  with  the  other
two  it  does  not.  In  Bryonia^  the  more  the  patient  moves
the  more  he  suffers,  while  with  RhuSy  the  more  and  longer
he  moves  the  better  he  feels,  until  he  is  exhausted.  In
acute  affections,  like  scarlatina  and  typhoid  fevers,  and  even
in  the  hot  stage  of  intermittent  fevers,  constant  movement
seems  to  be  the  patient's  only  relief  With  chronic  dis-
eases like  chronic  rheumatism  the  patient  must  move,  suf-
fers on  first  beginning  to  move,  but  as  he  continues  to
move  or,  as  he  expresses  it,  "gets  limbered  up,"  he  feels
better.  But  he  cannot  lie  long  comfortably  in  either  the
acute  or  chronic  trouble,  for  the  aching  comes  on  and  he
must  move  even  if  it  does  hurt  him  at  first  The  pains
causing  the  restlessness  of  Rhus  are  not  so  agonizing  as


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.


75


they  are  under  Aconite  and  Arsemm?n,  nor  is  the  prostra-
tion so  great  as  under  Arsenicum  nor  the  excitement  so
great  as  under  Aconite.  Rhus  and  Arse^iicum  are  often
indicated  in  typhoids,  Aconite  seldom,  or  never,  but  all
three  are  equally  restless  remedies.

If  in  genuine  typhoid  Arsenicum^  as  some  think,  heads
the  list,  because  oftenest  indicated,  Rhus  will  put  in
equally  strong  claims  in  all  other  diseases  that  take  on
typhoid  symptoms.  The  literal  meaning  of  the  term  or
word  typhus  is  smoke^  stupefaction.  Now  in  all  forms  of
typhus,  known  as  cerebral,  abdominal  and  pneumo-typhus,
taking  all  together,  Rhus  will  be  as  often  indicated  as  any
other  remedy.  Whenever  in  fevers  or  even  inflammatory
diseases  the  sensorium  becomes  cloudy  (smoky)  or  stupe-
faction sets  in,  with  low  grade  of  muttering  delirium,  dry
tongue,  etc.,  we  think  of  Rhus.  Dry  or  dark  coated
tongue,  with  triangular  red  tip,  is  especial  indication  for
this  remedy.  This  condition  of  sensorium  and  tongue
may  appear  in  dysentery,  peritonitis,  pneumonia,  scarla-
tina, rheumatism,  diphtheria,  bilious,  remittent,  typhoid
fevers,  etc.  It  makes  no  difference  what  the  name  or  lo-
cality of  the  disease  is  if  the  sympioins  are  there.  The
stupefaction  calling  for  Rhus  in  these  diseases  is  not  so
profound  as  that  calling  for  Hyoscyamus  or  Opium.,  but  is
more  on  a  parallel  with  such  remedies  as  Baptisia^  Nux
moschata.,  Lachesis  or  Phosphoric  acid.  Nor  is  the  delirium
so  violent  as  that  calling  for  such  remedies  as  Belladonna.,
Hyoscyamus  and  Stramo7iium.  Both  stupefaction  and
delirium  are  mild  in  form  but  regular  and  persistent.  Of
course  the  Rhus  restlessness  is  present  and  the  patient  tosses
or  turns  from  side  to  side,  even  without  knowing  of  it,  or
of  anything  going  on  around  her.  She  will  answer  ques-
tions and  perhaps  answer  correctly,  but  afterwards  does


7^  RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.

not  know  anything  that  transpired  while  she  was  sick,
may  be  for  days  or  weeks.

RhiLs,  Baptisia  and  Arnica  closely  resemble  each  other,
and  choice  is  sometimes  difficult ;  but  we  will  try  to  dif-
ferentiate them  when  we  come  to  write  upon  the  two
latter.

Cough  during  chill  in  intermittents  is  a  characteristic
given  us  by  Carrol  Dunham,  and  is  very  reliable,  as  I  have
had  occasion  to  prove.

Rhus  acts  particularly  on  fibrous,  muscular  and  cellular
tissues.  The  muscles  are  stiff  and  sore.  This  may  be  of
a  rheumatic  character,  or  may  have  been  induced  by
straining,  by  heavy  lifting  or  severe  muscular  exercise  of
any  kind  ;  or  it  may  have  been  brought  on  by  exposure  to
cold,  especially  wet  cold.

This  strained  condition  may  not  be  confined  to  the  mus-
cles alone,  but  may  involve  the  tendons,  ligaments  and
membranes  of  the  joints.  Severe  affections  of  the  mus-
cles of  the  back  and  even  the  spinal  membranes  (myelitis)
may  come  on  from  sprain,  or  by  exposure,  by  sleeping  on
damp  ground,  or  in  bed  with  damp  sheets,  or  getting  wet
in  a  rain  storm  especially  while  perspiring.  Indeed  Rhus
is  one  of  our  best  remedies  in  lumbago.  But  it  makes  no
particular  difference  what  muscles  are  strained  or  exposed
so  as  to  bring  on  this  lameness  and  soreness  the  remedy  is
the  same,  and  if  the  great  characteristic — "  Lameness
and  stiffness  and  pain  on  first  moving  after  rest,  or  on  get-
ting up  in  the  morning,  relieved  by  continued  motion,"
is  present,  Rhus  is  the  first  remedy  to  think  of.

Rhus  is  also  often  a  remedy  for  glandular  swellings,  of
parotid  or  submaxillary  glands  during  scarlatina,  cellulitis
in  diphtheria,  or  orbital  cellulitis.

This  is  also  one  of  our  best  remedies  in  skin  diseases.


RHUS  TOXICODENDRON.


77


No  one  who  has  been  poisoned  by  it  will  doubt  that  Rhus
has  power  to  produce  skin  disease,  and  of  course  in  ac-
cordance with  our  law  of  cure  we  would  expect  cures  by
it.  We  have  not  been  disappointed.  The  eruption  of
Rhus  poisoning  is  vesicular.  Erysipelas  of  the  vesicular
variety  accompanied  by  the  restlessness  and  sensorium  of
this  remedy,  is  quickly  cured  by  it.  So,  also,  is  scarlatina.
If  we  find  the  skin  red,  smooth  and  shiny,  with  high  grade
of  fever  and  delirium  Rhus  would  not  do  any  good  but
Belladonna  or  some  remedy  having  that  kind  of  skin,  etc.

Apis^  Cantharis^  Lachesis^  Ailanthus  and  others  have  each
their  peculiar  appearance  of  the  skin  in  these  acute  ex-
anthemata. Yet,  notwithstanding  this,  it  must  be  remefn-
bered  that  in  many  cases  the  leading  indication  for  a
remedy  will  not  lie  in  the  skin  symptoms,,  but  outside  of
them.

If  in  variola  the  eruption  turns  livid  and  typhoid  symp-
toms supervene  we  may  rely  on  Rhus  for  a  good  effect.
Probably  no  remedy  is  oftener  found  useful  in  herpes
zoster  than  this.

Rhus  is  no  less  valuable  in  chronic  skin  troubles  than
in  acute.  Eczemas  of  the  vesicular  type  are  often  cured  by
it ;  there  is  much  itching  which  is  not  greatly  relieved  by
scratching.  In  all  such  cases  of  course  the  constitutional
symptoms  weigh  as  much  as  the  local.  So  far  as  dose  is
concerned,  I  have  used  it  both  high  and  low,  and  find  it
useful  along  the  scale,  but  I  have  an  m.  m.  potency  made
upon  my  own  potentizer  which  lias  served  me  so  well  so
many  times  that  I  cannot  refrain  from  speaking  of  it.


78


BELLADONNA.


BELLADONNA.

We  now  come  to  consider  what  I  call  the  trio  of  de-
lirium remedies — Belladonna^  Hyoscyamus  and  Stramon-
ium. Many  other  remedies  have  delirium,  but  these  three
deserve  to  head  the  list.  Belladonna  may  also  be
called  pre-eminently  a  head  remedy.  In  most  complaints
where  this  remedy  is  indicated,  head  symptoms  prepon-
derate. The  blood  all  seems  to  be  rushing  to  the  head.
The  head  is  hot  while  the  extremities  are  cool.  The  eyes
are  red  and  blood-shot.  The  face  is  also  red,  almost
purple  red.  The  carotid  arteries  throb  so  as  to  be  plainly
visible.  There  is  either  great  pain,  pressure  or  sense  of
fullness,  or  an  almost  stupid  condition.  The  wild,  terrible
delirium,  if  present,  may  be  found  with  pain,  or  even  with
no  complaint  of  pain.  In  delirium  the  patient  "  imagines
he  sees  ghosts,  hideous  faces  and  animals  and  insects."
Fears  all  sorts  of  imaginary  things  and  wants  to  run  away
from  them  ;  breaks  out  into  fits  of  laughter  or  screams  and
gnashes  his  teeth ;  bites  or  strikes  those  around  him ;  in
short,  performs  all  sorts  of  violent  acts  and  is  controlled
with  great  difficulty.  No  remedy  has  more  persistently
violent  delirium  than  Belladonna.  One  of  the  character-
istic features  of  Belladonna  in  delirium  as  compared  with
the  other  two  remedies,  is  the  decided  evidences  already
mentioned  of  a  surcharge  of  blood  in  the  brain.  When
the  throbbing  of  the  carotids,  the  heat,  redness  and  con-
gestion of  face  and  conjunctiva  goes  away,  the  delirium
subsides  in  proportion.  Belladonna  may  have  delirium
with  pale  face  as  its  alternate,  but  it  is  the  exception.
Even  the  upper  lip  is  congested  and  swollen.

In  inflammations,  which  localize.  Belladonna  is  in  the


BELLADONNA.


79


first  stage  as  often  the  leading  remedy  as  any  other.  It
does  not  make  much  difference  where  they  localize,
whether  in  head,  throat,  mammae  or  elsewhere,  if  they
come  on  suddenly,  pursue  a  rapid  course,  are  red,  painful
and  especially  throbbing.  It  is  astonishing  how  many
local  inflammations,  even  a  carbuncle  or  boil,  will  so  dis-
turb the  general  system  and  circulation,  as  to  produce  the
general  inflammatory  fever,  with  the  characteristic  head
symptoms  calling  for  Belladonna^  and  no  less  astonishing
how  this  remedy  controls  the  whole  condition,  both  local
and  general,  when  indicated.  What !  exclaims  the  believer
in  local  applications,  give  Bellado7tna  internally  for  a  boil
on  the  hand  or  foot?  Yes,  indeed,  not  only  Belladonna^
but  Mercurius^  Hepar  sulphuris^  Tarentula  Cube7isiSy
and  many  others,  and  you  will  riot  have  any  need  for
local  medication  at  all.  It  is  only  in  the  first  or  conges-
tive or  active  inflammatory  stage  that  this  remedy  is  in
place ;  but,  if  properly  administered  then,  will  often  abort
the  whole  thing  and  never  leave  it  to  finish  all  its
stages,  or  if  not,  so  modify  as  to  make  it  comparatively
insignificant.

Belladonna  is  one  of  our  best  remedies  in  the  diseases
of  children,  even  vieing  with  Chamomilla.  They  come
on  suddenly,  almost  without  warning.  Child  is  well  one
minute  and  sick  the  next,  and  one  very  characteristic
symptom  in  these  cases  is,  the  child  is  very  hot,  with  red
face  and  semi-stupor,  but  every  little  while  starts  or  ju7nps
in  sleep  as  if  it  might  go  into  spasins.  This  condition  is
often  found  in  children  and  then  Belladonna  is  like  "  oil
upon  troubled  waters."  Remember  Belladonna  inflamma-
tions localize  more  than  they  do  in  Aconite.  I  drew  the
difference  between  these  two  remedies  in  inflammations
and inflammatory  fevers  when writing  upon  Acojiite.


8o


BELLADONNA.


There  is  no  use  of  confounding  them,  or  worse,  alternat-
ing them.  Some  do  so ;  but,  in  so  doing,  only  exhibit
their  ignorance.

There  are,  in  every  remedy,  symptoms  of  sensation,  cir-
cumstance, constitution  or  modality  which  are  peculiar
both  to  diseases  and  remedies.  These  symptoms  are
not  always  easily  accounted  for.  To  attempt  to  explain
them  from  a  pathological  standpoint  is  not  always  possible,
or  even  necessary,  were  it  possible.  A  simple  acceptance
of  them  as  fact  is  often  more  sensible  than  to  wait  long  to
what  we  know  is  better  than  waiting,  because  we  cannot
explain  or  account  for  it.  For  instance,  it  is  not  easy  to  tell
why  "  the  pains  of  Belladonna  appear  suddenly  and  after
a  time  disappear  as  suddenly  as  they  came,"  while  those
of  Stannum  "gradually  increase  to  a  great  height  and
as  gradually  decline,"  or  SulphiLric  acid  "  begin  slowly  and
decline  suddenly,"  or  "gradually  increase  and  suddenly
cease,"  but  so  it  is,  and  the  acceptance  of  these  facts
whether  he  can  explain  them  or  not.  To  be  sure  all  these
symptoms  have  their  pathological  explanation  if  we  could
give  it ;  but,  acting  on  our  law  of  Similia,  we  can  cure
our  patients  and  are  not  left  at  sea,  without  chart  or  com-
pass, because  we  cannot  explain.  We  know  that  these
symptoms  are  the  natural  outcry  of  the  pathological  state,
and  that  the  administration  of  a  poison  which  is  capa-
ble of  setting  up  a  similar  outcry  cures  the  patient.
What  else  is  necessary  ?  Hither  this  is  true,  or  Homoeopathy
is  a  humbug.

The  simple  fact,  abundantly  proven,  that  the  remedy
having  the  symptoms  corresponding  to  the  symptoms  of
the  patient,  cures  him,  no  matter  what  the  pathology.


BELLADONNA.


8l


where  a  cure  is  at  all  possible,  is  one  of  the  greatest  dis-
coveries of  scientific  investigation.  Long  live  the  name  of
Hahnemann,  the  discoverer.

From  our  description  thus  far  of  this  remedy  you  would
expect  it  to  be  a  good  one  for  congestive  headaches^
and  so  it  is,  and  not  only  so,  but  of  neuralgic  headaches.
congestion  of  blood  to  the  head.  Belladonna  headaches,
whether  congestive  or  neuralgic,  are  worse  on  stooping
forward,  bending  downward,  or  lying  down,  anything  that
takes  the  patient  out  of  the  perpendicular.  "  Worse  on
lying  down,"  in  fact,  seems  to  be  a  very  reliable  general
characteristic.  The  elder  Lippe  once  told  me  of  a  case
of  suspicious  enlargement  or  swelling  and  pain  of  the
breast  of  long  standing,  which,  as  he  expressed  it,  seemed
likely  to  prove  a  case  for  the  surgeon  (cancer),  which  was
entirely  cured  by  a  few  doses  of  Belladonna^  to  which  he  was
guided  by  this  symptom  of  the  pains  being  so  much  worse  on
lying  down.  Since  then  I  have  observed  and  verified  this
symptom  in  many  cases  of  different  kinds.  I  will  not  stop
to  give  all  the  symptoms  that  might  be  present  in  Bella-
donna headaches.

No  remedy  has  greater  affinity  for  the  throat.  The  burn-
ing, dryness,  sense  of  constriction,  with  or  without  swell-
ing of  the  palate  and  tonsils,  is  sometimes  intense.  I  once
witnessed  a  case  of  poisoning  in  which  these  symptoms
were  terribly  distressing.

There  are  two  very  characteristic  symptoms  in  the  ab-
dominal region,  viz.:  "Tenderness  of  the  abdomen,
aggravated  by  the  least  jar,  in  walking,  or  stepping,  or
even  the  bed  or  chair,  or  bed  upon  which  she  sits  or  lies;"
and  "pressure  downward  as  if  the  contents  of  the  abdomen
would  issue  through  the  vulva,  <  mornings." This  last


82


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGKR.


symptom  is  found  under  other  remedies,  notably  Lilium
tigriyium  and  Sepia.  With  Belladonna  there  is  often  associ-
ated with  this  pressure  downward  a  pain  in  the  back  "as
if  it  would  break."  ''Starting  and  jumping,"  or  "  twitch-
ing in  sleep,"  or  on  going  to  sleep  is  characteristic.  So
also  is  "sleepy,  but  cannot  sleep,"  and  "moaning  during
sleep."

With  Bellado7ina  the  head  likes  wrapping  up  or  cover-
ing, takes  cold  when  it  is  uncovered  or  from  cutting  the
hair  [Silicea).

Uniform,  smooth,  shining,  scarlet  redness  of  the  skin,
so' hot  that  it  nnparts  a  burning  sensation  to  the  hand  of
one  who  feels  of  it,  is  very  characteristic  (Guernsey,  H.  N.).

Convulsions  with  other  symptoms  of  Belladonna  are
very  frequently  found  under  this  remedy.

I  have  here  endeavored  to  give  an.  outline  of  this  great
remedy.  A  volume  might  be  profitably  written  upon  its
virtues.  No  one  remedy  would  be  more  greatly  missed
than  this,  if  it  were  to  be  expunged  from  our  great
Materia  Medica,  but  we  must  leave  it  here  and  proceed  to
notice

HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER,

which  is  as  delirious  as  Belladonna^  but  the  high  grade  ot
delirium  alternates  with  the  low.  With  Belladonna  the
violent  form  predominates,  while  the  quiet  or  stupid  form
is  the  exception.  With  Hyoscyamus  it  is  just  the  other  way.
The  stupid,  muttering  form  predominates,  with  occasional
outbreaks  of  the  violent  form.  The  face  of  the  Belladomia
patient  is  red,  that  of  Hyoscyamus  pale  and  sunken.
The  Hyoscyamus  patient  is  weak  and  the  weakness  in-
creases. His  violent  outbreaks  of  delirium  cannot  keep  up


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.


83


long  on  account  of  weakness.  This  is  not  so  much  so  with
either  Belladonna  or  Stramoiiium.  The  Hyoscyamus  patients
may  begin  with  the  violent  form  or  outbreaks  of  delirium,
but  they  grow  more  mild  and  less  frequent,  and  the  low  or
stupid  form  increases  until  there  is  total  unconsciousness  ;
so  much  so  that  it  sometimes  becomes  difficult  to  choose
between  it  and  Opiimi.

The  case  takes  on  typhoid  symptoms  fast.  The  tongue
gets  dry  and  unwieldy,  the  sensorium  so  clouded  that  even
if  you  can  arouse  the  patient  to  answer  questions  correctly
he  immediately  lapses  right  into  stupor  again.  This  un-
conscious condition  may  continue  even  with  the  eyes  wide
open,  staring  around  the  room,  but  seeing  nothing  but
flocks,  at  which  the  patient  reaches  and  grasps ;  picks  the
bed  clothes,  indistinctly  muttering,  or  not  saying  a  word
for  hours.  The  teeth  are  covered  with  sordes  ;  the  lower
jaw  drops ;  stools  and  urine  pass  involuntarily ;  thus  present-
ing the  most  complete  picture  of  great  prostration  of  mind
and  body.  This  is  a  picture  of  Hyoscyamus  as  we  find  it
often  in  typhoid  fever,  or  typhoid  pneumonia  (where  it  is
the  best  remedy  I  know  of),  scarlatina  and  other  diseases.  It
is  a  wonderful  remedy,  but  not  one  of  wide  range,  like
Belladonna.

Hyoscyamus  is  not  only  a  great  remedy  in  the  acute
affections  of  which  we  have  written,  but  it  is  also  one  of
the  most  useful  in  chronic  manias.  If  acute  delirium  passes
on  into  the  settled  form,  called  mania,  this  remedy  is  still
one  of  our  chief  reliances.  It  is  much  oftener  of  use  here
than  the  Belladon7ia.  Again,  if  the  mania  comes  on
after an acute  disease  it is still  one  of  our  leading-

o

remedies.  In  these  forms  of  mania  there  are  certain  very
marked  symptoms  calling  for  its  use,  such  as,  the  patient
is  very  suspicious ;  will  not  take  the  medicine  because  he


HYOSCYAMUS  NIGER.


thinks  you  are  trying  to  poison  him,  or  thinks  some  plot
is  being  laid  against  him.  He  is  jealous  of  others,  or  the
first  cause  of  the  attack  is  jealousy.  Again,  the  mania
often  takes  on  the  lascivious  form.  The  patient  uncovers
and  exposes  himself,  sings  and  talks  amorously.  JHyoscy-
amus  leads  all  the  remedies  for  this  form  of  mania.

The  patient,  like  the  one  in  acute  delirium  of  this  rem-
edy, is  liable  to  alternate  between  the  mild  and  violent
manifestations;  at  one  time  so  mild  and  timorous  as  to
hide  away  from  every  one,  and  again  so  violent  that  she
will  attack,  beat,  fight,  scratch,  and  try  to  injure  anyone
within  reach.

The  Hyoscyamus  maniac  is  generally  weak,  and  so  this
remedy  is  found  particularly  adapted  to  mania  consequent
upon  the  infirmities  of  age.  Of  course  it  is  useful  in  all
ages  if  indicated  by  the  symptoms.

The  nervous  manifestations  of  this  remedy  are  not  con-
fined to  the  cerebral  symptoms ;  but  seem  to  involve  the
whole  system.  As  H.  N.  Guernsey  says:  " Every  muscle  in
the  body  twitches,  from  the  eyes  to  the  toes."  This  is  one  of
his  chief  indications  for  its  use  in  convulsions,  whether
epileptic  or  not.  The  spasms  are  generally  of  the  clonic
not  the  tonic  order,  as  in  Nux  vomica  or  Strychnia.  Nor
are  they  so  violent  as  those  under  Cicuta  virosa\  but  the
general  twitching  is  characteristic  in  convulsions,  as  is  the
subsultus  tendinum  in  typhoids.

Hyoscyamus  is  very  useful  in  a  form  of  dry  cough  which
is  aggravated  when  lying  down  and  relieved  by  sitting  up.
Here,  too,  it  is  particularly  useful  in  old  people.  I  have
already  referred  to  its  great  usefulness  in  pneumonia.  I
wish  to  emphasize  it,  and  believe  it  to  be  the  leading  rem-
edy in  the  typhoid  form  of  the  disease.  At  least  it  has
performed  wonders  for  me.


4


LACHESIS  TRIGONOCEPHALUS.


85


It  is  also  very  useful  in  scarlatina  of  the  typhoid  form,
and  is  complementary  to  Rhus  tox.  in  those  cases.  I
never  alternate  the  two,  but  if  the  depressed,  sensorium  and
delirium;  goes  beyond  the  power  of  Rhus  to  control
I  suspend  the  Rhus  for  a  day  or  two  and  give  Hyoscyamus^
which  will  so  improve  the  case  that  Rhus  may  again  come
into  use  and  carry  it  to  a  successful  termination.  This  is
the  only  alternation  I  am  ever  guilty  of.  It  is  like  that  of
Hahnemann  when  he  alternated  Bryonia  and  RhiLs  in
fevers.


LACHESIS  TRIGONOCEPHALUS.

To  Dr.  Constantine  Hering  belongs  the  honor  of  intro-
ducing and  developing  the  wonderful  medicinal  properties
of  this  snake  poison.  If  he  had  never  done  anything  be-
side this  for  medicine,  the  world  would  owe  him  an  ever-
lasting debt  of  gratitude.  It  alone  would  immortalize  him.
h\\  this,  and  more;  notwithstanding,  Chas.  Hempel  wrote
in  his  first  volume  of  Materia  Medica:  "In  spite  of  every
effort  to  the  contrary  the  conviction  has  gradually  forced
itself  upon  my  mind  that  the  pretended  pathogenesis  of
Lachesis^  which  has  emanated  from  Dr.  Hering's  otherwise
meritorious  and  highly  praiseworthy  efforts,  is  a  great
delusion,  and  that  with  the  exception  of  the  poisonous
effects  with  which  this  publication  is  abundantly  mingled
the  balance  of  the  symptoms  are  unreliable."  Hempel
modified  his  views  somewhat,  I  think,  in  later  editions.

Now,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  Allen's  Encyclo-
paedia of  Pure  Materia  Medica,  the  verified,  and  especially
the  black  typed  symptoms,  almost  all  of  them,  are  verifica-
tions of  provings  made  with  the  30th  potency. It  is  also


IvACHESIS  TRIGONOCEPHALUS.

significant  that  the  provings  of  Hahnemann's  polychrest
remedies,  mostly  made  with  the  potencies,  are  among  the
most  useful  and  reliable  we  have  to-day.  Some  have
sought  to  destroy  confidence  in  the  provings  of  all  reme-
dies which  are  made  with  the  30th  potencies  and  upwards ;
not  only  that,  but  in  their  power  to  cure  even  when  the  prov-
ings were  made  with  cruder  preparations.  With  us,  who
know  the  value  of  these  potencies,  all  such  efforts  only  excite
pity.  But  many  who  do  not  know  are  misled  and  prejudiced
so  as  to  never  dare  to  test  for  themselves.  To  all  such  we
say  take  no  man's  ipse  dixit,  but  prove  all  things,  "hold
fast  that  which  is  good."

Lachesis  is  a  remedy  of  wide  range  of  action.  It  has
an  alternate  action  on  the  mind  and  sensorium,  that  of  ex-
citation and  depression.  Illustrative  of  the  former  are  the
following  symptoms:  "Quick  comprehension,  mental
activity  with  almost  prophetic  perception,  ecstasy,  a  kind
of  trance.  Exceptional  loquacity,  with  rapid  change  of
subject;  jumps  abruptly  from  one  idea  to  another."  This
kind  of  excitation  may  be  found  in  acute  or  chronic  com-
plaints ;  in  the  delirium  of  fevers,  or  in  mania  of  a  settled
form.  On  the  side  of  depression  occur:  "Weakness  of
memory ;  makes  mistakes  in  writing ;  confusion  as  to  time.
Delirium  at  night;  muttering;  drowsy;  red  face;  slow,
difficult  speech  and  dropped  jaw.  Feels  extremely  sad,
depressed,  unhappy  and  distressed  in  mind,"  and  this  con-
dition is  very  apt  to  be  worse  on  awaking  in  the  morning,
or  indeed  after  any  sleep,  day  or  night.  "Chronic  com-
plaints from  depressing  causes  like  long-lasting  grief  or
sorrow."  This  depressed  side  of  the  remedy  may  also  be
found  in  both  acute  and  chronic  complaints.  Again  these
opposite  conditions  may  be  found  alternating  in  the  same
person,  and  a  notable  fact  is  that  the  alternations  are  ex-


LACHESIS  TRIGONOCEPHALUS.  87

treme.  Of  course  the  causes  of  these  conditions  of  mind
and  sensorium  are  varied,  but  we  will  often  find  them  in
old  topers,  subjects  of  broken  down  constitution,  and  in
the  troubles  incident  to  the  climacteric  age.  Such  cases
are  subject  to  sudden  attacks  of  giving  away  of  strength,
fainting,  vertigo  from  rush  of  blood  to  the  head  causing
apoplectic  seizure,  or  opposite  symptoms  arising  from
sudden  anaemia  of  the  brain.  In  short,  the  circulation  in
Lachesis  subjects  is  very  uncertain.  This  is  what  makes
it  so  valuable  in  sudden  flushes  during  the  climacteric
period.

Lachesis  has  some  prominent  head  symptoms  where  no
other  remedy  can  take  its  place.  It  is  one  of  our  best
remedies  for  sun  headaches ;  of  course  it  does  not  compare
with  Glonoine  for  the  immediate  effects  of  sunstroke,  but
does  come  in  well  after  the  first  effects  are  overcome  by
that  remedy.  The  patient  is  troubled  with  headache  every
time  he  is  exposed  to  the  sun's  heat,  and  the  trouble  has
become  chronic.

This  is  another  characteristic  symptom,  namely,  weight
or  pressure  on  the  vertex.  This  is  found  mostly  in  women
suffering  at  the  menopause,  and  coupled  with  it  in  such
cashes  there  is  sometimes  burning  on  the  vertex.  Sulphur
has  this  symptom,  but  if  it  occurred  at  menopause  the
remedy  would  oftener  be  found  in  Lachesis^  unless,  indeed,
there  were  some  marked  psoric  complication.  Lachesis
has  a  variety  of  headaches,  but  I  know  of  only  two  charac-
teristics that  have  been  of  very  much  value  to  me  in  pre-
scribing for  them,  namely,  with  the  headache  very  pale  face ^
and  the  patient  sleeps  into  the  headache;  dreads  to  go  to
sleep  because  she  awakens  with  such  a  distressing  head-
ache. These  two  are  very  valuable  indications,  otherwise
I  would  expect  to  get  my  indications  outside  of  the  head-


88


LACHESIS  TRIGONOCEPHALUS.


ache  itself.  "  Headache  extending  into  the  nose,  comes
mostly  in  acute  catarrh,  especially  when  the  discharge  has
been  suppressed  or  stops  after  sleep.  This  kind  of  head-
ache is  often  found  in  hay  fever,  with  frequent  and  violent
paroxysms  of  sneezing.  Now  if  the  hay  fever  paroxysms
of  sneezing  are  decidedly  worse  after  sleeping,  even  in  the
day  time,  Lachesis  2000th  (Jenichen)  may  stop  the  whole
business  for  the  season."  Being  an  old  hay  fever  subject
myself,  I  am  authority  on  that  statement.

We  now  come  to  the  action  of  Lachesis  on  the  alimen-
tary tract ;  first  the  gums  are  often  swollen  and  spongy,
easily  bleeding ;  when  this  is  found  Lachesis  often  follows
Mercury  well.  If  the  gums  turn  purple  the  indication  is
strenghtened  for  Lachesis.  One  of  the  most  characteristic
symptoms  of  Lachesis  is  found  in  the  tongue,  especially  in
diseases  of  a  typhoid  type ;  namely,  puts  the  tongue  out
with  great  difficulty ;  it  is  very  dry ;  trembles  and  catches
under  lower  teeth.  The  tongue  trembles  and  is  protruded
with  difficulty  under  Gelsemiii7n,,  but  it  is  not  so  dry  as  in
Lachesis.  This  is  a  sign  of  great  weakness,  but  in
Gelsemiitm  it  occurs  in  the  very  beginning  of  the  fever,
while  in  Lachesis  it  comes  later.  There  is  bad  odor  from
the  mouth  in  Lachesis^  and  it  may  be  very  dry  throughout ;
or  there  may  be  an  abundant  accumulation  of  tenacious
mucus.  Here  it  again  resembles  Mercury.  Lachesis  is
one  of  our  best  remedies  for  sore  mouth  in  the  last  stage
of  consumption.  This  is  sometimes  a  very  distressing
symptom,  and  relief  for  it  is  often  very  difficult  to  find.
If  Lachesis  should  relieve  it,  my  experience  has  been  that
the  patient  is  also  greatly  relieved  in  other  ways ;  so  much
so,  indeed,  that  they  think  that  they  are,  after  all,
going  to  get  well.  This  brings  me  to  notice  what  I
believe  I  have  not  spoken  of  before,  that  where  a  cure  is


LACHESIS  TRIGONOCEPHALUS.


89


no  longer  possible,  and  temporary  relief  is  the  only  thing
left,  we  have  the  best  means  of  giving  it  in  the  homoeo-
pathically  indicated  remedy.  Narcotics,  counter  irritants,
so  called  tonics,  stimulants,  etc.,  do  not  and  cannot  com-
pare with  the  similimum,  if  properly  administered,  in
smoothing  the  pathway  to  the  inevitable  termination.
Lachesis  has  won  its  chiefest  laurels  in  affections  of  the
throat.

"Throat  and  neck  sensitive  to  slightest  touch,  or  ex-
ternal pressure;  everything  about  throat  distresses,  even
the  weight  of  the  bedcovers."  This  is  very  characteristic.
Another  peculiarity  is  that  empty  swallowing,  or  swallow-
ing of  saliva  or  liquids,  aggravates  a  great  deal  more  than
swallowing  of  solids.  The  pains  in  the  throat  run  up  into
the  ears.  There  is  much  mucus  in  fauces,  with  painful
hawking.  In  tonsillitis  and  diphtheria,  swelling  of  tonsils
begins  on  left  side  and  extends  to  the  right.  The  pains
are  aggravated  by  hot  drinks.  All  these  symptoms  are
peculiar  to  Lachesis^  and  are  all  apt  to  be  very  much  worse
after  sleep.  In  old  quinsy  subjects,  where  the  trouble
always  began  on  the  left  side,  I  have  often  not  only
aborted  the  attack,  but  cured  the  predisposition  thereto.

Sometimes  the  throat  assumes  a  gangrenous  appearance,
but  if  the  other  indications  are  present  it  is  an  additional
indication  for  its  use.  Lachesis  is  always  one  of  the  first
remedies  to  be  thought  of  in  any  disease,  when  it  seems
inclined  to  spend  its  main  force  in  the  throat,  such  as
typhoid  fever,  pneumonia,  scarlatina,  etc.

If  the  skin  turns  purple  or  bluish,  as  if  mortification
were  impending,  there  is  no  remedy  like  it.  Not  only  is
Lachesis  an  unusually  efficacious  remedy  for  these  acute
throat  troubles,  but  for  those  of  a  chronic  form,  and  the
same  symptoms  are  present,  even  in syphilitic  throat


90  I.ACHESIS  TRIGONOCEPHALUS.

troubles.  We  have  placed  great  stress  upon  the  great  sen-
sitiveness of  the  throat  to  all  touch  or  pressure ;  but  this
does  not  end  it,  for,  as  I^ilienthal  expresses  it,  Lachesis  is
the  great  enemy  of  all  constriction.  "  The  pit  of  stomach
sore  to  the  touch,  or  even  to  pressure  of  clothes."  "  Can-
not bear  any  pressure  about  the  hypochondria."  In  the
abdomen  there  is  "  Painful  distension,  flatulence,  which  is
very  annoying,  can  bear  no  pressure ;  the  surface  nerves
are  sensitive."  "Is  obliged  to  wear  clothes,  especially
about  stomach,  very  loose ;  they  cause  uneasiness ;  even  in
bed,  obliged  to  loosen  and  pull  up  night  dress  to  avoid
pressure ;  dare  not  lay  the  arm  across  the  abdomen  on  ac-
count of  pressure."  "Uterus  does  not  bear  contact;  has
to  be  relieved  of  all  pressure ;  frequently  lifts  the  clothes  ;
they  cause  an  uneasiness  in  the  abdomen,  even  with  no
tenderness."  "Ivarynx  sensitive  to  least  touch,  which
causes  suffocation'  and  feeling  of  lump  in  the  throat."
"  During  heat,  as  of  an  orgasm  of  blood,  he  is  obliged  to
loosen  clothes  about  the  neck ;  sensation  as  though  they
hindered  the  circulation  of  blood,  with  a  kind  of  suffoca-
tive feeling."  "  Intolerance  of  tight  neck  bands."  I  could
no  better  express  the  value  of  this  symptom,  or  great  mo-
dality of  Lachesis.,  aggravations  from  pressure  or  constric-
tions., than  by  quoting  entire  from  Guiding  Symptoms  the
above.  It  does  not  seem,  after  such  an  array  of  oft- verified
symptoms,  that  more  need  be  said  to  impress  this  upon
the  memory  and  confidence  of  any  physician.  Now,  the
why  of  this  almost  invariable  aggravation  from  pressure  of
Lachesis^  and  almost  as  invariable  amelioration  from  the
same  of  Bryonia^  I  leave  for  those  to  explain  who  pretend
to  be  able  to  do  so.  It  is,  however,  another  proof  of  the
value  of  modalities.

Lachesis  has  some  peculiar  symptoms  of  stool  and  anus.


LACHESIS  TRIGONOCEPHALUS.


91


There  is  an  urging,  or  rather  a  pressing  down,  in  the  rec-
tum, but  it  is  worse  when  he  attempts  a  stool ;  hurts  so
that  he  must  desist.  It  feels  "as  iTthe  anus  were  closed.
This  is  somewhat  like  the  constant  or,  rather  frequent,
though  ineffectual  urging  to  stool  of  Nux  vomica;  or  like
the  painful  constriction  of  Lycopodium^  which  either  pre-
vents stool,  or  follows  after  an  incomplete  and  unsatisfac-
tory one.  Another  marked  symptom  is  that  the  stools  are
often  very  offensive^  whether  formed  or  not.  Then,  under
Lachesis^  we  have  hemorrhages  from  the  bowels  of  decom-
posed blood,  which  occurs  mostly  during  the  course  of  ex-
hausting, acute  disease,  like  typhoid.  Guernsey  gave  this :
"Flakes  of  decomposed  blood,  having  form  and.  appear-
ance of  perfectly  charred  wheat  straw,  in  larger  or  shorter
flat  pieces;  portions  more  or  less  ground  up."  I  have  met
such  cases  and  the  Lachesis  was  very  efficacious,  not  only
in  changing  the  character  of  the  stool,  but  bringing  about
general  improvement,  ultimating  in  perfect  recovery.

This  remedy  is  often  of  great  use  in  that  very  common
malady,  hemorrhoids;  and  here  you  have  the  con-
stricted feeling,  whether  the  piles  are  external  or  blind,
and  sometimes  a  beating  or  throbbing,  or  as  the  pa-
tient will  perhaps  express  it,  a  sensation  of  "little  ham-
mers "  beating  in  the  rectum.  All  these  symptoms  and
many  more  show  the  affinity  of  this  remedy  for  the  anus
and  rectum,  as  it  does  also  its  power  over  disease  of  the
whole  alimentary  tract.

This  is  also  one  of  our  best  remedies  in  diseases  of  the
female  generative  organs.  In  the  first  place  it  is  eminently
an  ovarian  remedy,  and  seems  to  choose  by  preference  the
left  ovary.  It  is  of  use  in  simple  ovarian  neuralgia,  and
from  that  to  actual  tumors  or  even  cancer  of  the  left  ovary ;
or  the  trouble  begins  in  the  left  and  goes  to  right  ovary.


92  LACHESIS  TRIGONOCEPHALUS.

♦

But  we  may  have  neuralgia,  swelling,  induration,  suppura-
tion, tumors  or  cancer  of  one  or  both  ovaries.  Its  action
in  uterine  troubles  is  also  very  marked.  Here  is  a  condi-
tion, as  expressed  in  Guiding  Symptoms,  that  I  have  often
verified  during  climaxis.  "Pains  in  uterine  region  in-
crease at  times  more  and  more  till  relieved  by  flow  of
blood  from  vagina ;  after  a  few  hours  or  days,  the  same
again,  and  so  on."

In  these  cases  you  almost  always  have  the  intolerance  of
least  contact  or  pressure  over  the  uterine  region  so  charac-
teristic of  this  drug.  The  womb  prolapses,  is  at  times  per-
sistently congested,  and  obstinate  uterine  hemorrhages  re-
peatedly occur.  There  are  hot  flashes,  hot  vertex,  pale  face
and  fainting,  uterine  displacements  of  various  kinds,  and
deranged  capillary  circulation,  all  so  common  in  females
at  the  menopause.  Probably  there  are  not  three  remedies
in  the  whole  Materia  Medica  so  often  indicated  in  troubles
connected  with  this  period,  as  Lachesis.  It  is  often  of
great  use  in  cancer  of  either  the  breasts  or  uterus.  In
either  case  the  cancer  puts  on  a  bluish  or  purplish  appear-
ance, and  if  open  or  fungoid  bleeds  easily,  a  dark,  decom-
composed  blood.  In  case  of  bleeding,  the  pains  and  suffer-
ing, as  in  the  case  of  uterine  hemorrhage,  are  temporarily
relieved  by  it.  We  would  be  greatly  crippled  in  the  treat-
ment of  these  various  ovarian  and  uterine  troubles  without
Lachesis.

The  respiratory  organs  and  chest  also  come  under  the
influence  of  this  drug.  Paralysis  of  the  vocal  cords,  caus-
ing loss  of  voice;  larynx  is  sensitive  to  least  touch;  it
causes  suffocation ;  it  is  one  of  our  best  remedies  in  des-
perate cases  of  croup,  where  the  child  gets  worse  in  sleep ;
seems  to  sleep  into  it.  Spasm  of  the  glottis;  sensation  of
something  running  from  neck  to  larynx,  stopping  the


LACHESIS  TRIGONOCEPHALUS.  93

breath.  It  has  great  shortness  of  breath  when  walking,
especially  in  old  topers  and  in  heart  affections,  when  this
condition  is  always  the  guide  to  its  use.  "The  least  thing
coming  near  the  mouth  or  nose  interferes  with  breathing ;
tears  off  the  collar  or  everything  about  the  neck,  throat  or
chest,  because  it  suffocates."

Asthma  with  the  same  symptoms,  has  sudden  flushes  of
heat  or  orgasm  of  blood;  must  loosen  clothes  to  prevent
suffocation;  threatened  paralysis  of  the  heart  or  lungs;
dry  hacking  cough,  aggravated  by  touching  throat  or
larynx,  also  cough  during  sleep,  without  awakening  or
being  conscious  of  it.  Here  it  often  cures  very  obstinate
cases  of  cough  after  Chamomilla  has  failed,  which  also  has
this  symptom.  For  the  short  dry  cough  sympathetic  with
heart  troubles,  Lachesis  is  often  useful.  Cough  with  pain
in  anus,  or  stitches  in  pile  tumors.  One  of  our  best  reme-
dies in  typhoid  pneumonia  or  typhoid  fever  with  lung
complications.

Now  look  out  for  the  Lachesis  tongue  in  these  cases.
Lachesis  is  also  one  of  our  most  useful  remedies  in  heart
troubles,  acute  or  chronic,  the  peculiar  suffocation,  cough
and  aggravation  from  constrictions  being  the  guiding-
symptoms.

No  remedy  more  profoundly  impresses  the  nervous  sys-
tem than  this.  In  the  first  place  it  causes  trembling,  not
from  fright  or  excitement,  but  from  extreme  weakness.
In  this  it  resembles  Gelseinium ;  both  have  great  tremb-
ling of  the  tongue  on  trying  to  protrude  it.  With  both
remedies  the  whole  body  trembles ;  but  with  Lachesis  she
feels  faint,  as  if  she  must  sink  right  down.  This  great
prostration  is  both  mental  and  physical,  and  she  does  not
improve  from  rest  or  sleep,  but  on  the  contrary  is  worse  in
the  morning  after  sleeping. With  this  prostration  there  is


94  LACHESIS  TRIGONOCEPHALUS.

often  pain  or  other  troubles  with  the  heart ;  nausea,  pale
face  and  vertigo.  Now  if  this  thing  goes  on  the  next
stage  supervenes  and  paralysis  is  the  end  of  it.  The
paralysis  is  generally  left-sided,  as  are  the  majority  of  com-
plaints of  Lachesis,  which  is  pre-eminently  a  left-sided
remedy.  This  paralysis  may  come  on  as  a  result  of
apoplexy  or  cerebral  exhaustion ;  if  the  latter,  there  is  still
great  hope  of  a  perfect  cure  by  a  judicious  use  of  Lachesis..
Of  course  if  the  lesion,  is  too  extensive  in  apoplexy,  and
the  extravasation  of  blood  too  great,  there  is  little  hope ;.
but  some  apparently  most  desperate  cases  do  recover  even
then.  It  is  recommended  in  epilepsy  and  locomotor
ataxia,  but  I  have  never  seen  good  effects  from  it.

There  is,  however,  another  place  in  which  I  have  seen
it  accomplish  much,  and  that  is  in  the  languor,  weariness
and  prostration  from  hot  weather.  The  head  not  only
aches,  but  the  whole  body  seems  prostrated  by  sun  heat-
Worse  after  sleep,  or  rather  the  patient  sleeps  into  art-
aggravation^  is^  a  genuine  characteristic  of  this  remedy,  no
matter  what  the  enemies  of  Lachesis  say  of  it.  On  this
line  there  is  one  particular  symptom  to  which  I  wish  to-
call  attention,  i.  "As soon  as  the  patient  falls  asleep,  the
breathing  stops."  This  is  as  Hering  expresses  it.  I  have
oftener  found  it  this  way;  the  patient  cannot -go  clear  oflf
into  sleep,  because  just  on  the  verge  of  it  the  breath  stops
and  he  wakens  catching  for  breath.  This  is  often  found
in  heart  troubles,  functional  or  organic,  and  is  very  distress-
ing. Grindelia  robusta  has  a  similar  symptom.  I  have
had  no  experience  with  it.

I  once  had  a  case  of  very  obstinate  constipation  in  an
old  syphilitic  case.  He  was  at  last  taken  with  very  severe
attacks  of  colic.  The  pains  seemed  to  extend  all  through
the  abdomen,  and  always  came  on  at  night. After  trying:


LACHESIS  TRIGONOCEPHALUS.


95


various  remedies  until  I  was  discouraged,  for  he  "got  no
better  fast,"  he  let  drop  this  expression,  "  Doctor,  if  I  could
only  keep  awake  all  the  time,  I  would  never  have  another
attack."  I  looked  askance  at  him.  "I  mean,"  said  he,
"that  I  sleep  into  the  attack,  and  waken  in  it."  I  left
a  dose  of  Lachesis  200.  He  never  had  another  attack  of
the  pain,  and  his  bowels  became  perfectly  regular  from
that  day  and  remained  so.  I  could  give  more  cases  where
this  symptom  has  led  me  to  the  cure  of  ailments  of  dif-
ferent kinds.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  I  have  no  hesita-
tion in  adding  my  testimony  to  that  of  others  as  to  the
value  of  this  symptom.  I  think  I  have  said  enough  about
the  different  symptoms  of  Lachesis  to  indicate  that  it  is
one  of  the  most  useful  remedies  in  typhoid  fever.  I  will
only  add  here  that  it  is  generally  in  the  second  or  third
week  of  the  disease  that  it  is  found  indicated.  This  is
one  of  the  differences  between  it  and  Gelsemiiim.  For
the  trembling  and  weakness  of  Gelsemium  come  early,  and
if  recognized  then  Gelsemium  can  abort  the  disease  at
once.  Of  course  the  sensorium,  tongue,  mouth,  throat,
abdominal  and  stool  symptoms  already  spoken  of,  espe-
cially the  sleep  symptom,  help  to  decide  the  choice  be-
tween Lachesis  and  other  remedies.

Now  upon  the  tissues.  We  have  swellings  on  all  parts
of  the  body,  and  one  of  the  most  characteristic  conditions
is  the  color  of  them.  They  are  bluish  verging  onto  black.
I  never  see  a  swelling  of  that  color  but  Lachesis  immedi-
ately comes  to  my  mind,  and  then  if  I  find  that- they  can-
not bear  to  have  them  touched^  they  are  so  sensative ;  even
a  poultice  is  unbearable  because  it  is  so  heavy,  that  settles
it.  I  give  Lachesis  and  am  seldom  disappointed.  The
blood  decomposes,  or,  as  is  sometimes  said,  "breaks  down,"
becomes uncoagulable. This  often  occurs in  typhoid


9^  LACHESIS  TRIGONOCEPHALUS.

fever,  and  is  of  course  very  serious.  The  bleeding  is
easily  started,  and  is  very  persistent.  There  seems  to  be  a
tendency  to  hemorrhagic  trouble,  so  we  find  Lachesis  one
of  our  best  remedies  in  purpura  hemorrhagica.  Ulcers
and  wounds  bleed  profusely;  even  "small  wounds  bleed
much wounds  easily  become  gangrenous.  Here  Lach-
esis is  capable  of  doing  great  good.  Cancers  turned
bluish  or  black,  bleed  much  and  often,  and  burn ;  blood
appears  in  the  urine  in  many  affections,  indicating  its
broken  down  condition.

We  find  ourselves  drawn  out  to  a  greater  length  on  this
truly  polychrest  remedy  than  we  had  anticipated  when
we  began  writing.  We  have  also  found  it  a  much  more
useful  remedy  than  we  had  anticipated  from  our  impres-
sions of  it  when  reading  Charles  Hempel,  (for  whom  we
have  great  respect,)  in  our  studenthood.  It  wears  well  for
those  who  use  it  in  the  30th  potency  and  upwards.  Don't
forget  that  Lachesis  is  pre-eminently  a  left-sided  remedy,
as  Lycopodium  is  a  right-sided  one.  I^eft-sided  paralysis,
ovarian  affections,  throat  troubles,  lung  troubles,  headaches,
etc.,  all  make  us  think  of  this  remedy  first  because  of  its
positiveness  in  this  respect.  Of  course,  if  the  other  symp-
toms were  present  in  right-sided  affections  we  would  not
hesitate  to  use  it.  Lachesis  is  often  a  remedy  of  great  value
in  skin  affections;  in  scarlatina  maligna,  black  measles,
erysipelas,  small  pox,  malignant  boils,  furuncles,  carbuncles,
chronic  ulcers,  bed  sores,  fungus  haematodes,  etc.  In  all
these,  and  many  other  affections  appearing  upon  the  surface,
the  characteristic  dark  blue  color  is  present,  or  we  need  not
expect  much  from  this  remedy.  So  far  as  stages  of  life
and  constitution  are  concerned,  I  have  found  it  efficacious
in  all  ages  and  temperaments.  But  perhaps  oftener  indica-
ted in  thin  than  in  fat  people.


NAJA  TRIPUDIANS.  97

Now  we  bid  our  old  and  tried  friend  an  affectionate  good-
by  for  a  time,  and  heartily  recommend  all  who  have  not
done  so  to  seek  his  acquaintance.

NAJA  TRIPUDIANS.

Here  is  a  blood  relative  of  Lachesis,  if  serpent  poisons
may  be  called  relatives,  and  according  to  the  symptoms
arising  from  the  bite  of  the  serpent,  it  ought  to  be  equally
valuable  as  a  curative,  but  it  has  not  ye^  been  found  so.
Why  not?  On  referring  to  Allen's  Encyclopcedia  we  find
twenty-nine  provers,  poisonings  and  all,  for  Lachesis^  and
forty-five  for  Naja.  Of  course,  Lachesis  has  been  longest
in  use;  but  has  the  difference  in  time  been  sufficient  to  ac-
count for  the  very  great  difference  in  utility?  Another
thing  is  noticeable ;  the  provings  of  Lachesis  were  made
mostly  with  potencies  as  high  as  the  30th,  while  those  of
Naja  are  almost  all  with  the  lowest  preparations  or  the
crude  poison  from  the  bite  of  the  serpent.  Does  this  ac-
count for  it?

We  also  notice  on  referring  to  the  same  authority  that
all  the  most  marked  verifications  are  of  symptoms  pro-
duced by  the  provings  of  the  30th  of  Lachesis.  Does  this
indicate  that  Naja  must  be  proven  in  the  potencies  to  de-
velop its  most  efficient  powers  ?  Naja  has  been  found  of
very  decided  use  in  affections  of  the  heart,  especially  weak
heart ;  diphtheria,  where  there  is  impending  heart  failure
or  paralysis.  Dyspnoea  and  prostration  from  weak  heart
sympathetic  cough  in  organic  diseases  with  weak  heart
action.  In  these  troubles,  as  well  as  in'  chronic  weakness
of  heart,  there  is  no  doubt  of  the  value  of  Naja.  But
further  than  this  I  do  not  know  of  very  many  marked  sue-


98


CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.


cesses  from  its  use.  Nevertheless,  I  feel  convinced  that
with  further  proving  and  investigation,  along  the  same
line  as  Lachesis^  it  may  rival  if  not  outshine  it.


CROTALUS  HORRIDUS.

Here  is  another  snake  poison  which,  although  like  Naja
has  been  proven  only  in  the  low  preparations,  has  a  bet-
ter clinical  record.  Yet  it  lacks  the  clear  cut  indications  of
Lachesis,  It  has  shown  enough,  however,  to  indicate  that
it  is  a  remedy  of  great  value.  It  seems,  so  far,  to  have
shown  its  greatest  usefulness  in  diseases  which  result  in  a
decomposition  of  the  blood  of  such  a  character  as  to  cause
hemorrhages  from  every  outlet  of  the  body ;  even  the  sweat
is  bloody.  This  occurs  in  the  lower  fevers  of  hot  climates,
such  as  the  bilious  remittent  fevers,  typhoids,  and  that
dread  scourge  of  tropical  climates,  yellow  fever.  It  is  also
the  chief  remedy  in  diphtheria  when  the  profuse  epistaxis
occurs  which  marks  many  cases  of  a  malignant  type.  In
hemorrhages  of  the  nose  in  an  old  man  of  broken  down
constitution,  where  none  of  the  remedies  usually  applied
did  the  least  good,  Crotalus  acted  promptly  and  no  doubt
saved  the  man's  life.  This  was  a  patient  of  my  own,  and,
although  he  had  frequent  attacks  before,  he  never  had  an-
other after  the  Crotalus.  As  would  be  expected  with  such
a  remedy,  there  is  great  prostration  at  such  bleedings.

Malignant  jaundice  is  set  down  as  an  indication  for  Cro-
talus^ but  the  yellowness  of  the  skin,  so  characteristic  of
Crotalus^  is  after  all,  I  imagine,  more  of  haematic  than
hepatic  origin ;  yet  there  may  be  an  element  of  both,  as
hepatic  troubles  are  so  common  in  hot  latitudes  where
Crotalus  has  gained  its  greatest  laurels.


KALI  CARBONICA.  99

Crotalus  richly  deserves  proving  in  the  potencies  in
order  to  bring  out  its  finer  characteristics.


KALI  CARBONICA.

This  remedy,  like  some  others,  finds  its  leading  symp-
tom in  the  character  of  its  pains.  It  leads  all  the  remedies
for  stitching  pains.  Bryonia  stands  next,  but  there  is  a
very  marked  difference.  The  stitching  pains  of  Bryonia
come  on  with  every  movement,  and  only  exceptionally
when  quiet,  while  those  of  Kali  carb.  come  on  independ-
ently of  movement.  Again,  the  stitching  pains  of  Bryonia
are  oftenest  located  in  serous  membranes,  while  those  of
Kali  carb,  are  found  anywhere  and  everywhere,  and  in  al-
most every  tissue,  even  to  the  teeth.  One  of  the  favorite
localities,  however,  for  this  remedy  is  in  the  lower  right
chest.  This  sharp  stitching  pain  is  likely  to  run  right
through  to  the  back.  If  in  pneumonia  or  pi  euro-pneu-
monia your  Bryonia  has  failed  when  you  thought  it  indi-
cated, and  further  examination  reveals  that  the  stitching
pains  come  on  independently  of  the  respiratory  movement,
Kali  carb.  often  helps,  and  follows  well  after  Bryonia.
Often  the  fact  is,  that  Kali  carb.  was  all  the  time  the  remedy
and  ought  to  have  been  given  first.  Now,  these  stitching
pains  of  Kali  carb.  are  not  by  any  means  confined  to  the
right  chest,  but  we  may  find  them  in  the  left,  especially  in
pleuro-pneumonia,  peri-  or  endo-carditis.  Remember,  also,
Mercurius  vivus  in  these  lower  right-chest  pains.  If  there
should  be  present  at  the  same  time  sweat  without  relief,
and  the  mercurial  mouth  and  tongue,  neither  Bryonia  nor
Kali  carb.  are  "  in  it."

Another  kind  of  case  in  which  this  remedy  has  achieved


KALI  CARBONICA.

signal  success,  being  indicated  by  the  stitching  pains,  is
puerperal  fever.

The  pains  are  so  sudden  and  so  sharp  as  to  make  the
patient  cry  out  loudly,  and  then  they  are  gone.  A'a/z  card.
has  saved  some  desperate  cases  of  this  kind.  But  it  makes
no  particular  difference  where  the  disease  is  located  if  these
stitching  pains  are  present,  JiTalz  card,  should  not  be  for-
gotten. We  cannot  too  strongly  emphasize  this.

IsTalz  carbonica  exerts  a  profound  influence  over  the  blood
making  processes.  The  blood  lacks  red  corpuscles.  The
patient  is  anaemic,  with  great  debility,  skin  watery  or
milky  white.  This  condition  is  often  found  with  young
ladies  at  the  age  of  puberty.  They  do  not  seem  to  be  able
to  menstruate  because  of  the  poor  quality  of  blood  and  gen-
eral weakness.  They  incline  to  bloat,  particularly  in  face,
around  eyes  and  especially  upper  eyelids,  and  have  much
pain  and  weakness  in  the  lumbar  region  as  well  as  general
weakness.  Kali  carb.  is  in  such  cases  sometimes  success-
ful afcer  Ferrum  or  Pulsatilla  have  been  wrongly  pre-

This  anaemic  condition  is  also  found  at  the  menopause,
and  in  old  age,  when  the  same  dropsical  tendencies  appear,
and  the  same  characteristic  bag-like  swelling,  or  rather
bloating,  in  the  upper  eyelids  appeais.  In  all  these  cases
you  will  generally,  or  often,  at  least,  find  what  is  called
"weak  heart."  The  heart  action  is  irregular  or  intermit-
tent from  very  weakness  in  correspondence  with  the  gen-
eral muscular  weakness.  One  of  the  characteristic  symp-
toms which  makes  us  think  of  Kali  carb.  in  these  cases  is
the  "constant  backache  of  such  a  nature  that  the  patient
feels  ail  the  time  that  the  back  and  legs  must  give  out.
She  drops  into  a  chair  or  throws  herself  on  the  bed  com-
pletely exhausted. This  aching  often  extends  into  the  hips


KALI  CARBONICA.  lOI

and  down  into  the  gluteal  muscles.  Patient  sweats  easily.
Farrington  says:  This  particular  sweat,  backache  and
weakness  as  a  combination  is  not  found  under  any  other
remedy.

I  have  already  spoker.  of  this  remedy  somewhat  while
writing  of  its  stitching  pai.ns  as  an  indication  for  its  use  in
diseases  gf  the  chest,  but  I  did  not  there  do  it  full  justice.
It  is  not  only  a  great  remedy  for  pneumonia,  pleurisy  and
heart  troubles  as  there  spoken  of,  but  goes  much  further
and  becomes  very  useful  in  incipient  and  even  with  ad-
vanced cases  of  phthisis  pulmonalis.  I  have  seen  a  case
pronounced  incurable  by  several  old  experienced  and  skill-
ful physicians.  Dr.  T.  L.  Brown  among  them,  get  well
under  a  dose  once  in  eight  days  of  J^alz  carb.  The  dis-
ease was  located  mainly  in  the  lower  right  lung,  with  pro-
fuse expectoration  of  matter  of  pus-like  appearance,  pulse
1 20,  greatly  emaciated,  no  appetite,  and  quite  a  large
cavity  in  the  lung.  This  man  is  still  alive  (twenty-five
years  since),  hale  and  hearty.  Such  service  from  any
remedy  makes  a  man  fall  in  love  with  it.  There  is  a  time
characteristic  for  this  remedy  which  is  very  valuable  in
chest  affections,  viz.,  aggravation  at  3  A.  M.  It  may  be
found  in  cough,  consumption,  hydrothorax,  asthma,  and
dropsies  attending  heart  disease.  The  father-in-law  of  Dr.
T.  Iv.  Brown,  an  anaemic  old  man,  was  apparently  near  his
end  with  hydrothorax  and  general  dropsy.  Dr.  Brown
to  even  relieve.  In  consultation  with  Dr.  Sloan,  after
carefully  reviewing  the  case,  the  fact  appeared,  through  the
daughter  of  the  patient,  who  had  been  his  nurse  all  the
time,  that  all  his  symptoms  were  aggravated  at  3  A.  m.
Now  Kali  carb.  200th  was  given,  and  with  such  miraculous

results  that  in  an  incredibly  short  time  the  old  man  was

8


I02


KALI  CARBONICA.


well  and  never  had  a  return  of  that  trouble.  He  lived  for
several  years  after,  and,  finally,  did  not  die  of  dropsy  at  all.
The  day  of  miracles  is  not  past  yet.  Hahnemannian
Homoeopathy  performs  them  stib.

I  cannot  persuade  myself  to  leave  this  remedy  yet,
although  I  have  given  its  chief  uses.

I  must  call  attention  still  further,  even  at  the  risk  of
repeating  somewhat,  to  some  very  important  symptoms.
In  regard  to  the  nervous  system  I  have  already  spoken
of  the  great  debility  which  I  have  called,  7nuscular  de-
bility^ but  there  is  a  weakened  condition  of  the  nerves
in  the  symptoms  found  in  the  Materia  Medica.  "Very
easily  frightened,  shrieks  about  imaginary  appearances;
cannot  bear  to  be  touched ;  starts  when  touched  ever  so
lightly,  especially  on  the  feet."  These  are  valuable  indi-
cations for  Kali  carb.  Then  don't  forget  the  "bag-like
oedematous  swelling  in  the  upper  eyelids."  It  goes  with
many  affections  and  is  invaluable  as  a  guiding  symptom.
"Sticking  pain  in  the  throat  (pharynx),  as  if  a  fishbone
were  sticking  in  it"  (see  Hepar  sulphur^  Dolichos^  Nitric
acid  and  Argentum  nitricuin).

"Great  sensitiveness  of  epigastric  region,  externally."
"Stomach  distended,  sensitive,  feels  as  if  it  would  burst."
"  Excessive  flatulency,_eyeryth2ng  he  eats  or  drinks  appears
to  be  converted  in to_gas."  "Fullness,  heat  and  great  dis-
tension in  abdomen  immediately  after  eating  a  little."
"Abdomen  distended  with  wind  after  eating."  All  these
stomach  and  abdomen  symptoms  indicate  the  value  of  this
remedy  in  dyspeptic  conditions.  They  make  us  think  of
Carbo  vegetabilis^  China  officinalis Lycopodium  clavatum^
but  remember  Kali  carb.  and  that  it  is  especially  adapted  to
broken  down,  aged  people  who  are  senemic. "Sitting up.


KALI  BICHROMICUM.  IO3

leaning  forward,  relieves  in  chest  affections."  The  patient
is  also  aggravated  by  lying  on  the  affected  side.  Don't
forget  this,  for  it  may  enable  you  to  choose  between  it  and
Bryonia^  which  has  the  reverse.

Now  in  what  I  have  written  I  do  not  pretend  to  have
told  all,  and  if  I  thought  that  any  young  physician  would
be  led  to  rely  upon  this  work  of  mine  or  be  led  away
from  thorough  study  of  the  Materia  Medica  instead  of  to
it  I  would  stop  writing.

KALI  BICHROMICUM.

"Affections  of  any  mucous  membranes  with  discharges  of
tough,  stringy,  adherent  mucus,  which  can  be  drawn  out
into  long  strings."  No  remedy  has  this  more  prominently
than  this  one.  Hydrastis  comes  near  to  it,  and  Lyssin
may  approach  it  when  from  the  mouth  or  throat ;  also  Iris
versicolor.

But  Kali  bich.  produces  and  cures  this  kind  of  discharge
from  nose,  mouth,  fauces,  pharynx,  larynx,  trachea,
bronchi,  vagina  and  uterus.

And  the  action  of  the  drug  does  not  stop  here,  but  goes
on  to  the  formation  of  tough  membranes,  on  the  same
surfaces.  Again  it  causes  and  cures  ulcerations  of  the
mucous  membrane?.  These  ulcers  are  peculiar,  "deep  as
if  cut  out  with  a  punch,  edges  regular."  I  remember  one
case  of  years  ago  in  which  such  ulcers  appeared  in  the
throat  of  a  woman.  One  had  eaten  up  through  the  soft
palate  into  the  posterior  nares,  and  the  whole  palate  looked
as  though  it  would  be  destroyed  by  the  ulcerative  process
if  not  speedily  checked.  The  case  had  a  syphilitic  look
to  me  and  had  been  under  the  treatment  of  two  old  school
physicians  for  a  long  time. I  gave  Kali  bich.  30th,  and


I04


KALI  BICHROMICUM.


to  say  that  I  was  astonished  at  the  effect  (for  it  was  in  my
early  practice)  is  putting  it  mildly,  for  the  ulcers  healed  so
rapidly,  and  her  general  condition  which  was  very  bad,
correspondingly  improved,  that  in  three  weeks  from  that
time  she  was  well  to  all  appearance  and  never  had  any  re-
turn of  the  trouble  afterwards,  or  for  years,  at  least  as  long
as  I  knew  her.  .  I  forgot  to  state  that  she  also  had  the
stringy  discharge,  though  not  so  profuse  as  I  have  often
seen  in  other  cases.

I  once  cured  a  dog  that  had  a  sore  mouth  and  throat,
from  which  the  saliva  hung  in  strings,  and  dragged
on  the  ground  as  he  staggered  along.  People  who  saw
him  said  he  was  mad,  but  I  think  not,  as  he  did  not  snap
or  bite  or  have  suffocating  spasms.

Kali  bichromicum  is  one  of  our  sheet  anchors  in  the  treat-
ment of  disease  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  nose.  Not
only  in  inflammations  of  an  acute  character,  which  are  at-
tended with  stringy  discharges,  but  also  of  a  chronic  kind
known  as  "chronic  catarrh."  In  these  cases  the  patient
often  complains  of  much  pressure  at  the  root  of  the  nose,
and  especially  if  an  habitual  discharge  becomes  suddenly
suppressed.  Slugs  and  clinkers  form  in  the  nose,  which
form  again  and  again  after  removal.  Sometimes  there  dis-
charges tough  green  masses  or  hard  plugs.  This  process
of  chronic  inflammation  may  go  on  from  bad  to  worse,
until  ulceration  sets  in  to  such  an  extent  that  the  whole
septum  may  ulcerate  away.  1  have  known  a  case  in
which  the  apparently  "  punched  out"  ulcers,  ate  a  hole
right  through  the  septum.  This  may  be  syphilitic  or  not.
If  in  syphilitic  cases  the  destructive  process  should  attack
the  bones  Kali  bich.  may  still  be  of  use,  though  I  should
expect  to  be  obliged  to  resort  to  Aiwiim  met.  or  some  more
deeply  acting  remedy.


KALI  BICHROMICUM.


I  have  likewise  found  in  those  troublesome  cases  of
chronic  post-nasal  catarrh,  where  the  dropping  back  into
the  throat  is  stringy,  or  those  crusty  or  pluggy  formations
occur,  this  to  be  a  good  remedy,  and  it  has  gained  me  some
fast  friends.

In  its  formation  of  membranes  in  the  throat  it  is  as  posi-
tive as  any  other  remedy,  and  when  the  membrane  extends
downward  into  the  larynx,  causing  membraneous  croup,  I
believe  no  remedy  excels  it.  I  have  with  it  cured  many
cases  of  diphtheritic  croup,  and  of  late  years  never  give  it
below  the  30th  potency,  because  abundant  experience  has
convinced  me  that  it  does  better  than  the  low  triturations.

Kali  bichromicum  has  been  of  use  in  the  treatment  of
stomach  troubles.  The  vomiting  is  often  of  the  ropy  char-
acter, and  here  also,  as  in  nose,  mouth  and  throat,  we  may
have  formed  "round  ulcers."  But  short  of  actual  ulcera-
tion we  have  a  form  of  dyspepsia,  in  which  this  remedy  is
very  useful.  It  is  often  found  in  drunkards,  especially  beer
drunkards.  There  is  great_weight  in  the  stomach,  fullness,
a  distress  immediately  after  eatins^  (like  Nux  moschatd)^  but
not  like  Nux  vomica^  which  comes  on  two  or  three  hours
after,  nor  like  Anacardium^  which  also  comes  on  two  or
three  hours  after  eating,  and  then  the  pain  continues  until
he  eats  agaiii^  which  relieves^

There  are  two  appearances  of  the  tongue  which  may  be
present  in  conjunction  with  these  stomach  troubles,  one  is
a  yellow  coating  at  the  base  {Mercitrius  prot.  and  Natrum
/to.)  the  other  a  dp/ smooth  glazed  or  red  cracked  tongue.
This  latter  tongue  is  found  more  often  in  connection  with
dysentery,  in  which  Kali  bich.  has  sometimes  done  good
service.

There  is  one  kind  of  discharge  which  comes  from  mucous
membranes  of  which  I  have  not  yet  written,  "jelly-like


io6


KALI  BICHROMICUM.


mucus."  It  may  come  from  nose,  posterior  nares,  vagina
or  anus.  Tiiis  is  especially  found  in  dysentery  where  the
stools  have  by  some  other  remedy  changed  from  an  appear-
ance "  like  scrapings"  to  the  jelly-like  form.  Of  course
leucorrhoeas  of  both  the  ropy  and  jelly-like  variety  come  under
this  remedy  and  many  fine  cures  have  resulted  from  its  use.
It  is  no  less  so  in  affections  of  the  respiratory  organs  in
coughs,  croup,  bronchitis,  asthma,  and  even  in  consump-
tion. The  chromic  acid  element  in  this  combination  of
Kali  seems  responsible  for  the  ropy  mucus  as  no  other  Kali
has  it  in  any  such  degree.

There  are  a  few  more  points  about  this  remedy  that
ought  not  to  be  omitted.  The  pains  are  peculiar.  They
appear  in  small  spots,  which  can  be  covered  with  the
point  of  a  finger.  This  is  markedly  so  with  the  pains  in
the  head.  In  sick  headache  often  so.  Farrington  says  :
There  are  quite  a  number  of  remedies  having  blind
headache,  but  Kali  bichromicum  is  the  best  of  them."
The  blindness  comes  on  before  the  headache ;  then,  as  the
headache  begins,  the  blindness  disappears.  Then  the  pain
settles  in  a  small  spot  and  is  very  intense.  Again,  the
pains  of  Kali  bichromicum  |^j2S^,i^_^id_disappear  suddenly.
This  is  like  Belladonna.  Then,  again,  they"  fly  from  one
place  to  another  like  Pulsatilla.  There  are  five  remedies
having  markedly  wandering  or  erratic  paijis,  viz:  Kah
bichromicum.,  Kali  suiphuricum., 'Putsatiua.,  L.ac  caninum
and  Manganum  aceticum.  Kali  bichromicum  does  not  stay
as  long  in  a  place  as  Pulsatilla  does,  nor  is  there  so  much
disposition  to  swell.  Kali  sulphuricum  is  most  like  Pulsa-
tilla in  all  its  symptoms  (see  Boericke  &  Dewey's  Twelve
Tissue  Remedies).  The  Mangamim  pains  shift  crosswise
from  joint  to  joint,  while  Lac  caninum  alternates  sides,
being  worse  on  one  side  one  day  and  on  the  other  the  next,


KALI  HYDRIODICUM.


etc.  Then,  again,  Kali  bichromicum  alternates  symptoms;
for  instance,  rheumatic  and  dysenteric  symptoms  alternate.
(Also,  Abrotanum.)  Platina  alternates  back  symptoms,
with  general  mind  and  bodily  symptoms.

Kali  bichromicum  is  particularly  adapted  to  fat,  light-
haired  persons,  or  children  disposed  to  catarrhal,  croupy,
scrofulous  or  syphilitic  affections.  Dr.  Drisdale  deserves
much  credit  for  what  he  has  done  for  the  profession  by  in-
troducing this  truly  great  remedy.


KALI  HYDRIODICUM.

This  is  one  of  the  drugs  so  greatly  abused  by  the  old
the  first  place,  from  my  prejudice  against  it,  and,  in  the
second,  because  it  never  had  so  thorough  a  proving  as  did
Kali  carb.  by  Hahnemann.

There  is  one  condition  of  the  respiratory  organs  in  which
I  have  found  it  of  great  value.  When  after  a  hard  cold  a
long-continued  cough  is  the  consequence,  or  it  may  be  after
an  attack  of  pneumonia.  The  patient  seems  as  if  running
into  consumption.  There  is  profuse  expectoration
from  low  down,  deep  in  the  chest,  as  if  it  came  from  mid-
sternum,  with  painjthrough  to  between  the  shoulders
carb.^  lower  right  chest  through  to  back),  and  there
are  exhausting  night-sweats  and  great  general  weakness.
I  have  repeatedly  cured  such  cases  where  consumption
seemed  inevitable.

In  the  beginning  of  my  practice  I  used  to  dissolve  two
to  four 'grains  of  the  crude  salt  in  a  four-ounce  vial  of
water  and  direct  to  take  a  tablespoonful  of  this  prepara-
tion three  times  a  day,  until  it  was  half  used,  and  then  fill


io8


KALI  HYDRIODICUM.


Up  with  water  and  continue  taking  the  same  way  until
cured  ;  filling  up  the  vial  every  time  it  was  half  used.  But
several  years  ago,  having  a  marked  case  of  this  description
and  feeling  sure  of  my  remedy,  I  gave  it  in  the  200th
potency  as  an  experiment.  This  case  also  made  fully  as
speedy  a  recovery  as  the  others  treated  with  the  crude  drug,
are  two  other  remedies  that  may  dispute  the  place  with
Kali  hyd.  in  such  cases,  viz.,  Sanguinaria  and  Sta7tnum.
In  all  the  expectoration  is  profuse  and  thick,  but  in  Stan-
mim  the  matter  tastes  sweety  in  Sangtcmaria  the  breath
and  sputa  are  very  fetid^  even  to  the  patient  (also  Sepia
and  Psorin7im\  while  in  Kali  hyd.  it  is  salty  to  the  taste
(Sepid).  With  Kali  hyd.  and  Stannum  the  expectoration
is  often  thick,  green  ;  not  so  much  so  with  Sanguinaria.
Sometimes  with  the  Kali  hyd.  there  is  a  frothy  or  soapsuds-
like  appearance  of  the  sputa,  but  the  heavy,  green,  salty  ex-
pectoration  seems  to  me  to  be  more  characteristic.  The
frothy  expectoration  is  found  in  oedema  of  the  lungs  and
may  occur  in  Bright's  disease.  I  have  more  than  once
gotten  the  reputation  of  curing  consumption  in  such  cases
as  I  have  been  describing,  and  I  don't  know  but  I  deserved
it,  at  least  I  was  never  known  to  deny  it.

Kali  hydriodiami  as  used  by  the  old  school  is  given
either  as  a  sort  of  specific  against  syphilis,  or  more  often
syphilis  complicated  by  their  abuse  of  mercury,  or  again  as
an  alterative  in  scrofulous  affections,  without  much  reason.
Now,  what  is  an  alterative?  Here  is  the  definition:  "A
medicine  which  gradually  induces  a  change  in  the  habit
or  constitution,  and  restores  healthy  functions  without
sensible  evacuation."  Isn't  that  rather  sweeping?  How
is  that  for  a  school  of  medicine  that  claims  to  be  the  cus-
todian of  all  medical  science? Isn't  that  about  what  we


KALI  HYDRIODICUM.  IO9

would  like  to  do  in  every  case — restore  healthy  function^
without  sensible  evacuation?  How  would  Kali hydriodicum
do  then  for  a  panacea?  There  are,  however,  many  so-called
alteratives  according  to  this  definition ;  which  shall  we  give?
It  is  just  here  that  we  homoeopaths  believe  that  such  vague
general  terms  as  alterative,  tonic,  narcotic,  etc.,  are  too
unmeaning  for  purposes  of  close  prescribing,  and  therefore
a  class  of  remedies,  instead  of  the  particular  remedy  of  that
class  best  adapted  to  the  individual  case.

We  claim,  therefore,  great  superiority  for  our  system  of
prescribing,  which  is  based  upon  a  system  of  close  drug
proving,  which  brings  out  the  closest,  finest  shades  of  differ-
ence between  remedies  belonging  to  a  class  of  remedies.
There  must  be  no  substitution  of  one  for  the  other,  if  we
would  do  the  finest  prescribing  possible.

It  requires  but  little  comparison  between  the  Materia
Medicas  of  the  two  schools  to  show  the  wide  difference  in
this  respect.

There  is  said  to  be  a  place  for  the  use  of  this  remedy,  in
pneumonia.  I  have  not  had  experience  with  it  here,  but
on  account  of  its  reputation  I  give  it,  and  may  use  it  if
occasion  requires.

I  give  you  Farrington's  words  for  it :  "Pneumonia,  in
which  disease  it  is  an  excellent  remedy  when  hepatization
has  commenced,  when  the  disease  localizes  itself,  and  infil-
tration begins.  In  such  cases,  in  the  absence  of  other  symp-
toms calling 'distinctively  for  Bryonia,  Phosphorus  or  Sul-
phur, I  would  advise  you  to  select  Iodine  or  Iodide  of
Potasa.  It  is  also  called  for  when  the  hepatization  is  so  ex-
tensive that  we  have  cerebral  congestion,  or  even  an  effusion
into  the  brain  as  a  result  of  this  congestion.  The  symp-
toms are  as  follows  in  these  cases :


s


1 10


KALI  HYDRIODICUM.


"  First  they  begin  with  a  very  red  face,  the  pupils  are  more
or  less  dilated,  and  the  patient  is  drowsy ;  in  fact,  showing
a  picture  very  much  like  that  of  Belladonna.  You  will
probably  give  that  remedy,  but  it  does  no  good.  The  pa^
tient  becomes  worse,  breathes  more  heavy,  and  the  pupils
more  inactive  to  the  light,  and  you  know  then  that  you
have  serous  effusion  into  the  brain,  which  must  be  checked
or  the  patient  dies."  So  far  good.  But  now  even  Far-
rington  dulls — all  great  men  sometimes  do.  He  says,
the  symptoms  aloite  in  this  case  would  fail,  because  he  has
not  taken  the  totality  of  the  case."  What  does  Farrington
mean?  Does  he  mean  that  in  his  picture  of  Belladonna
that  he  had  the  totality  of  the  case  without  the  hepatiza-
tion, or  does  he  mean  that  the  hepatization  was  the  totality
without  the  other  symptoms.  Here  are  the  two  horns  of
his  dilemma — which  would  he  take?  I  contend  that  all
the  other  symptoms  of  the  case,  without  the  hepatization,
was  not  the  totality  of  the  case.  The  hepatization  was
one,  and  only  one,  of  the  totality  of  symptoms.  Now  he
says — "Put  your  ear  to  the  patient's  chest,  and  you  will
find  one  or  both  lungs  consolidated."  Well,  I  should  call
that  a  very  important  objective  symptom,  and  one  that
could  not  be  left  out  of  the  totality  of  the  case.  Remem-
ber that  both  subjective  and  objective  symptoms  must  enter
into  every  case  in  order  to  make  the  totality  complete.

So  after  all,  in  true  Hahnemannian  fashion,  I  claim  that  he
and  cannot  fail  where  a  cure  is  at  all  possible.  These  are
and  must  be  our  infallible  guide,  or  Similia  Simillibus  Cur-
a7iter  is  not  true.  (See  Kafka's  case,  Hom.  Clinic,  page
73,  1870.)

Guiding  Symptoms,  Vol.  VI,  page  441,  records  this—


KALI  HYDRIODICUM.  1 1 1

"Distends  all  the  tissues  by  interstitial  infiltration,  oedema,
enlarged  glands,  tophis  exostoses,  swelling  of  the  bones."
Then  of  course  it  cures  such  distensions  of  the  tissues.
Great  mistakes  and  abuses  of  the  remedy,  and  irreparable
injury  to  the  patient,  often  follows  the  use  of  remedies  on
such  vague  or  single  indications,  that  is  of  course  if  we
zation. This  is  only  one  symptom,  and  that  one  may  occur
under  many  remedies.  If  we  say,  or  could  say,  interstitial
distension  of  the  tissues  with  certain  other  symptoms  peculiar
to  that  remedy,  then  could  we  differentiate  between  it  and
other  remedies.  But  to  use  a  remedy  simply  as  an  absorbent
because  it  has  secured  absorption  in  some  other  case,  is
simply  to  fall  back  into  the  indiscriminate  generalization
and  routinism  of  the  old  school.  Kali  iodatum  is  called  an
anti-syphilitic.  So  is  mercury.  Sulphur  is  called  anti-
psoric,  and  Thuja  anti-sycotic.  That  is  well  to  begin  with,
but  "  the  end  is  not  yet."  There  is  a  large  class  of  remedies
for  each  of  these  missions  and  the  one  (indicated  by  all  the
symptoms  or  the  characteristic  symptoms)  out  of  the  class
is  the  one  to  select  for  the  cure  of  each  individual  patient.

The  very  fact  that  Kali  iodatum  has  been  too  generally
and  indiscriminately  used  is  the  reason  why  it  is  a  great
question  as  to  whether  humanity  has  been  most  blessed  or
cursed  by  it.  We  homoeopaths  have  much  to  do  in  com-
batting the  evils  produced  by  the  abuse  of  both  these  drugs,
and  Hepar  sulphur  is  07ie  of  the  best  antidotes.  Most  of
the  reported  cures  with  this  remedy  Kali  iod.  are  made  with
the  low  or  crude  preparations  of  the  drug.  I  think  it  can
be  used  lower  than  most  drugs  without  injury,  and  yet  I
believe  we  do  not  know  half  its  remedial  power  as  developed
by  our  process  of  potentiation.


112


KALI  MURIATICUM.


KALI  MURIATICUM

Is  one  of  the  so-called  "  Bio-chemic  "  remedies,  or  one  of
the  twelve  tissue  remedies,  claimed  by  Schiissler  to  be  able
to  cure  all  the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to. It  has  not  been
proven  enough  to  know  half  its  real  value. Clinical  use
in  the  potencies,  ranging  from  the  3d  to  the  30th,  has
proven  that  it  is  a  remedy  of  undoubted  great  value. It  is
of  use  in  the  second  stage  of  inflammations  or  the  stage  of
interstitial  exudation  in  any  part  of  the  body,  and  here  it  is
not,  so  far  as  yet  known,  attended  with  the  danger  of  Kali
hydriodicum. If  it  had  been  used  in  the  massive  doses  of
the  latter  remedy,  we  might  have  had  more  deleterious  re-
sults than  we  now  know  of I  have  seen  enlarged  joints
after  acute  rheumatism,  rapidly  reduced  to  normal  size  un-
der its  action,  sometimes  after  they  had  resisted  other  rem-
edies a  long  time  ;  but  I  do  not  know  of  any  characteristic
symptoms  for  its  use  in  preference  to  other  remedies. It  is
also  a  remedy  for  tonsillitis  after  the  acute  inflammatory
symptoms  have  been  checked  by  Aconite^  Bellado7tna^  or
Ferrum  phos.  I  have  found  it  very  efficacious  in  deafness
from  inflammation  and  closure  of  the  eustachian  tube.  I
began  using  it  in  the  3d  or  6th,  but  have  better  success  with
the  24th  potency. A  great  many  cases  of  chronic  incurable
deafness  might  have  been  cured  by  this  remedy  if  used  early.
Mercurius  dulcis  may  be  mentioned  in  this  connection,  as  it
was  not  when  we  wrote  of  the  Mercuries^  as  another  rem-
edy for  these  eustachian  troubles. Of  course  you  would  be
apt  to  have  some  other  mercurial  symptoms  which  would
perhaps  enable  you  to  choose  between  the  two  remedies.
Kali  mur.  is  likely  to  come  into  use  more  from  a  clinical


APIS  MELLIFICA.


introduction  than  from  provings.  That  is  what  Hering
used  to  call  a  remedy  born  by  breech  presentation.  It  is
possible,  but  not  right  or  natural.

APIS  MELLIFICA.

It  seems  to  me  that  in  this  remedy  also  the  leading  char-
acteristic is  to  be  found  in  its  sensation — burning  stinging
pains.  They  are  sharp  and  quick,  like  the  sting  of  the
bee.  These  pains  are  as  characteristic  of  this  remedy  as  are
the  itching-like  chilblains  of  Agaricus^  or  the  burnings
of  Arsenicum  and  Sulphur ;  but  the  burnings  of  Apis
are  relieved  by  cold,  while  those  of  Arsenic  are  relieved
by  heat.  The  stinging  appears  in  many  diseases,  and
kinds  of  tissue.  In  the  serous  membranes  or  the  brain
coverings,  when  we  get  those  "shrill,  sudden  piercing
screams" — "m'^  cerebrale^^''  which  attend  such  dangerous
affections  as  hydrocephalus,  cerebro-spinal  meningitis  and
typhus  cerebralis.  Again  we  get  these  pains  in  the  mu-
cous membranes,  as  in  the  throat  and  hemorrhoids,  and
the  burning  is  almost  always  more  or  less  present  at  the
same  time.  It  is  also  found  very  prominent  in  the  ovaries.
It  has  proved  a  very  valuable  remedy  in  cancers,  even  open
ones,  when  this  stinging,  burning  pain  was  present ;  also
in  panaritium.  I  have  seen  rapid  cures  follow  its  exhibi-
tion in  felon.  Hering  puts  it — "  redness  and  swelling  with
stinging  and  burning  pain  in  the  eyes,  eyelids,  ears,  face,
lips,  tongue,  throat,  anus,  testicles."

So  we  see  how  generally  the  system  comes  under  the
action  of  this  remedy.  In  skin  affections,  especially  the
acute  exanthems,  this  is  the  grand  leading  symptom,
and  it  is  especially  indicated  in  affections  of  the  brain  and
meninges  caused  by  a  sudden  suppression  of  skin  diseases.


114  APIS  MELI.IFICA.

The  next  general  condition  for  which  this  remedy  seems
to  be  as  near  specific  as  any  remedy  can  be,  is  an  infiltrated
cellular  tissue ;  an'  oedematous  or  dropsical  condition.
This  condition  obtains  almost  from  the  beginning  of  inflam-
matory affections  and  extends  to  the  stage  of  exudation,
and  even  to  chronic  dropsical  states.  In  those  intensely
violent  and  rapid  cases  of  diphtheria  in  which  the  whole
throat  fills  right  up  with  oedematous  swelling,  the  uvula
hanging  down  like  a  transparent  sac  filled  with  water,  and
the  patient  is  in  imminent  danger  of  death  by  suffocation
from  actual  closure  of  the  throat  and  larynx,  there  is  no
remedy  like  Apis.  The  stinging,  burning  pains  may  be
present  in  these  cases ;  or  what  is  more  dangerous  still,
because  there  is  no  complaint  until  the  case  is  far  advanced,
is  an  absolutely  paiiiless  condition.  Baptisia  has  painless-
ness in  throat  affections,  but  the  swelling  is  not  so  rapid  as
Apis^  and  there  is  no  oedema.

This  oedematous  condition  of  Apis  may.  be  found  in  al-
most any  part  of  the  body,  but  is  especially  prominent  in
mouth  and  throat,  eyelids  and  face,  around  the  eyes  ;  lower
lids  hang  down  like  bags  of  water.  {Kali  carb.  upper  lids.)
In  erysipelas  the  swelling  of  the  skin  is  of  this  oedematous
appearance,  and  generally  with  stinging  pains.  Some-
times the  oedema  increases  until  it  forms  large  blister-like
bags  of  water.

The  dropsical  effusion  may  be  general  or  local.  It  is
found  in  the  thoracic  cavity,  in  ovaries,  in  abdominal
cavity,  scrotum,  and  genitals  of  females.  One  peculiar
symptom  which  helps  to  choose  between  it  and  other
remedies  in  dropsy  is  the  almost  absolute  abscence  of  thirst.

I  will  now,  in  addition  to  what  I  have  written,  call  atten-
tion to  some  particular  affections  and  symptoms  in  which
Apis  should  be  remembered. A  very  important  symptom


CANTHARIS  VESICATORIA.


not  vet  mentioned  is  tenderness  or  sensitiveness  to  touch,  as
if  bruised.  This  is  particularly  true  in  the  abdominal,
uterine,  and  ovarian  regions,  but  is  not  by  any  means  con-
fined here,  for  we  may  find  the  whole  surface  of  the  body
exceedingly  sensitive  to  touch,  even  the  hair  seems  sore
(chin).  This  condition  is  often  found  in  cerebro-spinal
meningitis  and  is  a  strong  indication  for  Apis.  In  erysip-
elas this  tenderness  is  often  present,  and  is  found  under
Hepar  sulphur  as  well  as  Apis.

The  sleep  of  Apis  is  either  very  restless,  or  in  brain  dis-
eases there  is  deep  stupor,  interrupted  occasionally  by  pierc-
ing screams.  Never  forget  Apis  then.  In  all  inflammatory
affections  and  in  intermittent  fevers,  if  you  find  the  patient
alternately  dry  and  hot,  or  perspiring,  think  again  of  Apis.

No  remedy  has  this  alternation  so  strong  as  Apis.  Sen-
sation as  if  every  breath  would  be  his  last,  is  very  charac-
teristic, and  occurs  not  only  in  dropsical  troubles  of  the
chest,  but  seems  also  to  be  a  nervous  symptom.  In  scarla-
tina Apis  is  especially  indicated  if  the  eruption  is  retarded
or  retrocedent  and  serious  brain  troubles  result,  and  it  is  no
less  efficacious  in  post-scarlatinal  dropsies  if  the  symptoms
do  not  indicate  some  other  remedies.

CANTHARIS  VESICATORIA.

If  I  were  to  select  the  one  remedy  with  which  to  prove
the  truth  of  the  formula  similia,  etc.,  I  think  this  would  be
the  one.  There  is  no  remedy  that  so  surely,  and  so  vio-
lently, irritates  and  inflames  the  urinary  organs,  and  no
remedy  so  promptly  cures  such  irritation  when  it  puts  on
the  Cantharis  type  or  form,  which  it  often  does.

H.  N.  Guernsey  wrote :  ''It  is  a  singular  fact,  though
known  to  most  practitioners,  that  if  there  be  frequent  mic-


«


no  CANTHARIS  VESICATORIA.

turition  attended  with  burning,  cutting  pain,  or  if  not
so  frequent  and  the  cutting  burning  pain  attends  the  flow,
Cantharis  is  almost  always  the  remedy  for  whatever  other
suffering  there  may  be,  even  in  inflammation  of  the  brain
or  lungs."  He  might  have  added  in  the  throat,  and  mu-
cous membranes  all  through  the  intestinal  tract,  even  to
the  rectum  and  anus,  and  in  the  pleura  or  on  the  skin.

He  also  wrote :  "  Cantharis  should  always  be  remembered
and  studied  in  treating  affections  of  the  air  passages  when
the  mucus  is  tenacious."  I  had  the  pleasure  of  verifying
the  truth  of  this  in  the  case  of  a  lady  who  had  suffered  a
long  time  with  bronchitis.  The  mucus  was  so  profuse,
and  tenacious,  and  ropy,  that  I  thought  of  Kali  bichromi-
czim,  and  thought  it  must  be  the  remedy,  but  it  did  not  even
ameliorate,  and  she  got  worse  all  the  time  until  one  day
she  mentioned  that  she  had  great  cutting  and  burning  on
urinating,  which  she  must  do  very  frequently.

On  the  strength  of  the  urinary  symptom,  for  I  knew
nothing  of  its  curative  powers  on  the  respiratory  organs  at
that  time,  I  gave  her  Cantharis. The  effect  was  magical.

sician and  patient  in  such  a  case,  for  it  was  astonishing,
the  rapidity  with  which  the  perfect  and  permanent  cure  of
the  case  was  accomplished.

Let  us  notice  still  further  the  effects  of  this  remedy  upon
the  urinary  organs  by  calling  attention  to  a  few  symptoms
that  have  been  both  produced  in  proving  and  cured  ab
tisu  in  morbis.  I  have  learned  to  place  the  highest
estimate  upon  such  symptoms.  To  be  sure  there  are  many
symptoms  in  our  great  Materia  Medica  that  have  come  to
us  through  clinical  sources  only,  and  very  valuable  ones
too.  But  they  cannot  be  received  with  such  implicit  con-
fidence on  short  acquaintance  as  those  that  are  both  patho-


CANTHARIS  VESICATORIA.  1 1?

genetic  and  clinical.  They  should  always  be  separated
when  possible,  as  they  were  in  "  Hull's  Jahr"  of  old.  Here
are  a  few  of  them.  "  Violent  pains  in  bladder,  with  fre-
quent urging  to  urinate,  with  intolerable  tenesmus. "  "  Vio-
lent burning  cutting  pains  in  the  neck  of  the  bladder."

Before,  during,  and  after  urinating  fearful  cutting  pains
in  the  urethra."  "Constant  urging  to  urinate;  urine
passed  drop  by  drop  with  extreme  pain."  "  Urine  scalds
him  ;  it  is  passed  drop  by  drop."

No  homoeopathist  meeting  these  symptoms  in  a  case
would  fail  to  think  of  Cantharis  at  once  no  matter  what
else  ailed  the  patient,  as  it  has  cured  the  most  diverse  and
varied  diseases,  when  occurring  in  conjunction  with  these
urinary  symptoms.  How  any  physician  of  any  school  can
deny  the  truth  of  similia  similibtis  curantur  in  the  light
of  such  testimony  or  proof  can  only  be  accounted  for  on  the
principle  of  "  none  so  blind  as  those  who  will  not  see."

Cantharis  has  also  very  decided  action  upon  the  skin.
In  erysipelas  it  is  sometimes  the  best  remedy,  and  choice
lias  to  be  made  between  it  and  Apis^  which  also  sometimes
has  great  urinary  irritation  in  such  cases.  In  the  Apis
cases  there  is  apt  to  be  more  oedema ;  in  CanthaiHs  more
blistering.  In  Cantharis  the  burning  is  more  intense  than
under  the  Apis^  while  in  the  latter  there  is  more  stinging.
The  urinary  symptoms,  if  present,  are  very  much  more  in-
tense under  Cantharis.  Again,  the  mind  symptoms  of  the
two  remedies  are  quite  different.  In  the  Apis  cases,  aside
from  the  stinging  pains  which  make  the  patient  cry  out
sharply  at  times,  especially  if  the  eruption  inclines  to
^'  go  in"  and  attack  the  membranes  of  the  brain,  the  patient
may  not  be  so  very  restless  and  complaining  ;  but  in  the
Cantharis  case  the  patient  is  uneasy,  restless,  jissatisfied,

distressed,  sometimes  moaning  or  violently  crying T'w^anls
9


Il8  CANTHARIS  VESICATORIA.

to  be  moved  about  constantly.  The  mind  symptoms  actu-
ally make  one  think  of  Arsenicum  alburn^  and  when  we
take  into  account  the  intense  burning  it  is  doubly  so.  So
that  it  would  be  very  easy  to  get  confused  between
these  two  remedies  as  well  as  Cantharis  and  Apis.  If
great  thirst  is  also  present  it  would  make  us  think  of  Ar-
senic. And  now  we  are  upon  the  skin,  Cantharis  is  a
great  remedy  for  burns,  both  locally  as  an  application  and
internally  for  the  more  chronic  conditions  and  sequelae.
In  all  skin  troubles  where  blebs  or  watery  vesicles  form,
which  burn  and  itch,  or  when  touched  burn  and  smart,  we
do  well  to  remember  Cantharis^  and  look  further  to  find
more  symptoms,  if  present,  to  corroberate  it.  Hering  used
to  challenge  skeptics  to  burn  their  fingers,  and  then  cure
them  by  dipping  the  fingers  into  water  medicated  with
Cantharis. So  great  was  his  faith  in  it.

I  will  call  attention  to  a  sensational  symptom  of  Can-
tharis which  I  believe  is  underestimated  in  practice.  It
is  the  sensation  of  Burning.  If  any  remedy  deserves  to  be
placed  along  side  Arsenicum  for  burning,  it  is  this  one.  I
will  quote  so  as  to  bring  all  together,  in  a  way  to  impress
upon  our  memory  the  burnings  of  Cantharis.  "  Inflam-
mation of  the  eyes  particularly,  when  caused  by  a  burn."
"  Burning  in  mouth,  throat,  and  stomach."  "  Great  thirst,
with  burning  pain  in  throat  and  stomach."  "Violent
burning  pain  in  stomach  in  region  of  pylorus."  "Violent
burning  pain  and  heat  through  whole  intestinal  tract."
"  Passage  of  white  or  pale-red  tough  mucus  with  the  stool
like  scrapings  from  intestines,  with  streaks  of  blood  ;  after
stool  colic  relieved,  burning,  biting,  and  stinging  in  the
anus."  "Great  burning  pain  in  the  ovarian  regions."
"Peritonitis  with  burning  pain,  abdomen  sensitive  and
tenesmus  of  the  bladder." "  Burning  and  stinging  of  the


TARENTULA  HISPANA.


119


larynx,  especially  when  attempting  to  hawk  up  tough  mu-
cus." "  Burning  in  the  chest."

We  have  already  spoken  of  the  burnings  connected  with
affections  of  the  urinary  organs,  and  also  of  the  burnings  of
the  skin  in  erysipelas  and  other  eruptions  upon  the  surface.

This  seems  to  me  to  be  sufficient  to  impress  upon  the
reader  the  value  of  this  symptom  belonging  to  this  remedy.
I  will  close  by  calling  attention  to  its  effects  upon  the  mem-
branes to  increase  their  secretion.  This  action  is  positive
and  is  a  valuable  indication  for  its  use.

TARENTULA  HISPANA.

This  spider  poison  has  like  other  spider  poisons  very
positive  nervous  symptoms.  It  acts  upon  the  uterus  and
ovaries,  and  upon  the  female  sexual  organs  generally.  "  In
cases  of  hypersesthesia  or  congestion  of  these  organs,  which
set  up  a  general  hysterical  condition,  states  simulating
spinal  neurasthenia,  sensitive  and  painful  back,  excessive
restlessness,  and  impressibility  to  excitements,  music  espe-
cially, where  there  is  constant  inclination  to  keep  the  hands
busy,  and  again  especially  if  accompanied  by  sexual  desire
or  pruritus  of  the  genitals,  Tarentida  is  able  to  accomplish
much."  "Choreaic  conditions,  which  are  often  the  outcome
tion, are  peculiarly  amenable  to  this  remedy.  Twitching
or  jerkiiag  of  the  muscles  in  conjunction  with  other  troubles
should  always  call  to  mind  this  remedy,  with  which  such
jerkings  are  so  characteristic.  This  remedy  is  not  yet
as  thoroughly  understood  as  it  should  be.  Another  spider
ought  to  be  mentioned  in  this  connection,  viz.,  the


I20  TARENTULA  CUBENSIS.


TARENTULA  CUBENSIS,

or  the  hairy  spider.  It  is  one  of  the  most  efficacious  rem-
edies for  boils,  abscesses,  felons,  or  swellings  of  any  kind,
where  the  tissues  put  on  a  bluish  color ^  and  there  are  inieiise
burning  pains.  We  used  to  think  we  had  two  great  reme-
dies in  Arsenicum  and  Anthracinwn  for  these  swellinp-s:
but  Tarentula  Cubensis  is  simply  wonderful.  I  have
seen  felons  which  had  kept  patients  awake  for  night  after
night  walking  the  floor  in  agony  from  the  terrible  pains
so  relieved  in  ^  very  short  time  that  they  could  sleep  in
perfect  ^comfort  until  the  swellings  spontaneously  dis-
charged, and  progressed  to  a  rapid  cure.  This  remedy
should  receive  a  thorough  proving. It  is  a  gem.

MYGALE  LASIODORA

Is  also  a  spider  poison,  and  has  cured  cases  of  chorea.  The
cases  seem  to  have  been  of  a  very  violent  nature,  and  the
twitching  in  the  facial  muscles  is  predominant.  This
remedy  also  ought  to  be  fully  proven.

ARANEA  DIADEMA.

Another  spider  which  Grauvogl  classed  with  his  so-called
hydrogenoid  remedies,  i.  e.^  the  patient  always  suffered  with
whatever  she  had ;  most  in  wet  weather.  It  is  well  to  re-
member such  positive  modalities,  for  it  may  narrow  down
the  case  to  a  few  remedies  from  which  our  curative  must
be  chosen;  for  instance — Aranea^  Natrum  sulphuricum.^
Dulcamara,  Nux  moschata,  Rhus  toxicodendron,  Rhodo-
dendron—^S\.  have  these  wet  weather  aggravations,  and  we


THERIDION  CURASSAVICUM.  121

will  be  apt  to  find  our  remedy  there  if  the  patient  is  char-
acteristically worse  in  wet  weather.

THERIDION  CURASSAVICUM,

Another  spider  poison  proven  by  Hering.  There  is  one
peculiar  and  characteristic  symptom  under  this  remedy,
which  has  b"een  verified  by  myself  and  others—"  Vertigo
with  nausea  especially  on  closing  the  eyes."  It  occurs  in
different  affections  of  the  head  or  stomach,  and  cures  the
whole  trouble  when  it  is  present.

It  seems  like  a  small  thing  to  "  go  by,"  but  no  smaller
than  "  vertigo,  worse  on  lying  down,  and  turning  the  head"
{Conmm\  or  "vertigo  on  looking  upward"  {Silicea^  Pulsa-
tilla) and  many  other  symptoms  of  other  remedies  which
have  been  verified  many  times.  Another  symptom  which
seems  to  be  very  valuable  in  chest  affections  is,  "pain
runs  through  upper  left  chest  to  shoulder."  This  is  like
Myrtus  communis^  with  which  I  have  helped  many  cases
having  that  peculiar  local  symptom.  Sulphur^  Pix  liquida
and  Anisum  stellatum  also  have  it.

COCCUS  CACTI.

We  now  leave  the  spider  family,  but  as  we  are  dealing
with  small  fry  of  the  insect  order  we  will  notice  the
Coccus  cacti^  a  small  bug  or  insect  which  infests  the
plants  of  the  cactus  species  of  Mexico  and  Central  America.
It  has  made  its  best  record  in  curing  affections  of  the  re-
spiratory organs.  Whooping  cough  with  expectoration  of
much  tough,  ropy  white  mucus.  This  mucus  comes  in
large  quantities  and  is  often  accompanied  with  gagging  and
vomiting,  which  seems  to  expel  the  mucus  from  the  stom-


122


CIMEX  LECTULARIUS.


acli.  Sometimes  a  bronchial  catarrh  remains  after  whoop-
ing cough,  which  has  this  kind  of  expectoration.  Here
this  remedy  will  sometimes  clear  up  the  whole  case.  This
is  all  I  know  of  its  virtues  ab  usu  in  morbis.  Now  we  come
to  a  little  pest  of  womankind  all  over.

CIMEX  LECTULARIUS.  .

It  has  one  characteristic  symptom  which  has  been  veri-
fied. "  Sensation  as  if  the  tendons  were  too  short."  There
is  sometimes  actual  contraction  as  if  the  legs  cannot  be
stretched  out.  This  has  been  verified  in  intermittent  fevers,
and  only  the  other  day  (a  short  time  ago)  Dr.  Brewster,  of
Syracuse,  told  of  a  case  in  which  he  was  guided  by  this
symptom.

A  man  was  driving  a  fractious  horse  that  started  to  run
away  with  him.  Thinking  to  give  him  enough  of  it,  he
let  the  horse  run,  and  when  he  tired  of  running  whipped
him  into  running  more  until  he  had  run  him  up  a  hill  sev-
eral miles  long.  The  road  over  which  he  passed  was  very
rough,  and  the  man  was  so  bruised  and  sprained  about  the
buttocks  and  legs  that  he  was  confined  to  the  house  for  a
long  time  in  consequence.  It  finally  settled  into  what
seemed  likely  to  be  a  permanent  contraction  of  the  tendons
of  the  lower  limbs.  No  remedy  relieved,  until  the  good
doctor  bethought  him  of  a  case  of  intermittent  fever  which
he  had  cured  twenty  years  before,  being  guided  by  this
symptom.  He  gave  the  patient  a  dose  of  Jenichen's  6ooth
potency  of  Cimex^  with  immediate  result,  and  a  cure  of  the
case.  "  Honor  to  whom  honor  is  due,"  even  if  it  be  a  bed-
bug.


•3


CHAMOMILLA  MATRICARIA.


123


CHAMOMILLA  MATRICARIA.

Charles  J.  Hempel  called  this  "  the  catnip  of  Homoeop-
athy," because  it  was  particularly  adapted  to  nervous  affec-
tions, especially  of  children.  This  is  one  of  the  remedies
that  finds  its  leading  characteristic  symptoms  in  the  mind
of  the  patient.  To  "boil  down"  all  the  different  ways  in
which  the  Chamomilla  mind  can  be  and  is  expressed  :  "  The
patient  is  cross,  ugly,  spiteful,  snappish.  She  knows  it,
admits  it,  and  so  does  every  one  else.  She  will  return
mean,  uncivil,  spiteful  answers  to  her  best  friends,  and
then  confess  her  fault,  to  repeat  it  again  and  again,  and
stoutly  affirms  she  cannot  help  it.  she  feels  so."  This  state
of  mind  is  always  present  in  the  marked  Chamomilla  case,
whether  it  be  adult  or  child.

Of  course  the  young  child  cannot  give  vent  to  its  feel-
ings by  talking,  so  it  comes  as  near  to  it  as  it  can  by  whin-
ing and  crying,  sometimes  it  seems  without  cause,  and
also  when  it  shows  by  fever,  diarrhoea,  teething  and  many
other  complaints  that  it  is  actually  sick  and  suffering.  It
wants  this  or  that  thing,  puts  out  its  little  hand  for  it,  and
when  it  is  offered  pushes  it  away  and  points  to  something
else,  to  reject  it  in  turn.  Now  the  child  does  not  know
what  it  wants,  but  the  homoeopathic  physician  does.  It
wants  a  dose  of  Chamomilla.  This  peevish  disposition,  in
which  nothing  pleases,  takes  possession  of  the  child,  mo-
ther, father  or  any  and  all  grades  and  classes  of  subjects
when  Chamomilla  is  the  remedy,  and  it  is  found  in  con-
nection with  all  kinds  of  diseases.  It  is  also  especially-
adapted  to  ailments  brought  on  by  fits  of  anger.  In  short,
it  is  the  X^dAm^anger  re7nedy  of  the  Materia  Medica.


124  CHAMOMILLA.  MATRICARIA.


It  is  also  one  of  the  leading  remedies  for  pain,  and  there
is  this  peculiarity  about  it,  the  pain  is  not  always  in  propor-
tion to  the  gravity  of  the  case,  and  we  often  see,  for
instance,  in  labor,  a  great  deal  harder  pains  of  which  the  pa-
tient doeg  not  complain  half  so  loudly.  But  in  the  Cham-
omilla  case  the  patient  is  exceedingly  sensitive  to  the  pain
and  exclaims  continually,  "Oh  !  I  cannot  bear  the  pain."
Many  times  have  I  met  this  condition  in  labor  cases,  and  in
the  majority  of  them  the  cross,  peevish,  snappish  condition
of  mind  accompanying,  and  seen  it  changed  in  a  short
time  to  a  mild,  uncomplaining,  patient  state,  by  a  single
dose  of  Chamomilla  200th.

This  sensitiveness  to  pain  is  not  confined  to  labor  cases,
but  I  have  often  observed  it  in  neuralgias,  toothache,  rheu-
matism, etc.,  and  the  same  happy  results  follow  its  use.

This  condition  of  sensitiveness  is  often  found  in  coffee
drinkers,  or  in  those  who  have  been  addicted  to  narcotics.
Chamomilla  is  very  useful  here.  There  is  another  sensa-
tion which  is  often  found  in  conjunction  with,  or  some-
times alternating  with,  this  pain  or  sensitivenessTanS  that
is  numbness.

It  islbund  in  rheumatism  or  paralytic  states  and  is  very
characteristic.  The  pains  of  Chamomilla  are  oftener  ag-
gravated by  heat  than  otherwise,  but  are  not  on  the  other
hand,  like  Pidsatilla,  ameliorated  by  cold.  In  fact,  the  pa-
tient is  often  very  sensitive  to  cold,  and  cold  air  brings  on
troubles  for  which  this  remedy  is  specific.  I  now  call  to
mind  a  very  painful  case  of  rheumatism  of  the  left  shoulder
in  a  middle  aged  man.  It  was  in  my  earlier  practice,  when
I  was  prescribing  for  names  more  than  I  do  now,  and  of
course  he  got  Aconite^  Bryonia  and  Rhus  toxicodendron^
etc.,  but  no  relief.  A  wiser  man  was  called  in  consulta-
tion, and  the  patient  was  quickly  cured  by  Chamomilla,


CHAMOMILLA  MATRICARIA.  125

remedy  he  answered,  numbness  with  the  pains.

Another  condition  which  is  met  by  this  remedy  is  rest-
lessness, and  sleeplessness.  You  will  remember  that  we
gave  as  the  great  trio  of  restless  remedies  Aco7iite^  Arseni-
cu7n  and  Rhus  tox.  That  was  right  but  we  did  not  say
that  those  were  all  the  restless  remedies.  Here  we  have
another  in  Chamomilla.  Let  me  quote:  "Violent  rheu-
matic painsdrive  him  out  of  bed  at  ni^]7t^  and  compel  him
to  walk  about."  "  Excessive  uneasiness,  anxiety,  agonized
tossing  about,  with  tearing  pains  in  the  abdomen."  "  The
child  can  only  be  quieted  by  carrying  it  on  the  arms,  will
not  be  quiet  unless  carried."  These  symptoms  represent
in  a  few  words  the  restlessness  of  this  remedy.  But  some
will  ask,  isn't  this  similar  to  your  trio  of  restless  remedies.
It  is ;  but  there  are  shades  of  difference  and  concomitant
symptoms  that  decide  between  them  all.  And  the  true
Hahnemannian  is  the  man  to  recognize  them.  There  is  no
particular  overwhelming  fear ;  fear  of  death  etc.  under
Chamomilla  as  there  is  under  Aconite.  The  patient  is
maddened  ;  driven  to  desperation  under  the  Chamomilla  \
does  not  care  whether  she  dies  or  not ;  had  rather  die  than
suffer  so,  and  so  we  might  draw  lines  of  differentiation  be-
tween this  and  other  restless  remedies,  but  it  would  take  too
long.  Each  physician  must  get  a  habit  of  doing  this  for
himself  In  his  ability  to  do  this  lies  the  superior  skillful-
ness  of  the  homoeopathic  practitioner.  Without  this  he
can  only  hope  for  indifferent  success  at  most,  and  will  be
driven  to  all  sorts  of  experiments,  adjuvants,  surgical  meas-
ures and  so  forth  which  might  be  avoided,  much  to  his
own  credit,  and  the  advantage  of  his  patient.  The  sleep-
lessness of  the  Chamomilla  patient  is  owing  to  the  pain  and
excessive  nervous  sensibility,  and  this  remedy  procures


126


CHAMOMILLA  MATRICARIA.


sleep  by  overcoming  these  troubles,  which  make  the
patient  sleepless.  Now  there  are  a  few  symptoms,  when
occurring  in  conjunction  with  the  peculiar  mind  and  nerv-
ous symptoms  of  this  remedy,  that  confirm  the  choice  of
it,  such  as

"  Warm  sweat  on  the  head  wetting  the  hair."
"  Pressing  earache  in  spells ;  tearing  pain  extorting  cries."
"  Ears  particularly  sensitive  to  cold  air."
"One  cheek  red  and  hot,  the  other  pale  and  cold."
"  Face  sweats  after  eating  or  drinking."
"  Toothache  if  anything  warm  is  taken  into  the  mouth."
(Pulsatilla).

"  Toothache  re-commences  when  entering  a  warm  room."
"  Teeth  feel  too  long."

"  Dentition  with  diarrhoea  of  green  stools  smelling  like
rotten  eggs."

"Hot  and  thirsty  with  the  pains  ;  also  fainting."  (Hep.
sul.)

"Gastralgia  in  coffee  drinkers;  constrictive  pain,  or  as  if
a  stone  were  in  the  stomach." {Nux  vom.)

"Wind  colic;  abdomen  distended  like  a  drum ;  wind
passes  in  small  quantities  without  relief"

"  Stools  green,  watery,  corroding  {Sulph.)  like  stirred
eggs."

"  Stools  hot,  smelling  like  rotten  eggs."
"  Metrorrhagia,  dark  coagulated  blood,  flowing  in  parox-
ysms."

"Menstrual  colic,  also  following  anger."
"  Labor  pains  press  upwards,  or  begin  in  back,  and  pass
off  down  inner  side  of  thighs."

"  Rigidity  of  os,  pains  unendurable."
"After-pains  also  unendurable."

"Children  have  spasms,  from  fit  of  anger  in  the  nurse."


COFFEA  CRUDA.


127


"Cough  from  tickling  in  throat  pit."

"  Cough  dry,  worse  at  night,  especially  while  asleep."

"Chronic  cough,  worse  i^u  winter jor^cold  weather."

"  Body  chilly  and  cold  ;  face  and  breath  hot."

"  Heat  ana  chill  intermingled." (Ars.  alb)

"Skin  moist  and  burning  hot."  {Bell)

"  This  does  not  by  any  means  cover  all  the  symptoms
which  indicate  Chamomilla^  but  when  they  do  occur  it  is
strongly  indicated  and  shows  something  of  the  range
and  usefulness  of  this  remedy,  when  given  according  to
homoeopathic  rules.

COFFEA  CRUDA

Like  Chamoviilla  acts  strongly  upon  the  nervous  sys-
tem. Indeed  in  nervous  troubles,  where  the  patient  has  not
been  addicted  to  the  coffee  habit,  it  often  takes  precedence.
If  on  the  other  hand  he  is  a  coffee  drinker,  Chamomilla  is
the  remedy.  Doctor  Teste,  of  Paris,  used  to  say  that  coffee
was  responsible  for  a  large  proportion  of  the  neuralgias  of
France.  The  Coffea  patient  is  a  subject  of  very  great  gen-
eral exalted  sensibility.  See  Hering's  characteristic  cards.
"All  the  senses  more  acute,  reads  fine  print  easier,  smell,
taste,  and  touch  acute,  particularly  also  in  increased  per-
ception of  slight  passive  motions."  "Unusual  activity  of
mind  and  body."  "Full  of  ideas,  quick  to  act,  no  sleep  on
this  account."  "  Lively  fancies,  full  of  plans  for  the  future."
•  These  symptoms  portray,  as  plainly  as  words  can,  the
nervous  conditions  calling  for  this  remedy.

It  makes  one  think  of  Chamomilla^  but  the  mind  of
Chamomilla  is  not  there.  On  the  other  hand,  it  makes  one
think  of  Aconite^  but  the  fear  of  death  is  not  there.
Hering  used  to  recommend  Aconite  "and  Coffea  in  alterna-


128


COFFEA  CRUDA.


tion  in  painful  inflammatory  affections,  where  the  fever
symptoms  of  the  former  and  also  the  nervous  sensibility  of
the  latter,  were  present,  and  I  know  of  no  two  remedies
that  alternate  better,  though  I  never  do  it,  since  I  learned
to  closely  individualize.  Coffea  is  especially  adapted  to
mental  shocks,  such  as  sudden  surprises,  especially  joyful
surprises,  excessive  laughter  and  playing,  disappointed  love,
noises,  strong  smells,  etc.  It  is  also  adapted  to  variable
moods ;  first  crying,  then  laughing,  then  crying  again.

Coffea  also  vies  with  Chamo^nUla  and  Aconite  as  a  pain
remedy.  "  Pains  insupportable  drive  to  despair."  "Ex-
asperation, tears,  tossing  about  in  great  anguish."  Here
again  we  would  not  give  Coffea  in  an  habitual  coffee
drinker,  but  Chamomilla  rather.

The  particular  localities  where  these  pains  mostly  occur
are  in  the  head,  where  the  pain  is  generally  one-sided^ feel-
ing "  as  though  a  nail  were__d riven  into  the_head.  Ignatia
has  a  similar  headache,  and  they  generally  occur  in  hys-
terical subjects.  Then  the  choice  may  have  to  be  made  be-
tween these  two  remedies.

Prosopalgia,  which  is  often  traceable  to  bad  teeth,  and
Coffea  has  a  very  peculiar  toothache,  in  the  fact  that  the
tooth  is  easy  as  long  as  he  holds  cold  water  upon  it.  Re-
member Chamomilla  toothache  is  often  caused  by  taking
warm  things  into  the  mouth,  but  is  not  relieved  by  taking
cold  things  like  Coffea.

Dysmenorrhoea,  with  excessively  painful  colic.  If  there
are  large  black  clots  and  Coffea  does  not  relieve,  follow  with
Chamomilla.  Pains  threatening  abortion,  or  after-pains,,
or  very  severe  unbearable  labor  pains  are  often  relieved  by
this  remedy.  In  short,  pains  anywhere,  which  seem  in-
tolerable, and  there  are  no  other  especially  leading  symp-
toms, Coffea  is  to  be  remembered.


IGNATIA.


129


The  same  over-excitability,  so  characteristic  of  this  drug,
causes  great  sleeplessness,  and  Coffea  has  won  to  itself  great
credit  as  a  sleep  remedy.  In  my  experience  and  observa-
tion, it  works  best  here  in  the  200th  potency.  And  there
is  no  more  beautiful  verification  of  the  truth  of  Similia
than  just  here,  for  it  causes  great  sleeplessness  in  many
people  when  taken  in  large  quantities.  Cough  and  sleep-
lessness after  measles  (a  very  common  occurrence)  is  won-
derfully relieved  by  it,  and  it  is  sleep,  not  narcosis,  and
never  injures  or  sickens  the  patient  like  the  stzipor  of  the
opium  preparations.


IGNATIA  '

Is  another  one  of  the  long  list  of  our  nervous  remedies.
Its  peculiar  mental  symptoms,  like  those  of  Aconite,  Chctm-
omilla,  Nux  vomica  and  many  others,  are  most  characteris-
tic. Ivike  these  remedies,  it  seems  to  exalt  the  impression-
ability of  all  the  senses ;  but,  unlike  the  others,  it  has  in  it
a  marked  element  of  sadness,  and  disposition  to  silent
grieving.  Anyone  suffering  from  sup^lj^ssed,  dee^^^rief,
with  long  drawn  sighs,  much  sobbing,  etc.,  and  especially
if  inclined  to  smother  or  hide  that  grief  from  others,  is
just  the  subject  for  this  remedy.  She  desires  to  be  alone
with  her  grief  Sighs  much  and  seems  so  sad  and  weak.
The  weakness  is  complained  of  right  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach.  She  feels  weak,  faint,  and  "  all  gone  "  there.
Another  equally  characteristic  state  of  mind  is  a  change-
able mood.  No  remedy  can  equal  Ignatia  for  this.
Aconite,  Coffea,  Nux  moschata  and  a  few  others  have  it,
but  Ignatia  in  the  greatest  degree.  And  so  this  remedy
becomes  one  of  our  best  in  the  treatment  of  hysterical  af-


IGNATIA.


fections.  The  patient  is  at  one  time  full  of  glee  and  mer-
riment, to  be  followed  suddenly  with  the  other  extreme,  of
melancholy  sadness  and  tears,  and  so  these  states  of  mind
rapidly  alternate.  Again,  we  have  in  Ignatia  an  im-
patient, quarrelsome,  angry  mood  (but  not  to  the  degree
of  Chamo millet)  2X  times.  Again  the  Ignatia  patient,  is,
because  of  her  excessive  impressibility,  easily  frightened.
Here  it  becomes  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  the  effects  of
fright,  vying  with  Acojiite^  Opium  and  Veratrum  album.
In  short  Ignatia  may  justly  be  termed  pre-eminently  the
remedy  of  moods.

Aside  from  its  mental  symptoms,  it  is  a  great  nervous
remedy.  It  acts  upon  the  spine  as  decidedly  as  Nux
vomica^  affecting  both  motor  and  sensory  nerves.  It  is  one
of  our  best  remedies  for  spasms  or  convulsions,  and  is  es-
pecially adapted  to  spasmodic  affections  originating  in
mental  causes,  as  after  fright,  punishment  of  children  or
other  strong  emotions.  In  one  case  of  puerperal  convul-
sions, other  remedies  having  failed  to  do  any  good,  the
consulting  physician  while  observing  the  patient  during
one  of  the  spasms  noticed  that  she  came  out  of  it  with  a
succession  of  long  drawn  sighs.  He  inquired  if  the
patient  had  had  any  recent  mental  trouble,  and  learned
that  she  had  lost  her  mother,  of  whom  she  was  exceedingly
fond,  and  whom  she  had  mourned  for  greatly,  a  few  weeks
before.  Ignatia  30th  quickly  cured  her.  Again,  short  of
actual  convulsions,  Ignatia  has,  in  a  most  marked  degree,
twitchings  all  over  the  body,  hence  it  becomes  one  of
our  best  remedies  for  chorea,  especially  if  caused  by  fright
or  grief  on  the  mental  side,  or  teething  or  worms  on  the
reflex  irritation  side.  There  is  only  one  remedy  that  comes
near  it  for  these  twitchings  and  that  is  Zincum  metal-
licum. Of  course  Agaricus^  Hyosciamus^  Cuprum  met.^


IGNATIA.


etc.,  come  close,  and  some  might  think  are  equal.
Veratrum  viride^  when  better  known,  may  lay  claim  to
high  rank  here.  Ignatia  is  sometimes  recommended  for
paralysis,  but  will  be  found,  I  think,  exceptionally  useful,
and  that  mainly  in  hysterical  cases,  which  are  not  of  a
very  dangerous  character.  Like  Aconite^  Chamomilla
and  Cojffea^  Ignatia  is  over-sensitive  to  pain.

Ignatia^  like  its  male  partner,  Nitx  vomica.^  is  a  great
remedy  for  headaches  of  nervous,  especially  hysterically
nervous  subjects.  That  would  be  about  the  same  as  saying,
that  while  Nux  vomica  is  adapted  to  nervous  men  Ignatia  is
the  same  for  women,  which  is  quite  true.  You  will  re-
member that  hysterical,  nervous  headaches  are  often  one-
sided. Hence  Ignatia  is  such  an  efficient  remedy  for  head-
aches as  expressed  in  these  words  :  "  Headache  as  if  a  nail
were  driven  out  through  the  side  of  the  head  relieved  by
lying  on  it."  These  headaches  come  on  in  highly  nervous
and  sensitive  subjects,  or  in  those  whose  nervous
systems  have  suffered  from  over-anxiety,  grief  or  men-
tal work.  The  ever-changeable  and  contradictory  symp-
toms so  characteristic  of  the  drug  show  here  as  else-
where. Not  only  does  the  pain  in  head  change  locality,
but  at  one  time  the  pain  will  come  on  gradually  and  abate
suddenly  (like  5?/^>^2^rz<;aa'(^)  or,  like  Bellado7ina^  it  will
come  on  suddenly  and  abate  as  suddenly  as  it  came.  Like
Aconite^  Gelsemium^  Silicea^  and  Veratrum  alburn^  the
headache  often  terminates  with  a  profuse  flow  of  urine.
That  is  often  the  case  in  headaches  of  nervous  hysterical
women.

Finally  the  headaches  are  aggravated  by  coffee,  smoking,
the  abuse  of  snuff,  inhaling  tobacco  smoke,  alcohol,  close
attention,  from  pressing  at  stool,  and,  while  it  is  sometimes
relieved  while  eating,  is  agravated  soon  after. The  Ignatia


132


IGNATIA.


headache  is  sometimes  accompanied  by  hunger  like  that  of
Psorinum.  It  is  also  <  by  cold  winds,  turning  head  sud-
denly, stooping,  change  of  position,  running,  looking  up
long, moving  the  eyes,  noise  and  light.

It  is  ameliorated  by  warmth,  lying  on  it,  soft  pressure,
external  heat,  and  profuse  flow  of  limpid  urine.  Igjiatia
has  some  strong  throat  symptoms.  In  the  first  place  it  has
the  so  commonly  observed  symptom  called  "  globus  hys-
tericus," or  as  if  a  lump  came  up  from  the  stomach  into
the  throat  as  if  she  would  choke.  She  swallows  it  down,
but  it  comes  right  back  and  is  very  distressing.  It  is  es-
pecially apt  to  come  if  she  gets  grieved  and  wants  to  cry.
These  are  of  course  purely  nervous  sensations,  but  Ignatia
goes  further,  and  also,  cures  real  serious  affections  of  the
throat  like  tonsillitis  and  diphtheria.  In  these  cases  the
real  characteristic  symptom  is,  that  the  pain  and  suffering
in  the  throat  is  relieved  by  swallowing.  A  very  peculiar
symptom  for  such  troubles,  for  such  cases  are  generally
aggravated  by  swallowing,  hence  we  would  not  expect  to'
frequently  find  a  case  in  which  this  would  be  the  remedy ;
but  such  cases  do  arise  occasionally  and  baffle  us  if  we
haven't  the  remedy.  Here  is  where  Homoeopathy,  as  we
say  in  base  ball,  "  scores  some  of  its  best  runs,"  and  the
satisfaction  of  curing  such  a  case  with  an  unusual  remedy
is,  to  say  the  least,  very  gratifying  to  him  who  performs
the  cure.  With  Ignatia  cases,  in  addition  to  the  aggrava-
tion when  not  swallowing,  there  is  sometimes  aggravation
when  swallowing  liquids  and  relief  from  swallowing
solids.  This  is  like  Lachesis,  you  remember,  but  is  the
le^^is&oiBaptisia^  which  can  swallow  liquids  only;  the  least
solid  food  gags.  It  is  necessary  to  keep  these  correspondences
and  opposites  in  mind,  for  it  often  enables  us  to  make
what  are  called  "  snap  shot "  prescriptions  and  save  much
time,  study  and  suffering.


IGNATIA.


Some  of  the  particularly  valuable  "guiding  symptoms"
of  Ignatia,  in  addition  to  those  already  noticed,  are  "  ex-
treme aversion  to  tobacco  smoke."  This  is  a  general  aver-
sion and  aggravates  many,  many  complaints.  "Weak,
empty,  gone  feeling  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach."  In  the
case  of  Ignatia  this  symptom  is  apt  to  be  accompanied  by  a
disposition  to  sigh  or  take  a  long  breath.  Two  other -rem-
edies have  this  symptom  of  goneness  in  the  stomach  as
prominently  as  Ignatia.  They  are  Hydrastis  and  Sepia.
The  other  symptoms  must  decide  between  them.  This
weak  feeling  in  the  stomach  in  Ignatia  is  sometimes  de-
hung  down  relaxed.  Ipecacuanha  has  a  similar  feeling.
Sometimes  we  come  across  very  severe  cases  of  gastralgia
in  women  of  hysterical  tendencies.  Here  this  remedy  is
the  first  to  be  thought  of.

Ignatia  has  as  positive  action  upon  the  anus  and  rectum
as  does  Nux  vomica.  Prolapsus  of  the  rectum  is  marked.  U
lyike  Nux  vomica  it  has  frequent  desire  for  stool,  but  in
place  of  the  stool,  or  with  it,  comes  the  prolapsed  rectum.
The  patient  is  afraid  to  strain  at  stool,  to  stoop  down  or
lift,  for  fear  of  the  prolapsus.  A  contractive  sore  pain
often  follows  after  a  stool  and  lasts  for  an  hour  or  two.
This  is  like  Nitric  acid^  which  has  the  same  symptom  even
after  a  loose  stool.  There  is  also  some  pain  in  anus  with-
out reference  to  stool.  Dunham,  that  prince  of  observers,
gave  us  the  characteristic  :  "  Sharp  pains  shooting  up-
ward into  the  rectum."  It  is  a  gem,  and  has  often  been
verified!  So  we  seeTliat  Ignatia  is  one  of  our  important
anal  and  rectal  remedies.

This  remedy  is  also  very  unique  in  its  fever  symptoms.

There  is  no  disease  in  which  we  are  better  able  to  show

the  power  of  the  potentized  remedy  to  cure  than  inter-
10


^34


IGNATIA.


mitteiit  fever.  Chronic  cases  that  have  resisted  the  Qui-
nine treatment  for  years  are  often  quickly  and  perma-
nently cured  by  the  200th  and  upwards.  The  following
symptoms  indicate  Ignatia :  ist.  Thirst  during  chill  and
in  no  other  stage.  2d.  Chill  relieved  by  external  heat.
3d.  Heat  aggravated  by  external  covering.  4th.  Red  face
during  the  chill.  Here  are  four  legs  to  the  stool,  and  we
may  sit  upon  it  in  perfect  confidence.  No  other  remedy
has  thirst  during  chill  and  in  no  other  stage.  In  Nux
vomica^  you  will  remember,  the  chill  is  not  relieved  by  the
heat  of  the  stove,  or  the  bed,  and  during  the  heat  Niix
vomica  must  be  covered,  as  the  least  uncovering  brings
back  the  chill.  So  we  see  that  notwithstanding  the  alka-
loid of  both  drugs  is  strychnia  they  differ  widely  when
we  come  to  apply  them  to  the  cure  of  the  sick.  The  red
face  during  chill  led  me  to  the  cure  of  an  obstinate  case,
and  after  I  noticed  the  red  face  I  also  noticed  that  the
boy  was  behind  the  stove  in  the  warmest  place  he  could
find.  The  200th  promptly  cured.  Two  other  cases  in  the
same  family,  at  the  same  time,  and  from  the  same  malari-
ous district,  were  cured,  one  by  Capsicmn  200th,  the
other  by  Eupatorium  perfoliatttm^  same  potency.  The
former  had  chill  beginning  between  shoulders,  in  the  latter
the  chill  in  the  A.  m.  great  pain  in  bones  before,  and
vomiting  of  bile  at  the  end  of  chill.  I  do  not  know  but  I
have  mentioned  these  three  cases  before  ;  but  it  will  bear
repeating,  for  it  illustrates  the  efficacy  of  potencies  in
obedience  to  our  great  law  of  cure.  Can  any  reason-
able man  doubt  such  evidence  ?


COCCUIvUS  INDICUS.


COCCULUS  INDICUS.

Farringtou  says :  "  Coccuhcs  acts  on  the  cerebro-spinal
system,  producing  great  debility  of  these  organs.  *  *  *
It  causes  a  paralytic  weakness  of  the  spine,  and  especially
of  its  motor  nerves  ;  thus  we  find  it  a  certain  and  frequent
remedy  in  paralysis  originating  in  diseases  of  the  spinal
chord.  *  *  *  It  is  especially  indicated  in  the  begin-
ning of  the  trouble,  when  the  lumbar  region  of  the  spine
is  affected  ;  there  is  weakness  in  the  small  of  the  back  as
if  paralyzed ;  the  small  of  the  back  gives  out  when  walk-
_ing.  There  is  weakness  of  the  legs,  and  by  the  legs  I
mean  the  entire  lower  extremities;  the  knees_^_£ive _ out
when  walking,  the  soles  .o£_the^j££t  feel  as  if  they  were^
asleep,  the  thighs  ache  as  if  they  were  pounded ;  first  one
hand  goes  to  sleep,  then  the  other ;  sometimes  the  whole
arm  goes  to^Ieep  and  the  hand  feels  as  if  swollen.  These
symptoms  lie  at  the  foundation  of  the  symptomatology  of
the  whole  drug  ;  they  all  seem  to  depend  upon  spinal
weakness."  Dunham  says:  "Its  sphere  of  action  is  pre-
eminently the  system  of  animal  life ;  the  voluntary  mus-
cular system  first,  and  then  the  sensorium  are  the  primary
seats  of  action.  Nausea  extending  to  the  point  of  vomit-
ing and  accompanied  by  faintness  and  by  severe  vertigo
when  lifting  the  head  is  a  characteristic  symptom."
Hughes  says  :  "It  influences  the  voluntary  muscles  rather
than  the  intellectual  powers ;  with  this  Hahnemann's
provings  entirely  agree."  Pareira  says  :  "It  acts  rather
on  the  voluntary  muscles  than  the  intellectual  powers."
We  have  given  these  quotations  from  different  authors  in
order  to  find  whether  they  afforded  us  much  help  from  a


136


COCCULUS  INDICUS.


practical  standpoint.  Dr.  Hughes  says  the  provings  of
Hahnemann  corroborate  these  generalizations.  We  quote
from  the  provings:

Weakness  of  the  cervical  muscles  with  heaviness  of
the  kead^  muscles  seem  unable  to  support  the  head."

Paralytic  pain  in  the  small  of  the  back,  with  spasmodic
drawing  across  the  hips,  which  prevents  walking."  His
knees  sink  down  from  weakness,  he  totters  while  walking
and  threatens  to  fall  to  one  side."

"  At  one  time  the  feet  are  asleep,  at  another  the  hands."
"The  hand  trembles  while  eating,  and  the  more  the
higher  it  is  raised."  "Now  o^^and^_nowi_ih^_other
seems  insensible_and  asleep."  "  The  soles  of  the  feet  go
to  sleep,  while  sitting."  "  General  attacks  of  paralytic
weakness  with  pain  in  the  back."

All  these  are  verified  symptoms  from  Allen's  Encyclo-
pedia of  Pure  Materia  Medica.  They  are  in  the  simplest
terms,  and  while  they  do  agree  with  the  statements  of  the
above  quoted  learned  men,  acting  upon  the  spine  and
motor  muscles,  could  be  applied  to  the  cure  of  the  sick  ac-
cording to  the  directions  of  Hahnemann  by  any  layman
of  ordinary  intelligence.  Thus  is  the  practice  of  curative
medicine  simplified,  being  delivered  from  speculative
theorizings  of  dreamers,  and  if  it  will  cure  the  sick  in  the
case  of  a  Cocculus  patient,  it  will  by  the  same  unerring
law  of  "  symptom  covering  "do  it  in  every  curable  case.

We  might  sum  up  the  whole  action  of  this  remedy  upon
the  nervous  system  in  one  word,  viz.,  prosU^utign^  but  what
does  that  amount  to  for  purposes  of  prescribing.  Many
remedies  prostrate  fearfully,  but  each  one  has  its  peculiar
kind  of  prostration,  and  when  men,  like  I  heard  a  cele-
brated surgeon  in  a  homoeopathic  college  do,  make  their


COCCULUS  INDICUS.


out  any  regard  to  symptomatology,  I  can  but  feel  that
such  know  little  or  nothing  of  the  art  of  homoeopathic
prescribing,  no  matter  what  their  other  attainments.  Ac-
cording to  Hahnemann's  teachings  symptomatology  leads
in  scientific  prescribing,  no  matter  what  the  pathological
condition.

Aside  from  the  symptoms  which  attend  the  general  pros-
tration and  spinal  trouble,  or  coupled  with  them,  we  have
the  following  which  are  characteristic  :  "  Confusion  or
stupefaction  of  the  head,  increased  by  eating  and  drink-
ing." "  Vertigo,  as  if  intoxicated  and  confusion  of  the
mind."  "  Whirling  vertigo  on  rising  up  in  bed  ;  which
compelled  him  to  lie  down  again."  "  Sick  headache  with
nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit."  "All  these  symptoms
are  made  particularly  worse  by  riding  in  carriage  or  boat."
The  headaches  and  vertigo  of  Cocculus  are  different  from
Bryonia^  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  both  are  made
worse  by  rising  up  in  bed.  In  Bryonia  and  some  other
remedies  the  sickness  at  the  stomach  precedes  the  head-
ache, which  in  Cocculus  is  exactly  the  reverse.  Painful
sensation  of  weakness  or  e^nptiness  in  the  head  is  found
under  Cocculus  and  is  in  keeping  with  the  general  weak-
ness. This  sensation  of  emptiness,  which  is  another  name
for  weakitess,  is  a  general  characteristic  for  Cocculus,  and  is
found  in  head,  abdomen,  bowels,  chest,  heart,  stomach,  in
short,  in  all  internal  parts.  The  nausea  of  Cocculus,  which
is  so  constant  a  symptom  of  the  headaches,  is  something
like  that  which  is  so  characteristic  of  Colchicum,  viz.  :
"Extreme  aye^sion^to^food,  caused  ev^n_byjthe_smen
food,  although  with  hunger."  With  Colchicum  there  is
more  pronounced  nausea,  as  well  as  aversion.  The  pa-
tient is  nauseated  evento  faintness.  There  is  with  Cocculus
a  metallic  taste  in  the  mouth. The  sensorium  comes


I  3^  COCCULUS  INDICUS.

under  the  same  profound  depression  that  invades  the  gen-
eral nervous  system.  The  patient  is  sad,  absorbed  within
himself,  brooding,  moody,  silent,  sits  in  a  corner  buried  in
sad  thoughts,  etc.  This  is  particularly  the  case  in  nerv-
ous fevers.  Depression^  depression^  depression.  Cocculus
has  some  very  important  symptoms  in  the  abdominal  and
uterine  regions.

One  is  great  distension  of  the  abdomen.  This  is  found
in  both  flatulent  colic  and  dysmenorrhoea.  In  flatulent
colic,  for  which  it  is  so  valuable  a  remedy,  the  patient
complains  of  a  sensation  as  if  the  abdomen  were  full  of
sharp  sticks  or  stones.  The  attacks  are  often  at  midnight.
The  flatus  seems  here  and  there,  and  passage  of  it  does  not
seem  to  relieve  much,  for  new  forms  again  take  its
place.

Then  again  there  seems  to  be  great  pressure  in  the
inguinal  region  as  if  hernia  would  occur.  In  dysmen-
orrhoea, in  addition  to  the  distension,  there  are  griping.,
cramping  pains.,  which  are  very  severe,  and  also  a  remark-
able degree  of  weakness.  She  is  so  weak  that  she  can
hardly  stand,  walk,  or  talk.  This  is  very  characteristic
and,  so  far  as  weakness  goes,  resembles  Carbo  animalis^
but  in  Cocculus  it  is  in  line  .  with  the  general  prostration
of  the  remedy,  while  in  Carbo  animalis  the  flow  weakens
her.  In  Cocculus  the  flow  may  not  be  at  all  excessive,
but  on  the  contrary  may  grow  less  and  less  and  a  leucor-
rhea  appear  in  its  stead,  or  even  between  the  menses  also.
This  is  the  way  we  have  to  differentiate  between  remedies
if  we  are  successful  in  practice.

Now,  if  I  were  to  give  the  four  great  characteristic
symptoms  for  this  remedy  they  would  be  these  :

1.  Weakness  of  cervical  muscles,  with  heaviness  of  head.

2.  Affections  caused  or  <  by  riding  in  cars,  carfiage  or
boat.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.  139

3.  Sensation  of  weakness,  or  hollo wness  in  various
organs.

4.  Ill  effects  from  loss  of  sleep,  night-watching  or  over
work.

What  would  you  add,  my  brother?


CONIUM  MACULATUM.

This  is  another  of  the  so-called  spinal  remedies.  I  will
not,  as  I  did  under  Cocciilus^  quote  what  authorities  say
from  a  pathological  stand-point.  All  seem  to  agree  that
it  paralyzes  from  below  upwards,  and  the  poisoning  of
Socrates  with  it  is  adduced  in  illustration.  It  ought  to  be
a  remedy  for  locomotor  ataxia.  The  strongest  character-
istic I  know,  from  a  homoeopathic  stand-point,  is  its  pecu-
liar vertigo,  which  is  much  aggravated  by  tijrning  the
head  sideivise.  Turning  over  in  bed  is  the  same.  Some
say  lying  down  in  bed  and  turniitg  over.  I  have  found
that  it  is  not  so  much  the  lying  down  as  it  is  the  turning
of  the  head  sidewise^  whether  in  an  upright  or  horizontal
posture.

I  once  treated  a  case  of  what  seemed  to  be  locomotor
ataxia  with  this  remedy.

The  patient  had  been  slowly  losing  the  use  of  his  legs  ;
could  not  stand  in  the  dark ;  and  when  he  walked  along
the  street  would  make  his  wife  walk  either  ahead  of  him,
or  behind  him,  for  the  act  of  looking  sidewise  at  her  or
in  the  least  turning  head  or  eyes  that  way  would  cause  him
to  stagger  or  fall.

Conium  cured  him.  It  would  always  aggravate  at  first,
but  he  would  greatly  improve  after  stopping  the  remedy.
The  a^ravation  was  just  as  invariable  after  taking  a  dose


CONIUM  MACULATUM.

of  Fincke's  cm.  potency  as  from  anything  lower,  but  the
improvement  lasted  longer  after  it.

Taking  an  occasional  dose  from  a  week  to  four  weeks
apart  completely  cured  him  in  about  a  year.  It  was  a  bad
case,  of  years'  standing  before  I  took  him.

I  have  often  verified  this  symptom  in  the  vertigo  of  old
people,  where  it  is  most  frequently  found  ;  but  it  also  often
accompanies  various  affections  in  all  ages,  and  especially  is
found  in  ovarian  and  uterine  affections.  I  know  of  no
remedy  that  has  this  symptom  so  strongly.

There  is  a  form  of  ophthalmia  in  strumous  subjects  which
calls  for  Conium  in  preference  to  any  other  remedy,  and
the  peculiar  prominent  and  uncommon  (as  Hahnemann
says,  Organon  T[  153)  symptom  is  photophobia  intense,  out
of  all  proportion  to  the  objective  signs  of  inflammation
in  the  eye.  The  pains  are  worse  at  night  and  terribly
aggravated  by  the  least  ray  of  light,  relieved  in  dark
room  and  by  pressure.

There  may  or  may  not  be  ulcers  on  the  cornea.  Conium  is
also  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  falling  of  the  eyelids,  as
are  three  other  remedies,  viz. :  Gelsemium^  Caiisticum  and
Sepia.  "  Swelling  and  induration  of  glands,  with  tingling
and  stitches,  after  contusions  or  bruises."  Many  cases  of
lumps  or  swellings  in  the  breasts  (for  which  Conium  seems
to  have  a  particular  affinity)  have  disappeared  under  the  ac-
tion of  this  remedy.  -  Kven  cancerous  affections  of  breasts,
uterus  and  stomach  have  been  helped  or  cured,  especially
if  the  trouble  seems  to  have  originated  in  a  blow  or  injury
to  the  part.  It  is  perhaps  the  first  remedy  to  be  thought
of  in  all  cases  of  tumors,  schirrhous  or  otherwise,  coming
on  after  contusions,  especially  if  they  are  of  stony  hard-
ness and  heavy  feeling. Again  it  is  to  be  especially  con-.


CONIUM  MACULATUM.


141


sidered  if  at  every  menstrual  period  the  breasts  become
large  ^  sore  oMdpamfuJ^  aggravated^  by  the  least  jar  or
walki7tg.

In  all  the  schirrhous  affections  of  the  breast,  womb  or
other  parts  the  pains  of  Coniitm  are  burning,- stinging,  or
darting,  and  may  make  one  think  of  Apis  mellijica.  The
other  symptoms  must  then  decide  between  them.

Conmm  has  marked  action  upon  the  sexual  organs.
In  the  male  there  is  great  weakness  of  the  organs.  He
has  intense  desire  and  amorous  thoughts,  but  is  unable  to
perform.  He  has  emissions  at  the  very  thought  or  presence
of  a  woman.  The  erections  are  insufficient,  last  only  a
short  time,  or  "go  back"  on  him  in  the  act  of  embrace,
and  he  suffers  with  weakness  and  chagrin  afterwards.  This
affects  the  mind  and  hypochondriasis  of  the  bluest  blue
takes  possession  of  him.  This  condition  of  mind  may
obtain  in  both  sexes;  as  a  result  of  too  free,  and  also
especially  too  infrequent  indulgence ;  or,  excessive  ab-
stemiousness. Hence  Coniitm  becomes  a  good  remedy  for
old  bachelors  and  old  maids.  If  the  vertigo  is  also  present
in, such  cases  Conium  is  sure  to  be  of  great  benefit.

Injermitterit  Aqw  <?f  very  characteristic.  One

might  think  that  this  was  owing  to  a  paralytic  condition
of  the  bladder.'  I  don't  know;  but  I  do  know  that  the
symptom  often  occurs  in  the  hypertrophy  of  the  prostate
gland  incident  to  old  age  and  Conhmi  helps.  "  Sweats_^y
or  night ;  assoon^as  one  sleeps  or  even_when  closing  the
€yes,"  is  a  characteristic  ^und' under  no  other  remedy  that
I  know  of.

Dr.  Adolph  Lippe  once  made  a  splendid  cure  of  a  com-
plete one  sided  paralysis  in  a  man  80  years  of  age  with
this  remedy,  and  was  guided  to  it  by  this  symptom.  I
think  it  would  be  rather  a  difficult  task  to  give  a  correct


142


^SCUIvUS  HIPPOCASTANUM.


pathological  explanation  of  such  a  symptom  ;  but  there  is
a  reason,  and  whether  we  can  give  it  or  not  we  can
cure  it  if  we  have  a  corresponding  one  appearing  under  a
remedy;  where  a  cure  is  at  all  possible.

iESCULTJS  HIPPOCASTANUM.

This  is  one  of  the  remedies  that  is  not  so  remarkable  for
its  wide  range  of  action  as  it  is  for  positiveness  within  its
range.  Almost  all  its  usefulness,  so  far  as  known,  centers
in  its  action  in  the  lower  back  and  pelvic  region  and  ever
prominent  is  this  characteristic:  Constant  dull  backache^
affecting  sacricm  and  hips^  much  aggravated  by  walking  or
stooping.  It  is  one  of  our  leading  remedies  for  hemor-
rhoids, and  in  addition  to  this  backache  there  is  a  feeling  of
fulhiess^  dryness^  and  sticking  as  if  the  rectum  was  full  of
sticks.  There  is  not  the  tendency  to  protrusion  or  pro-
lapsus that  there  is  in  Ignatia^  Aloe^  Podophyllum  and  some
other  remedies,  and  the  backache  is  often  greatly  out  of
proportion  to  any  external  evidence  of  piles.  This  feeling
of  fullness  seems  to  be  a  sort  of  general  characteristic  of
y^sculus^  but  is  especially  prominent  in  the  pelvic  cavity.

These  symptoms  are  often  found  in  conjunction  with
other  affections  besides  hemorrhoids,  such  as  uterine  dis-
placements, and  inflammations  ;  and  some  very  bad  forms  of
leucorrhoea  have  been  promptly  cured  by  this  remedy.
There  is  another  quite  valuable  symptom  in  these  pelvic
troubles  vis:  throbbing  or  beating  sensations,  that  calls
for  y^sculus.  I  have  seen  equally  good  results  from  the
use  of  this  remedy  in  the  3  rd.,  and  the  potencies.

I  have  used  ^sculus  with  very  good  results  in  coryza
and  sore  throat.  The  coryza  is  very  much  like  the  Arsenic
coryza,  thin,  watery,  and  burning,  but  what  characterizes


ZINCUM  METALLICUM.


^scuhts  here  is  sensation  of  rawness;  \sensitive  to  inhaled
cold  air.  In  the  throat  it  has  the  same  sensation  of  raw-
ness, both  in  the  acute  form,  and  also  in  chronic  follicular
pharyngitis  for  which  it  is  often  a  good  remedy.  It  may
be  that  age  and  use  will  develop  more  uses  for  this  remedy.

ZINCUM  METALLICUM.

This  metal  seems  to  act  principally  upon  the  nervous
system.  I  think  it  is  Burt  who  says:  "what  Iron  is  to
the  blood  Zi7ic  is  to  the  nerves."  If  we  examine  the
provings  and  clinical  records  of  Zinc^  we  find  that  it  seems
to  have  the  power  to  arouse  or  strengthen  the  nervous  sys-
tem in  its  inability  to  supply  force  to  carry  on  functions
necessary  to  health  or  the  elimination  of  disease  products
from  the  system.  This  is  speculation.  What  are  the
facts?  I  St.  If  scarlatina  or  other  eruptive  diseases  do
not  properly  develop  the  eruption,  on  account  of  too
great  weakness  of  the  patient  as  evidenced  by  general  de-
pression of  pulse,  temperature,  etc.,  Zinc  is  very  useful.

Other  remedies  have  such  or  similar  trouble.  Cuprum.^  for
instance ;  but  in  Cuprum  the  eruption  has  been  suppressed
by  some  outward  cause.  Zinc^  it  has  never  come  to  the
surface,  or  it  has  been  out,  and  has  receded  from  lack  of
vitality  or  strength  to  hold  it  there.  Sulphur  may  be  the
remedy,  but  the  cause  is  then  more  often  apt  to  be  traceable
to  psora.

This  weakness  shows  in  other  ways,  as,  for  instance,  in
asthma.  The  patient  can't  expectorate,  but  as  soon  as  he
can  he  is  relieved  ;  or  again  she  cannot  menstruate,  and  is
relieved  of  her  suffering  while  menstruating.

Tliere  is  another  peculiarity  connected  with  this
characteristic. The  nervous  weakness of  the  Zincum


T44


ZINCUM  METALLICUM.


patient  is  that  he  can  take  no  wine  or  stimulants.  You
would  think  that  a  little  wine  would  at  least  temporarily
relieve ;  on  the  contrary,  it  aggravates  all  the  sufferings,
even  though  taken  in  small  quantities.  Of  course  other
remedies  have  this,  aggravation  from  wines  or  stimulants,
like  Glonoine^  Ledimi^  Fluoric  acid^  Antimonm7n  critdum^
etc.,  but  I  think  Zinc  stands  first.

The  nervous  debility  of  Zinc  shows  in  other  ways  also.
The  backaches,  are  worse  while  sitting  and  better
when  moving  about.  This  would  call  to  mind  Rhus
toxicodeiidron^  but  with  Zincmn  you  would  not  get  the
general  aching  relieved  by  continued  motion  as  is  the
case  with  Rhus,  Pulsatilla  has  it  also,  but  generally  in
connection  with  menstrual  irregularities.  The  remedy
most  resembling  Zinc  in  this  particular  is  Cobaltum.  Both
these  remedies  have  this  symptom,  in  consequence  of
sexual  excesses  or  weaknesses,  but  in  Zinc  an  emission
temporarily  relieves  the  pain  and  in  Cobalt  it  does  not.
The  most  characteristic  of  all  the  symptoms  of  Zinc^  in
connection  with  its  general  nervous  weakness,  is:  ''''An
tncessa?it.,  violent  fidgety  feeling  in  the  feet  or  lower  limbs;
must  move  them  constantly^  This  is  present  in  many,  if
not  almost  all,  of  the  affections  for  which  Zinc  is  par  ex-
cellence the  remedy.

There  is  also  sometimes  present  "burning  along  the
whole  length  of  the  spine."  This  burning  is  purely  sub-
jective, for  there  is  no  actual  local  increase  of  temperature.
Another  characteristic  of  this  remedy  is,  "  twitching  and
jerking  of  various  ?nusclesy  I  spoke  of  this  symptom  when
writing  upon  Ignatia.  I  would  place  Zincum^  Ignatia  and
Agaricus  in  the  van  of  all  remedies  for  causing  and  curing
these  general  twitchings.


ZINCUM  METALLICUM.


Another  symptom  for  which  this  is  one  of  our  best  reme-
dies is,  general  trembling. This  is  also  from  prostration.

The  patient  loses  control  over  his  motions,  although  he
is  not  yet  paralyzed.  Paralysis  may  come  later  if  this  con-
dition is  not  remedied.

A  word  or  two  about  the  importance  of  this  remedy  in
brain  troubles.  It  makes  little  difference  whether  the  affec-
tion of  the  brain  arises  from  suppressed  eruptive  diseases,
dentition,  typhus  fever  or  disease  of  any  other  name  or
nature,  if  the  symptoms  indicating  the  remedy  are  present.
Allow  me  to  relate  a  case  from  my  own  practice  illustrating
its  curative  value  in  typhoid.

A  young  lady  about  2,0  years  of  age  complained,  a  week
before  I  was  called,  of  weakness,  or  feeling  of  general
prostration;  headache,  and  loss  of  appetite,  but  the  greatest
comolaint  was  of  prostration.  She  was  a  student  and  her
mother,  who  was  an  excellent  nurse,  attributed  all  her
sickness  to  overwork  at  school,  and  tried  to  rest  and  "nurse
for  her  Gelsemium  and  followed  it  with  Bryonia  according
to  indications,  and  she  ran  through  a  mild  course  of  two
weeks  longer,  and  seemed  convalescing  quite  satisfactorily.

Being  left  in  a  room  alone,  while  sleeping  and  perspiring,
she  threw  off  the  clothes,  caught  cold  and  relapsed.  Of
course  the  "last  state  of  that  patient  was  worse  than  the
first."  The  bowels  became  enormously  distended,  profuse
hemorrhage  occurred,  which  was  finally  controlled  by
Alumen^  a  low  form  of  delirium  came  on,  the  prostration
became  extreme  notwithstanding  the  hemorrhage  was
checked,  until  the  following  picture  obtained — staring  eyes
rolled  upward  into  the  head,  head  retracted ;  complete  un-
consciousness, lying  on  back  and  sliding  down  in  bed,
twitching,  or  rather  intense,  violent  trembling  all  aver^  so


STANNUM  METALUCUM.

that  she  shook  the  bed.  I  had  nurses  hold  her  hands  night
and  day,  she  shook  and  trembled  so ;  hippocratic  face,  ex-
tremities deathly  cold  to' knees  and  elbows,  pulse  so  weak
and  quick  I  could  not  count  it,  and  intermittent ;  in  short,
all  signs  of  impending  paralysis  of  the  brain.  The  case
seemed  hopeless,  but  I  put  ten  drops  of  Zincum  metallicum
in  two  drams  of  cold  water,  and  worked  one-half  of  it  be-
tween her  set  teeth,  a  little  at  a  time,  and  an  hour  after  the
other  half  '  In  about  one  hour  after  the  last  dose  she
turned  her  eyes  down  and  faintly  said,  milk.  Through  a
bent  tube  she  swallowed  a  half  glass  of  milk,  the  first
nourishment  she  had  received  in  24  hours.  She  got  no
more  medicine  for  four  days,  and  improved  steadily  all  the
time.  She  afterward  received  a  dose  of  Nux  vomica  and
progressed  rapidly  to  a  perfect  recovery.  So  Zinaim  200th
can,  like  other  metals,  perform  miracles  when  indicated.

STANNUM  METALLICUM.

Another  metallic  remedy.  The  leading  characteristic
is,  great  weakness  in  the  chest ;  so  weak  cannot  talk.  No
remedy  has  this  symptom  so  strongly  as  tin.  It  is  present,
not  only  in  the  laryngeal  and  lung  troubles  for  which
Stannum  is  such  a  great  remedy,  but  in  general  debility.
It  is  found  in  connection  with  uterine  displacements  and
leucorrhoeas  of  thin,  debilitated  subjects  and  has  made
brilliant  cures  in  such  cases.  Of  course  in  the  lung,
bronchial,  and  laryngeal  affections,  this  symptom  is  vefy
prominent.  In  these  troubles  there  is  generally  very  pro-
fuse expectoration  with  the  cough,  and  the  matter  raised
tastes  very  sweet,  or  it  may  be  exceptionally  salty.  For  the
salty  expectoration  I  would  sooner  think  of  Kali  iod.  or
Sepia. In  all  three  of  these  remedies  the  expectoration


PLATINA.  i


may  be  thick,  heavy,  and  green  or  yellow  in  color.  Both
Stannu7n  and  Kali  iod.  have  profuse  night  sweats,  but  the
Stammm  has  greater  sense  of  weakness  in  the  chest  (can-
not talk)  than  any  of  the  others.  Another  very  character-
istic symptom  of  Stannum  is  that  the  pains  gradually  in-
crease to  a  great  degree  of  intensity  and  then  as  gradually
decrease.  This  'pain  is  of  course  neuralgic,  may  be  located
anywhere  in  the  tract  of  a  nerve,  but  has  been  often
verified  in  prosopalgia,  gastralgia  and  abdominal  colic.

These  pains  are  ameliorated  by  pressure,  like  Colocynth^
so  if  CoLocynth  fails,  which  is  generally  first  thought  of  in
abdominal  pains  relieved  by  pressure,  Stannum  may  relieve,
and  especially  if  the  attacks  have  been  of  long  standing  or
the  patient  seems  to  have  a  chronic  tendency  thereto.  If  in
children,  the  patient  is  relieved  by  carrying  it  over  the
point  of  the  shoulder,  the  shoulder  pressing  into  the
abdomen.  The  Sta7i7ium  patient  is  generally  very  sad.
I  have  often  verified  the  above  symptoms  and  have  seen
equally  good  effects  from  the  12th,  30th,  200th,  and  500th,
(Boericke  &  Tafel)  potencies.

PLATINA.

This  remedy  may  be  studied  in  three  relations :  in  its
relation  to  the  mental,  nervous,  and  sexual  systems.  It
has  curious  mental  symptoms.  Here  are  three  of  them.
"  Pride  and  over-estimation  of  one's  self ;  looking  down
with  haughtiness  on  others."  "  Illusions  of  fancy  ;  on  enter-
ing the  house  after  walking  an  hour,  as  if  everything  about
her  were  very  small,  and  all  persons  mentally  and
physically  inferior,  but  she  herself  physically  and  mentally
superior."  "  Changing  moods,  gay  and  sad  alternately."
This  last  symptom  is  like  Ignatia,  Crocus,  Nux  moschata


.5


148


PLATINA.


and  Aconite^  and  Platina  has  another  symptom  like  ^^^/^zV^
— "fear  of  death."  Now  the  first  two  symptoms  above
mentioned  might  appear  to  some  as  of  no  practical  value
in  the  treatment  of  the  sick.  There  is  no  pathological  ex-
planation for  them  beyond  the  fact  of  a  generally  disordered
mind,  which  might  take  any  other  form  of  hallucination.
But  this  is  a  valuable  indication  and  found  under  no  other
obstinate  case  of  insanity  which  had  resisted  the  skill  of
several  allopathic  physicians  of  note,  and  they  had  finally
decided  that  the  case  must  be  sent  to  the  insane  asylum.
The  parents,  however,  who  were  quite  wealthy,  could  not
consent  to  that,  and  were  induced  to  try  Homoeopathy.
I  gave  her  Platina  on  the  strength  of  this  mental  indica-
tion, which  was  very  prominent,  coupled  with  another
prominent  symptom,  which  also  appears  under  this  remedy
viz,"  physi^al^symptoms  disappear  and  mental  symptoms
appear,"  and  vice  ^^sq.  The  physical  symptom  was  a
pain  the  whole  length  of  the  spine.  This  was  the
symptom  alternating  with  the  mental  one.  It  was  one  of
the  most  brilliant  cures  I  ever  saw.  Improvement  began
the  first  day  and  never  flagged,  and  she  has  remained  well
now  15  years,  with  never  a  sign  of  return.

The  nervous  symptoms  outside  the  brain  symptoms
calling  for  Platina  are:  rst.  "  The  pains  increase graditally
and  as  gradually  decrease?^  2d.  "The  pains  are  at-
tended with  numbness  of  the  parts."  This  first  symptom
you  will  remember  is  like  Stannum^  but  the  Platinum
patient  is  not  characteristically  so  weak  as  the  Stan7ium  one.
The  second  one  is  like  Chamomilla^  but  the  Platina  patient
is  not  so  unvaryingly  ugly  as  the  Chamomilla  one.  Both
are  great  mental  remedies,  however,  and  if  any  question


SELENIUM.


149


arises  (as  there  may)  a  close  study  of  them  in  their  entirety
may  be  necessary.

In  regard  to  the  gradual  onset  of  the  pains  of  Platina  and
Stannum^  Belladonna  has  exactly  the  opposite,  but  Bella-
donna more  resembles  the  Platina  in  its  brain  symptoms.

Sexual  organs.  "  Nymphomania  aggravated  in  the  ly-
ing-in ;  tingling  or  tittilation  up  into  the  abdomen."
"Excessive  sexual  desire  especially  in  virgins;  premature
or  excessive  development  of  sexual  instinct."  "Genitals
excessively  sensitive ;  cannot  bear  to  be  touched  ;  will  al-
most go  into  a  spasm  from  an  examination,  and  almost
faint  during  intercourse."  "  Metrorrhagia  or  profuse
menses  ;  blood  black  and  clotted."

Ovarian  trouble  and  prolapsus  with  the  profuse  menses
and  excessive  sensitiveness  of  the  genitals  to  touch  on
coition.  All  these  are  very  strong  indications  for  this
remedy.  All  these  symptoms,  mental,  nervous,  spasmodic,
sexual,  etc.,  would  indicate  that  Platina  ought  to  be  a
good  remedy  for  that  protean  malady,  hysteria,  and  so
abundant  experience  has  proved  it  to  be.  Here  again  I
have,  as  in  the  case  of  ZinaLtn  and  Stannum^  found  the
higher  preparation  of  the  drug  most  potent  for  good.

SELENIUM.

Here  is  another  metal,  that,  like  Stannu7n,  has  for  its  most
characteristic  condition,  excessive  weakness.  But  the  weak-
ness of  Selenium  does  not,  like  Stannum^  seem  to  centre
in  any  particular  locality.  It  is  more  general.  He  is  so
weak  that  he  is  easily  exhausted  from  any  kind  of
labor,  either  mental  or  physical.  This  debility  may  fol-
low any  exhaustive  disease  like  typhoid  fever,  or  may

come  from  seminal  emissions. The  weakness  of  Selenium
11


150  PHOSPHORUS.

shows  itself  as  much  in  the  male  sexual  organs,  as  it  does
generally.  Erections  are  slow  and  weak,  emissions  of
semen  too  rapid  in  coition  and  he  is  cross  and  weak  after-
wards. Sexual  desire  strong,  but  he  is  physically  impotent.
Has  seminal  emissions  two  or  three  times  a  week,  and  gets
up  with  weak,  lame  back  after  them.  Prostatic  fluid
oozes  while  sitting,  during  sleep,  when  walking,  or  at
stool.  If  this  weakness  has  been  of  long  standing, .  he  be-
gins to  emaciate,  especially  in  the  face^  hands  and  thighs.
This  is  a  picture  of  the  Selenium  prostration.  Aside  from
or  connected  with  it  are  a  few  other  characteristic  symp-
toms, such  as  constipation,  the  stool  being  of  such  immense
size  that  it  cannot  be  discharged  without  mechanical  aid.
It  must  be  picked  away  with  the  fingers.  Involuntary
dribbling  of  urine  while  walking,  or  after  urinating  or
stool.

Bad  effects  from  drinking  too  much  tea ;  all  complaints
are  aggravated  by  it.  Hoarseness,  must  often  clean  the
throat  of  mucus  especially  at  the  beginning  of  singing.
Irresistible  desire  for  stimulants,  wants  to  get  drunk  but
feels  worse  after  it.  Very  forgetful  in  business,  but  during-
sleep  dreams  of  what  he  had  forgotten.  I  have  never
used  this  metal  below  the  200th  potency.

PHOSPHORUS.

As  a  general  characteristic.  Burning  is  almost  as  strong
under  this  remedy  as  under  Arsenicum  and  Sulphur.
There  is  no  organ  or  tissue  in  which  it  may  not  be  found,
from  the  outer  skin  to  the  innermost  surface  of  every  tract
or  parenchyma.  It  may  be  subjective  only  without  actual
rise  of  temperature,  or  it  may  attend  organic  changes  in
malignant  diseases,  with  great  rise  of  temperature.  The


PHOSPHORUS.


sensation  of  burning  in  an  intense  degree  should  always
place  Phosphorus  in  the  front  rank  for  consideration.
Again,  there  is  perhaps  no  remedy  having  stronger  action
on  The  Nervous  System.  It  attacks  it  in  its  very  citadel
of  strength,  the  brain  and  spinal  chord,  producing  soften-
ing or  atrophy  with  all  its  attendant  symptoms  in  their
order,  as  prostration,  trembling,  numbness,  and  complete
paralysis.  It  does  this  in  both  acute  and  chronic  forms  of
disease.

It  will  be  found  in  acute  typhoids  as  well  as  in  that
slowly  progressive  disease,  locomotor  ataxia.  Its  causes
may  be  sudden,  like  pneumonia,  typhus :  exanthematic  dis-
eases, croup,  bronchitis,  when  vitality  reaches  its  lowest
ebb,  or  may  arise  in  a  condition  undermined  by  grief,  care,
or  excessive  mental  exertion ;  excess  in  venery  or  onanism.

Its  action  at  the  first  may  be  characterized  by  a  burning
heat  in  various  parts,  and  especially  in  the  skin  with  rest-
less  moving  and  anxiety,  especially  at  twilight.  Over-sen-
sitiveness of  all  senses,  such  as  external  impressions,  light,
odors,  noises,  touch,  etc.,  and  later^  when  organic  changes
have  taken  place,  the  other  extreme,  of  loss  of  motion,
sensation,  a.nd_sensitiveness  obtains.

In  the  former  state  there  is  one  very  characteristic  symp-
tom, the  patient  moves  continually^  can't  sit  or  stand  still  a
moment.  Instead  of  fidgety  feet,  like  Zhtcitm^  he  is  fidgety
all  oyer.  Phosphorus  afiects  every  tissue.  The  blood  be-
comes broken  down  or  impoverished.  Chlorosis  and  per-
nicious anaemia  obtains.  Apis  and  Kali  carb.  also  each  have
anaemia  or  a  pale  waxy  or  what  is  called  bloodless  appear-
ance of  the  patient.  They  all  have  oedema  or  bloating,
and  there  is  one  peculiar  difference  in  the  face  between
them.  In  Kali  carb,  the  upper  lids  bloat  and  hang  down
like  a  bag  of  water. In  Apis  it  is  more  in  the  lower  lids,


152  PHOSPHORUS.

while  in  Phosphorus  they  bloat  all  around  the  e^  es;  and  the
whole  face  bloats.  Under  Phosphorus  the  blood  becomes
so  broken  down  that  it  will  not  clot  any  more,  and  we
have  purpura  hsemorrhagica.  Even  in  apparently  healthy
tissues  we  have  this  strong  characteristic  discovered  by
Hahnemann,  viz:  "Slight  wounds  bleed  much."  This  is
what  is  called  the  hemorrhagic  diathesis,  and  is  much  to
be  feared,  as  many  persons  having  it  may  bleed  to  death
from  any  slight  abrasion;  and  this  same  tendency  to  bleed
extends  to  fungoid  growths  like  fibroids,  fungoids,  cancers
etc.,  and  are  very  dangerous  and  troublesome.

Then  again  Phosphorus  attacks  the  bones  in  the  form  of
necrosis.  It  is  so  especially  of  the  lower  jaw,  but  is  also
true  of  other  parts,  as  the  vertebrae ;  and  I  once  cured  a
very  extensive  and  long  standing  case  of  caries  of  the  tibia
with  it.

Fatty  degeneration  of  heart,  liver  and  kidneys,  with  the
characteristic  anaemic  condition,  should  call  attention  to
this  remedy.  General  emaciation,  rapid  or  slowly  progress-
ing like  atrophy  in  children,  also  comes  under  its  tissue
destroying  power.

And  so  we  find  it  to  be  a  remedy  of  wide  range  and
great  power.  But  it  is  never  enough  for  the  homoeopathist
to  know  simply  the  action  in  general  upon  any  organ  or
set  of  organs.  He  must  know  how  it  acts  difierently  from
other  remedies  when  acting  upon  the  same  tissues  or  organs.
Now  while  Phosphorus  acts  upon  the  mind,  to  cause  "great
anxiety  and  restlessness "  as  in  other  remedies.  Aconite^
Arsenicum^  etc.,  it  must  be  remembered  that  it  is  the
anxiety  and  restlessness  that  precedes  another  state.

It  belongs  to  a  stage  of  irritation  in  the  brain  and
nervous  system  which  if  not  checked  will  go  on  to  or-
ganic changes,  which  will  be  attended  with  a  very  different


PHOSPHORUS.


set  of  symptoms,  such  as  comes  for  instance  from  actual
brain  softening  in  which  appears  apathy,  sluggishness;
talks  slowly,  is  indifferent  or  won't  talk  at  all.  There  is
one  particular  symptom  worthy  of  note :  the  patient  fears
tjojbe  kft  alone;  is  afraid  ;  afraid  of  the  dark  ;  in  a  thunder
storm,  etc.  This  is  more  during  the  irritable  stage  of
which  we  have  spoken.  Phosphorus  is  a  great  remedy  in
typhoids,  especially  with  lung  complications  and  here  we
often  get  stupor  and  low  muttering  delirium  like  Lachesis\
but  while  Lachesis  is  worse  after  sleep.  Phosphorus  is
generally  better,  if  he  can  get  to  sleep.  In  the  late  stage
of  brain  or  nervous  troubles,  calling  for  this  remedy,  we
find  the  patient  losing  all  ambition  to  do  anything ;  either
mental  or  physical  labor  is_s]^imned.  There  is  great  ijOj
difference.  He  cannot  think  with  his  usual  clearness ;  can-
not apply  himself  to  study  or  mental  operations,  ideas  come
slowly  or  not  at  all.  Again  the  patient  is  sometimes
amative,  or  like  Hyosciamus  shamelessly  exposes  himself.

There  is  no  remedy  that  covers  a  greater  variety  of  mind
symptoms  arising  from  brain  trouble  than  Phosphorus.  No
remedy  produces  greater  vertigo,  with  a  longer  list  of
various  connections.  I  have  found  it  one  of  the  best,  and
oftenest  indicated  for  vertigo  of  the^aged.  Chronic  con-
gestion to  the  head  is  characteristic,  and  the  sense of
burning  in  the  brain  is  prominent ;  the  heat  and  conges-
tion seems  to  come  up  frsmithe  spine.

Heat  running  up  the  back  is  more  characteristic  of  this
than  any  other  remedy.  Deafness  is  prominent,  and  is
peculiar,  in  that  it  is  especially  deafness  to  the  human  voice,
a  common  symptom  in  the  aged.  The  most  frequent  use
I  have  made  of  the  remedy  in  nose  affections  is  in  a
chronic  catarrh,  in  which  the  patient  frequently  blows


^54  PHOSPHORUS.

^  small  quantities  of  blood  fro7n  the  nose;  the  handkerchief  is
always  bloody.

As  I  said  when  writing  upon  the  tissues,  the  face  of
/%^?i-/)/^^?r2/^  is  characteristically  pale  and  bloated  around  the
ness of  the  cheek  upon  the  side  of  the  lung  inflamed.  This
is  also  true  with  Sanguinaria.  About  the  mouth  and
tongue  I  do  not  know  anything  particularly  characteristic.
It  has  a  peculiar  symptom  of  the  throat.  The  food
swallowed  comes  up  i^nim^^  if  it  had  never  reached .

the  stomach.  This  is  supposed  to  be  due  to  spasmodic
stricture  of  the  oesophagus.

Under  appetite  and  thirst  we  have  some  very  valuable
indications  for  this  remedy.

Hunger  is  one,  must  eat  often  or  he  faints ;  right  after
or  soon  after  a  meal,  is  hungry  ;  hungry  in  the  night ;
must  eat.  He  is  relieved  by  eating,  but  is  soon  hungry
again.  This  calls  to  mind  lodj^te,  Chelidoniiun^  Petroleum
Anacardiuin^  et  cetera.

The  thirst  is  also  peculiar.  He  wants  cold  things,  like
Pulsatilla,  but  as  soon  as  they  get  warm  in  the  stomach  they
are  vomited.

Some  people  have  an  abnormal  craving  for  salt,  or  salt
food,  and  eat  too  much  of  it.  Phosphorus  is  a  good  remedy
to  counteract  the  bad  effects.

We  have  many  kinds  of  vomiting  nndiQr  Phosphorus,
but  nothing  characteristic  except  the  one  already  men-
tioned. .

We  have  already  spoken  of  the  hungry,  faint  feeling  in
gone  feeling,  and  here  again  we  think  of  such  remedies  as
Ignatia,  Hydrastis,  Sepia  and  others;  but  Phosphorus  does
not  stop  here  with  this  sensation,  but  extends  through  the


PHOSPHORUS.


whole  abdoynen. No  remedy  has  this  feeling  in  the  ab-  j
domen'so'strong  as  Phosphortcs. Under  stool  and  rectum  /
occur  some  very  characteristic  symptoms  also,  for  instance :
Stools  profuse,  watery  pouring  away  as  from  a  hydrant,
with  lumps  of  white  mucus,  like  grains  of  tallow.  Stools
bloody,  with  small  white  particlesjike  opac^ue  frog^^
Stools  involuntarily  oozing  from  a  constantly  open  anus,
or dysenteric stools with wide-open anus  and  great
tenesmus. Constipation  ;  faeces  slender,  long,  dry,  tough
like  dog  stools. No  remedy  has  a  richer  array  of  stool
symptoms,  and  as  we  see  by  the  above  few  select  ones,
some  of  them  are  very  unique  and  have  often  been  verified.
It  will  repay  any  physician  to  carefully  and  frequently
look  them  over.

This  remedy  powerfully  excites  the  sexual  appetite  in
both  sexes.  It  is  almost  irresistible,  and  leads  the  patient
into  a  mania  in  which  he  will  expose  himself  This  is
succeeded  by  the  opposite  extreme  of  impotence,  though
the  desire  remains  after  the  ability  to  perform  is  gone.  Of
course,  these  sexual  symptoms  are  accompanied  with  many
concomitant  symptoms  of  the  drug.

Upon  the  female  sexual  organs  Phosphorus  is  true  to  its
general  hemorrhagic  tendencies ;  if  the  menses  do  not  ap-
pear, there  is  often  vicarious  bleeding  from  the  nose  or
lungs  instead.  Phosphorus  is  boicnd  to  bleed.  It  is  so  with
cancer  of  the  womb  or  breasts  also.  They  bleed  easily.
Upon  the  respiratory  organs  also.  This  is  one  of  our
greatest  remedies.  Beginning  with  the  voice  and  larynx,
it  causes  and  cures  great  hoarseness.  Patient  can  hardly
make  a  loud  noise,  and  is  apt  to  be  worse  in  the  evening
or  fore-part  of  the  night.  There  is  pain  in  the  larynx,  worse
by  talking,  or  can't  talk  at  all  on  account  of  it.  In  croup,  it
sometimes  comes  in  after  Aconitum  and  Spongia  have  failed.


PHOSPHORUS.

The  disease  has  progressed  downward  until  it  involves  the
bronchi  and  parenchyma  of  the  lungs.  It  is  of  indispens-
able value  here;  and,  also  when,  after  the  violence  of  the
affection  seems  to  have  abated  ;  the  patient  hoarses
up  every  evening  and  seems  to  be  inclined  to  relapse.

In  bronchitis  the  cough  is  tight,  worse  from  evening  to
midnight,  also  from  speaking,  laughing,  reading  aloud,
cold  air  and  lying  on  left  side.  The  patient  suppresses  the
cough  with  a  moan  just  as  long  as  he  can,  because  it  hurts
him  so. The  whole  body  trembles  with  the  cough.

It  has  great  oppression  of  breathing  in  both  acute  and
chronic  affections  of  the  lungs.  There  is  heaviness^  as  of
a  weight  on  the  chest.  In  pneumonia,  for  which  Phos-
phorus is  one  of  our  best  remedies,  it  attacks  by  preference
the  lower  half  of  the  right  lung.  It  is  apt  to  be  indicated
by  the  symptoms,  either  at  the  beginning  of  the  stage  of
hepatization,  when  it  puts  a  stop  to  the  further  progress  of
the  disease,  but  its  more  frequent  application  comes  in
where  the  stage  of  hepatization  is  past  and  we  want
to  break  it  up  and  promote  absorption  or  resolution.
Here  it  has  no  equal,  as  I  am  fully  convinced  by  abundant
experience.  <

Now,  do  not  misunderstand  and  give  the  remedy  blindly
on  a  pathological  indication  only.  If  you  do  you  will
sometimes  fail,  and  ought  to.  But  I  repeat,  this  remedy
will  oftener  be  found  the  indicated  one  here  than  any
other.  After  the  hepatization  begins  to  break  up  other
remedies  like  Tartar  emetic^  Sulphur^  and  Lycopodium-
will  come  in.

In  pleuritis,  you  will  find  stitches  in  the  left  side  increased
by  lying  on  the  left  side.  Remember  in  both  affections
Phosphorus  is  characteristically  increased  by  lying  upon
the  left  side.


PHOSPHORUS.


In  tuberculosis,  it  is  oftenest  indicated  in  the  incipient
stage  with  the  symptoms  of  cough,  oppression  and  general
weakness  already  mentioned;  but  I  have  often  found  it  in-
dicated in  the  later  stages,  and  if  given  very  high  and  in
the  single  dose  and  not  repeated  have  seen  it  greatly  benefit
even  incurable  cases.  If  given  too  low  and  repeated  it  will
fearfully  aggravate.

One  of  the  most  characteristic  symptoms  of  this  remedy

'-'-feeling  of  intense  heat  running  up  the  backy  Again
the  burning  may  be  in  spots  along  the  spine.  Also  it
has  intense  heat  and  burning  between  the  scapulae.  (See
also  Lycopodium).  '

These,  like  the  rest  of  the  burnings  of  Phosphorus,  often,
occur  in  diseases  of  the  spine  and  nervous  system,  but  not
necessarily  so.  Like  Ziftc^  these  burnings  may  be  purely
subjective,  but  are  none  the  less  valuable  as  therapeutic
indications.

Another  very  characteristic  symptom  of  Phosphorus  is
burning  of  the  hands.  It  is  as  strong  as  the  burning  feet
of  Sulphur^  and  is  found  both  in  acute  and  chronic  dis-
eases; cannot  bear  to  have  the  hands  covered.  The  flashes
of  heat  ^11  over  (which  Phosphorus  has)  begin  in  the  hands
and  spread  from  there  even  to  the  face.  It  now  remains
to  call  attention  to  the  Constitution  of  Phosphorus.

1.  "Tall,  slender  persons  of  sanguine  temperament,  fair
skin,  blonde  or  red  hair  ;  quick,  lively  perception  and  sen-
sitive nature."

2.  "Tall,  slender  phthisical  patients,  delicate  eyelashes^
soft  hair."

3.  "Tall,  slender  women  disposed  to  stoop."

4.  "Y«fLing  people  who  grow  too  rapidly  and  are  in-
clined to  stoop."

5.  "  Nervous,  weak  persons  who  like  to  be  magnetized."'


158


SEPIA.


Now,  in  number  four  there  is  not  the  tendency  to  grow
fat,  like  Calcarea  carbonica^  but  tall,  and  you  will  notice
that  the  Phosphorus  element  in  Calcarea  phosphorica  takes
away  the  fat  producing  property  of  the  Calcarea  element.

Now,  in  closing,  we  desire  to  say  we  have  only  touched
upon  the  wonderful  virtues  of  this  drug,  which  must  be
studied  in  its  entirety.  Enough,  however,  we  trust  to  con-
vince of  its  great  value.

SEPIA.

This  is  another  of  our  wonderful  remedies  of  which  the
dominant  school  knows  nothing,  except  they  have  learned
it  from  us.  Its  chief  sphere  of  action  seems  to  be  in  the
abdomen  and  pelvis,  especially  of  women.  No  remedy
produces  stronger  symptoms  here.  We  quote  from  dif-
ferent but  equally  good  observers.

"  Sensation  of  bearing  down  in  the  pelvic  region,  with
■dragging  pains  from  the  sacrum ;  or  feeling  of  bearing
down  of  all  the  pelvic  organs."  (Hahnemann.)

"  Labor-like  pains  accompanied  with  a  feeling  as  though
she  must  cross  her  legs  and  '  sit  close  '  to  keep  something
from  coming  out  through  the  vagina."  (Guernsey.)

"  Pain  in  uterus,  bearing  down,  comes  from  back  to
abdomen,  causing  oppression  of  breathing  ;  crosses  limbs
.to  prevent  protrusion  of  parts."  (Hering.)

"Prolapsus  of  the  uterus,  of  the  vagina,  with  pressure  as
if  everything  would  protrude."  (Lippe.)

"  Experience  has  shown  its  value  in  cases  of  ulceration
and  congestion  of  the  os  and  cervix  uteri.  Its  use  super-
cedes all  local  applications." (Dunham.)  ^

No  higher  authority  than  the  united  testimony  of  these
five  of  our  best  observers  could  be  brought  to  show  the
action  of  Sepia  upon  the  pelvic  organs.


I


SEPIA.


Now  when  we  come  to  examine  the  provings  in  Allen's
Encyclopedia,  we  find  that  these  symptoms  were  mainly
produced  by  Hahnemann  and  his  provers,  and  Hahnemann
advocated  proving  remedies  in  the  30th.  and  some  of  them
were  produced  by  the  200th.,  especially  those  most  strong-
ly verified  by  blackfaced  type.

We  confess  that  we  cannot  understand  how  so  many
•question  the  value  of  potencies  for  proving  or  curing,  and
most  of  all  do  we  wonder  at  Dr.  Allen  himself  "  going
back"  on  potencies  above  the  1 2th.  Such  a  course  looks
very  much  to  us  like  "kicking  against  the  pricks"  or,  in
■other  words  trying,  to  fight  the  truth.  But  we  must  be
charitable.

Sepia,  like  Sulphur,  affects  the  general  circulation  in  a
very  marked  manner.  Flashes  of  heat  with  perspiratio7i
and  faintness  is  almost  as  characteristic  of  this  remedy  as
of  Sulphur.  But  there  is,  with  Sepia,  more  apt  to  be
associated  with  them  the  pelvic  symptoms  already  given,
and  they  are  also  more  apt  to  occur  in  connection  with  the
climacteric.  Indeed,  these  flashes  often  seem  ^\\\iSepia  to
start  in  the  pelvic  organs  and  from  thence  to  spread  over
the  body.

But  this  irregularity  of  circulation  extends  as  far  as  that
of  Sulphur.  The  hands  and  feet  are  hot  alternately,  that
is,  if  the  feet  are  hot,  the  hands  are  cold,  and  vice  versa.
There  is  not  so  much  sensation  of  burning  with  Sepia  as
with  Sulphur,  but  there  is  actual  heat,  and  the  venous  con-
gestion, which  seems  to  be  the  real  state  of  the  organs
where  the  pressive  bearing  down  et  cetera  is  felt,  is  also
accompanied  with  much  throbbing  and  beating.

This  local  congestion  to  the  pelvic  organs  is  not  simply
sensational.  There  are  actual  displacements  in  consequence
of  it,  and  the  long  continued  congestion  results  in  inflam-


i6o


SEPIA.


mations,  ulcerations,  lencorrhoeas  and  even  malignant  or
cancerous  disorganizations.  Induration  with  a  painful
sense  of  stiffness  in  the  uterine  region  is  characteristic.

This  pelvic  congestion  also  affects  the  rectum  in  a
marked  degree.  The  rectum  prolapses,  there  is  a  sensa-
tion of  fullness,  or  of  a  foreign  substance  as  of  a  ball  or
weighty  and  oozing  of  moisture  from  the  rectum.  Indeed,,
the  rectal  and  anal  symptoms  are  almost  as  strong  as  the
uterine  and  vaginal.  It  is  impossible  to  enumerate  all  the
symptoms  connected  with  the  circulatory  disturbances  of
Sepia  in  such  a  work  as  this,only  a  general  study  of  the
Materia  Medica  can  do  it.

The  urinary  organs  come  in  for  their  share  of  symptoms.
The  same  pressure  and  fullness  consequent  upon  the  portal
congestion  reaches  here.  We  will  now  proceed  to  give
what  we  have  found  to  be  particularly  valuable  symptoms
under  the  various  organs  in  this  region.  "Pressure  on
bladder  and  frequent  micturition  with  tension  in  lower
abdomen."  "  Sediment  in  the  urine  like  clay ;"  as  if  clay
was  burnt  on  the  bottom  of  the  vessel;  urine  very  ofiensivey
can't  endure  to  have  it  in  the  room,  it  is  reddish  or  may  be
bloody."  This  is  found  mostly  with  women.  With
children  there  is  one  peculiar  symptom  which  has  often
been  verified.  "The  child  always  wets  the  bed  during  its
first  sleep?''

Upon  the  male  organs  I  have  found  it  particularly  use-
ful in  chronic  gleet.  There  is  not  much  discharge,  but  a
few  drops  perhaps,  which  glue  up  the  orifice  of  the  urethra
in  the  morning;  but  it  is  so  persistent  and  the  usual
remedies  will  not  "dry  it  up."  In  my  early  practice,  I
used  to  use  a  weak  injection  of  Sulphate  of  Zinc,  but  it
used  to  annoy  me  that  I  could  not  do  it  without  resorting
to  local  measures. Sepia  does  it  in  the  majority  of  cases


SEPIA.


l6l


and  Kali  iodatiim  will  do  it  in  the  rest.  I  have,  where
there  was  a  thick  discharge  of  long  standing  and  the
smarting  and  burning  on  urinating  continued,  several
times  finished  the  case  with  Capsicum,

As  a  rule,  this  long  continued  slight,  passive  gleety  dis-
charge is  a  result  of  weakness  of  the  male  genitals,  as  is
shown  by  a  flaccidity  of  the  organs  and  frequent  seminal
emissions.  The  emissions  are  thin  and  watery..  Sepia
covers  all  of  this  and  often  sets  all  to  rights  in  a  short  time.

The  mind  symptoms  of  Sepia^  are  like  Pulsatilla^  in  that
she  is  sad  and  cries  frequently  without  knowing  the  reason
why.  So  if  in  a  tearful  mind  with  uterine  disturbances
Pulsatilla  should  fail  you,  the  next  remedy  to  be  studied
is  Sepia.  But  there  is  another  condition  of  mind  not
found  under  Pulsatilla  or  any  other  remedy  in  the  same
•degree,  and  that  is,  that  notwithstanding  there  is  no  sign
•of  dementia  from  actual  brain  lesion  the  patient,  contrary
to  her  usual  habit,  becomes  indifferent  to  her  occupation,
her  house  work,  her  family  or  their  comfort,  even  to  those
whom  she  loves  the  best.  This  is  a  very  peculiar  symp-
tom and  a  genuine  key-note  for  the  exhibition  of  Sepia.

Upon  the  head  Sepia  is  one  of  our  best  remedies
in  hemicrania  of  women  of  the  Sepia  temperament,  and
who  are  suffering  from  uterine  trouble  which  we  have
pain  comes  in  terrific  shocks^  so  as  to  jerk  t\i&head  in  spite
of  the  patient.

There  are  three  remedies  that  have  prominently  droop-
ing eyelids  {Causticum  Gelsemium  and  Sepia).  Of  course,
the  other  symptoms  must  decide  which  is  the  one  indicated
in  the  case  at  hand.  So  far  as  the  nose  is  concerned.  Sepia
is  often  of  use  in  chronic  catarrh.  I  had  a  case  in  which
the  discharge  was  thick,  bland  and  in  large  quantities.


l62


SEPIA.


Pulsatilla  would  relieve  the  catarrhal  trouble  but  would,  at
the  same  time,  increase  the  menstrual  flow  too  much,  but
Sepia  cured  both.  The  choice  will  sometimes  have  to  be
made  between  Kali  bichromicum  and  Sepia  in  these
chronic  catarrhs,  but  it  is  generally  easy,  although  the  local
symptoms  are  much  alike.

"  Yellow  saddle  across  upper  part  of  cheeks  and  nose,
and  yellow  spots  on  the  face,"  is  a  characteristic  of  great
value,  but  the  yellowness  and  yellow  spots  do  not  always
stop  here.  You  may  find  them  in  abundance  on  the
abdomen.  The  whole  surface  of  the  body  may  be  yellow
like  jaundice.  Th^  face  of  the  Sepia  patient  is  the  most
"tell  tale"  face  I  know,  and  if  you  find  it  upon  a  woman
you  may  always  find  her  leading  symptoms  in  connection
with  her  menstrual  and  uterine  functions.

There  is  one  symptom  of  Sepia  upon  the  stomach  that  is
also  very  characteristic,  viz.,  a  "  painful  sensation  of
emptiness,  goneness  or  faintness."  The  patient  will  call
it  an  "  all  gone  "  feeling.  Of  course  you  remember  that
Ignatia  and  Hydrastis  Canadensis  have  this  symptom  very
strongly.  Other  remedies  also  have  it  in  more  or  less
marked  degree,  but  none  so  strongly  in  connection
with  uterine  symptoms  as  Sepia^  unless  perhaps  it  be
Murex  purpurea^  and  you  will  not  often  have  much
difficulty  in  choosing  between  these  last  two  if  you  carefully
examine  all  the  symptoms.  I  have  often  thought  that  this-
symptom,  so  persistent  and  severe  might  be  due  to  the
actual  emptying  of  the  upper  abdomen  by  the  prolapsed
womb,  dragging  everything  after  itself  into  the  pelvic
cavity.  It  is  so  in  Stannum  and  Lilium  tigrinum^  and
the  weakness  of  the  natural  supports  (ligaments)  of  the
uterus  being  remedied  (not  supplanted  by  pessaries  and
artificial  supports  of  various  kinds)  the  distressing  symp-


SEPIA.  163

toms  disappear.  Vomiting  in  pregnancy  with  this  "all
gone"  feeling  is  often  cured  hy  Sepia  \  also  the  thought  or
smell  {Colch.)  of  food  sickens  her.  I  mentioned  the  "  sense
of  weight  or  a  ball  in  the  rectum  when  writing  of  the
pelvic  congestion  of  Sepia.  This  sensation  is  not  relieved
by  stool.  Sepia  is  a  remedy  for  constipation,  and  that  of  a
very  obstinate  character.  Like  Selenium  it  has  great
straining ;  but  manual  aid  is  necessary  to  accomplish  the
stool. This  is  mostly  in  children.

I  once  cured  a  very  obstinate  case  of  entero-colitis  (so-
called  cholera  infantum)  after  the  complete  failure  of  two
eminent  allopaths,  with  Sepia^  the  leading  symptom
being,  "always  worse  after  taking  milk."  Oozing  of
moisture  from  the  anus  finds  its  remedy  here  sometimes,
but  oftener  in  Antimonium  crudum.  The  Sepia  patient  is
very  weak.  "A  short  walk  fatigues  her  very  much.'^
She  faints  easily  from  extremes  of  cold  or  heat,  after  getting
wet;  from  riding  in  a  carriage,  while  kneeling  at  churchy
and  on  other  trifling  occasions.

Skin  "Itching  often  changes  to  burning  when
scratching."  (Sulpli).  "Soreness  of  skin;  humid  places  in
bends  of  knees."  "  Brown  spots  in  face,  chest,  abdomen  ;
chloasma."  Herpes  circinatus.  "I^arge  suppurating  pus-
tules constantly  renewing  themselves."  "Acarus  itch,
pruritus;  tettery  eruptions  etc."  Sepia  like  Sulphur  \ia&
many  forms  of  eruption  on  the  skin,  and  indeed  there  is
great  general  resemblance  between  these  two  anti-psorics.
They  follow  each  other  well.  Of  course  that  is  always
providing  they  are  indicated  by  the  symptoms,  which  is
often  the  case.  I  do  not  believe  in  the  so-called  incom-
patables  as  some  do.  I  should  give  Causticum  after  Phos-
phorus, Silicea  after  Mercury,  or  Rhits  tox.  after  Apis
mel.  if  I  found  them  indicated.


164


UUUM  TIGRINUM.


LILIUM  TIGRINUM

Is  oue  of  the  remedies  that  closely  resembles  Sepia  in  its
action  on  the  uterine  organs.  This  symptom,  for  instance,
weight,  with  feeling  as  if  the  pelvic  contents  would  press
out  through  the  vagina  if  not  prevented  by  pressure  with
the  hand,  or  by  sitting  down."  There  is  no  remedy  that  is
more  efficacious  for  uterine  displacements  than  Lilium.
The  persistent  bearing-down  feeling  in  the  uterine  region
of  Lilium  is  attended  with  a  feeling  as  if  the  pelvic  viscera,
indeed  the  whole  abdominal  contents,  were  being  dragged
downward,  even  from  the  chest  and  shoulders,  towards  the
vagina.

The  choice  between  Lilium  and  Sepia  might  not  always  be
easy.  The  Sepia  case  is  more  likely  to  be  a  chronic  one.  On
the  other  hand  the  Lilium  case  is  more  intense,  painful
and  distressing.  The  Sepia  cachexia  of  course  would  de-
cide easily  in  its  favor,  if  it  is  markedly  present.  There  is
more  urinary  irritation,  or  frequent  desire  to  urinate,  with
Lilium  ;  indeed  this  is  sometimes  so  severe  as  to  make  one
think  of  Ca7itharis.  Again  rectal  irritation  and  distress  is
often  found  in  conjunction  with  the  urinary,  in  this  respect
reminding  one  of  Merc,  cor.^  Capsicum  or  Nux  vo^nica.

With  the  uterine  we  often  have  quite  an  array  of  very
severe  heart  symptoms.  There  are  sharp  quick  pains,  and
much  fluttering  of  the  heart.  This  remedy  also  has  in  a
marked  degree  the  great  characteristic  symptom  of  Cactus
graiidiflorics^^^ sens^.'donB.s  if  the  heart  were  constricted
or  held  by  an  iron  band."  This  symptom,  associated  with
the  many  other  heart  symptoms,  has  sometimes  led  to  a
prescription  of  Cactus^  when  Lilium  was  the remedy  and


SECALE  CORNUTUM.  1 65

vice  versa.  The  uterine  symptoms  are  sometimes  masked
so  as  to  be  over-looked  for  the  time  by  the  violence  of  the
heart  symptoms.  All  these  heart,  urinary,  and  rectal
•symptoms  seem  to  be  mainly  reflex,  while  the  real  trouble
is  centered  in  the  uterus  and  its  appendages.

The  mind  is  also  very  markedly  affected  under  Lilium.
Here  it  may  resemble  Pulsatilla  for  tearfulnesss  ;  doubts
her  salvation,  like  Veratrum  alburn^  Sidphur  and  Lycopo-
dium  and  a  constant  hurried  feeling,  as  of  i7nperative  duties
with  utter  inability  to  perform  them.  (See  Argentitm
nitricum.)

SECALE  CORNUTUM

Is  a  remedy  capable  of  great  good,  but,  is  perhaps,  as
much  misused  as  Quinine.  Its  power  to  contract  the
uterus  is  undoubted,  and  for  this  reason  it  is  often^  given
when  other  remedies  would  do  better.  It  has  power  to
control  haemorrhages  that  few  other  remedies,  if  any,  can
surpass.  It  is  said  to  do  this  by  contracting  the  capillaries.
But  we  must  remember  that  other  remedies  control  hsemor-
'rhages,  and  whether  they  do  it  by  contracting  the  capil-
laries, by  their  action  upon  the  blood  itself,  or  other
specific  action,  makes  no  difference,  so  long  as  they  control
it.  Some  physicians  are  always  giving  Ergot  in  post-
partem  haemorrhages  on  this  contracted  theory,  without
ever  thinking  of  anything  else.  They  always  give  it  in
material  doses  to  get,  as  they  term  it,  the  physiological
effect.  I  have  never,  in  a  practice  of  thirty-five  years,  used
it  in  this  way,  but  have  always  been  able  to  control  such
haemorrhages.  Secale  is  not  often  indicated  in  active
post-partem  haemorrhages.  If  there  is  a  tendency  to
passive  haemorrhages,  everything  open  and  loose,  no  action,


SECAI^K  CORNUTUM.

in  thin,  scrawny,  cachectic  women  (muscles  flabby),  there
is  no  remedy  like  it,  and  the  potencies  are  much  better
than  the  tincture  or  none  of  Ergot  in  massive  doses.  This
is  also  true  in  menorrhagias  and  metrorrhagias  unconnected
with  pregnancy.  The  blood  is  dark,  liquid  and  flowing
worse  on  the  slightest  motion.

The  constitution,  temperament  and  age  of  the  patient  is
of  great  importance,  for  it  is  particularly  adapted  to  feeble,
thin,  scrawny,  cachectic  women  of  lax  muscular  fibre,  sub-
ject to  passive  haemorrhages  from  all  outlets  of  the  body  •
also  old  decrepid  persons.

This  remedy  (Secale)  is  often  abused  on  account  of  its
power  to  produce  muscular  contractions  of  the  womb.
Now  in  regard  to  this  as  with  haemorrhages,  it  is  capable
of  doing  all  that  it  ought  to  be  called  upon  to  do  in  the
potencies.

I  fully  agree  with  Cowperthwaite,  who  says :  "To  give  it
in  parturition  to  hasten  delivery,  as  is  the  practice  of  the
old  school,  is  simply  inexcusable."  On  the  other  hand  I
agree  with  Dr.  N.  Guernsey,  "that  it  is  useful  when  labor
pains  are  weak,  suppressed  or  distressing,  in  weak  cachectic
women,  in  the  200th  dilution,"  and  have  verified  it  beyond
question.

The  practice  of  giving  the  fluid  extract  in  such  cases,  as
is  done  by  some  physicians  calling  themselves  homoeo-
pathic, ought  to  be  sufficient  cause  for  expelling  them
from  a  homoeopathic  society.  It  seems  to  me  to  be  con-
fession of  either  inexcusable  laziness  or  ignorance.

We  have  a  long  list  of  remedies  of  undoubted  value  for
weak  labor  pains  with  specific  indications  for  their  use,
and  when  so  indicated  they  are  more  efficacious  and  less
dangerous  than  Secale  in  massive  doses  of  fluid  extract
with  no  other  indications  than  uncontracted  uterus  or


SECALE  CORNUTUM.  1 67

weak  pains.  The  men  who  prate  learnedly  of  getting  the
physiological  effects  of  Secale  in  massive  doses  had  better
ask  themselves  if  the  same  result  gotten  with  the  poten-
tized  remedy  homoeopathically  applied,  is  not  just  as  much
in  accordance  with  physiological  law,  and  much  more
scientific  from  a  homoeopathic  standpoint.  Weak  pains
remedied  by  the  indicated  homoeopathic  drug,  brings  on
natitral  labor,  while  large  doses  for  the  same  purpose  of  an
unindicated  one  does  not  and  never  can  produce  natural
labor. It  is  nothing  more  or  less  than  drug  poisoning.

Here  is  one  symptom  of  Secale  that  is  of  inestimable
value:  "  Great  coldness  (objective)  of  the  siuface^  yet  the
patient  cannot  bear  to  be  covered."  This  is  oftenest
found  in  cholera  and  cholera  infantum ;  but  it  is  also
found  in  senile  gangrene.  The  feet  and  toes  may  be
objectively  cold  as  an  iron  wedge,  but  the  patient  is  dis-
tressed beyond  endurance  by  having  them  covered.  I  saw
one  marked  case  of  this  kind.  All  the  toes  were  attacked
with  dry  gangrene.  A  few  doses  of  Secale  (high)  afforded
great  relief,  and  checked  for  a  long  time  the  progress  of
the  disease.

Camphor  has  the  same  symptom  in  a  marked  degree  in
choleraic  disease.  The  Camphor  seems  to  be  most  effica-
cious for  the  first  stage  or  early  collapse  in  the  course  of
the  disease,  before  the  discharges  have  become  offensive,
putrid  or  dark  colored.  Secale  has  burning  in  the  feet
{Sulphur)  and  cramps  in  the  calves  [Sulphur).

unlike  in  their  entirety.  Sulphur  does  not  have  the  degree
of  collapse  of  Secale^  nor  the  icy  coldness  of  surface  with
subjective  burning.  So  we  see  the  folly  of  one  symptom
prescribing  after  all.


IO«  CAUIvOPHYU.UM  THAUCTROIDES.

We  must  have  the  keynote  symptom,  of  course,  but  it
must  harmonize  with  the  rest  of  the  case.  Secale  has
burning  of  all  parts  of  the  body,  as  if  sparks  were  falling
on  them."  It  also  has  numbness^  crawling  and  paralysis
of  the  extremities.  This  is  due  to  its  action  on  the  spinal
chord.  In  addition  to  the  coldness  of  the  skin  already
noticed,  we  must  state  that  the  skin  looks  dry^  wrinkled,
and  is  insensible  often,  or  there  may  be  much  formication
under,  as  if  mice  were  creeping  there.

CAULOPHYLLUM  THALICTROIDES

Is  another  very  valuable  "  woman  remedy,"  because  of  its
specific  action  upon  the  uterus.  It  deserves  a  thorough  re-
proving. I  cannot  better  show  its  virtues  than  by  report-
ing a  case  or  two.

A  married  lady,  aged  40,  with  wry  neck  of  long  stand-
ing, was  seven  months'  pregnant.  She  was  attacked  with
severe  pains  and  swelling  of  all  the  finger  joints.  The  only
way  she  could  get  relief  from  the  intense  pain  so  that  she
could  rest  or  sleep  at  all,  was  by  enveloping  her  fingers  in
the  finger  pains,  but  brought  on  such  severe  labor  pains,
that  I  was  obliged  to  discontinue  it  for  fear  of  premature
labor.  Then  the  bearing-down  pains  ceased,  and  the  finger
pains  returned  and  continued  in  full  force  until  she  was
delivered  of  her  child,  when  they  also  ceased  for  two
or  three  days.  Then  the  lochia  instead  of  decreasing
gradually  or  normally,  increased  until  it  amounted  to  a
metrorrhagia.  The  flow  was  of  a  passive  nature,  dark  and
liquid.  There  was  great  sense  of  weakness  and  internal
trembling  (not  visible  externally)  and  now,  to  crown  her
suffering,  the  terrible  finger  pains  returned  again. I  was


ACTEA  RAC?:mOSA.


169


afraid  of  the  Caiilophyllum,  although  it  seemed  indicated,
because  it  brought  on  the  bearing-down  pains  when  I  gave
it  before.  But  after  giving  Ar?tica,  Sabiiia^  Secale  and
Sidphur  without  the  least  improvement,  I  concluded  to  try
Caiilophylliim  high.  I  did  so  in  the  200th  potency  and
cured  the  whole  case  promptly  and  permanently.  Now
this  was  a  perfect  Caulophyllum  case,  and  if  I  had  given  it
properly  in  the  first  case,  I  have  no  doubt  I  would  have
saved  that  woman  all  unnecessary  suffering.

I  have  given  this  remedy  in  long-continued  passive
haemorrhage  from  the  uterus  after  miscarriage,  when  I  had
the  characteristic  weakness  and  sense  of  internal  trembling
present.  It  has  often  regulated  irregular  spasmodic  labor
pains,  and  has  also  often  relieved  pains  of  the  same  char-
acter in  dysmenorrhoea.  I  repeat,  this  remedy  deserves  a
careful  reproving.

ACTEA  RACEMOSA

Is  another  remedy  which  exerts  a  strong  influence  upon
the  female  organism.  The  nervous  system  manifests  its
action  in  a  multitude  of  symptoms,  many  of  them  being
what  is  kno^yn  as  hysterical  in  character.  There  are
twitchings,  spasms,  convulsions,  neuralgias  and  mental
symptoms  in  abundance.  She  shivers  (nervous  chill  with-
out coldness),  faints,  talks  incessantly,  frequently  changing
subjects ;  is  grieved  and  troubled,  with  sighing,  or  is  very
gloomy  with  sleeplessness ;  thinks  she  is  going  insane,  etc.

In  the  head  there  are  severe  paipis,  pressiiig  outward^  as
if  the  top  of  the  head  would  fly  off,  or  running  into  the
eyes  which  ache  fearfully ;  or  the  pains  settle  in  the  occi-
put and  shoot  down  the  neck.  There  are  very  few,  if  any,
remedies  that  have  worse  ciliary  neuralgia  than  Actea
racemosa.


170


SABINA.


In  the  female  sexual  organs  it  cures  "pains  in  the  uterine
region  darting  from  side^to  side.''  The  menstrual  func-
tion is  performe^^egulariy.  "Sometimes  the  flow  is
scanty,  but  more  generally  profuse,  and  we  have  the
mental  and  nervous  symptoms  above  enumerated  in
abundance,  with  these  irregularities.  It  is  one  of  our  best
remedies  in  menorrh^ia,  when  there  is  "severe  pahjjn
the  back,  down  the  thighs  and  through  the  hipvwith
heavy  pressing  down,"  as  I  have  often  proven.  It  is  also
excellent  in  infra-mammary  pains  in  the  left  side  during
the  climacteric,  as  I  have  also  proven.

Also  in  backache  and  spinal  irritation  sympathetic  with
uterine  troubles.  It  cures  sharp  lancinating  pains  in
various  parts,  either  nervous  or  muscular,  if  they  are  con-
nected with  uterine  disturbances.  In  rheumatism  the
affection  attacks  the  belly  of  the  muscle  by  preference.
Actea  is  a  many  sided-remedy,  and  adapted  to  nervous
troubles  of  many  forms.

SABINA

Is  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  profuse  flowing  from  the
female  genital  organs,  as  in  menorrhagia,  metrorrhagia,
abortions,  or  after  labor.

These  haemorrhages  are  apt  to  occur  in  paroxysms,  worse
from  motion  {Secale)^  blood  dark  {Kali  7iit.  and  Cyclamen)^
and  clotted  {Crocus)^  or  partly  clotted  and  partly  fluid  and
watery  (Ferrum)^  the  clots  being  black ;  from  loss  of  tone
in  the  uterus;  {Caulophyl.)  after  abortion  or  parturition,
with  pain  from  back  to  pubes.  This  pain  from  back  to
pubes  is  its  grand  keynote,  and  may  be  found,  not  only  in
flooding,  but  in  threatened  abortion  and  menstrual  troubles
generally. There  is  sometimes  present  the  general  char-


HELONIAS  DIOICA.


171


acteristic  of  Pulsatilla^  "aggravation  from  warm  air  and
in  a  warm  room,  and  amelioration  in  open,  cool,  fresh  air,"
and  in  cases  of  too  profuse  menstruation;  but  you  cannot  give
Pulsatilla  because  it  increases  the  already  too  profuse  flow.
Here  is  where  Sabina  comes  in,  for  it  has  the  same  aggra-
vation and  amelioration  with  the  profuse  flow.  This  is  an
important  diagnostic  difference  between  the  two  remedies,
and  is  reliable.

Sabijia  is  indicated  in  threatened  abortion  at  the  third
month,  especially  if  the  characteristic  pain  from  back  to
pubes  is  present.  If  the  pains  begin  in  the  back  and  go
around  from  there  and  end  with  cramps  in  the  uterus,
Viburnum  opulzLs  is  the  remedy.  This  kind  of  pain  seems
as  characteristic  for  Viburnum  as  is  the  other  for  Sabina.

Sabina  has  arthritic  swelling  of  the  wrist  joint ;  also  of
the  toe  joints.  This,  if  occurring  in  conjunction  with  its
profuse  flow  from  the  genitals,  may  make  the  choice  of
remedy  lie  between  it  and  Caulophyllum  in  some  cases.  The
ovaries  sympathize  very  much  with  the  uterine  troubles  of
Sabina^  especially  after  abortion,  or  suppressed  gonorrhoea,
or  leucorrhoeas.

HELONIAS  DIOICA.

I  have  found  this  remedy  of  use  in  a  generally  debili-
tated condition  of  women,  with  many  and  various  com-
plaints or  symptoms  in  the  region  of  the  uterus.

There  is  almost  always  associated  with  it  a  more  or  less
anaemic  condition.  This  anaemia  may  seem  to  be  conse-
quent upon  too  profuse  menstruation  or  flooding,  or  it  may
exist  entirely  independent  of  any  such  cause.  In  these  cases
I  have  often  found  albumen  present  in  the  urine ;  some-
times in  large  quantities,  especially  in  pregnant  women,


172


DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.


and  seen  rapid  improvement  and  disappearance  of  the
albumen  under  the  action  of  this  remedy.

The  fact  that  these  anaemic  and  debilitated  states  are
found,  both  under  profuse  and  scanty  discharges  of  the
uterine  organs,  seems  to  indicate  that  the  local  symptoms
are  secondary,  or  a  consequence  of  general  debility  and
impoverished  blood.  Again,  the  fact  that  the  Helo7iias
cures  equally  well  both  conditions,  seems  to  corroborate  it.

What  are  the  symptoms?  The  leading  symptoms  are
anaemia,  great  general  weakness  and  languor,  and  great
lowness  of  spirits  or  profound  melancholy.  This  condition
of  mind  is  temporarily  relieved  by  diversion.  She  is
always  better  if  she  can  get  her  mind  off  herself;  dragging
weakness  in  sacral  region;  various  displacements  of  womb,
but  more  especially  prolapsus;  pain  in  the  back,  with
lameness,  stiffness  and  weight,  and  heat  or  burning  in
lumbar  region  ;  back  feels  tired  and  weak.  Now  this  con-
dition and  these  symptoms  are  often  found  at  the  age  of
puberty,  during  pregnancy  and  after  labor,  and  here
Helo7tias  is  indeed  a  blessing.  I  have  found  it  efficacious
in  the  2d  and  the  30th,  according  to  susceptibility  of  the
patient.  Helonias  deserves  a  thorough  proving  in  the
potencies.

DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.

Very  much  has  been  said  and  written  upon  this  as  a
heart  remedy.  It  is  called  a  cardiac  tonic,  but  Homoeopathy
knows  no  such  thing  as  a  tonic  in  medicines.  The  only
tonic,  in  the  sense  of  something  to  impart  strength  or  tone
to  the  human  organism,  is  nourishing  food.  If  Digitalis
is  capable  of  correcting  a  diseased  condition,  it  does  so  by
opposing  its  own  power  to  the  power  that  is  making  the
patient  sick^  which  is  called  disease.


DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.


The  leading  characteristic  of  Digitalis  is  a  very  slow
pulse.  This  may  alternate  with  a  very  quick  pulse,  and
between  the  two,  we  muy  sometimes  get  a  very  irregular  or
intermittent  pulse.

One  day  I  saw  an  old  but  very  strong  man  staggering
across  the  road  toward  my  office.  I  thought  he  was  drunk,
but  on  closer  observation  I  noticed  that  his  face  looked
purple,  his  lips  bluish,  and  I  stepped  out  and  helped
him  in.  He  sat  down  and  could  not  for  a  few  minutes
speak  a  word,  but  sat  and  struggled  for  breath.  His  pulse
was  very  irregular  and  intermittent.  When  he  could  speak,
he  told  me  that  for  a  number  of  weeks  past  he  had  been
having  these  spells,  had  fallen  several  times  and  been
obliged  to  go  into  the  stores  and  sit,  before  he  could  go
along  the  streets.  Auscultation  revealed  hard,  blowing
sound  with  first  beat  of  the  heart.  He  had  had  inflamma-
tory rheumatism  in  his  younger  days.  He  had  been  obliged
to  give  up  all  manual  labor  and  dared  not  go  away  from
home  on  his  business,  that  of  bridge  builder.  Said  he  ex-
pected to  die  with  this  heart  disease.  I  gave  him  Digitalis
2d,  a  few  drops  in  water.  In  a  few  days  I  saw  him  shovel-
ling snow  from  the  walk  in  front  of  his  dwelling.  "  Hello,'*
he  said,  "I  have  no  heart  disease;"  and  I  saw  him  often
after  that  and  he  told  me  that  that  medicine  cured  him  of
"  those  spells."

A  young  man  of  good  habits  was  taken  with  nausea  and
vomiting.  He  was  drowsy,  and  after  a  couple  of  days  he
began  to  grow  very  jaundiced  all  over.  The  sclerotica
were  as  yellow  as  gold,  as  was,  indeed,  the  skin  all  over
the  body,  even  to  the  nails.  The  stools  were  natural  as  to
consistence,  but  perfectly  colorless,  while  the  urine  was  as
brown  as  lager  beer,  or  even  more  so.  Where  you  could
see  through  it,  on  the  edge  of  the  receptacle,  it  was  yellow


174


DIGITALIS  PURPUREA.


as  fresh  bile.  The  pulse  was  only  thirty  beats  per  mimUe^
and  often  dropped  out  a  beat.

This  was  a  perfect  Digitalis  case  of  jaundice,  and  this
remedy  cured  him  perfectly  in  a  few  days,  improvement  in
his  feelings  taking  place  very  shortly  after  beginning  it ;
the  stools,  urine  and  skin  gradually  taking  on  their  natural
color.  The  characteristic  slow  pulse  was  the  leading  symp-
tom to  the  prescription,  for' all  the  rest  of  the  symptoms
may  be  found  in  almost  any  well-developed  case  of  severe
jaundice.

In  dropsies,  consequent  on  heart  disease,  Digitalis  is
often  the  remedy,  and  in  these  cases  the  skin  is  more  apt  to
be  bluish,  as  from  venous  stagnation,  than  in  those  cases
dependent  on  renal  disease.

x\mong  the  troubles  consequent  upon  weak  heart  action
with  slow  pulse  that  are  particularly  amenable  to  Digitalis^
are  vertigo  (this  is  often  found  in  the  aged);  dropsy  of  brain,
chest,  abdomen  or  scrotum ;  passive  congestion  of  the  lungs.

Among  the  more  characteristic  symptoms,  aside  from  the
slow  pulse,  are :

"  Blueness  of  skin,  especially  eyelids,  lips,  tongue  and
nails;  cyanosis."

"Faintness  or  sinking  at  stomach;  feels  as  if  he  were
dying."

"Sensation  as  if  the  heart  would  stop  beating  if  she
moved."

"  Respiration  irregular,  difficult,  performed  by  frequent
deep  sighs."

''Great  weakness  and  general  sudden  sinking  of
strength."


CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS.


CACTUS  GRANDIFLORUS

Is  another  great  heart  remedy,  and  its  grand  characteristic
is  not  at  all  like  Digitalis.  It  is  a  "sensation  of  constric-
tion of  the  heart,  as  if  an  iron  band  prevented  its  normal
movement."  This  sensation  of  constriction  is  not  confined
to  the  heart,  but  is  found  in  the  chest,  bladder,  rectum,
uterus,  vagina,  in  short,  it  seems  to  be  a  general  character-
istic for  this  remedy,  as  does  that  of  fullnesss  for  y^scuhis
hippocastanum.

The  heart  troubles  of  Cactus  are  quite  apt  to  be  caused
by  inflammatory  rheumatism,  where  it  is  one  of  our  best
remedies.  Among  the  symptoms  found  more  or  less  con-
nected with  heart  troubles,  for  which  Cactus  is  indicated
are:

Heavy  pain  on  vertex  like  a  weight  [Lachesis  at  climac-
teric), a  frequent  symptom  in  persons  suffering  with  heart
troubles,  cerebral  congestion,  profuse  epistaxis,  haeraata-
mesis,  hemorrhages  from  anus,  hsematuria  or  haemoptysis.
In  any  haemorrhages,  seeming  to  be  in  sympathy  with
heart  trouble,  think  of  Cactus.

Now,  besides  the  leading  characteristic  of  Cactus  on  the
heart,  we  have  other  chest  and  heart  symptoms  which  are
very  valuable.  Oppression  of  chest  or  difficult  breathing,
as  if  the  chest  could  not  be  expanded,  with  this  sense  of
band-like  constriction.

"Periodical  attacks  of  suffocation,  with  fainting,  cold
perspiration  on  face  and  loss  of  pulse."

"  Fluttering  and  palpitation  of  heart,  increased  when
walking  or  lying  on  left  side."

"Great  irregularity  of  heart's  action,  intermittent  pulse,
valvular  murmurs  in  organic  diseases  of  heart."


SPIGELIA  ANTHEI.MINTICA.

"  CEdema  of  left  hand,  foot  and  leg."
"Rheumatism  of  all  joints,  beginning  in  upper  ex-
tremities."

"  Numbness  of  the  left  arm."

"  Cactus  is  a  remedy  of  not  very  wide  range,  but  of  para-
mount importance  in  its  sphere."

SPIGELIA  ANTHELMINTICA.

In  this  we  have  another  valuable  heart  remedy.  The
pains  in  the  heart  in  this  remedy,  are  as  severe  as  those
under  Cactus^  and  the  action  is  more  violent  than  under
either  Cactus  or  Digitalis.  It  is  so  violent  as  often  to  be
visible  to  the  eye  through  the  clothes,  shaking  the  whole
chest,  and  the  sounds  are  often  audible  several  inches  away.
It  is  not  only  a  very  valuable  remedy  in  acute  attacks  of
the  heart,  but  in  chronic  valvular  affections  following  the
acute  attack,  where  we  have  the  loud  blowing  sounds  and
attacks  of  violent  palpitation.  I  have  seen  the  violent  at-
tacks of  palpitation  quickly  relieved,  and  not  only  that,  but
the  valvular  troubles  gradually  and  perfectly  cured  under
the  action  of  this  remedy.  It  is  one  of  our  best  remedies
for  neuralgic  affections  of  the  head,  face  and  eyes.

The  headaches  are  generally  one-sided,  beginning  in  the
occiput  and  extending  forward.  They  are  aggravated  by
the  least  noise  or  jar.  They  increase  with  the  rising  of
the  sun  and  decrease  wkh  its  going  down,  and  the  eye  on
the  affected  side  often  runs  clear  water.

Spigelia  is  very  useful  in  ciliary  neuralgia,  the  pain
being  of  the  same  character  as  the  headaches.  The  pains
are  also  stabbing,  running  through  into  the  back  of  the
head,  or,  like  Actea,  they  press  outward,  as  if  the  eyeballs
were  too  large  for  the  sockets  {Comocladia).


KALMIA  LATIFOLIA.  177

In  any  or  all  of  the  above-named  affections,  for  which
Spigelia  is  so  efficacious,  the  patient  is  made  worse  from
motion,  noise,  inspiration  or  moving  the  eyes.  It  makes
us  think  of  Bryojiia^  Kalniia  and  Natrum  mur.,  and  Aclea
(motion),  Belladonna  (noise),  and  China  (touch,  especially
light  touch).  It  is  certainly  a  very  valuable  remedy,  though
not  one,  so  far  as  known,  of  very  wide  range  of  action.


KALMIA  LATIFOLIA

Ought  to  be  noticed  just  here,  because  it  seems  at  first
sight,  so  much  like  Spigelia,  and  Hering  says  it  follows
Spigelia  well  in  heart  disease.

Both  remedies  have  severe  neuralgia  of  the  face,  but
Kalmia  is  oftenest  right-sided,  Spigelia  left.  Both  have
pains  in  eyes,  worse  on  turning  them,  hnX.  Kalmia  has  a  sense
of  stiffness  {Rhus  tox.  and  Natrum  mur.\  Spigelia  eyes
hurt  as  if  too  large  for  the  orbit.  Both  affect  strongly  the
heart,  and  are  useful  in  heart  troubles  of  rheumatic  origin.
Both  have  violent,  visible,  tumultuous  action  of  heart;
Spigelia  is  invariably  so,  while  Kalmia  has  at  times  re-
markable slowness  of  the  pulse  (like  Digitalis).  The.
Kalmia  form  of  rheumatism,  like  Cactus,  goes  from  above
downwards  {Ledum  from  below  upwards),  and  the  pains  in
Kalmia  shift  suddenly.  If  we  were  called  to  a  case  of
migratory  rheumatism,  and  the  heart  seemed  to  be  suffer-
ing we  would  think  of  Kalmia  before  Pulsatilla,  of  course
all  the  other  symptoms  taken  into  consideration.

So  far  as  the  neuralgic  symptoms  of  Kalmia  are  con-
cerned, they  are  not  much  like  Spigelia,  except  that  they
locate  in  the  face,  and  are  very  violent.  The  sides  and  time
of  aggravation  are  different,  and  Kalmia  is  not  often  found


178


IPECACUANHA.


involving  the  whole  head,  like  Spigelia,  Hering  mentions,
that  with  Kalmia  "weakness  is  the  only  ^^^/z^ra/ symptom
with  neuralgia."  The  neuralgic  pains  of  Kalmia  are  some-
times attended  with,  or  followed  by,  numbness  of  the  parts
affected,  in  this  resembling  Aconite,  Chamomilla,  Gna-
phalium  and  Platina.  It  is-  to  study  up  the  points  of  re-
semblance of  remedies  having  a  particular  affinity  for  the
same  region  or  organ,  and  to  note  also  more  particularly  the
No  kind  of  labor  will  bring  better  returns.

IPECACUANHA

Ivcads  all  the  remedies  for  nausea.  Any  complaint  ac-
companied with  persistent  nausea,  the  patient  not  being  at
all  relieved  by  vomiting,  just  as  sick  after  as  before — this
is  what  we  mean  by  persistent  nausea.  This  should  at
once  call  attention  to  this  remedy.  It  is  often  found  in
connection  with  gastric  troubles  from  dietetic  errors,  and
the  choice  will  sometimes  be  between  Ipecacuanha  and
Pulsatilla,  because  both  are  useful  in  gastric  disturbances
caused  by  indulgence  in  mixed  diet — pastry,  ice-cream,
pork,  fatty  food,  etc.  Pulsatilla  may  be  considered  the
better,  while  the  food  is  in  the  stomach.  Ipecacitanha  after
it  is  out,  but  the  nausea  persists  notwithstanding.

Again,  with  Pulsatilla  the  tongue  is  often  coated,  like
Antimoniuin  crudum,  while  with  Ipecacuanha  there  may
be  a  slight  coating,  or  the  tongue  may  be  perfectly  clean.
This  vomiting  with  clean  tongue,  however,  is  not  an  in-
fallible indication  for  Ipecacuanha,  for  we  sometimes  find
it  in  connection  with  worm  symptoms,  where  Cina  has  it
just  as  prominently,  and  is  the  remedy.  Digitalis  also  has
it  in  heart  disease.  Ipecacuanha  affects  the  whole  intestinal


IPECACUANHA.


179


tract.  One  very  characteristic  symptom,  is  that  the  stomach
and  bowels  feel  as  if  relaxed  and  hanging  down.

There  are  three  kinds  of  looseness  of  the  bowels,  or
rather  three  characteristic  stools  :

1.  Fermented  stools — foamy,  like  yeast.

2.  Grass-green  stools — mucous  or  watery.

3.  Slimy  stools — dysenteric,  with  more  or  less  blood.

All  these  stools  are  found  very  often  in  children,  espe-
cially in  summer  time,  often  as  a  consequence  of  over-
eating or  wrong  eating,  when  a  dose  of  Ipecacuanha  200th
will  set  matters  to  rights,  and  prevent  the  little  patient  from
running  into  so-called  cholera-iufantum  or  entero-colitis,
which  often  becomes  a  very  serious  and  obstinate  affection.
The  characteristic  nausea  is  a  sure  indication.

We  will  also  find  this  nausea  present,  where  this  remedy
is  the  "proper  caper,"  in  headaches.  Headache,  as  if
bruised,  all  through  the  bones  of  the  head,  and  down  into
the  root  of  the  tongue.  This  kind  of  headache  may  be  of
rheumatic  origin,  but  the  nausea  is  there  just  the  same,  if
Ipecacuanha  is  to  cure.  Then  we  hkve  a  sick  headache  of
gastric  origin,  the  nausea  beginning  before  the  pain  in  the
head,  and  continuing  all  through.  In  what  seems  to  be
hydrocephaloid  with  this  nausea,  ipecacuanha  has  often
cleared  up  the  whole  case  in  a  few  hours.

Again,  we  find  the  nausea  accompanying  the  cough  in
the  affections  of  the  respiratory  organs.  Also  in  the  hemor-
rhages and  in  the  fevers  in  which  it  is  often  indicated.  In
short,  we  cannot  do  better  than  to  use  Hering's  expression :
"Nausea,  distressing,  constant,  with  almost  all  complaints,
as  if  from  the  stomach,  with  empty  eructations,  accumula-
tion of  much  saliva,  qualmishness  and  efforts  to  vomit."

During  the  nausea,  the  face  is  generally  pale,  eyes  sunken,
with  blue  margins,  and  often  there  is  more  or  less  twitch-


IPECACUANHA.

ing  of  face  and  lips,  and  sleepiness  after  vomiting.  We
have  a  great  many  remedies  that  are  powerful  emetics,  like
Aniimonium  tartaricum,  Zinc  sidphate,  Lobelia  and  Apo-
7norphine;  but,  so  far  as  I  know,  the  nausea  is  not  so  per-
sistent, nor  is  it  found  in  connection  with  so  many  other
affections.  Of  course,  no  single  symptom,  however  strong,
would  justify  a  prescription,  if  there  were  other  symptoms
just  as  strong  in  the  same  case.

For  instance,  if  there  were  burning  in  the  stomach,  in-
tense thirst,  but  could  not  drink,  great  restlessness  and
prostration,  we  would  think  of  A^^senicum  alburn^  and  it  is
often  the  best  remedy  to  follow  Ipecacuanha^  if  the  the  case
goes  from  bad  to  worse.

Ipecacuanha  affects  the  mucous  lining  of  the  respiratory
organs,  almost  as  prominently  as  it  does  that  of  the  ali-
mentary tract.

There  is  great  accumulatioa  of  mucus,  which  loads  up
the  air  cells  and  bronchi,  until  there  seems  to  be  great
danger  of  suffocation. Note  the  symptoms :

"Violent  degree  of  dyspnoea,  with  wheezing  and  great
weight  and  anxiety  about  the  prsecordia."

"  Threatened  suffocation  from  accumulation  of  mucus."

This  excessive  accumulation  of  mucus  in  the  air  passages,
seems  to  excite  spasm  like  a  foreign  body,  and  an  asthma,
or  spasmodic  cough,  or  both  together,  ensues.  But  the
spasmodic  cough  and  asthma  do  not  seem  to  all  depend
upon  accumulation  of  mucus,  for  Ipecamanha  is  often  our
best  remedy  in  the  first  stage  of  both  asthma  and  whoop-
ing cough,  before  the  stage  when  the  mucus  is  present.

Again,  "Suffocating  cough,  whereby  the  child  becomes
quite  stiff  and  blue  in  the  face."

"  Whooping  cough,  with  nosebleed,  bleeding  from  the


IPECACUANHA.  loT

mouth,  vomiting,  loses  breath,  turns  pale  or  blue,  and  be-
comes rigid."

Infantile  pneumonia,  with  chest  loaded  with  mucus,
rapid,  wheezing  respiration,  surface  blue,  face  pale,  finds  a
very  effectual  remedy  in  Ipecamanha.

Old  people  with  emphysema  from  chronic  asthma,  are
also  much  relieved  by  Ipecacuanha.  So  that  we  might
narrow  down  the  respiratory  troubles  to  two  conditions :

I  St.  Those  in  which  excessive  accumulation  of  mucus
characterized  the  case.

2d.  Those  in  which  spasm  was  the  characteristic  feature.
Of  course,  all  the  symptoms  must  be  taken  into  considera-
tion, in  order  to  differentiate  between  Ipecaaianha  and
other  remedies  having  the  same  objective  states  and  con-
ditions.

The  control  that  this  remedy  has  over  hemorrhages,  de-
serves honorable  mention.  It  has  hemorhages  from  the
nose,  stomach,  rectum,  womb,  lungs  and  bladder;  from  all
the  orifices  of  the  body.  So  does  Crotahcs^  but  the  blood
in  Ipecacuanha  is  bright  red.^  not  decomposed.  Stdphuric
acid  also  has  hemorrhages  from  all  the  outlets  of  the  body,
but  the  other  attending  symptoms  are  differnet.  With
Ipecacuanha.,  the  hemorrhages  are  active,  profuse,  bright
red.  It  is  a  better  remedy  than  Secale  ever  was  or  can  be,
for  post-partum  hemorrhages,  and  it  is  not  necessary  to  use  it
in  large  and  poisonous  doses,  for  it  will  stop  it  in  the  200th
potency,  and  is  quicker  in  its  action  than  Secale.  L<et  us
notice  a  few  remedies  for  hemorrhages  :

Ipecacuanha.  Bright  red,  profuse,  with  heavy  breathing
and  nausea.

Aconitum. Active,  bright,  with  great  fear  and  anxiety.
Arnica. From  injuries,  bodily  fatigue,  physical  exer-
tion.

13


l82


IPECACUANHA.


Belladonna.  Blood  hot,  throbbing  carotid,  congestion  to
head.

Carbo  vegetabilis.  Almost  entire  collapse,  pale  face,
wants  to  be  fanned.

China. Great  loss  of  blood,  ringing  in  ears,  faintness.

Crocus. Blood  clots,  in  long,  dark  strings.

Ferrujn.  Partly  fluid,  partly  solid,  very  red  face,  or  red
and  pale  alternately.

Hyoscyamus.  Delirium,  and  jerking,  and  twitching  of
muscles.

Lachesis.  Blood  decomposed,  sedimeitt  like  charred
straw.

Crotalus^  Elaps  and  Sulphuric  acid.  Black  fluid  blood,
the  first  and  last  from  all  outlets.

Nitric  acid. Active  hemorrhages  of  bright  blood.

Phosphorus.  Profuse  and  persistent,  even  from  small
wounds  and  tumors.

Platinum. Partly  fluid,  and  partly  hard  black  clots.

Pulsatilla. Intermittent  hemorrhages.

Secale. Passive  flow  in  feeble,  cachectic  women.

Sulphtcr. In  psoric  constitutions  ;  other  remedies  fail.

Other  remedies  and  indications  might  be  added  here,  but
hemorrhage  is  only  one  symptom,  and  never  alone  fur-
nishes a  reliable  indication  for  any  remedy.  But  Ipecacu-
anha is  one  of  the  best  if  indicated.

Ipecacuanha  is  a  well-known  intermittent  fever  remedy
in  our  school.  Jahr  recommends  it  in  the  beginning  of
all  cases,  unless  there  are  special  indications  for  some  other
remedy,  and  says,  "  By  pursuing  this  course  I  have  cured
many  cases  of  fever  and  ague  by  the  first  prescription,
thus  saving  myself  a  good  deal  of  unnecessary  seeking
and  comparing."  Whatever  may  be  said  in  condemnation
of  this  loose  prescribing,  it  is  certainly  preferable  to  the


IPECACUANHA.


inevitable  Quinine  prescription  of  the  old  school,  and  some
self-styled  homoeopaths,  for  the  reason  that  it  will  cure
more  cases  than  the  Quinine,  and  do  infinitely  less  harm.
Ipecac  can  cure  more  cases  than  Quinine,  but  both  can
cure  the  cases  to  which  they  are  homoeopathic,  and  that  in
the  potentized  form  of  the  drug.  We  have  such  clear-cut
indications  for  the  use  of  many  remedies  that  we  need  not
fail  once  where  the  allopaths  do  twenty  times,  with  their
indiscriminate  Quinine  treatment.

The  whole  case  generally  revolves  around  one  to  three
guiding  symptoms,  for  instance  :

Ipecac. The  persistent  nausea  in  one  or  all  stages.

Arsenicum  alb.  Irregularly  developed;  thirst  intense
during  heat,  for  small  quantities.

Eiipator.  perf.  Bone  pains ;  vomits  bile  at  end  of  chill ;
7  to  9  A.  M.

Ig7iatia.  Chill,  with  red  face,  >  by  external  heat ;  fre-
quent sighing.

Capsicum.  Chill  begins  between  shoulder  blades  and
spreads.

Nux  vo77iica.  During  heat  can't  uncover  in  least,  with-
out chill.

Nat.  mur.  Chill  lo  to  ii  a.  m.;  bursting  headache  dur-
ing heat ;  sweat  >  ;  after  Quinine.

Rhus  tox.  Cough  in  chill ;  restless  and  dry  tongue  in
heat ;  tossing  about.

Podophyllum.  Great  loquacity  during  chill  and  heat ;
jaundice.

Aiitimonium  tart.  Great  sleepiness  during  heat  and
sweat,  with  pale  face.

These  characteristics  are  genuine  and  reliable,  and  many
more  might  be  added  if  we  had  time  and  space,  but  they
can  all  be  found  in  H.  C.  Allen's  work  on  hitermittent


184  ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.

Fever.  They  show  how  different  the  remedies,  and  how
remedy  for  this,  as  well  as  all  other  diseases.  Remittents
also  often  come  under  the  control  of  this  remedy.

ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM

Is  another  powerful  emetic.  I  can  remember  the  time
when  the  old  allopaths  used  it  almost  as  generally  as  the
botanies  did  Lobelia  inflata^  to  ''^  clean  out  the  stomach.''''
Now  a  day's,  washing  out  the  stomach  by  lavage,  and  the
rectum  and  colon  by  enemas,  according  to  "  Hall's
method,"  is  quite  fashionable,  and  is  withal  much  more  sen-
sible, inasmuch  as  they  are  so  lame  in  their  therapeutics.

Notwithstanding  these  improvements,  there  is  still
a  great  deal  of  gut  scraping''''  going  on  in  the  name  of
"  cleaning  out  the  system,"  as  though  the  alimentary  canal
was  not  a  self-cleaning  institution,  if  kept,  or  put  into  a
healthy  condition,  but  must  be  regularly  "gone  through"
once  in  about  so  often,  on  the  "  house  cleaning"  principle.
To  be  sure  it  is  folly,  but  they  do  the  best  they  know.
Neither  Antimonium  tart,  nor  any  other  emetic,  is  used  by
us  for  emetic  purposes  from  a  therapeutic  standpoint.

Our  therapeutic  uses  of  it  are  the  same  as  those  of
any  other  remedy,  on  the  principle  of  siinilia  siviilibus
curantur.  The  nausea  of  this  remedy  is  as  intense  as  that
of  Ipecacuanha.,  but  is  not  so  persistent,  and  there  is  relief
after  vomiting.  I  have  found  it  the  nearest  a  specific  (of
course  we  know  there  is  no  absolute  specific  for  any  dis-
ease) for  cholera  morbus  of  any  remedy.  For  more  than
twenty-five  years,  I  have  seldom  found  it  necessary  to  use
any  other,  and  then  only  when  there  were  severe  cramps
in  the  stomach  and  bowels,  when  Cuprum  metallicum  re-
lieved.


ANTIMONIUM  TARTARICUM.  1 85

It  has  the  nausea,  vomiting,  loose  stools,  prostration,
cold  sweat,  and  stupor  or  drowsiness  found  in  almost  all
bad  cases  of  this  disease,  and  I  have  seldom  been  obliged
to  eive  more  than  two  or  three  doses,  one  after  each  vomit-
ing,  before  the  case  was  relieved.  It  is  not  generally
recommended  in  the  text-books  for  this  ailment,  but  is  a
gem,  as  I  know  from  abundant  experience  and  observation.

If  Antimonium  tart,  possessed  only  the  one  power  of
curing,  that  it  does  upon  the  respiratory  organs,  it  would  be
indispensable.  No  matter  what  the  name  of  the  trouble,
whether  it  be  bronchitis,  pneumonia,  whooping  cough  or
asthma,  if  there  is  great  accumulation  of  mucus  with  coarse
rattlmg^  or  filling  up  with  it ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  there
seems  to  be  inability  to  raise  it,  Tartar  emetic  is  the  first
remedy  to  be  thought  of.  This  is  true  in  all  ages  and  con-
stitutions, but  particularly  so  in  children  and  old  people.

There  is  one  symptom  that  is  very  apt  to  be  present
in  these  cases,  and  that  is,  great  drowsiness  or  sleepiness,
sometimes  amounting  to  coma.  This  is  found,  not  only  in
diseases  of  the  respiratory  organs,  but  in  cholera  infantum,
cholera  morbus  and  intermittent  fever.  In  pneumonia,
both  Tartar  emetic  and  Opium  may  have  great  sleepiness;
but  there  is  no  need  for  any  confusion  here  as  to  choice,
for  in  Opium  the  face  is  dark  red  or  purple,  and  there  may
be  sighing  or  stertorous  respiration.  With  Tartar  emetic
the  face  is  always  pale,  or  cyanotic,  with  no  redness,  and
the  breathing  is  not  stertorous.

Three  remedies  are  remarkable  for  sleepiness,  viz.:
Opium ^  Tartar  emetic  and  Nux  moschata^  but  aside  from
this  one  symptom  they  are  not  alike.  Antimonium  tart.
is  also  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  hepatization  of  lungs
remaining  after  pneumonia. There  is  dullness  on  percus-


1 86  IRIS  VERSICOLOR.

sion,  and  lack,  or  absence  of  respiratory  murmur,  and  short-
ness of  breath,  and  patient  continues  pale,  weak  and  sleepy.

If  Sidphur  should  not  promote  absorption  in  such  a  case,
Tartar  emetic  will  often  do  it.  I  have  used  it  from  the
200th  to  the  c.  m.  potencies  with  equally  good  results.

IRIS  VERSICOLOR

Is  another  remedy  which  causes  great  nausea  and  vomit-
ing. It  is  sometimes  very  serviceable  in  cholera  infantum.
The  substance  vomited  is  generally  very  sour^  so  sour  that
it  excoriates  the  throat.

The  gastric  troubles  of  this  remedy  are  often  accom-
panied with  a  burjiing  of  tongue^  throaty  oesophagus  and
stomach,  and,  if  diarrhoea  is  present,  with  burning  of  the
anus.  This  burning  of  the  alimentary  canal  is  very  char-
acteristic of  this  drug.

The  vomiting  is  not  always  sour,  but  may  be  bitter  or
sweetish.  There  is  also  profuse  flow  of  saliva.  I  once
had  a  case  of  stomach  trouble  in  a  middle-aged  lady.  She
had  frequent  attacks  of  vomiting  of  a  stringy,  glairy
mucus  which  was  very  ropy,  would  hang  in  strings  from
her  mouth  to  the  receptacle  on  the  floor.  Then  the  sub-
stance vomited  became  dark-colored ;  like  coffee  grounds.
She  became  very  weak,  vomited  all  nourishment.  She
also  had  profuse  secretion  of  ropy  saliva.  Thinking  she
had  cancer  of  the  stomach,  she  made  her  will  and  set  her
house  in  order,  to  die.  Kali  bichromicum  was  given  with
no  benefit  whatever,  but  Iris  cured  her  completely  in  a
short  time  and  she  remains  well  ten  years  since.

Iris  is  also  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  sick  headache.
These  headaches  seem  to  be  of  gastric  or  hepatic  origin,
and  often  begin  with  a  blur  before  the  eyes. I  used  to


SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.  1 87

give  the  remedy  in  the  3d ;  but  of  late  years  have  given  it
in  the  50m.  and  am  better  pleased  with  the  results,  be-
cause it  is  more  prompt  and  lasting.  It  is  recommended
in  sciatica,  but  I  have  had  no  experience  with  it  in  this
affection.  It  seems  to  act  most  powerfully  upon  the  ali-
mentary tract. I  have  never  used  it  in  skin  troubles.

SANGUINARIA  CANADENSIS.

Sick  headache:  Pain  commences  in  the  back  of  the
head,  rises  and  spreads  over  the  head,  and  settles  down
over  the  right  eye,  with  nausea  and  vomiting;  patient
wants  to  be  in  a  dark  room  and  perfectly  quier.  I  have
made  some  fine  cures  in  long-standing  cases  of  habitual
sick  headaches  of  this  kind  with  this  remedy.  It  will  prob-
ably cure,  or  greatly  relieve,  the  ordinary  American  sick
headache  as  often  as  any  other  remedy.  I  use  the  200th.
Ivoose  cough,  with  badly  smelling  sputa ;  the  breath  and
sputa  smelling  badly  to  the  patient  himself  This  kind  of
cough  usually  comes  on  after  a  severe  bronchitis  or  pneu-
monia, and  it  looks  as  though  the  patient  were  fast  run-
ning into  consumption.  There  may  also  be  flushes  of  fever
Many  a  case  of  this  kind  has  been  helped  by  this  remedy.
Dr.  T.  Iv.  Brown  used  the  first  trituration  of  the  alkaloid
with  fine  effect.  The  200th  has  made  just  as  good  cures.
In  typhoid  pneumonia,  with  great  dyspnoea  and  circum-
hands,  done  good  service.  The  right  lung  seems  to  come
markedly  under  its  influence,  either  in  acute  or  chronic
troubles.  "Rheumatic  pain  in  right  arm  and  shoulder,
worse  at  night  in  bed,  cannot  raise  the  arm."  This  condi-
tion has  often  been  relieved  by  this  remedy  in  my  hands


1 88  PHOSPHORIC  ACID.

and  has  won  me  much  credit.  I  have  seen  07ie  dose  of  the
first  trituration  cure  such  cases  of  long  standing.  I  have
seen  the  cm.  do  the  same  thing.  Flashes  of  heat,  with
hot  palms  and  soles,  at  the  climacteric  find  a  remedy  in
Sanguinaria.  Sometimes  indicated  after  Sulphur  and
of  the  cheeks  appear.

PHOSPHORIC  ACID.

The  leading  characteristic  of  this  remedy  lies  in  its
effects  upon  the  sensorium.  "He  lies  in  a  stupor  or  in  a
stupid  sleep,  unconscious  of  all  that  is  going  on  around
him,  but  when  aroused  is  fully  conscious."  This  is  Phos-
phoric acid  in  its  intensest  degree,  as  found  in  typhoid
fever,  in  which  it  is  one  of  our  best  remedies.  But  it  is
not  alone  here  that  the  sensorial  depression  appears.  It
'may  be  found,  in  a  lesser  degree,  in  the  results  of  depress-
ing emotions,  like  grief  at  the  loss  of  a  friend,  lover,  prop-
erty or  position,  and  the  effect  seems  to  be  even  deeper
rooted  than  in  those  cases  which  call  for  Ignatia.  The
subj'St  seems  stupefied  with  grief  There  is  not  the
.  nervous  twitching  of  Ignatia^  but  a  settled  despair,  general
.weakness  or  prostration.  The  hair  turns  gray,  and  a
weary,  worn  and  haggard,  hopeless  look  obtains.  I  have
succeeded  in  curing  such  a  case  when  Ignatia  failed.  In
such'/a  case  the  patient  sometimes  complains  of  a  pain  like
a  crushing  weight  ojt  the  vertex^  or,  again,  of  pain  in  the
occiput  or  nape  of  the  neck,  and  with  both  they  appear
physically  weak  or  exhausted,  want  to  lie  down,  don't
want  company,  or  to  be  noticed  or  spoken  to.  We  often
find  this  sensorial  depression  in  connection  with  the  effects
of  onanism  or  excessive  coition. The  patient  is  disturbed


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.  1 89

by  the  culpability  of  his  indulgence,  grieves  over  it,  is  in-
clined to  sink  into  despair.  This  is  true  of  both  sexes,  and
the  depression  is  much  worse  if  the  patient  is  growing  too
fast,  or  is  overtaxed  mentally  or  physically.  With  Calcarea
carb.  they  grow  too  fat,  with  Phosphoric  acid  too  fast  and
tall.  We  have  in  Phosphoric  acid  a  remedy  for  the  head-
ache of  students,  especially  of  those  who  are  growing  too
fast.  It  is  a  sin  to  keep  such  young  people  bowing  down
to  hard  study,  and  while  it  is  true  that  youth  is  the  time
to  get  an  education  it  is  also  true  that  it  is  the  time  when
too  great  a  strain  in  that  direction,  may  utterly  wreck  and
forever  incapacitate  a  mind  which  might,  with  more  time
and  care,  have  been  a  blessing  to  the  world.

Now  Phosphoric  acid^  properly  exhibited,  may  be  of  in-
calculable benefit  in  such  cases.  It  will  sometimes  be  a
choice  between  Phosphoric  acid  and  Natrum  muriaticum
or  Calcarea  phos.;  the  other  symptoms  must  decide.

In  regard  to  the  use  of  Phosphoric  acid  in  typhoids,
there  are  no  other  remedies  exactly  like  it  in  its  depressing
eflfect  on  the  sensorium.  Arnica  has  its  apathy  or  indiffer-
ence ;  but  the  Arnica  depression  is  more  profound,  as  is
also  that  of  Baptisia^  for  they  both  go  to  sleep  while  an-
swering a  question,  showing  how  overpowering  is  the
stupor.  Then  with  the  former  we  have  petechise  or  ecchy-
mosis,  which  is  not  found  under  Phosphoric  acid^  and  under
the  latter  the  tendency  to  decomposition  of  the  fluids  as
found  in  the  terribly  offensive  stools  and  urine.  Opium
surpasses  them  all  in  its  stupefying  powers,  and  the  face,
breathing  and  general  appearance  is  not  at  all  like  Phos-
phoric acid.

Rhus  tox.  and  Hyoscyamus  are  very  stupid  also,  but  in
other  respects  are  very  different.  The  description  of  these
remedies  is  found  under  each,  as  we  have  written  of  their


190


PHOSPHORIC  ACID.


use  in  typhoids.  Nux  moschata  ought  also  to  be  men-
tioned in  this  connection.

We  must  not  forget  the  action  of  Phosphoric  acid  upon
the  bowels.  It  does  not  exhibit  any  peculiar  characteristic
action  upon  the  stomach,  but  does  in  the  abdominal  region,
as  the  following  well-verified  symptoms  show:  "Meteor-
istic  distension  of  the  abdomen ;  rumbling  and  gurgling
and  noise  as  from  water;  painless  stools."  "Diarrhoea
white,  or  yellow  watery ;  chronic  or  acute,  without  pain
or  any  marked  debility  or  exhaustion."  Now,  it  seems
very  singular  that,  after  so  much  talk  about  the  general
depression  or  weakness  of  this  remedy,  we  should  be
obliged  to  record  that  the  profuse  and  sometimes  long-
continued  diarrhoea  should  not  debilitate,  as  a  characteristic
symptom.  Well,  there  are  a  good  many  unaccountable
things,  in  both  disease  and  therapeutics,  and  this  is  one  of
them,  but  the  fact  remains  and  we  act  upon  it.  Let  us  re-
member that  the  profound  weakness  and  depression  of
Phosphoric  acid  is  upon  the  sensorium  and  nervous  system,
and  will  be  there  whether  diarrhoea  is  present  or  not.
It  is  markedly  so  in  typhoids,  as  I  can  fully  attest
from  abundant  observation.  China  debilitates  by  its  diar-
rhoea or  loss  of  fluids  generally.  Phosphoric  acid  attacks
the  nervous  system  primarily,  even  in  onanism,  and  its
results  or  effects  are  not  so  much  the  loss  of  semen  as  a
vital  fluid,  as  under  China^  the  nervous  system  suffering
very  much,  even  though  the  emissions  be  neither  very  fre-
quent nor  profuse.

Young  boys  even  suffer  from  the  orgasm  of  onanism
before  there  is  much  or  any  semen  secreted.  This  is  well
to  remember  in  a  choice  between  these  two  remedies.  There
is  a  condition  in  which  I  have  found  this  remedy  very
valuable,  especially  in  men. The  leading  symptom  is  a

i


MURIATIC  ACID,  19I

"  weak  feeling  in  the  chest  from  talking."  You  remember
Stanmini  has  this  symptom  very  strongly  and  may  lead  us
into  a  wrong  prescription  if  only  the  one  symptom  were
considered.  If  the  patient  is  a  young  man,  married  or
single;  if,  again,  he  seems  weak  in  mind,  listless,  apathetic,
reticent ;  if  he  is  growing  fast ;  all  these  things  would  in-
dicate Phosphoric  acid^  and  the  proper  use  of  it  might  save
him  from  consumption,  for  many  go  into  it  in  this  way.
If  he  has  cough  with  expectoration  under  Phosphoric  acid^
it  will  be  copious,  purulent,  offensive ;  under  Staimuni^
thick,  heavy  and  of  sweetish  taste.  All  this  condition  of
things  may,  when  Phosphoric  acid  is  the  remedy,  find  its
cause  in  one  or  both  of  two  things :  Onanism,  or  sexual
excess,  and  too  rapid  growth.  Phosphoric  acid  lias  two  very
marked  peculiarities  in  the  urine,  viz.:  very  profuse  and
clear,  watery,  or  milky  itrine.

The  first  is  found  with  general  nervous  depression,  and
if  there  is  headache  it  is  like  Gelsemium  relieved  by  the
flow  of  urine.  The  other  is  from  excess  of  phospliates  in
the  urine,  indicating  nerve  waste.  We  must  distinguish
between  the  profuse  urine  of  Ignatia  and  Phosphoric  acid^
for  the  first  is  hysterical,  the  latter  not  at  all  so.

MURIATIC  ACID.

This  remedy,  also  one  of  our  best  remedies  in  typhoids,
is  found  useful  in  cases  of  lower  grade  than  in  the  Phos-
phoric acid  case.  It  comes  nearer  to  Carbo  vegetabilis  than
any  other  remed)'.

Its  indications  are  given  in  "  Hering's  Guiding  Symp-
toms "  as  •  well  as  anywhere.  There  is  decomposition  of
fluids;  the  stools  are  involuntary  while  passing  urine;
stools  dark,  thin,  or  haemorrhage  of  dark  liquid  blood.


192  MURIATIC  ACID.

Mouth  full  of  dark-bluish  ulcers ;  unconscious.  Moaning-
and  sliding  down  in  the  bed  from  excessive  weakness ;  lower
jaw  fallen,  tongue  dry,  leathery  and  shrunken  to  a  third  of
its  natural  size,  and  paralized  ;  pulse  weak  and  intermittent.
It  is  hardly  possible  to  draw  a  picture  of  a  more  desperate
case  of  typhoid  than  this. It  is  not  necessary  to  resort  to
quinine,  brandy  or  any  other  fashionable  so-called  stimu-
lants. Broth,  milk  or  oatmeal  gruel  for  nourishment,  and
Muriatic  acid  will  do  all  that  can  be  done  for  the  saving  of
the  life  of  such  a  patient,  and  will  do  it  quicker  and  with
less  liability  to  relapses  than  any  other  course  of  treatment.
Of  course  the  friends  are  anxious,  even  desperate,  and  a
show  of  work  must  be  made. If  much  pressure  is  brought
to  bear  in  the  way  of  suggestions  or  demands  for  counsel,
all  sorts  of  wonderful  prescriptions  that  cured  a  great  many
cases  like  this,  let  Sac  lac  be  given  every  five  minutes.  It
is  a  wonderfully  qiiieti7ig  medicine  (to  friends  and  meddlers)
and  should  never  be  omitted. Send  the  most  rampant
howler  off  on  horsback  miles  away,  if  you  can,  for  some-
thing, no  matter  what. That  is  indispensable  to  the
patient's  recovery. The  greatest  danger  to  the  patient  is,
that  the  physician,  losing  his  presence  of  mind,  will  suffer
himself  to  be  led  or  driven  away  from  the  only  truly  helpful
course. This  advice  is  given  only  to  those  who  need  it.
Many  a  patient  has  died  because  his  physician  "lost  his
head"  under  this  kind  of  pressure. This  use  of  Muriatic
acid  in  typhoid  is  the  only  experience  I  have  had  with
the  remedy,  but  this  alone  is  well  worth  a  page  for  con-
sideration. No  doubt  it  has  other  valuable  uses.


NITRIC  ACID.


^93


NITRIC  ACID

Is  one  of  our  most  effective  antidotes  to  the  effects  of  allo-
pathic dosing  with  mercury  in  syphilis.  For  the  other  bad
effects  of  the  abuse  of  mercury  other  remedies  are  better,
notably,  Hepar  sulphur,  calc.  Nitric  acid  has  a  particular
affinity  for  the  outlets  of  mucous  surfaces,  where  the  skin
and  membrane  join,  such  as  the  mouth  (corners),  nose  and
anus.  In  the  mouth  we  find  the  corners  cracked,  ulcer-
ated and  scabby;  also  aphthae,  stomatitis  with  ptyalism,
swelling  of  the  gums,  fetor  oris,  etc.

If  Mercurius  has  already  been  used  without  avail  Nitric
acid  follows  well  and  will  often  cure.

This  ulcerated,  swollen  and  spongy  condition  of  the
gums  will  extend  into  the  throat,  and  if  it  is  the  result  of
combined  syphilis  and  mercurialization  of  the  old  school
Nitric  acid  is  the  first  remedy.  The  action  of  this  remedy
is  just  as  positive  upon  the  other  outlet  of  the  alimentary
canal.

The  anus  is  cracked  and  fissured  similarly,  and  haemor-
rhoids protrude,  crack,  bleed  and  are  very  sore.  No  remedy
has  more  decided  action  upon  the  anus,  and  one  very  char-
acteristic symptom  is,  "great  pain  after  passage  of  stool,
eveji  soft  stooV  He  walks  the  floor  in  agony  of  pain  for
an  hour  or  two  after  a  stool.  In  dysentery  this  symptom
distinguishes  this  remedy  from  Nux  vomica^  which  is  re-
lieved after  stool,  and  Mercurius,  which  has  tenesmus  all
the  time,  or  before,  during  and  after  stool.

Another  very  strong  characteristic  of  this  remedy  in  all
these  affections  is,  prickiiig  pain  as  of  a  splinter  in  the
part:' Nitric  acid  has  haemorrhages  from  all  outlets  of  the


194


SULPHURIC  ACID.


body,  and  the  blood  is  generally  bright  red.  It  is  especially
so  in  typhoid  and  haemorrhoids.  Nitric  acid  is  one  of  our
best  remedies  in  chronic  diarrhoea.  It  is  one  of  the  cele-
brated trio,  viz.:  Thiija^  Staphisagria  and  Nitric  acid  for
condylomata.

SULPHURIC  ACID

Is  another  remedy  of  value  in  aphthous  affections  of  the
mouth.  It  is  particularly  efficacious  in  greatly  debilitated
subjects,*and  in  children  with  marasmus  with  this  kind  of
mouth.  There  is  often  present  sour  stomach  with  sour
vomiting,  and  the  child  smells  sour  all  over  despite  the
greatest  care  in  regard  to  cleanliness.  One  of  the  strongest
characteristics,  perhaps  the  strongest,  in  weakened  subjects
in  which  this  is  the  appropriate  remedy,  is  a  sense  of  in.
ter7tal  trembling.  This  is  a  subjective  symptom,  for  not.
withstanding  this  positive  sensation,  to  a  degree  that  is
very  distressing,  there  is  no  visible  trembling.  This  symp-
tom is  frequently  found  in  old  topers,  who  are  broken  down
or  almost  wrecked  in  health  by  strong  drink.  Tiiie  symp.
tom,  however,  is  not  confined  to  such  subjects,  but  is  often
found  in  other  cases  when  the  debility  is  traceable  to  other
causes;  when  markedly  present  from  whatever  cause^
Sulphuric  acid  should  never  be  forgotten.  We  have
already  spoken  of  the  value  of  this  remedy  in  purpura
hsemorrhagica.  I^ike  Crotalus^  it  has  haemorrhages  from
every  outlet  of  the  body,  and,  the  blood  also  settles  in
ecchymosed  spots  under  the  skin.  This  last  symptom
would  indicate  that  Sulpuric  acid  might  be  useful  in  black
and  blue  spots  in  the  skin,  as  the  result  of  bruising,  and
practice  corroborates  it,  and  it  follows  well  after  Ar7iica.
Ledum  palustre  is  also  one  of  our best  remedies  for


PICRIC  ACID.


ecchymosis  from  bruises,  "black  eye,"  for  instance;  this
is,  of  course,  for  bruises  under  the  skin;  while  Ruta  is  just
as  efficacious  for  bruises  of  the  periosteum.  There  is
enough  of  the  Sulphur  element  so  that  it  may  succeed  in
"flushes"  of  heat,  after  Sulphur  has  failed  at  the  climateric.

PICRIC  ACID.

This  is  a  comparatively  new  remedy,  but  has  already
developed  some  valuable  therapeutic  powers.  In  the  first
place,  it  attacks  the  vital  force,  as  is  manifested  by  an  ex-
cessive languor  or  persistent  tired  feeling  all  over  the
body,  which  is  generally  accompanied  with  corresponding
weakness  of  mind,  indifference,  and  want  of  will  power,
and  a  desire  to  lie  down.  There  is  great  heaviness  of  the
legs,  can  hardly  lift  them  from  the  ground,  tired  aching
feeling  in  the  back  with  some  burning  at  times,  low  down.
Even  the  brain  is  fagged  and  the  slightest  exertion  or
mental  effort  brings  on  headache.  In  short,  this  remedy
presents  a  perfect  picture  of  nervous  prostration.  I  found
this  rei  edy  very  useful  in  apparent  failure  of  brain  power
in  an  old  man  who  had  always  been  strong  up  to  within  a  ^
year  or  so  of  the  time  he  called  on  me.  He  complained
of  heaviness  in  the  occiput  and  inability  to  exert  the  mind
to  talk  or  think,  and  general  tired  "played-out"  feeling.
I  feared  brain  softening ;  but  I  gave  him  Picric  acid  6th  trit.
and  it  promptly  cured  him.  This  remedy  has  strong  points
of  resemblance  to  Phosphoric  acid  and  Phosphorus  in  its
effects  upon  the  sexual  organs,  especially  of  the  male.  There
is  strong  sexual  desire  with  terrible  erections,  which  is
followed  by  corresponding  weakness  or  complete  impotence.
There  seems  to  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  destined  to  become  one
of  our  most  valuable  remedies  for  brain,  spinal,  and  gen-


196


GKLSEMIUM  NITIDUM.


eral  nervous  prostration,  especially  if  connected  with  or
arising  from  sexual  excesses.  It  may  be  studied  along
with  Gelsemium^  Phosphoric  acid^  Phosphorus^  Argentum
nitriatm^  Sulphur^  Alumina  and  Silicea  and  all  those
remedies  affecting  the  brain,  cord,  and  general  nervous
system.


GELSEMIUM  NITIDUM.

This  remedy  affects,  primarily,  the  whole  nervous  sys-
tem. The  most  prominent  symptom,  as  we  are  in  the
habit  of  recording  the  effects  of  remedies,  is  "complete  re-
laxation and  prostration  of  the  whole  muscular  system,
with  almost  or  quite  entire  motor  paralysis."  This  mus-
cular prostration  seems  to  come  through  inability  of  the
nerves  to  convey  impressions ;  thus  we  have  the  symptom
^'  muscles  will  not  obey  the  will."  This  condition  comes
on  gradually,  the  first  symptom  being  a  feeling  of  lassi-
tude or  general  fatigue.  He  wants  to  lie  down  he  feels  so
weak  {^Picric  acid)^  and  is  inclined  to  drowsiness ;  the  pulse
becomes  weak  and  slow,  but  is  accelerated  on  the  least
motion.  Then,  if  he  attempts  to  walk,  the  legs  tremble^
or  the  hands  tremble  if  he  attempts  to  lift  them,  the  tongue
trembles  if  he  attempts  to  protrude  it ;  all  this  from  weak-
ness^ both  objective  and  subjective.  If  I  were  to  put  one
adjective  before  this  remedy  to  indicate  its  chief  character-
istic I  would  call  it  the  tre^nbling  remedy.  Sometimes
this  trembling  is  so  severe  as  to  actually  shake  the  patient
like  a  chill,  but  there  is  no  chill,  objective  or  subjective.
This  weakness  may  increase  to  the  stage  of  complete
paralysis,  and  such  symptoms  as  these  appear :  The  eye-
lids droop  {Sepia,  Caust.)  until  they  are  completely  closed.


GELSEMIUM  NITIDUM.


197


The  fingers  become  unmanageable,  so  that  he  can  no
lono-er  o-uide  them  over  the  keys  of  the  piano  in  playing ;
he  cannot  guide  his  feet  where  he  wants  to  m  trymg  to
walk,  notwithstanding  the  sensorium  remains  clear,  with
perhaps  the  exception  of  a  little  drowsiness.  He  knows
perfectly  well  what  he  wants  to  do,  but  cannot  do  it

Then,  again,  there  may  be  neuralgia  in  various  parts,
and  the  pains  may  be  a  dull  aching  all  over  {myalgia),  or
they  may  be  sudden  and  darting,  so  acute  as  to  cause  sud-
den starting.  Or,  again,  it  may  cause  spasms  or  convul-
sions; but  with  all  these  there  is  the  characteristic  prostra-
tion, for  instance,  in  prosopalgia  the  eyelids  droop  from
weakness.  So  we  repeat  Gelsejniiim'  is  preeminently  a
nerve  remedy.

Having  shown  the  central  action  of  this  great  remedy
as  it  manifests  itself  upon  the  nervous  system,  we  will  pro-
ceed to  notice  some  of  its  local  uses  which  will  always  be
more  or  less  associated  with  such  action.  Upon  the  mind
it  shows  its  depressing  power,  and  is  portrayed  in  such
symptoms  as  these  :  The  Gelsemium  subject  is  torpid,
sleepy,  and  dreads  movement.  The  mental  faculties  are
dull ;  cannot  think  clearly  or  fix  his  attention  ;  "  desires  to
be  quiet ;  does  not  wish  to  speak  or  have  any  one  near  her
for  company,  even  if  the  person  be  silent."  This  condition
of  mind  is  in  perfect  accordance  with  the  general
of  mind  sometimes  is  temporarily  suspended  to  give  place
to  an  alternate  condition  of  excitement.  But  this  is  not
the  leading,  characteristic,  and  legitimate  effect  of  the  drug,
but  is  only  the  reaction ;  like  a  state  of  sleeplessness  is  to
the  characteristic  sleepiness  or  stupor  of  Opium.  I  con-
sider the  large  doses  of  either  remedy  used  by  some  to  quiet
excited  conditions,  or  to  control  spasms  or  convulsions  by
14


198


GELSEMIUM  NITIDUM.


their  toxic,  depressing,  or  paralyzing  action  on  the  muscu-
lar system,  antipathic,  and  in  no  way  truly  curative.  There
is  an  excessively  sensitive  condition  of  the  nerves  that
is  very  peculiar,  and  that  this  remedy  controls  markedly,
viz.,  susceptibility  to  mental  disturbance,  such  as  sudden
excitement  or  emotion,  bad  news  or  fright,  the  anticipa-
tion of  any  unusual  ordeal.  One  of  the  effects  following
these  things  is  a  diarrhoea.  Many  people  are  thus
affected.  Gelsemiitm  not  only  cures  the  diarrhoea  for  the
time  being,  but  often  cures  the  whole  abnormal  condition.
I  have  never  known  the  remedy  to  do  much  good  in  these
conditions  below  the  30th  potency,  but  often  in  the
potencies  much  above  that.

As  would  be  naturally  supposed  from  its  general  action
upon  the  nervous  system,  this  remedy  exerts  a  decided  in-
fluence upon  the  sensorium  and  brain.  Dizziness,  with
blurred  vision,  pupils  dilated,  double  sight,  and  sense  of
intoxication,  show  this  influence.  One  very  characteristic
symptom  appears  here  which  is  found  under  only  one
other  remedy  with  any  prominence,  viz.,  "  child  starts  and
grasps  the  nurse  and  screams,  as  if  afraid  of  falling."
If  there  is  any  difference  between  it  and  Borax^  it  is  that
in  Borax  the  child  manifests  this  fear  only  when  it  is  being
laid  down  in  the  cradle,  or  downwm^d  motion.

The  most  characteristic  headache  of  Gelsemium  is  a
dull,  tired  headache  at  the  base  of  the  brain.  The  patient
wants  to  lie  with  head  raised  upon  a  high  pillow,  and  lie
perfectly  still.  It  is  aggravated  by  mental  labor,  smoking
tobacco,  lying  with  the  head  low,  and  in  the  heat  of  the
sun.  It  is  temporarily  ameliorated  by  pressure  and  stimu-
lants. Such  headaches  often  follow  a  debauch.  Some-
times we  have  a  headache  from  passive  congestion  ;  then
the  pain  begins  in  the  occiput,  and  spreads  all  over  the


GELSEMIUM  NITIDUM.


199


head.  The  aggravations  are  about  the  same  as  in  the  other
variety,  or  nervous  headache. One  notable  characteristic  is
that  sometimes  the  headache  is  relieved  by  a  profuse  flow
of  urine. {^Lac  defloratum  has  a  profuse  flow  of  urine  dur-
ing sick  headache  to  which  it  is  adapted,  but  the  pain  is
not  so  markedly  relieved  by  the  flow.) Gelsemium  has
also  a  sick  headache  that  is  preceded  by  a  blindness.  As
the  head  begins  to  ache  the  blindness  disappears.  The
sick  headache  of  this  remedy  is  not  accompanied  with
much  nausea  and  vomiting,  as  is  that  of  Sangumaria^  Iris
versicolor  and  Lac  defloratum^  but  is  accompanied  by  the
characteristic  weakness  and  trembling  belonging  to  this
remedy. Gelsemium  is  one  of  the  so-called  fever  remedies.
It  is  useful  in  the  remittent  fever  of  children. The  fever
is  never  of  that  active  or  violent  form  calling  for  Aconite
or  Belladonna^  but  of  a  milder  form. The  child  lies
drowsy,  does  not  want  to  move,  or,  if  it  does,  cannot  move
much  on  account  of  the  weakness. One  author  says  that
Gelsemium  stands  midway  between  Aconite  and  Veratricm
viride. I  should  rather  place  it  between  Baptisia  and
Belladonna. lyike  Baptisia^  there  is  prostration,  but  the
typhoid  tongue  and  other  symptoms  are  not  so  strong.
There  may  be  dark  red  face  with  both,  and  a  sort  of  be-
sotted expression ;  but  with  Baptisia  the  sensorium  comes
more  fully  under  the  influence  of  the  drug,  so  that  the
patient  will  fall  asleep  even  when  trying  to  answer  ques-
tions. Then  the  offensive  sweat,  stool  and  urine  of  Bap-
tisia are  not  found  under  Gelsemium. Like  Belladojina^
there  is  congestion  to  the  brain  and  dilated  pupils,  but  it  is
not  so  intense,  accompanied  by  active  or  violent  delirium
as  with  Belladon?ta. Gelsemium  is  not  a  very  great  inter-
mittent fever  remedy  ;  but  is  one  of  the  best  for  nervous
chills,  when  there  is  great  shaking  and  chattering  of  the


200


BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA.


teeth,  with  no  objective,  or  even  sense  of  coldness.  "Pa-tient
wants  to  be  held  because  he  shakes  so."  This  kind  of  chill  is
frequently  found  in  hysterical,  and  heart  diseases  (organic).
The  pulse  of  Gelsemium  is  slow  when  quiet,  but  greatly
accelerated  on  motion.  For  the  weak,  slow  pulse  of  old
age  there  is  no  remedy  oftener  useful.  For  the  nervous
is  nothing  like  Gelsemium.  I  have  aborted  many  cases  of
typhoid  fever  with  this  remedy — at  least  I  think  so.

BAPTISIA  TINCTORIA

Will  quite  naturally  come  in  here,  as  it  is  often  indicated
after  the  Gelsemium  stage  is  over  in  fevers.  Typhoid
fever  can  be  aborted  under  proper  homoeopathic  treatment,
no  matter  what  the  old-school  say  to  the  contrary.  I
have  had  but  one  case  of  typhoid  fever  run  its  full  course
in  seven  years,  and  that  was  a  case  of  a  young  lady  whose
mother  tried  to  treat  her,  until  the  disease  was  fully  estab-
lished. The  symptoms  indicating  Baptisia  are,  in  the  first
stage,  great  nervousness,  chilliness,  aching  pains  all  over,
but  especially  in  head,  back  and  limbs,  and  a  sensation  of
soreness  all  over ;  feels  as  if  bruised.  Then  the  patient
grows  weak,  prostrated,  drowsy,  becomes  confused,  the  face
and  eyes  suffused  so  as  to  give  it  a  "  besotted  appearance;"
the  sensorium  is  so  blunted  that  the  patient  falls  asleep
even  before  he  can  answer  a  question,  or  while  he  is  in  the
middle  of  an  answer.  Then  the  tongue  becomes  streaked
down  the  middle,  at  first  white,  then  becomes  brown  in  a
well-defined  streak  down  the  middle,  and  as  he  comes  more
fully  under  the  typhoid  influence  he  mutters  and  reaches
about  the  bed,  tossing  to  and  fro,  and  if  he  says  anything
he  says  he  feels  "  scattered  around  the  bed  and  is  trying  to


FERRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.


20I


get  the  pieces  together:'  •  Now  the  bowels  begin  to  rum-
ble, especially  in  the  ilio-coecal  region,  which  is  also  sensi-
tive to  touch  ;  later  still  the  bowels  begin  to  discharge,
and  all  the  discharges  (stool,  urine  and  sweat)  are  extremely
offensive.  This  is  a  true  picture  of  a  Baptisia  typhoid,  and
I  have  aborted  in  the  first  stage  many  cases  and  even
checked  their  progress  (in  other  cases)  and  cured  them
when  they  had  been  running  eight  to  twelve  days.  I  have
used  both  the  low  and  high  preparations  with  equal  suc-
cess, but  now  use  the  30th  generally.


FERRUM  PHOSPHORICUM.

This  one  of  Schiissler's  tissue  remedies,  has  proven  a  val-
uable remedy  in  some  inflammatory  diseases.  In  keeping
with  its  element  of  Iron^  it  presents  the  local  congestion
tendencies  of  that  remedy  ;  and  in  its  Phosphorus  element
its  affinity  for  the  lungs  and  stomach  ;  and  in  its  combina-
tion proves  a  great  hcemorrhage  remedy.  The  haemor-
rhages are  of  bright  blood,  and  may  come  from  any  outlet
of  the  body.  Further  proving  and  clinical  use  will  enable
us  to  use  it  more  scientifically  than  we  now  do.  So  far  as
I  have  observed,  it  is  not  adapted  to  the  full-blooded,  san-
guine, arterial  subjects,  with  an  overplus  of  red  blood  that
Aconite  cures,  but  rather  to  pale,  anaemic  subjects,  who  with
all  their  weaknesses  are  nevertheless  subject  to  sudden  and
violent  local  congestions  and  inflammations,  like  pneu-
monia, on  sudden  congestions  to  head,  bowels,  or  any  other
part,  or  to  inflammatory  affections  of  a  rheumatic  character.
It  is  only  useful  in  the  first  stage  of  such  attacks,  before
the  stage  of  exudations  appears.  It  has  been  found  useful


202


VERATRUM  VIRIDE.


who  have  sour  ei^tcdations  occurring  in  stomach  troubles,
usually  termed  dyspeptic.  In  dysentery,  in  the  first  stage
with  a  good  deal  of  blood  in  the  discharges,  it  is  very  val-
uable, and  often  cures  in  a  very  short  time.

Again,  it  is  often  efficacious  in  the  night  sweats  of  the
weak  and  anaemic.  I  am  sorry  not  to  be  able  to  give  char-
acteristic indications  for  the  use  of  this  remedy,  but  I  am
fully  persuaded  that  it  is  a  very  valuable  one  and  ought  to
receive  a  thoroughly  Hahnemannian  proving.


VERATRtJM  VIRIDE

•

Is  another  remedy  which  at  one  time  had  a  great  reputa-
tion in  the  first  or  congestive  stage  of  inflammatory  dis-
eases, and  especially  in  those  organs  coming  under  the  con-
trol of  the  pneumogastric  nerve,  viz.,  pharynx,  oesophagus,
stomach  and  heart.  For  a  time  the  journals  fairly  bristled
with  reported  cures  of  pneumonia,  and  its  curative  power
was  attributed  to  the  influence  of  the  remedy  to  control  the
action  of  heart  and  pulse.  It  was  claimed  that  if  we  could
control  the  quickened  circulation  so  as  to  decrease  the
amount  of  blood  forced  into  the  congested  lung,  that  you
thereby  gave  the  lung  a  chance  to  free  itself  of  the  existing
engorgement.

It  looked  plausible,  and  certainly  in  many  cases  remark-
able cures  were  effected,  and  that  in  a  short  time.  I  was  a
young  physician  and  thought  I  had  found  a  prize  in  this
remedy.  But  one  day  I  left  a  patient,  relieved  by  this
remedy  of  an  acute  and  violent  attack  of  pneumonia,  to  go
to  a  town  five  miles  distant,  and  when  I  returned  found
my  patient  dead.  Then  I  watched  others  treated  with  this
remedy,  and  found  every  little  while  a  patient  with  pneu-


VERATRUM  VIRIDE.  203

monia  dropping  out  suddenly  when  they  were  reported
better.

Now  we  don't  hear  so  much  of  Veratruvi  vir.  as  the  great-
est remedy  for  the  first  stage  of  this  disease.  What  was  the
matter?  ist.  It  was  (like  other  fads)  used  too  indiscrimi-
nately. 2d.  It  is  not  desirable  (it  is  wrong)  to  control  or
depress  the  pulse  regardless  of  all  the  other  conditions.  3d.
The  patients,  who  had  weak  hearts,  were  killed  by  this
powerful  heart  depressant.  A  quickened  circulation  is
salutary,  in  all  inflammatory  diseases  and  is  evi-
dence that  the  natural  power  to  resist  disease  is
there  and  at  work.  The  pulse  will  come  to  its  nor-
mality when  the  cause  of  its  disturbance  is  removed  and
never  should  be  forced  to  do  so  until  then.  Here  is  a
common  fault  of  the  old  school  notwithstanding  their  cry
oi'-'-Tolle  causamy  Sol  find  fault  with  Guernsey's  key-
note, "Great  activity  of  the  arterial  system  ;  very  quick
pulse."  Next  to  Digitalis^  Veratrum  viride  slows  the
pulse,  as  is  abundantly  shown  in  the  provings.  If  quick
pulse  is  ever  a  result  of  this  remedy,  it  is  a  secondary  or
re-actionary  effect,  like  the  sleeplessness  of  Opium  or  con-
stipation of  cathartics.  So  it  seems  to  me  that  as  an  anti-
phlogistic (forgive  me)  it  must  go  into  the  shade  with  the
once  vaunted  Digitalis.

Then  what  is  Veratrum  viride  good  for?  Well,  I  do  not
think  that  its  sphere  is  yet  fully  defined,  or  can  be  without
further  proving  and  verification.  The  provings  are  al-
ready carried  far  enough  to  show  that  it  must  be  a  very
powerful  and  useful  remedy.  That  it  inflames  the  oesoph-
agus or  stomach  is  well  known,  as  is  the  fact  that  it  con-
gests the  brain  and  lungs,  but  what  are  the  characteristic
preference  to  the  other  remedies  that  do  the  same  thino-  is


204


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


not  SO  well  known.  One  peculiar  symptom  I  believe  to  be
characteristic,  and  which  I  have  verified  in  a  very  severe
case  of  erysipelas,  which  was  accompanied  by  great  delirium,
is  "a  narrow,  well-defined  red  streak  right  through  the
middle  of  the  tongue."  Again  I  believe  Veratrum  viride
to  be  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  spasms,  twitchings  and
convulsions,  btit  do  not  know  of  any  very  reliable  symp-
toms guiding  us  to  its  selection  in  the  individual  case.  I
once  cured  a  man  of  a  very  severe  and  persistent  attack  of
vomiting,  which  was  aggravated  on  rising,  with  this
remedy.  He  had  suffered  from  several  similar  attacks
before  this  one,  but  never  any  after  this  one,  now  several
years  ago.

VERATRUM  ALBUM.

Here  is  a  remedy  that  has  a  characteristic  "  Cold  sweat
on  the  forehead?^  It  makes  no  difference  whether  it  is
cholera,  cholera  infantum,  pneumonia,  asthma,  typhoid
fever  or  constipation;  if  this  symptom  is  prominently
present,  and  the  patient  is  in  anything  like  a  faint,  collapse,
or  greatly  prostrated  condition  Veratrum  album  is  the
first  remedy  to  think  of.  It  is  one  of  Hahnemann's  trio
of  remedies  for  Asiatic  cholera.  Camphor  and  Cuprum
metallicum  being  the  other  two  ;  and  to-day  his  indications
for  its  use  stand  as  true  as  when  he  first  gave  them  to  the
profession.  It  abides  the  test  because  it  is  founded  upon  a
natural  law  of  cure,  which  is  the  same  "  yesterday,  to-day,
and  forever."

VeratriLm  alb.  has  some  very  strong  mind  symptoms.
"Mania  with  desire  to  cut  and  tear  things,  especially
clothes,  with  lewdness  and  lacivious  talk,  religious  or  amor-
ous."


VERATRUM  ALBUM.


205


Here  the  choice  will  sometimes  have  to  be  made  between
this  remedy  and  Stramo7tmin.  They  are  both  very  loqua-
cious, and  both  strongly  religious.  Also  both  at  times
very  violent;  but  the  face  of  Stramo7iium  is  generally
very  red  and  bloated,  while  that  of  Veratrum  is  likely  to
be  pale,  sunken  or  hippocratic;  again,  there  is  greater  gen-
eral weakness  with  Veratrimi.  Sometimes  the  violent
form  of  mania  alternates  with  a  "disposition  to  silence,"
but  if  irritated  gets  mad,  scolds,  calls  names  and  talks  of
the  faults  of  others.  These  forms  of  mania  are  often  con-
sequent upon  suppressed  menses  or  the  puerperal  state.
They  may  be  acute  or  become  chronic.  In  either  case  we
may  find  the  cure  in  Veratrum  album.

as  near  as  possible,  for  which  this  remedy  was  best,  it  would
be  collapse.  Let  me  quote:  "Rapid  sinking  of  forces;
complete  prostration;  cold  sweat  and  cold  breath."  "Skin
blue,  purple,  cold,  wrinkled,  remaining  in  folds  when
pinched."  "Face  hippocratic;  nose  pointed."  "Whole
body  icy  cold."  "Cold  skin,  face  cold,  back  cold."  "Hands
icy  cold."  "  Feet  and  legs  icy  cold."  "Cramps  in  calves."
All  these  are  verified  symptoms,  and  show  to  what  an  ex-
treme degree  of  collapse  a  case  may  come  and  yet  be  cured.
This  condition  may  be  found  in  rapidly  progressing,  acute
cases  like  cholera,  or  it  may  be  found  in  suppressed  ex-
anthemata; or,  again,  in  the  course  of  bronchitis,  pneu-
monia, typhoid  or  intermittent  fever.  No  matter  where
found,  or  in  connection  with  whatever  disease,  if  this  col-
lapse is  present,  and  especially  if  the  grand  keynote,  "  cold
sweat  on  face  a7id  forehead,''  is  present,  we  may  give  this
remedy  with  full  confidence  that  it  will  do  all  that  can  be
done  and  much  more  than  the  old  school  system  of  stimu-
lation with  alcoholics. In  choleraic  diseases  Camphor


2o6


HELLEBORUS  NIGER.


comes  nearest  to  Veratrum,  but  with  Veratruvi  the  stools
are  profuse  and  like  rice-water,  while  they  are  scanty  or
entirely  absent  with  Camphor.  The  pains  of  Veratrum
are  very  severe  sometimes,  driving  the  patient  to  delirium.
It  is  said  to  be  a  good  remedy  for  rheumatism,  which  is
worse  in  wet  weather  and  which  drives  the  patient  out  of
bed  (Ferrum  7net.\  Veratrum  is  a  remedy  of  wide  range,
because  it  covers  a  condition  which  may  be  found  in  so
many  different  diseases.

HELLEBORUS  NIGER.

Another  remedy  of  not  very  wide  range,  so  far  as  we
have  any  clinical  knowledge,  but  so  far  as  we  do  know  is
invaluable.

We  know  of  its  use  in  the  advanced  stage  of  serious
brain  troubles,  such  as  meningitis  or  any  trouble  of  the
brain  where  is  threatened  effusion,  or  effusion  already
present.

Symptoms :  Head  rolling  from  side  to  side  on  the  pil-
low, with  screams ;  great  stupidity  or  soporous  sleep ;
greedy  drinking  of  water;  wrinkled  forehead  with  cold
sweat ;  motion  of  jaws,  as  if  chewing  something ;  dilated
pupils,  and  often  cannot  be  made  to  see  or  hear,  or  be  made
to  sense  anything  at  all ;  continual  motion  of  one  arm  and
leg,  while  the  other  lies  as  if  paralyzed ;  urine  scanty  or
entirely  suppressed,  sometimes  sediment  like  coffee  grounds.
These  symptoms  indicate  a  desperate  condition,  and  the
patient  will  soon  die  comatose  or  in  convulsions  unless  the
proper  remedy  can  be  found.

Helleborus  niger  can  often  cure  such  cases,  as  I  have
often  observed,  not  only  in  my  own  practice,  but  in  that  of
others. I  have  sometimes  observed  that  the  first  sign  of


CUPRUM  METALLICUM.  207

improvement  in  such  cases  was  a  decided  increase  in  the
urine,  and  following  it  a  general  subsidence  of  all  the  other
bad  symptoms.  I  have  used  it  with  most  prompt  and  satis-
factory results  in  the  loooth  (B.  &  T.)  and  33  m.  (Fincke)
potencies.

Helleborits  is  also  an  excellent  remedy  in  post-scarlatinal
dropsies,  which  come  on  very  rapidly.  Here  the  coffee-
grounds  sediment  may  or  may  not  be  present.  The  choice
is  sometimes  not  easy  between  this  remedy  and  Apis
mellijica.

CUPRUM  METALLICUM.

The  grand  central  characteristic  symptom  is  expressed
in  one  word — spasm.  If  in  brain  affections,  congestion,
meningitis  or  apoplexy  Cuprmn  is  to  do  any  good,  spasm
will  be  present  in  some  degree,  at  least,  from  a  simple
twitching  of  the  fingers  and  toes  to  general  convulsions.
If  in  cardialgia,  there  is  violent  spasmodic  griping  and
pressure,  followed  by  vomiting.  In  cholera,  cholera  morbus,
or  cholera  infantum  the  cramping  pains  are  sometimes  ter-
rible. Dunham  said:  "In  Camphor  collapse  is  most
prominent ;  in  VeratriLm  album.,  the  evacuations  and  vomit-
ing; in  Cuprtmi.,  the  cramps.^'^  In  whooping  cough  "chil-
dren get  stiff,  breathing  ceases,  spasmodic  twitchings;  after
awhile  consciousness  returns,  they  vomit  and  recover  but
slowly;"  or  the  child  coughs  itself  into  a  complete  "cata-
leptic spasm  with  each  paroxysm  of  cough."  In  all  kinds
of  repercussed  exanthematic  spasms,  CiLprum  is  the  first
remedy  to  be  thought  of  (see  comparison  with  Zincum\

These  spasms  may  also  be  found  in  dysmenorrhoea,  in
child  bed,  or  in  after  pains.  Then,  aside  from  any  and  all
kinds  of  local  affections.  Cuprum  may  be  found  indicated


2O0  CICUTA  VIROSA.

in  epilepsia,  chorea,  and  other  purely  nervous  spasmodic
aflfections  of  a  general  nature.  There  is  one  thing  peculiar
in  the  spasms  of  Cttprmn  that  I  have  often  observed,  and
it  is  a  strong  indication  for  the  remedy,  viz.:  The  spasm
begins  by  twitching  in  the  fingers  and  toes,  and,  spreading
from  there,  becomes  general.

There  is  another  symptom  which  Farrington  thought
very  valuable,  viz.:  ''Mental  and  bodily  exhaustion  from
overexertion  of  mind,  or  loss  of  sleep."  This  is  similar  to
Cocculus  and  Nux  vomica.  The  other  symptoms  must
decide  between  them.  I  have  always  used  the  metal  in-
stead of  the  acetate,  because  I  used  the  potencies,  and  it
acted  promptly.


CICUTA  VIROSA

Is  another  remedy  which  is  characterized  by  its  excessively
violent  convulsions.  With  this  remedy  the  patient  is
thrown  into  all  sorts  of  odd  shapes  and  violent  contor-
tions, but  one  of  the  most  invariable  is  the  bending  of  the
head,  neck  and  spine  backwards,  opisthotonus.  It  is  on  this
account  that  it  was  tried  for  cerebro-spinal  meningitis.  Dr.
Baker,  of  Moravia,  N.  Y.,  cured,  during  an  epidemic  of
this  terrible  disease,  sixty  cases  of  all  degrees  of  malig-
nancy without  the  loss  of  a  single  case.  This  is  a  wonder-
ful record,  and  he  thinks  it  is  as  near  a  specific  for  this  dis-
ease as  can  be.

Cicuta  is  also  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  convulsions
during  dentition  or  worms  if  Ci?ia  does  not  help.  It  is  also
a  good  remedy  for  the  effects  of  concussion  of  the  brain  or
spine,  if  spasms  are  in  the  train  of  chronic  effects  there-
from and  Arnica  does  not  relieve.  In  the  affections  for
which  Cicuta  is  useful  the  actions  of  the  patient  are  as


CAUSTICUM.


violent  as  are  the  spasms — moans  and  howls,  makes  gesticu-
lations and  odd  motions,  great  agitation,  etc.

All  sorts  of  convulsions — tonic,  clonic,  epileptic,  cata-
leptic, worm,  puerperal,  etc. — if  of  a  very  violent  charac-
ter, should  call  to  mind  Cicuta.

It  is  also  wonderful  for  skin  affections,  "  pustules  which
run  together,  forming  thick  yellow  scabs  on  face,  head  and
other  parts  of  the  body."  I  once  had  a  case  of  eczema
capitis  in  a  young  woman — it  was  of  long  standing — which
covered  the  whole  scalp,  solid,  like  a  cap.  I  gave  her
Cicuta  200th  and  cured  her  completely  in  a  very  short
time.  She  had  used  many  local  applications  without
benefit.

CAUSTICUM.

This  is  a  very  unique  remedy,  proven  by  Hahnemann
and  classed  among  the  anti-psorics.  Its  exact  chemical
composition  is  not  known,  but  it  is  supposed  to  be  a  kind
of  potash  preparation.  It  has  quite  a  long  list  of  peculiar
symptoms,  which  are,  nevertheless,  very  reliable.  In  the
first  place  it  has  great  weakness^  such  as  characterize  the
potash  salts  generally.  It  is  with  Caiisticum,  i2:\xiV  \\V^
weakness,  or  sinking  of  strength,  with  trembling."  In
this  it  resembles  Gelsemium^  and  it  has  another  symptom,
in  connection  with  its  general  weakness  which  resembles
Gelsemium,  viz.:  drQoping  of  the  eyelids:'  Sepia,  Causti-
cum  and  Gelsemium  is  the  trio  having  this  peculiar  symp-
tom in  a  very  marked  degree.  Now,  the  weakness  of
Caicsticum  progresses  until  we  have  ''gradually  appearing
paralysis;''  indeed, /ar^/jvm  is  common  with  Causticum
and  attacks  in  a  general  way  the  right  side  {Lachesis  the
left),  but  it  also  has  local  paralysis ;  as,  for  instance,  of  the


2IO


CAUSTICUM.


vocal  chords,  muscles  of  deglutition,  of  tongue,  eyelids,
face,  bladder  and  extremeties.  On  the  other  hand,  it  has
all  grades  of  nervous  twitchings,  chorea,  convulsions  and
epileptic  attacks,  even  progressive  locomotor  ataxia.  I  can
only  name  these  diseases  here,  but  will  notice  further  on
the  symptoms  and  conditions  which  appear  in  connection
with  them.

Neuralgic  affections  are  also  common  with  this  remedy
and  are  generally  of  an  obstinate  character.  Causticum
has  helped  me  out  in  such  cases  when  other  seemingly  in-
dicated remedies  failed.  One  of  our  oldest  and  most  emi-
nent writers  on  Materia  Medica,  Charles  J.  Hempel,  sneered
at  the  multiplicity  of  symptoms  of  this  remedy,  as  found
in  the  "  Chronic  Diseases^''  but  the  clinical  test  has  proven
it  to  be  a  remedy  of  great  use  and  wide  range.  On  the
mind  it  exerts  a  very  depressing  influence  in  keeping  with
its  general  action  on  the  nervous  system.  Melaiicholy
mood ;  sadness;  hopelessness ;  is  apt  to  look  on  the  dark
side  of  everything."  This  melancholy  may  come  from
care,  grief  or  sorrow.  It  often  comes  from  long-lasting
grief  or. sorrow,  and  should  be  remembered  here  alongside
Ignatia^  Natrum  miiriaticum  and  Phosphoric  acid.

This  is  the  preponderant  mood  of  Causticum^  but  it  may
alternate  with  an  anxious,  irritable  or  hysterical  mood.
We  have  already  spoken  of  the  paralysis  of  the  eyelids.
The  vision  is  often  affected;  there  is  an  appearance  of
gauze  before  the  eyes,  or  as  if  a  fog  or  cloud  were  there.
This  is  often  the  case  in  incipient  cataract,  and  Causticum
often  remedies  it.

Upon  the  ears  there  is  roaring,  tinkling,  humming  and
all  sorts  of  noises.  It  is  one  of  our  best  remedies  in  deaf-
ness with  these  noises.  Reverberation  of  sounds,  espe-
cially the  patient's  own  voice,  finds  here  a  remedy.  Then


CAUSTICUM.  211

the  ears  (external)  burn  and  are  very  red.  Sulphur  also
has  this  symptom  very  prominently ;  and  right  here  we
may  say  that  there,  are  many  resemblances  between  these
two  remedies,  and  they  follow  each  other  well,  especially
in  chronic  diseases.

Upon  the  face  we  have  four  prominent  peculiar  symp-
toms :

ist.  Yellowness  of  the  face ;  sickly  yellow  (not  jaundice).

2d.  Paralysis  of  a  rheumatic  or  psoric  origin.

3d.  Prosopalgia  of  the  same  origin.

4th.  Stiffness  of  the  jaws ;  could  not  open  the  mouth.

This  latter  symptom  also  seems  to  be  rheumatic  and
is  in  keeping  with  ihe  arthritis  deformans,  of  which  we  will
sav  more  further  on.

Upon  the  tongue  we  have :  ist.  Paralysis;  or  indistinct
speech  without  complete  paralysis  {Gels.).  2d.  Tongue
coated  white  on  the  sides,  red  in  the  middle,  but  not  so
sharply  defined  as  in  Veratrum  viride.

The throat comes strongly under  the  influence  of
Causticum  :

"Burning  pain  in  throat,  not  <  by  swallowing;  pain  is
in  both  sides  or  seems  to  arise  from  chest."

"Rawness  and  tickling  in  throat  with  dry  cough  and  .
some  expectoration  after  long  coughing."

This  again  is  similar  to  Sulphur.,  which  has  burning  in
throat,  more  on  right  side.  I  have  found  that  if  Sulphur
did  not  relieve,  Causticum  given  after  it,  often  would.

Intestinal  Canal. — Sensation  of  lime  being  burned  in
the  stomach,  with  rising  of  air.  Guernsey  praised  this
symptom  and  considered  it  reliable.  I  have  not  verified
it.  Causticum  is  one  of  our  best  remedies  in  anal  troubles,
and  has  very  peculiar  symptoms.  "Constipation,  frequent
but  unsuccessful  desire  to  stool"  (A^z^,r). "Frequent  in-


212  CAUSTICUM.

effectual  desire  to  stool,  with  much  pain  and  straining,
with  redness  of  the  face."  "The  stool  passes  better  when
standing."  Haemorrhoids  impeding  stool,  swollen;  itch-
ing; smarting;  rawness;  moist;  stinging;  burning;  raw
and  sore^  aggravated  when  walking,  when  thinking  of
them,  from  preaching  or  straining  the  voice."  All  these
symptoms  have  been  verified  over  and  over  again.  There
are  other  symptoms  also  in  this  region  that  are  very  valu-
able, but  we  are  not  writing  a  complete  Materia  Medica
and  will  only  say  in  addition  that  in  all  anal  troubles  we
should  let  Causticum  rank  among  the  first  in  our  mind
when  we  are  hunting  for  the  similimum.  We  do  not
know  in  what  part  the  peculiar  and  characteristic  symptom
which  leads  to  the  similimum  will  appear,  but  must  be  on
the  alert  to  recognize  it  promptly.

Cazisticum  also  has  very  marked  action  upon  the
urinary  organs,  as  is  shown  by  the  following  symptoms:
"Itching  of  the  orifice  of  the  urethra."  "Constant  in-
effectual desire  to  urinate,  frequent  evacuations  of  only  a
few  drops,  with  spasms  in  the  rectum  and  constipation."

This  is  like  Niix  vomica^  and  Cantharis^  and  I  once
cured  a  chronic  case  of  cystitis  in  a  married  woman,  which
had  bafffed  the  best  efforts  of  several  old  school  physicians,
eminent  for  their  skill,  for  years.  There  was  another
symptom  in  the  case  that  was  prominent,  and  that  was  a
sensation  of  soreness  or  rawness.  More  will  be  said,  when
we  come  to  write  on  sensations.,  of  this  last  symptom.
Again,  "retention  of  urine,  with  frequent  and  urgent  de-
sire, occasionally  a  few  drops  dribble  away."

"  Involuntary  passage  of  urine  when  coughing,  sneez-
ing, blowing  the  nose ;  at  night  when  asleep  ;  when  walk-
ing." "  He  urinates  so  easily  that  he  is  not  sensible  of  the
stream,  and  scarcely  believes  in  the  dark  that  he  is  urinat-


CAUSTICUM.


213


ing  at  all,  until  he  makes  sure  by  sense  of  touch."  I  do  not
know  of  any  remedy  in  which  this  weakness  of  the  neck
of  the  bladder  is  more  prominent.  Causticum  also  affects
the  urine  itself  "  The  urine  is  loaded  with  lithic  acid
and  lithates  (Hughes),  there  are  thick  deposits  or  sedi-
ments of  various  colors  from  dark  to  light.  These  are  a
few  of  the  leading  urinary  symptoms  and  show  its  import-
ance here.

Respiratory  Or^<a:72^.— Hoarseness  worse  in  the  morn-
ing, with  rawness  and  sudden  loss  of  voice.  Laryngeal
muscles  refuse  to  act ;  cannot  speak  a  loud  word.  Chronic
hoarseness  remaining  after  acute  laryngitis.  Hoarseness
with  deep  bass  voice  (like  Drosera).  These  are  all  very
reliable  symptoms,  and  no  remedy  removes  them  oftener
than  Causticum.  All  this  loss  of  voice  may  come  from
paresis  of  the  vocal  chords,  or  from  catarrhal  causes.  Then
following  down  the  respiratory  tract,  we  have  great  raw-
ness and  irritation  of  the  trachea,  cough  dry,  hollow,  with
sore  or  raw  sensation  in  a  streak  down  along  the  trachea.
Cough  with  pain  in  hip  and  involuntary  urination.
Cough  with  sensation  as  if  she  could  not  cough  deep
enough  to  start  the  mucus.  Coughs  worse  on  expiration
(Aeon.).  Cough  relieved  by  a  swallow  of  cold  water.
Cough  with  inability  to  raise  the  mucus,  it  must  be  swal-
lowed ;  but  the  most  characteristic  symptom  all  through
the  cough  and  chest  symptoms  is  the  sensation  of  soreness
and  rawness  accompanying  them.  In  influenza  or  what
is  now  called  La  Grippe  it  disputes  for  first  place  with
Eupatorium  perf.  and  Rhus  toxicod.  All  three  have
a  tired,  sore,  bruised  sensation  all  over  the  body,  and  all
have  soreness  in  the  chest  when  coughing,  but  if  involun-
tary micturition  is  present  Causticu^n  wins.  No  homoe-
opath can  afford  to  be  without  an  understanding  of  Causti-
cum upon  the  respiratory  organs.
15


214


CAUSTICUM.


Now  upon  the  back  and  extremities  we  have — stiffness
and  pain  in  neck  and  throat,  muscles  feel  as  if  bound,
could  scarce  move  the  head.  Painful  stiffness  of  the  back
and  sacrum,  especially  on  rising  from  a  chair.  Paralysis
of  either  or  both  lower  and  upper  extremities.  Dull
drawing  pain  in  hands  and  arms.  Drawing  and  tearing  in
thighs  and  legs,  knees  and  feet,  worse  in  open  air
and  better  in  bed.  Weakness  and  trembling  of  the
limbs.  Rheumatic  and  arthritic  inflammations  with
contractions  of  the  flexors  and  stiffness  of  the  joints.
All  these,  and  many  more  symptoms,  show  what  a  useful
remedy  this  must  be  in  its  general  action  on  the  back  and
extremities,  and  right  here  I  wish  to  say  that  if  I  were  to
select  the  three  remedies  to  the  exclusion  of  all  others  for
the  treatment  of  chronic  rheumatism  and  paralysis  Causti-
cttm^  RhiLS  tox.  and  Sulphur  would  be  the  three.  These
three  remedies  studied  in  their  correspondence  and  relation
to  each  other  will  more  than  repay  the  careful  student,
and  Causticum  holds  well  its  own  in  the  comparison.
You  will  remember  that  I  have  before  alluded  to  the  re-
semblances of  Causticum  and  Sulphur^  and  may  continue
to  do  so  further  on.  I  wish  here,  although  constitutionally
opposed  to  making  too  much  of  complementaries  and  in-
compatibles  (so-called),  to  state  that  there  are  no  two
remedies  that  are  oftener  indicated  after  each  other,  and
work  as  well  when  so  indicated,  than  these  two.  If  Hahne-
mann had  never  given  to  the  homoeopathic  school  any
remedy  but  Causticum^  the  world  would  still  be  to  him  un-
der lasting  obligations.

Seitsations. — Tearing  pains  are  characteristic  of  this
remedy.  They  are  often  paroxysmal.  This  is  often  found
in  neuralgia  of  the  face.  Then  again  I  wish  to  call  par-
ticular attention to  the  sensation  of  SOreness  or  raw-


CAUSTICUM.


ness.  This  is  found  in  scalp,  throat,  larynx  and  trachea,
chest,  rectum,  anus,  urethra  and  eruptions.  We  observe
that  the  sensation  of  soreness  is  not  like  that  of  Arnica^
which  is  a  soreness  as  if  bruised  and  mostly  muscular,  nor
of  RhiLS  toxicodendro7i^  which  is  an  aching  soreness  as  if
sprained  and  oftcnest  found  in  the  tendons  and  sheaths  of
muscles,  or  areolar  tissues ;  but  it  is  a  soreness  mostly,  if  not
altogether,  of  mucous  surfaces  as  if  the  parts  were  raw.
This  is  important  and  a  very  reliable  sensation.  Then
again  we  have  in  Causticum  much  bitrning.  These  burn-
ings are  found  almost  everywhere,  and  in  this  we  again
see  its  resemblance  to  Sulphur.  Now  let  it  be  remembered
that  the  burnings  of  Sulphur  are  associated  with  itching,
those  of  Apis  mellijica  with  stinging^  and  those  of  Causti-
cum with  soreness.  So  we  must  always  learn  to  differen-
tiate, because  it  is  only  by  so  doing  that  we  can  select  the
one  remedy  out  of  a  class,  and  sometimes  a  large  class,
having  the  same  or  similar  symptoms.  The  drawing
pains  that  in  many  cases  result  in  forcing  out  of  shape  the
extremities  so  as  to  cause  that  terrible  affliction  known
as  arthritis  defor^na^ts  is  found  as  prominently  under
Causticum  as  any  other  remedy,  and  is  one  of  the  most
useful  agents  for  relief  or  cure.

Causticum  is  classed  among  Hahnemann's  anti-psorics.
It  is  certainly  one  of  the  prominent  remedies  for  affections
arising  from  the  suppression  of  itch  or  chronic  skin
troubles,  like  eczema.  I  was  once  called,  in  consultation,
to  a  case  of  prosopalgia  which  had  for  a  long  time  baffled
the  skill  of  a  very  good  homoeopathic  practitioner.  Not
being  able  to  relieve  the  case,  he  had  become  demoralized,
and  as  the  pain  and  suffering  were  very  great  he  had  re-
sorted to  anodynes,  but  with  the  usual  result  of  making
the  patient  worse  after  the  anodynes  had  worn  out,  than


2l6


HEPAR  SUI.PHURIS  CALCAREUM.


she  was  before.  On  looking  over  the  case  carefully,  I
found  in  addition  to  the  emaciated  and  greatly  debilitated
condition  of  the  patient,  after  so  long  suffering,  that  the
pains  came  in  paroxysms,  that  they  were  of  a  drawing
nature,  and  that  she  had  suffered  from  eczema  for  years,  at
different  times,  before  this  pain  appeared.  Sulphur  had  been
given  but  without  relief.  So  I  advised  Causticiim.  It  was
given,  in  the  200th,  and  a  rapid  and  a  permanent  cure  was
the  result.  Whether  Causticum  could  be  called  an  anti-
sycotic  as  well  as  anti-psoric,  or  not  I  do  not  know.  Cer-
tain it  is  that  it  is  one  of  our  most  successful  remedies  for
warts.  It  stands  next  to  Thuja^  if  not  equal.  It  is  also
foremost  in  old  sores  originating  in  burns.  I  have  given
more  space  to  Causticum  than  I  otherwise  would,  for  the
reason  that  I  am  sure  that  this  great  remedy  is  not  gen-
erally appreciated.  I  know  of  no  remedy  more  positive
and  satisfactory  in  its  action  when  indicated.


HEPAR  STJLPHURIS  CALCAREUM.

This  remedy,  standing  half-way  between  those  two  great
anti-psorics,  Calcarea  carb.  and  Sulphur^  has  some  very
strong  characteristics  which  guide  to  its  use  in  a  variety
of  ailments.  Its  strongest  characteristic  is  its  hypersen-
sitiveness  to  touch,  pain  and  cold  air.  The  patient  is  so
sensitive  to  pain  that  she  faints  away,  even  when  it  is
slight.  If  there  is  inflammation  or  swelling  in  any
locality,  or  even  eruptions  on  the  skin,  they  are  so  sensi-
tive that  she  cannot  bear  to  have  them  touched,  or  even  to
have  the  cold  air  blow  upon  them.  This  is  like  Chiiia
0^.^  only  that  while  the  latter  is  sensitive  to  the  lightest
touch  it  can  bear  hard  pressure. This  supersensitiveness


HEPAR  SULPHURIS  CALCAREUM.  2I7

to  pain  runs  all  through  the  drug. Next  to  this*  is  the
power  of  Hepar  sulph.  over  the  suppurative  stage  of  local
inflammations. It  comes  in  only  when  pus  is  about  to
form,  or  is  already  formed. If  given  very  high  in  the
first  case  (that  is  before  pus  is  formed),  and  not  repeated
too  soon  or  often,  we  may  prevent  suppuration  and  check
the  whole  inflammatory  process. But  if  pus  is  already
formed,  it  will  hasten  the  pointing  and  discharge  and  help
along  the  healing  of  the  ulcer  afterwards. I  am  not  at  all
sure,  as  is  generally  taught,  that  it  is  necessary  to  give  it
low  to  hasten  suppuration. The  most  rapid  pointing,
opening,  and  perfect  healing  I  ever  saw  was  in  the  case  of
a  large  glandular  swelling  on  the  neck  of  a  child,  under
the  action  of  the  cm.  potency. This  remedy  is  also  very
valuable  in  diseases  of  the  respiratory  organs. I  have
found  it  very  useful  in  cases  of  chronic  catarrh,  when  the
nose  stopped  up  every  time  the  patient  went  out  into  the
cold  air. He  says  it  seems  as  if  I  get  a  new  cold  every
time  I  get  a  breath  of  fresh  air  {Tuber culmimi). It  is  re-
lieved in  a  warm  room. In  croup  it  has  been,  ever  since
of  our  standard  remedies. We  do  not  use  the  five  pow-
ders as  Boenninghausen  did  in  a  certain  order,  but  only
use  them  according  to  indications.  Hepar  croup  is  accom-
panied with  rather  loose  cough,  with  wheezing  and  rat-
tling. Cough  as  if  mucus  would  come  up,  but  it  does  not.
It  is  seldom  indicated  at  first  ;  but  oftener  comes  in  after
Aconite  or  Spoitgia. I^ike  Aconite  it  seems  most  effectual
in  those  cases  brought  on  by  exposure  to  dry  cold  air ;  but
the  Aconite  croup  comes  on  in  the  evening  after  first  sleep
and  Hepar  in  the  early  morning  hours. This  tendency  to
croupy  exudations  on  mucous  membranes  seems  character-
istic of  Hepcir  and  is  not  confiued  to  the  respiratory


2l8  HEPAR  SULPHURIS  CALCAREUM.

organs.  Kafka  uses  it  on  the  ground  of  its  ability  to  con-
trol such  conditions  in  post-scarlatinal  dropsy,  to  prevent  or
cure,  and  claims  great  success  for  it.  I  believe  it  to  be  one
of  the  best  prophylactics  in  such  cases,  for  the  reason  that
during  and  after  the  desquamative  stage  the  skin  is  un-
usually susceptible  to  the  effects  of  chill  in  cold  air,  and
this  is  in  accordance  with  the  leading  characteristic  of
this  remedy.  It  fortifies  the  patient  against  such  atmos-
pheric influence.

In  croup,  as  in  other  affections  of  Hepar^  the  cough,
difficult  breathing  and  all  other  symptoms  are  aggravated
by  the  least  breath  of  cold  air,  which  the  little  patient
must  be  carefully  guarded  against.  Travelling  downward
the  larynx  is  attacked,  then  the  bronchi,  and  even  the
lungs,  and  the  formation  of  croupy  exudates  will  take
place  if  not  checked  by  the  remedy.  The  breathing  in  all
these  cases  becomes  rattling,  anxious,  wheezing,  even  to
threatened  suffocation,  so  that  the  patient  seems  asthmatic.
In  these  cases  it  is  often  able  to  relieve,  especially  if  this
condition  follows  a  hard  cold  and  the  acute  inflammatory
symptoms  have  been  controlled  by  Aconite  or  some  other
indicated  remedy.

In  chronic  asthma,  Hepar  often  resembles  Natru^n
sulphilricum^  but  there  is  this  diagnostic  difference,  which
is  very  valuable.  The  Hepar  asthma  is  worse  in  dry  cold
air  and  better  in  damp,  while  Natrum  sulph.  is  exactly  the
opposite,  like  Dulcamara.  There  is  no  other  remedy  that
I  know  that  has  the  amelioration  so  strongly  in  damp
weather  as  Hepar  sulphur.  One  characteristic  must  not
be  forgotten,  viz.:  "Coughs  when  any  part  of  the  body  be-
comes uncovered."  This  is  found  in  croup,  laryngitis,
bronchitis  and  consumption,  and  not  only,  is  the  cough
worse,  but  the  whole  case  is  aggravated. Then,  again,  it


HEPAR  SULPHURIS  CALCAREUM.  21 9

must  be  remembered  that  this  is  one  of  our  strongest  anti-
psorics,  and  for  that  reason  should  be  thought  of  for  all
respiratory  ailments  for  which  it  has  sUi|;^h  a  strong  ffenity,
especially  when  such  ailments  have  followed  a  suppressed
or  retrocedent  eruption  on  the  skin.

In  accordance  with  its  great  power  over  all  suppurative
processes,  it  should  come  to  mind  in  abscess  of  the  lungs,
of  course  in  all  cases  when  indicated  by  the  symptoms  in
toto.  Upon  the  throat  we  have  ist,  "sticking  in  the  throat,
as  from  a  splinter,  on  swallowing,  extending  to  the  ear,  also
on  yawning."  "Sensation  as  if  a  fish  bone  or  splinter
were  sticking  in  the  throat"  {Argentitm  nitricum^  Dolichos
and  Nitric  acid\  but  probably  the  condition  where  Hepar
is  oftenest  of  use  in  throat  trouble  is  in  that  distressing
complaint,  quinsy.

Here,  as  in  croup,  it  is  not  generally  indicated  in  the  be-
ginning. Having  had  much  success  and  experience  in
this  disease,  I  may  here  give  the  results  of  the  application
of  several  remedies  and  their  indications  :

Belladonna. — High  fever,  swelling  great,  and  redness,
headache,  throbbing  carotids.

Mercurius  vivus. — Either  side,  fetid  breath,  flabby,
moist,  indented  tongue,  and  sweat  without  relief

Mercurius  protoiodatus. — Same  symptoms,  but  begins
on  right  side,  and  tongue  thickly  coated  yellow  at  the
base.

Lachesis. — Left  side  extending  to  right,  great  sensitive-
ness to  touch,  and  aggravation  after  sleep.

Lycopodium. — Begins  right  side,  extends  to  left,  with
tongue  swollen  and  inclined  to  protrude  from  the  mouth,
and  stuffing  up  of  nose.

Lac  caninum. — Alternates  sides,  one  day  worse  on  one,
and  the  next  on  the  other.


220  HEPAR  SULPHURIS  CALCAREUM.

Hepar  sulph. — When  notwithstanding  all  other  rem-
edies die  case  seems  bound  to  suppurate  and  there  is  much
throbbing  pain.  l)Jow,  with  each  of  these  remedies  I  have
aborted  many  cases  in  old  quinsy  subjects,  who  never  ex-
pected to,  and  were  told  by  old  school  physicians  that  they
never  could  get  well,  without  suppuration,  and  in  the  end
have  cured  them  of  all  tendency  thereto.  I  will  add
here  that  Hepar  siUphur  is  also  a  good  remedy  in  chronic
hypertrophy  of  tonsils,  with  hardness  of  hearing.  In  these
cases,  which  are  generally  very  intractable.  Baryta  carbonica^
Lycopodium^  Plumbum^  and  others  are  also  to  be  consulted
according  to  indications.

Upon  the  alimentary  canal  Hepar  has  a  decided  in-
fluence. We  have  already  noticed  its  action  upon  the
throat.  The  stomach  is  inclined  to  be  out  of  order,  and
there  is  a  "  longing  for  acid  things."  This  is  often  the
case  in  chronic  dyspepsia  and  Hepar  helps.  This  condi-
tion of  the  stomach  is  sometimes  found  in  marasmus  of
children.  It  is  often  accompanied  by  diarrhoea,  and  a
very  important  feature  is  that  the  diarrhoea  is  sour;  in-
deed the  whole  child  seems  to  smell  sour  no  matter  how
much  it  is  bathed.  The  sour  stool  is  also  very  prominently
under  Magnesia  carbonica  and  Calcarea  carbonica.  Then
there  is  another  condition  of  the  bowels,  namely,  a  kind  of
atony.  The  stools  are  passed  with  great  difficulty,  even
though  they  are  soft  and  clay-like,  as  they  sometimes  are
under  this  remedy.  This  state  of  atony  is  also  found  in
the  bladder.

"  Micturition  impeded,  he  is  obliged  to  wait  awhile  be-
fore the  urine  passes,  and  then  it  flows  slowly  for  many
days."  "He  is  never  able  to  finish  urinating  ;  it  seems  as
if  some  urine  always  remains  behind  in  the  bladder."
"Weakness  of  the  bladder,  the  urine  drops  vertically  down,


CALCAREA  SULPHURICA.  221

and  he  is  obliged  to  wait  awhile  before  any  passes."
This  inability  to  expel  makes  one  think  of  Alumina  and
Veratrum  album  and  Silicea.  Again  Hepar  sulph.  is  a
great  "  sweat "  remedy,  either  partial  or  general.  It  may,
for  instance,  come  in  after  Mercurius  in  rheumatism,  in
which  the  patient  "sweats  day  and  night  without  re-
lief," and  Mercurms  does  not  help.  So  too  with  quinsy,
and  in  large  boils  and  swellings  ;  and  by  the  way,  Hepar
sulph.  is  one  of  our  best  remedies  after  Mercurius^  either
in  homoeopathic  practice,  or  as  an  antidote  to  old  school
poisoning.  So  also  is  it  the  leading  antidote  to  Iodide  of
Potassa  poisoning  from  the  same  source.  We  could  not
well  do  without  this  valuable  remedy.


CALCAREA  SULPHURICA.

One  of  Schlissler's  so-called  tissue  remedies,  not  well
understood  as  yet,  but  acting  much  along  the  line  of
Hepar  sulphur  so  far  as  we  do  know.  I  once  had  a  case
in  which  there  was  great  pain  in  the  region  of  the  kid-
neys for  a  day  and  night.  Then  there  was  a  great  dis-
charge of  pus  in  the  urine,  which  continued  several  days,
and  weakened  the  patient  very  fast.  A  Chicago  specialist
had  examined  the  urine  a  short  time  before,  and  had  pro-
Calcarea  sulphiLrica  I2th,  and  under  its  action  she  imme-
diately improved  and  made  a  very  rapid  and  permanent
recovery.  Since  then  I  have  found  it  a  good  remedy  in
profuse  suppurations  in  different  kinds  of  cases.  That  is
all  I  know  about  the  remedy.


222


CALCARBA  HYPOPHOSPHORICA.


CALCAREA  HYPOPHOSPHORiCA.

I  once  had  a  case  like  this  :  A  boy  eight  years  of  age
had  several  (four  or  five)  abscesses  in  and  around  the  knee
joint.  The  ulceration  had  also  attacked  the  tibia,  which
was  half  eaten  off,  so  that  the  ragged  necrosed  bone  pro-
truded through  the  surface  plainly  in  sight.  The  little  fel-
low was  greatly  emaciated,  and  had  no  appetite,  and  was
as  pale  as  a  corpse.  I  told  the  mother  that  I  thought  this
was  a  case  for  the  surgeon,  but  I  would  try  to  get  him  in
better  condition  for  the  operation.  I  remembered  reading
years  before  of  the  cures  of  abscesses  by  this  remedy,  made
by  Dr.  Searles,  of  Albany,  and  empirically  concluded  to
try  it  in  this  case.

I  put  him  upon  the  first  trituration,  a  grain  a  day.
Called  in  a  week  and  found  a  great  change  for  the  better.
The  mother  exclaimed  as  I  came  in  :  "Ah,  Doctor,  the
boy  is  eating  us  out  of  house  and  home."  Under  the  con-
tinued use  of  the  remedy  he  made  a  complete  and  rapid
recovery,  except  that  the  tibia  was  a  little  bent.  I  have
since  used  the  remedy  in  some  very  large  swellings  where
pus  had  formed,  with  the  effect  of  complete  absorption  of
the  pus  and  no  opening  of  the  abscess  on  the  surface.
One  was  a  case  of  hip  disease  which  had  been  pronounced
incurable  by  a  specialist  on  ulcerations.  (How  is  that  for
a  specialist,  regular  at  that.)  The  different  combinations
of  the  Calcareas  ought  to  be  so  thoroughly  proven  as  to
enable  us  to  put  them  each  in  their  exact  place.  So,  also,
with  the  Kalis,  Magnesias,  Natrums  and  Mercuries,  etc.


GRAPHITES.


223


GRAPHITES.

The  chief  leading  characteristic  of  this  remedy  is  found
in  its  skin  symptoms.

Hoyne  had  expressed  it  nearly  right.  "  Eruptions  oozing
out  a  thick,  honey-like  fluid."  It  may  be  found  on  any
part  of  the  body,  but  is  especially  found  on  or  behind  the
ears,  on  head,  face,  genitals  or  eyelids.  I  once  treated  a
case  of  eczema  of  the  legs  which  was  of  twenty  years'
standing.  It  was  in  an  old  obese  woman,  and,  by  the  way,
that  is  the  kind  of  subject  in  which  this  remedy  is  found
most  efficacious.

I  gave  her,  on  account  of  much  burning  of  the  feet,  a
dose  of  Sulphur  cm.  In  two  or  three  weeks  an  eruption
was  developed  all  over  the  body  which  exuded  a  glutinous,
sticky  fluid.  One  dose  of  Graphites  cm.,  dry  on  the
tongue,  cured  this  as  well  as  the  eczema  of  the  legs  and
left  her  skin  as  smooth  as  that  of  a  child.  This  was  years
ago.  Erysipelas  sometimes  takes  this  form,  and  in  such
cases  recurs  again  and  again.  It  will  naturally  occur  to
the  physician  that,  because  of  this  recuTrence,  there  is
some  psoric  taint  which  must  be  met  by  Sulphur.  But
we  must  not  make  the  too  common  mistake  of  thinking
that  Sttlphur  is  the  remedy  on  account  of  its  great  anti-
psoric  powers,  or  on  the  often  misleading  indication
"  when  seemingly  indicated  remedies  don't  act,"  because
Sulphur  is  not  the  only  anti-psoric  and  where  Graphites
is  indicated  is  not  at  all  the  anti-psoric,  for  the  case  in
only  a  name  after  all)  without  indications  any  more  than


224


GRAPHITES.


Graphites  is  a  powerful  anti-psoric,  as  is  also  Psorinitm,
Lycopodiimi^  Caicsticum  and  many  others.  Symptoms
must  decide  here,  as  elsewhere.  In  order  to  still  further
show  the  wonderful  anti-psoric  powers  of  this  remedy  I
will  give  another  case  from  practice.

A  child  three  years  of  age  had  eczema  capitis.  Under
allopathic  local  treatment  the  eczema  disappeared ;  but
soon  entero-colitis  of  a  very  obstinate  character  set  in.
Then  the  regulars  could  not  "  do  "  that  as  they  had  the
eczema,  and  after  they  had  given  up  the  case,  pronounc-
ing it  consumption  of  the  bowels,  the  homoeopath  (myself)
was  called  in  on  the  ground  that  he  could  do  no  harm  if
he  could  do  no  good  (so  they  said).

Case. — Child  greatly  emaciated,  little  or  no  appetite,
very  restless,  and  "  stools  brown  fiuid  mixed  with  undi-
gested sub  sta^ices^  and  of  an  intolerably  fetid  odor^  Tak-
ing into  the  account  the  history  of  the  suppressed
short  time  a  perfect  cure  was  the  result.  Psoriniim  has  a
similar  stool  as  was  present  in  this  case,  but  the  eruptions
of  the  two  remedies  are  different  and  this  one  corresponded
to  Graphites.,  hence  Psorimtm  was  ruled  out.  If  this  case  of
so  long  standing  had  not  had  the  eruption  I  might
have  thought  of  China  on  account  of  the  extreme  weak-
ness from  long-continued  drain  or  loss  of  fluids,  for  China
is  another  remedy  that  has  brown  loose  fetid  stools.  So  we
must  take  into  consideration  all  the  case.,  psora  and  all.  In
chronic  cases,  in  which  Graphites  is  likely  to  be  the  remedy,
we  may  look  for  affections  of  the  eyelids.,  of  the  same
eczematous  character  as  that  found  on  the  head,  behind
the  ears,  etc.

Notice — "  Eczema  of  lids,  eruptions  moist  and  fissured


GRAPHITES.


235


margins  of  lids  covered  with  scales  and  crusts.  In  Sulphur
lids  the  margins  are  very  red.  All  the  orifices  under
Sulphur  are  very  red.  Graphites  leads  all  the  remedies
for  eczematous  affections  of  the  lids,  Staphysagria  stands
next,  but  of  course  special  indications,  local  or  general,  or
both,  must  decide.

Graphites  is  one  of  our  best  anal  remedies.  We  have
o-iven  the  kind  of  loose  stool  characteristic  of  the  drug.
This  is,  however,  exceptional,  for  it  generally  tends  to  con-
stipation instead  of  diarrhoea.  The  stools  are  knotty  and
large^  the  lumps  sometimes  united  by  mucous  threads^  and
mucus  often  follows  the  stool.  There  is  often  eczema
around  the  anus,  and  it  is  one  of  our  best  remedies  for
fissura  ani.  There  is  in  these  cases  apt  to  be  much
pain  after  stool,  and  much  soreness  in  anus  on  wiping  it.
Now  if  all  this  should  occur  in  subjects  of  this  tendency
to  sticky  eruptions,  we  would  not  hesitate  to  give
Graphites  with  expectation  of  success.

Another  very  characteristic  calling  for  this  remedy  is
found  in  the  nails.  Both  finger  and  toe  nails  become
thick,  grow  out  of  shape.  Never  forget  Graphites  when
you  find  this  state  of  nails  present.  Again,  it  is  one  of  our
best  remedies  for  we^is  found  in  persons  of  herpetic
dyscrasia.  Old,  hard  cicatrices  soften  up  and  go  away
under  its  action,  especially  those  left  by  abscesses  of  the
mammae.  L/Umps  in  the  breasts  of  a  very  suspicious  ap-
pearance also  go  away  under  the  action  of  this  remedy.
In  menstrual  troubles  it  resembles  Pulsatilla.,  but  there
are  plenty  of  points  to  differentiate  them.  In  tempera-
ment it  resembles  Calcarea  ostrearum  ;  but  in  Graphites
the  menses  are  mostly  scanty  and  delayed,  in  Calcarea
too  soon  and  profuse.  Graphites  cures  complaints  of
many  kinds  when  you  have  present  two  things :


226


PSORINUM.


1st.  The  peculiar  tendency  to  obesity.

2d.  The  characteristic  glutinous  eruptions.

PSORINUM.

The  disease  products  are  powerful  remedies,  and  when
used  in  the  potentized  form  have  made  many  wonderful
cures.  It  is  believed  by  some  that  in  the  potentized  form
they  are  so  changed  that  they  become  homoeopathic  to
the  disease  which  produced  them,  especially  in  any  other
person  than  the  one  in  whom  the  original  disease  existed.

I  have  experimented  more  or  less  with  these  so-called
nosodes,  since  they  were  so  widely  proclaimed  by  Dr.
Swan.  I  never  found  them  markedly  efficacious  in  such
cases,  but  I  have  seen  remarkable  results  from  them  in
cases  resembling,  for  instance,  gonorrhoeal,  syphilitic  or
psoric  troubles,  without  any  history  of  pre-existing  trouble
of  the  kind.  I  have  cured  eruptions  on  the  skin  resem-
bling itch  with  Psora^  rheumatic  troubles  that  were
very  obstinate  under  our  usual  remedies  with  Medor-
rhmum  and  a  long  standing  case  of  the  caries  of  the
spine  with  Syphilinum^  but  in  not  one  of  these  cases
had  the  patient,  that  I  could  trace,  itch,  gonorrhoea
or  syphilis.  The  experience  of  many  others  seems  to  be
different.  I  give  only  my  own.  That  each  nosode  seems
capable  of  producing  thte  same,  or  similar,  symptoms
when  given  by  mouth  in  proving  as  when  inoculated  the
usual  way  seems  well  proven  in  the  case  of  Psorinuin.  I
do  not  see  why  the  constitutional  symptoms  appearing  _
after  inoculations  should  not  be  considered"  a  proving
as  well  as  those  following  a  bee  sting,  cantharis  blistering,
or  the  local  external  poisoning  of  the  varieties  of  Rhus.


PSORINUM.  227

If  Rhus,  very  high,  will  cure  Rhus  poisoning,  why  should
not  Syphilimtm,  &tc.,  cure  syphilis? Who  will  answer?

All  nosodes  are  as  capable  of  curing  as  they  are  of
poisoning.  If  not,  why  not?  We  must  not  let  prejudice
hinder  honest  investigation.  As  if  in  corroboration  of  the
theory  that  the  potentized,  disease  product  will  cure  the
disease  producing  it,  the  provings  of  Psorinum  indicate
that  the  chief  action  and  curative  power  of  the  poison  is
upon  the  skin.  And  is  it  not  remarkable  that  Psormum
should  so  strongly  resemble  Sulphur,  the  old  time  remedy
for  itch,  and  again  that  they  follow  or  complement  each
other  in  curing  skin  troubles?  Notice  some  of  the  leading
skin  symptoms.

"Itching,  when  the  body  becomes  warm."

"Itching,  intolerable  in  warmth  of  bed."  {Merc,  sol.)

"Itching,  scratches  until  it  bleeds."

"Itching  between  fingers  and  in  bends  of  joints."
{Sepia.)

"Repeated  outbreaks  of  eruptions."

^'^  Skin  has  a  dirty  dingy  look,  as  if  the  patient  never
washed,  and  the  body  has  a  filthy  smell  even  after  a  bath."

These  and  many  other  symptoms,  too  numerous  to
mention  here,  show  what  an  invaluable  remedy  this  should
be  in  skin  troubles,  and  abundant  experience  and  observa-
tion corroborates  the  truth  of  our  law  of  cure  in  the  cura-
tive power  of  disease  poisons,  as  it  also  does  in  vegetable,
mineral,  and  insect  or  animal.

Psorinum  is  also  found  useful  in  the  consequences  of  4
suppressed  eruptions,  and  in  such  cases  should  never  be
.  forgotten when  other anti-psorics fail. Dr.  Wm.  A.
Hawley,  of  Syracuse,  N.  Y.,  once  made  a  brilliant  cure  of
a  very  bad  case  of  dropsy  in  an  old  woman,  being  led  to


*


228


PSORINUM.


One  dose  of  Fincke's  42  m.  potency,  dry  on  the  tongue,
cured  the  whole  case  in  a  very  short  time.  It  was  a
case  of  long  standing.  Now,  if  we  examine  we  will  also
find  that  this  remedy  resembles  Graphites  in  many  points.
A  close  comparison  will  pay  the  earnest  student  of  Materia
Medica.  Psorinum  is  very  depressed  in  mind.  "Greatest
despondency,  making  his  own  life  and  that  of  those  about
him  almost  intolerable."  This  state  of  mind,  following
acute  diseases,  like  typhus,  is  especially  benefited  by  this
remedy.  When  writing  of  Graphites  we  mention  the  re-
semblance of  the  two  remedies  in  the  stools^  dark-brown^
watery^  and  of  intolerably  offensive  odor."  This  is  found
in  bad  cases  of  cholera  infantum  or  chronic  diarrhoea.
There  is  one  valuable  diagnostic  difference  between  them,
although  the  Remedies  are  so  much  alike,  and  that  is  that
the  Graphites  moisture  from  the  eruption  is  glutinous  or
sticky  and  not  markedly  so  with  Psorinum.

Again,  Psorinum  is  very  useful  for  weakness  or  debility
during  convalescence  from  severe  acute  diseases.  The
patient  sweats  profusely  when  taking  the  least  exercise.
Here,  again,  as  in  the  stool  symptom,  choice  may  have  to
be  made  between  Psorinum  and  China.  Loss  of  fluids,
blood,  suppuration,  etc.,  would  decide  in  favor  of  the  latter
and  itching  eruptions,  or  tendency  thereto,  before  or  dur-
ing the  sickness,  the  former.  One  thing  I  forgot  to  men-
tion in  connection  with  the  offensive  stool.  "All  excre-
tions, diarrhoea,  leucorrhoea,  menstrual  flow  and  perspira-
tion, have  a  carrion-like  smell,  even  the  body  has  a  filthy
smell,  notwithstanding  frequent  bathing."  So  we  see  in
Psorinum  when  proven  a  great  remedy  for  very  grave  con-
ditions. I  have  no  doubt  that  all  nosodes  are  equally
valuable  when  as  well  understood.


AURUM  METAI.I.ICUM.


229


AURUM  METALLICUM.

"Looks  on  the  dark  side,  weeps,  prays,  thinks  she  is
not  fit  for  this  world,  longs  for  death,  strong  inclination  to
commit  suicided  Strange  that  this  noble  metal,  for  which
mankind  strives  for  its  pecuniary  value,  should,  when  taken
into  the  organism,  cause  the  greatest  unhappiness.

The  Auriim  patient  is  plunged  into  the  deepest  gloom
and  despair. Life  is  a  burden,  he  desires  death.  Suicide
dwells  constantly  in  his  mind. In  men,  I  have  observed  it
oftenest  in  connection  with  liver  troubles. In  women,  with
womb  troubles,  especially  when  enlarged,  indurated  or  pro-
lapsed. In  both  these  cases,  the  result,  so  far  as  local  conditions
are  concerned ,  setems  to  be  from  repeated  attacks  of  congestion
to  the  parts,  which  finally  end  in  hypertrophy. The  liver
is  enlarged,  the  womb  also,  and  prolapsus  occurs  from  the
very  weight  of  the  organs. These  congestions,  so  charac-
teristic of  the  remedy,  take  place  also  in  head,  heart,  chest  and
kidneys; but,  whenever  they  come,  the  peculiar  mind
symptoms  are  always  present  to  furnish  the  chief  indica-
tion for  Gold. The  Gold  patient  is  also  at  times  "peevish
and  vehement,  the  least  contradiction  excites  his  wrath."
He  will  exhibit  these  outbreaks  occasionally,  even  when
the  more  characteristic  depression  and  gloom  greatly  pre-
ponderate. Other  remedies  have  a  similar  depression  and
tendency  to  suicide,  like  Naja  and  Nux  vomica.,  but  none
in  anything  like  the  degree  of  Aurum. I  once  cured
a  young  lady  who  tried  to  commit  suicide  by  drowning.
After  she  was  cured  she  laughed  at  the  occurrence,  and
said  she  could  not  help  it. It  seemed  to  her  she  was  of
no  use  in  the  world. She  felt  so.
16


230  AURUM  METALLICUM.

Aurum  has  been  found  efficacious  in  curing  some  bone
affections  of  syphilitic  origin,  especially  if  such  cases  had
been  the  subjects  of  old  school  dosing  with  Mercury.
There  would  be  a  great  falling  off  of  business  for  physi-
cians if  the  old  school  could  learn  to  cure  their  patients
without  poisoning  them  with  their  drugs. The  locality
where  Aurum  has  made  its  best  record  in  these  syphilitico-
mercurial  affections  is  in  caries  of  the  bones  of  the  nose
and  palate,  also  of  the  mastoid  process. In  these  nasal
troubles  it  is  sometimes  of  great  use  in  the  catarrh,  or
ozaena,  before  the  trouble  has  progressed  to  actual  caries.
The  nostrils  are  agglutinated,  ulcerated,  and  nose  ob-
structed and  filled  with  crusts,  or  there  are  excessively
fetid  discharges,  and  the  patient  is  melancholy  and  dis-
posed to  suicide. Auruvi  is  one  of  the  few  remedies  that
has  hemiopia  or  half-sight,  and  has  cur^d  it  even  in  the
200th  potency. Lycopodiuni  and  Lithium  ca7'bonica  also
have  half-sight,  but  Aui^uin  sees  only  the  lower,  while  the
other  two  see  only  the  left  half  of  objects.

Aurum  not  only  causes  and  cures  indurations  of  the
womb  in  the  female,  but  indurations  also  of  the  testicles
in  the  male,  and  in  both  cases  the  ever-present  mental
symptoms  of  Aurum  or  the  syphilitico-mercurial  history
furnish  the  chief  indications  for  its  use.  In  fatty  heart
in  ruddy,  corpulent,  old  people  it  is  one  of  our  best
remedies.  In  these  cases  there  is  much  vascular  disturb-
ance. "Violent  palpitation,  with  anxiety  and  congestion
to  the  chest,  aiid  visible  beating  of  the  carotids  and  tem-
poral arteries."

Bellado7i7ia  may  relieve  \\\^  attack,  but  Aurum  goes
deeper  and  is  more  lasting  in  its  effect.  Aurum  is  one  of
our  best  remedies  for  borie  pains.  Never  forget  it.  It
ranks  with  Kali  iodide,  Asafcetida  and  the  mercuries  in
periosteal  affections.


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.


231


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

Guernsey  says:  "  We  think  of  this  remedy  on  seeing  a
withered  and  dried  up  person,  made  so  by  disease."  This
especially  in  children.  "  He  looks  like  a  little  withered  old
man."  Argentum  like  Gold  profoundly  affects  the  mind,
lyike  Gold  it  is  also  one  of  the  best  remedies  for  hypochon-
driasis. The  symptoms  are  so  many  in  this  trouble  that
we  can  only  call  attention  to  them  as  found  in  Guiding
Sy^nptoms.  I  will  only  mention  a  few  more  prominent
and  peculiar  symptoms  that  have  been  frequently  verified.
"  The  sight  of  high  houses  makes  him  dizzy  and  causes
him  to  stagger.  It  seemed  as  if  the  houses  on  both  sides
of  the  street  would  approach  and  crush  him."

"When  walking  in  the  street  he  dreads  to  pass  a  street
corner,  because  the  corner  of  the  house  seems  to  project
and  he  is  afraid  he  will  run  against  it."  "  Impulsive,  must
walk  very  fast,  always  hurried."  {^Lilium  Tigrinum.)
"Apprehension  when  ready  to  go  to  church  or  opera  ;
brings  on  diarrhoea."  {Gelsemiu77z.)

The  hurried  feeling  of  both  Argentum  niiricum  and
Lilium  tigrinum  have  occurred  mostly  in  uterine  troubles,
while  the  diarrhoea  on  excitement  seems  to  depend  upon
a  general  nervous  condition.  Unless  the  indications
pointed  strongly  to  one  in  preference  to  the  other  remedy
it  might  be  well  to  try  the  vegetable  first.  The  minerals
are  generally  longer  and  deeper  in  their  action,  and  would
perhaps  be  preferable  the  more  chronic  the  case.

Some  of  the  very  curious  symptoms  found  under  this


232  ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.

and  other  remedies  are  not  found  in  everyday  practice,
but  when  found  are  all  the  more  valuable  because  the
cases  presenting  them  are  rare  and  not  easily  understood  or
cured  by  the  ordinary  remedies.  Some  of  our  most  brill-
iant cures  have  been  made  in  just  such  cases,  and  they  are
very  gratifying  to  both  physician  and  patient.

Argentum  nitricum  is  sometimes  the  best  remedy  for
hemicrania  ;  this  kind  of  headache,  is  often  very  distressing
and  hard  to  cure.  One  peculiar  symptom  belonging  to
Argentiun  nitricum  in  headaches  is  a  feeling  of  expansion^
feels  as  though  head  were  enormously  enlarged,  and,  like
Pulsatilla  and  Apis^  feels  better  when  tied  up  tight.  This
feeling  of  expansion  is  also  a  general  symptom,  feels  as
though  the  whole  body  or  part  of  it  were  expanding,  some
express  it  as  a  feeling  of  fullness.  {^scuUls  hippocasta-
num.)  It  is  found  under  other  remedies  also,  but  very
prominently  under  this.

Argentum  nitricum  has  a  great  deal  of  vertigo^  which
is  often  accompanied  with  buzzing  in  the  ears,  general
debility  and  trembling.  Cannot  walk  with  the  eyes  closed ;
the  sight  of  high,  houses  makes  him  dizzy.  These  symp-
toms call  to  remembrance  Gelsemium.  Both  remedies
have  much  vertigo ;  great  tremulous  weakness,  accom-
panied with  general  debility,  actual  trembling  and  tremu-
lous sensation,  and  both  have  been  found  useful  in  loco-
motor ataxia.  I  should,  other  things  being  equal,  give
the  preference  to  Gelsemium  in  recent  cases,  or  in  the  be-
ginning, and  Argentum  nitricum  further  along.  But  there
are  generally  diagnostic  indications  which  enable  us  to
choose  between  them.  In  eye  affections  Argentum  is  one
of  our  most  valuable  remedies,  and  like  all  remedies  which
are  very  valuable  for  anything  has  been  wofully  abused  by
the  old  school. It  is  a  pity  that  they  do  not  know  enough


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.  233

to  get  the  good  and  to  avoid  the  bad  effects  of  such  valuable
agents,  for  many  times  the  disastrous  results  of  their  mis-
use brings  the  remedies  into  such  disrepute  that  others  are
afraid  to  use  them  at  all.  It  was  for  this  reason  that  the
old  botanies  rejected  all  mineral  remedies.  Mercury  had
so  scared  them.  It  falls  to  the  Homoeopath  to  teach  how-
to  use  all  in  such  a  way  as  to  get  the  good,  while  avoiding
the  bad  effects.  In  eye  troubles  Allen  &  Norton  write  as
follows :  "  The  greatest  survice  that  Argentum  nitricum
performs  is  in  purulent  ophthalmia.  With  large  experience,
in  both  hospital  and  private  practice,  we  have  not  lost  a
single  eye  from  this  disease,  and  every  one  has  been
treated  with  internal  remedies^  most  of  them  with  Argen-
tum nitricum  of  a  high  potency,  30th  or  200th.  We  have
witnessed  the  most  intense  chemosis,  with  strangulated
vessels,  most  profuse  purulent  discharge,  even  the  cornea  be-
ginning to  get  hazy  and  looking  as  though  it  would  slough,
subside  rapidly  under  Argentmn  nitricum  internally.  The
subjective  symptoms  are  almost  none.  Their  very  absence,
with  the  profuse  purulent  discharge,  and  the  swollen  lids
from  a  collection  of  pus  in  the  eye,  or  swelling  of  the  sub-
conjunctival tissue  of  the  lids  themselves,  indicates  the
drug.  {Apis;  Rhus.)''  I^ater  Norton  writes:  "  I  do  be-
lieve that  there  is  no  need  of  cauterization  with  it,  except
\.xx\}ii^gonorrJioeal  iormoi  purulent  conjunctivitis."  Such
testimony  from  such  sources  ought  to  shame  the  abuse  of
this  agent  in  the  hand  of  old  school  physicians,  and  some-
times bogus  Homoeopaths.  In  ophthalmia  neonatorum  in
ray  own  practice  as  a  general  practitioner  I  have  had  very
often  better  success  with  Mercurius solubilis^  especially  where
there  was  much  purulent  matter  pouring  out  on  opening
the  eyes.  In  blepharitis  Graphites  and  Staphisagria  have
served  me  oftener  than  Argentum  7iitricum,  but  this  may


234


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.


not  be  the  experience  of  others,  for  in  eye  troubles,  as  in
all  others,  the  indications  are  to  be  studied  and  carefully
recognized  in  their  entirety.  Specialists  are  apt  to  lose
sight  of  this  and  be  led  to  local  treatment  when  consti-
tutional would  be  infinitely  better.  The  symptom,  "red,
painful  tip  of  the  tongue,  papillae  erect,  prominent,"  has
guided  to  the  cure  of  many  different  kinds  of  cases.
There  are  also  some  valuable  symptoms  in  the  digestive
organs;  for  instance,  "Irresistible  desire  for  sugar ;  fluids  go
right  through  him  ;  most  gastric  ailments  are  accompanied
by  belching  ;  belching  after  every  meal,  stomach  as  if  it
would  burst  with  wind,  belching  difficult ;  finally  air
rushes  out  with  great  noise  and  violence."  All  of  these
are  characteristic,  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  this  remedy  is
sometimes  indicated  when  Car  bo  veg.^  China  or  Lycopo-
diiim  are  given  because  they  are  generally  so  much  better
understood.  Dyspepsia,  gastralgia  and  even  gastric  ulcer
have  sometimes  found  a  powerful  remedy  in  Argentum^
and  it  has  also  done  great  good  in  very  obstinate  cases  of
diarrhoea  of  various  kinds.

"  Green  mucus  like  chopped  spinach  i7i  flakes?''

"  Stool  turning  green  after  remaining  on  diaper."

"  Stool  expelled  with  much  spluttering."

"  Stool  shreddy,  red,  green  muco-lymph,  or  epithelial
substance."  "During  stool  emission  of  much  noisy  flatus."
Now  there  are  other  remedies  which  have  some  of  these
symptoms  in  a  marked  degree,  notably  :  Calcarea  phos.^
which  has  the  spluttering  stool  with  much  noisy  flatus,  and
it  is  also  a  fact  that  both  remedies  are  very  valuable  ones
in  hydrocephaloid  consequent  on  the  long-continued  drain
from  intractable  cases  of  entero-colitis.  If  the  bone  develop-
ment should  be  slow  with  large  open  fontanelles  and
sweaty  head  of  course  Calcarea  phos.  would  win.  Then


ARGENTUM  NITRICUM.


in  Calcarea  phos.  the  child  wishes  smoked  meats,  bacon
etc.  in  Argenhcm  nitrimm  sugar  or  sweets.  Yet  both
have  great  emaciation,  the  child  looking  old  and  wrinkled,
and  it  will  sometimes  be  close  individualizing  to  choose
between  them.  Argentum  nitricum  has  its  place  in  the
treatment  of  throat  affections.  There  is  thick,  tenacious
mucus  in  the  throat  obliging  him  to  hawk  and  causing
slight  hoarseness.  Rawness,  soreness,  scraping  in  throat,
causing  hawking  and  cough.  Sensation  as  of  a  splinter
lodged  in  the  throat  {Nitric  ac.^  Hepar  siilph.^  Dolichos\
and  wartlike  excresences,  which  feel  like  pointed  bodies
when  swallowing.  This  kind  of  throat  r^ay  extend  down-
ward until  it  involves  the  larynx,  especially  in  singers,
clergymen,  or  lawyers  who  are  using  their  voice  very  much.
Then  it  is  doubly  indicated.  When  we  come  to  the  back
and  extremities  we  again  find  our  remedy  in  the  field  for
a  share  of  the  honors.  "Pain  in  the  back  ^small  of)  reliev-
ed  when  standing  or  walking,  but  severe  when  rising  from
a  seat,"  is  a  condition  often  found  in  practice.  I  have  often
relieved  it  with  Sulphur  or  Causticum^  but  remember  also
Argentum  nitricum.  If  in  back  troubles  we  find  great
lassitude  [Kali  carbonicum)^  with  weariness,  especially  in
forearms  and  lower  legs,  especially  calves,  or  if  in  addition
to  this  we  find  vertigo  and  trembling  of  the  extremities,
we  may  be  sure  Argentum  nitricum  will  do  us  good.  In
paraplegia  from  debilitating  causes  or  paralysis  after  diph-
theria we  may  find  this  remedy  indicated.  Also  in  epilepsy
or  convulsions;  in  the  former  (epilepsy)  one  characteristic
symptom  is  that  for  hours  or  days  before  the  attack  the
pupils  are  dilated  ;  in  the  latter,  the  convulsions  are  pre-
ceded for  a  short  time  by  great  restlessness.

Cuprum  metallicum  has  great  restlessness  between  the


236


FERRUM  METALLICUM  OR  ACKTICUM.


attacks.  Finally  Natrum  muriaticitm  is  the  best  antidote
for  the  abuse  of  Argentum  nit.^  especially  upon  mucous
surfaces.

FERRUM  METALLICUM  or  ACETICUM.

This  is  another  one  of  the  abused  remedies.  It  stands
with  the  Old  School  for  anaemia,  as  does  Quinine  for
malaria.  Each  can  and  does  cure  its  kind  of  both  condi-
tions, but  can  cure  no  other ;  and  each,  when  it  is  the  true
curative,  is  capable  of  doing  its  best  work  in  the  potentized
form.  Dr.  Hughes  writes:  "The  treatment  of  anaemia  by
Iron  is  one  of  the  few  satisfactory  and  certain  things  in
modern  medicine.  From  whatever  cause  this  condition
may  arise,  whether  it  be  the  chlorosis  of  defective  men-
struation, or  the  simple  poverty  of  blood  induced  by
haemorrhages,  deficiency  of  air,  light,  and  suitable  food,  or
by  exhausting  diseases,  Iro7t  is  the  one  great  remedy."  I
must  say  that  I  think  that  a  man  who  would  write  like
that  of  any  remedy  is  not  to  be  blamed  for  talking  of  the
few  satisfactory  and  certain  things  in  modern  medicine.
Iron  is  no  more  a  panacea  for  anaemia  than  is  Quinine
for  malaria  or  Phosphate  of  Lime  for  deficient  bone  de-
velopment. My  experience  has  taught  me  that  there  are
several  other  equally  efficient  remedies  for  these  conditions,
and  that  when  they  are  not  indicated  they  not  only  can-
especially  in  the  material  doses  in  which  they  are  gen-
erally recommended  by  such  teachers.  I  must  here  state
my  experience  founded  on  abundant  practice  and  observa-
tion that  such  prescribing  is  not  only  nn-Hahnemannian,
but  in  every  sense  un-homoeopathic,  and  I  warn  all  be-
ginners not  to  practice  along  that  line  or  they  too  will


FERRUM  MKTALLICUM  OR  ACETICUM.  237

come  to  talk  of  the  few  satisfactory  and  certain  things  in
modern  medicine. Now  we  have  given  this  quotation  from
Dr.  Hughes,  it  is  only  fair  to  him  to  quote  him  again,  in-
asmuch as  he,  in  this  latter  quotation,  talks  more  sensibly.
Talking  about  anaemia,  he  says  :  "The  malady  does  not
ordinarily  arise  from  any  failure  of  the  quantity  of  iron
supplied  in  the  food. If  the  element  is  deficient  in  the  blood
the  fault  lies  in  the  assimilative  processes. But  Reveil
has  ascertained  that  in  ansemia  there  is  no  change  what-
ever in  the  amount  of  iron  present  in  the  blood.  How-
ever few  the  corpuscles  they  contain  within  them  the  full
proportion  of  the  metal  normal  to  health,  and  though  under
the  influence  of  iron  itself  they  increase  to  double  and
triple  their  number  they  yield  no  more iron."  Then
Cowperthwaite  adds :  "  It  is  also  true  that  when  iron  is
introduced  into  the  system  in  large  quantities  with  a  view
to  supplying  a  deficiency  of  iron  in  the  blood  that  it  is  not
assimilated,  but  may  be  almost  entirely  obtained  from
the  feces,  having  been  eliminated  by  the  intestines. It  is
evident,  therefore,  that  iron  does  not  act  as  a  curative  a^ent
by  virtue  of  its  absorption  as  a  constituent  of  the  blood,
but  rather,  as  we  are  led  to  conclude,  from  its  physiological
effects  upon  the  organs  and  tissues  of  the  body,  that  it
owes  its  therapeutic  virtues  to  the  same  essential  dynamic
agency  possessed  by  other  drugs,  and  its  application  is
subject to  the same therapeutic  law." Sound  words,
remedy  for  anaemia,  or  any  other  disease,  without  indica-
ttons  according  to  our  therapeutic  law  of  cure. I  have
seen  better  cures  of  bad  cases  of  anemia  by  Natrum
miiriaticiim  in  potentized  form,  than I  ever  did  from
in  any  form,  although  Iroii  has  its  cases as  have
also  Pulsatilla, Cyclamen, Calcarea phos., Car  bo  veg.


238  FERRUM  METALUCUM  OR  ACETICUM.

China  and  many  other  remedies.  We  will  now  call  at-
tention to  the  symptoms  that  indicate  Iron  in  ansemia  or
any  other  condition  where  Iron  is  the  remedy.

"Ashy,  pale  or  greenish  face,  with  pains  or  other
symptoms  the  face  becomes  bright  red."  (Raue.)  "  The
least  emotion  or  exertion  causes  a  red,  flushed  face."
(Guernsey.)  "  Rush  of  blood  to  head ;  veins  of  head
swollen ;  flushes  of  heat  in  the  face."  "  Hammering,
beating,  pulsating  pains  in  the  head."  {^BelL,  Chi7ia,
Natrum  mur.^  Glon.)

"  Great  paleness  of  mucous  membranes,  especially  that
of  the  cavity  of  the  mouth."  (Raue.)

"  Always  better  from  walking  about,  notwithstanding
weakness obliges patient to lie down."  (Guernsey.)

Menses  too  soon,  too  profuse,  too  long  lasting,  with  fiery
red  face,  ringing  in  the  ears,  flow  pale,  watery  and  de-
bilitating." Now  if  in  addition  to  these  symptoms  you
have,  notwithstanding  the  general  ansemic  condition  of
the 'patient,  frequent  rushes  of  blood  to  head,  chest,  face,  or
other  local  congestions  you  have  a  typical  Iron  case  and
may  confidently  expect  a  cure  if  given  in  potency  and  at
proper  intervals.  But  if  your  patient  has  been  already
"  loaded  up  "  with  Iron  on  the  theory  that  the  blood  must
be  "  fed  "  with  it,  the  fact  is,  generally,  that  she  is  suffer-
ing from  the  over-dosing  more  than  from  the  original
disease  and  you  will  proceed  to  find  the  best  autidote,
guided  by  the  symptoms  here  as  elsewhere,  and,  in  adapt-
ing such  remedy  to  the  case  as  it  w,  will  often  be  able  to
cure  both  the  natural  and  drug  disease  together.

It  is  a  blessed  thing  that  this  is  so,  for  if  the  Qumine^
Iron  and  other  medicinal  cachexias  stalking  about  in  our
midst  were  not  curable,  we  would  be  a  sorry  spectacle  as
human  beings  if  allopathic  dosing  were  allowed  to  go  on.


FERRUM  METALLICUM  OR  ACETICUM.  .239

Now  while  we  are  talking  about  this  so-called  blood
remedy  we  will  speak  about  its  general  hsemorrhagic
tendencies.

These  local  congestions  so  characteristic  of  Iroji  are  at-
tended by  haemorrhages  from  nose,  lungs,  womb,  kidneys,
etc.,  hence  it  becomes  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  haemor-
rhages in  anaemic  or  debilitated  subjects,  with  the  peculiar
symptoms  before  mentioned.  In  the  form  of  Ferrum
phos.^  of  which  we  have  already  written,  taking  the  fact
that  both  remedies  entering  into  the  combination  being  of
decided  hsemorrhagic  tendencies,  it  becomes  doubly  ef-
fective in  this  sphere.

But  Iron  is  not  by  any  means  confined  in  its  usefulness
to  blood  troubles,  and  we  will  notice  briefly  some  other
uses  of  this  valuable  curative  agent.  In  disorders  of
stomach  and  bowels  it  becomes  sometimes  the  only  remedy,
and  has  some  peculiar  and  characteristic  symptoms  indicat-
ing it  here.

"  Canine  hunger  {China)  alternating  with  complete  loss
of  appetite."  "  Regurgitation  of  food,  or  eructations  after
eating."  ^'  Wants  bread  and  butter  ;  meat  disagrees  (oppo-
site Natrum  ?mcr.).  Beer  or  tea  also  disagrees.  Food  lies
in  the  stomach  all  day  and  is  vomited  at  night."  "  Bowels
feel  sore  as  if  they  had  been  bruised,  or  as  if  he  had  taken
cathartics;  undigested,  painless  stools  at  night."  {China.)
These  and  many  other  symptoms  show  its  value  here,  and
it  is  noticeable,  the  resemblances  of  this  remedy  to  Chi?ta.
There  is  sometimes  difficulty  in  choosing  between  them,
but  there  is  more  flatule7tce  with  China.  Both  remedies
have,  markedly,  lienteria  and  painless  diarrhoea.  These
two  remedies  both  antidote  and  complement  each  other
under  certain  circumstances.  They  should  be  studied  in
comparison  as  debility  remedies.


240  FERRUM  METALUCUM  OR  ACETICUM.

Next  to  the  easily  flushed  and  red  face  as  a  characteristic
symptom  stands  this — "  Walking  slowly  about  relieves."
This  is  true  of  the  general  restlessness,  of  the  great  weak-
ness also  ;  he  feels  better  walking  slowly  about,  even  though
he  is  so  weak  he  has  to  sit  down  every  little  while  to  rest;
pain  in  the  hip  joint  drives  out  of  bed  and  is  only  relieved
while  walking  slowly.  I  once  had  a  rather  pale  lady  come
to  me  for  treatment  for  pains  in  the  forearms;  after  prescrib-
ing for  her  for  a  week,  she  let  drop  this  symptom,  that  the
only  way  in  which  she  could  get  any  relief  nights  (when
the  pain  was  almost  unbearable)  was  by  getting  right  up
out  of  bed  and  walking  slowly  about  the  room.  Ferrum
metal.  loooth  cured  her  promptly  and  she  never  had  a  re-
turn. Some  people  think  that  metals  cannot  be  poten-
tized,  but  when  I  make  numerous  cures  like  this  with
Iron^  Stannum^  Zijtc  and  Platina  I  don't  believe  it.  Pal-
pitation of  the  heart,  haemoptysis  and  asthma  are  also  re-
lieved in  the  same  way  by  walking  slowly  about.  It  would
seem  hardly  possible  that  such  complaints  could  be  so  re-
lieved, but  there  are  many  such  curious  and  unaccountable
symptoms  in  our  Materia  Medica  which  have  become  reli-
able leaders  to  the  prescription  of  certain  remedies.

Ferrum  is  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  cough  with  vom-
iting of  food.  It  is  also  one  of  the  very  few  remedies  hav-
ing a  red  face  during  chill,  and  has  more  than  once  led  to
the  cure  of  intermittent  fever  on  that  symptom.  Again  it
is  one  of  the  remedies  found  in  intermitteuts  that  have
been  abused  by  Qui7iine.  In  these  cases  we  often  find  the
splenic  region  sore  on  pressure  and  much  swollen.


' PLUMBUM  METALUCUM  OR  ACETICUM.  2  4. 1


PLUMBUM  METALLICUM  or  ACETICUM.

Notwithstanding  the  very  extensive  provings,  this  rem-
edy has  not  been  so  useful  as  it  would  seem  it  should  be.
One  symptom  has  proved  to  be  very  characteristic  and  has
led  to  its  successful  administration  in  different  diseases,
viz.  :  "  Abdomen  retracted  to  the  spine  as  if  drawn  in  by
a  string."  In  this  symptom  there  is  both,  or  either,  actual
retraction  and  sensation  of  retraction  in  the  abdomen.  It
is  found  mostly  in  colic,  but  may  be  found  in  uterine
troubles,  such  as  menorrhagia,  etc.  Also  in  constipation.
H.  N.  Guernsey  claimed  great  powers  for  it  in  jaundice  ;
whites  of  eyes,  skin,  stool  and  urine  all  very  yellow,  and  I
paralysis  is  well  known,  and  it  is  owing  to  this  power  that
lead  colic  is  induced,  which  is  one  of  the  most  distressins"
and  dangerous  of  diseases.  I  cured  one  case  of  post  diph-
theritic paralysis  with  it.  It  was  a  very  severe  case  in  a
middle-aged  man.  His  lower  limbs  were  entirely  para-
lyzed, and  there  was  at  the  same  time  a  symptom  which  I
never  met  before,  nor  have  I  since,  in  such  a  case,  viz.,
excessive  hyperesthesia  of  the  skin.  He  could  not  bear  to
be  touched  anywhere,  it  hurt  him  so.  After  much  huntino-
I  found  this  hyperesthesia  perfectly  pictured  in  Allen's  Kn-
cyclopoedia,  and  that,  taken  together  with  the  paralysis,
seemed  to  me  good  reason  for  prescribing  Plumbum^  which
I  did  in  one  dose  of  Fincke's  40m.,  with  the  result  of  bring-
ing about  rapid  and  continuous  improvement  until  a  per-
fect cure  was  reached.  He  took  only  the  one  dose,  for  a
repetition  was  not  necessary.


242  CHEUDONIUM  MAJUS.

The  father-in-law  of  Dr.  T.  1^.  Brown,  over  seventy
years  of  age,  was  attacked  with  a  severe  pain  in  the  abdo-
men. Finally  a  large  hard  swelling  developed  in  the  ileo-
csecal  region  very  sensitive  to  contact  or  to  the  least  mo-
tion. It  began  to  assume  a  bluish  color,  and  on  account
of  his  age  and  extreme  weakness  it  was  thought  that  he
must  die.  His  daughter,  however,  studied  up  the  case,
and  found  in  Raue's  Pathology  the  indications  for  Plum-
bum as  given  in  therapeutic  hints  for  typhilitis.  It  was
administered  in  the  200th  potency,  which  was  followed  by
relief  and  perfect  recovery.

CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.

The  center  of  action  of  this  remarkable  remedy  is  in
the'  liver,  and  its  most  characteristic  symptom  is  a  fixed
pain  (dull  or  sharp)  under  the  lower  inner  angle  of  the
right  shoulder  blade.  This  very  characteristic  symptom
may  be  found  in  connection  with  general  jaundice,  cough,
diarrhoea,  pneumonia,  menses,  loss  of  milk,  exhaustion,
etc.,  in  fact,  no  matter  what  the  name  of  the  disease  this
symptom  present  should  always  bring  to  mind  Cheli-
donium  and  close  scouting  will  generally  reveal  hepatic
troubles  or  complications,  as  would  be  naturally  ex-
pected with  such  a  remedy.  Chelidonium  is  like  Lycopq-
diiiin,  by  preference,  a  right-sided  remedy,  right  supra-
orbital neuralgia,  right  hypochondrium  and  scrobiculum
cordis  tense  and  painful  to  pressure  ;  right-sided  pneumonia
and  shoulder  painful  ;  shooting  pain  in  right  hip,  ex-
tending into  abdomen  ;  drawing  pain  in  hips,  thighs,  legs,
or  feet,  more  right-sided  ;  right  foot  cold  as  ice,  left  natural.
Futher  study  will  show  that  Chelidonium  not  only  is  a
right-sided  remedy,  but  in  many  other  points  stands  close


CHELIDONIUM  MAJUS.  243

to  Lycopodium,  and  in  my  experience  one  is  often  found
indicated  after  the  other.  Although  this  characteristic
infra-scapular  pain  is  as  reliable  as  any  in  the  Materia
Medica,  there  may  be  cases,  in  which  it  does  not  appear  at
all,  which  can  only  be  cured  by  Chelidomum,  especially
liver  and  lung  trouble.  If  we  should  find  pressive  pain  in
the  region  of  the  liver,  whether  it  be  enlarged  and  sensi-
tive to  pressure  or  not,  bitter  taste  in  the  mouth,  tongue
coated  thickly  yellow^  with  red  margins  showhtg  imprints
of  the  teeth^  yellowness  of  whites  of  eyes,  face,  hands  and
skin;  stools  gray,  clay  colored,  or  yellow  as  gold ^  urine  also
yellow  as  gold,  lemon  colored  or  dark  brown,  leaving  a
yellow  color  on  vessel  when  emptied  out,  loss  of  appetite,
disgust  and  nausea,  or  vomiting  of  bilious  matter,  and
especially  if  patient  could  retain  nothing  but  hot  drinks
on  the  stomach,  we  would  have  a  clear  case  for  Cheli-
doniitm  even  though  the  infra-scapular  pain  were  absent.
All  these  symptoms  might  be  found  in  either  a  chronic  or
acute  case.  If  in  a  chronic  case,  some  antipsoric  like
Lycopodium  might  have  to  be  called  in,  according  to  indi-
cations of  course,  to  help  complete  a  cure,  but  Chelidonium
would  be  the  main  reliance.

These  liver  troubles  range  from  simple  congestion  and
inflammation  of  the  organ,  to  the  more  severe  and  deep
seated  affections  like  fatty  liver,  gall  stones,  etc.  Cheli-
do7iitim  is  one  of  the  leading  remedies  in  pneumonia,
which  is  complicated  with  liver  symptoms.  Sometimes
in  coughs  which  are  persistent  with  much  pain  through
right  side  of  chest  and  into  shoulder,  the  Chelidonium
helps  us  out  and  saves  the  patient  from  what  might  easily
terminate  in  consumption.


244  AURUM  MURIATICUM  NATRONATUM.


AURUM  MURIATICUM  NATRONATUM.

When  writing  of  Aurum  metallicum  we  might  have
said someth'ing of  this  combination  as  a  remedy  for
jaundice  or  liver  troubles.  Several  years  ago  I  was  troubled
with  frequent  attacks  of  derangement  of  the  liver  char-
acterized by,  first,  a  white  fecal  stool  for  several  days  in
succession,  with  dullness  of  the  head,  bad  tasting  mouth,
coated  tongue,  fullness  and  pain  in  right  side  and  shoulder,
and  jaundiced  skin. This  would  either  culminate  in  an
attack  of  bilious vomiting and diarrhoea,  or  in  fecal
stools  as  black  as  tar,  for  several  days  in  succession,  with
gradual  relief  of  the  general  bilious  symptoms.  I  tried  vari-
ous remedies,  as  well  as  I  was  able  to  choose  them,  among
which  were,  Mercurius^  Leptandra^  Podophyllum^  Lyco-
podium  and  others,  with  nothing  more  than  temporary  re-
lief, and  sometimes  not  even  that. While  on  a  visit  to
New  York  city,  I  called  upon  Dr.  M.  Baruch,  partly  to  see
the  man  who  had  been  reported  to  me  as  both  very  skillful
Aurum  77iuriaticitm  7tatronatum  i6ooth,  followed  by  a
powder  each  of  Veronica  officinalis  500th,  200th  and  30th,
and  directed  me  to  take  them  in  the  order  named  once  in
sixty  hours  and  said  :  "  In  three  months  you  will  be  well."
I  took  the  powders  as  r'irected  and  have  never  been
the Aurum  jnuriaticum  natronatum  for  some  obstinate
cases  of  jaundice,  with  the  alternating  white  and  black
stools,  and  have  been  successful  in  relieving  them.


LEPTANDRA  VIRGINICA.


LEPTANDRA  VIRGINICA.

While  writing  on  Auricm  muriaticiim  natrojtatum  I
mentioned  Veronica  with  which  Dr.  Baruch  followed  that
remedy  in  the  cure  of  my  own  case.  After  returning  home
I  tried  to  find  the  two  remedies. Found  AiLriini  muriati-
cum  7iatronatu?n  in  Hering's  Guiding  Symptoms,  and,  al-
though meager,  had  something  to  go  by  in  treating  other
cases,  with  the  result  there  mentioned. But  I  could  find
no  Vero7tica  proven  unless  it  was  the  Leptmidra^  which  is
one  of  the  Veronica  tribe. So  the  next  time  I  saw  Dr.
Baruch  I  asked  him  if  it  was  the  Leptandra  that  he  gave
me,  and  he  said,  "  No,  it  was  the  Veronica  officinalis "
(common  Speedwell). It  was  not  found  in  our  Materia
Medica  as  yet. There  is  no  doubt  the Veronicas  and
especially  the  Leptandra  are  good  liver  remedies,  but
aside  from  the  alternate  ashy  and  black  stools  we  have
nothing  very  definite  to  guide  us  to  its  selection.  The
only  two  provings  made  were  with  the  alkaloid,  and  that
in  too  low  preparations  to  be  of  much  value. I  once  suc-
ceeded with  Leptandra  in curing,  or  at  least she  im-
proved until  she  was  well,  a  lady  very  sick  with  what  was
called  by  her  former  physician  typhoid  fever. The  fol-
lowing indications  which  I  found  in  Jahr's  Clinical  Guide
(by  Lilienthal,  first  edition)  led  to  its  prescription.  Symp-
toms : — "Great  prostration,  stupor,  heat  and  dryness  of
skin,  calor  mordax  or  coldness  of  the  extremities,  dark,
fetid,  tarry,  or  watery  stools  mixed  with  bloody  mucus,
and  a  jaundiced  skin." Otherwise  I  have  never  seen  any
marked  benefit  from  this  remedy  in  any  case. Still  I  be-
lieve it  to  be  capable,  with  scientific  proving,  in  potency,


24^  BERBERIS  VULGARIS.


of  developing  great  curative  powers.  If  I  might,  in  this
short  notice,  inspire  some  young  physicians  to  thoroughly
prove  it  I  should  not  have  written  in  vain.


BERBERIS  VULGARIS.

"Bruised  pain,  with  stiffness  and  lameness  in  the  small
of  the  back."  "Rises  from  a  seat  with  difficulty."
"  Backache  worse  when  sitting  or  lying,  especially  when
lying  in  bed  in  the  morning."  "Sensation  of  numbness^
stiffness  and  lameness^  with  painful  pressure  in  lumbar  and
renal  regions."  These  pains  sometimes  extend  all  through
the  hips.  Guernsey  says  :  "A  great  many  old  troubles  in
the  back.  Sufferings  in  the  back  aggravated  by  fatigue.''''
One  might  say  all  these  symptoms  are  found  under  Rhus  tox.
True,  but  in  the  Berberis  case  they  all  come  from  or  are
in  connection  with  kidney  or  urinary  troubles,  Rhus
tox.  seldom  so.  The  pains  extend  often  into  the  bladder
and  urethra,  and  the  urine  itself  is  changed.  It  may  have
a  turbid,  flocculent,  clay-like,  copious,  mucous  sediment,  or
a  reddish,  mealy  sediment,  or  be  blood-red,  but  the  per-
sistent pains  in  the  back  are  the  leading  indications.  It  is
especially  to  be  thought  of  in  arthritic  and  rheumatic  affec-
tions, when  these  back  symptoms  connected  with  urinary
alterations  are  present.  One  very  characteristic  symptom
is  a  bubbling  sensation  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys.  An-
other is  soreness  in  region  of  kidneys  when  jumping  out
of  a  wagon  or  stepping  hard  down  stairs  or  from  any  jar-
ring movement.  There  is  almost  always  in  the  back
troubles  of  Berberis.,  a  great  deal  of  prostrations  or  a  sense
of  weakness  across  the  back,  and  the  face  looks  pale,
earthy  complexion,  with  sunken  cheeks  and  hollow  eyes,


TKREBINTHINA.  ^  247

with  blue  circles  under  tlieni.  No  matter  what  ails  the
region  of  the  kidneys  do  not  forget  Berberis.

TEREBINTHINA

Ought  to  come  in  here,  because  it,  like  Berberis^  has
much  pain  in  the  back  with  kidney  and  bladder  troubles.
Painters  working  under  the  smell  of  Turpe7itme  are  often
seriously  affected  by  it.  Some  are  unable  to  work  in  it.
In  the  Turpentine  kidney  troubles  there  is  apt  to  be
more  strangury  than  with  Berberis  and  more  blood  in  the
urine.  The  urine  becomes  brown,  black,  or  srnoky  in  ap-
pearance from  more  or  less  admixture  of  blood.  For
burning  and  smarting  on  passing  urine,  Turpe^itine  stands
nearer  to  Cantharis  or  Camiabis  sativa  than  it  does  to
Berberis.  All  four  may  be  found  useful  in  the  first  stage
of  albuminuria.  Turpentine  taking  the  lead,  and  it  may
sometimes  require  considerable  study  to  choose  between
them.  Mercurius  corrosivus  generally  comes  in  a  little
later.  Terebinth  is  one  of  our  best  anti-hsemorrhagic
remedies.  Hematuria,  hemoptysis,  and  haemorrhage  from
the  bowels,  especially  in  typhoid,  and  even  in  purpura
hsemorrhagica  it  may  do  splendid  work.  One  of  the  chief-
est  characteristics  for  its  use  is  the  smooth^  glossy^  red
tongue  ;  another  is  excessive  tympanitis.  These  two  symp-
toms are  often  found  in  typhoids,  and  then  Terebinth  is
the  remedy.  Dropsy  after  scarlatina,  with  smoky  urine,
may  find  its  remedy  here,  but  Lachesis^  Apis^  Helleborus
niger,  or  Colchicum  will  often  dispute  claims  with  it.
The  Old  School  make  great  use  of  it  in  many  other  af-
fections as  a  local  application.  '  I  have  seen  some  bad
effects  from  its  use  in  that  way  for  the  chest  in  pneumonia
in  their  hands. I  would  cot  recommend  it.


248


CANNABIS  SATIVA.


CANNABIS  SATIVA

Is  another  remedy  having  a  strong  action  on  the  urinary
organs,  particularly  upon  the  urinary  tract  or  urethra.
It  is  the  remedy  par  excellence  with  which  to  begin  the
treatment  of  gonorrhoea,  unless  some  other  remedy  is  par-
ticularly indicated,  and  such  cases  are  very  few.  The
most  characteristic  symptom  is  that  the  urethra  is  very
sensitive  to  touch  or  external  pressure.  The  patient  can-
not walk  with  his  legs  close  together  because  any  pressure
along  the  tract  hurts  him  so.  If  the  disease  has  extended
up  the  urethra,  or  into  the  bladder,  there  will  often  be
severe  pains  in  the  back  every  few  minutes  and  the  urine
may  be  bloody.  I  used  in  my  early  practice  to  put  five
drops  mother  tincture  into  four  ounces  of  water  (in  a  four
ounce  vial)  and  let  the  patient  take  a  tablespoonful  three
times  a  day.  After  about  four  days  the  inflammatory
symptoms  would  have  subsided,  and  the  thin  discharge
have  thickened  and  become  greenish  in  appearance.  Then
Mercurius  solubilis  3d  trituration,  a  powder  three  times
a  day,  would  often  finish  the  case.  Or  if  a  little  thin,  gleety
discharge  remained,  I  cured  that  with  Sulphur^  Capsicum^
or  Kali  iodide.  I  have  cured  many  cases  in  from  one  to
two  weeks  this  way.  I^ater  I  have  used  the  cm.  potency
in  the  first  stage,  and  sometimes  never  have  to  use  the
second  remedy.  If  I  do,  Mercurius  corrosivus  cm.  is
generally  the  remedy.  Sometimes  Pulsatilla^  Sulphur  or
Sepia  to  finish  up  the  case.  There  are  exceptions,  but  the
rule  is  that  cases  get  well  promptly  under  this  treatment.
After  Caiinabis  saliva^  Mercurius  corrosivus^  if  the  dis-
charge is  thick  and  green,  if  the  burning  continues.  Pul-


BENZOIC  ACID.


249


satilla  or  Sepia  if  the  discharge  is  thick  and  bland.  Sul-
phur for  gleet.  Of  course  I  have  not  mentioned  all  of  the
remedies  that  are  necessary  in  this  disease.  I  use  them  all
in  the  cm.  and  I  know,  having  tried  both,  that  they  cure
better  than  the  low  potencies.  There  is  one  curious  symp-
tom I  have  several  times  removed  by  this  remedy,  namely,
a  sense  of  dropping  around  or  in  the  region  of  the  heart.
I  do  not  know  its  pathological  signification,  but  it  is  very
annoying  and  the  patient  is  very  grateful  to  be  rid  of  it.

BENZOIC  ACID.

The  grand  central  characteristic  of  this  remedy  is  found
in  the  urine,  which  is  scanty,  of  a  dark  brown  color  (like
French  brandy),  the  urinous  odor  being  highly  iiitensijied.
This  odor  comes  at  the  time  of  passing  and  remains  after-
ward. One  need  not  wait  on  a  long-standing  specimen  to
find  it.  It  is  found  in  connection  with  rheumatism,
quinsy,  dropsy,  diarrhoea,  headache  and  other  diseases.  Of
course  many  other  remedies  have  offensive  urine,  like  Ni-
tric acid  urine  offensive  like  horse  urine,  Berberis  but  the
deposit  is  turbid,  Calcarea  ostrearum  but  the  deposit  is
white.  Benzoic  acid  often  smells  horribly,  with  no  deposit
at  all.  Both  Benzoic  acid  and  Berberis  are  great  remedies
feu:  arthritic  troubles  with  the  urinary  symptoms.  Ly co-
podium  and  Lithium  carb.  also  claim  attention  in  this  af-
fection, the  concomitants  deciding  the  choice.  I  have  seen
wonderful  relief  from  Benzoic  acid  in  nephritic  colic  with
the  characteristic  offensive  urine.  In  dribbling  of  urine
of  old  men  with  enlarged  prostate  it  has  also  done  good
service.  The  urine  in  the  clothing  scents  the  whole  room.
.  Menstrual  difficulties  and  prolapsus  uteri  with  the  charac-
teristic urinary  symptoms  are  also  relieved  by  it.  Heart


250  SARSAPARILLA.

troubles  of  rheumatic  origin  also.  So  we  have  a  widely
diversified  list  of  diseases  in  which  this  remedy  is  the  one^
and  all  seem  to  be  connected  with  this  one  strong  charac-
teristic symptom.


SARSAPARILLA

Is  another  remedy  which  has  excruciating  neuralgia  of
the  kidneys.  Renal  colic  and  passage  of  gravel  and  for-
mation of  vesicle  calculi.  Dr.  Hering  gives  many  testi-
monials to  the  efficacy  of  this  remedy  to  relieve  the  suffer-
ings attendant  on  gravel,  especially  with  rheumatic  symp-
toms. Lycopodium\i2S  red  sand  with  clear  urine  ;  Sarsa-
parilla  white  sand  with  scanty,  slimy  or  flaky  urine.  They
may  both  be  very  useful  in  chronic  rheumatic  troubles,
with  these  urinary  complications.  The  most  characteristic
symptom  of  Sarsaparilla  is  "  much  pain  at  the  conclusion
of  pas  si7tg  m'm&\  almost  unbearable."  There  is  often  in
this  case  great  tenesmus  of  the  bladder  at  the  same  time.
No  remedy  has  this  symptom  so  strongly  as  Sarsaparilla*
Pulsatilla  has  something  similar,  so  far  as  tenesmus  is  con-
cerned, in  connection  with  enlarged  prostate.  Natrum
muriaticum  has  also, — "  After  urination  burning  and  cut-
ting in  the  urethra;  spasmodic  contraction  in  abdomen,
etc."  So  we  must  be  careful  about  prescribing  on  one
symptom  alone,  be  it  ever  so  prominent.  In  marasmus
Sarsaparilla  stands  alongside  of  Iodine^  Natrum  mur.^
and  Abrotanum.  In  Sarsaparilla  the  neck  emaciates  and
skin  (in  general)  lies  in  folds.  Iodine^  general  emaciation,
wishes  to  eat  all  of  the  time.  Natrum  7nur.  eats  and
emaciates  all  of  the  time,  neck  particularly.  Abrotanum^
general  marasmus,  legs  most. Argentum  7titrictc7n,  child


PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.  25 1

looks  old,  dried  up,  like  a  mummy.  Sarsaparilla  is  one
of  the  best  remedies  for  headache  or  periosteal  pains  gen-
erally, from  suppressed  gonorrhoea.  I  have  seen  great  re-
sults from  the  200th.  It  is  also  a  good  remedy  for  syphilitic
eruptions  with  great  emaciation ;  cracks  on  hands  and
feet,  especially  on  sides  of  fingers  and  toes.

PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.

There  are  many  remedies  that  are  powerful  cathartics,
and  this  is  one  of  them.  A  superficial  understanding  of
our  law  of  cure  would  lead  a  novice  to  conclude  that  all
one  would  have  to  do  for  a  case  of  diarrhoea  would  be  to
the  result.  The  simple  fact  of  diarrhoea  is  only  a  factor
in  the  case,  where  the  selection  of  a  remedy  for  its  cure  is
concerned;  for  each  cathartic  has  not  only  a  diarrhoea,  but
a  peculiar  kind  of  diarrhoea  which  no  other  remedy  has.
The  diarrhoea  of  Podophyllufn  is  characterized  by

ist.  The  profuseness  of  the  stool.  2d.  The  offensiveness
of  the  stool.  3d.  The  aggravations  in  the  morning,  hot
weather,  and  during  dentition.  Then  again  the  con-
comitants are  very  peculiar.  There  is  often  present,  pro-
lapsus ani,  sleep  with  eyes  half  closed  and  rolling  the  head
from  side  to  side  and  moaning  ;  frequent  gagging  or  empty
retching.  These  symptoms  present  have  often  led  to  the
administration  of  this  great  remedy  with  very  gratifying
results.  In  regard  to  the  profuse  stools,  they  are  so  much
so  that  they  seem  to  drain  the  patient  dry  at  every  one.
They  may  be  yellow  or  greenish  watery,  and,  when  watery,
always  profuse.  Then  again  they  may  be  pappy  and  pro-
fuse {Gambogia\  or  mucous  and  scanty,  but  always  with
Podophyllum  very  oflfensive. I  have  cured  these  cases  in


252


PODOPHYI^LUM  PELTATUM.


all  Stages.  In  the  first  onset  of  the  disease,  as  well  as  in
the  very  far  advanced  and  apparently  hopeless  cases  of
cholera  infantum,  the  loooth  potency  (B.  &  T.)  has
done  the  best  for  me.  Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  this
remedy  is  one  of  quite  a  list  set  down  for  liver  troubles,
both  with  looseness  of  the  bowels  and  constipation,  I  have
not  found  it  very  efficacious  in  the  latter.  I  can  readily
see  how  it  might  be,  however,  in  liver  troubles  with  con-
stipation which  had  followed  a  preceding  diarrhoea,  just
as  Opium  might  cure  the  sleeplessness  that  followed  pre-
ceding stupor,  and  Coffea  sleepiness  which  followed  pre-
ceding excitement.  All  drugs  have  their  double  action,
or  what  is  called  primary  and  secondary  action.  But  the
surest  and  most  lasting  curative  action  of  any  drug  is  that
in  which  the  condition  to  be  cured  simulates  the  primary
action  of  the  drug.  For,  as  I  have  held  elsewhere,  I  think
that  what  is  called  secondary  action  is  really  not  the  legiti-
mate action  of  the  drug^  but  the  aroused  powers  of  the
organism  against  the  drug.  So  the  alternate  diarrhoea
and  constipation  in  disease  is  a  fight,  for  instance,  between
the  disease  (diarrhoea)  and  the  natural  powers  resisting  it.
It  is  of  considerable  importance  then  to  be  able  to  recognize
in  such  a  case  whether  it  is  the  diarrhoea  or  constipation
that  is  the  disease,  against  which  the  alternate  condition  is
the  effort  of  the  vital  force  to  establish  health.  Yet  such
an  understanding  is  not  always  absolutely  imperative,  for
in  either  case  there  are  generally  enough  concomitant
symptoms  to  decide  the  choice  of  the  remedy.  Indeed,  the
choice  must  always  rest  upon  either  the  peculiar  and  char-
acteristic symptoms  appearing  in  the  case  or  the  totality
of  them.  None  but  the  true  homoeopathist  learns  to  ap-
preciate this.  Here  is  where  what  is  called  pathological
prescribing  often  fails,  for  the  choice  of  the  remedy  may


PODOPHYLLUM  PKLTATUM.


253


depend  upon  symptoms  entirely  outside  of  the  symptoms
"which  go  to  make  up  the  pathology  of  the  case,  at  least  so
far  as  we  as  yet  understand  pathology.

Podophyllum  has  a  great  desire  to  press  the  gums  to-
gether during  dentition.  When  this  symptom  is  prominent,
the  choice  will  have  to  be  made  between  this  remedy  and
Phytolacca^  both  being  great  remedies  for  cholera  infantum.
In  the  nausea  of  Podophyllum  vomiting  is  not  so  promi-
nent as  with  Ipecac^  but  the  gagging  without  vomiting  is
very  marked,  as  it  is  also  under  Secale  cornutmn.
Rumbling  in  the  abdomen  ;  especially  in  the  ascending
colon,  is  strong  indication  for  this  remedy  even  in  chronic
bowel  troubles.  Prolapsus  ani  is  also  a  prominent  symp-
tom of  this  remedy,  so  also  is  prolapsus  of  the  uterus,
especially  after  straining,  over-lifting  or  parturition.  Here
the  choice  will  often  be  between  Podophylhim^  Rhus  tox.
and  Nux  vomica.

Podophyllum  seems  also  to  have  a  strong  affinity  for  the
ovaries,  and  some  remarkable  cures  have  been  made  on  the
symptom, — "Pain  in  right  ovary,  running  down  thigh  of
that  side."  Sometimes  there  is  also  numbness  attending.
Ovarian  tumors  have  disappeared  under  the  action  of  this
remedy,  when  this  symptom  was  present.  I  once  made  a
brilliant  cure  of  an  obstinate  case  of  intermittent  fever
with  this  remedy.  The  chills  were  very  violent  and  were
followed  by  intense  fever  with  great  loquacity.  There  was
also  great  jaundice  present.  When  the  fever  was  past  the
patient  fell  asleep,  and  on  awaking  did  not  remember  what
he  had  said  in  his  loquacious  delirium.  The  range  of  this
remedy  does  not  seem  very  wide,  but  within  its  range  its
action  is  surprisingly  prompt  and  radical.


254


ALOE  SOCOTRINA.


ALOE  SOCOTRINA.

This  remedy  should  be  considered  alongside  of  Podo-
phyllmn,  because  it  is  one  of  the  so-called  cathartics.  Al-
though one  is  as  decided  a  cathartic  as  the  other  the  char-
acteristics which  guide  to  their  choice  are  very  different.

Both  are  apt  to  be  worse  during  hot  weather.

Both  are  apt  to  be  worse  in  the  morning.

Both  are  often  well  supplemented  with  Sulphur.

But  now  let  us  look  at  some  of  the  more  marked  and
peculiar  symptoms  of  Aloe.  Stool  yellow,  fecal,  bloody
or  transparent  jelly-like  mucus.  Sometimes  this  jelly-
like mucus  comes  in  great  masses,  or  "  gobs,"  and  drops
out  of  the  rectum  almost  unnoticed.  Again  the  stools  are
often  passed  involuntarily  when  expelling  flatus  or  passing
urine.  There  seems  to  be  not  only  an  actual  weakness  in
the  sphincter  ani,  but  a  distressing  sense  of  weakness.  The
rectum  feels  as  if  full  of  heavy  fluid  which  will  fall  out,
or  escape  from  the  patient,  and  in  fact  does  so  if  he
doesn't  "git  there  Eli."  This  escape  of  stool  with  flaLus
in  Aloe  finds  its  counterpart  in  Oleander.  No  two  reme-
dies aje  more  alike  in  this  respect,  though  Muriatic  acid
is  also  similar.  Again  a  very  characteristic  symptom  in  the
Aloe  diarrhoea  is  "Great  rumbling  in  the  abdomen  just
before  stool,"  and  the  feeling  of  weight  in  the  rectum  al-
ready mentioned  is  not  always  confined  to  the  rectum  but  is
also  felt  through  the  whole  pelvis  and  abdomen.  Again,
the  rectum  protrudes  in  Aloe  like  a  bunch  of  grapes,  and
is  relieved  by  the  application  of  cold  water.  Muriatic  acid
is  relieved  by  hot  applications.  Both  of  these  remedies
have  blue  haemorrhoids  ;  the  Aloe  itching  intensely,  while
those  of  Muriatic  acid  are  very  sore  and  sensitive  to  touch,
even  of  the  bed  clothes. In  addition  to  the  aggravations


CROTON  TIGLIUM.


already  mentioaed,  the  diarrhoea  of  Aloe  is  aggravated  by
walking  or  standing,  after  eating  or  drinking.  In  dysen-
tery there  is  violent  tenesmus,  heat  in  the  rectum,  prostra-
tion even  to  fainting  and  profuse  clammy  sweats.  The
weakness  of  the  sphincter  ani  is  also  found  in  constipation.
It  is  a  curious  symptom,  and  I  would  not  believe  it  until  I
had  seen  it  with  my  own  eyes.  "  Solid  stool  passing  in-
voluntarily, passing  away  unnoticed."  I  was  called  to
treat  a  child  five  years  of  age  suffering  from  birth  with  a
most  obstinate  form  of  constipation.  He  had  to  be  forced
and  held  to  the  stool,  crying  and  screaming  all  the  while,
being  totally  unable  to  pass  any  feces  even  after  an
anema.  After  trying  several  remedies  in  vain,  I  asked  the
mother  to  turn  the  child  over  (he  was  in  bed)  to  let  me
examine  the  anus  and  rectum.  As  she  turned  down  the
bed  clothes  to  do  so,  a  large  chunk  of  solid  feces  appeared
in  the  bed.  "There,"  said  she,  "that  is  the  way  it  is.
Notwithstanding  his  inability  to  pass  stool  when  he
tries,  we  often  find  these  things  in  the  bed,  and  he  does
not  know  when  they  pass,  nor  do  we."  I  then  gave  a  few
doses  of  Aloe  200th  and  cured  the  whole  trouble  quickly
and  permanently.  Aloe  like  Podophyllum  has  also  prolap-
sus uteri,  and  the  feeling  of  heat,  heaviness  and  fullness  in
the  abdomen,  pelvis  and  rectum,  guides  to  its  selection.
Like  Podophyllum^  also,  its  range  of  action  is  not  wide,  but
positive,  reliable  and  satisfactory.

CROTON  TIGLIUM.

When  the  Allopaths,  in  any  case  where  they  considered
an  operation  of  the  bowels  imperative,  had  exhausted  all
other  resources,  Croton  tiglium  was  their  "  biggest  gun  for
the  last  broadside." In  other  words,  this  is  a  most  violent


256


CROTON  TIGUUM.


cathartic.  Now  if  Similia,  etc.,  is  not  true  Croton  tig.
ought  utterly  to  fail  to  cure  diarrhoea  ;  but  it  is  true,
and  notwithstanding  this  remedy  has  proven  its  truth  over
and  over  again  the  Allopaths  deny  and  reject  homoeopathy.
As  in  Podophyllum  and  Aloe^  Croton  tig.  cures  its  kind
and  no  other.  Its  guiding  symptoms  are :
First :  "  Yellow  watery  stool."

Second  :  "Sudden  expulsion,  coming  out  like  a  shot,  all
at  once."

Third :  "Aggravation  from  the  least  food  or  drink."
In  this  combination  Croton  tig.  leads  all  of  the  remedies.
The  first  symptom  is  found  notably  under,  Apis  mel.^  Cal-
carea  ost.^  China.,  Gratiola^  Hyoscyamus^  Natrum  sulph..,
and  Thuja.  The  second  under  Jatropha^  Gratia la^  Podo-
phyllum and  Thuja.  The  third  under  Argenium  nit.  and
Arsenicum  alb.  The  Calcarea  ost.  is  found  in  the  Cal-
carea  temperament  and  China  in  cases  weakened  by  loss
of  fluids,  and  all  the  others  have  strongly  marked  symp-
toms which  distinguish  them  from  Croton  tiglium.  For
want  of  space  we  cannot  give  them  here.  Aloe  has  rum-
bling before  the  stool,  while  Croton  tig.  has  swashing  in
the  intestines  as  from  water.  Both  of  these  remedies  hav-
ing aggravation  after  eating  or  drinking,  we  would  have
to  look  further  for  the  symptoms  deciding  between  them.
Another  symptom  that  has  frequently  been  verified  in  this
remedy  is — "Excruciating  pain  running  from  nipple  to
back  (scapula)  of  the  same  side  when  the  child  nurses.
I  have  cured  bad  cases  of  mastitis  guided  by  this  one  symp-
tom. Croton  tig.  cures  eczema  especially  of  the  scrotum,
when  the  eruption  itches  intensely,  but  is  so  sensitive  and
sore  to  touch  that  he  cannot  scratch.  This  comprehends
the  main  uses  of  this  valuable  remedy.


NATRUM  SULPHURICUM.


NATRTJM  STTLPHURICUM.

Natrum  sulphuricum  is  also  one  of  our  armamentarium
for  diarrhoea,  both  acute  and  chronic.  Like  Podophyllum^
Stdphur,  Nuphar  and  Rumex,  the  diarrhoea  is  aggravated
in  the  morning.  Sulphur  drives  the  patient  out  of  bed,
but  Natrum  sulph.^  like  Bryonia,  is  worse  only  after  begin-
ning to  move.  Then  again  Natrum  sulph.  has,  like  Aloe,
much  rumbling  in  the  bowels  as  of  flatulence.  This
rumbling  of  flatus  is  often  with  Natrum  sulph.  located  in
the  right  side  of  the  abdomen  in  the  ileo-csecal  region.

Again  the  Natrum  sulphuricum  stool  is,  like  China,
Argentum  nit.,  Calcarea  phos.,  Agaricus  and  Aloe,  accom-
panied by  a  profuse  emission  of  flatus.  This  flatulence  is
not  always  present,  but  is  often  so.  In  chronic  diarrhoea
there  is  almost  always  some  trouble  with  the  liver,  evi-
denced by  soreness  in  right  hypochondrium,  which  is
sensitive  to  touch,  and  hurts  on  walking  or  any  jar.  One
very  strong  characteristic  for  this  remedy  in  this  trouble
is  aggravation  of  the  diarrhoea,  pain,  etc.,  in  damp  weather.
In  this  it  resembles  Dulcamara  and  Rhododendron.  The
Dulca^nara  has  the  aggravation  in  change  from  warm  to
cold  weather,  whether  damp  or  dry.  This  aggravation  in
damp  weather  is  not  confined  to  diarrhoea  in  Natrum
sulph,,  but  is  especially  present  in  cases  of  chronic  asthma.
I  have  seen  very  great  benefit  in  such  cases  of  this  very
troublesome  and  obstinate  disease,  and  as  aggravation  in
damp  weather  very  commonly  occurs  in  cases  of  old
asthma  this  remedy  is  often  indicated.  I  have  not  ob-
served much  benefit  from  this  remedy  in  runarounds,  for
which  it  is  highly  recommended ;  but  have  seen  nice  re-


258


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.


suits  from  it  in  very  obstinate  cases  of  gonorrhoea,  when
the  discharge  was  thick  and  greenish,  and  little  pain.
Loose  cough,  with  soreness  and  pain  through  the  left
chest,  is  very  characteristic.  This  is  one  of  the  chief  diag-
nostic points  of  difference  between  Bryonia  and  Natruni
siilphuricum^  that  while  with  both  there  is  great  soreness
of  the  chest  with  the  cough,  with  Bryonia  the  cough  is
dry,  while  with  Natruin  sulph.  it  is  loose.  The  patient
springs  right  up  in  bed  the  cough  hurts  him  so.  *
There  is  as  much  soreness  as  there  is  with  Bryonia^  and
when  the  patient  coughs  he  springs  up  in  bed  and  holds
the  painful  side  in  his  hand  to  ease  the  hurt.  This  symp-
tom may  be  found  in  chronic  affections  of  the  respiratory
organs,  such  as  asthma,  phthisis,  etc.,  and  I  have  several
times  seen  remarkably  prompt  relief  and  cure  follow  its
administration  in  pneumonia  when  this  symptom  was
present.  This  pain  through  the  lower  left  chest  is  as  char-
acteristic for  Natruni  sulph.  as  is  that  of  pain  running
through  right  lower  chest  for  Kali  carbonicum.


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.

Now  that  we  have  introduced  the  Natrums^  we  will  con-
tinue them.  Common  salt.  A  gentleman  once  said  to  me
more  sulphur  than  that  in  every  egg  I  eat.  How  can  that
do  me  any  good?  "  My  answer  was,  wait  and  see.  And  he
was  cured  of  both  doubts  and  disease.  There  is  no
remedy  in  the  Materia  Medica,  I  think,  that  so  disgusts
the  advocates  of  the  low  potency,  and  low  only,  as  this
one.  The  unquestionable  cure  of  the  most  obstinate  cases
of  intermittent  fever  with  the  200th  and  higher  poten-


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  259

cies  demoralizes  them. That  people  eating  salt  in  ap-
preciable quantities  right  along  and  can't  live  without  it,
don't  get  well  on  it,  and  do  get  well  on  the  same  thing
potentized, does  not hold  to reason,  the  microscope,
molecular  theory, spectrum analysis,  or  anything  else
scientific  (so  called),  not  being  able  to  discover  any  ma-
terial in  the  dose. But  there  stand  the  cures,  like  the
blind  man  whom  Jesus  healed. It  is  a  hard  thing  to  be
confronted  by  such  facts  against  our  prejudices.  "Oh,
well,"  said  one  of  these  doubters,  "People  sometimes  get
well  without  medicine." So  they  do  with,  I  replied.
Isn't  it  curious  how  some  physicians  will  hoot  at  a  potency
and  fly  like  a  frightened  crow  from  a  bacillus  varying  in
size  from  0.004  millimeters  to  0.006  m.m. They  can
hardly  eat,  drink  or  sleep  for  fear  a  little  microbe  of  the
fifteenth  culture  will  light  on  them  somewhere,  but  there
is  nothing  in  a  potency  above  the  12th. Oh,  consistency  !
When  prejudice  gives  way  to  honest,  earnest  investigation
for  truth,  the  world  may  be  the  better  for  it.  Natrum
mur.  is  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  anaemia. It  does  not
seem  to  make  much  difference  whether  the  anaemia  is
caused  by  loss  of  fluids  {China^  Kali  carb.)^  menstrual  irreg--
ularities  (Puis.),  loss  of  semen  [Phos.  acidy  China),  grief,  or
other  mental  diseases. In  these  cases  of  anaemia,  to
which  Natrum  is  adapted,  we  may,  in  addition  to  the  gen-
eral paleness, have emaciation, notwithstanding  the
patient  eats  well. Severe  attacks  of  throbbing  headache  ;
shortness  of  breath,  especially  on  going  up  stairs,  or  other
physical  exertion  ;  scanty  menstruation  ;  more  or  less  con-
stipation and  generally  great  depression  of  spirits.  In
fact,  depression  of  spirits  is  characteristic  of  this  drug  ;  the
patient  weeps  much,  like  Pulsatilla,  the  difference  being
that  the  Pulsatilla  patient  is  soothed  and  comforted  by


26o


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.


consolation,  while  the  Natrwn  mur.  patient  is  aggravated.

There  is  almost  always  in  these  anaemic  cases  a  great
deal  of  fluttering,  palpitation,  and  even  intermittent  action
of  the  heart.  I  have  helped  many  such  cases  with  this
remedy,  high,  in  single  doses,  only  repeating  when  im-
provement lagged.  I  have  seen  a  patient  who  had  lost  40
pounds  of  flesh  (weight,  160  lbs.)  though  eating  well  all  of  the
time,  under  one  dose  of  Natrum  mur.^  tip  the  scales  at  200
lbs.  within  three  months  from  the  time  of  taking.  He
was  very  hypochondriac  at  the  time  of  the  beginning  of
treatment.  I  cannot  speak  too  highly  of  Natrum  mur.  in
these  affections.  Natrum  mur.  is  one  of  our  best  remedies
for  chronic  headaches.  They  come  in  paroxysms  and  would,
by  their  intense  throbbing  nature,  cause  one  to  think  of
Belladonna^  only  that  they  occur  mostly  in  the  anaemic,  and
the  face  is  pale,  or  at  least  only  slightly  flushed.  If  the
face  is  red  and  burning,  eyes  injected,  and  pain  of  beating
or  throbbing  nature,  we  would  immediately  think  of  such
remedies  as  Mellilotus^  Bellado7ina^  or  Nux  vom.^  and  then
look  for  concomitant  symptoms  to  decide  between  them*
The  headaches  of  Natrum  mur.  are  very  apt  to  occur  after
the  menstrual  period,  as  if  caused  by  loss  of  blood,  and  you
know  that  China  also  has  throbbing  headache  in  such  cases.
With  Natrum  the  throbbing  headache  occurs  whether  the
menses  be  scanty  or  profuse.  Natrum  mur.  also  cures  the
headaches  of  school  girls,  and  here  it  may  be  difficult  to
choose  between  it  and  Calcarea  phos.^  both  remedies  also
being  particularly  adapted  to  anaemic  states.  Indeed,  I
have  sometimes  missed  and  had  to  give  Calcarea phos.  when
Natrum  failed  and  vice  versa,  because  I  could  not  make
the  choice.  In  actual  practice  such  cases  do  sometimes  oc-
cur, where  the  case  in  hand  is  not  far  enough  developed  in
symptomatic  indications  to  enable  one  to  choose  between


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.


261


two  about  equally  indicated  remedies. If  a  man  hits  it  well
without  ever  having  to  try  but  twice  I  can  forgive  him  for
failing  the  first  time,  and  am  willing  to  be  forgiven  myself.
In  these  cases,  however,  let  the  physician  be  blamed,  and
not Homoeopathy, for  that  never  fails. So-called  sick
headaches  often  find  their  similimum  in  Natrum  7nur.
For  want  of  space  we  cannot  giveall  of  the  symptoms  which
might  indicate  it. Natrum  mur.  acts  upon  the  whole
alimentary  tract,  from  mouth  to  anus,  and  has  very  char-
acteristic symptoms  guiding  to  its  administration.  The
lips  and  corners  of  the  mouth  are  dry,  ulcerated,  or  cracked.
In  this  it  resembles  Nitric  acid^  as  it  also  does  at  the  other
end  of  the  alimentary  canal;  for  with  both  remedies  the
anus  is  fissured,  sore,  painful,  and  sometimes  bleeding.
Anthnonium  crudum  and  Graphites  are  also  to  be  remem-
bered in  this  connection;  but  while  Graphites  has  the  af-
fection of  both  mouth  and  anus,  it  is  more  of  an  eczematous
or  eruptive  character  than  either  of  the  other  remedies.
Natritm  has  great  sense  of  dryness  in  the  mouth  without
actual  dryness. Now  Mercury  has  thirst  with  moist  mouth,
but  there  is  with  this  remedy  swollen  tongue,  or  flabby
tongue,  with  indentations  or  prints  of  the  teeth  upon  it,
and  very  oflfensive  breath,  all  of  which  is  not  markedly  so
oi  Natrum  7nur.,  so  there  is  no  danger  of  confounding  the
two. You  will  remember  that  although  alike  or  simifar  in
their  mind  symptoms,  Pulsatilla  has  the  exact  opposite  as
regards  this  symptom,  viz.,  dry  mouth  with  710  thirst,  fur-
nishing a  very  marked  contrast  where  a  choice  is  necessary.
Natrum  has  another  similarity  to  Pulsatilla,  in  that  it  has
bitter  taste,  and  loss  of  taste. Again  Natru7n  has  a  sensa-
tion upon  the  tongue  similar  to  Silicea,  viz.,  sensation  of
a  hair  upon  the  tongue. Deep  painful  fissure  in  middle
upper  lip  is  given  in  Guiding  Symptoms,  but  I  have  found
18


262


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.


it  in  the  lower  lip  and  believe  it  to  be  just  as  characteristic.
I  made  a  splendid  cure,  being  led  to  examination  of  the
remedy  in  this  symptom.

Blisters,  like  pearls  around  the  mouth,  are  found  in  Nat-
rum  micr.^  especially  in  intermittents.  If  the  upper  lip  is
much  thickened  or  swollen,  not  of  an  erysipelatous  char-
acter, we  would  think  of  three  remedies,  all  of  which  have
it,  Belladonjia^  Calcarea  ost.^  Natrum  miir.  Alone,  of
course,  this  symptom  would  not  amount  to  much,  but  is
strongly  corroborative  if  found  in  connection  with  other
symptoms  of  any  of  these  remedies.  The  symptoms  of
the  gums  may  be  summed  up  in  one  word,  scorbutic.
Now  study  also  Mercurius^  Car  bo  veg..  Muriatic  acid^  etc.

There  is  another  curious  symptom  in  which  I  was  helped
in  a  case  that  had  baffled  me  for  a  long  time,  viz.,  numb-
ness and  tingling  of  tongue,  lips  and  nose.  This  came  in
connection  with  a  chronic  soreness  of  the  liver,  derange-
ment of  digestion,  such  as  is  often  found  in  a  condition
which  is  popularly  termed  biliousness.  This  condition
Natrum  mur.^  given  very  high  (said  Lippe)  cm.,  clears  up
the  case  in  a  very  short  time.  Map  tongue  is  found  under
NatriLm  mur.^  Arseniatm  alb.^  Lachesis^  Nitric  acid^  and
Taraxacum.  I  have  used  Natrum  with  success  oftener
than  the  others.  I  have  not  found  Natrum  7nur.  a  great
throat  remedy,  except  in  follicular  pharyngitis,  which  had
been  abused  with  local  applications  of  Nitrate  of  Silver.
In  post  diphtheritic  paralysis  of  the  muscles  of  deglutition
Lachesis  or  Causticum  have  served  me  much  better.
Salivation  profuse,  watery  and  salty,  is  the  reactionary  or
secondary  action  of  Natrum  and  may  find  its  remedy  here.
But  this  is  not  so  often  found  as  the  other  condition  of
dryness. Natrum  mur.  has  some  strong  characteristics


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.  263

under  the  head  of  appetite,  thirst,  desires  and  aversions.
No  remedy  is  more  hungry,  yet  he  looses  flesh  while  eat-
ing well.  Iodine  has  this  canine  hunger  with  emaciation  ;
but  after  eating  the  Natrum  patient  feels  weary  and  sleepy,
while  the  Iodine  one  feels  better.  The  Natriim  patient
after  eating  feels  dull,  with  heavy  aching  and  sense  of  full-
ness and  discomfort  in  the  region  of  the  stomach  and  liver,
which  is  relieved  as  digestion  advances  ;  but  the  lodhte
patient  wishes  to  eat  all  of  the  time  and  feels  comfortable
only  when  the  stomach  is  full  or  being  filled.  There  are
several  remedies  which  are  either  hungry  or  are  relieved
by  eating,  notably,  Anacardium^  Chelidoiiium  and  Petro-
leimz^ '  as  well  as  Natrum  mur.  and  Iodine.  One  might
add  also  as  hungry  remedies  China  and  Lycopodittm.  The
Anacardium  has  pain  in  the  stomach  which  extends  to  the
spine,  and  an  all  gojie  sensation  which  must  be  relieved  by
eating,  and  after  two  hours  returns  and  he  must  eat  again.
Chelidonium  hunger  is  accompanied  with  the  characteristic
liver  symptoms.  (See  Chelidonium.^  In  China.,  Natrtcm
mur.  and  Lycopodium  hunger  patient  fills  up  quickly  and
fullness,  flatulence  and  distress  follow  until  the  process  of
digestion  is  well  advanced,  when  they  are  relieved.  Again,
Natrum  mur.  is  a  very  useful  remedy  for  an  abnormal
craving  for  salt.  Patient  salts  everything  he  eats.  A  dose
of  the  cm.  corrects  this  craving  and  often  cures  other
symptoms  accompanying.  Causticum  also  has  this  symp-
tom, and  if  the  other  symptoms  indicate  must  take  the
preference.  Of  course  the  intense  thirst  of  salt  is  well-
known,  and  keeps  pace  with  the  hunger.  Now  this  is  the
case  with  diabetes,  for  which  Natrum  is  a  curative  if  other-
wise indicated.  In  all  of  these  cases,  of  course,  it  must  be
used  high,  for  we  get  the  low  in  our  food.

Under  the  head  of  stool  and  rectum  few  remedies  have


264


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.


Stronger  symptoms.  I  quote  verbatim  from  "Guiding
Symptoms": — "Constipation;  obstinate  retention  of  stool;
stools  irregular,  hard,  unsatisfactory;  during  menses;  stools  in
large  masses;  stools  like  sheep  dung;  from  inactivity  of
rectum;  anus  contracted  or  torn,  bleeding,  smarting,  or
burning  afterwards;  stitches  in  the  rectum  causing  hypo-
chondriasis or  ill  humor;  great  torpor  without  pain;  from
want  of  moisture,  dryness  of  mucous  linings,  with  wateiy
secretions  in  other  parts;  difficult  expulsion,  fissuring  anus
with  flow  of  blood,  leaving  sensation  of  much  soreness;  with
uterine  displacements;  hemorrhoidal;  in  Addison's  Disease."
Now  to  read  this  rightly  we  must  entirely  separate  these
symptoms,  here  separated  by  the  semi-colon,  and  put  the
word  constipation  before  each  one.  That  saves  the  error
of  supposing  that  all  the  symptoms  here  quoted  must  be
present  in  a  single  case  of  constipation  to  make  Natrum
muriaticum  the  proper  remedy.

One  of  the  best  possible  exercises  for  a  student  of
Materia  Medica  is  to  compare  these  different  symptoms,  as
follows  :  Stools  dry,  crumbling,  is  also  found  under  Am-
monium  muriatiaim  and  Magnesia  muriatician.  Consti-
pation from  inactivity  of  the  rectum,  Alumma^  Veratrum
alburn^  Silicea^  etc.  Anus  contracted,  torn,  bleeding,  smart-
ing and  pain  after  stool,  Nitric  acid.  From  want  of
moisture,  dryness  of  mucous  linings,  Bryonia  and  Opium.
Leaving  sensation  of  much  soreness,  Ignatia^  Nitric  acid^
Alume7i.  Then  again  Natrum  mur.  may  become  the  only
curative  for  cholera  infantum,  chronic  diarrhoea,  and  other
conditions  where  loose  stools  predominate.  I  will  not
wait  to  specify  all  the  symptoms.  Emaciation,  hunger
and  thirst  are  present,  especially  in  cholera  infantum,
emaciation  being  most  noticeable  in  the  neck.  Emacia-
tion, Natrum,  Sarsaparilla  and  Iodine. On  the  urinary


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.


265


organs  I  will  only  call  attention  to  the  increased  secretion
already  spoken  of,  and  the  involuntary  escape  of  urine,
which  is  also  found  under  Causticiim^  Pulsatilla^  Zmciim
and  others,  and  a  burning  and  cutting  in  the  urethra  after
urination.  Sarsaparilla  has  the  nearest  to  this  last  symp-
tom, and  we  remember  here  the  resemblance  of  these  two
remedies  as  to  emaciation  in  cholera  infantum.  This  cut-
ting in  the  urethra  may  be  found  in  chronic  cases  of  gleet,
and  in  these  cases  the  discharge  is  almost  always,  as  it  is
under  Natrum  mur.  in  all  mucous  membranes,  clear  and
watery.  This  remedy  is  one  of  the  best  for  bearing  down
pains  in  women,  which  are  worse  in  the  morning.  The
patient  feels  as  if  she  must  sit  down  to  prevent  prolapsus.
This  is  like  the  pains  of  the  Sepia  patient,  who  feels  as  if
she  must  cross  her  legs  for  the  same  purpose.  Now  if  we
had  the  stool  and  anal  symptoms  of  Natrum  present,  and
especially  the  hypochondriasis,  we  would  have  almost  a
sure  thing  in  Natrum.  These  uterine  symptoms  of
Natrum  are  often  accompanied  by  back  pains,  which  are
relieved  by  lying  upon  the  back,  like  Rhus.  I  have  al-
ready spoken  of  the  headaches  accompanying,  and  especially
following  the  menses.  They  are  throbbing  and  accom-
panied by  great  soreness  of  the  eyes,  especially  on  turning
them.  I  have  a  patient  now  who  has  these  headaches  oc-
casionally. She  is  inclined  to  anaemia.  Was,  when  young,
very  anaemic.  She  is  always  relieved  by  this  remedy  in
the  250m.  potency,  and  under  it  is  regaining  her  color  and
general  health.

Natrum  mur.  has  strong  action  upon  the  heart  and  cir-
culation, as  the  following  marked  symptoms  indicate:
"  Fluttering  of  the  heart,  with  weak  faint  feeling,  worse
lying  down.  Irregular  intermission  of  beats  of  heart  and
pulse,  worse  lying  on  left  side. Violent  pulsations  of  the


266


NATRUM  MURIATICUM.


heart  which  shake  the  body."  {Spigelia.)  All  these
symptoms  are  more  markedly  present  in  anemic  subjects,
with  constitution  generally  weakened  by  grief,  sexual  ex-
cess, loss  of  blood  or  other  debilitating  causes.  It  is  espe-
cially efficacious  in  subjects  suffering  from  abuse  of  Qui-
nine. In  fevers  it  is  among  Hahnemannians  too  well
known  to  need  much  space  here.  In  intermittents  it
is  especially  useful  in  cases  suppressed,  not  cured,  by
Quinine^  and  its  leading  characteristic  is  in  the  time  of  the
appearance  of  the  chill.

Natrum  appears  characteristically  at  lo  to  ii  A.  M.

Eupatorium  perfoliatum  at  7  A.  m.

Apis  mellifica  at  3  p.  m.

Lycopodium  at  4  P.  m.

Arsenicum  alb.  at  i  to  2  P.  M.  or  A.  m.
Without  fixing  the  time  just  to  the  hour,  there  are  many
remedies  which  have  chills  in  the  morning  or  in  the  even-
ing, etc.  Now  in  regard  to  the  time  of  aggravation  in
fevers,  they  occur  quite  as  characteristically  in  other  than
intermittents.  For  instance  the  Natrum  at  10  A.  m.,  the
Arse7iic  at  i  P.  m.  or  A.  m.,  etc.

The  fever,  headache  and  all  other  symptoms  of  Natrum
are  relieved  by  sweating.^  as  are  those  of  Arsenicum  also.
There  are  some  strong  symptoms  found  in  the  extremities.
"  Hang  nails."  The  Natrum  subject  is  always  having
them.  Again,  numbness  and  tingling  in  fingers  and  toes,
like  that  also  found  in  the  lips  and  tongue,  should  make
one  think  of  Natrum.  The  ankles  are  weak  and  turn
easily,  especially  in  children  who  are  late  in  learning  to .
walk.  Painful  tension  in  the  bends  of  the  limbs,  as  if  the
cords  were  too  short.  This  may  amount  to  actual  de-
formity, like  Causticttm^  Guaiacum  and  Ci??tex.  Then
the  spine  is  very  irritable,  sensitive  to  touch,  yet  relieved


NATRUM  CARBONICUM.


267


by  hard  pressure,  with  weakness  of  the  limbs,  fluttering  of
the  heart,  even  half  paralyzed  extremities.  As  far  as  this
spinal  weakness  is  concerned,  it  may  take  on  a  form  of
general  debility,  for  which  there  is  no  better  remedy  than
Natriim  7nur.  The  mental  and  physical  powers  seem
greatly  relaxed,  and  physical  and  mental  labor  equally
prostrating.  This  condition  may  gradually  progress  to
paralysis,  and  may  be  the  result  of  badly  treated  intermit-
tents,  sexual  excesses,  diphtheria,  depressing  emotions  or
other  causes  of  nervous  exhaustion.  The  action  of  Na-
trum  upon  the  skin  must  not  be  overlooked.  First  and
foremost  is  its  eczema,  which  is  raw,  inflamed,  and  espe-
cially worse  at  the  edges  of  the  hair.  Next  for  tetters  at
the  bends  of  the  joints.  They  crack  and  crust  over  and
ooze  an  acrid  fluid.  Finally  in  urticaria  it  ranks  with
Apis^  Hepar  sulphur  and  Calcarea  ost.  I  have  used  more
space  for  this  remedy,  as  I  did  for  Lachesis^  than  for  most
other  remedies,  for  the  following  reasons  :  First,  they  are
both  remedies  most  efficient  in  high  potencies.  Second,
they  are  not  appreciated  by  the  general  profession.  Third,
I  hope  to  induce  those  who  do  not  to  use  them,  to  in-
vestigate them.  I  have  found  that  those  who  highly
value  these  two  remedies  are  generally  good  Homoeopathic


NATRTJM  CARBONICUM.

One  of  the  most  frequently  corroborated  symptoms  of
this  remedy  is  the  modality — aggravated  by  7nental  exer-
tion. The  patient  is  unable  to  think  or  perform  any
mental  labor  without  headache,  vertigo  or  a  sense  of  stupe-
faction. This  symptom  alone  makes  it  an  invaluable


268


MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.


remedy,  as  we  often  come  across  that  kind  of  patient.  At
least  I  have,  and  have  frequently  gained  great  credit  by
relieving  them.  I  generally  use  the  30th  potency  here.
Again,  this  kind  of  headache  is  apt  to  be  worse  on  ex-
posure to  the  sun's  rays.  Persons  suffering  from  over-heat-
ing from  the  sun  may  find  relief  from  either  Natrum
carb.^  Glonoine  or  Lachesis.  Like  the  other  Natrums^  the
carbonate  is  greatly  depressed  in  spirits,  wholly  occupied
with  sad  thoughts.  It  is  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  chronic
catarrh  of  the  nose,  which  extends  to  the  posterior  nares
and  throat.  There  is  violent  hawking  and  spitting  of  thick
mucus  that  constantly  collects  again.  Although  never
produced  in  the  proving,  clinical  use  has  proved  it  a  great
remedy  for  "bearing  down"  pains.  Here  the  concomitant
symptoms  of  mind,  sadness,  over-sensitiveness  to  noise,
especially  music,  etc.,  will  confirm  its  choice.  Weakness
of  the  ankles  from  childhood  finds  a  good  remedy  in  Na-
tru7n  carb.  I  cured  a  very  bad  case  in  a  young  man
who  was  very  fleshy  and  walked  on  the  inside  of  .his
ankles,  feet  bending  outward,  from  such  weakness,  his
ankles  refusing  to  support  him,  especially  when  a  little
over  fatigued.  Those  are  the  only  uses  of  Natrum  carb.
that  I  know  from  personal  experience  or  observation.

MAGNESIA  CARBONICA.

The  salts  of  Magnesia  are  not  new  to  the  medical  profes-
sion as  remedies.  Especially  is  the  one  under  consideration
so  well  known  in  its  action  upon  the  intestinal  canal  that
it  has  for  a  long  time  been  "my  lady's"  habitual  resort  for
sour  stomach  and  constipated  bowels.  Of  course,  then  it
should  become  a  very  useful  remedy  for  diarrhoea  in  the
hands  of  a  Homoeopathist,  and  so  it  is. The  kind  of  diar-


MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.


269


rhoea  to  which  it  is  most  applicable  is — "Stools  green  and
frothy,  like  the  scum  of  a  frog  pond."  All  of  the  Magnesias
are  great  pain  producers,  consequently  pain  relievers,  and,  as
might  be  expected,  the  stools  of  Magnesia  carb.  are
preceeded  hy  griping  doiibling-itp  colic.  So  far  as  colic  is
concerned,  sometimes  it  might  be  difficult  to  choose  between
Magnesia  carb.  and  Colocynth.^  but  the  stools  are  not  alike.
Rhetim  comes  nearest  to  Magttesia  carb.  in  that  both  have
colic  before  stool,  sour  stool  and  sour  smell  of  the  whole
body;  but  with  Magnesia  the  green  stool  stands  first  and
with  Rheum  the  sourness.  The  stool  of  Rheum  is  oftener
dark  brownish  than  green.  Chamomilla  has  green  stool
with  much  pain,  but  the  stool  is  watery,  while  Magnesia
carb.  is  more  slimy.  Mercury  has  the  slimy  stool  which
may  be  green  also;  but  with  Mercury  tenesmus  is  the
leading  symptom,  and  the  mouth  symptoms  and  sweat
without  relief  under  it  are  not  like  the  other  remedies.
Magnesia  carb.  has  toothache  which  at  fiist  sight  seems  to
simulate  that  of  Mercury.  It  comes  in  decayed  teeth  and
is  worse  at  night.  There  is  a  finer  shade  of  difference,
however,  that  distinguishes  them.  Mercury  \s  worse  from
the  warjnth  of  the  bed  (a  general  characteristic  of  Mercicry)^
while  Magnesia  carb.  is  worse  quiet.  The  patient  is  obliged
to  walk  about  for  relief  This  kind  of  toothache  is  common
among  pregnant  women,  and  I  have  often  cured  it.  I  have
used  it  in  the  200th  potency  for  this  trouble.  Have  used
it  lower  in  diarrhoeas.


MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.

This  salt  of  Mag?tesia  seems  to  act  differently  from  the
Magnesia  carb.,  for  while  the  latter  most  characteristically
produces  diarrhoea,  and  we  find  it  oftenest  useful  there,


270


MAGNESIA  MURIATICA.


the  former  constipates.  It  has  a  peculiar  form  of  constipa-
tion. The  stools  are  hard,  difficult,  slow,  insufficient;
knotty,  like  sheep's  dung,  and  crumble  at  the  verge  of
the  anus.  The  remedies  most  resembling  it  in  this  form
of  constipation  are  Natrum  mur.  and  Ammonium  mur.^
and  now  that  I  think  of  it  I  might  as  well  mention  here
another  similarity  between  Ammonium  mur.  and  Mag-
nesia carb.  which  is  characteristic,  viz.:  The  menstrual
flow  is  worse  at  night.  I  forgot  this  when  writing  of
Magnesia  carb.  Perhaps  it  will  be  all  the  better  remem-
bered for  this  interruption.  With  the  Magnesia  mur.
menstruation  is  very  painful,  accompanied  with  severe
cramps,  which  may  increase  to  general  spasms  of  an
hysterical  nature.  This  nervous  condition,  if  found  coupled
very  sure  indication  for  the  use  of  this  remedy.  Again,  it
has  a  peculiar  nervous  headache,  which  is  better  from
strong  pressure  {^Pulsatilla)  or  wrapping  head  up  warmly
{Silicea).  This  headache  also  is  often  hysterical.  The
spasms  in  connection  with  uterine  troubles  may  find  rival
remedies  in  Actea  raceniosa  and  Caiclophylhcm^  the  tout
e7isemble  must  decide.  Magnesia  mur.  is  a  liver  remedy,
and  in  some  symptoms  resembles  Mercurius^  notably,  the
tongue  takes  imprint  of  the  teeth  and  the  aggravation
from  lying  on  the  right  side.  But  the  stools  of  these
remedies  are  characteristically  very  different.  Again,  while
Mercurius  is  best  adapted  to  acute  affections  of  this  organ
Magnesia  mur.  is  more  so  to  the  chronic.  Ptelea,  liver
troubles  are  worse  when  lying  on  the  left  side.  A  very
peculiar  symptom  of  Magnesia  mur.  often  confirmed  is  :
Palpitation  of  the  heart  when  the  patient  is  quiet,  re-
lieved when  moving  about.


MAGNESIA  PHOSPHORICA.


271


MAGNESIA  PHOSPHORICA.

Now  we  come  to  the  prince  of  the  Magnesias.  It  is
comparatively  new  and  has  never  been  accorded  a  place
in  our  Materia  Medica  according  to  its  importance  and
merits.  Dr.  H.  C.  Allen  gives  the  best  rendering  of  it  in
the  transactions  of  the  International  Hahnemannian  As-
sociation for  1889.  Magnesia phos.  takes  first  rank  among
our  very  best  neuralgia  or  pain  remedies.  None  have  a
greater  variety  of  pains.  They  are  sharp,  cutting,  pierc-
ing, stabbing,  knife-like,  shooting,  stitching,  lightning-
like in  coming  and  going,  intermittent,  the  paroxysms  be-
coming almost  intolerable,  often  rapidly  changing  place
and  cramping.  This  last  is  in  my  opinion  most  char-
acteristic^ and  is  oftenest  found  in  stomach,  abdomen  and
pelvis.  For  colic  of  infants  it  ranks  with  Chamomilla  and
Colocynth  and  for  dysmenorrhoea  of  the  neuralgic  variety,
with  the  characteristic  crampy  pains,  I  have  found  no
remedy  equal  to  it.  In  this  last  affection  I  habitually  pre-
tizer,  so  that  I  know  exactly  what  it  is.  So  often  are  we
confronted  with  the  question  when  we  report  cures  with
the  high  potencies,  where  do  you  get  them,  and  are  you
sure  they  are  what  they  purport  to  be  ?  Now  let  me  say
right  here,  if  I  have  not  done  so  before,  that  we  have
potencies  as  high  as  the  m.m.,  made  by  ourselves  upon
this  accurately  self-registering  potentizer  that  are  marvel-
ous for  their  curing  powers.  We,  Dr.  Santee  and  myself,
invented  the  machine  for  our  own  individual  use  and  have
never  yet  offered  the  potencies  for  sale.  So  we  can  hardly
be  accused  of  mercenary  motives  in  reporting  cures,  from


272


OPIUM.


them.  Alongside  the  characteristic  cramping  pains  of
this  remedy  is  its  characteristic  modality — relief  from
hot  applicatio7is.  No  remedy  has  this  more  prominently
than  Arsenicum  alb.^  but  you  will  notice  that  among  all
the  various  kinds  of  pain  we  have  mentioned  as  belong-
ing to  Magnesia  phos.  the  one  conspicuous  for  its  ab-
sence is  the  one  most  characteristic  of  Arsenicum^  viz. —
burning  pains.  I  watched  this  difference  and  found  that
if  burning  pains  were  relieved  by  heat,  Arse7iicum  was
almost  sure  to  relieve,  while  those  pains  not  burning  but
also  relieved  by  heat  were  cured  by  Magnesia  phos.  I
think  that  this  will  be  found  a  valuable  diagnostic  between
the  two  remedies.  At  least  I  have  found  it  so.  During
painful  menstruation  Magnesia  phos.  is  quicker  in  its
action  than  Pulsatilla^  Caulophylhim^  Cimicifuga^  or  any
other  remedy  that  I  know.  The  Cimicifuga  seems  to  me
to  cover  better  cases  of  a  rheumatic  character,  or  in  a
rheumatic  subject,  while  Magnesia  phos.  cures  those  of  a
purely  neuralgic  character.  The  pains  cease  when  the
flow  begins,  for  Magnesia  phos.  In  facial  neuralgia  this
remedy  has  made  many  cures.  In  fact,  it  seems  to  be  ap-
plicable to  neuralgic  pains  anywhere  if  the  proper  condi-
tions are  present.  So  far  as  its  power  to  control  spasms  or
convulsions  is  concerned  I  have  no  experience  that  proves
it  unless  its  power  over  cramping  pains  is  proof  I  have
no  faith  in  the  Schiisslerian  theory  in  regard  to  it.  Similia
similibus  curantur  has  stood  the  test  with  other  remedies
and  will  with  the  so-called  tissue  remedies  regardless  of
theories.

OPIUM.

One  of  the  worst  abused,  because  frequently  used,  reme-
dies, of  all  schools  of  medicine.  I  must  explain.  I  said
all  schools. The  true  Homoeopath  does  not  abuse  it,  but


OPIUM.


273


many  members  of  the  school  calling  themselves  Homoeo-
pathic do.  A  teacher  in  one  of  the  Homoeopathic  col-
leo-es  defended  its  use  in  narcotic  doses  in  many  cases  to
produce  sleep  and  relief  from  pain.  I  will  say  just  here
that  any  Homoeopathic  physician  that  feels  obliged  to  use
Opmm  or  its  alkaloid  in  this  way  and  for  this  purpose  does
not  understand  his  business  and  had  better  study  his
Materia  Medica,  and  the  principles  of  applying  it  accord-
ing to  Hahnemann,  or  else  go  over  to  the  old  school  where
they  make  no  pretensions  to  having  any  law  of  cure.  In
the  first  place  Opium  in  narcotic  doses  does  not  produce
sleep,  but  stupor,  and  it  only  relieves  pain  by  rendering  the
patient  unconscious.  How  many  cases  have  been  so
masked  by  such  treatment,  that  the  disease  progressed  un-
til there  was  no  chance  for  cure.  Pain,  fever  and  all  other
symptoms  are  the  voice  of  the  disease,  telling  where  is  the
trouble  and  guiding  us  to  the  remedy.  The  true  curative
often  relieves  pain  even  more  quickly  than  Opium^  and
does  so  by  curing  the  condition  upon  which  it  depends.
And  even  in  cases  where  it  does  not  so  quickly  stop  the
pain,  it  is  often  far  better  to  suffer  awhile  until  the  cura-
tive can  get  in  its  work.  Probably  ninety-nine  in  a  hun-
dred of  those  suffering  from  the  terrible  habit  of  morphine
morphine  to  "  relieve  pain  and  procure  rest  and  sleep."
And  when  we  take  into  this  account  the  abuse  of  stimu-
the  same  class  of  physicians  it  is  no  wonder  that  they  are
often  heard  to  say,  I  don't  know  whether  I  have  done  more
good  or  harm.

It  is  this  very  narcosis  which  presents  the  leading  char-
acteristic indication  for  the  Homoeopathic  use  of  this  drug.
No  remedy  produces  such  profound  stupor,  and  it  is  ex-


274


OPIUM.


pressed  in  our  Materia  Medica  as  follows  :  "  Stupid,  coma-
tose sleep,  with  rattling,  stertorous  breathing y  In  addition
to  this  the  face  is  red  and  bloated,  the  eyes  blood-shot  and
half  open  and  the  skin  covered  with  hot  sweat.  Now  this
condition,  which  is  nothing  more  or  less  than  such  a  ful-
ness of  the  vessels  of  the  brain  or  head  that,  from  pressure,
a  paralysis  or  semi-paralysis  of  the  nerves  which  carry  on
the  act  of  breathing,  keep  the  lower  jaw  up  (which  drops)
and  closes  the  sweat  glands,  takes  place.  There  are  many
diseases  in  which  this  state  of  things  may  appear,  such  as
typhoid  fever,  where  the  patient  becomes  totally  uncon-
scious and  oblivious  to  all  around.  There  is  no  response
to  light,  touch,  noise  or  anything  else,  except  the  indicated
remedy,  which  is  Opium.  So  in  pneumonia,  where  Opiwn
has  made  remarkable  cures  in  Homoeopathic  hands ;  while
in  massive,  or  what  they  like  to  call  heroic,  doses  of  the
old  school  (given  to  stop  pain  and  procure  sleep)  it  has
sent  many  a  poor  victim  to  his  long  resting  place.  In
many  other  diseases,  in  fact  in  any  disease  where  these
symptoms  are  found,  we  may  confidently  expect  Opium
either  to  cure  the  case  or  to  so  change  the  condition  ihat
other  remedies  will  follow  it  to  a  perfect  cure.  Other
remedies  may  vie  with  it,  for  instance  in  typhoids,  such  as
Lachesis  or  Hyoscyamus.  These  two  remedies  will  often
claim  attention  in  typhoid  pneumonia.  It  often  requires
close  discrimination  to  choose  between  them.  Apoplexy
often  calls  for  Opium,  but  here  as  elsewhere  the  symptoms
must  decide.

The  fact  that  Opiu?n  is  capable  of  banishing  pain,  or,
rather,  I  should  say,  rendering  the  organism  incapable  of
sensing  pain,  is  one  of  the  chief  indications  for  its  use  in
homoeopathic  therapeutics.  There  is  not  only  complete
absence  from  pain,  but  as  complete  unsusceptibility  to  gen-


4^

OPIUM.  275

eral  drug  action.  You  know  that  we  are  told  that  when
the  seemingly  indicated  remedy  does  not  act  give  Sulphur.
Now  it  may  be  that  Opium  is  a  better  remedy  to  give,  if
all  there  is  of  the  case  is  that  there  seems  to  be  no  vital
reaction.  Sulphur  would  be  likely  to  be  the  best  remedy
if  the  lack  of  reaction  were  due  to  some  psoric  taint ;  but
even  here  all  the  symptoms  must  be  taken  into  account.
Laurocerasics  is  another  remedy  to  arouse  reaction  when  it
seems  to  depend  upon  excessively  low  vitality.  Psorinimi
may  succeed  in  psoric  obstructions  to  vital  reactions  when
Sulphur  fails.  There  is  nothing  to  be  more  condemned
in  homoeopathic  prescribing  than  roiciiJtism.  This  same
paralyzing  effect  of  Opium  is  seen  in  the  intestines.  Their
irritability  is  lost.  Peristaltic  action  is  entirely  suspended.
There  is  no  desire  even  for  movement.  The  faeces
lie  there  in  the  convolutions  of  the  intestines,  form  into
hard,  black  balls,  which  must  be  removed  by  enemas  or
purgatives.  Again,  the  urinary  organs  come  under  the
same  action.  The  urine  is  retained  from  paralysis  of  the
fundus  of  the  bladder  ;  can't  pass  water  from  blunting  of
the  sensitiveness  of  the  walls  of  the  bladder,  etc.  Or  the
other  extreme,  involuntary  urination  or  stool  from  paraly-
sis of  the  sphincters.  Everywhere  Opium  is  a  producer  of
insensibility  and  partial  or  complete  paralysis  and,  other
things  being  equal,  is  homoeopathically  indicated  there.

Now  we  find  an  exactly  opposite  state  of  things  under
Opium  to  that  we  have  been  describing  as  indicated  by
the  following  symptoms:  "Delirious;  eyes  wide  open,
glistening  ;  face  red,  puffed  up."  "  Vivid  imagination,  ex-
altation of  the  mind."  "  Nervous  and  irritable,  easily
frightened."  "  Twitching,  trembling  of  head,  arms,  hands  ;
jerking  of  the  flexors,  even  convulsions."  "Sleeplessness
[Cimicifuga, Coffed),  acuteness  of  hearing ;  clocks


276


NUX  MOSCHATA.


Striking,  and  cocks  crowing  at  a  great  distance  keep  her
awake."  These  are  the  secondary  or  reactionary  symp-
toms of  Opium.  Nature  has  been  pushed,  like  a  pendulum,
clear  to  one  side  of  the  perpendicular  or  normal  condition.
Now,  nature  endeavoring  to  undo  the  mischief,  like  the
law  of  gravity  with  the  pendulum,  pulls  back  with  such
force  that  the  pendulum  swings  not  only  to  its  normal
state  but  clear  over  to  the  other  extreme,  and  then  if  left
to  herself  will  continue  to  oscillate  back  and  forth  until
the  normal  place  is  found  and  natural  law  again  reigns  su-
preme. It  must  be  remembered  here  that  the  first  class  of
symptoms  are  drug  action^  the  later  action  nature's  efforts
against  the  drug  ;  so  that  such  excitement,  irritability  and
spasms  never  come  under  the  homoeopathic  action  of
Opium  as  a  remedy  unless  this  state  has  been  preceded
by  drowsiness,  stupor  and  insensibility,  etc.  It  cannot  be
the  Homoeopathic  remedy  to  the  case  without  this,  for  its
perfect  similarity  is  not  to  be  found  there.  This  is  the
reason  why  the  homoeopath  can  make  his  sleepless  patient
sleep  a  natural  sleep  with  Opium  in  the  little  dose,  while
the  Allopath  forces  his  patient  into  a  stupor  (not  sleep)
with  his  big  dose.  The  one  is  curative,  the  other
poisonous.

NUX  MOSCHATA.

The  nutmeg,  though  frequently  used  for  its  peculiar  flavor
in  common  cookery,  is  nevertheless  a  powerful  poison,  hence
a  valuable  remedy.  The  mind  and  sensorium  are  profoundly
affected  by  it,  as  shown  by  the  following  characteristic
symptoms:  "Stupor  and  insensibility,  and  inconquerable
sleep."  Again,  "Vanishing  of  thoughts  while  talking,  read-
ing, or  writing." Again,  "Weakness  or  loss  of  memory."


NUX  MOSCHATA.


277


Again,  "Fitful  mood,  changing  from  deepest  sorrow  to
frolicsome  behavior;  now  grave,  now  gay."  Again,  "Ab-
sence of  mind,  cannot  think;  has  to  collect  his  thoughts  before
he  can  answer  simple  questions."  Many  more  symptoms
appear  among  the  provings  that  show  the  action  of  this
drug  upon  the  brain.  The  effect  upon  the  brain,  while
producing  a  sleepiness  and  dullness  almost  equal  to  that  of
Opium^  is  of  an  entirely  different  character,  the  Opium
being  seemingly  due  to  fullness  of  the  blood  vessels  and
pressure,  while  that  of  Nitx  moschata  seems  to  be  a  benumb-
ing of  the  very  nerve  substance  itself.  It  is  interesting  to
notice  the  sleepiness  of  Opium^  Nux  mos.  and  Tartar
emetic^  and  to  study  these  drugs  in  comparison.  Opium
and  Tartar  emetic  are  often  remedies  for  pneumonia,  but
the  concomitant  symptoms  are  very  different.  Opium  and
Nux77ios.  in  typhoid  fever,  but  the  choice,  notwithstanding
this  symptom  of  stupor  common  to  both,  is  not  at  all
difficult.  All  three  of  these  remedies  in  bowel  complaints
of  children  have  this  symptom  in  common,  but  it  is  not
difficult  to  choose  between  them.  Another  very  character-
istic symptom  of  this  remedy  is  excessive  dryness  of  the
mouth.  Mouth  so  dry  that  the  tongue  sticks  to  the  roof,
yet  no  thirst.  The  tongue,  lips,  and  throat  are  all  dry.  Of
course  there  are  other  remedies  having  this  dryness  with-
out thirst,  such  as  Apis^  Pulsatilla  and  Lachesis^  but  in  this
respect  Nux  moschata  is  the  strongest.  Then  again  Nzix
moschata  is  greatly  troubled  with  flatulence.  The  abdomen
is  enormously  distended,  especially  after  meals.  There  are
two  remedies  which  have  pain  and  distress  in  the  stomach
immediately  after  eating,  even  when  the  patient  is  still  at
the  table.  They  are  Nux  mos,  and  Kali  bichromicum.
With  Nux  vomica  and  A7iacardtu7U  the  pain  comes  on  an
hour  or  two  after  eating.  With  Ntix  mos.  every  thing
19


278


NUX  MOSCHATA.


they  eat  seems  to  turn  to  wind,  and  fills  the  stomach  and
abdomen  so  full  as  to  cause  pressure  upon  all  of  the  organs
of  chest  and  the  abdomen.  Again  there  is  diarrhsea  with
this  remedy.  It  is  very  efficacious  in  cholera  infantum,
when  the  above  mentioned  sensorial  symptoms  are  present.
I  once  had  a  very  severe  case  of  typhoid  fever  of  the  nervosa
stupida  variety.  On  account  of  the  stupidity,  the  yellow
watery  diarrhoea,  and  rumbling  and  bloating  of  the
abdomen,  I  thought  surely  Phosphoric  acid  must  help;  but
it  did  not.  I  finally  discovered  the  excessive  dryness  of  the
mouth,  which  had  escaped  my  attention  before.  This  com-
pleted the  picture  for  Nux  moschata.  Under  the  action  of
the  200th  potency,  the  patient  rapidly  improved  unto
complete  recovery.  So  we  must  "watch  out"  when  the
seemingly  indicated  remedy  does  not  cure,  for  it  may  not  be
Sulphur^  Opium^  Laurocerasus  or  Psorinum  that  will  have
to  be  given,  as  we  said  when  writing  on  Opium  and  Sul-
phur; but  we  have  not,  no  matter  what  the  "seemings,"
chosen  the  homoeopathic  remedy  at  all,  and,  as  in  this
case,  some  symptom  may  appear  that  will  change  the  pre-
scription entirely.

Now  we  will  notice  in  detail  the  mind  and  sensorium
symptoms  that  we  have  given,  by  way  of  comparison.  I
will  add  to  the  comparison  made  between  this  remedy  and
Antimonium  tart,  and  Opium^  Apis  mellifica^  which  has
soporous  sleep ;  but  it  is  interrupted  by  piercing  screams,
especially  in  brain  diseases,  where  the  sopor  is  generally
found.  None  of  the  other  remedies  have  these  screams
(cri  encephalique)  so  prominently.  "  Vanishing  of  thought
while  talking,  reading  or  writing  "  may  find  their  similar
under  Camphor^  Cannabis  hidica  and  Lachesis.  "Loss  of
memory  "  under  many  remedies,  but  notably  under  Ly co-
podium,  Baryta  carb.,  Sulphur  and  Natrum  muriaticum.


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


279


The  "fitful,  changing  moods  and  disposition"  is  found
under  Aconite^  Ignatia^  Crocus  and  Platina.  "  Absence  of
mind,"  Aftacardmm^  Kreosote^  Lachesis^  Natrum  mur.  and
Mercuriits.  I  notice  that  those  remedies  that  are  oftenest
similar  to  Nux  moschata  in  its  mind  and  other  symptoms
are  often  found  among  the  so-called  hysteric  remedies.
And  why  not.  For  Niix  moschata  is  one  of  our  best  in  this
hydra-headed  complaint.  Taking  together  all  of  the  symp-
toms we  have  been  over,  and  adding  to  them  that  other
one,  "  easy  fainting,"  where  can  you  find  a  more  com-
plete general  picture  of  the  average  hysteric  ?  I  will  not
use  more  space  here  for  this  remedy,  but  recommend  to
every  careful  student,  and  practitioner,  who  does  not  already
understand  it,  a  careful  study  of  this  certainly  valuable
drug.  That  it  has  not  received  the  use  in  practice  that  it
should,  is  due,  I  have  no  doubt,  to  the  fact  that  it  is  used
so  frequently  in  foods,  that  many  think  it  cannot  be  much
of  a  remedy.

BARYTA  CARBONICA.

This  is  one  of  the  leading  so-called  anti-scrofulous  reme-
dies. Please  refer  to  what  I  said  on  this  subject  (scrofula)
while  writing  on  Sulphur.  This  is  also  one  of  the  reme-
dies which  has  one  of  its  leading  indications,  like  Calcarea
ost.^  in  the  constitution  of  the  patient.  Complaints  of
dwarfish  children;  mind  and  body  weak ;  don't  grow ;  in-
clined to  glandular  swellings.  The  defective  growth  is
both  mental  and  physical.  The  weakness  of  the  mind
may  amount  almost  to  idiocy  or  imbecility.  Then  again
it  is  equally  adapted  to  old  age,  with  mental  and  physical
weakness ;  feeble  and  tottering  ;  childishness  and  thought-
less behavior. It  is  especially  adapted  to  apoplexy  of  old


28o


BARYTA  CARBONICA.


people,  or  a  tendency  thereto.  For  loss  of  memory  in
such  subjects  it  stands  equal  to  Anacardmm.  Now  we  see
that  if  all  this  is  true,  Baryta  carb.  becomes  a  valuable
remedy  at  both  ends  of  life.  Marasmus,  infantile  or  senile,
comes  equally  within  its  range.  In  the  marasmus  of
children  we  may  have  to  choose  from  among  other  reme-
dies such  as  Silicea^  Abrotaiium^  Natrum  niuriaticum^  Sul-
phur^  Calcarea  and  lodme.  Under  all  these  remedies  we
may  find  emaciation  of  the  rest  of  the  body,  while  the
abdomen  is  greatly  enlarged.  Again  under  every  one  of
them,  the  child  may  have  a  voracious  appetite,  eat  enough,
but  grow  poor  all  of  the  time.  It  is  defective  assimilation.
There  are  some  strong  points  of  resemblance  between
Baryta  carb.  and  Silicea^  namely  :  Offensive  sweat  on  the
feet.  The  head  is  disproportionally  large  for  the  body.
Both  suffer  from  damp  changes  in  the  weather  and  both
are  sensitive  to  cold  about  the  head.  But  Silicea  has  the
important  diagnostic  difference — profuse  sweat  on  the
head  equal  to  that  of  Calcarea  ost.^  which  Baryta  has  not.
And  there  is  not  that  weakness  of  mind  in  Silicea  that
is  found  in  Baryta  ;  on  the  contrary  the  child  is  self  willed
and  contrary.

The  resemblances  the  other  remedies,  other  than  these
we  have  mentioned  are  so  many  that  we  will  not  under-
take to  compare  them  here,  but  will  proceed  to  notice  some
of  the  other  strong  points  of  Baryta.

Besides  the  strong  action  of  Baryta  upon  the  glandular
system  generally,  it  seems  to  have  a  peculiarly  strong
afi&nity  for  the  throat,  especially  the  tonsils,  which  be-
come greatly  inflamed,  swollen  and  suppurate  as  a  conse-
quence of  the  least  exposure  to  cold.  Thus  it  becomes
one  of  our  most  valuable  therapeutic  agents  in  old
quinzy  subjects. Alone  it  is  often  sufficient  to  abort  an


lODIUM.


281


attack  of  quinzy  and  with  an  occasional  dose  at  long
intervals  with  a  high  potency,  to  overcome  the  tendency
thereto.  But  like  Lachesis^  Lycopodium^  Phytolacca  and
other  remedies,  it  must  be  chosen  according  to  all  the
indications.  Baryta  is  really  fully  as  useful  to  change  the
constitutional  tendencies  to  quinzy,  as  it  is  in  the  acute
attack.  You  will  find  occasionally  a  case  of  chronic
cough  in  children,  with  enlarged  tonsils,  reported  in  the
journals  as  cured  by  this  remedy.  The  cure  of  the  cough
depends  evidently  upon  the  power  of  the  remedy  over
the  condition  which  produced  the  enlarged  tonsils,  for
aside  from  this,  I  have  never  found  it  to  be  a  great  cough
remedy.  In  tonsilitis  acute  or  chronic  which  seems  to
have  come  as  the  result  of  a  suppressed  footsweat  we
would  immediately  think  of  Baryta^  notwithstanding
Silicea  has  more  troubles  arising  from  such  suppression,
than  any  other  remedy,  and  Silicea  has  not  nearly  the
same  affinity  for  the  throat  that  Baryta  has.

Here  we  will  close  Baryta^  for  while  it  is  a  remedy  of
the  greatest  value,  its  range  is  not  a  wide  one.  Some  of
the  remedies  of  this  kind  make  up  for  the  lack  of  range,
by  a  positiveness  within  their  range,  and  this  is  one  of
them.


lODIUM.

This  is  another  so-called  anti-scrofulous  remedy.  Here
are  a  few  characteristic  indications :

First:  "Scrofulous  diathesis;  low  cachectic  condition,
with  profound  debility  and  great  emaciation."

Second  :  "  There  is  a  remarkable  and  unaccountable
sense  of  weakness  and  loss  of  breath  on  going  up  stairs."


282


lODIUM.


Third:  "Ravenous  hunger;  eats  often  and  much,  but
loses  flesh  all  of  the  time."

Fourth  :  "  Feels  relieved  after  eating  or  while  eating."

Fifth:  " Dwindling  of  the  mammae  and  soreness."

Sixth  :  "  Profuse  uterine  hemorrhages ;  cancer  of
uterus."

Seventh :  "  Chronic  leucorrhoea,  which  is  abundant  and
so  corrosive  as  to  eat  holes  in  the  linen."

Eighth  :  "  Swelling  of  glands,  especially  mesenteric  and
thyroid. "

Ninth :  "  Membraneous  croup,  wheezing,  sawing  respira-
tion, dry,  barking  cough,  especially  in  children  with  dark
eyes  and  hair  ;  child  grasps  the  throat  with  the  hand  when
coughing."

Tenth :  "  Aggravations  in  general  from  warm  room."
Here  is  Iodine  in  a  nutshell.  The  remarkable  hunger  re-
lieved by  eating,  with  progressive,  emaciation  is  the  first
in  importance.  This  relief  by  eating  is  not  only  of  the
sensation  of  hunger,  but  his  sufferings  in  general ;  he  only
feels  well  while  eating,  or  always  feels  best  while  eating.
It  makes  no  difference  whether  it  is  phthisis  pulmonalis,
mesenterica,  or  general,  that  this  symptom  well  developed
rules  out  everything  but  Iodine  in  almost  every  case  and
it  has  made  many  remarkable  cures.  I  have  cured  many
cases  of  goitre  with  lodiiie  cm.,  when  indicated,  giving
a  powder  every  night  for  four  nights,  after  the  moon  fulled
and  was  waneing.  I  have  only  failed  in  one  case  either  to
check  Jthe  further  development  or  cure.  Some  will  sneer
at  this,  but  the  cured  ones  do  not.  The  local  application
for  glandular  enlargement  is  foolish  and  dangerous.


CINA.


283


CINA.

Here  is  a  truly  unique  remedy  that  none  but  the  homoe-
opathist  knows  how  to  use.  The  old  school  chagrined  at
our  success  with  it,  and  not  willing  to  resort  to  our  small
doses  have  bungled  with  its  alkaloid,  doing  more  harm
than  good,  and  at  last  have  come  to  sneer  at  the  idea  of
children  being  troubled  with  worms  at  all.  I  have  known
of  several  instances  of  the  kind  and  it  has  become  so  com-
mon in  the  region  where  I  practice  that  the  people  often
ask  me — "Doctor,  do  you  believe  in  worms?  Old  school
doctors  don't.  I  have  found  several  worms  that  my  child
has  passed,  and  have  come  to  you  to  see  if  you  can  do
anything  for  them."  It  is  of  great  advantage  to  us  Homoe-
opaths to  cure  the  little  patients^  whether  we  believe  in
worms  or  not.  But  Cina  is  not  always  the  remedy  for
worms.  But  it  is  perhaps  the  oftenest  indicated  remedy
for  complaints  arising  from  lumbiicoides,  or  children  in-
fested with  the  animal.  Another  thing  I  have  proven  to
my  entire  satisfaction,  and  that  is,  that  it  is  more  efficaci-
ous for  these  cases  in  the  200th  or  higher  potencies  than
in  the  alkaloid  or  lower  potencies.  Now  I  say  this  in
ordei  to  induce  those  who  have  lost  faith  in  the  remedy,  to
try  it  high,  according  to  well-known  indications,  as  laid
down  in  our  Materia  Medica.  So  many  "lose  the  good
they  oft  might  win  by  fearing  to  attempt."  Let  us  look
at  a  few  of  the  leading  symptoms.  The  wormy  child  will
be  very  restless  nights,  "  screams  out  sharply  in  its  sleep,"
making  one  think  of  Apis^  but  other  symptoms  appear
which  rule  Apis  out.  The  child  is  cross  and  ugly  like
Chamomilla^  kicks  and  strikes  the  nurse,  wants  to  be  car-


284


CINA.


ried  {^Chamomilld)  or  rocked,  or  don't  want  to  be  touchea
or  looked  at  {Antimonium  crud.\  desires  things  and  then
refuses  them  when  offered  {^Bry.  and  Staphisagrid)^  or,  un-
like Chamomilla^  it  cries  if  any  one  tries  to  take  hold  of  or
carry  it. Isn't  that  a  perfect  picture  of  the  mind  of  a
wormy  child  ? When  these  symptoms  appear  in  a  child
we  may sometimes  be  at  a  stand between  Cma  and
Chamomilla^  but  close  watching  will  generally  decide.
For  instance,  if  you  watch  or  inquire  of  the  nurse  you  will
find  that  it  alternates  between  a  red-hot  face,  glowing  with
a  bright  redness  of  both  cheeks,  and  a  pale,  sickly  face
with  dark  rings  or  circles  around  the  eyes ;  or,  again,  red
face  with  great  paleness  around  the  mouth  and  nose.  This
is  Cina. If  the  face  is  frequently  red  and  hot  on  one  side
and  pale  and  cold  on  the  other,  it  is  Chamomilla.  Then
again,  on  inquiry,  or  we  may  observe  ourselves,  the  child
is  boring  or  picking  its  nose  a  great  deal  of  the  time,
grinds  its  teeth  when  asleep,  and  jumps  and  jerks  in  its
sleep,  frequently  swallowing  as  if  something  came  up  into
the  throat,  or  even  choking  and  coughing  for  the  same
cause. Such  a  combination  is  not  found  under  any  other
remedy. Both  Chamo^nilla  and  Cina  have  profuse  and
pale  urine,  but  Cma  urine  becomes  milky  after  standing
awhile. Cina  has  alternating  canine  hunger  and  no  ap-
petite at  all. Cina  is  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  whoop-
ing cough,  also  jerking,  trembling,  twitching  and  even
convulsions  ;  but  in  all  these  affections  I  have  found  it
efficacious  when  the  aforementioned  worm  symptoms  were
present. I  once  had,  at  one  time,  and  in  one  family,  five
cases  of  typhoid  fever,  and  they  were  all  very  sick.  There
was  no  mistake  about  the  diagnosis,  and  I  speak  thus  posi-
tively, because  some  think  that  a  child  under  the  age  of
six  years  cannot  have  this  disease. This  child,  five  years  of


DULCAMARA.


285


age,  was  the  last  one  of  the  family  attacked  with  the
disease,  and  it  pursued  the  same  course  as  the  others  in  its
regular  rise  and  fall  of  temperature,  bloating  of  abdomen,
diarrhoea  and  other  symptoms  common  to  this  disease.
This  being  in  the  earlier  years  of  ray  practice,  and  Cina
not  being  set  down  in  the  text-books  as  a  remedy  for
typhoid,  I  selected  as  well  as  I  could  from  the  usual  reme-
dies for  typhoid.  I  knew  perfectly  that  she  had  Cina
symptoms  all  mixed  in  with  those  already  mentioned,  and
if  it  had  not  been  for  the  disease  (name)  would  have
given  it.  But  finally  after  trying  the  other  remedies,  and
the  case  got  no  better  fast,  I  resolved  to  give  a  few  doses
of  Cma  anyway,  and  to  my  surprise  I  found  my  patient
much  better  every  way  at  my  next  visit  and  the  improve-
ment progressed  right  along  to  complete  recovery.  I  had
to  learn  several  such  lessons  as  that  in  my  "kittenhood"  of
homoeopathic  practice  before  I  learned  for  good,  that,  for
purposes  of  prescribing,  the  name  of  the  disease  was  of
little  account.  Since  I  did  settle  that  question,  I  have  had
frequent  opportunity  to  help  my  younger  brethren  out  of
difficulties  along  the  same  line,  and  they  have  been  as
much  astonished  as  I  was.


DULCAMARA.

This  remedy,  like  many  others,  finds  its  chief  character-
istic in  its  modality.  "Complaints  caused  or  aggravated
by  change  of  weather  from  warm  to  cold."  Of  course  all
kinds  of  inflammatory  and  rheumatic  diseases  may  spring
from  such  a  cause,  and  so  Dulcamara  comes  to  be  indicated
in  along  list  of  them.  For  instance:  After  taking  cold
the  neck  gets  stiff",  back  painful,  and  limbs  lame,  or  the
throat  gets  sore  and  quinsy  results,  with  stiff"  tongue  and


286


RHODODENDRON.


jaws;  the  tongue  may  even  become  paralyzed.  We  see
here  a  resemblance  to  Baryta  carb.^  and  indeed  the  two
remedies  complement  each  other  nicely.  If  we  had  present
in  a  sore  throat  the  above  mentioned  stiffness  and  lameness,
Dulcamara  would  be  preferred.  This  cold  in  throat  may
travel  downward  and  invade  the  bronchi  and  lungs,  and
cough  and  bloody  expectoration  result.  It  is  especially
apt  to  occur  in  children  or  old  people  this  way,  and  then
there  is  apt  to  be  much  mucous  secretion,  hard  to  raise,
with  threatened  paralysis  of  the  vagi.  Here  it  again  re-
sembles Baryta  carb.  It  also  resembles  it  in  the  tendency
to  get  these  colds.  Asthma  humidum,  loose  cough  and
rattling  of  mucus  is  another  affection,  and  the  choice  here
may  lie  between  Dulcamara  and  Natrum  siilphuricum^
which  is  another  wet  cold  weather  remedy.  Colic  and
diarrhoea,  from  cold  exposure,  are  often  quickly  relieved  by
Dulcainara^  especially  if  taking  place  in  hot  weather,
when  the  days  or  nights  become  suddenly  cold;  also  dysen-
tery, lyct  me  repeat  that  it  is  a  great  remedy  for  back
troubles  from  taking  cold.  I  have  made  particular  mention
of  these  affections  because  such  marked  relief  has  followed
its  administration  ;  but  we  need  not  by  any  means  stop
here.  The  bladder,  skin  or  any  other  part  of  the  body
comes  in  for  the  benefical  action  of  this  remedy,  when  we
have  present  its  characteristic  modality.  Dulcamara  is  for
affections  from  damp  cold^  what  Aconite  is  for  the  same  from
dry  cold.

RHODODENDRON

Will  naturally  come  in  for  notice  while we  are  upon
weather  remedies. Like  Dulcamara,  its  strongest  character-
'  istic  is  in  its  modality,  "aggravation  in  wet  stormy  weather ;"
but  Rhododendron  is  particularly  worse  befo7^e  the  storm.


RHODODENDRON.


287


especially  a  thunder  storm ;  after  the  storm  breaks  the
patient  feels  better.  The  aggravation  before  the  thunder
storm  does  not  all  seem  to  depend  on  the  coldness  or  damp-
ness, but  partially  at  least  on  the  electric  conditions  of
the  atmosphere.  This  is  like  Phosphorus^  Natrimi  curb.
and  Silicea.  Rhododendron  resembles  Rhus  toxicod. .  in
that  it  is  worse  during  rest  and  better  during  motion.
Again,  the  pains  of  Rhododendron^  which  are  aggravated  in
damp  weather,  differ  from  those  of  Rhus  toxicod.  in  that
they  seem  to  be  deeper  seated  and  are  felt  in  the  periosteum,
as  in  the  teeth,  and  in  the  bones  of  the  fore-arm  and  tibial.
These  pains  are  not  however  coiifined  to  periosteal  mem-
branes, but  attack  also  muscles  and  ligaments,  so  as  to  make
it  difficult  to  choose  between  these  remedies.

So  we  have  quite  a  list  of  marked  wet  weather
remedies  in  Dulcamara.,  Natrum  sulphuricum.,  Rhododen-
drofty  Rhus  toxicodendron  and  Nux  moschata.

Rhodode7idron  seems  to  have  an  especial  affinity  for  the
testicles.  They  are  swollen,  with  drawing  contusive  pains,
which  sometimes  extend  to  abdomen  and  thighs,  and  they
are  very  sensitive  to  touch.  The  remedies  most  like  it
here  Auruni  metall.^  Clematis  erecta^  Pulsatilla^  Arge7t-
tum  metall.^  and  Spongia.  If  the  affection  was  of  syphilitic
origin  we  would  prefer  Azirum,  especially  if  the  case  had
been  abused  by  Old  School  mercurialization.  If  it  came
from  suppressed  gonorrhoea.  Clematis  or  Pulsatilla ;  if  of
rheumatic  origin.  Rhododendron.  Of  course  all  the  case
would  come  into  the  calculation  when  making  up  the
perfect  picture.


288


I.KDUM  PALUSTRE.


LEDUM  PALUSTRE.

lyedura  is  a  very  valuable  remedy  for  rheumatism.  This
complaint  is  confessedly  a  very  difficult  disease  to  cure  by
Old  School  treatment.  Seldom  is  a  case  of  the  inflamma-
tory form  completely  cured  by  them.  The  great  majority
of  their  cases  run  from  the  acute  into  the  chronic  form,  and
last  for  life.  They  are  often  drawn  all  out  of  shape  (their
patients),  or  left  with  incurable  valvular  heart  trouble.  This
is  not  the  case  under  homoeopathic  treatment.  On  the  con-
trary the  patients  treated  homoeopathically  are  generally
cured^  and  very  seldom  left  with  any  heart  trouble,  even  if
the  disease  commenced  there,  as  it  sometimes  does.  Oftener,
of  course,  it  begins  in  the  back,  extremities  or  joints  gen-
erally, and  then  if  treated  allopathically  with  local  appli-
cations it  is  driven  to  the  heart,  which  cannot  be  reached
with  local  applications,  hence  stays  there  until  exudations
occur  and  hardened  deposits  form  upon  the  valves.  Any
homoeopathic  physician  guilty  of  treating  a  case  this  way,
with  such  results,  ought  to  lose  his  practice  and  his
diploma.

I  do  not  say  this  inadvisedly,  for  I  have  lived  and  prac-
ticed for  thirty  years  past  in  a  decidedly  rheumatic  district
and  know  whereof  I  affirm.  When  we  homoeopaths  of
the  east  condemn  those  of  the  west  for  the  Quinine  (in
material  doses)  treatment  of  intermittents,  we  are  reminded
that  we  do  not  live  in  miasmatic  districts,  so  we  are  not
authority,  and  we  can  only  reply  that  we  know  many  phy-
sicians who  do  live  there  who  cure  their  patients  without
the  abuse  of  Quinine.  But  in  this  verdict  of  mine  on
rheumatism  I  cannot  be  turned  off  that  way.  Rheumatism


LEDUM  PALUSTRE.


289


is  one  of  those  diseases  that  presents  plenty  of  symptoms
and  modalities  to  guide  to  the  choice  from  a  long  list  of
remedies  of  the  one  appropriate  to  the  case  in  hand.
There  is  such  a  great  difference  in  the  results  of  applying
the  remedy  according  to  symptomatic  indications,  and
those  arising  from  simply  pathological  prescribing,  that
one  does  not  need  long  to  experiment  to  be  convinced.
Indeed  the  pathological  condition  in  this  complaint  does
not  figure  largely  in  the  account,  for  purposes  of  prescrib-
ing. But  sensations  and  modalities  do.

The  Leditm  rheumatism  begins  in  the  feet  and  travels
upward.  This  is  the  opposite  of  Kalmia^  which  goes  the
other  way.  Ledum  may  be  indicated  in  both  acute  and
chronic  forms  of  this  complaint.  In  the  acute  form  the
joints  are  swollen  and  hot,  but  not  red.  The  swellings  are
pale  and  the  pains  are  worse  at  night  and  from  the  heat  of
the  bed;  wants  them  uncovered.  This  is  like  Mercurius^
but  with  Mercury  the  profuse  sweat  without  relief  and  es-
pecially the  characteristic  mouth  and  tongue  symptoms,
will  decide.  I  have  seen  wonderful  benefit  from  Ledum  in
such  cases.

In  the  chronic  form  of  the  disease  this  remedy  is  equally
efiicacious.  Here  also  we  have  the  joints  swollen  and
painful,  especially  in  the  heat  of  the  bed,  and  painful,  hard,
nodes  and  concretions  form  in  the  joints  of  feet  first,  then
hands.  The  periosteum  of  the  phalanges  is  painful  on
pressure.  The  ankles  are  swollen  and  the  soles  are  pain-
ful and  sensitive  ;  can  hardly  step  on  them.  This  painful
and  sensitive  soles  of  feet  is  also  found  under  Antimonium
crud.^  Lycopodium  and  Silicea^  and  I  have  relieved  it,  other
'  symptoms  agreeing  with  each  and  every  one  of  these
remedies.  In  these  cases  of  rheumatic  troubles  the  I^edum
patient  is  unnaturally  cold. "Lacks  vital  or  animal  heat,"


I


I.EDUM  PALUSTRE.

in  this,  again,  resembling  Silicea  ;  but  although  the  Silicea
patient  has  chronic  rheumatism  of  the  feet,  ankles  and
soles  similar  to  Ledum,  aggravated  also  at  night,  the
warmth  of  the  bed  does  not  aggravate,  but  on  the  contrary
he  wants  to  be  covered  warmly.  Under  Ledum  the  relief
from  cold  is  so  prominent  that  sometimes  the  only
amelioration  is  from  putting  the  feet  into  cold  water.  It  is
well  to  think  of  Ledum  in  all  cases  of  rheumatism  of  the
feet  and  study  it  up.

We  must  not  leave  this  remedy  without  calling  attention
to  its  virtues  as  a  remedy  for  injuries.  We  are  apt  to
think  of  Arnica  first,  for  bruises  and  the  results  therefrom,
and  on  account  of  its  well-deserved  reputation,  to  forget
that  there  are  sometimes  other  remedies  equally  valuable.
Ledum  sometimes  comes  in  to  finish  up  a  work  that
Ariiica  began  well,  but  could  not  complete,  even  when
Arnica  was  best  at  the  first,  for  it  often  removes  the
ecchymosis  and  discoloration  more  rapidly  and  perfectly.
For  black  and  blue  spots  from  blows  or  bruises  there  is  no
better  remedy  than  Ledum.

Then,  again,  we  have  Sulphuric  acid,  which  is  very  use-
ful in  ecchymosis  from  the  same  cause,  especially  if  occur-
ring in  cachectic  or  weakened  constitutions,  with  tendency
to  purpura,  or  breaking  down  of  the  blood.  This  patho-
logical condition  would  be  attended  with  the  characteris-
tic symptoms  of  the  drug.  We  often  have  ecchymosis
into  the  conjunctiva  or  sclerotica,  for  which  Nux  vomica  is
specific,  but  for  "black  eye"  from  a  blow  of  the  fist  no
remedy  equals  Ledum  in  the  2c  potency.  Ledum  is  a
good  remedy  for  punctured  wounds,  such  as  the  sticking
of  a  nail  into  the  foot,  or  an  awl  into  the  hand,  etc. ;  also,
for  stings  of  insects,  especially  mosquitoes,  but  this  also
needs  modification. It  makes  some  difference  what  kind


BISMUTH.


291


of  tissue  is  wounded  by  this  kind  of  wounds.  If  a  nerve,
for  instance,  Hypericum  would  be  preferable  ;  if  the  perios-
teum, Ruta;  if  the  bone,  Calcarea  phos.,  or  Symphytum  to
promote  re-union  or  repair.  We  must  not  forget  to  men-
tion in  connection  with  what  has  been  said  of  Ledum  in
injuries  of  the  eye  that  if  there  is  great  pain  in  the  eye-
ball itself  from  the  blow  Symphytum^  may  have  to  be  used.
For  all  these  affections  I  believe  the  200th  potency  better
than  the  lower  preparations.

BISMUTH.

This  is  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  cholera  infantum  ;
genuine  cholera  infantum,  where  the  disease  is  sudden  in
its  onset,  and  rapid  in  its  course.  Such  cases  die  in  a  night
or  even  a  few  hours,  unless  Bismuth^  Veratrum^  Kreosote
or  some  remedy  of  such  rapid  action  saves  them.  With
Bismuth  the  stools  are  watery^  profuse^  painless  and  very
offensive  ;  cadaverous  smelling.  There  is  also  vomiting  of
large  quantities,  and  the,  intense  thirst  is  accompanied
with  vomiting  of  the  water  drank  the  moment  it  touches
the  stomach.  Water  only  is  so  vomited.  Food  is  retained
a  little  longer  (with  Arsenicum  both  water  and  food  are
vomited).  There  is  prostration  equal  to  that  of  Arsenicum
or  Veratrum  album^  but  the  surface  is  warm  and  often
covered  with  warm  sweat.  The  face  is  deathly  pale,  with
rings  around  the  eyes.  This  is  a  perfect  picture  of  Bis-
muth^ and  no  other  remedy  need  be  confounded  with  it.

Again,  Bismuth'is  a  remedy  for  purely  nervous  gastralgia.
The  pain  is  of  a  pressing  nature,  sometimes  pressing
between  the  shoulders  and  sometimes  there  is  much  burn-
ing in  the  stomach  {Arseiticum).  It  is  also  often  of  benefit
in  cancer  of  the  stomach,  when  there  is  at  times  vomiting


292


KREOSOTUM.


of  enormous  quantities  of  food  that  seems  to  have  lain  in
the  stomach  for  days.  In  such  cases  there  is  much  burning
and  pain.  It  has  a  restlessness  similar  to  Arsenic^  wants  to
move  around,  can't  stay  long  in  one  place.  In  the  neu-
ralgic form  of  gastralgia  the  lower  triturations  have  served
me  best,  but  in  cholera  infantum  I  never  use  lower  than
the  200th  and  have  seen  remarkable  results.

KREOSOTUM.

This  curious  substance  seems  to  act  chiefly  upon  the
mucous  membranes,  producing  profuse  and  oflfensive  secre-
tions and  ulcerations,  with  greatly  depressed  vitality.  This
is  especially  true  of  the  genital  organs  of  the  female.
Leucorrhoea  is  putrid,  acrid,  corrosive,  staining  the  linen
yellow.  The  parts  with  which  the  discharge  comes  in
contact  itches  and  burns,  while  scratching  does  not  relieve
but  inflames  the  parts.  This  remedy  has  a  tendency
to  hemorrhages,  which  are  often  very  obstinate.  The
hemorrhages  occur  with  leucorrhoeal  troubles;  they  are
I  intermittent,  will  almost  stop,  then  freshen  up  again  and

again.  This  is  often  the  case  with  the  lochia  after  con-
finement, when  the  choice  may  lie  between  these  three
remedies,  Kreosote^  Rhus  tox.  and  Sulphur.  The  other
symptoms  must  decide  between  them.  This  ulceration
may  be  found  in  cancer  of  the  uterus,  and  then  Kreosote
will  often  be  of  great  value.  I  have  no  doubt  that  many
cases  which  degenerate  into  cancer  might  be  prevented  by
its  timely  use.  In  some  cases  there  is  awful  burning  in
the  pelvis,  as  of  red-hot  coals,  with  discharge  of  clots  of
foul  smelling  blood.  I  see  that  Guernsey  recommends  it
in  cancer  of  the  mammae,  saying  it  is  hard,  bluish-red  and
covered  with  scurby  protuberances. I  have  never  so  used


KREOSOTUM.


it,  but  in  corrosive  leucorrhoeas  and  ulcerations  I  have
with  great  satisfaction.  I  generally  use  it  in  the  200th,
with  simply  tepid  water  injections  for  cleanliness.

There  is  perhaps  no  remedy  that  has  a  more  decided
action  upon  the  gums  (not  even  Mercury)  than  this  one.
It  is  not  used  often  enough  in  painful  dentition.  The
gums  are  very  painful^  swell,  look  dark-red  or  blue,  and
the  teeth  decay  almost  as  soon  as  they  are  born.  A  child
that  has  a  mouth  full  of  decayed  teeth,  with  spongy,  pain-
ful gums,  will  find  its  best  friend  in  Kreosote.  Cholera
infantum  in  such  children  is  of  common  occurrence,  and
is  of  a  very  severe  type,  for  the  vomiting  is  incessant  and
the  stools  cadaverous  smelling.  Never  forget  Kreosote
in  cholera  infantum,  which  seems  to  arise  from  painful
dentition,  or  in  connection  with  it,  for  I  have  seen  some  of
the  finest  effects  I  ever  witnessed  from  any  remedy  from
this  one.

I  have  used  it  here  also  in  the  200th.  Kreosote  is  also
one  of  our  best  remedies  in  other  kinds  of  vomiting ;  in
the  vomiting  of  pregnancy  and  in  that  other  intractable
disease  of  the  stomach,  known  as  gastromalacia.  I  do  not
know  any  characteristic  indication  for  it  here ;  but  should  I
find  the  troubles  before  mentioned,  in  part  or  whole,  such
as  corrosive  leucorrhcea,  or  the  hemorrhages,  or  on  a  gen-
eral hemorrhagic  tendency,  small  wounds  inclined  to  bleed
profusely  (like  Lachesis  and  Phosphorus),  I  would  feel
confident  of  Kreosote.

Kreosote  has  strong  characteristics  in  regard  to  urination.

First,  it  has  copious  pale  urine.

Second,  they  can't  go  quick  enough  the  urging  is  so
great  or  sudden.

Third,  the  child  wets  the  bed  during  first  sleep,  which  is

very  profound,  can  hardly  wake  it.
20


294  LAC  CANINUM.

To  recapitulate.  Bad  teeth  and  gums  "  from  way  back,"
foetid  corrosive  discharges ;  great  debility  should  always  call
to  mind  this  remedy.

LAC  CANINUM.

At  one  time  I  would  not  have  admitted  this  substance
into  my  list  of  remedies,  for  I  thought  it  a  disgrace  to  try
to  foist  dogs'  milk  upon  the  profession  as  a  homoeopathic
remedy.  But  after  accumulated  evidence  in  its  favor,  and
the  rule  that  I  had  adopted  early  in  my  professional  life,
"to  prove  all  things  and  hold  fast  that  which  was  good,"
I  concluded  to  try  it,  and  my  first  trial  was  in  a  case  of  in-
flammatory rheumatism  which  had  withstood  my  best
efforts  to  relieve  for  two  weeks.

The  pains  travelled  from  joint  to  joint,  but  Pulsatilla
utterly  failed.  I  noticed,  after  a  while,  that  it  not  only
travelled  from  joint  to  joint,  but  crosswise  ;  one  day  in  the
right  knee,  the  next  day  or  two  in  the  left,  and  then  back
again,  etc.  Lac  caninum  cured  the  case  very  quickly.
Not  long  after  I  had  a  very  severe  case  of  scarlatina.  The
throat  was  swollen  full,  and  the  restlessness  was  so  marked
with  pains  in  the  limbs  which  left  the  patient  tossing  from
side  to  side  that  I  thought  surely  Rhus  iox,  must  be  the
remedy.  But  it  failed  to  relieve.  Then  I  discovered  that
the  soreness  of  the  throat  and  the  pains  alternated  sides.
This  called  my  mind  to  the  remedy,  which  was  given  with
prompt  relief I  used  the  cm  in  both  these  cases.

Two  cases  of  tonsilitis  in  one  house  in  separate  families.
I  was  called  to  treat  one  of  them,  and  a  very  excellent
Allopathic  physician  the  other.  Of  course  there  was  close
watching  to  see  which  case  would  get  well  the  quickest,
and  especially  if  either  could  be  cured  \yithout  suppuration


LAC  CANINUM.


taking  place.  They  were  both  very  bad  cases.  Both
progressed  rapidly  for  forty-eight  hours.  In  my  case  the
swelling  began  on  one  side ;  the  next  day  was  even  worse
on  the  other  side,  so  I  told  them  that  as  the  first  side  was
better  I  thought  the  last  one  would  be  better  to-morrow ;
but  alas  the  next  day  number  one  was  worse  again,  the
patient  could  not  swallow,  food  and  drinks  came  back  by
the  nose.  It  was  with  much  difficulty,  choking  and  strug-
gling that  even  a  spoonful  of  medicine  could  be  taken.  I
hesitated  no  longer  but  gave  Lac  cani7ium  cm  at  noon,  and
when  I  visited  her  in  the  evening  found  her  taking  oyster
broth  and  she  could  speak  distinctly,  whereas  she  could
not  articulate  a  word  in  the  morning.  In  another  day  the
patient  was  well  except  some  weakness.  The  other  case
went  on  to  suppuration  and  was  over  a  week  longer  in
getting  around.  So^  another  victory  was  scored  for  Homoe-
opathy, and  I  have  continued  to  verify  this  characteristic
of  erratic  pains,  alternating  sides,  until  I  consider  it  as
reliable  as  the  key-note  of  any  other  remedy.

The  curative  power  of  this  remedy  being  settled  in  my
mind,  I  determined  to  test  it  by  a  proving.  I  induced
three  clerks  in  a  dry  goods  store  to  take  pills  (No  35)  of  the
200th  (B.  &  T.),  once  in  two  hours.  They  would  not  con-
sent to  do  it  until  I  told  them  what  they  were  to  take,  and
one  of  them,  a  well  read  young  man,  remarked  with  a
laugh  that  if  wolf's  milk  would  not  kill  Romulus  and
Remus  it  would  not  them.  The  result  was  that  within
three  days  they  had  sore  throats,  and  the  young  man  men-
tioned had  on  both  tonsils  distinct  patches  as  large  as  a
thumb  nail.  The  other  young  man  was  frightened  and
would  not  continue  the  proving,  and  the  young  lady's  sore
throat  was  followed  by  a  severe  .cough  with  soreness  of  the
chest  for  over  a  week.


296


KALI  SULPHURICUM.


I  have  found  Lac  caninum  a  very  useful  remedy  in  mas-
titis, the  chief  indication  being  great  tenderness  and  sore-
ness which  cannot  bear  the  least  jar  of  the  bed  or  stepping
on  the  floor.  Again,  if  the  breasts  and  throat  get  sore  dur-
ing menstruation,  especially  if  the  menses  flows  in  gushes
instead  of  continuously,  Lac  caninum  is  the  remedy.

KALI  SULPHURICUM.

When  writing  upon  the  Kalis  I  left  this  one  out.  There
is  no- proving  (deserving  the  name)  of  this  drug,  but  like
some  other  remedies  in  our  Materia  Medica  clinical  use  on
the  theory  of  Schuessler  has  developed  some  valuable  guides
to  its  homoeopathic  .uses.  It  resembles  Pulsatilla  in  a
number  of  its  symptoms,  and  being  a  deeper  acting
remedy  is  sometimes  useful  to  complement  that  remedy.
But  first  let  us  note  the  similarities :

ist.  Yellow  or  greenish  discharges  from  mucous  mem-
branes.

2d.  Evening  aggravation  of  fever  symptoms.

3d.  Amelioration  (general)  in  open  air.

4th.  Rheumatic  pains  in  joints,  or  any  part  of  the  body,
of  a  shifting,  wandering  nature.

5th.  Aggravation  in  a  heated  room.

6th.  lyoose  cough,  with  rattling  of  mucus.

These  are  all  very  similar  to  Pulsatilla^  and  I  have  fre-
quently verified  them,  in  cases  of  catarrh  of  mucous  mem-
branes, whether  acute  or  chronic,  but  especially  chronic,
or  after  the  failure  of  Pulsatilla.

I  once  produced  rheumatism  of  the  joints  with  Kali  sulph,
symptom  genuine,  though  up  to  that  time  it  was  only
clinical. I  always  use  it  in  the  30th,  and  I  think  that  any  .


ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALIS.


297


after- cured  symptom  from  a  potency  as  high  as  the  30th,
will  be  found  in  accordance  with  our  law  of  similia  when
thorough  proving  of  the  drug  is  made.

ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALIS

Is  a  very  valuable  remedy,  but  is  not,  I  think,  generally  ap-
preciated by  our  school.  It  ought  often  to  be  used  in
that  hydraheaded  complaint  called  dyspepsia,  for  which
Nux  vomica  is  so  indiscriminately  used.  Both  are  excel-
lent remedies,  and  it  is  only  necessary  to  know  the  differ-
ence to  make  the  choice  between  them  easy.  Anacardium
has  a  pain  in  the  stomach,  which  comes  on  only  when
the  stomach  is  empty  and  is  relieved  by  eatings  while
Nux  vomica  is  relieved  after  the  process  of  digestion  is
over.  The  pain  of  Nux  vomica  is  worst  two  or  three
hours  after  meals,  but  lasts  only  until  digestion  is  accom-
plished, and  then  comes  relief,  whereas,  with  Anacardium^
this  is  the  time  when  the  suffering  is  worst.  I  have  cured
many  cases  (some  of  them  of  quite  long  standing)  of  this  de-

*scription  with  Anacardium^  and  find  almost  as  many  of
them  as  I  do  Nux  vofnica  cases.  I  have  found  the  200th
here  more  efficacious  than  the  lower  potencies.  The
potency  here  as  well  as  elsewhere  and  with  all  remedies  has
more  to  do  with  success  in  curing  than  some  imagine.

Both  these  remedies  have  frequent  ineffectual  urging
to  stool,  but  Nux  vomica  is  the  result  of  irregular  peris-
taltic action  as  observed  by  Carrol  Dunham,  while  Anacar-
dium has  an  insufficiency  or  paralytic  state  of  the  rectum
which  does  not  appear  under  Nux  vomica.  In  other  words,
Nux  vomica  has  desire,  but  with  irregular  or  over  action.

.  A7iacardiu7n  has  the  desire,  with  not  sufficient  action  to
carry  it  out. Then  Anacardium  has  a  sense  of  a  lump  or


298


ANACARDIUM  ORIENTALS.


plug  in  the  anus  which  ought  to  come  away,  which  does
not  appear  under  Nux  vomica.

Anacardiiim  is  also  one  of  our  leading  remedies  for  loss
of  memory^  especially  in  old  people  of  broken  down  consti-
tutions. Of  course,  if  the  characteristic  stomach  or  bowel
symptoms  were  present,  or  had  been  suffered  from  during
former  years  as  a  concomitant,  or  as  the  exciting  cause  of
the  mental  trouble,  the  indication  would  be  strengthened.
There  are  many  remedies  having  loss  of  memory  as  a
leading  symptom,  but  none  stronger  than  this  one.  Of
course,  the  whole  case  must  be  taken  into  the  account.
This  remedy  has  two  other  peculiar  mind  symptoms.
First:  "Irresistible  desire  to  curse  and  swear."  This
symptom,  queer  as  it  may  .seem,  is  no  more  so  than  the  other
symptom  found  under  Stramonium^  and  often  verified,
"patient  wants  to  pray  continually."  Some  of  the  most
remarkable  and  convincing  cures  have  been  made  on  just
such  symptoms.  Another  symptom  is,  "the  patient  feels
as  if  he  had  two  wills,"  each  commanding  or  mov-
ing him  to  do  opposite  things,  or  one  commanding
him  to  do  a  thing  and  the  other  commanding  him
not  to  do  it.  Such  symptoms  are  often  found  in  de-
mentia, and  are  valuable  guides  to  the  curative  remedy.
See  my  case  reported  under  Platina.  Then,  again,
Anacardium  has  two  other  peculiar  symptoms.  One
as  of  a  hoop  around  parts,  and  the  other  as  of  a  plug  in
inner  parts.  This  may  be  found  in  head,  chest,  abdomen  or
anus.  The  sensation  of  a  hoop  around  parts  may  be  found  in
spinal  troubles  and  Anacardium  will  be  the  remedy.  Other
remedies  have  a  general  characteristic  sensation,  as  Aitacaj^-
dium  has  the  sensation  of  a  plug ;  for  instance,  the  feeling
of  fullness  as  if  too  full  of  blood  of  yEsculus  hippocasianum^
and  the  sensation  of  constriction  of  Cactus  grandiflorus.


ALUMINA.  299

Anacardiu7n  is  also  said  to  be  a  good  antidote  for  Rhus
poisoning. I  have  never  used  it.

ALUMINA.

The  chief  characteristic  leading  to  the  use  of  this
remedy  is  found  in  its  peculiar  constipation.  Inactivity
of  the  7^ectum^  even  the  soft  stool  requires  great  straining.

Like  Bryonia^  there  is  no  desire  for  stool  and  the  consti-
pation seems  to  depend  upon  dryness  of  the  mucous  fol-
licles. Again  it  is  adapted  to  dry  spare  subjects.  There
are  other  points  of  resemblance  between  these  two
remedies  and  they  complement  each  other  well.  They  are
both  excellent  in  infantile  constipation,  which  is  often  a
very  obstinate  '  affection  to  treat.  Anacardium^  Sepia^
Silicea  and  Veratrum  album  are  nearest  of  kin  in  this  l^ck
of  expulsive  power  in  the  rectum.

Alumina  is  one  of  our  remedies  in  chlorotic  conditions.
The  patient  is  pale,  weak,  tired,  must  sit  down  to  rest.
The  menses  are  scanty,  delayed,  and  are  pale  colored  when
the}^  come,  and  after  the  menses  the  patient  is  exhausted
and  pale.  Then,  again,  there  is  profuse  leucorrhoea  some-
times running  down  to  the  heels  if  she  does  not  wear  a
cloth.  It  is  as  profuse  as  the  menses  ought  to  be.  These
anaemic  patients  are  often  hungry  for  starch,  chalk,  rags,
charcoal,  cloves  and  other  ridiculous  and  unnatural  things.
Alumina  is  a  great  remedy  in  such  cases.  The  Natrum
mur.  chlorotic  couldn't  eat  bread,  or  had  an  aversion  to  it.
The  Alumina  patient  can't  eat  potatoes;  they  disagree.
Pulsatilla  can't  eat  fat  food,  pastries,  etc.  Alumina  re-
sembles Pulsatilla  in  chronic  nasal  catarrhs,  and  both  are  of
tearful  temperament,  but  the  constitutions  are  different,
Alumina  being  dry  and  thin,  Pulsatilla  phlegmatic.  One


300  ALUMEN.

thing  I  forgot  to  mention  under  stool  and  rectum,  viz.,
Alumina^  is  one  of  the  best  remedies  for  hemorrhages  of
the  bowels  in  typhoid  fever.  The  blood  comes  in  large
clots  looking  solid  like  liver.  This  remedy  is  also  very
efficacious  in  chronic  sore  throats,  like  clergyman's  sore
throat.  There  is  "soreness,  rawness,  hoarseness  and  dry-
ness." This  dryness  excites  a  continual  disposition  to
hawk,  and  after  a  long  time  the  patient  raises  a  little  thick,
tough  phlegm.  This  kind  of  throat  is  temporarily  re-
lieved by  warm  food  and  drinks.  The  remedy  nearest  to
this  is  Argentum  nitricum^  but  in  Arge^itum^  there  are
wart-like  excrescenses  or  granulations  in  the  throat.^  Both
remedies  have  a  sensation  of  a  splinter  in  the  throat,  as
does  also  Hepar  sulphuriciLm^  Dolichos  and  Nitric  acid.

Aliiinina  has  also  a  sensation  of  constriction  in  the  throat
and  oesophagus.  It  hurts  to  swallow.  Alumina  is  recom-
'  mended  for  the  following  symptoms,  which  often  appear  in
locomotor  ataxia  :  ''''Great  heaviness  in  the  lower  limbs;
can  scarcely  drag  them  ;  while  walking  staggers  ajtd  has  to
sit  down;  in  the  evening."  "Inability  to  walk  except
with  the  eyes  open  and  in  the  day  time."  Numbness  of
the  heel  when  stepping."  ^^Excessively  faint  and  tired^
must  sit  downy  "Pain  in  the  back  as  if  a  hot  iron  were
thrust  through  the  vertebrae."  I  give  these  on  the
authority  of  others,  for  I  have  never  verified  them.  I  will
add  here  the  value  of

ALUMEN

In  typhoid  hemorrhages  from  the  bowels.  It  is  an  excel-
lent remedy  and  the  stools  are  of  dark  clotted  blood,  in
large  quantities.  It  is  also  excellent  for  relaxed  uvula  in
sore  throat.


STICTA  PULMONARIA.


301


STICTA  PULMONARIA.

This  remedy,  although  never  anywhere  fully  proven,
has  come  to  be  a  very  useful  one.  In  acute  catarrh  it  is
one  of  the  best.

Its  characteristic  symptom  here  is  heavy  pain  and
pressure  m  the  forehead  a7td  root  of  the  nose.  This  is  in
the  beginning  of  a  cold ;  when  the  nose  begins  to  discharge
freely  the  pain  ceases  or  becomes  much  less.

It  is  also  of  great  value  in  the  form  of  nasal  catarrh,  if
when  the  discharges  dry  up  there  is  this  same  pain  in
forehead  and  frontal  sinuses.  In  these  cases  the  nasal
secretions  incline  to  dry  up  and  are  hard  to  discharge,  but
the  irritation  is  so  great  that  there  is  a  constant  inclination
to  blow  the  nose,  with  little  result.  These  secretions  be-
come so  hard  and  dry  as  to  form  scabby  concretions.  This
condition  is  next  door  to  the  plugs  and  clinkers  of  Kali
bichromicum^  which  often  go  on  to  ulcerations  of  the  sep-
tum. I  have  relieved  many  cases  of  chronic  catarrh  with
Sticta  ;  some  of  years'  standing.

You  will  remember  that  Kali  bichromicum  also  has  a
severe  frontal  headache  at  the  root  of  the  nose,  especially
from  suppressed  catarrh,  so  that  all  the  other  symptoms
must  be  considered  in  choosing  between  them.  The  other
remedies  that  resemble  Sticta  in  the  acute  form  of  catarrh
are  Aconite^  Ammonium  carb.^  Camphor^  Nux  voinica  and
Sambucus,  and  in  the  chronic  form  Ammonium  carb.  and
Lycopodium.

There  is  never  with  Sticta  the  watery  or  fluent  form  of
coryza,  such  as  calls  for  Euphrasia^  Mercurius^  Arsenicum
and  Kali  hydriodiacm. Nor  have  I  ever  found  it  of  use  in


302


RUMEX  CRIvSPUS.


the  thick,  bland  kind  of  discharge  that  calls  for  Pulsatilla.
Sepia  and  Kali  sulphuricum.  Sticta  is  also  one  of  our  cough
remedies,  and  one  of  the  best  indications  for  its  use,  espe-
cially in  acute  cough,  is  the  aforementioned  nasal  catarrh
attending  it.  The  Sticta  cough  is  also  worse  at  night
when  lying  down  and  keeps  the  patient  awake,  though  I
do  not  think  the  wakefulness  is  entirely  owing  to  the
cough  but  that  a  nervous  condition  which  also  comes
under  the  curative  range  of  Sticta  contributes  to  it.

This  remedy  is  one  of  the  best  for  the  obstinacy  of  cough
attending  or  following  measles,  and  here  we  remember  that
sleeplessness  is  a  frequent  concomitant.  In  this  respect
Sticta  is  like  Coffea  cruda^  which  is  wonderfully  efficacious
here.  The  cough  of  Sticta  is  at  first  dry,  but  later  on  may
become  loose  ;  hence  it  is  often  found  of  use  in  the  inces-
sant, racking,  wearing  coughs  of  consumptives.  In  hay
fever  it  is  the  remedy  when  the  trouble  centres  in  the
head  and  frontal  sinuses;  the  nose  is  completely  plugged
up,  though  there  is  continual  sneezing.

I  have  found  Sticta  promptly  curative  in  inflammatory
rheumatism  of  the  knee  joint.  It  is  very  sudden  in  its
attack,  and  unless  promptly  relieved  by  Sticta  will  go  on
to  the  exudative  stage  and  become  chronic  in  character.
In  one  case  the  pain  was  so  severe  that  the  patient,  though
a  strong,  resolute  man,  became  delirious  with  the  pain.
Sticta  relieved  and  completely  cured  him,  so  that  he  was
able  to  attend  to  his  business  (teamster)  within  a  week.
Sticta  deserves  a  thorough  proving.

RUMEX  CRISPUS.

There  are  three  localities  in  which  this  remedy  acts  very
markedly,  viz.:  Respiratory  organs,  bowels  and  skin.
"  Violent,  incessant  cough,  dry  and  fatiguing,  with  very


RUMEX  CRISPUS.


little  or  no  expectoration,  aggravated  by  pressure,  talking,
and  especially  by  inspiring  cold  air^  and  at  night."  (Dun-
bam.)  There  is  perhaps  no  remedy  under  which  the  sen-
sibility of  the  mucous  membranes  of  the  larynx  and
trachea  becomes  more  exalted  than  this  one.  The  patient
must  cover  up  the  head  in  bed  in  order  to  protect  these
membranes  from  contact  with  the  air,  which  immediately
excites  cough.  Several  other  remedies,  like  Phosphorus
and  Spo7igia^  have  cough  aggravated  by  breathing  cold  air,
but  none  so  markedly  as  Rurnex,  Going  from  warm
room  into  cool  air.  Bryonia  and  Natrum  carbonicum  have
-the  opposite.  The  tickling  that  excites  the  cough  may
locate  in  the  throat-pit,  supra-sternal  fossa,  or  down  behind
the  sternum  to  stomach,  where  is  often  added  a  sensation
of  soreness  or  rawness.  {Causticum?)  Again  we  have
•  found  it  efficacious  in  cough,  with  stitching  pain  through
left  lung  just  below  left  nipple. {Natrum  sulph.)

The  diarrhoea  of  Rtnnex  is  similar  to  that  of  Natrum
sulph. ^  Sulphur  and  Podophyllum^  in  that  it  occurs  in  the
morning,  but  it  is  a  brozvn  diarrhoea  and  is  apt  to  be  ac-
companied with,  or  an  accompaniment  of  the  cough.  On
the  skin  it  cures  an  eruption  which  is  characterized  by  in-
tense itching  when  undressing  to  go  to  bed.  This  eruption
may  be  vesicular,  like  army  or  prairie  itch,  or  may  look
like  simple  urticaria.  Itching  on  undressing  is  also  found
under  Natrum  sulphuricum  and  Oleander^  but  with
Natrum  this  itching  is  apt  to  be  found  in  connection  with
jaundice  or  malarial  symptoms.  If  we  should  get  intense
itching  over  the  body,  which  was  aggravated  by  warmth,
especially  warmth  of  the  bed^  we  would  think  of  Mercurius
solubilis  or  protoiodide.


3^4  ARUM  TRIPHYIvLUM.


ARUM  TRIPHYLLUM.

This  is  a  very  unique  remedy.  I  do  not  know  of  one
that  stands  so  far  apart  from  any  and  all  others,  and  its
peculiar  and  characteristic  symptoms  are  capable  of  such
remarkable  verification  in  different  diseases  as  would,  or
ought  to,  convince  the  most  skeptical  of  the  truth  of
Similia  Similibus  Curantur^  etc.

Hering's  "Guiding  Symptoms"  gives  it  in  the  best  ren-
dering. Let  us  quote  a  few  of  the  best  symptoms:
"  Appearance  of  raw^  bloody  surface^  on  lips^  buccal
cavity^  nose^  etc.''''  '''' Patients  often  pick  and  bore  into  the
raw  surfaces.^  though  doing  so  gives  great  pain^  and  they
scream  with  it  but  keep  up  the  boring.^''  There  is  also  one
other  symptom  not  so  well  expressed  in  Hering,  viz.  :
That  these  raw  surfaces  are  very  red,  like  a  piece  of  fresh
beef  steak  in  appearance.  Notice  that  in  Hering  these
symptoms  of  mouth,  tongue  and  nose  are  given  in  con-
nection with  Scarlatina  mainly.  I  want  to  say  that  they
are  also  found  in  typhoid  and  typhus  fevers.  When-
ever, in  any  disease,  this  red,  raw  condition  of  mouth,
nose  and  lips,  at  which  the  patient  bores  and  picks,  con-
tinually appears,  give  Arum  triphyllum.  Another  im-
portant use  of  this  remedy  is  in  affections  of  the  larynx
and  bronchia.  Hoarseness  or  loss  of  voice,  or  voice  in-
controllable  ;  it  breaks  when  trying  to  sing  or  speak  in
a  high  tone  or  key.  This  is  often  found  in  clergyman's
sore  throat,  or  in  operatic  singers.  Aggravation  of  hoarse-
ness from  singing  is  also  found  under  Arge^ttum  ?iitri-
cum^  Arnica^  Selenium^  Phosphorus  and  Causticum.


ARNICA  MONTANA'.


ARNICA  MONTANA.

This  is  the  leading  remedy  for  bruises  and  the  results
therefrom,  and  the  symptoms — "  Weakness,  weariness,
sensation  as  of  being  bruised."  "Felt  as  if  bruised  over
the  whole  body,"  as  found  in  the  provings,  explain  the
reason  and  the  many  cures  it  has  made,  even  in  the  high
and  highest  potencies,  of  both  acute  and  chronic  affections.
The  result  of  trauma  is  another  evidence  of  the  truth  of
our  law  of  cure.  One  of  the  best  characteristics  is
"  Everything  on  which  he  lies  seems  too  hard ;"  he  must
keep  changing  position  to  get  relief  This  is  because  of
the  sensation  of  soreness  as  if  bruised  all  over.

Baptisia  has — "  Feels  as  if  lying  on  a  board  ;  changes
position,  bed  feels  so  hard,  makes  him  feel  sore  and
bruised."

Phytolacca  has — "  Feels  sore  all  over  from  head  to
foot;  muscles  sore  and  stiff,  can  hardly  move  without
groaning,"

Rhus  toxicod.  has — "  Soreness  171  every  muscle^  which
passes  off  duriiig  exercise  ;  feels  stiff  and  sore  on  first  be-
ginning to  move.''''

Ruta  has — "  All  parts  of  the  body  on  which  he  lies  are
painful  as  if  bruised."

Here  are  five  remedies  which  seem  much  alike,  and
others  might  be  added,  like  Staphisagria,  which  has —
"  All  the  limbs  are  sore  as  if  bruised,  and  as  if  there  were
no  strength  in  them,"  and

China — "  He  is  sore  all  over,  in  the  joints,  the  bones,
and  the  periosteum,  as  if  they  had  been  sprained,  like  a
drawing,  tearing  especially  in  the  spine,  the  sacrum,  the


3o6


ARNICA  MONTANA.


knees  and  thighs."  Now  to  know  thus  far  of  these  reme-
dies would  be  of  little  use  for  therapeutic  purposes,  for  it
the  exclusion  of  all  the  rest  without  a  good  reason  for  so
doing.  Fortunately  there  is  always  a  possibility  of  making
choice  between  them,  "but  it  is  not  always  easy.  Take,
for  instance,  Arnica  and  Baptisia.  Both  have  the  symptom
of  sore  bruised  feeling y  Both  have  feeling  as  if  the  bed
were  too  hard.  Both  have  stupor^  from  which  they  can  be
aroused,  but  fall  quickly  back  into  it  again.  Both  have
a  dark  streak  running  through  the  tongue.

Both  have  a  deep  red  face^  and  all  these  similarities  often
occur  in  the  course  of  a  typhoid  fever.  How  are  we  to
choose  between  them?  Look  further.  If  in  addition  to
these  symptoms  the  patient  "tosses  about  the  bed,  reaching
here  and  there,  and  in  his  delirium  complaining  that  he
cannot  get  himself  together^''''  Baptisia  is  the  remedy,  or
if  the  stool,  urine  and  sweat  are  extremely  offeiisive^  it  is
Baptisia.  If  the  stool  and  urine  are  passed  unconsciously
and  there  appear  suggillations  under  the  skin,  Arnica  is
the  remedy.  Now  here  are  only  a  few  of  the  characteristic
differences.  There  are  others,  and  we  must  "watch  out"
for  them.  It  is  no  harder  to  choose  between  these  two
remedies  than  it  is  to  choose  sometimes  between  Hyoscy-
amus  and  Opium  in  the  same  disease.  Here  is  the  place
where  the  old  physician  might  exhort  the  younger  as  Paul
did  Timothy.  "Study  to  show  thyself  approved,  *  *  *  a
workman  that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed,  rightly  dividing
the  truth,  etc."  Such  close  prescribing  is  business  of
course,  and  it  also  successful.

If  I  came  to  a  case  that  had  the  bruised  sensation  very
markedly  in  connection  with  a  diphtheritic  throat  I  would


ARNICA  MONTANA.


not  give  Arnica^  because  it  does  not  have  that  kind  of
throat;  but  Phytolacca  has,  and  it  has  also  another  symptom
of  Arnica^  viz.  :  heat  and  redness  of  head  and  face,  while
the  body  and  limbs  are  cool  or  cold.

I  have  met  many  such  cases  of  diphtheria,  and  if  pre-
other  remedy.  Again  if  I  found  a  patient  with  the  sore,
bruised  sensation,  who  was  brought  into  that  condition  by
getting  wet  while  perspiring,  or  by  lying  on  damp  ground,
or  between  damp  sheets,  or  from  a  strain  of  the  muscles,
RhtLS  toxicodendron  would  be  the  remedy.

If  in  cases  of  actual  injury  I  should  find  the  bruise  in
the  periosteum  or  bone,  I  should  expect  more  benefit  from
Rtita^  which  seems  to  be  better  also  than  Rhus  tox.  in  one
kind  of  muscular  strain,  viz.  strain  of  the  ciliary  muscles.
I  have  often  relieved  sewing  girls  or  students  of  pains  in
the  eyes  from  this  cause  and  have  sometimes  enabled  them
optician.  It  is  much  better  to  use  this  remedy  in  a
weakened  power  of  accommodation  than  to  try  and  com-
pensate for  it  with  artificial  lenses.  Of  course  where  the
impaired  vision  is  purely  optical  this  cannot  be  done.

So  we  might  go  on  to  draw  the  diagnostic  symptoms
between  all  the  various  remedies  having  a  similar  symp-
tom if  we  had  time  and  space.  But  it  would  not  be  the
best  thing  to  do,  for  every  physician  should  get  in  the
habit  of  doing  this  for  himself.

In  addition  to  all  that  has  been  said  about  the  great
value  of  the  sore  as  if  bruised  sensation  of  this  remedy,  it
should  always  be  remembered  in  affections,  acute  or
chronic,  which  are  the  result  of  trauma.  Among  these
are  concussion ;  fractures  of  the  skull  with  compression  of
the  brain ;  headaches  of  long  standing ;  meningitis ;  apo-


308  ARNICA  MONTANA.

plexy;  inflammation  of  the  eyes  with  suggillations,  or
even  retinal  hemorrhages,  where  it  expedites  the  absorp-
tion of  the  blood,  deafness,  epistaxis,  newly  filled  teeth,
affections  from  blows  on  stomach  or  other  viscera.  I  once
cured  a  man  who  had  suffered  from  what  he  and  his  physi-
cians had  called  dyspepsia  for  several  years.  He  had  been
obliged  to  give  up  his  business  because  he  could  not  eat
enough  to  support  his  strength.  He  had  been  told  by  his
physicians  that  he  would  never  be  well  again  and  had
given  up  hopes  himself  This  condition  was  caused  by
the  kick  of  a  horse  upon  the  region  of  the  stomach.  A
few  doses  of  Arnica  200th  cured  him  in  a  short  time  and
he  resumed  his  business.  Now  I  will  conclude  Arnica
with  a  few  characteristics  that  are  genuine,  and  have  been,
with  me,  of  inestimable  value.

"Stupor  with  involuntary  discharge  of  faeces  and
urine."

"  Fears  being  struck  or  touched  by  those  coming  to-
wards him."

"  Putrid  smell  from  the  mouth."

"  Offensive  eructations  or  flatus,  smelling  like  rotten
eggs."

"Bruised  sore  feeling  in  uterine  region,  cannot  walk
erect."

"  Soreness  of  parts  after  labor,  prevents  haemorrhages
or  pyemia."

"Cough;  child  cries  before  paroxysms,  as  if  sore."
"While  answering  falls  into  a  deep  stupor  before  fin-
ishing."

"Head  alone,  or  face  alone,  hot,  rest  of  body  cool."
"Many  small  boils,  painful,  one  after  another,  extremely
sore."


HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA.  309

'^Prevents  suppuration  and  septicemia  and  promotes  ab-
sorption."

Arnica^  although  an  old  remedy,  is  not  so  often  used  as
it  should  be  in  general  practice.

HAMAMELIS  VIRGINICA

Is  another  remedy  having  the  symptom  "  soreness  as  if
bruised''^  in  a  marked  degree,  and  which  I  did  not  men-
tion when  writing  of  Arnica.  This  soreness  is  sometimes
found  in  rheumatism,  and  Hamamelis  has  cured  when
Arnica  failed.  But  one  of  the  chief  distinctions  between
these  two  remedies  is  that  Arnica  acts  more  upon  the
capillaries,  causing  their  relaxation,  whereby  suggillations
take  place,  while  Hamamelis  acts  more  upon  the  veins,
which  are  very  full,  enlarged  and  SOre.  One  author  says  :
"It  is  the  Aconite  of  the  veins."

From  clinical  use  we  know  enough  of  the  remedy  to
value  it  highly  in  varicosities  of  almost  all  kinds.  It  is
here  a  powerful  rival  of  Pulsatilla^  but  except  the  soreness
of  the  veins  we  do  not  know  of  guiding  symptoms  for  its
use.

It  has  produced,  in  proving,  severe  hemorrhages,  and

clinical  use  has  defined  the  bleeding  to  be  of  very  dark

clotted,  venous  blood. There  is  no  doubt  of  its  power  over

such  hemorrhages,  whether  occurring  from  the  nose,  bowels,

uterus,  lungs  or  bladder. I  have  used  it  in  every  place

with  satisfaction. It  is  not  a  powerful  poison  and  can  be

used  low  without  bad  effects. One  of  its  best  uses  is  in

orchitis  and  inflammation  of  the  spermatic  veins,  the  prov-

ings  markedly  indicating  its  homceopathicity  here.  In

hemorrhages  from  the  anus,  whether  from  piles  or  typhoid
21


COLOCYNTHIS.


Hamamelis  is  excellent.

Like  Arnica  and  Calendula^  Hamamelis  has  often
seemed  to  act  well  as  a  local  application.  I  am  not  in
favor,  generally,  of  using  remedies  in  this  way,  unless  it
be  for  external  injuries  which  are  not  disease.

COLOCYNTHIS.

No  remedy  produces  more  severe  colic  than  this  one,
and  no  remedy  cures  more  promptly.

Dr.  T.  L.  Brown  once  said  to  me  in  substance :  If  I  was
disposed  to  be  skeptical  as  to  the  power  of  the  small  dose
to  cure,  Colocynthis  would  convince  me,  for  I  have  so
promptly  cured  severe  colic  in  many  cases,  from  a  child  to
adults,  and  even  in  horses.  Of  course,  every  true  homoeo-
path can  respond  amen  to  that.

The  colic  of  Colocynth  is  terrible,  and  is  only  bearable
by  bending  double^  or  presshig  something  hard  against  the
abdomen.  He  leans  over  chairs,  the  table  or  bed  post  to
get  relief.  This  colic  is  neuralgic  in  character,  and  is  often
attended  with  vomiting  and  diarrhoea,  which  seems  to  be
a  result  of  the  great  pain  more  than  any  particular  derange-
ment of  the  stomach  or  bowels.  We  often  find  it  in  con-
nection with  dysentery.  My  experience  has  been  that  it
does  not,  as  a  rule,  occur  in  the  first  stage  of  the  disease,  but
later,  when  the  disease  has  not  been  fully  controlled  by
Aconite^  Mercurius^  Nux  vomica  and  that  class  of  remedies,
but  has  extended  upward  to  the  small  intestines.  The
pains  are  of  a  crampy  nature.  The  remedy  that  comes
nearest  to  Colocynth  for  colic  is  Magnesia  phosphorica.,  espe-
cially in  colic  in  children.  They  both  have  the  cramping
pains,  but  the  pains  of  Magnesia  phos.  are  most  relieved


COLOCYNTHIS.  3^^

by  hot  applications  like  Arseniaim.  Both  Colocynth
and  Magnesia  phos.  are  also  equally  efficacious  for  neuralgic
affections  in  other  localities,  for  instance,  in  sciatica  and
prosopalgia,  and  even  uterine  colic  of  a  neuralgic  nature,
though  in  this  latter  affection.  Magnesia  phos.  leads.
Remember  the  modalities,  for  upon  the  individualization
depends  the  choice  between  them.  Chamo7mlla  and  Colo-
cynth  resemble  each  other,  in  that  both  have  colic  from  a  fit
of  anger  or  other  neuralgic  affections  from  the  same  cause.
Chamomilla  succeeds  in  the  colic  of  children,  if  there  is
much  wind  which  distends  the  abdomen ;  the  child  tosses
about  in  agony,  but  does  not  double  up  like  Colocynth.
Other  symptoms  often  come  in  of  course  and  help  to
choose  between  them.  If  both  fail  I  have  succeeded  with
Magnesia  phos.  Staphisagria  is  also  a  remedy  for  colicky
children,  with  disposition  like  Colocynth  and  Chamomilla.
In  such  children  the  teeth  grow  black  and  decay  early.
Again  the  Staphisagria  child  is  often  troubled  with  sore
eyelids.  In  such  a  case  there  is  chronic  tendency  to  colic
and  Staphisagria  is  sometimes  the  only  remedy.  Veratrum
album  also  has  colic,  bending  the  patient  double,  similar  to
Colocynth.,  but  the  patient  walks  about  for  relief,  or  is  much
prostrated  and  has  cold  sweat,  especially  on  the  forehead.
Bovista  has  colic  relieved  by  bending  double,  after  eating.

Dioscorea  is  a  good  remedy  for  wind  colic.  The  pain
begins  right  at  the  umbilicus,  and  then  radiates  all  over
the  abdomen,  and,  unlike  Colocynth.,  the  pain  is  aggravated
by  bending  forward  and  relieved  by  straightening  the  body
out.  Stannum  is  a  colic  remedy,  and  the  only  way  the
child  is  relieved  is  by  being  carried  with  the  abdomen  on
the  mother's  shoulder.  I  have  cured  a  case  of  the  kind.
It  was  a  very  obstinate  case  of  long  standing  in  a  weakly
child. The  usual  remedies  had  signally  failed.  Jalapa


312


COIvOCYNTHIS.


cured  one  of  the  most  obstinate  cases  of  long  standing  that
I  ever  saw,  the  child  crying  almost  continually  day  and
night  for  weeks.  There  was  in  this  case  diarrhoea  all  the
time.  Both  colic  and  diarrhoea  were  very  quickly  cured.  I
have  lengthened  out  these  indications  for  colic  remedies  in
connection  with  Colocynth  because  there  is  great  tempta-
tion, especially  with  young  physicians,  to  give  "paragoric,"
soothing  syrups,  etc.,  because  it  is  not  always  easy  to  find
the  homoeopathic  remedy.  I  never  have  to  do  it,  and  I  cure
my  cases.  Of  course  there  are  many  other  remedies  for
the  same  trouble,  and  all  have  their  particular  guiding
symptoms.

Colocynth  not  only  cures  neuralgic  affections  originating
in  the  abdominal  region,  but  has  been  very  efficacious  in
facial  and  sciatic  neuralgia. The  pains  in  these  localities,
like  those  in  the  abdomen,  are  of  a  decidedly  crampy  na-
ture. Here  also  Magnesia  phos.  often  disputes  place  with
Colocynth^  in  the  fact  of  its  also  having  characteristically
the  same  kind  of  pains. The  relief  from  heat,  although
found under both remedies, is most marked  under
Magnesia  phos. In  sciatica,  the  pain  of  Colocynth  extends
from J:he  hip  down  the  posterior  portion  of  the  thigh  into
the  popliteal  fossa. Phytolacca^  the  pains  run  down  the
outer side  of  the thigh. These two remedies,  with
Gnaphalium^  are  the  leading  remedies  for  the  treatment  of
this most distressing malady. But of course  other
i  remedies  often  have  to  be  given,  and  the  indications  are
sometimes  found  outside  of  the  local  trouble,  as  they  are
in  many  other  diseases. One  of  the  worst  cases  of  sciatica  ^
I  ever  saw  was  cured  with  Arsenicum  alburn.^  on  the  indi-  i  i
cations,  worse  at  midnight,  especially  from  i  to  3  o'clock ;  \
burning  pains ;  and  the  only  temporary  relief  during  the  ,


PETROLEUM.


paroxysms  was  from  bags  of  hot,  dry  salt  applied  to  the
painful  part.

This  lady  was  a  sister  of  Charles  Saunders,  of  New  York,
of  school  reader  fame,  who  was  himself  a  cripple  from
allopathically  treated  sciatica.  She,  after  suffering  in-
describable agony  for  six  weeks,  was  cured  rapidly  and
permanently  with  a  dose  of  Jenichen's  8  m.  of  Arsenicum
album.  So  we  see  again  that  no  remedy  and  no  particular
set  of  remedies  can  be  entirely  relied  upon,  but  the  indi-
cated one  can. These  are  the  chief  uses  of  Colocynth.

PETROLEUM.

One  of  our  best  anti-psoric  remedies.  The  eruptions  that
it  causes  and  cures  are  very  similar  in  appearance  to  those
of  Graphites.  They  appear  on  different  parts  of  the  body,
as  scalp  behind  ears,  on  scrotum,  female  genitals,  hands,
feet  and  legs,  etc.

There  is  one  very  marked  characteristic  symptom  that
guides  to  this  remedy,  out  of  a  large  list,  having  similar
eruptions,  and  that  is  that  the  eruption  is  worse  during
the  winter  season.  There  is  no  other  remedy  that  has  this
so  prominently.  The  hands  chap,  crack  and  bleed,  and  are
all  covered  with  eczema  during  the  winter  and  get  well  in
summer.  I  have  cured  a  case  of  eczema  of  the  lower  legs
of  twenty  years'  standing,  always  worse  in  winter,  with  one
prescription  of  the  200th.  I  have  cured  chapped  hands  the
same  way.  I  once  had  a  very  obstinate  case  of  chronic
diarrhoea,  but  as  soon  as  the  fact  that  he  had  eczema  of  the
hands  in  winter  came  to  light,  I  cured  him  quickly  of  the
whole  trouble  with  Petroleum  200th.  Chilblains,  which
are  moist,  and  itch  and  burn  much  in  cold  weather,  are  also
cured  by  it. Petroleum  also  has  a  symptom  similar  to


3^4  HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.

Hepar  sidphuris,  viz.,  the  slightest  scratch  or  abrasion  of
the  skin  suppurates.  You  remember  that  Hepar  sulphuris
is  also  worse  in  cold  weather  or  cold  air.

Again,  Petroleum  is  one  of  our  remedies  for  sea-sickness.
In  this  it  resembles  Cocculus.  Another  curious  symptom
is  cracking  of  the  joints.  This  is  like  Causticum.  Both
of  these  remedies  are  valuable  in  chronic  rheumatism,
especially  where  this  symptom  is  present.  Petroleum  has,
with  Chelidonium  and  Anacardium^  a  symptom,  pain  in
stomach,  relieved  by  eating.  Again,  it  is  valuable  in
diarrhoea  and  dysentery,  which  is  worse  during  the  day.
Petroleum  deserves  to  be  classed  with  the  leading  anti-
psorics,  such  as  Sulphur^  Graphites^  Causticum  and  Lyco-
Podium.

HYDRASTIS  CANADENSIS.

This  is  a  more  celebrated  remedy  with  the  eclectics  than
with  us.  They  especially  value  it  for  what  they  call  its
tonic  properties  and  its  specific  action  in  the  way  of  heal-
ing ulcerations  in  mucous  membranes.  We  have  also
found  it  useful  in  such  cases,  but  we  have  more  decided
indications  for  its  use.  F'or  instance,  in  stomach  troubles,
where  they  attributed  its  curative  power  to  its  tonic  prop-
erties, we  find  it  especially  valuable  only  when  we  have
this  symptom  present:  "Dull  aching  pain  in  stomach
which  causes  a  very  weak^  faint^  gone  feelhig  in  the  epi-
gastrium." The  stomach  is  sometimes  actually  sunken
(objectively).  There  are  two  other  remedies  that  have  this
symptom  to  a  degree  almost  equal,  viz.,  Sepia  and  Ignatia^
but  Sepia  is  generally  in  connection  with  uterine  affections,
while  Ignatia  is  purely  nervous.  Hydrastis  is  a  good
remedy  for  chronic  constipation. E.  M.  Hale  taught  that


CAMPHOR.


it  must  be  used  in  tincture  or  very  low  dilution.  I  have
found  it  most  efficacious  in  the  500th  (B.  &  T.).  I  once
cured  a  case  that  was  of  year's  standing,  had  worn  cathartics
out,  and  all  the  way  she  could  live  (her  words)  was  to
swallow  a  spoonful  of  whole  flaxseed  with  every  meal.  I
have  used  it  in  infantile  constipation  successfully,  and  it  is
most  useful  when  all  other  symptoms  aside  from  the  consti-
pation are  conspicuous  for  their  absence.  Again,  Hydras-
tis is  indicated  in  affections  of  mucous  membranes  where
there  is  a  viscid  stringy  discharge.  This  is  like  Kali  bichro-
micum^  but  the  other  symptoms  of  these  two  remedies  are
not  much  alike.  Chronic  bronchitis  of  old  debilitated
people  is  sometimes  greatly  relieved  by  it ;  also  leucorrhoea,

CAMPHOR.

The  great  characteristic  around  which  the  whole  action
of  Camphor  SQQ:ms  to  revolve  is :  "Great  coldness  of  the  ex-
ternal surface,  with  sudden  and  complete  prostration  of  the
vital  forces."  It  is  no  wonder  Hahnemann  headed  his  trio
{Camphor^  Cuprum  and  Hellebore)  of  cholera  remedies
with  Camphor.  If  we  were  to  sum  up  the  same  condition
in  one  word  it  would  be  collapse.  No  remedy  comes
nearer  to  Camphor  than  the  last  of  the  trio,  viz.,  Veratrum
album,  but  Camphor  has  the  collapse  with  painless  stool  or
even  no  stool  at  all,  while  Veratrum  has  the  collapse
seemingly  as  a  consequence  of  the  very  profuse  evacuations
of  stomach  and  bowels.  Both  have  great  external  cold-
ness, but  Veratricm  has  a  very  marked  appearance  of  cold
sweat  upon  the  hippocratic  face,  especially  forehead.
Cuprum  leads  the  trio,  when  the  cramp  in  stomach  and
extremities  is  the most prominent symptom.  These


3i6


THUJA  OCCIDENTAUS.


remedies  are  indicated  when  these  characteristic  symptoms
appear,  not  only  in  cholera,  but  in  any  disease.  There  is
one  peculiarity  in  the  coldness  of  Camphor^  viz.,  the
patient  will  not  be  covered,  or  objects  to  it,  no  matter  how
objectively  cold  he  is.  Secale  coldness  or  collapse  is  ex-
actly like  this,  and  even  in  gangrena  senilis  it  proves  a
great  remedy  on  the  same  indication.  The  signal  success
of  Dr.  Rubini,  of  Naples,  in  treating  five  hundred  and
ninety-two  cases  of  cholera  with  Camphor^  verified  the  pre-
diction of  Hahnemann  beyond  question.

Collapse  with  cold  surface  and  aversion  to  heat  may
come  on  in  retrocedent  exanthema,  or  in  the  later  stage  of
so-called  cholera  infantum,  in  pneumonia,  or  capillary
bronchitis,  from  exposure  to  intense  cold  or  traumatic
shock.  Indeed  it  does  not  matter  from  what  cause  except
death.  Camphor  is  the  first  remedy  to  be  thought  of,  and
according  to  susceptibility  or  strength  of  patient  the  dose
must  be  varied  from  tincture  to  higest  potency.

THUJA  OCCIDENTALIS.

Hahnemann  recognized  three  miasms  (as  he  called  them)
which  complicated  the  treatment  of  all  diseases.  They
were  syphilis,  psora  and  sycosis.

Sulphur  was  his  chief  anti-psoric,  Mercury  his  anti-
syphilitic  and  Thuja  his  anti-sycotic.

Whatever  may  be  said  against  his  theories  along  this
line,  certain  it  is  that  these  three  remedies  do  correct  cer-
tain states  of  the  system  which  seem  to  obstruct  the  cura-
tive action  of  other  seemingly  well-indicated  remedies.

Thuja,  for  instance  cures  or  so  changes  the  existing  con-
ditions that  other  remedies  cure  which  could  not  do  so  be-
fore Thuja  was  given. Many  diseases  of  various  forms


THUJA  OCCIDENTAUS.  31?

come  under  this  rule.  Whenever  warts,  condylomata,  fig-
warts,  etc.,  which  come  in  consequence  of  gonorrhoea!  af-
fections, especially  suppressed  gonorrhoea,  are  found  in
any  case  we  think  of  Thuja.  For  instance,  a  case  of
enuresis  had  resisted  many  seemingly  indicated  remedies,
until  the  hands  were  discovered  to  be  covered  with  warts,
when  a  few  doses  of  Thuja  cured.  Of  course,  the  curative
power  of  Thuja  is  not  confined  to  sycosis,  but  can,  like
other  remedies,  cure  when  symptoms  indicate  it  where
no  sycotic  element  in  the  case  is  apparent.  Nevertheless,
its  chief  power  is  manifested  in  those  cases  in  which  this
miasm  is  unmistakably  present.  It  is  astonishing  what
widely  different  and  varied  forms  of  disease  will  be  so
modified  by  this  miasm  as  to  call  for  anti-sycotic  treat-
ment.

As  Sulphur  is  not  the  only  anti-psoric,  or  Mercury  the
only  anti-syphilitic,  so  Thuja  is  not  the  only  anti-sycotic;
for  Nitric  acid^  Staphisagria,  Sabina^  Cinnabaris  and  other
remedies  are  sometimes  called  for,  either  before  or  after
Thuja^  or  even  when  Thuja  is  not  at  all  the  remedy.  But
on  the  whole,  Thuja^  perhaps,  as  Hahnemann  taught,
stands  at  the  head  of  the  list.  Thuja^  Agaricus  and  Lyco-
podium  have  been  called  over  proven  remedies ;  but  when
we  realize  the  wide  range  of  diseases  which  are  compli-
cated by  the  sycotic  element  in  them  we  are  not  so  sure  of
the  over-proving  of  Thuja^  for  it  could  not  so  benefit  such
a  wide  range  of  complaints  if  it  could  not  produce  a  wide
range  of  symptoms  in  its  pathogenesis.  This  is  also  true
of  Sulphur  and  Mercury.  Thuja  has  some  very  peculiar
symptoms  of  the  mind  which  have  been  verified.

"Fixed  ideas,  as  if  a  strange  person  were  at  his  side;  as
if  the  soul  and  body  were  separated ;  that  the  body  and
particularly  the  limbs  were  made  of  glass,  and  will  readily


STAPHISAGRIA.


break ;  as  if  a  living  animal  were  in  the  abdomen ;  tells
about  being  under  the  influence  of  a  superior  power."
Insane  women  will  not  be  touched  or  approached.  Aside
from  these  curious  mind  symptoms  we  have:  "Headaches
of  sycotic  origin,  with  various  symptoms ;  white  dan-
druff, hair  falling  out  or  grows  slowly  and  splits;
eyelids  bear  styes,  chalazse,  tarsal  tumors,  or  condylomata;
ears  inflame,  discharge  pus,  or  grow  polypi.  Nose  dis-
charges thick,  green  mucus  like  Pulsatilla^  or  scabs  are
formed  in  it ;  warts  on  the  outside  of  the  nose  or  eruptions
on  its  wings ;  face  has  a  greasy  or  shiny  look ;  teeth  begin
to  decay  at  the  roots  as  soon  as  they  come,  the  crowns  re-
maining sound.  Ranula  under  the  tongue,  or  varicosities
in  the  mouth  or  throat ;  a  great  deal  of  croaking,  rumb-
ling and  grumbling  in  the  abdomen,  as  if  of  an  animal
crying;  abdomen  puffed  and  big,  protruding  here  and
there  as  if  from  the  arm  of  a  foetus,  or  of  something  alive;
constipation  of  hard,  black  balls;  chronic;  stools  large;
or  diarrhoea  forcibly  expelled,  copious,  gurgling  like  water
from  a  bung  hole  of  a  barrel ;  diarrhoea,  especially  from  the
effects  of  vaccination;  anus  fissured  or  surrounded  with
condylomata;  ovarian  troubles;  asthma;  nails  brittle^  dis-
torted, crumbling ;  misshapen  or  soft ;  warts,  condylomata,
bleeding  fungous  growths;  nsevins;  epitheliom,  and  many
other  affections  in  sycotic  subjects.  Finally  don't  forget
to  look  for  the  three  miasms  in  all  obstinate  cases,  whether
acute  or  chronic.

STAPHISAGRIA.

"Great  indignation  about  things  done  by  others  or  him-
self, grieving  about  the  consequences,  continual  concern
about  the  future."


STAPHISAGRIA.


"Throws  things  away  indignantly,  or  pushes  them  away
on  the  table."

"Children  are  ill  humored  and  cry  for  things  which  after
getting  they  petulantly  throw  away,  worse  early  in  the
morning."

"  Very  sensitive  to  the  least  impression,  the  least  word
that  seems  wrong  hurts  her  very  much."

"Hypochondriasis,  apathy;  weak  memory;  caused  by
unmerited  insults,  sexual  excess,  or  by  persistently  dwell-
ing on  sexual  subjects."

"Ailments  from  indignation  and  vexation  or  reserved
displeasure;  sleeplessness."

I  quote  all  these  symptoms  in  order  to  impress  the
reader  with  the  value  of  Staphisagria  as  a  mind  remedy.
Chamomilla  is  often  used  when  Staphisagria  would  be
better,  especially  for  children,  and  Nux  vomica  is  some-
times used  for  adults  the  same  way.

Phosphoric  acid  is  sometimes  used  for  the  results  of  onan-
ism when  Staphisagria  would  do  better.  You  will  also
notice  that  this  remedy  may  be  indicated  for  the  effects  of
anger  instead  of  Chamo7nilla  or  Colocy7ith.  Here  are
Chamomilla^  Nux  vomica^  Cina^  Colocynth  and  Staphi-
sagria standing  very  close  to  each  other  for  cross,  ugly,
irritable  subjects,  and  there  are  few  cases  that  one  or  the
other  will  not  fit.  Then  we  have  Phosphoric  acid^  Natrum
muriaticum^  Anacardium^  Aurum  and  Staphisagria  for
the  apathetic  or  hypochondriacal.

Staphisagria  has  a  sensation  as  if  the  stomach  were
hanging  down  relaxed.  Ipecac  and  Tabacicm  have  the  same
tion.  It  also  has  the  same  sensation  in  the  abdomen ;  feels
as  though  it  would  drop,  wants  to  support  it  with  the
hands. Colic,  which  might  be  styled  "  habitual  colic,"  in


320


STAPHISAGRIA.


scrawny,  ugly,  pot-bellied  children,  and  especially  if  they
suffer  much  with  their  teeth,  which  turn  black,  with
tender,  spongy  gums,  which  are  sensitive  and  painful.

Now,  when  we  add  dysentery  to  the  foregoing,  we  see
that  Staphisagria  acts  along  the  whole  intestinal  tract.
Staphisagria  is  one  of  the  remedies  which  has  as  a  marked
characteristic  aggravation  after  the  least  food  or  drink.
This  remedy  has  a  very  peculiar  symptom,  which  appeared
in  the  provings,  and  which  I  have  verified,  viz.,  "burning
in  the  urethra  when  not  urinating."  While  urinating  the
burning  ceased.  We  have  plenty  of  remedies  for  burning
before,  during  and  after  urination,  but  Staphisagria  is  the
only  one  having  this  burning  all  the  time  between  the  act
of  urinating.  In  addition  to  this  being  one  of  the  best
remedies  for  onanism,  it  is  one  of  the  best  for  affections  of
the  prostate  gland  in  old  men,  with  frequent  urination  and
dribbling  of  urine  afterwards.  A  very  common  and
troublesome  symptom  found  in  connection  with  troubles  of
the  genital  organs,  both  male  and  female,  is  backache^
which  is  peculiar,  in  that  it  is  always  worse  at  night  ijt  bed
and  in  the  morning  before  rising.  It  is  a  very  efficacious
remedy  here.  Staphisagria  is  a  good  skin  remedy.  It
cures  both  dry  and  moist  eruptions.  The  eczema  of  Staphi-
sagria oozes  an  acrid  moisture  from  under  scabs,  and  new
vesicles  form  from  the  contact  of  the  exudation.  They
generally  itch  very  severely,  and  one  peculiarity  is,  that
when  the  itching  is  relieved  by  scratching  in  one  place  it
immediately  appears  in  another.  The  eczema  is  often  on  the
head,  on  the  sides  around  the  ears,  but  the  most  marked
action  is  in  the  eyelids.  Bering's  card  expresses  it  thus :
"Styes,  nodosities,  chalazse  on  eyelids,  one  after  another,
sometimes  ulcerating."  There  is  only  one  remedy  that
can  compare  with  this  one  in  chronic  blepharitis,  and  that


COI.CHICUM  AUTUMN  ALE.  321

is  Graphites.  It  has  made  some  remarkable  cures  of  cross,
puny,  sickly  children,  having  the  teeth  and  eyelid  symp-
toms. Not  only  were  the  local  troubles  remedied,  but  the
patient  zvas  cured  every  way.

I  think  of  but  two  other  uses  of  Staphisagria,  which  I
wish  to  mention.  First,  its  use  in  the  cure  of  condylo-
mata, figwarts  or  cauliflower-like  excrescences.  In  one
case,  with  the  200th  of  this  remedy,  I  removed  an  excres-
cence on  the  perineum  of  a  lady  in  which  the  growth  was
an  inch  long  and  the  appearance  was  exactly  in  appear-
ance like  cauliflower.  It  rapidly  disappeared  under  the
action  of  this  remedy  and  never  returned.  Second^  its  use
for  incised  woimds.  It  is  the  best  remedy  here,  where
there  is  a  clean  cut  as  after  surgical  operations.  It  is  to
such  wounds  what  Calendula  is  to  lacerations.  Arnica^
Hamamelis^  Ledum  and  Sulph.  acid  for  bruises,  Rhus
tox.^  Calcarea  ostrearum^  and  Nux  vomica  for  strains.
Calcarea  phosphorica  and  Symphytum  for  fractures.

COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

This  remedy  has  one  of  the  most  positive  and  reliable
characteristic  symptoms  in  the  whole  Materia  Medica,  and
one  which  cannot  be  accounted  for  from  any  pathological
standpoint  that  I  know  of  I  mention  this  here  because
there  is  a  seeming  desire  on  the  part  of  some  to  base  all
their  prescriptions  on  pathological  indications.  I  have  no
objections  to  their  doing  so  if  they  can  and  succeed  in
curing  their  patients.  But  I  claim  full  recognition  for  the
value  of  those  subjective,  sensational  symptoms  and  the
modalities  which  cannot  be  so  accounted  for.  Indeed,  I
feel  quite  sure  that  the  well-verified  subjective  symptoms
are  oftener  to  be  relied  upon  in  curing  our  patients  than


322


COI.CHICUM  AUTUMNALE.


all  the  pathological  conditions  we  know.  Now  for  the
symptom.  ^'The  smell  of  food  cooking  nauseates  to  faint-
nessy  To  illustrate  the  value  of  this  symptom  I  will  give
a  case  from  my  own  practice ;  it  was  also  my  first  experi-
ence with  a  potency  as  high  as  the  200th.  Patient  was  a
lady,  seventy-five  years  of  age,  who  was  suddenly  seized
with  sickness  at  the  stomach  and  vomiting  of  blood  in
large  quantities ;  then  bloody  stools  followed,  which  were
at  first  profuse  then  became  small  and  of  bloody  mucus.
There  was  great  tenesmus  and  pain  in  the  bowels.  Aconite^
Mercuriiis^  Nux  vomica^  Ipecacuanha^  Hamamelis  and  Sul-
phur^ all  tried  as  well  as  I  knew  how  to  select  them  at  that
time,  but  no  relief  came,  and  at  the  end  of  twelve  days
my  patient  was  rapidly  going  down  and  it  looked  to  me  as
though  she  must  die.  She  had  become  so  weak  that  she
could  not  lift  her  head  from  the  pillow.  By  actual  count
the  number  of  stools  passed  on  cloths  in  the  bed  was  sixty-
five,  in  twenty-four  hours,  the  pains,  number  of  passages
and  all  symptoms  were  aggravated  from  sundown  to  sun-
rise (this  is  another  characteristic  of  Colchicum).

Now  during  all  this  sickness  this  patient  had  been
so  nauseated  and  faint  at  the  smell  of  cooking  food  that
they  had  been  obliged  to  keep  the  doors  closed  between
her  bed  room  and  the  kitchen,  which  was  two  large
rooms  away.  I  was  not  so  well  acquainted  with  Materia
Medica  then  as  now,  and  while  I  did  not  over-look
the  symptom  did  not  know  of  any  remedy  that  had  it.
But  I  had  my  I^ippe  text-book  of  Materia  Medica  in  my
carriage,  and  I  went  out  and  got  it  and  sat  down  by  the
bed-side;  determined  to  find  that  peculiar  and  persistent
symptom  and  "fight  it  out  on  that  line  if  it  took  all  sum-
mer." I  began  at  Aconite^  and  looked  at  the  stomach  symp-
toms of  every  remedy,  until  for  the  first  time  I  remem-


COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALK.


bered  ever  having  noticed  it,  there  it  stood  in  plain  English
under  Colchiacfn.  Then  I  looked  in  my  medicine  case  for
the  remedy.  None,  there  and  I  was  four  miles  from  home.
I  had  a  box  of  Dunham's  200ths  under  my  carriage  seat
that  had  been  there  for  over  a  year,  but  which  I  had  n^ver
used  for  want  of  confidence  in  high  potencies.  It  was
the  best  I  could  do  for  the  present,  so  I  dissolved  a  few
pellets  in  a  half-glass  of  cold  water,  and  directed  to  give
one  teaspoonful  after  every  passage  from  the  bowels.  On
my  way  home  I  stopped  my  horse  two  or  three  times  to
turn  around  and  go  back  and  give  that  poor  suffer-
ing woman  some  medicine.  I  felt  guilty,  but  I  said  to
myself  this  is  lyippe's  Materia  Medica^  and  these  are
Carrol  Dunham's  potencies,  and  here  is  a  clean  cut  indica-
tion for  its  administration,  and  the  other  symptoms  do  not
counter-indicate.  Well,  I  got  home.  But  I  started  early
the  next  morning  to  try  and  make  amends  for  my  rashness
(if  the  patient  was  not  dead)  of  yesterday.  Imagine  my
surprise  as  I  stepped  into  the  sick-room  when  my  patient
slowly  turned  her  head  upon  the  pillow  and  said  with  a
smile,  good  morning,  doctor.  I  had  been  met  with  a  groan
several  past  mornings.  I  felt  faint  myself  then.  I  dropped
into  a  chair  by  the  bed-side  and  remarked,  you  are  feeling
better.  O,  yes,  doctor.  How  much  of  that  last  medicine
did  you  take?  Two  doses.  What!  Two  doses,  I  only
had  two  more  stools  after  you  left.  Don't  you  have  any
more  pain?  Pain  stopped  like  that  (putting  her  two  hands
together)  and  I  feel  well  except  weakness.  She  took  no
more  medicine,  quickly  recovered,  and  was  perfectly  well
for  five  years  after  and  finally  died  at  eighty  years  of  age.
I  never  got  over  that  surprise.  Convinced  against  my  will,
but  not  of  the  same  opinion  still.

Now  I  fell  to  experimenting  with  the  200ths  in  down-


324  COLCHICUM  AUTUMNALE.

right  earnest.  I  have  cured  many  cases  since  of  autumnal
dysentery  with  this  remedy  on  the  same  indication,  and
with  the  same  potency.  I  have  also  cured  a  very  severe
case  of  typhilitis  (now  called  appendicitis,  for  which  they
so  often  operate  with  more  deaths  than  were  ever  known
before  the  operation  became  popular)  on  the  same  symp-
tom, which  was  markedly  present  in  the  case.  Bright's
disease,  a  bad  case,  was  also  cured  by  it.  Rheumatism,
gout  and  dropsies  have  been  cured,  this  symptom  being
present,  and  so  I  have  been  at  length  in  giving  my  experi-
ence with  this  remedy  in  order  to  prove  three  things :

ist.  That  we  should  not  be  influenced  by  prejudice.

2d.  That  subjective  symptoms  are  most  valuable.

3d.  That  the  200ths  do  act  and  cure.

Of  course,  there  are  other  valuable  symptoms  besides  the
one  upon  which  we  have  laid  such  particular  stress.  For
instance,  Colchicum  has  two  symptoms  that  are  opposite
one  to  the  other,  viz.:  Violent  burning  and  icy  coldness  in
the  stomach.  These  opposites  are  also  found  in  the  ab-
domen. Again,  it  is  sometimes  indicated  in  autumnal
dysentery,  the  white  or  bloody  mucus  discharges  having  a
shreddy  appearance^  looking  as  if  the  mucous  membrane
had  been  scraped  off  the  intestines,  with  great  tenesmus.
Cantharis  has  these  stools  looking  like  scrapings  as  promi-
nently as  Colchicum^  but  with  Cajttharis  the  pain  and
tenesmus  implicates  the  urinary  organs  at  the  same  time.
Colocynth  also  has  such  stools,  but  the  doubling-up,  colicky
pains  distinguish  it  from  both  the  others.  Colchicum  has
great  meteoristic  distension  of  the  abdomen.  It  is  in  the
200th  potency  a  good  remedy  for  the  bloating  of  cows  that
have  eaten  too  much  green  clover.  In  dyspepsia,  when
there  is  complaint  of  burning  or  sensation  of  coldness  in
the  stomach,  and  much  gas  in  stomach  or  abdomen,  or


CROCUS  SATIVUS.


both,  Colchicujn  is  excellent,  taking  sometimes  preference
over  Carbo  vegetabilis^  China  or  Lycopodimn.

Colchicmn  is  always  set  down  in  the  text-books  for
rheumatism,  articular,  migrating  and  gouty,  and  I  have
often  tried  it,  but  never  with  anything  like  the  success  of
our  other  rheumatic  remedies.  I  have  been  greatly  disap-
pointed in  it  here.  Perhaps  I  did  not  use  it  low  enough.
It  is  also  said  to  be  a  good  remedy  for  weakness  or  sudden  •
prostration,  but  here  I  have  no  personal  experience  with  it.
However,  if  in  any  of  these  troubles,  or  others,  I  should
find  its  prime  characteristic  present  I  should  certainly  give
it  and  confidently  expect  good  results.

CROCUS  SATIVUS.

This  remedy  has  three  different  spheres  of  usefulness  in
homoeopathic  therapeutics.

ist.  In  hemorrhages  from  different  parts.  The  blood  is
black,  viscid,  clotting  and  forming  itself  into  long  black
strings  from  the  bleeding  orifice.  It  makes  no  difference
whether  from  the  nose,  uterus,  lungs  or  stomach,  if  the
blood  is  of  this  nature  Crocus  must  be  given.

2d.  In  hysterical  conditions  in  which  there  is  great
changeableness  of  the  mental  symptoms.

The  patient  is  alternately  cheerful  or  depressed.  In  the
former  state  she  will  sing,  dance,  jump,  laugh,  whistle,
love  and  want  to  kiss  everybody.  In  the  latter  she  will
cry,  get  into  a  rage,  abuse  her  friends,  and  then  repeat  it,
etc.

Crocus,  for  these  alternate  mental  states,  resembles
Aconite,  Igiiatia  and  Nux  moschata,  but  with  Crocus
there  is  another  peculiar  and  persistent  symptom,  viz.,
sensation  as  of  something  moving,  or  hopping  about  in


326


BORAX  VENETA.


the  stomach,  abdomen,  uterus  or  chest.  Often  this  sensa-
tion of  moveiuent  is  so  positive  that  the  patient  mistakes
it  for  the  movements  of  a  foetus,  and  is  sure  she  is  in  a
present,  don't  be  too  ready  to  promise  a  baby,  but  give  a
dose  of  Crocus  and  await  developments.

3d.  Crocus  is  one  of  our  remedies  for  choreic  affections.
There  are  twitchings  of  single  sets  of  muscles,  {Ignatia  and
Zinc)^  twitchings  of  eyelids  especially.  These  twitchings  are
very  common  in  hysterical  subjects,  and  there  are  many
remedies  for  them,  so  that  one  could  not  of  course  pre-
are  suited  to  hysteria  and  also  other  nervous  diseases,  in
which  twitchings  are  very  prominent  and  Crocus  is  one  of
them.

BORAX  VENETA.

This  remedy,  although  an  old  one,  is  not  universally
appreciated.  Its  action  upon  the  nervous  system  is  very
marked.  In  the  first  place  it  manifests  itself  in  what  is
called  nervousness  in  regard  to  noises^  to  which  the  patient
is  very  sensitive.  Almost  any  noise,  as  a  cough,  a  sneeze,
rustling  of  a  newspaper,  a  cry,  distant  shot,  etc.  Bella-
don7ia  is  sometimes  given  for  this  starting  at  noises,  when
Borax  would  do  better.  Then  there  is  another  very
peculiar  nervous  symptom,  viz.,  fear  of  falling,  froin
downward  motion.  The  child  cries  out  and  clings  to  the
nurse  when  she  attempts  to  lay  it  down  in  the  cradle.
Carrying  it  down  stairs  has  the  same  effect.  It  will  scream
and  cling  to  the  nurse  as  long  as  the  downward  motion
continues.  Adults  get  the  same  symptom.  Will  not  sit
in  a  rocking  chair,  or  ride  on  horseback,  or  on  the  waves,


BORAX  VENETA.


or  swing,  or  go  coasting,  because  of  this  dread  of  down-
ward motion.  There  is  only  one  other  remedy  having
this  symptom  that  I  know  of  and  that  is  Gelsemium^  and
so  far  I  think  that  this  has  only  appeared  in  intermittent
fever.

Children  may  be  sleeping  quietly  and  awake  suddenly,
screaming  and  holding  on  to  the  sides  of  the  cradle,  with-
out any  apparent  cause  for  so  doing,  or  it  may  start  from
sleep,  clinging  to  the  nurse  as  if  frightened.  In  such  cases
we  might  think  of  Apis  mellifica^  Bellado7ina^  Cina^
tom. Look  at  the  child's  mouth,  and  if  you  should  find
an  aphthous  sore  mouth  it  would  settle  it  pretty  surely  for
Borax.  Then,  again,  Borax  has  a  very  strong  action  as
a  general  remedy,  even  domestic,  from  "way  back,"  and
homoeopaths  took  it  and  found  its  exact  place.  Now  the
choice  has  to  be  made  between  it  and  Mercurius^  Hy-
drastis.^ Sulphur  and  Sulphuric  acid.,  etc.

It  is  not  necessary  to  draw  the  line  between  the  different
remedies  here,  but  I  will  say  that  the  sore  mouth  itself  is
only  one  symptom  in  every  case.  The  rest  are  found  out-
side the  local  affection  and  often  have  more  to  do  with  the
final  choice  of  the  remedy.  The  nervous  symptoms  already
mentioned  are  "pointers  "  for  Borax.  Not  only  upon  the
mucous  membranes  of  the  mouth  is  this  action  of  Borax
notable,  but  upon  every  other  one.  The  eyelashes  become
gummy  and  stick  together,  or  turn  inwards.  The  cars  dis-
charge. I  cured  a  case  of  otorrhoea  of  fourteen  years'
standing  with  this  remedy.

Dry  crusts  form  in  the  nose  and  re-form  if'  removed.
Greenish  stools  day  and  night,  with  aphthae.  The  infant
cries  when  urinating  or  before,  showing  an  inflamed  con-


1


328  KUPATORIUM  PERFOUATUM.

dition  of  the  urethra.  If  these  crying  spells  before  urinating
should  be  followed  with  a  deposit  of  sand  in  the  diaper  or
vessel,  Lycopodium  or  Sarsaparilla  would  be  thought  of

The  mucous  membranes  of  the  respiratory  organs  are
also  affected.  There  is  cough,  and  expectoration  of  an
offensive,  herby  taste.  Then  we  have  decided  pleuritis  in
the  chest,  in  the  right  pectoral  region.

Borax  has  also  white,  albuminous,  starchy  leucorrhoea,
quite  profuse,  and  with  a  sensation  of  warm  water  running
down.  These  altogether  show  the  action  of  Borax  upon
the  mucous  membranes.  I^ike  Chamomilla^  Hepar  sitl-
phuris  and  Silicea^  Borax  has  ulcerations  of  the  skin  from
slight  injuries,  which  suppurate.

EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM.

When  writing  upon  Arnica^  I  there  compared  several
remedies  which  have  a  sensation  as  if  bruised.  This
remedy  might  also  have  been  mentioned  there,  as  it  has
Bruised  feelings  as  if  broken^  all  aver  the  body^  The
bruised  feeling  of  Eupatorium  is  accompanied  with  a  deep^
hard  aching^  as  if  in  the  bones.

Let  us  quote  some  of  the  symptoms  illustrating  :  "In-
tense aching  in  the  limbs  and  back  as  if  the  bones  were
broken."  "  Aching  in  the  bones  of  the  extremities,  with
soreness  of  the  flesh;  soreness  of  the  bones."  "Soreness
and  aching  of  the  arms  and  forearms ;  painful  soreness  in
both  wrists  as  if  broken  or  dislocated."  "Soreness  and
aching  of  lower  limbs ;  stiffness  and  general  soreness  when
rising  to  walk."  "  Calves  of  the  legs  feel  as  if  they  had
been  beaten."  "  Aching  pains  as  if  in  the  bones,  with
moaning."  These  symptoms  are  all  characteristic  and  may
be  found  in  influenza,  bilious  or  intermittent  fever,  bron-


EUPATORIUM  PERFOLIATUM.


chitis,  especially  of  the  a^ed,  and  many  other  diseases.
This  was  what  gave  the  popular  name  "bone-set"  \.o  Eupa-
torium^  because  on  account  of  the  severe  aching,  as  if  the
bones  were  broken,  that  occurred  in  an  epidemic  of  inter-
mittent fever  this  was  the  remedy  that  cured,  or  "  set  the
bones."  The  epidemic  was  called  break-bone  fever.  Of
course  this  curative  property  of  the  drug  was  then  dis-
covered by  accident,  but  abundant  proving  and  verification
have  demonstrated  the  homoeopathicity  of  such  cures.  So
with  Apis  in  dropsies.  If  this  remedy  had  no  curative
properties  other  than  it  has  for  intermittents  it  would  still
remain  a  priceless  boon  to  Homoeopathy.  It  cures  a  kind  of
intermittent  for  which  the  great  anti-periodic  (Quinine)  of
the  old  school  can  do  little  or  nothing.  Three  character-
istics stand  out  prominently,  to  indicate  the  cases  in  which
it  is  appropriate :

ist.  As  to  time  of  chill — 7  to  9  A.  m.

2d.  The  intense  aching  in  the  bones  before  the  chill.

3d,  Vomiting  of  bile  between  chill  and  heat.

There  are,  of  course,  other  symptoms  which  may  appear
in  a  Eupatorium  case,  but  these  three  are  a  sure  guide,  and
many  authentic  cures  corroborate  their  genuineness.  This
remedy  is  also  very  useful  in  diseases  of  the  respiratory
organs.  In  the  so-called  la  grippe  of  recent  years  it  has
proven  in  my  hands  very  valuable;  the  "aching  all  over,
as  if  in  the  bones,"  being  the  leading  symptom.

It  also  has  hoarseness  in  the  morning,  like  Causticiim^  but
while  Causticum  has  more  bunting  and  rawness  Eupa-
toriiLm  has  more  soreness  in  the  chest;  when  coughing
has  to  support  the  chest  with  the  hands,  it  hurts  so.
Both  remedies  have  aching  in  the  bones,  especially  in  in-
fluenza or  la  grippe,  but  Eupatorimn  the  most.  If  either
of  these  remedies  fail  to  cure  the  hoarseness  Sulphur  will


330  EUPATORIUM  PURPUREUM.

often  complement  them.  Altogether,  Etipatoriu7n,  is  to  be
remembered  in  many  diseases  having  these  characteristic
symptoms.

EUPATORIUM  PURPUREUM.

From  the  provings  made  by  Dr.  Dresser  and  his  wife
this  remedy  ought  to  be  a  good  one  for  urinary  disease.
And  Dr.  Hughes  says:  "The  drug  has  become  my  favorite
remedy  for  vesical  irritability  in  women."  I  have  not  yet
tried  it  in  such  cases  ;  but  I  have  done  some  good  work
with  it  in  intermittents,  when  the  chill  began  in  the  small
of  the  back  and  spread  from  there  up  and  downwards,
which  is  as  near  a  keynote  as  any  I  know  for  its  use.  Like
the  Eupatoriiim perfoliatum  there  are  boiie  paiiis  present.
A  lady  who  had  lived  near  a  marsh  or  swamp  for  seven
years  never  had  any  appearance  of  malarial  symptoms
while  living  there,  but  after  she  came  away  they  developed
and  were  unyielding  to  the  usual  Quinine  treatment.  In
fact,  it  utterly  failed  to  do  more  than  suppress  for  a  short
time,  when  it  would  return  and  in  an  intensified  form.  On
the  above  indications  she  was  quickly  and  permanently
cured  by  Eupatorium purpureum  200th.

Capsicum  seems  to  resemble  this  remedy,  both  in  the
chills  beginning  in  the  back  and  the  vesical  irritability,
but  the  Capsicum  chill  begins  exactly  between  the  should-
ers while  Eupatorium  begins  in  the  dorsal  or  lumbar
region.

Capsicum  has  violent  chill,  with  general  coldness  of  the
body.  Eupatorium  purp.^  violent  shaking  with  little  cold-
ness of  the  body.  Eupatorium  purp.^  EupatojHum  per/.
and  Capsicum  all  have  bone  pains  before  the  chill,  but
Eupatorium  per/,  the  strongest.


CAPSICUM.


CAPSICUM

Is  also  a  good  remedy  for  dysentery,  or  the  later  stage  of
gonorrhoea,  or  in  throat  complaints,  when  there  is  great
burning  in  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  aflfected  part.  In
short,  it  is  a  remedy  to  be  remembered  in  all  affections  of
mucous  membranes  in  any  locality.  The  characteristic
burning  is  not  like  that  of  Arsenicum,  but  feels  as  if  red
pepper  had  been  applied  to  the  parts  ;  nor  is  it  relieved  by
heat  applied,  as  is  that  of  Arsenic.

SPONGIA  TOSTA.

This  is  not  a  remedy  of  very  wide  range,  so  far  as  yet
known,  but  is  of  such  marked  utility  within  its  range  that
we  could  not  afford  to  lose  it.  Its  action  upon  the  respira-
tory organs  is  first  to  be  considered.  It  first  attacks  the
larynx,  extends  from  there  to  the  trachea,  bronchial  tubes
and  into  the  air  cells  of  the  lungs  themselves.  Next  to
Aconite  it  is  the  remedy  oftenest  indicated  in  croup.  The
cough  is  dry  and  sibilant,  or  sounds  like  a  saw  driven
through  a  pine  board,  each  cough  corresponding  to  a
thrust  of  the  saw.  Croup  often  comes  on  after  exposure
to  dry,  cold  winds.  It  generally  comes  on  in  the  evening,
with  high  fever,  excitement  and  fearfulness.  For  this
cause  and  these  symptoms  Aconite  is  the  first  remedy,  and
in  the  30th  or  200th  cures  a  great  majority  of  cases  with-
out the  aid  of  any  other  remedy.  But  if  after  a  few  doses,
or  a  reasonable  time,  it  does  not  alleviate,  and  the  case  con-
tinues to  grow  worse,  and  the  paroxysms  of  cough  and
suffocation  come  on  oftener,  and  especially  on  awakening
out  of  sleep,  Spongia  is  generally  the  next  remedy.


332


SPONGIA  TOSTA.


I  live  in  a  croupy  climate  and  district,  and  after  experi-
menting for  thirty  years,  first  with  the  low,  then  with  the
higher  preparations,  affirm  that  the  200th  potency  of  this
remedy  does  better  work  in  croup  than  the  lower  prepara-
tions. I  often  give  either  of  these  remedies  (^Aconite  or
Spongia)^  according  to  indications,  as  often  as  once  in
fifteen  minutes  in  watery  solution  until  amelioration,  and
then  lengthen  the  intervals  between  doses  according  to
amelioration.  After  the  croup  becomes  loose,  but  still  re-
taining some  of  its  croupy  sound,  Hepar  sulphiiris  comes
in,  especially  if  inclined  to  get  worse  after  midnight  or  in
the  morning  hours.  If  the  case  inclines  to  relapse,  or  get
a  little  more  croupy  every  evening.  Phosphorus  will  often
finish  the  cure.  In  the  laryngitis  or  bronchitis  of  adults,
Spo7igia  is  as  useful  as  it  is  in  the  case  of  croup  in  chil-
dren. There  is  great  hoarseness,  some  soreness  and  burn-
ing, and  the  cough  is  worse  on  talking,  reading,  singing
or  swallowing.  I  often  find  it  particularly  useful  after
Bellado7ina  has  improved  the  sore  throat  which  often  pre-
cedes the  laryngeal  or  bronchial  trouble,  and  which  is  gen-
erally brought  on  by  colds  so  often  contracted  here  in  our
northern  climate.

In  chronic  affections  of  the  respiratory  organs,  which
may  finally  lead  to  consumption,  Spongia  vies  with  Phos-
phorus, Sangidnaria  and  Sulphur.  There  is  soreness,
burning,  rawness  and  heaviness  in  the  chest,  while  the
cough  is  worse  in  the  evening,  from  cold  air,  talking,  sing-
ing or  moving,  and  better  from  eating  and  drinking.  I
will  not  attempt  to  give  all  the  symptoms  for  its  use  in
respiratory  diseases,  but  proceed  at  once  to  its  remarkable
action  •  upon  the  heart.  I  have  never  done  better  work
with  any  remedy  in  valvular  disease  than  with  Spongia.
''Awakes  out  of  sleep  from  a  sense  of  suffocation,  with


CHIiMAPHILA  UMBELLATA.  333

violent,  loud  cough,  great  alarm,  agitation,  anxiety  and
difficult  respiration"  is  a  key-note,  and  is  frequently  met
in  valvular  affections.  No  remedy,  not  even  Lachesis,  can
do  better  here.  Not  only  are  these  paroxysms  relieved  or
stopped,  but  valvular  murmurs  of  years'  standing  have  dis-
appeared under  the  action  of  Spongia.

The  dry,  chronic,  sympathetic  cough  of  organic  heart
disease  is  oftener  and  more  permanently  relieved  by  this
remedy  than  by  Naja.  Spongia  is  also  a  good  remedy  for
goitre,  with  sense  of  suffocation  after  sleep.

CHIMAPHILA  UMBELLATA.

I  have  had  some  valuable  experience  with  this  remedy
in  cystitis.  It  has  made  some  fine  cures  where  there  were
great  quantities  of  ropy  mucus  in  the  urine.  There  may
be  strangury  or  not  in  such  cases.  There  is  one  symptom
to  which  I  wish  to  call  attention,  because  it  indicates  that
this  remedy  may  become  very'  useful  in  prostatic  troubles,
and  is  found  under  only  one  other  remedy  that  I  know  of,
viz.,  Cannabis  hidica.  These  prostatic  troubles  are  very
serious  ones,  and  anything  that  can  contribute  to  their  suc-
cessful treatment  is  valuable.  The  symptom  is — "Sensa-
tion of  swelling  in  the  perineum  or  near  the  anus,  as  if
sitting  on  a  ball."  We  often  have  very  large  amounts  of
mucus  in  the  urine  in  prostatic  troubles,  and  if  I  found  it
coupled  with  this  sensation  would  expect  benefit  from  the
remedy.  I  know  of  no  other  use  for  this  remedy  at
present.  While  we  are  here  upon  a  urinary  remedy,  we
will  call  attention  to  another  comparatively  new  but  good
one.


334


EQUISKTUM  HYEMALE.


EQUISETUM  HYEMALE.

This  remedy  is  sometimes  successful  in  cases  which  are
not  relieved  by  Cantharis.  There  is  as  much  inclination
to  urinate  as  with  Cantharis^  and  there  is  pain  in  the
bladder,  as  if  too  full  of  urine,  which  must  be  voided  in
order  to  get  relief  from  both  pain  and  pressure,  but  urinat-
ing does  not  satisfy  and  he  must  soon  go  again.  There  is
burning  in  the  urethra  when  urinating,  but  there  are  larger
quantities  of  urine  discharged  than  with  Cantharis,  which
has  characteristically  very  small  amounts,  but  often  re-
peated, even  but  a  few  drops  at  a  time.  Equisetum,  like
Chimaphila,  sometimes  shows  excess  of  mucus,  and  it  is
also  very  useful  in  enuresis.  Both  Chimaphila  and
Equisetum  need  further  proving  to  draw  out  their  character-
istics.

LAPIS  ALBUS.

Th  is  is  the  name  given  by  Von  Grauvogl  to  a  species  oi
•gneiss  that  he  found  in  the  springs  of  Gastein.  Goitre
and  cretinism  abound  among  the  people  who  drink  this
water.  Grauvogl  experimented  with  it,  and  found  it  to
cause  burning  and  shooting  pains  in  the  cardia  and  pylorusj
and  also  in  the  uterus  and  mammae.  In  practice  he  found
it  remarkably  successful  in  scrofulous  affections,  but  that  it
did  harm  in  cases  that  had  previously  suffered  from  malaria.
He  treated  five  cases  of  uterine  carcinoma,  pronounced
true  and  incurable  by  allopaths,  and  cured  them  all.  I
have  a  case  now  under  my  care,  to  which  I  was  called  a
year  ago.  She  has  a  very  large  uterine  fibroid.  Under
various  remedies  she  grew  worse,  having  hemorrhages,  fre-


MEDORRHINUM.


335


qiiently  repeated,  so  profuse  that  it  seemed  as  if  she  would
bleed  to  death.  The  tumor,  which  involved  the  whole  body
of  the  womb,  laid  across  the  pelvis,  the  upper  part,  in  the
left  sacro-iliac  fossa,  and  the  os,  of  course,  exactly  opposite
in  the  other  side  of  the  pelvic  cavity,  so  far  up  on  the  side
that  it  was  impossible  with  the  speculum  to  get  the  least
view  of  it.  After  the  bleeding  had  gone  on  for  months  in
this  way  the  discharge  became  black  and  horribly  offensive,
and  the  os  had  a  decidedly  rough  feel  to  the  finger.  Finally
she  began  to  complain  of  intense  burning  pains  all  through
the  diseased  parts.  Arsenicum  album  effecting  nothing
for  her,  I  put  her  upon  Lapis  albus  as  an  experiment,  for
I  had  no  hope  that  she  could  live  more  than  two  weeks  at
the  longest.  Under  the  action  of  this  remedy  she  began
to  improve  immediately,  and  from  the  half  dead  wreck
that  could  not  turn  in  bed  without  help,  a  skeleton,  white
as  a  ghost,  she  has  steadily  improved  until  she  is  now
doing  her  own  housework,  the  discharge  having  all  ceased
except  her  natural  menses  at  her  regular  periods.  The
tumor  grows  smaller,  and  it  seems  as  though  she  might  get
well. She  takes  a  dose  of  Lapis  albus  30th  once  a  week.

MEDORRHINUM.

The  gonorrhoeal  virus,  is  undoubtedly  a  great  remedy.
Any  one  who  has  had  much  to  do  with  gonorrhoea  well
knows  the  severe  form  of  rheumatism,  which  is  often  the
consequence  of  the  introduction  of  this  disease  product
into  the  system.  I  have  seen  some  remarkable  results  from
the  use  of  this  remedy  in  chronic  forms  of  rheumatism.
One  case  (a  middle-aged  lady)  was  not  able  to  attend  church,
a  few  rods  from  her  residence,  for  a  long  time,  the  trouble
being  in  her  feet  and  ankles  and  soles  of  the  feet.  The  ankles


336


CHENOPODIUM.


were  so  sore  and  stiff  and  soles  so  tender  that  she  could
not  walk  on  them.  Antimonium  crud.^  which  had  cured
some  bad  cases  with  similar  symptoms  for  me,  was  without
any  beneficial  effect,  but  MedorrhiniLm  cm.,  one  dose,  so
benefited  her  that  she  could  walk  where  she  pleased.  In
the  Organon  (journal),  Vol.  3,  Dr.  J.  A.  Biegler,  of
Rochester,  N.  Y.,  reports  a  remarkable  cure  of  chronic
rheumatism  in  a  man  60  years  of  age.  No  history  of
previous  gonorrhoea  appears  in  the  case,  and  I  have  never
found  any  such  history  in  the  cases  which  I  have  been  able
to  benefit  with  this  remedy.  In  Vol.  i,  of  the  same
journal,  is  a  remarkable  cure  reported  by  Dr.  Skinner,  of
lyiverpool,  England.  It  is  a  cure  of  caries  of  the  spine  of
long  standing  by  Syphilinuni  (high).  I  had  a  very  similar
case,  for  which  I  had  been  prescribing  for  over  a  year  with-
out success,  when  I  first  read  the  report  of  this  case.  In
my  case,  as  in  his,  the  patient  had  severe  pains  in  the
diseased  part  diirmg  the  night.  Every  one  acquainted  with
syphilitic  troubles,  especially  of  the  bones,  knows  of  these
(terrible,  sometimes)  nightly  bone  pains.  Three  doses  of
Swan's  Syphiliniim  cm.  cured  this  case  in  the  remarkably
short  space  of  forty  days.  I  could  not  find  any  reliable
history  of  syphilis  in  this  case.  Then  the  question  arises,
is  Swan's  nosode  theory  true,  or  are  disease  products  homceo-
pathically  curative  only  in  those  cases  resembling  them,
not  having  a  disease  product  history?  I^et  others  answer,
I  am  not  able  to  as  yet.  •

CHENOPODIUM.

I  have  the  300th  potency  marked  Chenopodium  glaicc^
with  which  I  cured  one  case  of  pain  under  the  left  shoulder
blade.  The  case  was  of  several  years'  standing,  the  pain  at
times  becoming  very  severe. I  have  also  used  it  in  other


CHENOPODIUM.


337


cases  with  benefit.  I  always  think  of  this  remedy  where
I  find  such  a  pain,  and  of  Chelidonmm  where  it  is  under
the  right  shoulder  blade.  According  to  Dr.  Jacob  Jeanes,
Chejiopodium  anthehnintimm  cures  a  pain  under  the  right
shoulder  blade  similar  to  that  of  Chelidonmm.  The  pain
in  both  seems  to  depend  upon  some  hepatic  derangement.
Having  succeeded  with  the  Chelidoniuni  so  well,  I  have
never  used  it.  Clielidonium  is  well  proven,  and  a  full
proving  of  the  Chenopodium  may  enable  us  to  distinguish
between  them.  Between  the  two  Che^iopodiums  and
Chelidonium^  we  have  an  important  trio  for  infra-scapular
pains  which  ought  to  be  better  understood.  Such  single
symptoms  are,  of  course,  small  guides  to  follow,  but  are
sometimes  the  only  ones  we  have,  and  when,  after  full
proving,  the  drug  having  them  is  developed,  we  often  find
that  they  were  reliable  though  we  could  not  at  first  give
their  pathological  significance.  I  would,  I  think,  as  often
follow  such  a  guide,  as  speculations  and  theories,  which  are
only,  so  far  as  we  know,  speculations  and  theories.  For
instance,  here  are  some  such  single  symptoms  which  have
often  been  verified.  Infra-mammary  pains  at  climacteric,
Actea  racemosa.  Pain  drawing  through  from  nipple  to
back  when  child  nurses,  Croton  tiglium.  Pain  in  upper
left  chest  through  to  scapula,  Myrtus  com.^  Pix  liquida^
Theridion  and  Sulphur.  Pain  through  lower  right  chest,
Chelido?tium^  Mercurius  vivus  and  Kali  carbonicum.  Pain
through  upper  right  chest,  Calcarea  ostrearum  and  Ar-
senicum albicm.  Pain  through  lower  left  chest,  Natrum
sulphuricum.  We  might  add  many  more  such  to  this  list,
and  they  are  very  valuable.


338


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.


AMMONIUM  CARBONICUM.

Guernsey  says :  This  remedy  seems  particularly  useful
in  constitutionally  delicate  women  who  faint  easily  and
want  some  kind  of  smelling  salts  around  them  most  of  the
time.  They  are  weak,  with  deficient  re-action  and  gener-
ally of  the  lymphatic  temperament.  Such  patients  want
stimulants,  especially  such  stimulants  as  act  through  the
olfactory  nerves,  like  spirits  of  Ammonia,  Camphor,  Musk,
Alcohol,  etc.  .  In  the  first  onset  of  such  a  .suddenly  pros-
trating disease  as  cerebro-spinal  meningitis  this  has  been
found  a  good  remedy  to  excite  re-action  and  place  the
patient  in  a  condition  for  the  choice  of  the  next  remedy
indicated  by  the  now  aroused  vital  force  in  conflict  with
the  disease  (so-called).  One  thing  Ammonium  carb.  is
good  for,  is  dry  or  stuffed  coryza,  acute  or  chronic.  The
patient  is  worse  at  night,  has  to  breathe  with  the  mouth
open.  Sambucus^  Lycopodium^  Nux  vomica  and  Sticta
pulmonaria  may  be  compared  with  it.

Another  frequently  verified  symptom  of  the  nose  is
epistaxis  while  washing  the  face.  I  don't  know  why  it
comes  on  then,  but  it  does,  and  this  remedy  cures  it.  The
only  other  affection  in  which  I  have  found  it  very  useful  is
scarlatina.  The  body  is  very  red,  almost  bluish-red,  and
the  throat  seems  to  be  the  center  where  the  force  of  the
disease  seems  to  be  expended  in  malignant  intensity.  The
eruption  is  faintly  developed,  or  has  seemed  to  disappear,
from  sheer  inability  from  weakness  of  the  patient's  vitality
to  keep  it  on  the  surface.  {Zinc  has  convulsions  from  the
same  cause.)  Erysipelas  of  old,  debilitated  persons  comes
under  the  same  head. Cerebral  symptoms,  simulating  a


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.


339


drunken  stupor,  is  present  in  both  cases.  The  whole  system
seems  to  be  overpowered  by  the  toxic  effect  of  the  disease
poison.  (See  also  Ailanthiis.)  Ammonium  curb,  will  some-
times help  us  out  in  such  cases.

AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.

One  symptom  of  this  remedy  that  has  proved  to  be  a
valuable  keynote  for  its  administration  is:  '^Sensation  of
coldness  in  the  back,  between  the  shoulders."  It  is  generally
found  in  chest  affections,  such  as  cough  or  pains  in  the
chest  without  cough.  I  have  found  it  as  reliable  a  key-
note as  is  the  burning  between  the  shoulders  of  Ly co-
podium  or  Phosphorus.  It  is  also  a  remedy  for  constipa-
tion, the  stool  being  hard,  dry  and  crumbling  and  also
very  difl&cult  to  expel.  Sometimes  the  stool  is  covered
with  mucus,  something  like  Caitsticum^  which  has  stool
covered  with  mucus,  shining,  as  if  greased.  There  is  also
a  resemblance  between  these  two  remedies  affecting  the
muscles  and  ligaments.  Ammoniimt  mitr.  has  pain  with  a
sensation  as  if  the  muscles  were  contracted  or  too  short,
while  CaiLsticum  goes  a  step  further  and  has  actual  contrac-
tion of  these  parts,  producing  what  is  known  as  arthritis
deformans.

There  are  two  remedies  that  have  menses,  or  flow  of  blood
from  the  vX^ms^  at  night.  They  are  Ammoniu7n  7nur.  and
Bovista^  the  other  symptoms,  of  course,  deciding  the
choice  between  them.  This  remedy  is  also  sometimes  use-
ful in  sciatica.  Here  we  have  the  sense  of  contraction  in
the  tendons  and  the  patient  is  worse  while  sitting,  some
better  when  walking  and  entirely  relieved  when  lying
down. It  also  has  pains  in  the  heels  as  if  ulcerated.  For


340


.STHUSA  CYNAPIUM.


pains  in  the  heels  see  also  Phytolacca,  Cycla77ien,  Man-
gaiiiim,  Ledum  and  Causticum.  I  once  cured  a  case,  very
severe  and  long  lasting,  with  Valeriana.

iETHUSA  CYNAPIUM

Is  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  vomiting  in  children.  The
milk  comes  up  as  soon  as  swallowed,  by  a  great  effort,  after
which  the  child  becomes  greatly  relaxed  and  drowsy ;  or  if
the  milk  stays  down  longer  it  finally  comes  up  in  very  sour
curds,  so  large  that  it  would  seem  almost  impossible  the  child
could  have  ejected  them.  If  this  condition  of  the  stomach
is  not  cured  the  case  will  go  on  to  cholera  infantum,  with
green,  watery  or  slimy  stools,  colic  and  convulsions.  The
convulsions  of  this  remedy  are  peculiar,  in  that  the  eyes
turn  downward  instead  of  up  or  sidewise.  If  the  case
still  progresses  unfavorably  there  is  an  appearance  of  sunk-
enness  in  the  face  with  linea  nasalis,  which  is  a  surface  of
pearly  whiteness  on  the  upper  lip,  bounded  by  a  distinct
line  from  the  outer  nasal  orifice  to  the  angles  of  the  mouth.

This  last  symptom  is  more  characteristic  of  yEthusa  than
any  other  remedy,  ^thusa  has  complete  absence  of  thirst.
The  prostration  and  anxiety  is  very  marked,  but  this  ab-
sence of  thirst  rules  for  y^thttsa  instead  of  Arseiiicmii
album.

Vomiting  of  large  curds  (sour)  is  also  found  under
Calcarea  ostrearmn,  but  with  this  remedy  we  have  at  the
same  time  sour  stools,  and  then  sweaty  head  and  open
fontaneles  as  well  as  Calcarea  temperament  would  generally
be  found  in  the  case.

There  is  another  very  peculiar  symptom  of  ^thusa  that
has  been  cured  twice  to  my  knowledge,  by  this  remedy,
viz.:  Imagined  she  saw  a  rat  or  mouse  run  across  the  room.


JAIvAPA.

In  both  these  cases  the  symptom  occurred  in  hard  worked,
nervous  women,  but  the  symptom  was  very  persistent  and
annoying,  ^thiisa  not  only  cured  the  aberration  but  im-
proved the  general  health.  I  always  use  it  in  the  200th
potency.

JALAPA.

"Child  'good'  all  day;  screaming,  restless  and  very
troublesome  at  night"  (frequently  verified).  I  once  had  a
case  of  entero-colitis  that  for  more  than  eight  weeks  baffled
my  best  efforts  to  cure.  The  case  went  from  bad  to  worse,
until  it  was  reduced  almost  to  a  skeleton.  Instead  of
screaming  all  night  it  screamed  day  and  night,  all  the  time
(so  the  mother  said),  and  certain  it  was,  it  was  always
screaming  when  I  saw  it.  With  the  screaming  there  were
constant  contortions  of  the  body,  bending  forward,  back-
wards and  sidewise,  alternately.  I  cannot  tell  how  many
different  remedies  I  tried,  but  finally,  in  the  course  of
human  events,  I  gave  it  some  Jalapa  12th,  run  up  from
some  of  the  crude  drug  which  I  procured  from  an  ordinary
drug  store.  The  child  went  to  sleep,  and  from  that  nap,
which  was  a  good,  long  one,  recovery  was  rapid  and  perfect.
The  only  indication  I  had  was  that  it  caused  colic  and
diarrhoea.


RHEUM

Is  another  remedy  which,  like  Jalapa,  has  been  abused  by
the  old  school,  but  is  very  valuable  when  used  homceo-
pathically.  The  leading  indication  is  sour  stools.  They
may  be  brown  mixed  with  mucus,  or  thin  and  pasty.  There
is  often  much  pain  before  the  stool,  of  a  colicky  nature,  and


342


COLIvINSONIA  CANADENSIS.


there  may  be  tenesmus  after  stool.  It  is  most  useful  in
colicky  diarrhoea  of  children.  There  is  a  another  very  charac-
teristic symptom,  viz.:  "  Not  only  the  stools  are  sour  ;  the
whole  child  smells  sour,  no  matter  how  much  it  is  bathed."

COLLINSONIA  CANADENSIS.

This  remedy  has  not  been  thoroughly  proven,  but  enough
has  been  learned  from  what  we  have,  and  clinical  experi-
ence, to  indicate  that  it  is  a  very  valuable  one.  As  a  remedy
for  hemorrhoids  or  rectal  "trouble  it  may  be  compared  with
y^sculus  hippo castanmn^  for  both  have  a  sensation  as  if  the
rectum  was  filled  with  sticks.  From  this  one  symptom  we
some  of  the  differences.

^scuhts  has  also  a  prominent  sense  of  fullness  in  rectum,
Collinsonia  has  not.

^sculus  piles  do  not,  as  a  rule,  bleed.

Collinso7tia  piles  often  bleed  persistently.

^sculus  has  great  pain,  soreness  and  aching  in  the
back.

Collinsonia  does  not  as  yet  develop  that  symptom.
y^sculus  sometimes  has  constipation,  sometimes  not.
Colli?ispnia  is  greatly  constipated,  with  colic  on  account
of  it.

This  comparison  is  carried  far  enough  to  show  that  a
choice  between  these  remedies  is  not  generally  difficult.
With  Collinsonia  I  once  cured  a  very  severe  colic  which
had  been  of  frequent  occurrence  in  a  lady  for  several  years
and  had  completely  baffled  the  old  school  efforts  to  cure.
I  was  led  to  choose  the  remedy  on  account  of  the  obstinate
constipation,  the  great  flatulence  and  the  hemorrhoidal
condition  present.


CORAIvLIUM  RUBRUM.


343


I  also  cured  one  of  the  most  obstinate  cases  of  chronic
constipation  I  ever  met.  The  patient  for  over  two  years
had  only  averaged  a  movement  of  the  bowels  once  in  two
weeks,  and  then  only  under  the  action  of  powerful
cathartics,  after  which  he  would  be  almost  sick  two  or
three  days  in  bed.  Collinsonia  cured  him  within  a  month
so  perfectly  that  his  bowels  moved  naturally  every  day,  and
the  trouble  never  returned  so  long  as  I  knew  him,  for  years
afterwards.

CORALLIUM  RUBRUM

Is  useful  for  spasmodic  cough,  like  whooping  cough.  It
is  continual,  short,  hacking  through  the  day,  so  constant
and  frequent  as  to  have  merited  the  description  given  it  of
"Minute  gun"  cough.  This  is  during  the  day  and  there
is  not  much  whooping,  but  at  night  there  is  more  whoop-
ing. The  night  paroxysms  are  sometimes  very  severe.

I  have  found  Coral,  one  of  the  very  best  remedies  for
post  nasal  catarrh,  with  much  dropping  of  mucus  into  the
throat.  I  do  not  know  any  other  remedy  so  efficacious  in
have  strong  indications  for  some  other  remedy.  I  seldom
fail  to  hear  a  good  report  from  it.

Coral,  has  also  been  found  useful  in  chancre.  The  ulcer
is  red  (coral  red),  flat  and  exceedingly  sensitive,  sometimes
painful.  Chancroids  or  soft  chancre,  for  which  the  old
school  cauterize,  may  find  a  swift  and  sure  cure  in  Coral.

COCCUS  CACTI

Is  another  animal  remedy  often  found  valuable  in  whoop-
ing cough.  With  this  remedy  the  aggravations  generally
come  (^n  in  the  after  part  of  the  night  or  in  the  morning
when  the  child  awakens. The  paroxysms  are  not  confined


344


CLEMATIS  ERECTA.


to  this  time,  but  the  worst  one  comes  then.  The  paroxysm
ends  in  vomiting  of  clear  ropy  mucus  in  large  quantities,
hanging  in  long  strings  from  the  mouth.  For  such  a
cough  Coccus  cacti  is  excellent.

CLEMATIS  ERECTA.

This  is  a  good  remedy  for  gonorrhoea  when  there  are  on
account  of  slow  or  intermittent  flow  of  urine,  indica-
tions of  formation  of  a  stricture,  and  will,  if  given  early,
(high)  often  prevent  it.  So  much  pain  and  suffering  often
necessitating  operation  for  the  relief  of  stricture  has  been
experienced  that  everything  possible  should  be  done  to
avert  it.  In  the  first  place  the  cauterization  method,  or
fashionable  local  treatment,  is  responsible  for  nearly,  if  not
quite,  all  strictures.  I  know  that  such  practice  is  neither
scientific  nor  curative  in  the  remotest  sense,  and  on  the  other
hand  I  know  that  constitutional  treatment  alone  is  adequate
to  cure  (not  simply  suppress)  the  worst  cases,  and  that  in
the  shortest  possible  time.  Another  use  for  Clematis  is
for  curing  the  orchitis  arising  from  the  suppression  of
gonorrhoea,  or  when  it  may  have  extended  to  the  testicles
without  such  suppression,  which  latter  condition  seldom
occurs.  The  testicle  becomes  greatly  swollen,  and  if  not
promptly  relieved  becomes  indurated  and  hard  as  a  stone.
I  have  cured  them  very  promptly  with  Clematis.  Pulsa-
tilla is  undoubtedly  the  remedy  oftenest  indicated  in
orchitis  from  suppressed  gonorrhoea,  but  if  after  it  has  re-
duced the  pain  and  restored  the  discharge ;  it  fails  to  re-
duce the  swelling  or  induration  Clematis  will  do  the  rest.
It  has  not  disappointed  me.  Clematis  has  a  symptom
similar  to  Coffea,  viz.,  "Toothache  relieved  by  holding
cold  water  in  the  mouth."


COPAIVA.


345


COPAIVA.

This  remedy  acts  strongly  upon  mucous  membranes.  It
has,  like  many  other  remedies,  been  so  abused  by  the  old
school  that  it  has  fallen  into  disrepute,  and  the  tendency
even  with  our  own  school  under  such  circumstances  is  to
underate  its  virtues  or  to  fail  to  investigate  as  they  ought  to.
It  is,  however,  an  excellent  remedy  in  a  form  of  chronic
bronchial  catarrh,  with  profuse  expectoration  of  greenish
or  gray  purulent  matter.  {Staiiniim^  Lycopodium^  Siclphur^
Phosphorus^  etc.)  A.mong  remedies  not  yet  well  under-
stood we  have

Copaiva^  profuse  greenish-gray,  disgusting,  smelling
sputa.

Illiciu7n  anisatum^  pus,  with  pain  at  third  cartilage,  right
or  left.

Pix  liquida^  purulent  sputa,  pain  at  left  third  costal
cartilage.

Myosotis^  copious  sputa,  emaciation,  night  sweats.
Balsam  Peru.^  catarrhal  phthisis,  copious  purulent  ex-
pectoration.

Verba  santa^  accumulation  of  mucus  causing  asthmatic
breathing.

I  mention  these  remedies  in  order  to  call  attention  to
them  for  trial  in  case  we  cannot  find  the  curative  among
the  better  proven  ones.  All  the  old  remedies  had  to  have
their  begimiings.

Copaiva  is  a  valuable  remedy  in  gonorrhoea.  There  is
great  irritation  in  the  urethra  and  at  the  neck  of  the
bladder.  It  may  be  indicated  in  the  beginning,  when
the  discharge  is  thin  or  milky,  and  later,  especially  when


346


CUBEBA.


the  disease  has  extended  to  the  bladder,  with  discharge  of
a  large  amount  of  viscid  mucus  or  blood  and  mucus  in  the
urine.  Although  not  so  violent  in  its  action  on  the  urinary
tract  as  Cantharis^  it  stands  very  close  to  it.

CUBEBA.

This  remedy,  also  fallen  into  disrepute  from  its  empirical
use  in  the  old  school,  has  an  important  place  in  the  thera-
peutics of  gonorrhoea,  if  after  the  first  or  inflammatory
stage  is  passed  under  the  usual  remedies  for  that  stage
there  still  remains  burning  in  the  urethra  after  urination
and  the  discharge  remains  thick,  yellow  or  pus-like.  Not-
withstanding Mercitrius  or  Pulsatilla^  one  may  find  our
remedy  in  Cubeba.  I  have  made  some  fine  cures  myself  in
such  cases.  With  Pulsatilla  the  discharge,  while  thick,  or
yellow,  or  green,  is  more  likely  to  be  bland^  as  it  is  on
mucous  membranes  elsewhere.  Mercury  has  a  similar  dis-
charge, but  all  the  symptoms  are  worse  at  night.  When
the  discharge  becomes  thin  (gleety)  neither  of  these  reme-
dies are,  as  a  rule,  appropriate.

Right  here  let  us  call  attention  to  another  remedy  which
ought  to  be  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  treatment  of
gonorrhoea.

PETROSELINUM.

It  has  a  very  characteristic  indication  for  its  administra-
tion, viz.:  "Great  and  sudden  desire  to  urinate."  This  is
mostly,  found  in  chronic  cases  after  the  inflammation  has
extended  backward  to  the  neck  of  the  bladder.  Another  very
troublesome  symptom  found  under  Petroselinum  is  itching
in  the  urethra ;  feels  as  if  he  must  run  a  stick  or  something


ALLIUM  CEP  A.  347

in  there  and  scratch  it.  Children  are  sometimes  troubled
with  such  sudden  and  intense  desire  to  urinate  that  they
will  jump  right  up  and  down,  trying  to  hold  on  until  their
clothes  are  unbuttoned.  It  is  like  the  sudden  desire  for
stool  of  Aloe — must  git  thary

ALLIUM  CEPA.

Anyone  who  has  cut  up  raw  onions  for  cooking  knows
what  is  the  effect  upon  the  eyes  and  nose — irritation,  which
causes  violent  sneezing  and  lachrymation.  Then,  if  the
homoeopathic  law  of  cure  is  true,  it  ought  to  be  a  good
remedy  for  coryza,  and  so  it  is;  but,  like  every  other
remedy,  it  cures  its  own  peculiar  and  characteristic  form  of
the  disease.

It  has  constant  and  frequent  sneezing,  with  profuse  acrid
discharge,  which  burns  and  corrodes  the  nose  and  upper
lip,  and  it  is  worse  in  the  evening  and  indoors  and  better
in  open  air.  It  has  also  profuse  lachrymation,  with  burn-
ing, biting  and  smarting  of  the  eyes,  but  the  discharge  is
bland ;  that  is,  it  does  not  make  the  eyes  sore  afterwards.
There  may  or  may  not  be  headache ;  if  there  is  it  is,  like
the  coryza,  worse  in  warm  room  or  evening  and  better  in
open  air.  I  have  found  it  particularly  useful  in  children
when  the  profuse  coryza  or  cold  extended  downward  to  the
bronchi,  with  a  like  profuse  secretion  in  the  bronchial
tubes,  with  much  coughing  and  rattling  of  mucus.  Before
Cepa  came  into  homoeopathic  use  we  used  to  give  Eu-
phrasia when  there  was  profuse  coryza  and  lachrymation.
The  difference  between  the  two  remedies  is,  that  with  Cepa
the  nasal  discharge  is  acrid  and  the  lachrymal  bland,  while
exactly  the  reverse  is  true  of  Euphrasia.  The  action  of
the  remedy  seems  to  be  primarily  in  the  nose  with  the  one


34^  PHYTOLACCA  DECANDRA.

and  in  the  eyes  with  the  other,  and  thus  we  must  learn  to
differentiate  between  all  remedies.

PHYTOLACCA  DECANDRA

Is  one  of  our  most  valuable  remedies  for  sore  throat,  and
the  indications  are  plain.  The  throat  becomes  generally
inflamed ;  the  tonsils  swell  and  become  very  red  at  the  first,
and  then  white  spots  appear  which  (unless  checked)  soon
spread  and  coalesce  and  form  patches  of  a  diphtheritic  ap-
pearance. There  are  sharp  pains  often  running  up  into
one  or  both  ears.  These  are  the  local  throat  symptoms,
and  the  constitutional  symptoms  are :

Intense  head  and  backache^  and  a  sore,  aching,  bruised
feeling  all  over  the  body,  causing  the  patient  to  groan,  and
while,  like  Rhus  toxicode7idro7i^  he  feels  as  if  he  must  move
the  act  of  moving  greatly  aggravates  all  his  pains  and
soreness.  The  patient  is  also  greatly  prostrated,  and  sitting
upright  makes  him  faint  and  dizzy  like  Bryonia.  There
is  high  fever,  for  the  pulse  is  very  quick ;  but  the  heat,  like
that  of  Arnica^  is  mostly  in  the  head  and  face  while  the
body  and  limbs  are  cool.  Now  these  symptoms  present,
it  makes  no  difference  whether  the  case  is  called  tonsilitis,
diphtheria  or  scarlatina.  Abundant  experience  in  my  own
person  and  observation  with  my  patients  has  proven
Phytolacca  to  be  a  remedy  of  inestimable  value.  Nor  is  it
necessary  to  give  it  in  twenty  drop  doses  of  the  mother
tincture,  and  gargle  in  addition,  as  some  advise,  but  it  will
in  the  potentized  dose  do  much  better  the  same  as  other  ho-
moeopathic remedies.  I  have  done  some  good  work  with
this  remedy  in  follicular  pharyngitis,  especially  when  in
public  speakers  the  voice  gave  out  from  overwork  and


PHYTOLACCA  DECANDRA.


349


there  was  much  burning  in  the  throat,  as  of  a  hot  sub-
stance there.  In  this  kind  of  sore  throat  I  have  the  best
success  with  the  remedy  very  high.

Now  let  me  call  attention  to  a  symptom  of  this  remedy
that  has  been  of  great  value  to  me:  "Irresistible  inclina-
tion to  bite  the  teeth  or  gums  together."  On  this  indica-
tion I  have  often  relieved  the  complaints  of  various  kinds
incident  to  the  period  of  dentition.  I  once  had  a  case
that  was  sent  up  to  the  country  from  New  York  City.
The  child  had  been  sick  a  long  time,  with  cholera  infantum
(entero  colitis),  and  its  physicians  said  it  must  leave  the
city  or  die.  But  country  air  and  change  of  diet  brought
no  relief.  The  little  fellow  was  greatly  emaciated,  having
frequent  loose  stools  of  dark-brown  color,  mixed  with  slime
or  mucus  of  the  same  color.  After  trying  various  remedies,
I  discovered  that  the  child  wanted  to  bite  its  gums  together,
or  to  bite  on  everything  that  it  could  get  into  its  mouth,
and  the  mother  then  told  me  that  this  had  been  the  case
all  through  its  sickness.  Phytolacca  produced  immediate
relief  of  the  symptom  and  rapid  recovery  followed.  I
have  since  verified  this  symptom  several  times.  Phytolacca
is  also  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  mastitis.  The  breasts
are  very  hard,  greatly  swollen  and  painful.  There  is  fever,
great  pain  in  the  head  and  back,  and  if  it  is  a  bad  case,
unless  checked  is  very  liable  to  go  on  to  suppuration.
Every  time  the  child  nurses  the  pains  spread  all  over  the
body.

The  choice  often  lies  between  this  remedy  and  Bryonia^
and  they  complement  each  other.  Almost  every  case  of
swollen  breasts  with  the  milk  fever,  when  the  breasts  fill
for  the  first  time  after  confinement,  may  be  speedily  re-
lieved with  one  or  the  other  of  these  two  remedies.  If  the
case  should  have  gone  on  to  suppuration,  with  large,  fistu-


350  PHYTOLACCA  DECANDRA.

lous,  gaping  and  angry  ulcers  discharging  a  watery  or  fetid
pus,  Phytolacca  is  still  the  remedy,  and  will  often  do  more
good  than  Hepar  sulphur  and  Silicea.  But  the  choice
sometimes  has  to  be  made  between  other  remedies,  such  as

Croton  iiglium.  The  pain  runs  through  to  the  back
when  child  nurses.

Phella7idrium.  Pain  runs  along  the  milk  ducts  between
the  acts  of  nursing.

Lac  caninum.  The  breasts  are  greatly  filled  and  so  sore
that  their  own  weight  hurts  the  patient,  who  wants  to  hold
them  up  and  shrinks  from  the  least  jar.  Of  course  Aconite^
Apis  and  Belladonna  must  not  be  forgotton,  and  have  as
positive  indications  for  their  use  as  either  of  the  above
remedies.

I  have  removed  a  great  many  suspicious  lumps  or  tumors
in  the  breasts,  some  of  them  of  years'  standing,  by  giving
a  dose  of  Phytolacca  cm.,  once  a  month,  during  thewa^ie
of  the  moon.  What  has  the  moon  to  do  with  it  ?  I  do  not
know.  I  cure  goitre  the  same  way  (but  not  with  Phyto-
lacca)^ and  was  led  to  that  way  of  administration  by  a  sug-
gestion of  Jahr.  That  some  diseases  have  their  aggrava-
tions in  certain  times  of  the  moon  I  know^  and  that  certain
remedies  act  better  then,  I  know  just  as  well.  Do  not  forget
that  the  bruised,  sore  feeling  of  Phytolacca  that  we
noticed  at  length  when  writing  of  Arnica  is  sometimes
markedly  present  in  sciatica,  for  which  it  is  one  of  our  suc-
cessful remedies.  The  characteristic  symptom  for  Phyto-
lacca in  this  painful  affection  is,  that  the  pain  runs  down
the  outer  side  of  the  limb.  Sciatica  is  one  of  the  com-
plaints in  which  Homoeopathy  has  scored  some  of  its  most
brilliant  victories  over  the  anodyne  treatment  of  the  old
school.  Periosteal  rheumatism,  where  the  pains  are  espe-
cially worse  in  wet  weather,  sometimes  finds  a  remedy  in


GLONOINK.


Phytolacca.  This  drug  seems  to  resemble  in  its  action  on
the  periosteum,  glands,  bones  and  skin  Kali  hydriodicicm^
and  the  two  remedies  complement  each  other,  of  course,
with  indications,  or  the  choice  may  sometimes  lie  between
them.  It  is  curious  to  note  that  almost  every  chemical
remedy  has  a  closely  resembling  relative  from  the  vegetable
kingdom.  Kali  hydriodicum  and  Phytolacca^  Aloes  and
Sulphur^  Cepa  and  Phosphorus^  Chamomilla  and  Magnesia
carb.^  China  and  Ferrum^  Belladonna  and  Calcarea  ost,^
Ipecac  and  Cuprum^  Bryo?tia  and  Alumi^ia^  Mezereum
and  Mercury^  Pulsatilla  and  Kali  sulphuricum.  This  has
been  before  mentioned  by  Hering.


GLONOINE.

This  is,  in  the  first  place,  one  of  our  great  head  remedies.
It  has  intense  pain  in  the  head,  with  great  throbbing  and
sensation  of  fullness  and  constriction  of  the  vessels  of  the
neck.  There  are  so  many  symptoms  attending  this  condi-
tion of  congestion  that  it  is  not  wise  to  try  to  give  them
all  here.  I  used,  in  my  early  practice,  to  carry  a  small
vial  of  the  ist  dilution  in  my  case  on  purpose  for  those
who  were  inclined  to  sneer  at  the  young  doctor  and  his
sweet  medicine,  and  many  a  disbeliever  have  I  convinced)
in  about  five  to  ten  minutes,  that  there  might  be  power  in
small,  sweet  medicine,  by  dropping  on  the  tongue  a  drop
of  this  preparation,  for  it  seldom  failed  to  produce  its
characteristic  throbbing  headache  within  that  time.  One
lady,  not  willing  to  acknowledge  that  it  affected  her,  rose
to  leave  the  room,  and  fainted  and  would  have  fallen  on
the  floor  if  I  had  not  caught  her.  No  one  ever  asked  after
that  experiment  for  any  more  proof  of  the  power  of  ho-


352


GLONOINE.


moeopathic  medicine. This  throbbing  headache,  seeming
to  arise  from  the  neck,  is  very  characteristic,  and  the  throb-
bing is  not  a  mere  sensation  but  is  visible  in  the  carotid
arteries. The  vessels  are  full  to  bursting,  and  if  their  walls
were  not  healthy  there  is  danger  of  apoplexy. No  remedy
equals  this  one  for  producing  sudden  and  severe  congestion
of  the  head,  and  none  can  cure  it  quicker  when  indicated
by  the symptoms. The remedies that stand  nearest
Glonoine  in  their  effect  on  the  head,  I  believe  to  be  Bella-
donna and  Melilotus. Belladonna  and  Glonoine  both  have
the  fullness,  pain  and  throbbing,  but  that  of  Glonoine  is
more  intense  and  sudden  in  its  onset,  and,  on  the  other
hand,  subsides more rapidly  when relieved.  Again,
Glonoine  is  better  adapted  to  the  first  or  congestive  stage
of  inflammatory  diseases  of  the  brain,  while  Belladonna
goes  further  and  may  still  be  the  appropriate  remedy  after
the  inflammatory  stage  is  fully  initiated. Belladonna  is
better  by  bending  the  head  backward;  Glonoine  worse.
Belladoniia  is  made  worse  by  having  the  head  uncovered,
and  suffers  from  having  the  hair  cut ;  Glonoiite  must  have
the  head  uncovered,  can't  bear  to  wear  his  hat,  or  wants
the  hair  cut. Belladonna  is  wo7^se  lying  down,  even  if  he
keeps  still ;  Glonoine^  though,  sometimes  worse  after  lying
down  is  also  sometimes  better  when  lying  still.  One
symptom  very  characteristic  of  Glonoine  is,  that  the  patient
carries  the  head  very  carefully,  for  the  least  jar  or  shak-
ing of  it  greatly  aggravates  the  pain. Another  peculiar
symptom  is,  it  seems  to  the  patient  that  there  is  not  only
throbbing,  but  there  is  an  undulating  sensation  as  if  the
brain  were  moving  in  waves  synchronous  with  the  pulse.
There  is more  disturbance  of  the  heart action  with
Glonoijte  than  with  Belladonna^  though  both  have  it
strongly.


GLONOINE.  353

MelilotiLS  also  lias  great  congestion  to  the  head,  with
pain  and  sense  of  fullness.  Not  being  so  thoroughly  proven
as  Belladonna  and  Glonoine,  we  cannot  so  clearly  indicate
the  exact  place  for  it,  but  there  is  one  very  prominent
symptom  which  always  makes  one  think  of  it,  viz.:  "  Glow-
ing redness  of  the  face.''  No  remedy  that  I  know  of  has
it  more  strongly.  Glonoine  and  Belladonna  may  both
have  very  red  face ;  on  the  other  hand,  a  pale  face,  with
the  other  congestive  symptoms,  does  not  contra-indicate
them,  but  does  MeliloULs.  Then,  again,  with  Melilotus  the
head  symptoms  are  often  relieved  by  a  profuse  epistaxis,
which  is  also  another  very  prominent  symptom  of  this
remedy.  I  cured  a  very  bad  case  of  typhus  cerebralis,  and
also  a  case  of  insanity  of  long  standing,  with  this  remedy,
being  guided  to  it  by  these  symptoms.

"  Looses  his  way  in  well-known  streets"  is  a  symptom  of
Glonoine  that  has  several  times  been  confirmed.  The  local
congestions  of  Glonoine  are  often  found  in  different  diseases ;
for  instance,  climacteric  flushings  are  often  most  felt  in  the
head.  Glonoine  cures  such  cases.  It  is  also  useful  in  puer-
peral convulsions.  And  another  symptom  often  present  in
these  cases  is,  a  sense  as  if  the  head  were  expanding  from
fullness.  Now  look  out  for  convulsions  and  give  Glonoine^
especially  if  there  be  albumen  in  the  urine.  Congestion
to  the  head  from  suppressed  or  retarded  menses  sometimes
finds  a  remedy  here ;  also,  different  pathological  conditions
of  the  heart,  but  the  symptoms  must  be  present.

For  sunstroke  it  is  probably  oftener  indicated  than  any
other  remedy ;  also,  for  the  after-sufferings  therefrom.  Not
only  from  sunstroke,  but  from  other  bad  effects  of  radiate
heat ;  for  instance,  children  get  sick  in  the  night  after  sit-
ting too  long  or  falling  asleep  before  an  open  coal  fire.


354  AMYLENIUM  NITRATE.

Then,  again,  warm  room  increases  the  headache  and  warm
bed  the  faceache.

"  Burning  between  the  shoulders  "  is  another  symptom
of  this  remedy,  like  Lycopodium  and  Phosphorus.  Am-
monium muriaticum  and  Lachnanthes  have  the  opposite.
While  we  are  here  now  I  will  call  attention  to  another
remedy,  which,  for  flushings  and  congestions  to  head  and
face,  resembles  Glo7ioine.

AMYLENIUM  NITRATE.

It  has  quite  a  reputation  for  arresting  paroxysms  of  epi-
lepsy and  resuscitating  patients  sinking  under  mKBsthetics.
It  is  given  here  by  olfaction.  There  are  various  specula-
tions as  to  how  it  does  this ;  the  most  important  thing,
after  all,  is  that  it  does  it.

We  know  that  it  causes  and  cures  tumultuous  heart
action  very  similar  in  appearance  to  that  of  Glonoine.  I
have  cured  a  very  bad  case  of  chronic  blushing  or  flush-
ing of  blood  to  the  face  on  the  least  excitement,  either
mental  or  physical.  It  was  in  a  young  married  woman,
not  near  the  climacteric,  and  she  had  suffered  very  much
for  a  long  time.  The  cure  is  permanent  and  the  patient  is
very  grateful,  for,  as  she  said,  she  supposed  it  was  natural
and  medicine  could  not  help  it.  Those  who  cannot  blush
don't  need  it.  This  is  all  the  experience  I  have  had  with
this  remedy  and  I  always  use  it  in  the  30th.

KALI  BROMATUM.

I  do  not  know  much  about  this  remedy  from  a  homoeo-
pathic standpoint.  It  first  gained  a  reputation  with  the
old  school  profession  for  its  sleep-producing  qualities  and
its  power  over  epileptic  seizures. As  usual,  it  was  pushed


KALI  BROMATUM.


355


for  these  things  until  they  found  it  was  a  dangerous
remedy  in  the  large  doses  which  they  had  to  use  to  produce
the  desired  effect.

They  discovered  that  it  produced  sleep,  not  by  increas-
ing the  blood  in  the  brain  to  stupefaction,  like  Opium^  but
by  decreasing  the  amount  of  blood,  thus  resembling  more
nearly  natural  sleep.  Then  they  exclaimed,  Eureka !  But,
alas!  too  great  and  long- continued  ancBmia  resulted  in  lack
of  nutriment  to  the  brain  tissue,  and  as  a  consequence
there  developed  depression,  melancholia,  insanity  and  signs
of  brain  softening  until  Hammond,  its  chief  advocate,  ad-
mitted that  it  put  more  patients  into  the  insane  asylum
than  any  other  remedy.

Well,  for  what  can  we  safely  use  the  remedy?  For  the
symptoms  arising  from  cases  simulating  the  effects  of  Kali
bromatum^  just  as  we  do  any  other  homoeopathic  remedy.
I  do  not  understand  the  remedy  well  enough  to  give  char-
acteristic indications  for  its  homoeopathic  uses.  There  is
one  symptom  which  I  think  is  valuable  as  a  "guiding
symptom,"  viz.:  "Fidgety  hands."  The  patient  must  be
working  or  playing  with  them  continually  ;  even  the  sleep-
lessness is  somewhat  relieved  by  moving  the  fingers  over
the  bed  clothes ;  or  he  plays  with  his  watch  chain  or  the
head  of  his  cane,  anything  to  work  off  this  excess  of  nerv-
ousness. Zincu^n  has  "fidgety  feet,"  and  Phosphorus  a
general  fidgetiness  or  uneasiness;  can't  sit  still,  but
changes  position  continually ;  not  like  Rhus  toxicodendron,
because  he  is  relieved  of  pain  by  moving  but  because  he
is  simply  nervous.  The  homoeopathic  uses  of  Kalibromatum
ought  to  be  better  understood.


356


MOSCHUS,  CASTOREUM,  ASAFCE:TIDA.


MOSCHUS;  CASTOREUM;  ASAF(ETIDA;  VALER-
IAN; AM  BRA  GRISEA.

Here  are  five  so-called  hysterical  remedies.  They  have
many  nervous  symptoms  that  are  similar,  and  I  will  only
give  a  few  characteristic  symptoms  of  each  and  leave  their
study  to  those  who  love  to  study.

Moschus.  "Hysterical  spasms  of  the  chest,  nervous
suffocative  constriction,  especially  on  becoming  cold."
Palpitation  (hysteric)  with  dyspnoea,  prostration,  fainting,
exclaiming,  I  shall  die!  I  shall  die!  etc.,  greatly  excited.
Laughs  immoderately,  or  cries  or  scolds  until  her  lips  turn
blue,  eyes  stare  and  she  falls  down  fainting  or  unconscious.

Castoreum.  "  Exhausted,  pains  better  from  pressure,
menstrual  colic,  with  pallor  and  cold  sweat."

Asafoetida.  "  Full  of  wind ;  flatulence  with  eructations
all  pressing  upward^  but  none  downward.  Seems  as  if
she  would  burst  with  the  upward  pressure,  reverse  peris-
talsis." "Especially  useful  if  its  nervous  symptoms  come
on  after  the  suppression  of  leucorrhoeal  or  other  habitual
discharges."  All  discharges  offensive,  even  of  ulcers,  and
great  sensitiveness  to  contact  or  touch.  Osteitis  or  caries
with  this  same  exceeding  sensitiveness  to  contact  {Hepar).

Valerian,  General  nervous  irritation,  cannot  keep
still ;  tearing  pains  and  cramps  in  different  places.  Feels
as  if  floating  in  the  air  {Sticta  pulm.  as  if  legs  were  float-
ing in  the  air).  Over-sensitiveness  of  all  the  senses.
Sensation  as  of  a  thread  hanging  down  throat.  With  this
remedy  I  once  cured  a  severe  case  of  sciatica  in  a  pregnant
woman  on  the  symptom  pain  worse  when  standing  and
letting  the  foot  rest  on  the  floor.  She  could  stand  with
that  foot  resting  on  a  chair,  or  could  lie  down  in  comfort.


CANNABIS  INDICA.


357


Ambra  grisea.  Discharge  of  blood  between  the
periods ;  any  little  exertion  or  straining  at  stool  causes  it.
Nervous  cough  followed  by  eructations  of  wind.  It  is  par-
ticularly adapted  to  nervous  affections  of  old  people  and
spare  subjects  nervously  "worn  out."

These  five  remedies  should  be  studied  together.

CANNABIS  INDICA.

A  lady  with  dropsy,  consequent  on  valvular  heart
disease,  after  being  relieved  of  the  bloating,  was  suddenly
unable  to  talk.  In  answer  to  a  question  she  could  begin  a
sentence,  but  could  not  finish  it,  because  she  could  not  re-
member what  she  intended  to  say.  She  was  very  im-
patient about  it  and  would  cry,  but  could  not  finish  the
sentence,  but  could  signify  her  assent  if  it  was  finished  by
some  one  else  for  her.  This  continued  for  several  days,  or
until  she  received  Cannabis  Indica^  when  she  rapidly  re-
covered her  power  to  express  herself.  This  is  all  the
experience  I  have  had  with  the  remedy  that  is  worth  re-
lating.

AGARICUS

Has  some  very  characteristic  skin  symptoms.  "Ears,  face
nose,  toes  and  skin  in  general  are  affected  with  a  redness,
itching  and  burning  as  if  from  being  frozen."  This  is  a  very
valuable  symptom  and  may  lead  to  the  choice  of  this  drug
in  many  very  different  diseases.  I  have  used  the  remedy
a  good  many  years  with  very  gratifying  results  for  chilblains.
I  always  use  it  internally  in  the  200th.  It  is  also  a  remedy
of  first  importance  for  twitchings,  from  simple  twitching
in  face,  eyelids  (especially)  and  extremities,  to  severe  cases
of  chorea.  In  the  latter  disease  the  twitchings  cease  dur-
24


358


LITHIUM  CARBONICUM.


ing  sleep.  Again  it  has  been  found  useful  in  spinal  irrita-
tion. The  symptoms  indicating  it  here  are  best  given  in
Allen's  EncyclopcBdia.  No  doubt  this  remedy  has  been
over-proven,  and  as  a  consequence  many  of  its  recorded
symptoms  are  unreliable.  The  best  work  that  can  be  done
with  it  now  is  to  separate  them,  if  possible,  "proving  all
things  and  holding  fast  that  which  is  true."

LITHIUM  CARBONICUM.

Chronic  rheumatism  connected  with  valvular  heart
troubles  should  call  our  attention  to  this  remedy,  for  it  has
done  good  service  in  such  cases.  Symptoms:  "Rheumatic
soreness  in  the  cardiac  region."  "Violent  pains  in  the
heart  when  bending  over."  "  Pains  in  heart  when  urinat-
ing or  at  menstrual  period."  "Fluttering  of  the  heart
with  mental  agitation,"  are  all  valuable  guides  to  its  selec-
tion. Then  if  we  have  the  rheumatic  symptoms,  swell-
ing and  redness  with  great  tenderness  of  the  small  joints,
the  indications  are  very  positive  for  its  use.

There  are  often  heavy  deposits  in  the  urine  of  mucus,
uric  acid  or  pus.  I  have  done  some  excellent  work  with
it  in  such  cases.

SAMBUCUS  NIGRA

Is  a  prime  remedy  for  "snufiles"  in  small  children.  It  is
of  the  dry  variety,  completely  obstructing  the  nose,  child
must  breath  through  the  mouth.  It  is  also  one  of  the  best
remedies  for  asthma  millari.  The  attacks  come  on  sud-
denly in  the  night;  child  turns  blue,  gasps  for  breath  and
seems  as  if  almost  dying.  Then  it  goes  to  sleep  and
wakens  with  another  attack  again  and  again. I  once


SQUILLA.  359

relieved  a  very  bad  case  of  chronic  asthma  in  an  old  lady
having  similar  attacks  of  suffocation  with  the  200th  of
this  remedy.  The  relief  was  followed,  or  rather  accom-
panied by  a  profuse  flow  of  urine,  which  carried  off  a  large
amount  of  dropsical  effusion  in  her  legs  and  abdomen.  She
has  remained  much  better  of  all  her  symptoms  since  and
is  now  very  old.  One  very  peculiar  characteristic  which
should  never  be  forgotten  is,  "dry  heat"  while  asleep  and
"profuse  sweat  when  awake."  No  other  remedy  has  it,
and  it  has  been  confirmed  many  times.  Conmm  has
"sweats  as  soon  as  he  closes  his  eyes  to  sleep."  Thuja  has
sweats  on  uncovered  parts.  Pulsatilla^  one  sided  sweats,
and  many  of  our  best  characteristics  are  found  under  the
so-called  fever  symptoms,  including  chill,  heat  and  sweat,
and  as  we  are  apt  to  have  one  or  the  other,  or  all  of  these
three  conditions  in  most  diseases,  it  is  well  to  have  a  ready
understanding  of  them.  It  will  save  much  time  some-
times in  hunting  after  the  similimum.

sauiLLA

Has  been  found  useful  in  cough,  with  sneezing;  watering
of  the  eyes,  and  involuntary  micturition.  There  may  also
be  pleuritic  effusion  in  the  chest,  with  or  without  effusion.
The  cough  is  generally  loose  and  rattling,  with  expectora-
tion of  much  mucus,  and  the  loose  cough  in  the  morning
is  more  fatiguing  than  the  dry  one  in  the  evening.

Verbascum  thapsus.  Cough,  deep,  hollow,  hoarse,  with
sound  like  a  trumpet.  I  have  cured  many  cases  and  always
used  it  low.  I  have  never  used  the  remedy  for  anything
else.

Senega.  Cough,  with  great  accumulation  of  mucus,
which  seems  to  fill  the  chest,  with  much  rattling,  wheez-


36o


GAMBOGIA.


ing  and  difficult  breathing;  especially  valuable  with  old
people,  but  works  well  with  others.  Have  also  cured  many
cases  of  this  kind  and  always  use  it  low ;  no  success  with
the  high.

Myrtus  communis.  Obstinate  cough,  mostly  dry,  with
pain  in  upper  portion  of  left  chest,  right  through  to  left
shoulder  blade.  This  is  a  gem  and  has,  I  believe,  cured
more  than  one  case  of  incipient  consumption  for  me.
Sulphur ^  Pix  liqiiida^  Anisum  and  Theridion  have  a  similar
symptom,  but  Myrtus  leads,  unless  there  is  decided  psoric
taint,  when  Pix  liquida  or  Sulphur  would  lead.

Drosera  rotundifolia  has  a  deep  sounding,  hoarse,  bark-
ing or  trumpet-toned,  something  like  that  of  Verbascum^
but  there  is  more  laryngeal  trouble  with  Drosera^  for  the
voice  in  talking  has  a  deep  bass  sound.  Drosera  is  also
one  of  our  leading  remedies  in  spasmodic  coughs.  With
the  cough  there  is  great  constriction  of  the  chest  and  ab-
dominal muscles,  so  that  the  patient  holds  them  with  the
hands. The  cough  is  worse  after  midnight.

GAMBOGIA

Is  a  very  valuable  remedy  for  diarrhoea,  though  not  so
often  used,  I  think,  as  it  should  be.  It  resembles  Croton
tiglium  in  the  suddenness  of  the  desire  for  stool,  and  in
the  all  coming  out  at  one  gush.  Again,  it  resembles  it,  in
that  it  is  sometimes  watery  and  yellow,  but  Crotoit  tig.  is
aggravated  by  the  least  food  or  drink,  which  is  not  the  case
with  Gambogia.  Again,  Gafnbogia  has  all  the  way  from
yellow,  watery,  to  almost  formed  stools,  and  in  each  case,
the  stool  comes  all  at  once  in  one  prolonged  effort,  and
there  is  a  feeling  of  great  relief  after  stool,  as  if  an
irritating  substance  were  removed. Sometimes  there  is


CON  V  ALL  ARIA  MAJALIS.  36 1

burning  of  the  anus  after  the  stool,  similar  to  Arseni-
cum^ Iris  versicolor  and  Capsicum.  It  is  curative  in  both
acute  and  chronic  forms  of  diarrhoea.  There  is  often  much
rumbling  in  the  bowels.

Gratiola  officinalis  is  another  remedy  that  has  the  yel-
low, watery  diarrhoea,  gushing  out  with  great  force.  It  is
sometimes  especially  useful  in  the  summer  complaints  of
children,  especially  where  they  have  been  drinking  too
much  cold  water,  which  frequently  happens.  Gratiola  re-
sembles Aloes  in  some  points,  but  has  not  the  hemorrhoids.

Oleander  is  one  of  our  best  remedies  for  diarrhoea  of  un-
digested food,  and  the  best  indication  for  it  is  involuntary
stool  when  emitting  flatus.  The  least  passage  of  flatus
is  always  accompanied  with  some  stool,  so  that  the  clothes
are  always  liable  to  be  soiled.  I  cured  with  the  200th  of
this  remedy  a  case  of  three  year's  duration  in  a  child.  It
was  my  own  child,  and  I  had  tried  many  remedies  (it  was
in  the  beginning  of  my  practice)  and  was  almost  despair-
ing that  she  would  ever  be  well  or  strong,  but  after  taking
the  Oleander  she  was  cured,  not  only  of  the  diarrhoea,  but
became  perfectly  strong  and  well  and  has  always  remained
so,  not  having  the  slightest  tendency  to  a  return  of  the
trouble.

CONVALLARIA  MAJALIS.

I  believe  the  lily  of  the  valley  is  to  become  one  of  our  very
valuable  remedies.  It  ought  to  receive  a  Hahnemannian
proving.  I  have  used  it  with  much  satisfaction  in  women
who  complained  of  great  soreness  in  the  uterine  region
and  sympathetic  palpitation  of  the  heart.  It  has  also  served
me  well  in  dropsies  of  cardiac  origin,  especially  in  women
who  have  at  the  same  time  the  above-mentioned  soreness


362


CARDUUS  MARIANUS.


in  uterine  region.  I  once  checked  the  progress  of  a  very
bad  case  of  cardiac  dropsy  after  the  effusion  in  the  chest
had  so  increased  that  the  patient  could  not  breathe  when
lying  down,  and  there  was  much  bloody  expectoration.  I
used  the  30th  potency  in  this  case,  though  many  times  very
fine  results  follow  the  use  of  the  remedy  in  much  lower
preparations.  The  dropsy  all  disappeared  and  she  was  able
to  be  around  and  enjoy  life  very  well,  though  the  organic
heart  trouble  was  not  removed.

Bovista  has  been  of  use  to  me  in  only  one  affection,  but
in  that  it  is  invaluable — menorrhagia.  The  flow  is  always
worse ^  or  sometimes  flows  only  in  •  the  night  in  bed.  I  do
not  know  of  a  more  reliable  symptom.  It  has  helped  and
cured  many  cases,  both  acute  and  chronic.

It  has  also  sometimes  a  flow  between  the  periods,  like
Ambra  grisea^  but  the  latter  remedy  has  more  nervous  or
hysterical  symptoms.

Ustilago  maydis  is  also  a  remedy  that  is  very  useful  in
menorrhagia  or  metrorrhagia,  and  I  think  I  have  observed
that  it  is  best  adapted  to  those  cases  where  the  flow  is  of  a
passive  nature.  There  is  apt  to  be  more  or  less  pain  and
irritation,  at  the  same  time,  in  one  or  both  ovaries.  It  is
especially  useful  in  these  cases  at  the  cUmacteric.  I  have
cured  some  very  bad  cases,  and  always  use  both  this  remedy
and  Bovista  in  the  200th  potency.

CARDUUS  MARIANUS

Is  a  so-called  liver  remedy,  and  I  have  seen  good  results
from  it  in  liver  troubles,  yet  I  do  not  know  of  any  special
indications  for  its  use.  I  have  known  cases  of  habitual
colic  from  gall  stones,  checked  and  the  further  formation  of
the  stones  prevented  by  this  remedy. One  of  them  was  a


If

PTEIvEA  TRIFOLIATA.

very  bad  case,  for  which  old  Dr.  Piilte,  of  Cincinnati,  pre-
I  saw  her,  in  consultation  with  another  physician,  at  one  of
these  terrible  attacks  of  gall  stone  colic.  She  could  not  lie
down,  but  sat  in  her  chair,  bent  over  forward,  for  forty-
eight  hours,  and  during  this  time  she  passed  two  hundred
gall  stones,  very  hard  and  nearly  the  size  and  shape  of  a
beech  nut,  which  were  found  by  washing  the  faeces.  I  have
a  dozen  or  so  now  in  a  little  vial  in  my  office.  Carduus
was  also  a  help  to  her,  but  she  takes,  right  along  for  years
at  a  time,  olive  oil,  thinking  that  it  dissolves  the  stones  or
keeps  them  from  forming.

When  other  remedies  fail  for  pain  in  the  region  of  the
liver,  with  dizziness,  bad-tasting  mouth,  jaundiced  skin
and  the  usual  symptoms  called  "bilious,"  if  I  have  no
special  indications  for  other  remedies,  I  have  given  Carduus^
and  several  times  with  very  good  results.  But,  as  I  said
before,  I  can  give  no  special  indications  for  its  use.  I  can
do  better  for


PTELEA  TRIFOLIATA,

Another  liver  remedy,  for  it  has  one  very  characteristic
symptom,  viz.:  Aching  and  heaviness  in  the  region  of  the
liver,  greatly  aggravated  by  lying  on  the  left  side ;  turning
to  the  left  causes  a  dragging  sensation.  Magnesia  mur.^
you  will  remember,  has  all  these  symptoms,  termed
"bilious,"  but,  like  Mercurius^  it  is  worse  when  lying  on
the  right  side.  Then  Mercurius  is  apt  to  have  loose  stools,
while  Magnesia  mur.  is  greatly  constipated.  Ptelea  may
have  either  constipation  or  diarrhoea,  or,  like  Nux  vomica^
constipation  and  diarrhoea  alternately.  I  cured  one  bad
case  of  liver  trouble  with  Ptelea  after  oedema  of  the  feet


1^

3^4  MARUM  VERUM  TEUCRIUM.

and  legs  had  set  in ;  she  had  the  symptom,  could  not  lie
comfortably  on  the  left  side ;  her  breathing  was  becoming
oppressed,  and  I  thought  the  case  looked  as  if  it  would  not
be  very  likely  to  be  much  better.  I  used  the  30th  in  this
case.  The  trouble  rapidly  disappeared  and  never  returned.
I  considered  it  a  brilliant  cure.

MARUM  VERUM  TEUCRIUM.

I  have  found  this  remedy  one  of  the  best  for  ascarides-
Have  cured  many  cases  who  had  tiHed  everything'''*  (so
they  said)  without  avail.  I  have  noticed  that  people
troubled  with  ascarides  often  have  a  great  deal  of  tickling,
tingling,  etc.,  in  the  nose,  wliich  they  are  frequently  rub-
bing. (Children  troubled  with  ascarides  have  this  symp-
tom.) And  it  is  notable  that  Teucriiim  is  one  of  the  best
remedies  for  polypus  of  the  nose  ;  will  cure  it,  and  that
never  to  return.  I  have  a  preparation  of  the  remedy,  made
on  the  Santee  potentizer,  50m.,  which  does  the  best  of  any
preparation  I  ever  used.

MEZEREUM.

Pains  in  the  long  bones,  especially  the  tibia^  are  some-
times greatly  relieved  by  this  remedy.  I  once  cured  a
very  obstinate  case  of  facial  neuralgia  with  it.  The  pains
were  brought  on,  or  greatly  aggravated  by  eatings  and  the
only  relief  he  could  get  was  to  hold  that  side  of  his  face
as  near  as  he  could  to  a  hot  stove.  Hot  cloths,  wet  or  dry»
or  any  other  heat  applied  did  not  relieve.

TELLURIUM.

With  this  remedy  I  have  had  the  pleasure  of  curing
several  cases  of  otorrhoea  of  long  standing,  generally  fol-


EPIGEA.


lowinsf  scarlatina  in  childhood. I  used  the  6th  in  these

o

cases. The  high  failed.

EPIGEA

Cures  headaches  coming  on  after  a  hard  day's  work,  over-
fatigue from  work  or  excitement,  what  is  often  called
"tired  headache."  Such  cases  are  very  frequent,  and  the
patients  volunteer  to  mention  the  fact  that  they  always
came  on  when  they  were  "tired  out."  Of  course  one
swallow,  does  not  make  a  summer,  neither  does  one  symp-
tom always  make  unfailing  indication  for  a  remedy,  but  a
symptom  often  verified  is  always  a  valuable  leader  to  the
totality  of  symptoms.

Epigea  needs  further  proving.

LAUROCERASUS.

"Want  of  energy  of  vital  power;  want  of  reaction,
especially  in  chest  and  heart  affections."  And  there  is
another  characteristic  symptom  under  this  remedy  in  heart
troubles,  "The  cyanosis,  dyspnoea,  etc.,  are  worse  when
sitting  up."  Only  one  other  remedy  has  this  aggravation,
and  that  is  Psorinum.  "Want  of  nervous  reaction;  the
well  chosen  remedy  does  not  act."

"  Capsicum^  lack  of  reaction  in  persons  of  lax  fibre."

Opium,  in  patients  where  there  is  no  pain ;  stupidity
and  drowsiness.

Valerian  and  Ambra  in  nervous  affections,  well  chosen
remedies  fail.

Carbo  vegetabilis,  collapse,  coldness  of  knees,  breath;
perfect  indifference.

Sulphur  and  Psorinum,  where  Psora  complicates  and
hinders  reaction.


366


LACTIC  ACID.


Each  one  of  these  remedies  may  be  called  for  in  de-
fective reaction,  and  there  may  be  many  more,  and  in  each
case,  as  with  all  remedies  elsewhere,  symptoms  must
decide  which  one.

LACTIC  ACID

Is  a  great  remedy  for  diabetes  mellitus.  It  is  especially
indicated  if  in  addition  to  the  thirst,  voracious  hunger
and  profuse  urine  loaded  with  sugar,  there  are  rhemnatic
pains  in  the  joints.  It  is  generally  given  low,  but  abundant
experience  has  taught  me  that  the  high  is  much  better,
and  it  does  not  need  frequent  repetition.

Oxalic  acid  has  a  very  peculiar  symptom  which  has  often
been  verified  by  myself.  Palpitation  and  dyspnoea  in
organic  heart  disease,  zvorse  when  thinking  of  it,  a  very
peculiar  modality,  but  genuine.

HYPERICUM

Is  the  remedy  "/^r  excellence  "  for  wounded  or  injured
nerves;  from  simple  punctures  from  nails,  splinters,  pins,
rat  bites,  etc.,  to  severe  concussions  of  the  spine  and  brain.
It  is  to  this  kind  of  injuries  what  Arnica^  Hamamelis^
Ruta^  etc.,  are  to  bruises,  and  Calendula  to  lacerated
muscular  tissue,  and  Staphisagria  to  cuts  with  sharp
instruments.


REMEDIAL  INDEX.


The  black  numbers  indicate  the  page  where  the  remedy  may  be  found  as
treated  in  the  text.


Abrotan.,  107,  250,  280

Aconitum,  11,  22,  37,  43,  50,  63,  67,
74,  75,  112,  124,  127,  128,  129,
131,  14S,  152,  155,  178,  181,  199,
201,  217,  279,  2S6,  301

^sculus,  13,  142,  298

^thusa  cyn.,  340

Agaricus,  50,  113,  130,  257,  357

Ailanthus,  77

Aloe,  21,  142,  254,  256,  257,  301
Alumen,  145,  264,  300
Alumina,  196^  221,  264,  299  '
Ambra,  357

Ammonium  carb.,  46,  301,  338
Ammonium  mur.,  264,  270,  339
Amylenium  nit.,  357
Auacardium,  47,  105,  154,-  263,  277,

280,  297,  299
Anisum  stell.,  121

Antimonium  crud.,  25,  28,  144,  163,

178,  261,  284,  289
Antimonium  tart. ,  156,  i8r,  183,  184,

277,  278

Apis,  22,  50,  73,  77,  113,  117,  141,
151,  T63,  207,  215,  232,  233,  247,
256,  266,  267,  277,  278,  283

Apomorphia,  180

Aranea,  120

Argentum  met.,  287

Argentum  nit,  102,  165,  196,  219,
231,  250,  256,  257,  300,  304

Arnica,  76,  168,  181,  189,  194,  208,
215,  290,  304,  305


Arsenicum  alb.,  19,  29,  36,  37,  39,  50'
53.63,  65,  67, 74,  75,  113,  118,  127'
142,  150,  152,  180,  183,  256,  262,
266,  277,  291,  292,  301
^-Arum  tri. ,  304

Asafoetida,  230,  356

Aurum  met.,  9,  104,  229,  231,  287

Baptisia,  75,  76,  114,  132,  189,  199,

200,  305,  306
Baryta,  47,  220,  278,  279,  286
Belladonna,  11,  22,,  43,  63.  64,  75,  77,

78,  82,  83,  106,  no,  112,  127,  131,

149,  177,  182,  199,  219,  230,  238,

260,  262
Benzoic  acid,  249
*  Berberis  v.,  246,  247,  249
Bismuth,  291
Borax,  326

Bryonia,  9,  12,  13,  20,  26,  51,  52,  67,
74.  85,  90.  99.  124,  257,  258,  264,
284,  299,  303

Cactus  grand.,  164,  175,  176,  298
Calcarea  ost.,  10,  42,  54,  60,  158,  216,
220,  225,  239,  249,  256,  257,  260,
263,  267,  279,  280,  305,  321
Calcarea  hypophos.,  222
Calcarea  phos.,  59,  158,  189,  221  >

234.  237,  257,  260,  291,  340,  357
Calcarea  sulph.,  221
Calendula,  210,  319,  324,  366


368


RKMEDIAL  INDEX.


Camphor,  167,  204,  205,  206,  207,  278,

301,  315
Cannabis  Ind.,  278,  333,  337,  357
Cannabis  sat,  247,  248
Cantharis,  31,  36,  38,  50,  77,  115,

164,  212,  241,  247,  324
Capsicum,  134,  161,  164,  183,  321,

330,  331,  361,  365
Carbo  an.,  50,  138

Carbo  veg.,  17,  35,38,  39,  41,  72,
102,  182,  191,  234,  237,  262,  324,
365

Carduus  m.,  362
Castoreum,  356

Caulophyllum  thai.,  168,  170,  171,
270,  272  ^

Causticum,  41,  49,  53,  67,  140,  161,
163,  196,  209,  224,  262,  263,  265,
266.  303,  304,  314,  329,  339,  340

Cepa,  68,  71,  347

Chamomilla  8,  26,  64,  78,  93,  123,
127,  128,  129,  130,  131,  148,  178,
269,  271.  282,  284,  310,  319,  328,
351

Chelidonium  maj.,  154,  233,  242,
314.  337

China  off.,  34,  39,42,  43,  44,  102,
177,  182,  190,  216,  224,  228,  234,
23«,  239,  256,  259,  263,  305,  324,
351

Chimaphila  nmb.,  333,  334

Chenopodium,  336

Cicuta  vir.,  84,  208

Cimex  lect.,  122,  216

Cimicifuga  rac,  169,  176,  177,  270,

272,  275,  337
Cina,  35,  178,  208,  283,  319,  327
Ciunabaris,  317
Clematis  erect.,  287,  344
Cobaltum,  144
Cocculus  Ind.,  135,  208,  314
Coccus  cacti.,  121,  347


Coffea  crud.,  64,  127,  129,  131,  252,

275.  302,  344
Colchicum  aut.,  137,  163,  247,  321
Collinsonia  Can.,  342
Colocynthis,  47,  147,  269,  271,  310,

319,  324
Comocladia,  176
Conium  mac,  121,  139,  359
Convallaria  maj.,  361
Copaiva,  345
Corrahum  rub.,  343
Crocus  sat.,  147,  170,  182,  279,  325
Croton  tig.,  2§5,  337,  350,  360
Cuprum  met.,  143,  184,  204,  207,

235i  315,  351
Cubeba,  346

Cyclamen,  170,  237,  340

Digitalis  purp.,  171  175.  ^76,  i77,

178,  203
Dioscorea  vil. ,  311
Dolichos,  102,  219,  300
Drosera  rot.,  213,  360
Dulcamara,  67,  100,  218,  257,  285,

286

Elaps  cor.,  182
Epigea,  365
Equisetum,  334

Eupatorium  perf.,  36,  134,  183,  213

266,  328
Eupatorium  purp.,  330
Euphrasia,  301,  347

Ferrum,  38,  100,  170,  182,  206,  236,
351

Ferrum  phos.,  22,  37,  112,  201,  239
Fluoric  acid,  144

Gamboge,  251,  360

Gelsemium  nit.,  88,  93,  95,  140,  145,

151,  161,  196,  209,  211,  231,  232,

227


REMEDIAL  INDEX.


Glonoine,  87,  144,  238,  268,  351

Gnaphalium,  178,  312

Graphites,  49,  55,  223,  228,  233,  261,

313,  314,  321
Gratiola,  256,  361
Guaiacum,  266

Hamamelis,  309,  321,  366
Helleborus  nig.,  47,  206,  247
Helonias  dio.,  171
Hepar  sulph.,  37,  46,  55,  61,  79,  87,

102,  III,  193,  216,  267,  300,  314,

328,  332,  350,  356
Hydrastis  Can.,  72,  103,  133,  154,  162,

Hyoscyamus  nig.,  75,  78,  82,  130,

153,  182,  189,  256,  274,  306
Hypericum,  291,  316

Ignatia  am.,  8,  16,  36,  66,  72,  128,
129,  142,  144,  147,  154.  162,  185,
188,  191,  210,  264,  279,  314,  325,
326

Illicium,  345

Iodine,  154,  250,  263,  264,  280,  281
Ipecacuanha,  36,  37, 133,  178,  184,

253.  319.  322,  351
Iris  vers.,  103,  186,  199,  361

Jalapa,  311,  341
Jatropha,  256

Kali  bich.,  12,  33,  103,  n6,  162,  186,

277,  301,  315
Kali  brom.,  354

Kali  carb.,  22,  99,  107,  114,  115,  151,

258,  259,  337
Kaliiod.,  17,  37,  47,  107,  146,'  161,

230,  301,  351
Kali  mur.,  51,  112
Kali  nit.,  170

Kali  sulph.,  17,  106,  296,  302,  351


Kalmia  lat.,  177,  289
Kreosotum,  279,  291,  292

Lac  can.,  45,  106,  219,  294,  350
Lac  def.,  199

Lachesis  tri.,  45,  63,  75,  77,  85,  97,
98,  132,  153,  175,  182,  188,  209,
219,  247,  262,  267,  268,  274,  278,
279,  281,  293,  333

Lapis  alb.,  334

Lachnanthes,  354

Lactic  acid,  366

Laurocerasus,  275,  278,  365

Ledum  pal.,  144,  177,  194,  288,  321,
340

Leptandra  Virg.,  244,  245
Lilium  tig.,  82,  162,  164,  230,  231,
249

Lithium  carb.,  358

Lobelia  infl,,  180,  184

Lycopodium  clav.,  17,  33,  35,  39,  42,
50,  55,  63,  91,  96,  102,  156,  157,
165,  219,  220,  224,  230,  234,  242,
243.  244,  249,  250,  263,  266,  277,
278,  281,  289,  30T,  314,  317,  324,
328,  338,  339,  345  354

Lyssin,  103

Magnesia  carb.,  220,  268,  270,  351

Magnesia  mur.,  264,  269,  363
•JMagnesia  phos.,  19,  271,  310,  312
Manganum  acet. ,  106,  340
Marum  v.  t.,  364
Medorrhinum,  226,  335
Melilotus  alb.,  260,  352
Mercurius  corr.,  31,  43,  164,  247,  248
Mercurius  cyan,,  32
Mercurius  dulc,  112
Mercurius,  33,  45,  105,  219,  303
Mercurius  sol.,  31,  227,  233,  298,  303
Mercurius  viv.,  9,  17,  19,  28,  31,
68,  71,  79,  88,  99,  III,  163,  193,


s


370


REMKDIAIv  INDEX,


219,  221,  244,  261,  262,  264,  270,
279,  289,  293,  301,  303,  310,  316,

317,  327.  337.  346,  351,  363
Mezereum,  351,  364
Moschus,  356
Murex  purp.,  162
Muriatic  acid,  39,  72,  191,  254
My  gale,  120
Myosotis,  345

Myrtus  com.,  121,  337,  360

Najatri.,  97,  99,  229,  333
Natrum  carb.,  267,  287,  303
Natrura  mur.,.9,  36,  37,  60,  177,  183,

189,  210,  236,  237,  238,  239,  250,
^58,  270,  278,  279,  280,  299
Natrum  phos.,  33,  105
Natrum  sulph., 67, 120, 218,  256,

257,  286,  287,  303,  337
Nitric  acid,  37,  102,  133,  182,  193,

219,  261,  262,  264,  300,  317,  319,

321,  322
Nuphar  lut. ,  257

Nux  mosch.,  12,  67,  75,  105,  120,  129,
147,  185,  121,  276,  287,  319

Nux  vom.,  7,  14,  16,  17,  23,  24,  44,
67,  84,  loi,  105,  126,  129,  130,
131.  133.  134,  146,  164,  183,  193,
208,  211,  212,  229,  250,  260,  277,
290,  297,  298,  301,  319,  321,  322,
338,  363

Oleander,  254,  303,  361

Opium,  21,  47,  64,  66,  75,  83,  130,

185,  189,  197,  203,  252,  264,  272,

277,  278,  306,  355,  365
Oxalic  acid,  266

Paris  quad.,  17
Petroleum,  154,  263,  313
Petroselinum,  346
Phellandrium,  350


Phosphoric  acid,  42,  50,  72,  95, 188,
195,  196,  210,  259.  278,  319

Phosphorus,  17,  38,  50,  70,  109,  150,
163,  189,  195,  196,  287,  293,  303,
304,  332,  339.  345,  351,  354,  355

Phytolacca  dec,  45,  253,  281,  305,
307,  312,  340,  348

Picric  acid,  195,  196

Pix  liq.,  121,  337,  345,  360

Platina,  107,  147,  178,  182,  278,  288

Plumbum,  38,  220,  294

Podophyllum  pelt.,  21,  142,  183,  244,
251,  254,  255,  256,  303

Psorinum,  49,  101,  132,  224,  226,  275,
278,  365

Ptelea,  270,  363

Pulsatilla,  10,  12,  13,  14,  20,  21,  23^
24,  30,  37,  41,  100,  106,  121,  124,
144,  161,  162,  165,  171,  177,  178,

182,  232,  237,  248,  250,  257,  259,
261,  265,  270,  272,  277,  287,  294,
296,  299,  303,  309,  318,  344,  346,
351,  359

Rheum,  269,  341
Rhododendron,  120,  251,  286
Rhus  toxicod.,  11,  24,  63,  64,  65,  67,
74,  85,  120,  124,  144,  163,  177,

183,  189,  213,  214,  215,  227,  233,
246,  253,  265,  287,  292,  294,  305,
307,  321,  348,  355

Ruta  grav.,  195,  291,  305,  307,  366
Rumex  crisp.,  257,  302

Sabina,  169,  170,  317
Sambucus  nig.,  46,  301,  338,  358
Sanguinaria,  108,  154,  187,  199,  332
Sarsaparilla,  250,  264,  265,  328
Secale  corn.,  68,  73,  165,  170,  181,

182,  253,  316
Selenium,  149,  163,  304
Senega,  359


REMEDIAL  INDEX.


Sepia,  10,  17,  63,  72,  82,  108,  133,
140,  146,  154,  158,  164,  196,  209,
227,  248,  249,  265,  297,  302,  314

Silicea,  47,  60,  82,  121,  131,  163,  196,
221,  261,  264,  270,  280,  281,  287,
289,  290,  299,  328,  335

Spigelia,  176,  177,  378,  266

Spongia  tost.,  155,  217,  287,  303,  331

Squilla  mar.,  359

Stannum,  17,  42,  83,  146,  148,  149,
162,  191,  345

Staphisagria,  8.  194,  225,  233,  284,
305,  311,  317,  318,  366

Sticta,  301,  338,  356

Stramonium,  64,  72,  75,  78,  80,  108,
205,  298,  327

Sulphuric  acid,  38,  80,  131,  181,  182,
194,  290,  321,  327

Sulphur,  18,  22,  23,  42,  47,  48,  55,
56,  57,  58,  59.  68,  72,  87,  109,
III,  113,  121,  126,  143,  150,  156,
157,  159,  163,  165,  167,  169,  182,
186,  188,  195,  196,  211,  214,  215,
216,  223,  225,  227,  234,  248,  254,
257,  258,  275,  278,  279,  280,  293,
303,  314,  316,  322,  327,  332,  337,
345,  351,  360,  365


Symphytum,  291,  321

Syphilinum,  226,  227,  336

Tabacum,  319

Taraxacum,  262

Tarantula  Cub.,  120

Tarentula  Hisp. ,  119

Tellurium,  364

Terebinthina,  247

Theridion  cur.,  121,  360

Thuja  occ.  III,  194,  2f6,  256,  316,

359

Tuberculinum,  217

Ustillago  mayd.,  362

Valerian,  340,  356,  365

Verbascum,  359,  360

Veratrum  alb.,  66,  130,  131,  165,  204,

207,  221,  264,  291,  299,  311,  315,

317

Veratrum  vir.,  131,  199,  202,  211
Veronica  off. ,  244,  245

Yerba  santa,  345

Zincum  met.,  130, 143,  149,  151,  157,

207,  2.65,  326,  338,  355
Zincum  sulph.,  180


PREFACE  TO  THERAPEUTIC  INDEX.


This  index,  prepared  at  the  suggestion  of  my  publishers,
needs  a  word  of  explanation.  There  is  no  case  in  which  all
remedies,  liable  to  be  indicated  in  any  disease,  are  mentioned;
for  instance,  in  Scarlatina  only  ten  remedies  are  mentioned,
while  in  Johnson's  Therapeutic  Key  there  are  twenty-four;
and  even  this  list  does  not  by  any  means  cover  the  possible
number.  So  with  Diphtheria,  there  are  ten  remedies  by  my-
self and  eighteen  by  Johnson.

One  of  the  main  objects  of  this  work  is  to  give  that  knowl-
edge (or  the  beginning  of  it)  of  the  genius  of  each  remedy
pathology  has  never  yet  coined  a  name  for  his  malady.  This
is  Homoeopathy.  No  remedy  ever  yet  produced  a  case  of
scarlatina;  but  several  remedies  have  produced  a  condition
and  symptoms  similar  to  that  found  in  different  cases  of  this
disease.

When  names  of  diseases  are  mentioned  it  is  always  to  be
understood  that  the  name  generally  counts  for  nothing,  unless
the  symptoms  are  covered  by  the  remedy.

I  wish  here  to  express  my  gratitude  to  Drs.  E.  M.  Santee
and  J.  M.  Keese  for  their  valuable  assistance  in  correcting
proof  and  the  preparation  of  these  indexes.

E.  B.  N.


THERAPEUTIC  INDEX.


Abortion.— Aeon.,  66;  Coff.,  128;  Sabin.,  170,  171.

Albuminuria. — Berb.,  247;  Canth.,  247;  Cann.  sat.,  247;  Helon.,  171;

Merc,  cor.,  247;  Tereb.,  247.
Anaemia.— Calc.  phos.,  237;  Carbo  v.,  237;  China,  238;  Cycl.,  237;  Ferr,,

237,  238;  Ferr.  phos.,  201;  Helon.,  171;  Kali  c,  100;  Nat.  mur.,

237,  259;  Phos.,  151;  Puis.,  237.
Aphthae. — Borax,  327;  Merc.  28;  Nit.  ac,  193;  Sul.  ac,  194.
Apoplexy. — Cup.,  207;  Glon.,  352;  Lach.,  ^  <^

Asthma. — Ant.  tart.,  185;  Ars.,  71;  Carbo  v.,  42:;  China,  42;  Dulc,  218,
286;  Hep.,  218;  Ipec.  180;  Kali  b.,  106;  Kalic,  loi;  Lach.,  92,  93;
Natr.  sul.,  218,  257;  Samb.,  358;  Squil.,359;  Verat.  a.,  204;  Zinc,

143.

Blepharitis. — Arg.  nit.,  233;  Graph.,  233;  Staph.,  233,  320.
Boils.-r-Ars.,  73;  Bell.,  79;  Calc.  hypo.,  222;  Hep.,  79,  221;  Lach.,  96;

Merc,  79;  Tarent.  Cub.,  79,  120.
Bright's  Disease. — Kali  hyd.,  108;  Merc,  cor.,  31,

Bronchitis. — Ant.  tart.,  185;  Camph.,  316;  Canth.,  115;  Carbo  v.,  42;
Coccus  cact,  122;  Hep.,  218;  Kalib.,  106;  Phos.,  151, 156;  Spong.,
332;  Stann.,  146;  Kup.  perf.,  328;  Verat.  a.,  205.,

Burns. — Caust,  216;  Canth.,  118.

Cancer.— Apis,  113;  Bism.,  219;  Con.,  140;  Kreos.,  292;  Lach.,  92,  96;

Lapis,  334;  Phos.,  152.
Caries.— Asaf.,  356;  Aur.  met.,  230;  Medor.,  336;  Syph.,  226.
Cataract. — Caust.,  210.

Catarrh.— ^sc,  142;  Al.  cep.,  347;  Alum.,  299;  Amm.  c,  46,  338;

Amm.  mur.,  230;  Arg.  n.,  235;  Ars.,  68,  71;  Cop.,  345;  Coral,  346;

Hep.,  46,  217;  Kali  b.,  104;  Kali  sul.,  290;  Kreos.,  293;  Lye,  46;

Merc,  cor.,  31;  Nat.  c,  267;  Nat.  mur.,  264;  Puis.,  17;  Samb.,  46;

Sep.,  10;  Sticta,  301;  Tuberc.  217.
Chancre. — Coral.,  343.
Chilblains —Agar.,  357;  Petr.,  312.
Chlorosis.— Alum.,  299;  Phos.,  151.

Cholera.— Camph.,  315;  Sec.  c,  167;  Verat.  a,,  204,  205.
Cholera  Morbus. — Ant.  t.,  184.


376


THKRAPKUTIC  INDEX.


Choleralnfantum.— J3th.,  340;  Arg.  n.,  234;  Bism.,  291;  Calc.  c,  57;
Calc.  p.,  234;  Caniph.,  316;  Cina,  274;  Ipec,  174;  Iris,  186;  Jalapa,
341;  Nux  ni.,  278;  Opi.,  275;  Phyt.,  253,  349;  Podo.,  252,  253;
Psor.,  228;  Puis.,  16;  Sec.  c;  167;  Sep.,  163;  Verat.  a,,  206;
Verat.  v.,  204.

Chorea.— Agar.,  357;  Caust.,  210;  Croc,  326;  Cup.,  208;  Ign.,  130;  Myg.,
120.

Climacteric— Cact.,  175;  Cimic,  170;  Glon.,  353;  I,acli.,  87,  92;  Nux  v..

10;  Sang.,  188;  Sep.,  159;  Sul.  ac,  195.
Convulsions.— ^th.,  340;  Bell.,  82;  Caust,  210;  Cham.,  126;  Cic,  208;

Cimic,  169;  Cup.,  207;  Gels.,  197;  Glon.,  353;  Hyos.,  84;  Ign.,

130;  Silic,  62;  Verat.  v.,  200.
Constipation.— Aloe,  255;  Alum.,  69;  Amm.  m.,  339;  Anac,  297;  Bry.,

9,  23;  Caust,  211;  Collin.,  342;  Graph.,  225;  Hyd.,  314;  I.yc,

44;  Mag.  m.,  270;  Nat  m.,  264;  Nux  v.,  9,  13,  23; Phos.,  155;

Plumb.  241; Selen.,  150;  Sep.,  163;  Sil.,61;  Thuj.,  318;  Verat

a.,  264.

Colic— ^th.,  340;  Cast,  356;  Cham.,  126;  Cocc,  138;  Collin.,  342;

Coloc.,310;  Diosc,  311;  Dulc.,286;  Jalapa,  341;  Lach.,  94;  Mag.

c,  269;  Mag.  m.,  270; Mag.  p.,  271; Plumb.,  24;  Puis.,  19;

Stann.,  147;  Verat.,  311.
Congestion.— Ferr.  m.,  239;  Ferr.  p.,  201;  Glon.,  351;  Phos.,  153;  Sep.,

159;  Sulph.,  50;  Verat.  v.,  203.
Concussion. — Arn.,  307;  Cic,  208.

Cough. — Amm.  m.,  338;  Ant.  t.,  184;  Bar.  c,  281;  Bry.,  24,  25;  Calc.  c,
59;  Caust.,  212,  213;  Cham.,  127;  Chel.,  242;  Coc.  c,  343;  Dros.,
360;  Fup.  perf.,  329;  Ferr.,  240;  Hyos.,  84;  Ipec,  180;  Kali  u.,
106,  107;  Kali  c,  loi;  Kalis.,  296;  lyach.,  93;  Lye,  47;  Myrtus.,
360;  Nat.  s.,  258;  Phos.,  156;  Rhus,  11,  75;  Rumex,  302;
Seneg.,  359;  Squill.,  359;  Stict.,  302;  Verb.,  359.

Corns. — Ant.  c,  27.

Croup. — Aeon.,  66,  217;  Hep.,  217,  218;  lod.,  282;  Kali  b.,  105,  106;

Lach.,  92;  Phos.,  151,  155;  Spong.,.  218,  331.
Curvature. — Calc,  56.

Cyanosis. — Ant.  tart.,  185;  Carbo.  v.,  40;  Laur.,  365.
Cystitis. — Caust.,  212;  Chim.,  333.

Deafness. — Kalimur.,  102;  Merc,  dulc,  102;  Phos.,  153.

Dentition. — Calc.  c,  57;  Cham.,  126;  Coloc,  310;  Ign.,  130;  Kreos.,

293;  Phyt,  253,  349;  Pod.,  253;  Silic,  61;  Zinc,  145.
Diabetes. — Lact.  ac,  366;  Nat.  m.,  263.

Diarrhoea. — Aloe,  254;  Ant.  crud.,  25;  Arg.  nit.,  231;  Aur.  m.  n.,  244;
Benz.  ac,  249;  Bry.,  23,  26;  Calc  c,  57,  58,  59;  Calc.  p.,  60;


THERAPEUTIC  INDEX.


377


Cham.,  126;  Chel.,  242;  Chin.,  34,  35,  239;  Cina,  235;  Coloc,  310;
Crot.  tig.,  256;  Dulc,  286;  Ferr.,  239;  Gamb.,  360;  Gels.,  195;
Grat.,  361;  Hyos  ,  220;  Ipec,  179;  Iris,  186;  Jalap.,  340;  Mag.  c,
268;  Nat.  m.,  257;  Nat.  s.,'  264;  Nit.  ac,  184;  Nux  m.,  278;
Oleand.,  361;  Petr.,  314;  Phos  ac,  189;  Podo.,  251;  Psor.,
228;  Puis.,  16,  23,  24;  Rheum,  342;  Rumex,  343;  Sulph.,  54*
Thuj.,  318.

Diphtheria. — Apis,  114;  Crotal.,  98;  Ign.,  132;  Lach.,  89;  Lye,  45;
Merc,  cy.,  32;  Merc,  p.,  33,  35;  Naja,  97;  Phytol.,  307,  348;  Rhus
tox.,  75.

Dropsy. — Apis,  114,  115,  247;  Benz.  ac,  247;  Colch.,  247,  324;  Conval.,

361;  Dig.,  247;  Hel.  nig.,  207,  247;  Hep.,  21,  88;  Kali  c,  100,

loi;  Lach.,  247;  Psor.,  227;  Tereb.,  247.
Dysentery. — Aloe,  255;  Caps.,  331;  Car  bo  v.,  41;  Colch.,  324;  Ferr.  p.,

202;  Merc,  c,  31;  Merc,  v.,  9;  Nux  v.,  9,  31;  Petr.,  314;  Phos.,

155;  Rhus  tox.,  75;  Staph.,  320.
Dyspepsia. — Anac,  297;  Arg.  n.,  234;  Arn.,  308;  Colch.,  324;  Hep.,

220;  Kalib.,  105;  Kali  c,  102;  Nux  v.,  12;  Puis.,  16.
Dysmenorrhoea. — Caul.,  169;  Cham.,  126,  128;  Cocc,  128;  Coff.,  128;

Cup.,  207;  Mag.  p.,  19,  271;  Puis.,  18.

Fczema.— Calc.  c,  58;  Caust.,  215,  216;  Croton  t.,  256;  Graph.,  223,

224;  Natr.  m.,  267;  Petr.,  313;  Rhus  tox.,  77;  Staph.,  225,  320.
Emissions. — Selen.,  150;  Sep.,  161.
Emphysema. — Ipec,  181.

Enuresis.— Equis.,  334. '-^^  Oo^CJ^^^'^  ■

Epilepsy.— Amyl.  n.,  354;  Q.^^io%\  Cup.,  208;  ^^235;  Lach.,  87.
Epistaxis.— Amm.  c,  308,  338;  Bry.,  24;  Crotal.,  98;  Glon.,  353.
Erysipelas.— Amm.  c,338;  Apis,  114,  115;  Canth.,  117,  118;  Lach.,  96;

Rhus  tox.,  17;  Verat.  v.,  204.
Exostosis. — Kali  h.,  iii.

Fever:  Gastric — Ant.  c,  26,  .27.

Intermittent.— Ant.  c,  26;  Ant.  t.,  183;  Apis,  115;  Ars.,  183;
Caps.,  183;  Eupat.  perf.,  183,  329;  Eup.  pur.,  330;  Ferr.  m.i
240;  Gels.,  199;  Ign.,  133,  183;  Ipec,  182;  Nat.  m.,  183,
266;  Nux  v.,  183;  Pod.,  183,  253;  Rhus  t.,  74,  76,  183;
Verat.  a.,  205.

Inflammatory.— Aeon.,  37,  63,  65;  Nux  v.,  ir.

Puerperal ,y— Kali  c,  100.

Typhoid.— Apis,  113;  Arn.,  305;  Ars.,  69,  75;  Arum,  304;  Bapt.,
200;  Bry.,  74;  Carbo  v.,  39,  72;  Cina,  284;  Gels.,  199;  Glon.,'
353;  Hyos.,  83;  Lach.,  89;  Leptan.,  245;  Lye,  47;  Mur.  ac,


378


THERAPEUTIC  INDEX.


72,  191;  Nux  m.,  277,  278;  Opi.,  274;  Phos.,  151,  153;

Phos.  ac,  188,  189;  Rhustox.,  74,  75;  Selen.,  149;  Tereb.,

247;  Verat.  a.,  204;  Zinc,  145.
Yellow.— Crotal.,  98.
Fibroid.— Lach.,  96;  Lapis  a.,  334;  Phos.,  152.
Fissura  ani. — Graph.,  225;  Natr.  m.,  261;  Nit.  ac,  193.

Gallstone. — Card.,  262;  Chelid.,  243.
Gangrene. — Sec.  c,  167.

Gastralgia.— Arg.  n.,  234;  Bism.,  41;  Cham.,  126;  Cup.,  207;  Ign.  133;

Ipec,  133;  Nux  v.,  126;  Stann.,  147.
Gastric  Ulcer, — Arg.  n.,  234;  Kali  b.,  105.
Goitre — lod.,  aSfs  Lapis  a.,  334.

Gonorrhoea. — Cannab.  s.,  248;  Caps.,  248;  Clem.,  287,  344;  Cop.,  345;
Cub,,  346;  Kali  iod.,  248;  Merc,  c,  31,  248;  Merc,  s.,  248;  Natr.  s,,
258;  Puis,,  17,  19,  248;  Sabin.,  171;  Sars.,  251;  Sep.,  248;  Sulph.,
248;  Thuj.,  317.

Gravel. — Lye,  44;  Sars.,  250,

Hay  Fever. — Lach. ,  88.

Headache. — Aeon.,  131;  Ant.  c,  27;  Arg.  n.,  232;  Epigea,  365;  Gels.,
131,  198,  199;  Glon.,  351;  Hell.,  47;  Ign.,  131;  Ipec,  179;  Iris,
186;  Kali  b.,  106;  Lach.,  87;  Natr.  c  ,  267;  Natr.  m.,  259,  260,  261;
Nux  v.,  13;  Puis.,  19;  Sang.,  181;  Sars.,  251;  Sep.,  161;  Sil.,  62,
131;  Spig.,  176;  Stict.,  301;  Thuja,  318.

Hemorrhages. — Alumen,  300;  Alumina,  300;  Arn.,  308;  Cact.,  175;
Carbo.  v.,  41,  42;  Caul.,  169;  Chin.,  34,  42;  Croc,  325;  Crotal.,  98;
Ferr.,  239,  240;  Ham.,  309;  Iod.,  282;  Ipec,  179,  181;  Lach.,  91,
96;  Mur.  ac,  191;  Nit.  ac,  193;  Phos.,  155;  Puis.,  16;  Sec,  165;
Sul.  ac,  194.

Hemorrhoids. — ^sc.  h.,  142;  Aloe,  251;  Ant.  c,  26;  Apis,  173;  Caust,,

210;  Collin.,  342;  Nit.  ac,  193;  Nux  v.,  13;  Sulph.,  51.
Hernia. — Cocc,  138;  Lye,  44.
Herpes  Circinatus. — Sep.,  163.
Herpes  Zoster, — Rhus  tox,,  77.

Hoarseness. — Arum  t.,  304;  Carbo  v.,  41,  213;  Cocc  c,  69;  Eup.  perf.,

329;  Phos.,  155;  Selen.,  150;  Spong.,  332.
Hydrocephalus.— Apis,  113;  Calc.  c,  57;  Calc.  p.,  60;  Hell.,  206;  Ipec,

179.

Hydrothorax. — Kali  c,  loi.  «
Hypochondriasis.— Arg.  n.,  231;  Aur.  m.,  222;  Helon.,  172;  Natr.  m.,
265;  Nux  v.,  265;  Staph.,  319.

Impotence, — Lye,  45;  Phos.,  155.


THERAPEUTIC  INDEX.


379


Influenza. — Caust.,  213;  Eup.  perf,,  213,  328;  Rhustox.,  213

Injuries. — Arn.,  290,  305;  Calc.  p.,  291;  Hyper.,  291,  366;  Led.,  290;

Rhus  tox.,  307;  Ruta,  291;  Sulph.  ac,  290;  Symph,,  291.
Insanity.— Hyos.,  83;  Plat.,  148;  Verat.  alb.,  205.

Jaundice. — Aeon.,  66;  Aur.  mur.  nat.,  244;  Chel.,  242;  Dig.,  174;  Plumb.,
241.

La  Grippe. — Caust.,  213;  Eupat.  perf.,  213,  329;  Rhus  t,,  213.

Labor  Pains. — Nux  v.,  10;  Puis.,  19.

Laryngitis. — Hepar,  218;  Spong.,  332;  Stann.,  146.

Leucorrhoea. — ^scul.,  142;  Alumina,  299;  Asaf.,  356;  Borax,  328;  China,
34;  Hydras.,  315;  lod.,  282;  Kali  b.,  106;  Kreos.,  292;  Merc,  v.,
30;  Puis.,  17;  Sabin.,  171;  Sep.,  160;  Stann.,  146.

Liver. — Aur.  met.,  229;  Carduus,  362;  Chel.,  243;  Chin.,  37,44;  Crotal,,
98;  Lye,  44;  Mag.  m.,  270;  Ptel.,  363.

Locomotor  ataxia. — Alumina,  300;  Arg.  n.,  232;  Caust.,  210;  Conium,
139;  Phos.,  151;  Sil.,  62.

Lumbago. — Rhus,  76.

Marasmus.— Abrotan.,  250;  Arg.  n.,  250;  Baryt.  c,  280;  Calc.  ost.,  57;

Hepar,  220;  lod.,  250;  Nat.  m.,  250;  Phos.,  152;  Sars.,  250.
Mastitis. — Bry.,  24;  Lac  can.,  296;  Phytol.,  349.
Measles.— Bry.,  24;  Coff.,  129;  Lach.,  96;  Puis.,  18;  Stict.,  ^02.
Meningitis.— Amm.  c,  338;  Apis,  113,  115;  Bry.,  22;  Cicut.,  208;  Cup.,

207;  Hell.,  206;  Lye,  47.
Menorrhagia.— Bovista,  362;  Cimic,  170;  Nux  v.,  10;  Plumb.,  241;

Puis.,  18;  Sab.,  170;  Ustil.,  362.
Mercurial  poisoning.— Hep.,  37;  Kali  iod.,  37;  Nit.  ac,  37.
Metrorrhagia.— Caul.,  168;  Cham.,  126;  Plat.,  149;  Sab.,  170;  Ustil.,

362.

Mumps. — Puis.,  20.
Myelitis.— Rhus  t.,  76.

Nephralgia. — Benz.  ac,  249.

Neuralgia.— Caust.,  214,  215;  Cham.,  124;  Chel.,  242;  Cimic,  169;  CofT.,
127,  128;  Coloc,  311;  Gels.,  197;  Kalm.,  177;  Lyc,  242;  Mag.
p.,  271;  Sars.,  25o;*Spig.,  176;  Stann.,  147.

Night  sweats.— Calc.  c,  56,  57.

Nymphomania. — Plat.,  149.

Obesity.— Graph.,  55.

Cedema.— Kali  hyd.,  108,  iii;  Phos.,  151.

Onanism.— Lyc,  45;  Nux  v.,  14;  Phos.  ac,  188;  Staph.,  319.


38o


THKRAPEUTIC  INDKX.


Ophthalmia.— Arg.  n.,  233;  Con.,  140.
Orchitis.— Ham. ,  309;  Clem.,  344.
Otorrhoea.— Borax,  327;  Tell.,  364.

Palpitation.— Aur.  met.,  230;  Cactus,  176;  Conval.,  361; Ferr.,  240;

Ivacticac,  366;  Mag.  mur.,  270;  Mosch.,  356;  Spig.,  176.
Paralysis.— Arg.  n.,  235;  Caust.,  209,  210,  214;  Dulc,  286;  Lach.,  92,

94,  96;  Nat.  m.,  262,  267;  Opi.,  275;  Phos.,  151;  Plumb.,  241;

Rhus  t ,  214.  Sul.,  214.
Pericarditis. — Bry.,  22.
Peritonitis.— Bry.,  22;  Canth.,  118.
Pharyngitis.— ^sc.  h.,  143;  Nat.  m.,  262;  Phytol.,  348.
Phthisis.— Calc.  c,  58;  Hep.,  218;  lod.,  282;  Kali  b.,  106;  Kali  c,  loi,

107;  Myrtus,  360;  Natr.  s.,  258;  Phos.,  157;  Phos.,  ac,  191;

^pong-,  332;  Staun.,  18.
Pleuritis.— Aeon.,  66;  Ars.,  72;  Borax,  328;  Bry.,  22;  Kali  c,  loi;  Phos.,

156;  Squill.,  359;  Sulph.,  51.
Pneumonia.— Aeon.,  66;  Ant.  t.,  185;  Ars.,  71;  Camph.,  316;  Carbo  v.,

42;  Chel.,  242;  Ferr.  p.,  201;  Ipec,  181;  Kali  c,  99,  Toi;  Kali

iod.,  107,  109;  lyach.,  89;  Lye,  46,  47;  Natr.  s.,  258;  Opi.,  274;

Phos.,  151,  156;  Rhus  tox.,  75;  Sang.,  187;  Verat.  a.,  204;  Verat.  v.,

202.

Polypus. — Calc.  c,  56;  Mar.  ver.  t.,  364.
Prolapsus  ani. — Ignat.,  133;  Podo.,  253;  Sep  ,  160.

Prolapsus  uteri. — Aloe,  255;  Aur.  met.,  229;  Hell.,  172;  Lill.  tig.,  164;
Natr.  m.,  265;  Nux  v.,  253;  Platina,  149;  Podo.,  253;  Rhus  tox.,
253;  Sep.,  161.

Prostatic  disease. — Con.,  141;  Puis.,  250;  Sars.,  250;  Staph.,  320.
Purpura. — Phos.  152;  Sul.  ac,  194;  Tereb.,  247.
Pruritus. — Sep.,  163;  Tarent.  Hisp.,  119

Rachitis. — Calc.  c,  57.

Rheumatism. — Aeon.,  66;  Ant.  c,  27;  Benz.  ac,  249;  Berb.,  246;  Cact.,
175;  Caust.,  214,  215,  216;  Cham.,  124;  China,  136;  Cimic,  170;
Colch.,  324;  Dig.,  173;  Dulc,  285;  Ferr.  p.,  201;  Ham.,  309;  Hep.,
221;  Kali  m.,  112;  Kalis,,  296;  Kalm.,  177;  Lac  can.,  294;  Lac.  ac,
366;  Led.,  288;  Lith. ,  358;  Medor.,  335,  226;  Merc,  v.,  221;  Nux  v.,
11;  Petr.,  314;  Phyt  ,  350;  Puis.,  15,  16;  Rhodo.,  287;  Rhus  tox.,
74,  75,  214;  Sabin.,  171;  Sang.,  187;  Sars.,  250;  Sticta,  302;  Sulph.,
51,  214;  Verat.  a.,  206.

Scarlatina.— Amm.  c,  338;  Apis,  115;  Arum,  304;  Bry,,  24;  Cup.,  143;
Lac  can.,  294;  Lach.,  89,  96;  Phytol.,  348;  Rhus  tox.,  74;  Zinc>

143-


THRRAPEUTIC  INDEX.  38 1

Sciatica  -Lye.  46;  Puis.,  19  (?^t. 3  S^O  '  '2>  li^^V/^

Scrofula.— Bar.  c,  279;  lod.,  281;  Sil.,  48.  3/^  J  Qy  ^t^^l  n

Stomatitis.— Nit.  ac,  193.  ^ 7 7^*  o/J^

Strangury. — Tereb.,  247.
Sunstroke. — Lach.,  94.
Sycosis. — Thuj.,  30.

Syphilis. — Kalib.,  104;  Merc,  30;  Nit.  ac,  T93.

Tonsilitis. — Bar.  c,  280;  Bell.,  219;  Benz  ac,  249;  Hep.,  219;  Ign.,  132;
Kali  m.,  112;  Lac  ca.,  45,  219,  294;  Lach.,  89,  219;  Lye,  45,  219;
Merc,  28,  219;  Merc,  cy.,  32;  Merc,  prot.,  219;  Nux  v.,  11;
Phytol.,  45-

Toothache. — Ant.  c,  27,  28;  Cham.,  124,  126;  CofF.,  128;  Mag.  c,  269;

Puis.,  19,  126.
Typhoid  Fever. — (See  Fevers.)
Typhilitis. — Plumb,,  242.

Ulcers. — Ars.,  73;  Kalib.,  103;  Lach.,  95,  96;  Sil.,  61.
Urticaria. — Nat.  m.,  267.

Variola. — Rhus  tox.,  77.

Vertigo.— Aeon.,  66;  Arg.  n.,  232;  Cocc,  135,  137;  Con.,  139;  Gels.,

198,  232;  Natr.  c,  267;  Phos.,  153;  Therid.,  121.
Vomiting — Ars.,  70;  Calc.  c,  57;  Kali  b.,  105;  Kreos.,  293.

Warts.— Thuj.,  216.
Wens. — Silph.,  225.

Whooping  CO agh. — Coc.  cac,  121  (see  also  cough).
Worms. — Cina,  23.


t


1^
