A Summary of Some Late Observations upon the Generation, Composition, and Decomposition of Animal and Vegetable Substances (John Turberville Needham, 1748)
===========================================================================================================================================================
John Turberville Needham — Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, 1748. Public domain. Extracted from the issue scan via Internet Archive (paper-doi-10_1098_rstl_1748_0072).

A Summary of fome late Obfervations 
upon the Generation, Compolition, and 
Decompofition of Animal and Vegetable 
Subftances; Communicated in a Letter to 
Martin Folkes Bfq\ Preftdent of the Royal 
Society, by Mr. Turbervill Needham, Fel¬ 
low of the fame Society. 

Paris , Nov. 2 3, 1748, N. S. 

S IR, 

Read Dec. ij. 22. § i. r TP" ! HO’ I think myfelf now 
* 748 ' ahnoft fuffieiently quali¬ 

fied, by the Multitude ot Experiments I have already 
made upon animal and vegetable Subftances, fincc the 
16th, N. S. of laft March, to lay down fome Certain 
Truths upon this Subjeft, and from them to advance, 
by Induction, farther than fo fhort a Period of Time 
would allow me to proceed by fpecial Experiments, 
yet I would have your learned Royal Society look 
upon this Paper as an imperfeCt Sketch only of what 
Ihope to publifh from the Journals I have by me in 
a few Months, if thefe two or three Sheets are lo for¬ 
tunate as to meet with their Approbation. I am 
fufficiently fenfible how much I may hurt this little 
Performance, if I promife too much, and raife 
in this Matter higher Expe&ations from the Public 
than it may appear hereafter to deferve: It is at this 
time therefore particularly the more neceftary, that I 
fhould be exceedingly cautious to advance no Propo- 
fition raftily s nothing, but what feems to flow natu¬ 
rally from Obfervation. But this Precaution, however 

* ftriCt, 


The Royal Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve, and extend access to 

Philosophical Transactions (1683-1775). 

www.jstor.org 







ftrifl:, will not exclude now-and-then a probable 
Confequence from appearing; provided it lecms con¬ 
nected with fomc preceding manifeft Truth; for 
fuch mud be allow'd, as proper Foundations for a 
more exaCt Inquiry in a Matter I am very far from 
pretending, to have exhaufted. I mtaft therefore ob- 
ferve, for my own Security again!! future Objections, 
that tho’ I add no new deciftve Experiment to my 
prefent Lift, or throw any more Light upon the 
Subject than what I have already amaffed, I may 
poflibly, before my Eflay appears, whether by the 
Advice of Friends, or otherwife, conceive more 
mature Thoughts, rejeCt fome of the prefent, and 
adopt others in their Place. As this will be done, 
without affecting in any degree the main Syftem, 
which I imagine turns upon unqucftiomble Truths, 
it is a Liberty I am petfuaded that equitable and 
learned Society will indulge me in, if no other 
Confideration prevails, than the great Obfcurity that 
hangs over a Subject fo extenfive and fo intricate as 
this is ; in which I am already engag’d much farther 
than I at firft forefaw, and indeed too far to recede 
without faying fomething, 

§ z. 1 fhall take as little Notice as may be, in 
this fhort Summary, of the almoft. inevitable Mif- 
takes others may have made in this Matter be¬ 
fore me, and the too hafty Confequences they have 
drawn from Appearances that naturally furprife by 
their Novelty. Such Surprize is but too apt to cap¬ 
tivate Perfons even of the moft ferene Thoughts,, 
much more the young and unexperienced > fuch as 
Mr. Hartfoeker was, when he firft difeover’d the 
fpermatic Animals. 



§ 3* Mr. Lewenhoeck indeed, fo near his Cotem¬ 
porary in this Difcovery as to claim a Priority, was 
much more advanced in Age and Expedience } yet 
if he fhould alfo appear to have been miftaken, we 
are not to be furprifed at it; for his Repeated Ob- 
fervations upon the Sperm of fuch a Variety of Ani¬ 
mals, even as low as Infeds, feem to intitle him to 
draw Confequences as extenfive for a general Syf- 
tem of Generation, as his Experiments had" been. 
In effed, what two more powerful Arguments 
could a Philofopher with the Knowledge of no 
other Fad, than that of their Exiftence, have, than 
the Univerfality of Animalcules in this Fluid, and 
their feeming Confinement to this animal Secretion ? 

§ 4,. The Method of Reafoning by Analogy is but 
too apt to lead us into Miftakes, and therefore we 
ought to be very diffident of Confequences deduced 
this Way. Every new Appearance that has no known 
Caufe, immediately fixes, and but toooften at laft : 
puts the Thoughts of the Obferver upon the Rack. 
When the Mind arrives at this Intenfity of Adion, 
how natural is it to free ourfelves from a painful Un-. 
certainty at any rate, and that with as little Expence 
of Refledion as may be i The mod obvious and 
eafy Method is to clafs, if it admits it, and to re¬ 
duce it to fome other known Phanomena 5 poffibly 
we are yet no nearer the phyfical Caufe, becaufe 
that of both is unknown. We have ftill, however, 
the Satisfadion to have diminifhed the Surprize it 
gives, by taking from its Singularity, and reft in 
fome meafure contented with this little Deceit. 

§ 5. I call it a Deceit, if we acquiefce in it, tillfuch 
time as a Number of Circumftances (hall concur to 

* 2 place 



place it above the State of an Hypothecs, and {hew 
us we have been right in our Inferences. Mere Ana¬ 
logy, founded only upon one or two Fatts, and 
extended by Conje&ure, however plaufible, can but 
at moft furniffi Motives for a reafonable Doubt, and 
a more mature Enquiry. For tho’, as a modern Au¬ 
thor obferves very well, Nature feems every-where 
to hold with itfelf, and go off by an almoft imper¬ 
ceptible Gradation ; yet, in our prefent Ignorance 
of the entire Chain of Beings, we are fo liable to 
miftake two diftant Species for the next immediate 
ones to each other, that the Analogy is thereby 
nearly extinguifhed, and its Traces almoft effac’d. 

§ 6 . That this has been too much the Cafe in all the 
modern Syftems of Generation, will appear I believe 
plain in the Courfe of this Memoir to every un- 
biafs’d Naturalift. Animalcules were found univer- 
fally in all animal Seed, almoft at all times, and feem- 
ingly in this animal Secretion alone; they were 
therefore previoufly thought effential to Generation y 
or they fhould have added, a neceffaryConfequence 
of Properties in the Seed, Which Properties were 
eflential to Generation. But this Inference, how¬ 
ever- natural, was intirely overlook’d by them in 
their Reafoning; and Analogy induc’d them to ftop 
at the firft, without ever examining the fecond, 
tho’ equally confequcnt. The Opinion of pre- 
exiftent Germs had prevail’d, under the Notion of 
Female Eggs, ere this Difcovery was made; and 
thus one Miftake had been grafted upon another. 
When the fpermatic Animals appeared, it was not 
difficult to transfer thefe imaginary Germs from the 
one to the other; and at moft Philofophers were 

" : ' only 



only divided by it; tho’ as both Opinions were equally 
plauftble, the latter generally prevail’d by its Novelty. 
The vaft and unbounded Profped it open’d to the 
Imagination, in a View of fuch a prodigious Series 
from the firft Parent to the laft, of original Linea¬ 
ments, ftruck the Mind with an agreeable Surprize. 
The Folly of equivocal Generation, particularly as 
it had been ftated by the Antienrs, the falfe Grounds 
they had proceeded upon to eftablHh it, various Ex¬ 
periments that feem’d to prove every Animal, every 
Plant, defeended from Individuals of the fame Spe¬ 
cies; but, above all, the Facility of claffing thefe 
fpermatic Animals, the reducing them by Analogy 
to Seed and Eggs, and the known Tranfition of moift 
Infe&s from one State to another, feem’d all fuf- 
ficient to remove the Veil Nature had drawn, and 
furnifh a Clue of a competent Length to conduct 
us into its mod hidden Reedies. 

§ 7. Thus this new Syftcm of Generation foon be¬ 
came a favourite Opinion of the laft Age, as it is in¬ 
deed (till of this for the mod part; and many ingenious 
Methods were imagined ofanfwering the Difficulties 
from Obfervation that feem’d to oppofe it. The 
more antient Hvpothefis of female Eggs was at laft 
blended with it, and both were work’d up into one 
Syftem: Their real Exiftence was determined, with 
their Form, Colour, Size, Situation, and the Me- 
chanifm of their Conveyance to the Womb; and 
imaginary Valves were appointed in each Egg ad¬ 
mitting one, exclude of every other fpermatic 
Animal, Happy the firft of thefe minute Beings 
that could take Pofleffion of this little Cell, and 
fnut the Door againft contending Millions! Hi¬ 
therto 



therto every Step feemed eafy and natural, if not 
too clofely examined; the Inquifitive were con¬ 
duced as high as their Curiofity could promife; and 
we might have expcfted, that Philofophcrs Should 
have flopp’d here; but there is no End of realon- 
ing by Analogy. 

§ 8. No Body of Men fo ftri&ly deferves the 
Name of a Republic as that of the Learned does: 
Every one is paffionately fond of adding to the 
common Stock, and claims nothing in Return, but 
the Name and Merit of having enrich’d it; yet this 
Pafllon is often fo violent, that bafe Metals are 
miftaken for Gold, and Pebbles for Diamonds. It is 
not therefore Matter of much Surprize, if fome have 
carried the imaginary Scene yet farrtn-r; and, Aill pro¬ 
ceeding by Analogy, have fuppofed that the reticular 
Expan/ton, obferved in the Womb of Does fome 
Days after Copulation, by Harvey , and fince him, 
in other impregnated Females, was nothing more 
than the inverting Web, fpun by the fpermatic Ani¬ 
mal before it enter’d the chrylahdal State, and pre¬ 
paratory to its Tranfition from one Form to ano¬ 
ther. Certainly thefe Authors never confider’d the 
immenfe Disproportion, between the great Expan- 
fion of this Web and the inconceivable Minute- 
nefs of the Animalcule i otherwife it had appeared 
as rational to fuppofe, that an Alpine Mountain 
could have been rear’d in a few Days by a Angle 
Emmet fucceflively pileing one Grain of Sand upon 
another. Nothing now feem’d wanting to com¬ 
plete this Syftem, and place it above all Exception, 
but ocular Demonftration, if it might poflibly be 
obtained, that the original Embryo was really con¬ 
tained 



tained in each of thefe Animalcules: By DiflHtion, 
the young Butterfly had been obfcrved in the Ca¬ 
terpillar three or four Days before it became a 
Chryfalid ; Mr. Lewenhoeck had fucceeded in fome 
other very nice Operations upon extremely minute 
Subjects, nor did he defpair of his Succefs in this; 
yet his repeated Attempts, it feems, all proved frtiit- 
lcfs. But what the moft exquifite Art had deny’d to 
Lewenhoeck, Chance, if we believe him, presented 
to another Naturalift, a little Man ftarted from 
under the Integuments he was faid to wear in his 
vermicular State; and the Obferver very humour- 
oufly gave us a Figure of this diminutive Entity 
perfect in every Member. Thefe extraordinary 
Sallies, however, we mud not place to the Ac¬ 
count of the Learned, either of this or the laft 
Age; they were generally exploded, and they indeed 
continue fo; yet altho’ they were peculiar only to 
the moft lively; extravagant as they may appear to 
be, they were Confequences of the Syftem; and 
thus was this Method of Reafoning by Analogy 
fairly purfued, as far as Imagination could carry it. 

§ 9. Cudworth , Grew , Le Clerc, and fome 
other Gentlemen of Judgment, had reflected too 
deeply upon Nature to give way to any Hypothecs, 
how plaufible foever, that took in lefs than the 
whole Scene it exhibits to every attentive Obferver, 
Yet they feem to have advanced much too far to¬ 
wards the other Extreme; and their Syftem of plaf- 
tic Natures, tho' in its Detail attended with many 
Proofs of extenfive Thought, and profound Reflec¬ 
tion, in a general View derogates as much from the 

Omnipotence 



Omnipotence of an All-wife Creator; and is not 
perhaps lefs extraordinary, than that Opinion which 
attributed the Regularity and Motion of the Planets 
to the Miniftrv of Angels. In this Light, I prefume, it 
has been looked upon by others, as well as by myfelf; 
and it is upon this account that I imagine it has 
had fo few Followers; I fhall therefore take no 
further notice of it here, than to oblerve, that, in* 
afmuch as it admits a productive Force in Nature, 
and Operations that go much deeper than a mere 
Devclopement of Parts, it has certainly more of 
Truth in it, than the Opinion of pre-exiftent Germs: 
as I flatter myfelf, will appear evident in the Courfe 
of this Memoir, by Arguments drawn not from 
Obfervations only, that are obvious to every Natu- 
ralift, but particular,Experiments made upon animal 
and vegetable Subftances, during the whole Sum¬ 
mer of this prefent Year. 

§ xo. To enter therefore more particularly into 
my Subjett, where to place the pre-exiftent animal 
Embryo, for inftance, whether in the Animalcule 
or Egg, was ever the Queftion, and ftill remains 
unanfwer’d. A Divifion of vital, efiential, and 
original Stamina or Lineaments was impoflible yet 
innumerable Inftances in Monfters, Mules, and 
many natural Subjects, concur to prove, that the 
young Foetus partakes of the Nature, Qualities, 
Conftitution, Form, and Features of both the Pa¬ 
rents ; even as far as their Defers and Difeafes, which 
are but too often hereditary. How can it then be 
agreeable to Reafon? Or to what Purpofe fhould 
we call in to our Aid unalterable original Stamina ? 
Can the viflble Species of any Production be deter¬ 
min'd 



[ ] 

min’d by them, if every fenfible Quality may be in¬ 
fluenc’d indifcriminatcly by either Parent ? And if 
they cannot be alter’d, nor the vifible Species be 
determin’d exactly by them, in what does their Ef- 
fence confift, or how can they be applied to that 
very Ufe we feem to think them defigned for ? If 
they are placed in the Animalcule, or in the Egg, 
how are they tranfmitted? And if in the Animal¬ 
cule, why is the Proccfs attended with fo vaft an. 
Expence, fo great a Wafte of Millions of Entities, 
each containing within itfelf a Scries of the mod: 
perfedt and moll wonderful Productions imNature, 
when one only of thefe Millions of Millions is alone 
to take Place? How are thefe Animals generated? 
if in the common Way, not only the Procefs will be 
boundlels, and thefe in their Seed have others, and 
fo on in an immenfc Series; but they can not then 
be unalterable, becaufe they arc fnppofed capable 
of being generated. Further, if they float in the 
Air, or lie hidden in Food, as fome have thought, 
how is it that the Stamina of one Species do 
not fometimes inlinuate thcmfclvcs into a flrange 
Parent, with all the Inconveniences and A'ofurdi- 
ties of equivocal Generation ? Or if they arc faid 
to be excluded by proper Strainers adapted for 
that very Purpofc in diftant Species; at lead they 
cannot be fo in thofc Kinds that arc near akin: 
For if the fpermatic Animal, which is naturally pro¬ 
ductive of a Horle in its own proper Matrix , is yet 
fo fitted to the Eggs of the Afs, that it can poflefs 
a Celiule there exclufivc of every other, which ar¬ 
gues an exact Coaptitude, certainly the fame Animal¬ 
cules, if contained cither in Food, Air, or Water, 
common to both Horfc and Afs, might pal's the 

* * Strainer 



[ ] 

Strainers indifcriminately of either; and thus might 
we have Mules common from each refpeCtive Male, 
without a promifcuous Congrefs of thefe two Spe¬ 
cies. 

§11. In another View, if we confider the ex¬ 
treme Tenuity, I may fay the mere Nothingtiefs 
of one of thefe Stamina, in its firft Origin, at the 
Diftancc of many Ages; comparatively to any one 
Part, the fmalleft mufcular Fibre, for inftance, of 
an adult Animal it is now faid to confti'ute : how 
can we undciftand, that fo minute a Filament could 
be developed, or in any Senfe ferve as a Sub- 
jiratum to a Cylinder fo folid, fo maflive, fo compa¬ 
ratively immenfe? Could a Mountain be look’d 
upon as a Superftructure upon a Grain of Sand ? Or 
the terraqueous Globe derive its prefent Dimcnfions 
from the Dilatation of an Atom? What is not the 
prodigious Force of this mufcular Fibre in its pre¬ 
fent State, if compared with what it had in its 
Origin? and, conlequently, what mull have been 
the Incrcafe of real extraneous Matter, either by 
Appofition, or Incorporation ; which is now as 
much a Part of this Fibre as the original Stamen ? 
And if thus much can mechanically be aflimilated, 
why not the whole of it formed by mechanical 
Caufcs? Or why muft fo infignificant a Part of it 
be faid to be concreatcd with the Univcrfe? Eut to 
{trike at once with what, in my Opinion, may be 
look’d upon as a demor.ftrative Argument againft the 
Syftem of original Stamina ? The Difficulty (till in- 
creales immenfely, if we look into the Vegetation 
of Plants, and the wonderful Re-production of the 
Parts of Polypes, Starfifh, Lobftcrs Claws, &c. The 

original 



original Stamina , how minute foever, queftionlefs 
are diffufed through the whole Production; ftnce in 
this Syftem all animal or vegetable Growth is made by 
Deveiopementonly : But if diffus’d, then fome or ali 
maybe by fucceflive Bifedion loft; and if loft, how 
can they be reproduc’d r Or if reproduc’d, why ever 
laid to be original, and con created with the Univerfc? 

§ 12. Thefe are but a few of thofc many Dif¬ 
ficulties that might be enumerated which yet are 
of fuch a Nature, that it is evident to every unbiafs’d 
Obferver, they cannot be even feemingly evaded, 
but by multiplying Suppofitions on Suppofitions; 
which at laft render the Hypothcfis fo complex, as 
to retain no one Charaderiftic imprefs’d upon the 
ordinary Procefs and Operations of Nature. Is it not 
much more reafonabie to fay, that fo many fecretorv 
Duds, fo many Strainers, fo many preparatory Vefteis 
in Animals, and fuch a curious Difpoluion in Plants 
for the Continuation of every Species, imply a Dige- 
ftion, Secretion, and Preparation of Principles invari¬ 
ably, univocally productive of every Individual, when 
they fail into their refpedive Matrices, and find 
Aliment proper to affimilate? Are not thefe Princi¬ 
ples contained in the Nourifhment taken by the 
Parent Plant or Animal, the fame that continually 
vegetate within it, and furnifh it with Materials 
for its own Increafe; continue to be diftributed till it 
becomes adult, then plentifully exuberate, whilft it 
is, by new Preparations, fitted to propagate invaria¬ 
bly in a proper Matrix its refpedive Kind? Elfe, 
why this Digeftionr why this Secretion? why fo 
many Strainers, Bveceivers, Duds, and Valves? and 
why is fome Food more produdivc of thefe Princi- 



[ ] 

pies than others? Or if they are pre-exiftent Germs 
that are fecreted, are the pre-exiftent Germs of every 
Species contained in every Bird, Beaft, Fifh, or 
Plant, that fupplies another with nutritive Juice, 
and becomes its Food ? What a ftrange Confufion ? 
Flow unlike that beautiful Simplicity, which Na¬ 
ture exhibits in all its Productions ? Germs fhut up 
within Germs, and Nature fwarming with fupernu- 
merary Entities, all which we readily conceive might 
have been ftruck out at once, when the Univerfe 
was created} yet pretend not to be able to underftand 
how they may be continually formed in Times 
fucceftlve, and as Occafions may require. 

§13. This fnould feem as unnatural, and as unphi- 
lofophical, as it is difagreeable to Obfervation: For 
if every mix’d Body is made up by the Combination 
of certain Principles, I think we cannot queftion ; 
but that God may have eftablifhed Forces in Nature, 
fublifting Forces, by which fuch Principles may, in 
certain Circumftances, be invariably united, without 
any Danger of deviating, fo as to render Generation 
equivocal } and if every Production in Queftion is a 
mix’d Body, as it certainly is, we know at the fame 
time, that, how various foever they are, a fmall 
Number of Principles differently combined will 
yield an inconceivable Variety, fufficicnt to pro¬ 
duce them all. Thus may we reduce Nature to 
what it is really ever found to be, fimplc in the 
Beginning of its Courfe, but magnificent beyond 
Expreflion when diftributed: And this, I believe, 
will readily be allowed to be its true Procefs in 
Generation, if, beftdes taking in all the ordinary 
i PhanQmena } which no Hypotrttfis could yet explain, 

this 



[ ] 

this Procefs is found confonant to many particular 
Experiments, fomc of which feem to me to render 
the Syftem inconteftable. 

§ 14. Modern Naturalifts have unanimoufly 
agreed to lay down, for a certain Truth, that every 
Plant proceeds from its fpecific Seed, every Ani¬ 
mal from an Egg, or fomething analogous, pre- 
exiftent in a Parent of the fame kind. If it is ever 
of Ufe to feparatc difagreeing Ideas, and previoufly 
to explain equivocal Words, it is particularly requi- 
fite in this Cafe to determine what we mean by 
Seeds and Eggs. Seeds and Eggs, in the common 
Acceptation of thofe Terms, arc certain mix’d Bodies, 
of fevcral Dimenfions, that immediately furnifh 
thefe Productions. In this Senfe they are underftood 
to contain not only the pre-exiftent Germ, but the 
Nidus alfo, if I may fo term it, fitted for its Re¬ 
ception, and a due Supply of alimentary Principles 
to be aflimilated in proper Circumftances. They 
are therefore thus far heterogeneous Bodies, that 
coalcfce in a known Time; and their Principles are 
fo far from being originally united at the Creation, 
that they lenfibly come together from very dilfanc 
Places in all hermaphrodite Plants, and from 
different Individuals in all thofe Species, where 
the Male and Female arc diftinft. Now I can¬ 
not pcrfu.ade myfclf, but that either I have not 
underftood what has been written on this Subjeft, 
or that Authors have not fulliciently rcflcClcd upon 
this, when they aflert, that, becaulc the ‘Tlantula is 
found in the Seed, an Oak, for inftancc, in an 
Acorn, that therefore this diminutive Tree bears 
likcwife its Acorns, and thus on through a iong 

Series. 



C 3 

Series. I fiiall not ask how this finall Plant can have 
Seed ; in the common Acceptation of that Term, 
it is plain it cannot: and if it has not, where the 
pre-exiftent Germ is lodged; how, from an Atom, at 
fo immenle a Remove, can it be increas’d to a lcnfible 
Mai's, and be fuccellivcly developed through fo many 
Generations, till its Time of Appearance? with 
many other Confequcnccs that may be drawn from 
hence againft the Reality of prc-cxiftcnt Germs; all 
which are too obvious to require a diftinCt Enumera¬ 
tion. 

§ 15. It is in vain for us to pretend to lay down 
any one certain uniform Rule, and fay to Nature, 
This is thy Scheme ■, fuch are thy Statutes ■, and from 
thefe thou fhalt not deviate. If in many Productions 
fhe fixes it as an inviolable Law, that no Individual 
of that Species fiiall appear without a Co-operation 
of two Parents a Male and a Female, flic has at the 
fame time her Hermaphrodites both in Plants and 
Animals and if in thefe Hermaphrodites the two 
Sexes arc yet fo diftinCf, that fhe feems but to have a 
little diverfified her Operations, without any fenfiblc 
Deviation from her primitive Law, file will, in an¬ 
other Inftance, that of the Pncerons obferv’d by 
Mr. Bonnet , a& either with or without the Co¬ 
operation of a Male. If again you fay that a Female 
may be impregnated, fo that the Impregnation fiiall 
diffufe itfelf, and penetrate as far as five or fix Ge¬ 
nerations, fhe will point out to you in the Clafs of 
Polypes many Kinds, where Generation is carried 
on without either Male or Female, Egg or Seed; 
tho’, among thefe, there are fome of the plumed 
Sort, where a whole Family, when by real Ve¬ 
getation 



[ ] 

getation branch’d out as far as Nature defigns, jointly 
concurs to give one Egg, or foincthing analogous 
to an Egg, as the Source of a future Progeny. And 
thus is this Oafs united to its next moft immediate 
Superior. If you fhould ftill infill, that the vital ef- 
iential Stamina of every Plant and Animal were really 
concrcatcd with the Univerfc, and arc now diftufed in 
Water, Earth, or Air, from whence each will be 
united to its proper Subject in due time; or that the 
Experiments of Nie-xventyt, and other Naturalifls, 
of the Stems and Roots of Beans, or other Seeds, al¬ 
tering their Directions levcral times whcndifplac’d, 
to recover each its own, the Root downwards, and 
Stem upwards that thefe I fay evidently prove vital, 
eflential, unchangeable Stamina} as they muft be, 
if original, and concrcatcd with the Univerfc: In- 
ftanccs might be brought from the Memoirs of the 
Royal Academy of Sciences at ‘Paris, or Trees that 
have been io inverted, and induc’d to change their 
Direction, that the Branches have become Roots, and 
the Roots Branches; a Phenomenon totally incon- 
ftftcnt with vital, eflential, and unalterable Stamina. 
In fine, if at lafl you rclolvc to ftand by this one 
Refourcc, that at lcafl every Individual proceeds 
from a Parent like it fell',- that the original Germs, 
tho’ not wholly unchangeable, are yet l'ullicicntly 
fix’d to determine every Species, and that they arc 
either lodg’d in thefe Parents, or fecretcd from the 
Elements by Strainers through their Bodies: I be¬ 
lieve I can furnifh, from "my lafl Summer’s Obl'cr- 
vations, a Cloud oi lnflanccs, of a new C. lals of Be¬ 
ings, whole Origin has hirueno been unknown, 
wherein Animals grow upon, are produc’d by, and, in 

the 



C 3 

the ft rift Senfe of the Word, brought forth from 
Plants; then by a ftrangc Viciflitude again become 
Plants of another Kind, thefe again Animals of an¬ 
other, and thus on for a Series, further than the 
utmoft Power of GlalTcs can carry the moft inqui- 
iitivc Obferver. 

§ 16. It has generally been thought by Natu- 
ralifls, that microfcopical Animalcules were gene¬ 
rated from Eggs tranfported through the Air, or dc- 
pofited by a Parent Fly, invifiblc to the naked Eye, 
or even that aflifted with Microfeopcs. Yet is it 
ft range that no Naturalift fliould yet havefeen them, 
if they arc really fo numerous, when their fuppofed 
Progeny is lo various, and themfelvcs nutft be 
thought to be fo frequently gliding over the Surface of 
allftagnant Waters. By what extraordinary Turn is it 
brought about, might a Naturalift obferve, that 1'uch 
furprifing Revolutions Ihould happen in thefe little 
Oceans, as a total Dilappcarance of one Species fol¬ 
lowed by the almoft immediate Succcllion of 
another } and that in a manner fo fudden and un- 
cxpcftcdjthat I know not whither they arc retired, 
or what new Forms they may have allumcd. If they 
die, docs a whole Race pcrilh together, without any 
known Caufe? Or if they have taken any new 
Form, how is it that I fee none of them altering, juft 
alter’d, or expanding their little Wings upon thefe 
Waters, wherein I lately law fo many Millions 
in an aquatic State? It it is polliblc for them 
to become flying Infefts in a manner totally 
invifiblc, why do not thefe new Parents again dc- 
pofit their Spawn in the lame Waters, and give 
a Succcllion of the late Species, that has dil'ap- 

pcar’d ? 



[ ] 

peared ? The Element is not unfit for a new Progeny, 
lince other Kinds Succeed in it; nay 1 can trans¬ 
port from neighbouring Infufiotts Some of the fame 
Specific Animalcules into thefe abandon’d Infufions, 
and they will live. Nor yet has the Generation of 
this Species any peculiar Seafon which confines it: 
A frefh Infufion of the fame animal or vegetable Sub- 
ftance I apply’d before, will give me again in a little 
time the very Kind I am enquiring after, and that 
as often as 1 think proper to add new Matter. Thus 
might any Naturalift have reafon’d, who had ob¬ 
served thefe Animalcules with Some Attention; and 
been gradually conduced to doubt of their fuppofed 
Origin from flying InfeCts, or Eggs transported by 
the Winds. 

$ 17. But there is yet a Severer Difficulty, that 
fprings from the Confideration of Pafte-Eels: Thefe 
Animals, Mr. James Sherwood and I, by perform¬ 
ing a kind of cefarean Operation upon them, had 
the Pleafure to obferve were viviparous; and the 
Royal Society , about the latter End of 1745, or 
Beginning of 1746, did us the Honour to give At¬ 
tention to the Difcovery, when Mr. Sherwoods 
Paper * was read, and the Experiments exhibited at 
one of its Meetings. 1 need not repeat what was 
at that time or has been fince obferved, where the 
Multiplication from one Ed once rofe to io<5. 
It is Sufficient to obferve, that thefe Animalcules 
muftrhence confequently be thought to have ar¬ 
rived at their ultimate State of Perfection; no longer 
liable to change, or to live in any other State; too 
weighty, even the leaft of them, to be buoy’d up by or 

transported 

* See Phil. Tranf. N°. 478, p. 67. 

* 4 * 



tranfported through the Ait, and too much of tfre 
aquatic kind to fubftft out of Water, or to travel over 
dry Land, as I have often experienced, and any 
Gentleman may, by permitting the Water to eva¬ 
porate. The Queftion therefore is, how, in a Mafs 
from the cleared Spring-water, and the pureft Wheat- 
Flour, heated as intenfely as the Compofition will 
admit, thefe Animalcules may be generated? It is 
not hut that I think myfelf fufiiciently enabled, by 
my Experiments and Obfervations, to anfwer all 
thefe Quedions, and perhaps many more of greater 
Importance; but I have the ftrong Prejudice of 
near two learned Centuries, and the Opinions of 
Men of much more extenfive Knowledge and Parts 
than myfelf, to ftem and get over, before I can 
edablilh my own Sentiments upon this Subje&j 
and therefore am willing to hope I fhall not appear 
to have chofen a tedious and unneceffary Circuit, 
in tracing out the feveral Steps I have taken, to 
place my Conduct in a more rational Light. I 
mud further obferve, that I am obliged, previoufly 
to any of thefe Thoughts or Difcoveries, to my 
Friend Mr. Hilly who tranfiated and commented 
upon Theophraftus with fo much Applaufe, for two 
Obfervations, made while 1 was at London , upon a 
Sced-Infufion he gave me, and the Semen of a Dog 
in his own Houfe, which I, and fome other Friends 
of the Society , faw j a Peculiarity lingular enough 
was, that the Animalcules feem'd all hamper’d, and 
in fome meafure adhering by their fuppoled Tails, 
druggling as it were with a kind of ofcillatory Mo¬ 
tion to difengage themfelves, and not advancing at 
all progreffively. The Confequence of this Obfer- 
vation, which fufficiently hinted that they were then 

enafeent. 



t ] 

enafcent, and that their Tails were no Members given 
them by Nature to fleer or fwim withal, yet then 
efcaped our Notice ; and was not plainly clear'd up, 
till other fimilar and more diftinft Obfervations upon 
this Clafs of Animalcules occurr'd fonie co n fid cr able 
Time after. 

§ 18. It is now Time to obferve how much l am 
obliged to Mr. de Biffins Penetration, who firft en¬ 
gaged me in this Enquiry, by his ingenious Syftem, 
which he was pleas’d to read to me, and at the fame 
time expreffed hisDcfire 1 Qiould purfue it, before Ihad 
myfelf any Thoughts of it, or any one Experiment 
had been try’d. He had been long diflatisfy’d with the 
Opinion of prc-exi£lent Germs in Nature j and he 
and Mr. Maupertuis, Prelident of the Academy of 
Sciences at Berlin , had often difeours’d together 
upon the Subjeft. We have feveral Hints of this Dif- 
fatisfaftion, in a little Book, publilhed by Mr. Mau¬ 
pertuis himfelf upon thisQueftion at Tar is, before my 
Arrival there $ in fhort, it was by general Refle&ions, 
and fome other confequent Thoughts, that Mr. de 
Buffon was conduced to frame his Syftem of or* 
ganical Parts. Thefe he fuppofed, by Coalition, to 
conftitute the prima Stamina of all animal and ve¬ 
getable Bodies, fimple, uniform, common to all, and 
confequently to be found in a certain Quantity in 
every Portion of Food, Aliment, or nutritive juice j 
'and from thence to be digefted, and when the Sub¬ 
ject became adult, fecreted, and drain'd, for the For¬ 
mation of the Seed of every Plant and Animal ; and 
in this Fluid or Subftance to be confequently found 
in much Abundance. He further fuppofed thefe or* 
ganical Parts to be moving when difengaged, living 
in Appearance, and gifted with certain Organs, but 

* * * 2 extremely 



[ ] 

extremely Ample in their Compofition; being per¬ 
haps little more than elaftic Springs more or lefs com- 
prefs’d, more or lefs diverfify'd in the Direction of 
their Force. He thought the Calamary Machines I 
obferved fome time ago to be ftrong Proofs of his 
Opinion j and the fpermatic Animalcules to be Ma¬ 
chines, or organical Parts like thefe. 

$19. For my own part, 1 was then, as I had 
been before, fo far of his Opinion, as to think there 
were compound Bodies in Nature, not riling above 
the Condition of Machines, which yet might feem to 
be alive, and fponraneous in their Motions; fuch as 
the calamary Machines would certainly appear, if they 
were render’d fo diminutive as to conceal their Me- 
chanifm, and fuch I then fufpe&ed the fpermatic 
Animals to be: for Motion in general was but an 
equivocal Argument, and did not neceflarily imply 
Life in the common Acceptation of that Term 
When, fora further Proof, I inftanced Mr. Hill’s 
Seed-Infufion, wherein many Bodies were feen to 
move in a manner very different from Atoms in a 
fermenting Liquid, and yet not fo feemingly fpon- 
taneous as microfcopical Animalcules, he added, 
that in his Syftem it muft be fo; that thefe were 
detached organical Parts, and that the Seeds, and 
particularly the Germs of Seeds in Plants, muft ne¬ 
ceflarily abound with them more than any other Sub- 
flances. Thus did our Enquiry commence upon Seed- 
Infuftons, from a Defire Mr. de Buffon had to find 
out the organical Parts, and I, if poflible, to difeo- 
ver which among thefe moving Bodies were ftrictly 
to be look’d upon as Animals, and which to be ac¬ 
counted mere Machines. In the Courfe of this 

Paper 



[ ] 

Paper I fhall be as ex aft as poflible, in philofo- 
phical Juftice. Whatever Experiments or Difcove- 
rks are to be afcribed to Mr. de Buff on, were the 
Rcfult of his Dire&ions, or jointly made with him, 
1 fhall fo fpedfy, that they may appear diftinguifh'd 
from all thofe others I made at home. The fourfirft 
Infufions, among them one of Almond-Germs care¬ 
fully pick’d out from between the two Lobes and 
Kernel, 1 mixed up at my own Lodgings, and then 
clos'd them in Phials with Corks. The Obfervations 
thatoccurr'd, were, firft, a Separation or Digeftion of 
the Parts of thefe Subftances, and a continual flying off 
of the mod volatile. Thefe offufeated my Glaffes at 
every Inftanr, and, according to the Mixtures, 
yielded a fetid or an agreeable Odour; particularly 
that of the Almond-Germs, one ftrongly fpirituous. 
Eight Days after they had been infus’d, I began to 
perceive a languid Motion in fome of the Seed-Par¬ 
ticles, that before feemed dead; fuch as gave me 
Encouragement to profecutc my Enquiry. It was 
vifible, that the Motion, tho’ it had then no one 
Charafteriftic of Spontaneity, yet fprung from an 
Effort of fomething teeming as it were within the 
Particle, and not from any Fermentation in the 
Liquid, or other extraneous Caufe. A diftinct 
Atom would often detach itfelf from others of 
the fame or lefs Dimenftons; and whilft thefe 
others remained abfolutely unmov’d, advance pro- 
greffively for the Space of eight or ten of its own 
Diameters, or move in a little Orbit, then fall off 
languid, reft between two others, and detach it¬ 
felf again and again, with a Continuation of the 
the fame Phenomena. The Confequences of thefe 
were obvious, the Motion was not fpontaneousj 

for 



for thefe Atoms avoided no Obftacle, nor bad any 
other Chara&criftic of Spontaneity. It was not from 
any Commotion in the Fluid, Fermentation or the 
flying off of volatile Parts; becaufe a large Atom 
would frequently move and detach itfelf from 
a much lefs abfolutely quiefeent: They did not feem 
to be enafeent Embryo Animals., from a Depofition 
of any extraneous Spawn; for the Phials had been 
clofed with Corks; nay they were the very Seed, 
or the Almond-Germ Particles themfelves. 

§ 20. Thefe fame Obfervations Mr. de Buffm 
made himfclf; for we examin’d thefe Infufions to¬ 
gether a fecond time at his own Houfe; and their it 
was that he order’d fifteen Seed Infufions to be made 
up, which we continued regularly to examine twice 
a Week, till I pxopofed to him to take them home, 
and follow them more clofely by a daily or hourly 
Infpe&ion, if neceflary. The Refulc of our firft 
Obfervations was, that tho’ the Phials had been 
clofe flopp’d, and all Communication with the ex¬ 
terior Air prevented, yet, in about fifteen Days 
Time, the Infufions fwarna’d with Clouds of moving 
Atoms, fo fmall, and fo prodigioufly active ; that tho* 
we made ufe of a Magnifier of not much above 
half a Line focal Diftance, yet I am perfuaded no¬ 
thing but their vatt Multitude render’d them vifiblc. 
It feem'd therefore as if the firft teeming languid 
Particles we had obferved, vaft in their Dimenfions, 
if compared with thofe we now faw, had broke 
and divided into this immenfe Multitude of micro- 
fcopical active Atoms. Then it was that we began 
to lay down a Diftinttion between animated and 
mere organiz’d Bodies ; which, tho’ far. from being 



[ ] 

at this time groundlefs, yet afterwards proved to be 
falfe. Thefe, and the fpermatic Animals, we (up- 
poled to be of the latter kind ; and to be produc’d 
in their reipe&ive Fluids, by a Coalition of active 
Principles, much as I had feen the Calamary Ma¬ 
chines form’d by Hundreds, tho’ abfolutely detach’d, 
and fwimming at Liberty in the Milt of the Filh : 
whilfl we thought on the contrary, that the ordinary 
microfcopica Animalcules, withftrongChara&eriftics 
of fpontaneous Motion and Animation, were to be 
claf'd among Animals, and imagin’d them to proceed 
from Parent Individuals of their own Species. It was 
not till fome time after this, that, determin’d to con¬ 
vince myfelf and others, without any Poffibility of 
Doubt, whether thefe moving Atoms were really pro¬ 
duced from without, or from the very Subftance 
infus’d: I difeover’d all the common microfcopica! 
Animalcules, the fpermatic ones not excepted, were 
to be rang’d in the lame Clafs, and that their Ge¬ 
neration was very different from that of all other 
animated Beings. 

$ 21. For my Purpofe therefore, I took a Quan¬ 
tity of Mutton-Gravy hot from the Fire, and (hut 
it up in a Phial, clos’d up with a Cork fo well 
mafticated, that my Precautions amounted to as 
much as if I had fealed my Phial hermetically. I 
thus effectually excluded the exterior Air, that it 
might not be faid my moving Bodies drew their 
Origin from InfeCts, or Eggs floating in the Atmo- 
fphere. I would not inftil any Water, left, without 
giving it as intenfe a Degree of Heat, it might be 
thought thefe Productions were convey’d through 
that Element. Seeds or Plants were for this Rea* 

fon 



[ ] 

fon improper, becaufe they might have been judg'd 
to have been previoufly adhering to thefe Plants or 
Seeds: I negle&ed no Precaution, even as far as to 
heat violently in hot Alhes the Body of the Phial } 
that if any thing exifted, even in that little Por¬ 
tion of Air which filled up the Neck, it might be 
deftroy’d, and lofe its produ&ive Faculty. Nothing 
therefore could anfwer my Purpofe of excluding 
every Objection, better than hot roaft-Meat Gravy 
fecur’d in this manner, and expofed for fome Days to 
the Summer-Heat: and as I was determined not to 
open it, till 1 might reafonably conclude, whether, 
by its own Principles, it was productive of any thing, 
I allow’d fufficient Time for that Purpofe to this 
pure unmix'd Quinteffence, if I may fo call it, of 
an animal Body. From this time I take Corruption 
intirely in a philofophical Senfe, for the rifing of 
a dead Subftance, by a new kind of Vegetation, 
into Life : and no Axiom, how much foever it may 
have been exploded, is more true than that of the 
Antients, Corruptio untus eft Generatio alterius •, 
though they drew it from falfe Principles, and 
fo eftablifhed it as to render Generation equivo* 
cal, and never penetrated fufficlemly into Nature 
by Microfcopes, to difeover this Clafs of Beings, 
that are neither generated nor generate in the 
common Way, yet furnifh a Key to lead to the 
Generation of ail others. My Phial fwarm’d with 
Life, and microfcopical Animals of moft Dimen- 
lions, from fome of the largcft I had ever feen, to 
fome of the leaft. The very firft Drop 1 ufed, upon 
opening it, yielded me Multitudes perfectly form’d, 
animated, and fpontancous in all their Motions: 
And thus was 1 obliged to abandon not only the 

2 Notion 



Notion preconceiv'd of a Diftin&ion to be made m 
this C.a's of Animals, between thofe that appeared 
under a (cnfible Angle in the Microfcope, and the 
atomical ones.; but even that Hypothefis alfo which 
I had advanc'd as probable, in the little Efifay I pub- 
lifhed in 1745, that fpermatic Animals were no more 
than Multitudes of fuch Machines as thofe of the Ca- 
lamary; for now it was plain of what kind they were, 
and whence they deriv’d their Origin. 

§ 22. 1 fhail not at this prefent time trouble 

you with a Detail of Obfervations upon three or 
four Scores of different lnfufions of animal and 
vegetable Subftances, pofterior to thefe upon Mut¬ 
ton-Gravy 5 all which conftantly gave me the fame 
Phenomena with little Variation, and were uniform 
in their general Rcfult: Thefe? may better appear 
at Length upon fome other Occafion; let it fuffice 
for the prefent to take notice, that the Phials, 
clos’d or not clos’d, the Water previoufiy boil’d or 
not boil’d, the Infufions permitted to teem, and then 
plac’d upon hot Afhes to deftroy their Productions, 
or proceeding in their Vegetation without Inter- 
miflion, appear’d to be fo nearly the fame, that, af¬ 
ter a little time, I neglected every Precaution of 
this kind, as plainly unneceffary. I take no notice 
yet of their Manner of being generated and gene¬ 
rating ; in relating thefe Difcoveries, as I believe 1 
fhail be more intelligible, if I follow the Order of 
Time : It is a Juftice moreover I owe both to Mr. 
de Buffon and myfelfj for fome were made by him 
alone, fome by me, and fome of them in Concert 
together: His Syftem, the Detail of his Syftem, his 
Experiments, my own Difcoveries, my Thoughts 



[ 3 

in confequence of thefe Difcoveries; all thefe were 
reciprocally communicated; we made a Secret of 
nothing to each other. Thus where one Truth 
feems to lead to, or is the natural Confequcnce of an¬ 
other, it will be eafy, from the Order I have ob- 
ferv’d, to fee how much I have been obliged to his 
Penetration and Forelight. But this will yet appear 
more diftin&ly, when our feveral Effays upon this 
Subject (hall appear; and in the fecond Volume of 
his Natural Hiftory, which will very foon be publifhcd, 

I muft declare for a Fad, that all which precedes his 
Accounts of the Experiments, begun March 1 6. 
N.S. of this prefent Year 1748, was previous either 
to his own Experiments or mine, and was read to 
me by himfelf. 

§ 23. In this Order of Time therefore Mr. de 
Buff'on not only repeated the Experiment I have 
taken notice of, and added particular Obfervations 
of his own, but made fomc intircly new in every 
refpeft, peculiar to himfelf. Among thefe, that ne¬ 
ver to be forgotten by Naturalifts, which at once 
dcflroys the Opinion of Eggs in viviparous Animals, 
and fhews the real Ufc of thofc reddilh glandulous 
Bodies obferved by Vallifnieri upon the Tefticlcs 
or Ovaries, as hitherto call'd, of Cows. Every 
Anatomift knows, that the whitifh Specks, near 
each of which a Hydatide is plac'd upon all Female 
Ovaries, were hitherto either look’d upon to con¬ 
tain the real Female Eggs, or to be the remaining 
Scars of Eggs fecundated and diflodg’d. Vallifnieri , 
nearer the Truth, thought the large reddifh glandu¬ 
lous Bodies, which he calls Cherries, and found 
upon the Ovaries of Cows, and other Females, in 
the Time of their Heat, if the Animal is confined 

a to 



to any particular Seafon, or at any Time, in thofe 
females which are unconfined in this particular, 
were the real produ&ivc Organs contributory alone 
to Generation; yet ftiil with a View to the antient 
Opinion of Eggs, for he fuppofed- thefe glandulous 
Excrcfccnces to be real oviparous Productions. Mr. 
de Baffon, on the contrary, long before Observation 
had realiz’d his Conjectures, rightly thought thefe to 
no more than temporary Blofloms, if I may fo term 
them, not containing in their Cavity, which they 
have diftinct when they are ripe, an Egg, but the 
real Female Seed; that the whitifh Specks, Scatter'd 
upon the Surface of Female Ovaries, were partly the 
remaining Scars of fome of thefe temporary Blof¬ 
foms now faded, as having perform’d their deftin’d 
Office, or Embryo - Bloffoms not yet expanded; 
that the Hydatid annexed to each of thefe contained 
a Quantity of imperfect indigefled Seed; and that, 
if we took the Bloffom in time, when it fnould be 
intirely ripe for Action, as when a Female is in Heat, 
or not barren, thefe red glandulous Excrefcences 
would furnifh a Fluid as really productive of true 
Spermatic Animals, or organical Parts, as he calls 
them, as that of any Male obferv’d by Hartfoeker , 
Lcwenhoeck , or any other. The Refult of thefe Con¬ 
jectures was, thar, ordering a Bitch in Heat to be 
ftrangled, and diffectcd immediately, we found two 
of thefe red Excrcfccnces florid and ripe, one up¬ 
on each Ovary, thelc, from their refpective Cavi¬ 
ties that ran obliquely under thefe Productions for 
near an Inch in Length, furnilh’d a Tea-fpoonful of 
a thick turbid Fluid ; and this Fluid, obferv’d in 
the Microfcope with the mod powerful Magnifier, 

****2 after 



L ] 

after fome little time exhibited Numbers of Iperma- 
tic Animals, in every refpect like to thofe hithertoob- 
ferv’d by other Naturalifts, animated, and moving 
Ipontaneoufly. Thus was Mr. de Buffon\ Conjecture 
verify’d in every Particular. 

$ 24. About this Time, I think fome few Days 
after, Mr. de Bujfon in my Prefence examin’d fe- 
veral Sorts of male Semens and then it was that, 
for the firft time, we fairly faw the fpermatic Ani¬ 
mals enafeent. Thofe Kinds which fatisfy’d us in 
this particular were extremely vifeid, and contain’d 
in a certain Quantity in the Chryftal of a Watch. 
Thefe Precautions are not unncceffary; for if a vifeid 
Kind be not chofen, and that in a good Quantity 
together, fitch as that of Stags, &c. or any Seed of 
the leaft exalted Sort, if I may fo term it, as we 
found fome to be more lb than others; it will alter 
in the Atmofphcre by an Evaporation of its volatile 
Parts, which ferve to hold it though but gently 
together, after which it will liquefy, vegetate, ra¬ 
mify into filaments, and thefe Filaments again break 
into moving Globules, efpecially if the Weather 
be hot, before a fmall Portion can be adjufted to 
the Microfcope : whereby an Obferver may eaftly 
be impofed upon, and think the fpermatic Ani¬ 
mals original and pre-exiftent, becaufe he could not 
difeern that Action which produc’d them. This 
Deception takes Place in all Semen of the more 
exalted Kinds, fuen as particularly the Milt of Fifh, 
when it is in a State of immediate Impregnation, 
and many others: For it is to be obferved, that the 
Semen of Animals is not at all times in an equal 
State of Exaltation j and confeauently that fome Sorts, 

or 



[ ] 

or even the fame at different times, will at fome 
give the fpermatic Animals immediately, but at 
others not fo foon, and perhaps not under fome 
Hours : which is the Rea Ton why they have often 
been faid by Naturalifts, and even by Leivcnhoeck 
fcimfclf, not to have been found upon Infpcdtion. 
By this it will appear, that we had tried many ciorts, 
before we had the good Fortune to meet with one, 
in that exatt Degree of Exaltation neccflary to ex¬ 
hibit the whole Procefs of this Vegetation; and fo 
may others who fhall be defirous of trying thefe 
Experiments after us: Yet, when they fhall at laft 
have obtain’d a proper Subjedt, one accurate View 
will be fuflicient, and found to give the Key to the 
whole Secret. 

$ 25. When we had feized this favourable Op¬ 
portunity, we faw a final l Portion of male Semen 
plac’d on the Microfcrofcopc, firft, as it were to 
devclope and liquefy, then flioot out into long Fi¬ 
laments, ramify on every Side, thefe open and di¬ 
vide into moving Globules, and trailing after them 
fomething like long Tails; thefe Tails were fo far 
from being Members given them to fwim and 
fleer by, that they evidently caus'd in them an infta- 
ble ofcillatory Motion; and were in Effedfc nothing 
more than long Filaments of the vifeid feminal 
Subftance which they necefiarily trail’d after them; 
they were of various Lengths in various Animals, 
and they infenfibly, by the continual progreflive 
Motion of thofe Animals, grew fhorter and fhorter, 
till fome of them appear’d without any at all, fwim- 
ming equably in the Fluid. It was then plain ho w 
thefe Animals were to be clafs’d; their Origin v 
clearly to be deriv’d from Principles contain ' in 



[ ] 

this Matter, either by an Evolution of organical 
Parts, as Mr. de Buff on fuppofod, or by a real Vege¬ 
tation, as I thought, of the fame k nd with thofe I 
had before obferv’d in my Infufions; tho' more 
prompt, becaufe the Matter was more exalted: 
confcqucntly the fpcrmatic Animals were of the 
fame kind as all other microfcopical Animals, their 
Origin the fame, their Influence nothing more in 
Generation, nor any otherwife conducing to its 
Caufe, than as EfFc&s of thofe Principles in the Se¬ 
men, which alone arc the true and adequate Caufe 
of it. Sec Fig. i. 

Thcfe vegetative Powers, which, from the very 
Beginning of my Obfervations, 1 had found to reflde 
in all Subftances animal or vegetable, and in every 
Part of thofe Subftances, as far as the fmallcft mi¬ 
crofcopical Point, I had at this time certain Proofs 
of; tho’ not fo plain and inconteftablc as thofe I 
procur’d a few Days before Mr. de Buffon left Ba¬ 
ris for the Country, and which I profecutcd after his 
Departure. Thcfe I communicated to him in few 
Words the Night before he began his Journey, yet he 
was not at that time acquainted with any fpecial De¬ 
tail of the many Singularities that attend thcfe latter 
Vegetations, for 1 had but juft then made and enter’d 
upon the Difcovcry of them myfclf. I am obliged the 
more particularly to obferve this, becaufe the many 
Confequenccs he has fince drawn, as well as myfelf, 
and which, without any mutual Communication, hap¬ 
pen’d to tally with and feemingly to flow from the 
Difcovcries, were not in Fadt deduced from a circurn- 
ftantiated Knowlcgc of thcfe new Phxnomcna, which 
he had not, but from this one Principle, that there 



t ] 

is a real productive Force in Nature ; in which 
wc had both long fince agreed, however we may 
have differed in explaining that Action : For whether 
it be by an Evolution and Combination of organical 
Parts, as Mr. de Bitffon fuppofes, or by a real vege¬ 
tating Force refiding in every microfcopical Point, 
may be probably far beyond the Power of Micro- 
1copes to determine. Put as the Principle from 
which wc depart is intircly the lame, it mull nccef- 
arily lead to fimilar Thoughts, and fimilar Confe- 
qucnccs. 

§ 2 6. My firft Proofs therefore were drawn 
from a clofe Attendance to all the common Infu- 
lions, particularly that of Wheat pounded in a mar¬ 
ble Mortar. It was plain from them all, that after 
fomc time allow’d to the Water to call off the 
Salts and volatile Parts, which evaporated copioufly, 
the Subftance became fofter, more divided, and 
more attenuated: To the naked Eye, or to the 
Touch, it appear’d a gelatinous Matter, but in the 
Microfcopc was feen to con lift of innumerable Fila¬ 
ments; and then it was that the Subftance was in 
its higheft Point of Exaltation, juft breaking, as I 
may fay, into Life. Thefc Filaments would fwcll 
from an interior Force fo active, and fb productive, 
that even before they rcfolvcd into, or llicd any 
moving Globules, they were perfect Zoophytes teem¬ 
ing with Life, and Self-moving. 

If any Particle was originally very fmall and fphe- 
rical, as many among thofc of the pounded Seeds 
were, it was highly agreeable to obferve its little 
Star-like Form with Rays diverging on all Sides, 
and every Ray moving with extreme Vivacity. The 

Extremities 



Extremities likewife of this-gelatinous Subftancc 
exhibited die fame Appearances, active beyond Ex- 
prefllon, biinging forth, and paring continually with, 
moving proa re (live Particles o* various Forms, fphe- 
rical, oval, oblong, and cylindrical, which advanced 
in all Directions fpontancoufly, and were the true 
microfcopical Animals fo often obferved by Natu- 
ralifts. This brings to my Mind a Phenomenon of¬ 
ten taken notice of, and fecn with Surprize, Parti¬ 
cles detach’d by the Reaction of the Water from 
the Extremities of the Fins of Muflels, which yet 
continue to move progrcllivcly. I think it fuffi- 
ciently explain’d by thefe Obfervations; and that it is 
more than probable, that Muflels, Polypes, and 
other Kinds of this Nature, vegetate in a Manner 
analogous to this gelatinous Matter. Sec Fig;2. 

§ 27. In the Infufion of pounded Wheat, the 
firft Appearances, after an Exhalation of volatile 
Parts, as in every other Infufion, were the fecond or 
third Day Clouds of moving Atoms, which I lup- 
pofc to have been produced by a prompt Vegetation 
of the linallcft and almoft infallible Parts, and which 
requir’d not fo long a Time to digeft as the more 
grols, Thefe in a Day or two more intircly difap- 
peared; ail was then quiet, and nothing to be fecn, 
but dead irregularly formed Particles, abfolutely 
unactivc till about fourteen or fifteen Days after. 
From thclc uniting into one Mai's fprung Filaments, 
Zoophytes all, and fwelling from a Force lodged 
within each Fibre. Thefe were in various States, 
jult as tills Force had happen’d to divcrfiiy them; 
Ionic rcfembled Pcarl-Nceklaccs, and were a kind of 
microfcopical Coralloids 5 others were uniform 

throughout 



t ] 

throughout their whole Length, except juft the very 
Extremity, which fweli'd into a Head like a Reed, 
if the Force had afted equally on all Sides, or like 
the Head of a Bone at its Joint, if the Matter in its 
Expanfion had bore to either Side. Thefe Fila¬ 
ments were all Zoophytes, fo teeming with Life, 
that whenever, upon taking a Drop from the Sur¬ 
face of this Infulion, I had feparated the Extremity 
of a Filament fo fhort as not to conlift of above 
four Or five Globules Chaplet-wife; they would ad¬ 
vance progreffively and in Concert, with a fort of 
vermicular Motion, for a little Way, then fall off 
irregularly to one Side, as if not yet fitted for progref- 
live Motion, languidly turn their Extremities, and 
then again lie quiet for fome little time. It was my 
Fortune however, not in this Infufion only, but in 
many others, to find fome of thefe Chaplet-like Ani¬ 
mals much fmallcr indeed than thofe of the Wheat- 
Infufion; but intirely regular, conftanr in their ver¬ 
micular Motion, and which were confequently ar¬ 
rived to a higher Degree of Maturity and Perfection. 
I own I cannot but wonder to this Day at what I 
faw } and tho’ I have now feen them fo often, I ftili 
look upon them with new Surprize. Yet have thefe 
Phamomena ferv’d me to very good purpofc, and 
clear’d up many Difficulties in my former Obfer- 
vations. 

The Origin of Blight in Wheat, Rye, and other 
Vegetables, was no longer myfterious: An Atmo- 
fphere charg’d to an extraordinary Degree with Hu¬ 
midity, now plainly appear’d fufficient, particularly 
while the Grains were tender and replete with a milky 

5 * Juice 



[ ] 

Juice in a certain Degree of Exaltation, to produce 
in them this new kind of Vegetation, and to form 
their interior Subftance into Filaments, which are in> 
deed thofe very Eels I obferv’d fome Years ago in 
blighted Wheat. 

This agrees perfe&ly with another Obfervation 
made by the Gentleman who tranflated my little 
Eflay into French: Some of this blighted Wheat, 
two Years after I had gather’d it, I had given to 
Mr. Trembley , and he to this Gentleman. In a Note 
he has added, he obferves, that thefc Filaments not 
only recover’d Life and Motion, after they had 
been fo long dry, by macerating them in Water i 
but many broke, and difcharg’d from within them 
Globules, which mov’d with extreme Vivacity. The 
Application of the foregoing Obfervations to this 
Cafe is eafy and natural; nor is it now any Wonder, 
that thefe Filaments, the vegetative Force Bill re¬ 
ading within them, (hould move and refolve into 
Globules, or that they fhould have fubftfted fo long, 
full of that kind of Life they are a&uated with, 
though dry and without Nourilhmentj for now they 
ccafe to be Eels, as I formerly thought them. 

Blighted Rye, which is alfo fo full of Filaments 
of this Nature, that the Grains are fwell’d in their 
Diameters, and extended to an extraordinary Length 
by this new kind of Vegetation, exhibited nearly the 
fame Phenomena when macerated, and is to be 
dafs’d accordingly. I am told by fome of the Gem 
tlemen of the Royal Academy of Sciences here, that 
in thole Provinces of France., where this blighted Rye 
abounds, and is made up into Bread; it produces 
very ftrange Effects in the poor Country People who 



[ ] 

feed upon it, many of which are here found in the 
Hofpitals afflidted with a very lingular kind of Mor¬ 
tification, which caufes their Limbs to drop off. 

There are two Sorts of Blight, in one of which the 
Grain crumbles into a black Powder and the other is 
that which gives thefc moving Filaments or Eels. Mr,_ 
Bernard de jujjieu tells me, that one is from a Cor* 
ruption of the Flour, and the other of the Grain. 

It may not here be amifs to hazard a few Queries. 
Do not all Mortifications, and other Maladies in 
Which there appears an extraordinary Exuberance of 
Matter in any one Part, proceed from a Weaknefs, 
a Want of Refiftance, and from Principles of Union, 
which give to this vegetative Force, found to refide 
in every Point of animal or vegetable Subftances, 
more Play in one Part than in another ? For If the 
Refiftance be not equal in all Parts, the exuberant 
Matter muft break forth, and caufe that Part to de- 
compofe } and if the Habit of Body be extremely 
lax, the Decompofition muft continue; and that, 
in a certain extraordinary Degree, we fhall call a 
Mortification. To rub a Wound, or any natural 
Sore, with Salt and Spirits, is found to be falutary, 
and preventive of Mortifications j and Salt I know, 
by Obfcrvation, will immediately put a Stop to 
thefe microfcopical Vegetations, and caufe the Ani¬ 
mals to fubfide motionlefs to the Bottom: There 
fore it is probable, that Salts and Spirits are Princi¬ 
ples of Union, and produdtive of a greater Refiftance 
in the dudtile Matter adted upon by this vegetative 
Force. High Living, rich Wines, &c. are Preferva* 
tives againtt many contagious epidemical Diftempers: 
Do not therefore thefe Maladies arife from a laxer 

i* 2 Habit 



[ ] 

Habit of Body, and a more than ordinary A&ion of 
this fame vegetative Force? And may not thefe, and 
many other Phenomena of this kind, be reduc’d to 
the fame Principles? But this I leave to the Confi- 
dcration of Phyficians, who are better Judges of 
the Extent of thefe Obfervations and Principles. 

The Subftance emitted from the Globule c of the 
Farina facundans of all Flowers, by an A&ion I 
obferved fome Years ago, is alfo a Subftance of 
this Nature, filamentous, and in a vegetating State: 
Nothing can referable it more than the Fibres of 
moft kinds of Mould; refolving ali, as they do in 
Water, into others of a much finer Contexture, when 
the Vegetation, that had been before flopped by the 
nitrous Salts of the Atmofphere, begins by the Affift- 
ance of the Water to act again: And I know, by 
Obfervation, that all kind of Mould is formed by a 
Procefs of the fame Nature as the Growth of thefe 
microfcopical Plants; and to be clafs’d confequcntly 
with them, and reduc’d to the fame Principles. 

I cannot finifh this Article without obferving, 
that nothing can more perfectly than thefe wheaten 
Filaments, reprefent in Miniature Corals, Corallolds, 
and other Sea Plants, which have long been obferv’d 
to be teeming alfo with Life, and have been fuppos’d 
to be the Work of Animals, as it will appear to 
any one, that but infpe&s the Figure I have annex’d, 
and recollc&s my Defcription. Are not therefore 
all thefe in the fame Clafs, and is not their Origin 
fimilar? See Fig. 2. 

§ 28. But thefe Inftances from common Infu- 
iions, of a vegetative Force reliding in every mi¬ 
crofcopical Point of animal or vegetable Matter, how 

ftrong 



C 3 

ftrong foever and furprizing, were neither fo wonder¬ 
ful or extraordinary as fome others I obfcrv’d after 
Mr. de Bujfon'% Departure. From the wheaten fila¬ 
mentous Zoophytes it was eafy to infer, that they 
fprung from, and were Productions of, the Mafs of 
Matter that had fubfided to the Bottom of the Phial. 
Yet this I could not obtain a Sight of; nor was it 
poilible in this Way to obferve them without fe- 
parating them from their Roots and from the Mafs, 
out of which they arofe. The Method the mod na¬ 
tural therefore which occurr’d to me for the view¬ 
ing of thcfe Zoophytes, without difturbing their 
Vegetation, and for obferving their whole Procefs, 
from the Origin of the Plants to their laft Degree 
of Maturity, was to take extreme thin Slices of Cork, 
and intert, through little Hoies which I made, four 
or five in each Slice, Grains of Wheat or Barley, or 
any other farinaceous Seed, for thefe all nearly agree 
in the Phenomena they exhibit, with the Germ either 
turned upwards, or carefully pick’d out with the Point 
of a Penknife, to prevent their ufual flooring. 

Thcfe were permitted to fwim upon the Surface 
of frefh Spring-water, in a Glafs expofed to the 
Sun, that the whole vegetating Force might be de¬ 
termin’d downwards towards the inferior Moiety 
of each Grain, which alone .could in thefe Circum- 
ftances imbibe and be faturated with Moifture. This 
anfwer’d my Purpofe intircly * my Plants grews 
downwards into the Water like Corals, but appear’d 
not till fevcral Days after the Grains had been thus 
expos’d ; and were at laft fo large and ftrong, that 
I could fee them with my naked Eye. 


When 



[ ] 

When they became thus vifible, I cut off with a 
fmall Pair of Sciffars the vegetating Extremity, and 
plac’d it in a concave Objed-Glals with Water. 
The Plants then took a new Diredion, follow’d 
the Expanfe of the Fluid, and continued to vegetate, 
whiie I fupplied them with Water, which I did from 
time to time, covering them after Obfervation with 
another concave Objed-Glals, to prevent the Fluid 
from evaporating too faft. Thus I had for the Sub¬ 
ject of my Obfervations what I may call a microfco- 
pical Ifland, whofe Plants and Animals foon become 
fo familiar to me, that I knew every animal Species, 
and every individual Plant almoft without any Dan¬ 
ger of Miftake; an Exadnels fo neceffary, that it 
would not otherwife have been poffible to follow 
the Procefs of this Vegetation without Confufion. 
From this time I laid afide the Ufc of large In- 
fufions, and provided a certain Number of Watch- 
Chryftals, or concave Objed-Glaffes, for every Por¬ 
tion of animal or vegetable Subftance I was to ma¬ 
cerate in Water. The U le of thefe is plain and eafy * 
many fruitful little Iflands of various Kinds with 
Labels and Dates affix’d to each may thus be ob¬ 
tain’d, by placing the vegetating Subftances in thefe 
(jlaffes; and this is the Method I would recommend 
to all thofe who lhall be defirous to repeat or pur- 
fue my Experiments. 

I find my Subjed grows upon my Hands, and I 
am unwilling to take up too much of your At¬ 
tention: I fhall therefore finilh thefe Obfervations 
by annexing a Figure of my Wheat-Ifland and its 
Produdions, all which will be fufficiently intelli¬ 
gible without any more Words; and I lhall referve a 

Multitude 




[ 3 

Multitude of other Obfervations I have by me in 
my Journals, upon Infufions and other vegetating 
Iflands for the Effay, which I hope to publifh in 
fome Months, if thefe few Thoughts and Difcoveries 
(hall meet with Approbation. See Fig. 3. 

§29. Yet tnuft I trefpafs for a few Pages more; 
I cannot conclude this Letter without laying down 
fome general Truths, and recalling thefe fcatter’d Re¬ 
marks to fome certain Principles. A few Propo¬ 
rtions of this kind, together with the probable 
Confequences, that feem naturally to flow from 
them, will not only make my Syftem of Generation 
clear, but alfo take off many Objections, and render 
thefe very Obfervations better underftood, when 
they are reduced under certain Heads. 

It feems plain therefore, that there is a vegetative 
Force in every microfcopical Point of Matter, and 
every vifible Filament of which the whole animal or 
vegetable Texture confifts: And probably this Force ex¬ 
tends much farther; for not only in ail my Obferva¬ 
tions, the whole Subftance, after a certain Separa¬ 
tion of Salts and volatile Parts, divided into Filaments, 
and vegetated into numberlefs Zoophytes, which 
yielded all the feveral Species of common microfco¬ 
pical Animals; but tilde very Animals alfo, after a 
certain time, fublided to the Bottom, became mo- 
tionlefs, refolv’d again into a gelatinous filamentous 
Subftance, and gave Zoophytes and Animals of a 
lefl'cr Species. 

This is not only true of all the common microfco¬ 
pical Animalcules, but of the lpcrmatic alfo; which, 
after lofing their Motion, and finking to the Bottom, 
again refoived into Filaments, and again gave idler 

Animals. 



[ ] 

Animals. Thus the Procefs went on through all 
vifible Degrees, till I could not any longer purfue 
them with my Glafies: And thus evidently the fper- 
matic are to be clafs'd with the common micro- 
fcopical Animals. 

Hence it is probable, that every animal or vege¬ 
table Subflancc advances as faft as it can in its Re¬ 
folution to return by a flow Defcent to one com¬ 
mon Principle, the Source of all, a kind of uni- 
verfal Semens whence its Atoms may return again, 
and afcend to a new Life. This common Element 
therefore, tho’ uniform in its Origin and homoge¬ 
neous, branches out into innumerable Species more 
and more compounded, ,more and more heteroge¬ 
neous, as they depart and are further from tnis Source 
of organiz’d Bodies j yet may a Particle often be ar¬ 
retted, or moulded into other Bodies, long before it 
attains, which fome perhaps never do, to this ultimate 
Refolution. Nor is there any Danger upon thefe Sup- 
pofitions of falling into equivocal Generation j be- 
caufe the fpecific Semen of one Animal can never 
be moulded into another, and Seeds may differ fpe- 
cifically from one another by many invilible Prin¬ 
ciples totally unknown to us, and unattainable by 
Experiments 5 for we are very certain that the 
Power of Glafles, or Force of any Men/truum we can 
employ, mutt ftiil leave us at an immenfe Diftancc 
from the ultimate Refolution of Bodies, in which 
alone they agree, and are homogeneous. 

Ifay therefore the fpecific Seed of one Animal can 
never give another of a different Species; for, to be this 
fpecific Seed., it mutt have gone through many Changes 
from its firft Origin, and have many Singularities 

peculiar 



C 6 55 3 

peculiar to itfelf, and acquired fince it patted from 
the homogeneous Element, in which all Kinds co¬ 
incide. The a&ive vegetative Force that refides in it 
mud be precife, its Quantity muft be exa&ly propor¬ 
tion’d to the Nature, Solidity, Tenacity, Quantity, 
and Rcfiftance of the ductile Matter it has to wade 
through, if I may fo exprefs my felf j and thefe Com¬ 
binations are very, different in different Subjects, 
Thus much the many Strainers in every animal 
Body, neccffary to extradt this Semen from the Ali¬ 
ment we daily digeft, and to prepare it, feem evi¬ 
dently to imply. Yet is not this, fufficient as it may 
appear to caufe Varieties in the feveral Species of 
Semen , all that is to be confidcr'd: Times and Cir- 
cumflances make Changes in it even during the 
Term of Gcflation. What does not the Foetus then 
undergo? and who can determine the Differences 
between Matrix and Matrix between the Matter 
that is aflimilated into a. Foetus in one Subject, and 
that in another ■, between the fixing Principles, the 
Quantity of Salts, Spirits, &c. in a Parent of one 
Species, and one of another; between the more co¬ 
pious or more limited Affluences of afflmilating 
Matter; and between Times, where even fingle 
Minutes, Inftants, &c. may be of the greateft Con- 
fequence? 1 fee the Whole indeed, but confufedly; 
yet do I fee the Source of a Variety; which, 
boundlefs as it were, if permitted to expatiate at full 
Liberty, is neverthelefs invariably confin’d, by Him 
who made and rules the Univerfc, to a certain de¬ 
terminate Number of Species. Time, A&ion, Sear 
fon, Quantity of Force, Quantity of Rcfiftance, fixing 
Principles, Affluence of aflimilated Matter, Direction, 

6 * and 



1656 ] 

and numberlefs other Variations, arc all employ'd 
for His Purpofes, and modell’d by that Almighty 
Power, which forms and directs the Whole. • 

Thus do thefe Principles, however capable of 
differing Combinations, yet admit only of a limited 
Variation, and never deviate further than is coniift- 
ent with univocal Generation. Monfters, Mules, im¬ 
perfect Foetus’s, and other Inftances of this kind, are 
but rare; and as they can be aferib’d to nothing fo 
properly as to the Obftacles they meet with, or to 
fome accidental infuperablc Rcfiftance in the Mat¬ 
ter of which they are formed, they do at leaft ferve 
to fhew that there is in Nature a real productive 
Force given it at its Creation; and that animal or 
vegetable Productions are not the Confequences of 
pre-exiftent Germs, plaftic Natures, or of the imme¬ 
diate Hand of God himfelf, any more than the rnoft 
regular Operations of the Planetary World. 

§ jo. But to proceed in my Confequences from 
thefe Obfervations, all Naturalifts muft acknowlege, 
that the more compounded the organiz’d Bodies are, 
the lefs Danger there is of equivocal Generation in 
the Production of them ; for thus the immediate 
Principles from which they fpring, and their Cir- 
cumftances during the Time of Geftation, muft be 
much more varied than the more fimple Bodies 
are, and at the fame time be further removed, from 
that univerfal Element into which they may all ulti¬ 
mately be refolved : And even in the loweft Clafs of 
microfcopical Animals, I can truly fay, that 1 never 
yet obferved any others than Productions fpecifically 
determined; the fame Subftances giving the fame 
Plants and Animals, and in the fame uniform Or- 



[ 657 ] 

der and Defcent. Neverthelefs, tho 1 thus fpecifically 
determin'd, no one, that obferves their Origin with 
the fame Care as I have done, will be inclined to 
aferibe it to pre-exiftent Germs: It is therefore pro¬ 
bable, as I juft now advanced, that when we arrive 
at the loweft we can difeover in this Clafs, we are 
yet at an immenfe Remove from the univerfal Source j 
notwithftanding that fome of them are fmail beyond 
Conception, and no lefs fimple in their Motions; 
which argues their Organization as fimple, and feems 
to imply that there are among them, or not at a very 
great Diftance from them, fuch as are only mere 
Machines, without any true Spontaneity. 

I have myfelf feen a vaft Gradation, and fuch a one 
as I have yet but an imperfeft Notion of, in a Courfc 
of continual Obfcrvations made upon Infufions and 
Macerations of all kinds, from the moft compounded 
to the moft fimple; from Animal? of the largeft kind 
to moving Atoms of the leaft; from Motions as flow 
to the moft powerful Magnifier, as the Motion of the 
Minute-Hand of a Watch to Eyes unarm’d; from 
free Progrcflion in all Directions to merely ofcilla- 
tory Balances; which all feem to come to at laft in 
the Courfe of their Decompofition, when they are 
juft upon the Point of difappearing. 

§ 31. Thus thefe Animalcules, if they may be 
call’d indifferently by that Name, manifeftly conftitutc 
a Clafs apart; and their greateft Characteriftic is, 
that they neither are generated, fubfift by Nutri* 
ment, as other Plants and Animals do, or generate 
in the ordinary Way. This is indeed true, if the 
whole Clafs is taken in.one general View : Yetis the 
Head of it united to the Species of the next im- 

6 * 2 mediate 



[ 6 5 8 ] 

mediate Superior. The Bell-Animal, of which I have 
had many from my infufed Su'oftances, and whofc 
Growth I have purfued from its firft Origin, is a Spe¬ 
cies of microfcopical Polype, generating and feed¬ 
ing as other Polypes do, when once itfelf is gene¬ 
rated; tho’its own original Generation is perhaps dif¬ 
ferent from that of the others s for I could never ob¬ 
tain any of the larger Kinds this Way. 1 fay this 
howeverwith fomeReferve; for I will not aflert but 
that fome decay'd Water-Plants decompofing in par¬ 
ticular Circumftances, and their Subfiance exuberate- 
ing, may perhaps, when urged by this vegetative Force, 
give Polypes of every Kind; nay I very much fufpect, 
that feveral of the lowed Kinds of vifible Animals 
may, in due Circumftances, which yet perhaps are 
rare, be recoverable this Way, when the whole Spe¬ 
cies has perifhed in particular Places by fome un¬ 
common Accident. This I the more readily believe, 
from the Reafonablenefs of fome Allowances to be 
made in this refpect ; all which may be permitted, 
and muft have been foreleen by the Great Cre¬ 
ator, without any Danger of Confufion, or an un¬ 
limited Generation of new Species never before pro¬ 
duced : He who made Nature, and fees through the 
whole Machine, well knew its utmoft Force, and 
has conlequently forefeen every Circumftance, and 
limited its Productions accordingly. 

Nor indeed can there be a ftronger Argument 
deriv’d from any Syftem of Generation whatfoever, 
of an All-wife Being, All-powerful, and All-good, 
who gave to Nature its original Force, and now pre¬ 
sides over it, than from the Confideration of an 
exuberating duftile Matter, actuated with a vegeta¬ 
tive 



[ 6 59 ] 

tive Force, limited, tho we know not its exa& 
Bounds, in its fpecific Afcent or Defcent, and ex¬ 
panding itfelf in Directions as certain and determi¬ 
nate, as the Motions of the Plants. 

§32. Thefe Thoughts will appear to be lefs ha¬ 
zarded, if due Attention is given to the Generation 
of the Pafte-Eel. The Royal Society knows it to be 
viviparous 5 confequently perfect in this State, and fuch 
as may continue to generate in the common Way, as 
long as it has an Element and Matter proper for its 
Subliftencej yet is its own original Generation, as 
far as I can learn by Obfervation, as that of all thefe 
microfcopical Animalcules, from a dudtile vegetating 
Matter, the Produce of Wheat-Flour and Water \ 
tho' it undergoes more Changes than others, and lives 
in other Conditions 5 afeending for fome time before 
it enters its chryfilidal or Egg like State, whence it 
comes forth a perfeft Eel. 1 have added a Figure of 
a Group of thefe Eel-Chryfalids, but the Detail of 
their Metamorpholis Ilball referve for my little Elfay, 
and not trouble you now with an Account too cir- 
cumftantiated of every Obfervation I have made 
upon them: Bcftdes that I am not yet throughly fa- 
tisfied in the whole Manner and Procefs of their 
Generation. See Tab. V. Fig. 4. 

§ 33. But now, to obviate every Objcdtion that 
may remain againft the Exiftcnce of this vegetative 
Force, which leems to be the Key to much Know¬ 
ledge, and to remove many Errors j it may be pro¬ 
per to add, that, beltdes ocular Dcmonftration, which 
any Naturahft may have, beftdes the Precautions I 
took, that no fuppofed Germs might either be con¬ 
vey'd through the Air or the Water, or remain ad¬ 
hering 



[ 66o ] 

hcring to the Subftanccs infus'dI have often, for 
thefe Purpofcs, made ufe not only of hot Broth, im¬ 
mediately clofed up in a Phial, but alfo of pure ani¬ 
mal Subftanccs, luch as Urine, Blood, &c. with the 
fame Succefs; and in thefe, I believe, no one will 
fuppofe that Germs, Eggs, or Spawn, arc pre con¬ 
tain'd, if Carets taken to clofe the Phials imme¬ 
diately. 

Nay I have done more? I have, by rcafontng 
confequcntly to my Principles, been direded to the 
Choice of many Experiments, all wbiclyl conflantly 
found to anfwcr my Expcdation: I have thought, for 
inftance, that the more exalted an animal Subftancc 
was, by a certain Degree of Dccompofition, the 
more apt would it be to vegetate in a proper Ma¬ 
trix, and form the Part, of a larger Animal; or, if 
it extravafated, to vegetate into the lcfler; confe¬ 
qucntly, that if I took the milky Juice of germing 
Seeds, or that thick turbid Matter which forms the 
Wing of a Butterfly in its chryfalidal State, thefe 
Matters muft be more exalted than any ordinary 
Subftances, and therefore give me thefe microfco- 
pical Productions fo much the looncr: And in fad, 
I never, in thefe Cafes, fail’d of feeing them within 
the Space of a few Hours, while ordinary Infufions 
did not give them under fcvcral Days. 

Here it will be proper to obferve, that Natu- 
ralifts have thought the Butterfly's Wing pre-cxiftent 
in the Caterpiller, becaufe they difeover’d the firft 
Rudiments of it three or four Days before it enter'd 
the chryfalidal State; but it is then prccifely that 
the Caterpiller firft leaves off eating, tho' before 
extremely voracious; and that probably upon ac¬ 
count 



[ 661 ] 

count of the Revolution it finds in all its Parts, 
while its Forces are otherwife employ’d, and the 
Collection of vegetating ductile Matter it had ac¬ 
quir’d by plentiful Diet, now as plentifully exube¬ 
rates to form the Parts of the Butterfly. Thele 
Truths I am the better acquainted with, becaufe I 
have particularly examin'd all thole Subftances: You 
cannot tear off a Portion of the Butterfly’s Wing, 
even while in the Chryfalid, but you will find it 
in an Embryo-State, and the Matter which extra* 
vafates upon your Object-Glafi, if mixt with a little 
Water to pxcferve its Fluidity, will almoft immedi¬ 
ately vegetate into thefe microfcopical Productions. 
This argues an extreme Activity in it; from Activity 
follows Action, and an EtfeCt, which can be no 
other than the Formation of the Wing it was con¬ 
tain'd in. 

§ 34. Without inftancing in many other Exam¬ 
ples, where, by rcafoning from thefe Principles, I 
was invariably conducted to certain Confequenccs, 
this lafl lufliciently leads to the Nature of animal or 
vegetable Semen. Thefe latter arc Subftances of the 
fame fort, but more exalted, and from thence adapted 
to a prompter Vegetation. Of this kind alfo, but not 
fo exalted, was the gelatinous Subflancc 1 obtain’d by 
common Iniulions. 

The Exaltation however of Matter does not flop 
here; the lower I. purified this new Clals of Beings 
in its Defeent, the lefs was this vegetating Force 
clogg’d with relifting Matter, the fwifter was the 
Motion of the Bodies, and the higher the Degree of 
Exaltation that produc’d them. This inclines me 
to believe, that an animal Subftauce may be exalted 

this 



[ 662 ] 

this way into a Poifon, a Venom, or a contagious 
Vapour. Hence ftagnating Waters are poiionous 
and detrimental} and hence perhaps the vipcrcal 
Venom, or any other, may derive its Force j for 
thefe undoubtedly are all animal Secretions. Hence 
perhaps alfo arife contagious epidemical Diftcmpcrs, 
from a Leaven thrown into tire Blood by Exhala¬ 
tions of this kind. I am the more perfuaded of the 
Truth of this, from the Conlideration of Dr. Mead's 
Obfcrvations upon the Venom of the Viper: And 
fwift moving Bodies, which fubfidc and lhoot into 
Filaments, feem manifcftly to imply all thefe Con- 
lcquences. I had myfelf propos'd lall Summer to 
try the Elfc&s of fome of my mod exalted Infufions, 
by inrtilling them into the Veins of Animals ; but 
as yet 1 have had no Opportunities for thefe Expe¬ 
riments. 

1 might add other plaufiblc Con c&utcs, that 
feem to be the natural Confcqucnccs of thefe Dif- 
coveries, relating to the Origin of Afcarides , Tenia, 
Agaricks , dec. nay, perhaps I could maintain them 
with Arguments that would feem convincing to 
moll Naturalifts; I might even further luppofe, with 
fome Probability, that the mufcular Force, which 
ads againft the interllitial Air in my Friend Dr. 
‘ Parfons’s nr oft ingenious Syrtent, in one Word, 
that all the mechanical Forces of the Body, and the 
Imprcflrons which afted the Soul, may be derived 
from, and aferibed to, this vegetating adivc Force 
when confined: But 1 am tired with extending my 
Views fo far, nor do I at prefent fee an End of the 
Confequcnccs s the Subjcd and Principles appear fo 
bound lc fs. 

§ 5T 



C 663 3 

§ 3f. I fhall conclude therefore with fumming 
up my Syflem in a few Words: I fuppofe all Semen 
of any kind to be an exalted Portion of animal or 
vegetable Matter, fecrcted from the Aliment of every 
generating Subjedt, when it is adult, and no further 
Demand is made for its Increafe and Growth ,* this 
I fuppofe to be endued with a proportionable vege¬ 
tative Force 5 to be various in various Circumftances, 
and heterogeneous in different Subje&s$ but to be 
uniform in its Productions, when it falls into a pro¬ 
per Matrix , where it finds Matter to affimilate, of 
z Quality and in a Quantity fufficient to fora* that 
fpecific Being; whilft in other Circumftances, it will, 
if it extravafates, by the fame vegetating Force, yield 
all the feveral Phenomena I have above taken notice 
of. And thus, if I am not miftaken, I have ob¬ 
tained what I firft intended to make out, that the 
fpermatic Animals are not the efficient Caulc of Ge¬ 
neration, but only a neceffary Confequence of Prim 
ciples in the Semen , which Principles are neceffary 
to Generation. 

Thus have Iconne&ed my Syftem with our Coun¬ 
tryman Dr. Harvey’s Obfervation of that fine Tiffuc, 
or Web-like Expanfion, obferv’d in the Uterus of 
Does, in the Center of which the Embryo Foetus ,, 
invefted with its Amnion and Chorion , was found to 
be lodg'd : For let the Vegetation begin from the 
Semen, and continue to affimilate the affluent Mat¬ 
ter from the Matrix wherein it has taken Root, 
and the Fawn muft come forth like any other fpe¬ 
cific Animal or Plant. 

I (hall only obferve, that Lewenhoeck had difeo* 
ver’d this vegetating Power in the Semen, and had 

7 * like 



[ 664 ] 

like Mr. de Buffon and me, feen the Filaments from 
whence the fpermatic Animals fpring; he even calls 
them Nerves and Arteries; and in oric of his Let¬ 
ters to Mr, Oldenburg fays, that he faw more in 
one Minute than the moft accurate Anatomift could 
difcover by Diffe&ion in a Day: But when he after¬ 
wards chang’d this Syftem, falfe as it was, of Nerves 
and Arteries for another, I believe, as falfe, that of 
pre-exifting Germs in the fpermatic Animals, he ne¬ 
glected to improve this Observation as he might 
have done 5 nay he afterwards took no farther No¬ 
tice of it, but barely to fay, that it was to be ne¬ 
glected. This Remark 1 had from Mr. de Buffon. 

The'jDifFcrence therefore betwixt Mr. Lewenhoeck 
and Dr. Harvey was, that the firft had an Hypothefis 
to maintain, and the latter nothing in View but to 
follow Nature, without trufting too much to the 
firft ‘Phenomena, as I hope 1 fhall appear to have 
done in this my Enquiry. 

I had almoft forget one Remark that coincides 
with my Syftem ; that although animal and vegetable 
Subftances by a chymical Analylis appear to differ, 
they are nevertheless found by a natural Corruption 
to be reducible to the fame Principles. This has 
been obferved long ago by many Naturalifts. 

And now I think I have nothing more to add, 
only that I would be underftood, when I fpeak of 
a productive Force in Nature, &c. to mean only a 
Force, which, tho’ modell’d by the Supreme Cre¬ 
ator, goes no further than the mechanical and ma¬ 
terial Parts of a Man. I well know that we are com- 
pofed of two very different Principles; and no 
one mere philofophical Truth whatsoever prefents 

itfelf 



[ 66s ] 

itfelf to me with more Evidence or Convi&ion than 
the Spirituality of our immortal Soul. All have 
ever allow’d Man in his Origin to be a kind of Plant 
or Vegetable before he is animated; and all rational 
Men have deriv’d his Animation immediately from 
the Fountain of Life, the true Source of all fpiritual 
Subftances. I think I have faid no more» and thus 
only would be taken and explain'd. 

The Principle of Life in other Animals I do not 
examine into, nor do I think it necefiary. If they 
are truly fpontaneous, as they feem to be, they have 
certainly fome Principle diftinCt from Matter, which 
the Great Creator knows when and how to 
unite. 

This Expofttion, Sir, of my Sentiments, I thought 
might be necefiary ; not that I imagined that either 
you, or any of the Gentlemen of the learned Society 
in which you prefide, would think my Principles 
any way tending to Materialifm, from which no one 
can be more diftant or averfe than myfelfj for I 
well knew that I had nothing to apprehend from 
Perfons of fo much J udgment and Difcernment, and 
who could not but clearly fee, that there is really no 
Connection between thofe Principles, rightly ex¬ 
plain’d, and the DoCtrine of the Materials: But 
I was willing to guard againft the Mifapprchenfion 
of others lefs acquainted with Matters of this fort, 
and into whofe Hands this Paper might come, and 
have therefore taken thefc Precautions. 

And now, Sir, I take this Occafion of return¬ 
ing my moft humble Thanks both to yourfelf, and 
to the reft of the Gentlemen of the Royal Society , 
for the Honour I have received, in being cleftcd 
one of its Members, and for which I have not been 

$ abk 



[666 ] 

able as yet to make my perfonal Acknowledgments 
I hope both you and they will accept thefe Thoughts 
favourably, which are humbly fubmitted to impar¬ 
tial Inquiry by the Author, who is, with the utmoft 
Efteem and Refpeft, 

SIR , 

Tour obliged humble Servant, 

Turbervill Needham* 


Explanation of the Figures in Tab. V. 

Fig. i. Reprefents the Origin of the fpermatic Ani¬ 
mals. 

Fig. 2. The Wheat-Infulion. 

Fig. 3. What I have called an Eland in the Wheat- 
Infufion. 

Fig. 4. A Groupe of the Chryfalids of the Pafte- 
Eels. 

Fig. 5. Is a Draught of one of the firft micro- 
fcopical Plants or Zoophytes which 1 difcover’d; 
wherein A ftiews the Figure of the Plant throw¬ 
ing out its Animals, and B the fame again after 
the Animals were difcharged, again putting out a 
new Shoot from the Stem below, through the 
hollow tranfparcnt Head, to form a new Head, 
and produce another Generation. 


VII. Obf, 



yp o o \ o ! nv 

-f xx / ?> ) \ 

O'- yY>\ z / 1 '*} 


V /O- 


FluJao. Ira no. JW 4<) o. TAB. \ 
- _ /J-fitS. 



7 o, \ 
o oy 
b A \ 


r x / 

a . , 6» 1 


W 


✓ h 




'Q v -. 

0 , (I; 


O 

O 

/ »H\ 

1 / QO ° ) 

i >, « 


'w ff: 


•o i 6 


' F'uj. 1 . /O.tfyf. 


.5 f 


v ! y 


A '%. 

by ^ cco,.\ 


&r\ 

j \\fl? Xcfi- / W 

i ) A !v/ o^?\ / /| 

!U;\ <# c \ / | 

I I Y//V v ! i Orijr A v / Pi\ 

ill u - i/ c$OOY < M 

I,/ Y? ,7. x^/v I Ml 


k—< 3 »Kg-X~ • v-— 


vl Ml 

/i i 




O A;ph 5 ^b,s:- 


* V 


Iih^y ] 


r /UrJ. 2 . f. 0 $ n. 


-' X / X! c'T set\ 

4 

>/ >Jc >. r, X' c s>. 


• XSA 

, ^ 


k-\ vPkx.Z'Z 


ip >ri, ff ^ 

m -jm/t $% < 


mY 


’%§f^ 


7 .. iK'dt/i -
