THEORETICAL CHEMISTRY FROM THE STANDPOINT OF AVOGADRO'S RULE AND THERMODYNAMICS
Walther Nernst (1864-1941)
Revised in accordance with the fourth German edition; translated by L. M. Palmer. London: Macmillan and Co., 1904. (First English edition 1895.)
Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier theoreticalchemi00nernrich.
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

THEORETICAL CHEMISTRY

THEOEETICAL  CHEMISTEY

FROM  THE  STANDPOINT  OF

AVOGADRO'S  RULE  &  THERMODYNAMICS

BY

PROF.  WALTEE  NEENST,  PH.D.

OF THE UNIVERSITY OF GOTTINGEN

REVISED  IN  ACCORDANCE  WITH  THE
FOURTH  GERMAN  EDITION

ILontJon
MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LIMITED

NEW  YORK  :  THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY
1904

All  rights  reserved

First  English  Edition  published  in
Second  Edition,  1904.

THIS  BOOK  IS  DEDICATED  TO

PROF.  ALBERT  v.  ETTINGHAUSEN
OF  GRAZ

IN  LOYAL  MEMORY  OF
THE  AUTHOR'S  YEAR  OF  STUDY  AND  TRAVEL

141.373

TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE

THE  first  edition  of  the  German  text  was  translated  by  Prof.  C.  S.
Palmer  of  Colorado,  soon  after  its  publication,  and  long  remained
the  only  English  version  of  Nernst's  valuable  treatise.  Meanwhile,
the  original  has  passed  through  three  further  editions,  has  grown
some  two  hundred  pages  in  bulk,  and  has  gained  in  usefulness  by
repeated  careful  revision.  Under  these  circumstances  the  English
publishers,  in  1903,  asked  me  to  re-edit  their  translation.  In  doing
this,  I  have  translated  all  the  new  matter  contained  in  the  fourth
German  edition,  and  revised  certain  parts  of  the  old,  in  the  endeavour
to  free  the  book  from  any  mistakes  and  ambiguities  that  a  first
edition  is  so  liable  to  contain.  The  bulk  of  the  old  text,  however,
remains  as  it  was.

ROBERT  A.  LEHFELDT.

December,  1904.

VI 1

PREFACE  TO  THE  FOURTH  EDITION

THE  quantity  of  valuable  new  investigations  now  made  in  the  domain
of  theoretical  chemistry,  especially  in  chemical  statics  and  dynamics,
is  so  great  that  no  attempt  at  completeness  of  reference  could  be  made,
as  in  the  first  edition,  and  much  valuable  work  has  been  left  unmen-
tioned,  in  order  to  keep  the  length  of  the  book,  as  seemed  desirable,
approximately  the  same.

In  the  short  interval  since  the  last  edition,  the  most  remarkable
phenomenon  of  radio-activity  has  come  to  be  more  closely  investigated  ;
in  this,  chemical  processes  of  quite  a  different  order  to  those  previously
known,  seem  to  be  dealt  with, — a  matter  of  the  highest  consequence
to  the  theoretical  chemist.  Though  the  phenomena  are  still  very
obscure  I  have  attempted  to  present  in  a  new  chapter,  "  The  Atomistic
Theory  of  Electricity,"  the  development  of  electron  theory,  which  is
more  and  more  seen  to  be  a  powerful  extension  of  atomistic  method.

I  have  to  thank  Dr.  F.  Kriiger  and  Mr.  A.  Siemens  for  their  help
in  correcting  the  proofs.

W.  N.

GOTTINGEN,  November  1903.

IX

PKEFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION

IN  the  five  years  since  the  publication  of  the  first  edition  of  this  bookT
theoretical  chemistry  has  hardly  suffered  any  deep  change,  or  rearrange-
ment in  principle ;  but  the  assiduous  researches  that  have  been  made
have  accumulated  a  great  quantity  of  new  material,  which  the  fruitful
conceptions  of  the  new  theoretical  chemistry  have  put  in  a  clear  light.
Accordingly  I  have  hardly  changed  the  plan  of  the  work  in  re-editing
it,  but  have  attempted  to  weave  the  latest  results  of  experiment  into
the  text,  as  illustrations  of  the  leading  theoretical  conceptions.

W.  N.

GOTTINGEN,  September  1898.

PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  GERMAN  EDITION

THE  following  presentation  of  Theoretical  Chemistry  is  a  development
of  an  "  introduction  "  prepared  by  the  writer  two  years  ago  for  the
Handbuch  der  Anorganischen  Chemie  (Handbook  of  Inorganic  Chemistry),
edited  by  Dr.  0.  Dammer  (vol.  i.  pp.  1  to  358).  In  keeping  with
the  broader  requirements  of  an  independent  text-book  —  and  not
merely  an  introduction  to  a  special  work — it  has  been  considerably
rearranged  and  extended.  It  aims  to  consider  the  very  latest  investi-
gation, and  while  this  requires  no  change  in  the  fundamental  nature
of  the  more  recent  theories,  yet  it  implies  a  surprising  development
of  them.

I  believe  that  at  present  there  has  come  a  period  of  quiet  but
fruitful  toil  for  the  investigator  of  physical  chemistry.  The  ideas  are
not  only  at  hand,  but  they  have  attained  a  certain  maturity.  It  is
fortunate  that  new  thoughts  are  always  fruitful,  in  that  they  are
followed  by  a  period  of  enthusiastic  activity,  and  thus  at  present  we
see  the  powers  of  investigation  of  many  cultured  nations  occupied
with  rare  unanimity  in  the  hearty  and  successful  development  of  the
general  system  of  theoretical  chemistry.

At  such  times  there  is  especial  need  of  a  statement  of  the  guiding
ideas,  which  shall  not  only  give  instruction  to  the  student,  but  which
shall  also  give  advice  to  the  investigator.  As  is  well  known,  this  need
was  completely  satisfied  in  every  respect  by  the  two  most  excellent
treatises  of  Ostwald,  viz.  the  short  Outlines  and  the  larger  Manual
of  General  Chemistry  (Lehrbuch  der  Allgemeinen  Chemie),  the  latter  of
which  has  passed  to  a  new  edition.

Therefore  1  entertained  serious  doubts  as  to  the  advisability  of  a
new  work  on  the  same  subject  from  the  same  point  of  view,  at  least  as
regards  all  the  essential  questions.  But  in  such  a  case  this  adage

xi

xli  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

seemed  to  be  apposite,  viz.  "  When  many  come,  much  comes  "  ;  and
my  scruples  were  finally  completely  removed  by  the  direct  encourage-
ment of  Professor  Ostwald  in  the  preparation  of  this  separate  edition
of  the  introduction  to  Dammer's  Handbook ;  and  I  was  supported  in
this  undertaking  not  only  by  the  editor,  Dr.  Dammer,  but  also  by  the
kindness  of  my  publisher,  Mr.  F.  Enke  [of  Stuttgart].

Of  course  in  a  treatise  on  theoretical  chemistry,  the  different
chapters  of  physics  and  chemistry  must  find  their  place.  And  the
essential  contents  of  this  will  invariably  imply  so  much  of  chemistry
as  shall  be  indispensable  for  the  physical  investigator,  and  so  much  of
physics  as  shall  be  indispensable  for  the  chemical  investigator ;  and  in
all  of  this  the  physicist  must  conduct  himself  as  a  specialist  of  physics,
and  the  chemisi  as  a  specialist  of  chemistry.  Thus  the  development
of  physical  chemistry  as  a  special  branch  of  natural  science  means —
and  I  would  lay  particular  emphasis  on  this — not  so  much  the  shaping
of  a  new  science,  but  rather  the  co-operation  of  two  sciences  which
hitherto  have  been,  on  the  whole,  quite  independent  of  each  other.

In  the  selection  of  the  material  which  has  been  furnished  by  the
physical  or  chemical  investigator,  I  have  not  been  guided  by  the  aim
to  make  this  as  complete  as  possible, — a  task  to  which  I  do  not  feel
equal, — but  I  rather  wish  to  describe  thoroughly,  only  those  experi-
mental data  which  possess  a  universal  significance,  or  which  give
promise  of  achieving  it ;  only  those  hypotheses  which  have  already
proved  themselves  to  be  helpful ;  and  finally,  only  those  applications
capable  of  being  used  systematically,  whether  their  nature  is  that  of  cal-
culation or  of  experiment.  And  this  latter  aim  implies  the  description
and  illustration  of  several  important  pieces  of  apparatus  for  the  labor-
atory. I  attach  great  importance  to  the  incidental  description  of  some
simple  experiments  for  the  lecture-desk  which  I  have  tested  for  several
years  in  my  capacity  as  Decent  of  Physical  Chemistry.

Inasmuch  as,  in  giving  the  science  a  form  which  is  not  rendered
hazy  by  the  accident  of  historical  development,  I  have  primarily  sought
to  represent  it  as  it  appears  at  the  present,  rather  than  as  it  has  been
in  the  past — therefore  of  necessity  the  historical  element  has  been
repressed,  and  this  resulted  in  more  particular  reference  to  the  later
literature.  I  trust  that  this  method  of  treatment  will  not  be  inter-
preted as  implying  any  lack  of  respect  for  those  remarkable  men
who,  by  their  work,  laid  the  very  foundation  on  which  we  build  at
present.

In  working  this  out,  it  continually  became  clearer  to  me  that,  in

PREFACE TO THE FIRST GERMAN EDITION .  X11I

the  theoretical  treatment  of  chemical  processes, — which  constitutes  the
chief  part  of  my  problem,  —  the  most  important  foundations  are :
firstly,  the  Rule  of  Avogadro,  which  seems  to  be  an  almost  inex-
haustible "  horn  of  plenty  "  for  the  molecular  theory ;  and,  secondly,
the  Doctrine  of  Energy,  the  authority  of  which  is  recognised  by  all  the
processes  of  nature.  I  considered  that  this  view  should  be  emphasised
in  the  title  of  my  book.

In  noting  corrections  I  have  been  greatly  aided  by  the  friendly
assistance  of  Dr.  C.  Hohmann.

W.  N.

GOTTINGEN,  April  1893.

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION TO SOME FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES
OF MODERN INVESTIGATION

Empirical  facts  and  their  hypothetical  generalisation,  1.  Measurement,  4.  The
indestructibility  of  matter,  5.  The  transmutability  of  matter,  6.  Simple  and
compound  matter,  6.  The  indestructibility  of  energy,  6.  Measurement  of
energy^  9.  Equations  of  motion  of  a  particle,  12.  The  convertibility  of  energy,
15.  Isothermal  process,  18.  Transfer  of  heat,  19.  Summary  of  the  two  laws,
22.  Analytical  formulation  of  the  maximal  work,  24.  Free  energy,  26.  Con-
ditions of  thermodynamic  equilibrium,  28.  Physical  mixtures  and  chemical
compounds,  29.  The  law  of  constant  and  multiple  proportions,  30.  The  mole-
cular hypothesis,  31.  The  atom  and  the  molecule,  32.  The  table  of  the
elements,  33.  Classification  of  natural  processes,  34.  The  principle  of  arrange-
ment, 35.

BOOK  I
THE UNIVERSAL PROPERTIES OF  MATTER

CHAPTER I

THE  GASEOUS  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION

The  universal  properties  of  gases,  37.  The  laws  of  gases,  38.  The  hypothesis  of
Avogadro,  39.  The  content  of  energy  of  a  gas,  42.  The  specific  heat  of  gases,
42.  The  specific  heat  of  gases  at  very  high  temperatures,  43.  The  dependence
of  the  specific  heat  of  gases  on  the  temperature,  45.  The  thermodynamics
of  gases — first  law,  46.  The  ratio  of  the  specific  heats  of  a  gas,  49.  The
thermodynamics  of  gases — second  law,  52.  The  behaviour  of  gases  at  higher
pressures,  53.

XV

XVi  THEORETICAL CHEMISTRY

CHAPTER II

THE LIQUID STATE OF AGGREGATION

The  general  properties  of  liquids,  56.  Surface  tension,  57.  Vapour  pressure  and
the  heat  of  vaporisation,  58.  The  form  of  the  vapour  pressure  curve,  61.  The
boiling-point,  65.  The  critical  phenomena,  66.

CHAPTER III

THE SOLID STATE OF AGGREGATION

General  properties  of  solid  bodies,  69.  Melting-point  and  pressure,  69.  The  vapour
pressure  of  solid  substances,  72.  The  crystallised  state,  74.  The  fundamentals
of  geometrical  crystallography,  75.  The  classification  of  crystals  according  to
symmetry,  79.  Regular  system,  83.  Hexagonal  system,  83.  Tetragonal
system,  84.  Orthorhombic  system,  85.  Monoclinic  system,  86.  Triclinic
system,  86.  Twinning  and  growths  of  crystals,  87.  The  physical  properties
of  crystals,  88.  The  optical  properties  of  crystals,  90.  The  physical  properties
of  lower  symmetry,  92.  The  determination  of  the  crystallographic  symmetry,
94.  Polymorphism,  95.  Liquid  crystals,  97.  Amorphous  state,  98.

CHAPTER IV

THE PHYSICAL MIXTURE

General  observations,  100.  Gas  mixtures,  100.  The  physical  properties  of  liquid
mixtures,  105.  The  optical  behaviour  of  mixtures,  107.  One-sided  properties,
109.  The  vaporisation  of  mixtures,  110.  The  theory  of  fractional  distillation,
112.  The  thermodynamic  treatment  of  liquid  mixtures,  114.  The  critical
point  of  mixtures,  119.  Isomorphous  mixtures,  J20.  The  physical  properties
of  mixed  crystals,  122.  Fusion  and  solidification  of  mixtures,  123.  The
thermodynamics  of  isomorphous  mixtures,  128.  Adsorption,  129.

CHAPTER V

DILUTE SOLUTIONS

General  remarks,  130.  Osmotic  pressure,  130.  The  direct  measurement  of  the
osmotic  pressure,  132.  Indirect  methods  for  the  measurement  of  osmotic
pressure,  136.  Separation  of  the  pure  solvent  from  the  solution,  136.  Separa-
tion of  the  dissolved  substance  from  the  solution,  144.  The  law  of  osmotic
pressure,  146.  Osmotic  pressure  and  concentration,  146.  Osmotic  pressure
and  temperature,  146.  Osmotic  pressure  and  the  heat  of  dilution,  147.
Osmotic  pressure  and  the  nature  of  the  substance  dissolved,  148.  Osmotic

CONTENTS  XV11

pressure  and  gas  pressure,  148.  The  law  of  absorption  of  Henry  and  Dalton,
153.  The  nature  of  the  solvent,  154.  Molecular  state  of  bodies  in  solution,
155.  Osmotic  pressure  and  hydro-diffusion,  156.  Osmotic  pressure  in  mixture,
159.  Vapour  pressure  of  concentrated  solutions,  164.  Ideal  concentrated
solutions,  166.  The  extent  of  the  domain  of  the  laws  of  solutions,  168.  Solid
solutions,  168.

BOOK  II

ATOM  AND  MOLECULE
CHAPTER I

ATOMIC THEORY

Combining  weight  and  atomic  weight,  172.  The  rule  of  Avogadro,  174.  The  law
of  Dulong  and  Petit,  175.  Isomorphism,  177.  The  periodic  system  of  the
elements,  182.  Physical  properties  of  the  elements,  189.  Melting-point  of
elements  on  the  absolute  scale,  190.  Significance  of  the  periodic  system  in  the
table  of  atomic  weights,  191.  The  spectra  of  the  elements,  193.  Regularities
in  the  distribution  of  the  spectral  lines  of  the  elements,  195.

CHAPTER II

THE KINETIC THEORY OF THE MOLECULE

General  observations,  200.  The  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  201.  The  rule  of  Avo-
gadro, 205.  The  ratio  of  the  specific  heats,  206.  The  mean  length  of  the  free
path,  208.  The  behaviour  of  gases  at  higher  pressures,  210.  The  equation  of
van  der  AVaals,  212.  The  kinetic  theory  of  liquids,  215.  The  reduced  equation
of  condition,  223.  Application  of  the  theory  of  corresponding  states,  224.  The
coexistence  of  liquid  and  vapour,  227.  The  demonstration  by  Young,  230.
The  heat  content  of  compressed  gases  and  liquids,  236.  Critique  of  the  results,
239.  The  kinetic  theory  of  the  solid  state  of  aggregation,  240.  The  kinetic
theory  of  mixtures,  242.  The  kinetic  theory  of  solutions,  243.

CHAPTER III

THE  DETERMINATION  OF  THE  MOLECULAR  WEIGHT

The  molecular  weight  of  gaseous  substances,  247.  Eegnault's  method,  248.  Dumas's
method,  248.  The  Gay-Lussac-Hofmann  method,  249.  Victor  Meyer's  method
by  the  displacement  of  air,  249.  The  determination  of  the  vapour  density  at
very  high  temperatures,  251.  The  determination  of  the  vapour  density  at
diminished  pressure,  254.  Calculation  of  atomic  weight  from  gas  density,  255.
The  determination  of  the  molecular  weight  from  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the

XV111  THEORETICAL CHEMISTRY

dissolved  substance,  256.  The  depression  of  the  freezing-point,  257.  Freezing-
point  of  very  dilute  solutions,  259.  The  lowering  of  the  vapour  pressure,  261.
The  investigation  of  volatile  substances,  265.  The  lowering  of  the  solubility,
266.  The  distribution  of  a  substance  between  two  solvents,  267.  The  role
of  the  solvent,  267.  The  molecular  weight  of  strongly-compressed  gases  and
of  liquids,  269.  Molecular  weight  of  solids,  272.

CHAPTER  IV

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE MOLECULE

Allotropy  and  isomerism,  273.  The  constitution  of  the  molecule,  274.  The
chemical  forces,  275.  The  doctine  of  valence,  277.  The  dualistic  and  the
unitary  view,  279.  The  changeableness  of  chemical  valence,  280.  Molecular
compounds,  282.  The  compounds  of  carbon,  283.  The  peculiarities  of  the
carbon  compounds,  284.  The  methods  for  the  determination  of  the  constitution,
286.  The  benzene  theory,  288.  The  stereochemistry  of  carbon,  291.  Optical
isomerism,  293.  Geometrical  isomerism,  294.  The  stereochemistry  of  nitrogen,
296.

CHAPTER V

PHYSICAL PROPERTIES AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

General  observations,  299.  Specific  volume  and  molecular  volume,  300.  The  density
of  solid  bodies,  304.  The  refractive  power,  304.  The  molecular  refraction  of
organic  compounds,  306.  Dielectric  constants,  313.  Magnetic  rotation  of  the
plane  of  polarisation,  316.  Magnetism,  316.  The  heat  of  combustion,  317.
Regularities  in  the  boiling-points  of  organic  compounds,  321.  The  boiling-point
curves,  325.  The  critical  data,  326.  Heat  of  evaporation,  326.  The  melting-
point,  328.  Internal  friction,  330.  The  natural  rotation  of  the  plane  of
polarisation,  331.  The  decomposition  of  a  mixture  of  optical  isomers,  334.
Quantitative  relations  of  the  rotatory  power,  335.  The  absorption  of  light,  336.
The  theory  of  colouring  substances,  338.  Fluorescence,  340.  Crystal  form,  340.
The  systemisation  of  the  physical  properties,  342.

CHAPTER VI

THE DISSOCIATION OF GASES

Abnormal  vapour  densities,  344.  Dissociation,  345.  The  extent  of  dissociation,  345.
The  physical  conduct  of  dissociated  gases— effusion,  346.  Colour,  347.  Specific
heat,  347.  Thermal  conductivity,  348.  The  condition  of  dissociation,  349.

CHAPTER VII

ELECTROLYTIC DISSOCIATION

Dissociation  in  solutions,  350. Water  solutions,  352. Electrolytic  conduction,  353.
The  free  ions,  355. The  determination  of  the  degree  of  electrolytic  dissociation,

CONTENTS  XIX

357.  Hittorf's  transportation  values  and  Kohlrausch's  law  of  the  independent
migration  of  ions,  360.  The  characteristics  of  electrolytic  dissociation,  364.
The  diffusion  of  electrolytes,  365.  The  friction  of  the  ions,  371.  Other  solvents,
372.  Werner's  theory  of  molecular  compounds,  377.  Incandescent  gases,  378.
Historical  observations,  379.

CHAPTER VIII

THE PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF SALT SOLUTIONS

The  necessity  of  the  additive  relation,  381.  The  density  of  salt  solutions,  381.  The
refractive  power  of  salt  solutions,  383.  Light  absorption  and  colour,  384.  The
natural  power  of  rotation,  386.  Ionic  mobility,  387.  Systematic  resume'  of  the
properties  of  ions,  387.

CHAPTER IX

THE ATOMISTIC THEORY OF ELECTRICITY

General,  390.  Ion  and  electron,  391.  Free  electrons,  392.  Action  of  electrons  on
gases,  394.  Other  methods  of  formation  of  gas  ions,  395.  Mobility  of  the  gas
ions,  396.  Diffusion  of  gas  ions,  397.  Condensation  by  gas  ions,  399.  Posi-
tive and  negative  elements,  399.

CHAPTER X

THE METALLIC STATE

General,  401.  Metallic  solutions,  402.  Metallic  alloys,  404.  Electric  conductivity
of  alloys,  405.  The  theory  of  metallic  conduction,  407.

CHAPTER XI

COLLOIDAL SOLUTIONS

Colloids  and  crystalloids,  408.  Osmotic  pressure,  409.  The  freezing-point  and  the
vapour  pressure,  410.  The  molecular  weight  of  colloids,  411.  Gelatination,
412.  Dialysis,  414.

CHAPTER XII

THE  ABSOLUTE  SIZE  OF  MOLECULES

The  superior  limit,  416.  The  space  occupied  by  molecules,  416.  The  density  of
molecules,  419.  The  size  of  molecules,  420.  The  number  and  weight  of  mole-
cules, 420.  The  electric  charge  of  an  ion,  421.  Determination  of  the  absolute
charge  of  an  ion  by  J.  J.  Thomson,  422.

XX  THEORETICAL CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

THE  TKANSFOKMATION OF  MATTER
(THE DOCTRINE  OF  AFFINITY,  I)

CHAPTER I

THE LAW OF CHEMICAL MASS-ACTION

The  aim  of  the  doctrine  of  affinity,  423,  The  condition  of  chemical  equilibrium,
425.  Reversible  reactions,  426.  The  kinetic  development  of  the  law  of  mass-
action,  428.  The  history  of  the  law  of  mass-action,  432.

CHAPTER II

CHEMICAL STATICS HOMOGENEOUS SYSTEMS

Equilibrium  between  gases,  434.  The  formation  of  hydrogen  iodide,  435.  The
dissociation  phenomena  of  gases,  438.  The  dissociation  of  nitrogen  dioxide,

440.  The  dissociation  of  the  compound  of  hydrochloric  acid  and  methyl  ether,

441.  The  influence  of  indifferent  gases,  442. The  influence  of  an  excess  of  the
dissociation  products, 442. The  frequency  of  dissociation phenomena, 443.
The  decomposition  of  carbon  dioxide,  444. Decomposition  of  water  vapour,  446.
Equilibrium  in  homogeneous  liquid  systems — esteritication,  447. The  influence
of  the  nature  of  the  reacting  components,  449. The  dissociation  of  esters,  450.
Equilibrium  in  solutions,  451. The  distribution  of  hydrochloric  acid  between
alkaloids,  452. Dissociation  in  solutions,  455. Esterification  in  benzene,  456.
Evidence  of  chemical  action  from  the  osmotic  pressure  of  solutions,  458. The
influence  of  the  solvent,  458. The  participation  of  the  solvent  in  the  reaction,
459. Equilibrium  in  solid  systems,  461.

CHAPTER III

CHEMICAL STATICS HETEROGENEOUS SYSTEMS

The  kind  of  heterogeneity,  462.  General  law  regarding  the  influence  of  the  relative
proportions,  462.  Complete  and  heterogeneous  equilibrium,  464.  Phases  of
variable  composition,  466.  Equilibrium  between  a  gaseous  phase  and  a  solid
substance— sublimation,  467.  The  dissociation  of  a  solid  substance  which  pro-
duces only  one  gas,  467.  The  production  of  one  gas  from  several  solid  sub-
stances, 470.  The  dissociation  of  one  solid  substance  which  produces  several
gases,  470.  Reaction  between  any  arbitrary  number  of  gases  and  solid  sub-

CONTENTS  XXI

stances,  473.  Explanation  of  the  preceding  general  case  by  means  of  sublimation
and  dissociation,  474.  The  equilibrium  between  a  liquid  phase  and  solid  sub-
stances—the solubility  of  solid  substances,  475.  Solubility  of  hydrates,  477.
Equilibrium  between  solids  and  solutions,  477.  Several  phases  of  variable  com-
position—the vapour  pressure  of  solutions,  479.  The  law  of  distribution,  481.
The  simultaneous  evaporation  of  the  solvent  and  of  the  dissolved  substances,
481 — the  mutual  solubility  of  liquids,  484.  The  distribution  of  a  substance
between  two  solvents,  485.  Application  of  the  law  of  partition  to  determination
of  chemical  equilibrium,  487.  The  freezing  of  solutions  and  crystallisation  from
solutions,  488.  The  freezing-point  of  dilute  solutions,  489.  The  crystallising
out  of  dissolved  substances,  490.  The  so-called  cryohydrates,  490.  The  equili-
brium between  liquid  and  solid  solutions,  490.  The  most  general  case,  493.
Applications,  494.

CHAPTER IV

CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM IN SALT SOLUTIONS

The  reaction  capacity  of  ions,  496.  Electrolytic  dissociation  and  chemical  nature,
499.  The  strength  of  the  affinity  of  organic  acids,  500.  The  mixture  of  two
electrolytes  containing  the  same  ion,  503.  The  equilibrium  between  any  selected
electrolytes,  507.  Electrolytic  dissociation  of  pure  water,  508.  The  most
general  case  of  homogeneous  equilibrium,  510.  The  distribution  of  one  base
between  two  acids,  511.  The  strength  of  acids  and .bases,  516.  Hydrolytic  dis-
sociation, 519.  The  theory  of  indicators,  521.  The  so-called  ' '  Hydrate  Theory,"
525.  The  mutual  influence  of  the  solubility  of  salts,  526.  Anomalies  due  to
formation  of  complex  ions,  531.  Application  of  the  law  of  mass  action  to
strongly  dissociated  electrolytes,  532.  The  reaction  between  any  number
of  solid  salts  and  their  solution,  533.  Normal  and  abnormal  reactions,  536.
Formation  and  solution  of  precipitates,  538.  Distribution  of  an  electrolyte
between  water  and  a  second  phase,  539.

CHAPTEE V

CHEMICAL KINETICS

General  observations,  541.  The  inversion  of  sugar,  543.  The  catalytic  action  of
hydrogen  ions,  544.  The  catalysis  of  esters,  547.  Formation  of  sulphuretted
hydrogen  from  its  elements,  549.  Unimolecular  reactions,  549.  Bi-molecular
reactions — the  saponification  of  esters,  550.  The  theory  of  saponification,  554.
Further  bi-molecular  reactions,  558.  Tri-  and  multi-molecular  reactions,  559.
The  course  and  the  mechanism  of  a  reaction,  562.  The  reaction-velocity  and
the  constitution,  565.  Catalysis,  566.  Auto-catalysis,  567.  The  progress  of
incomplete  reactions,  568.  Multi-rotation  of  milk  sugar,  572.  Tautomerism,
572.  Complications  in  the  course  of  the  reaction,  574.  The  influence  of  the
medium,  577.  The  kinetics  of  heterogeneous  systems,  579.  The  linear  velocity
of  crystallisation,  582.  The  kinetic  nature  of  physical  and  chemical  equilibrium,
583.

XX11  THEORETICAL CHEMISTRY

BOOK  IV

THE  TRANSFORMATION OF  ENERGY
(THE DOCTRINE  OF  AFFINITY,  II)

CHAPTER I
THERMO-CHEMISTRY  I

THE APPLICATIONS  OF THE FIRST LAW OF HEAT

General  remarks,  586.  Heat  of  reaction,  587.  The  thermo-chemical  method  of
notation,  588.  The  law  of  constant  heat  summation,  591.  The  influence  of
temperature  upon  the  heat  of  reaction,  594.  Thermo-chemical  methods,  594.
Gases  and  solutions,  597.  The  changes  of  the  state  of  aggregation,  597.  The
heat  of  solution,  598.  The  heat  of  formation,  600.  The  heat  of  combustion  of
organic  compounds,  601.  The  thermo-chemistry  of  electrolytes,  603.

CHAPTER II
THERMO-CHEMISTRY  II

TEMPERATURE AND COMPLETE CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM

The  application  of  the  second  law  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat — historical,  608.
Gibbs's  "phase  rule,"  609.  The  point  of  transition,  612.  The  equilibrium
between  the  different  phases  of  water,  613.  The  equilibrium  between  water  and
sulphur  dioxide,  616.  The  hydrates  of  ferric  chloride,  622.  Detection  of
chemical  compounds  by  means  of  melting  curves,  628.  Systems  of  three  com-
ponents, 629.  The  thermodynamics  of  complete  equilibrium,  630.  Condensed
systems,  631.  All otropic  transformation,  633.  The  melting  of  salts  containing
water  of  crystallisation,  635.  The  formation  of  double  salts,  636.  The  double
decomposition  [metathesis]  of  solid  salts,  637.  The  vapour  pressure  and  the
solubility  at  the  temperature  of  transformation,  638.  The  determination  of  the
temperature  of  transformation,  640.

CHAPTER III
THERMO-CHEMISTRY  III

TEMPERATURE AND INCOMPLETE EQUILIBRIUM

Thermodynamics  of  incomplete  equilibrium,  642.  The  reaction  isotherm,  and  the
reaction  isochore,  643.  The  derivation  of  the  reaction  isotherm,  645.  The
derivation  of  the  reaction  isochore,  649.  Vaporisation,  650.  The  dissociation

CONTENTS  XX111

of  solid  substances,  651.  The  dissolving  of  solid  substances,  652.  The  dissocia-
tion of  solid  substances  by  dissolving,  653.  The  dissolving  of  gases,  654.  The
dissociation  of  gaseous  substances,  655.  The  dissociation  of  dissolved  substances,
658.  The  most  general  case,  660.  The  process  of  the  blast  furnace,  662.
The  law  of  the  mutuality  of  phases,  662.  Influence  of  the  extent  of  a
phase,  663.  The  influence  of  the  temperature  and  of  the  pressure  upon  the
state  of  chemical  equilibrium,  664.  Effect  of  non-uniform  pressure,  667.
Thermodynamic  potential,  668.

CHAPTER IV

THERMO-CHEMISTRY  IV

TEMPERATURE AND THE REACTION VELOCITY

The  acceleration  of  chemical  reactions  by  means  of  an  elevation  of  the  temperature,
670.  Non-reversible  decomposition,  671.  The  application  of  thermodynamics,
673.  Explosions  and  combustions,  675.  The  reaction  capacity  of  gases,  677.
Reactivity  of  oxygen,  679.  The  catalytic  action  of  water  vapour,  681.  The
velocity  of  the  transmission  of  explosions,  682.

CHAPTER V
THERMO-CHEMISTRY  V

HEAT  AND  CHEMICAL  ENERGY

The  "Principle  of  maximal  work,"  an  erroneous  interpretation  of  heat  of  reaction,
685.  The  standpoint  of  thermodynamics,  687.  The  standpoint  of  kinetics,
688.  The  results  of  experiments,  688.  The  measure  of  affinity,  691.  Methods
for  the  determination  of  affinity,  693.

CHAPTER VI

ELECTRO-CHEMISTRY I

GENERAL FACTS

The  conveyance  of  electrical  energy,  696.  Electrolytic  conduction,  697.  Electro-
lysis, 698.  The  development  of  electrical  energy  by  chemical  systems,  699.
Special  electro-chemical  reactions,  701.

CHAPTER VII
ELECTRO-CHEMISTRY  II

THERMODYNAMIC THEORY

Electrical  work,  703.  Application  of  the  first  law  of  thermodynamics,  703.  Revers-
ible elements,  706.  Law  of  conversion  of  chemical  energy  into  electrical  energy,

XXIV  THEORETICAL CHEMISTRY

709.  Galvanic  polarisation,  713.  Thermodynamic  calculation  of  electromotive
forces,  713.  Application  of  thermodynamics  to  the  lead  accumulator,  715.
Electromotive  force  and  chemical  equilibrium,  717.  The  galvanic  element  con-
sidered as  a  chemical  system,  718.

CHAPTER VIII

ELECTRO-CHEMISTRY  III

OSMOTIC THEORY

The  mechanism  of  current-production  in  solutions,  720.  The  dissolving  of  metals,
723.  Theory  of  the  production  of  the  galvanic  current,  725.  Concentration
cells,  726.  Normal  and  abnormal  potentials,  730.  Gas  batteries,  731.  Oxida-
tion and  reduction  cells,  731.  Theory  of  electrolysis,  732.  Chemical  application
of  osmotic  theory,  737.  Theory  of  galvanic  polarisation,  740.  General  theory
of  contact  electricity,  740.

CHAPTER IX

PHOTO-CHEMISTRY

The  action  of  light,  743.  Actinometry,  745.  Photo-chemical  extinction,  748.
Photo-chemical  induction,  748.  The  latent  light-action  of  silver  salts,  750.
The  laws  of  photo-chemical  action,  753.  The  theory  of  photo-chemical  action,
735.

INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS . . . 757

INDEX  OF  AUTHORS  765

INTRODUCTION

TO SOME FUNDAMENTAL PKINCIPLES OF
MODEBN INVESTIGATION

Empirical  Facts  and  their  Hypothetical  Generalisation. — As

the  most  common  and  immediate  aim  of  physics  and  chemistry,  we
may  propose  to  answer  as  thoroughly  and  as  simply  as  possible,  and
for  as  many  cases  as  possible,  this  question,  viz.  in  a  given  system
of  limited  dimensions,  what  events  will  transpire,  and  what  will  be
the  condition  of  this  system  after  the  lapse  of  a  definite  time  1  For
the  solution  of  this  problem  it  appears  necessary,  first  of  all,  to  realise
and  to  trace  out  the  history  of  that  system  whose  future  we  would
follow.  With  what  success  this  problem  is  to  be  attacked  depends
upon  the  skill  and  the  resources  of  the  observer,  and  results  will  grow
with  the  art  of  experimentation.

But  the  unlimited  variety  of  the  systems  occurring  in  nature  to
interest  us  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  the  unlimited  pains
which  human  endeavour  must  apply  to  the  explanatory  investigation
of  any  one  of  the  complex  and  changeable  systems,  these  difficulties
would  frighten  back  the  discouraged  student  from  a  systematic  in-
vestigation of  natural  phenomena,  were  there  not  furnished  another
assistance,  in  addition  to  the  immediate  impressions  of  the  senses.
This  assistance  is  the  theoretical  realisation  of  the  experiences
derived  from  different  systems,  and  consists  primarily  and  solely  in
this,  viz.  that  by  means  of  a  conclusion  of  analogy  the  perceptions
obtained  from  one  system  may  be  transferred  to  another.  If  we  have
studied  the  case  of  the  falling  of  a  heavy  body  at  one  point  of  the
earth's  surface,  then  it  is  at  once  possible  to  transfer  some  of  the
observed  phenomena  to  other  systems ;  for  example,  to  the  falling  of
a  heavy  body  at  other  points  of  the  earth's  surface.  The  successful
scrutiny  of  the  student  of  nature  reveals  itself  in  finding  out  that
which  phenomena,  apparently  very  diverse,  have  in  common,  and  the

B

2  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

results  are  the  more  brilliant,  as  the  parallelised  phenomena  appear  at
the  outset  more  diverse.

The  transference  of  observations  from  one  case  to  another  is
naturally  at  first  attended  with  uncertainty,  but  with  the  repeated
corroboration  of  the  experiences  in  question,  there  follows  an  ever-
growing credibility,  until  this  transference  finally  attains  to  the  rank
of  an  empirical  law  of  nature.  The  discovery  of  such  a  law — as,  for
example,  that  which  permits  the  calculation  of  the  specific  heat  of
solid  compounds,  from  certain  numerical  coefficients  of  the  elements,
viz.  the  so-called  atomic -heats — invariably  indicates  great  and  un-
doubted progress,  as  it  embodies  many  empirical  facts  and  Callows  the
anticipation  of  many  new  ones  previously  unknown.

The  history  of  the  exact  sciences  teaches  us  that  we  may  discover
new  laws  of  nature  in  two  essentially  different  ways,  one  of  which
may  be  designated  as  the  empirical,  the  other  as  the  theoretical.
Thus  in  one  way  by  suitable  observations,  one  collects  abundant
material,  capable  wherever  possible  of  mathematical  expression,  con-
cerning the  phenomena  between  which  he  suspects  a  connection ;  and
then  by  a  repeated  and  purely  empirical  grouping  of  the  data  so
obtained,  he  seeks  to  approach  the  desired  goal :  in  this  way,  for
example,  were  found  certain  relations  between  the  properties  of  the  ele-
ments and  their  atomic  weights.  The  second  way,  on  the  other  hand,
leads  from  suggested  conceptions  regarding  the  nature  of  certain
phenomena,  through  pure  speculation  to  new  information,  the  cor-
rectness of  which  must  be  determined  by  subsequent  research ;  thus
by  kinetic  considerations  of  the  combination  and  dissociation  of
substances  reacting  on  each  other,  the  law  of  chemical  mass  action
was  discovered.

The  first  of  these  two  methods,  the  empirical,  can  be  proposed  in
all  cases,  and  will  invariably  lead,  after  work  which  indeed  is  very
painstaking,  to  definite  results.  As  regards  the  value  of  a  law  of
nature  so  won,  in  the  first  place  its  applicability  will  be  authoritative,
and  the  esteem  which  men  render  it  will  be  so  much  the  greater,  as
the  natural  phenomena  concerning  which  the  law  affords  information
are  more  numerous  and  varied.  Therefore,  to  offer  what  is  un-
questionably the  most  brilliant  example  of  a  law  of  nature  empirically
proven,  viz.  the  doctrines  of  thermodynamics,  these  are  applicable  to
every  occurrence  which  we  see  transpiring  in  nature,  and  therefore
demand  attention  in  the  scientific  investigation  of  every  *  particular
natural  phenomenon.  On  the  other  hand,  to  be  sure,  the  com-
prehension of  such  a  far-reaching  law  of  nature  will  be  the  more
difficult,  and  its  treatment  will  require  more  practice,  as  it  is  more
universal,  and  in  the  given  cases,  tke  difficulties  of  a  correct  and
complete  application  to  a  particular  phenomenon  are  commonly  very
great ;  and  though  the  successful  transference  of  universal  principles
to  special  cases  possesses  undoubted  scientific  significance,  yet  the

INTRODUCTION  3

result  so  obtained  in  utilising  a  universal  principle  may  offer  nothing
new.

Although  this  purely  inductive  method  has  always  had,  and  will
always  have  great  consequence  for  the  advancement  of  the  natural
sciences,  yet  we  undoubtedly  penetrate  more  deeply  into  the  nature
of  the  phenomena  considered,  when  by  means  of  the  second  way,  viz.
on  the  basis  of  suggested  conceptions  and  their  subsequent  realisation,
we  arrive  at  new  laws  of  nature ;  and  therefore  this  latter  way
appears  the  more  fascinating.  Obviously  it  is  only  by  the  fortunate
choice  of  conceptions,  fundamental  in  theoretical  considerations,
that  we  can  arrive  at  safe  conclusions.  But  now,  according  to  the
nature  of  the  case,  it  is  commonly  true  that  we  cannot  subject  these
fundamental  conceptions  to  the  direct  test  of  experiment,  in  order  to
determine  their  value  or  worthlessness  ;  and  the  investigator  who
rashly  works  in  this  way,  is  continually  in  danger  of  being  led  astray
by  the  ignis-fatttm  of  principles  unfortunately  chosen.

Conceptions  of  this  sort,  incapable  of  direct  proof  by  experiment,
are  called  hypotheses  :  as,  for  instance,  the  assumption  of  a  space-per-
vading luminiferous  ether  which,  as  though  itself  of  imponderable  mass,
avoids  our  senses  which  are  identified  with  matter ;  or  the  assumption
that  all  matter  consists  of  very  small  but  not  infinitesimal  particles,
incapable  of  further  subdivision,  and  which,  on  account  of  their  small-
ness,  are  directly  intangible  to  the  senses.  The  introduction  of  these
hypotheses,  as  above  observed,  is  necessitated  in  order  to  obtain  a
deeper  knowledge  of  natural  phenomena,  which  in  turn  leads  to  new
and  legitimate  results.  These  are  accessible  to  experiment,  and  good
results  prove,  not  the  correctness  of  the  hypothesis  itself  indeed,  but
its  utility;  while  a  miscarriage  shows  beyond  a  doubt  not  only  the
unsuitableness,  but  also  the  incorrectness  of  the  conceptions  from  which
we  have  started.

In  suitable  ways  the  hypothesis  is  a  very  important  assistance  to
science ;  it  has  no  self-interest  at  all,  at  least  not  for  the  student  of
the  exact  sciences,  but  must  rather  adduce  proof  for  its  own  right  of
existence,  in  that  like  a  bridge  it  unites  known  empirical  facts  with  one
another,  or  it  brings  us  to  new  ones.  The  advantage  of  a  good
hypothesis  consists  essentially  in  deepening  and  broadening  our  know-
ledge of  natural  phenomena,  i.e.  in  doing  the  same  as  an  empirical  law
of  nature.  That  the  human  mind  has  turned  with  predilection  at  all
times,  though  in  different  degrees,  to  the  elaboration  of  hypotheses,  is
to  be^ascribed  to  the  circumstance  that  the  mental  satisfaction  afforded
in  finding  a  new  law  of  nature  is  greater  when  it  is  inferred  deductively
from  universal  generalisations,  than  when  inferred  inductively  from
knowledge  tediously  acquired.

We  may  say  then  that  the  speculative  activity  of  the  investigator
must  be  directed,  not  only  to  observation  and  measurement  of  pheno-
mena, but  to  the  discovery  of  the  most  general  laws  and  the  most

4  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

useful  hypotheses.  When  these  theorems  are  put  into  words  or
formulae  others  than  the  discoverer  can  take  part  in  testing  them ;
and  any  really  sound  new  theorem  brings  the  power  of  foretelling  a
whole  sheaf  of  detail.  "  He  who  learns  the  law  of  phenomena  wins
not  only  learning,  but  the  power  of  entering  into  the  course  of  nature
and  of  working  on  it  further  according  to  his  will  and  need.  He  wins
insight  into  the  future  course  of  these  phenomena.  He  wins  indeed
faculties  that  in  superstitious  times  were  looked  for  in  prophets  and
magicians"  (Helmholtz,  Goethe  Lecture,  1892).

At  present  we  possess  some  empirical  laws  and  hypotheses  which
have  the  widest  application  in  every  branch  of  natural  science ;  these,
accordingly,  deserve  a  preliminary  treatment  in  a  detailed  didactic
manner,  and  demand  a  special  consideration  in  showing  the  present
condition  of  theoretical  chemistry.  The  law  of  the  indestructibility  of
matter  was  first  clearly  demonstrated  by  chemical  investigation.  The
law  of  the  indestructibility  of  energy  has  called  into  being  a  special
branch  of  chemistry,  viz.  thermochemistry ;  and  the  fruitfulness  of  the
law  of  the  convertibility  of  heat  into  external  work  has  perhaps  never
had  a  more  brilliant  illustration  than  in  its  application  to  chemical
processes.  Finally,  the  atomic  and  molecular  hypotheses  appear  to
be  indispensable  for  a  comprehension  of  the  nature  of  chemical
compounds.

Measurement. — It  must  be  the  constant  endeavour  of  the  in-
vestigator to  give  his  observations  a  quantitative  form.  A  description
of  phenomena  is  usually  unintelligible  and  misleading,  repetition  of
observations  is  made  greatly  more  difficult,  when  data  as  to  the
magnitudes  concerned  are  not  given.  For  didactic  treatment  of
natural  phenomena,  reference  to  quantitative  relations  is  equally
indispensable.

The  choice  of  units  is  arbitrary ;  various  practical  and  historical
accidents  have  led  to  the  fundamental  units  of  length,  time,  mass,  arid
temperature.  Similarly  other  quantities  that  arise  in  our  growing
knowledge  of  nature  give  occasion  for  new  units,  many  of  which  are
in  use;  for  example,  the  "atmosphere,"  "candle-power,"  horse-power,"
calorie,  ete.

It  was  consequently  a  great  advance  when  Gauss  (1832)  and  Weber
(1852)  showed  in  the  case  of  magnetic  and  electric  units  that  this
arbitrariness  could  be,  if  not  quite  done  away  with,  at  least  much
restricted.  Their  method  was  to  use  the  laws  of  nature  to  define  new
units.

Thus  instead  of  comparing  electric  currents  in  any  arbitrary  way,
and  so  restricting  themselves  to  relative  measurements,  they  made  use
of  the  electrodynamic  action  between  currents  to  refer  current  strength
to  the  fundamental  units,  and  denned  the  unit  current  absolutely  as
such  that  two  portions,  each  1  cm.  long,  and  at  a  great  distance  L

INTRODUCTION  5

apart  on  the  same  axis,  exercise  a  force  1/L2.  The  unit  of  resistance
thus  follows  immediately  as  that  in  which  unit  current  produces  in
unit  time  an  amount  of  heat  equivalent  to  the  unit  of  work;  and
electromotive  force  is  denned  by  means  of  Ohm's  law,  so  that  the
potential  difference  between  the  ends  of  a  conductor  of  unit  resistance
is  unity,  when  unit  current  flows  through  it.1

This  method  of  referring  new  units  to  old,  and  comparing  new
quantities  by  reference  to  those  previously  known,  is  not  free  from
the  arbitrary  ;  in  the  foregoing  case,  the  unit  of  current  might  equally
well  be  denned  by  means  of  elements  of  a  different  shape  or  position ;
or,  as  Gauss  and  Weber  pointed  out,  electrostatic  forces  instead  of
electrodynamic  might  be  made  the  basis  of  the  system  of  measurement.
Still  the  arbitrariness  is  much  reduced  by  the  principle  of  Gauss  and
Weber.  But  it  is  even  more  important  that  the  absolute  system  does
away  with  the  numerical  factor  in  the  expression  of  many  laws  of
nature,  so  that  they  assume  a  simpler  form ;  thus  this  system,  like  a
good  theorem,  gives  the  physicist  a  quantity  of  detailed  knowledge  of
the  art  of  measurement,  and  of  the  most  varie,d  character.

The  four  fundamental  units  so  far  generally  used,  and  mentioned
above,  are  not  necessary.  Mass  may  be  referred  to  length  and  time
by  means  of  Newton's  law  of  gravitation  (Maxwell) :  The  gas  equation
pv  =  KT  may  by  putting  R  =  1  be  used  to  define  temperature  in
mechanical  measure,  as  a  quantity  of  energy.  For  various  reasons
such  definitions  are  not  convenient,  at  least  at  the  present  time,  and
it  will  be  well  to  wait  for  the  discovery  of  new  laws  of  nature  before
reducing  the  number  of  fundamental  units.  The  latter  should  of
course  be  so  chosen  that  they  can  be  as  accurately  measured  as  possible ;
this  condition  is  satisfied  by  length,  mass,  time,  and  temperature  to  a
high  degree,  but  not  by  energy,  which  for  that  reason  is  not  acceptable
as  a  fundamental  unit.

The  Indestructibility  of  Matter. — Numerous  investigations
have  shown  that  neither  by  physical  change  of  a  substance,  as,  for
example,  by  pressure,  heating,  magnetisation,  etc.,  nor  by  chemical
decomposition,  does  there  occur  a  variation  of  its  mass,  as  measured
by  the  attraction  of  the  earth  (Lavoisier).  Innumerable  chemical
analyses  and  syntheses  speak  for  the  correctness  of  this  law ;  in  spite
of  the  mighty  chemical  processes  occurring  in  the  sun,  its  attraction  of
the  planets  remains  unchanged  —  an  extraordinarily  sharp  proof  that
in  these  processes  the  total  mass  of  the  sun  itself  remains  unchanged.

The  question  whether  the  weight  of  a  product  of  reaction  is  equal
to  that  of  the  reacting  bodies  has  lately  been  tested  by  H.  Landolt,
with  great  accuracy  (Ber.  d.  d.  chem.  Ges.  [1893],  26.  1820;  Zeitsch.
f.phys.  Chem.  [1893],  12.  1).  It  appeared  that  in  the  cases  investi-
gated the  change  of  weight  due  to  chemical  reaction  was  at  most  a
1  Further  details  in  F.  Kolilrausch,  Leitfaden  derjorakt.  Physik,  Anhang.

6  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

millionth part,  probably much less, and in  no case was certainly
proved  at  all.

The  Transmutability  of  Matter. — The  properties  of  a  sub-
stance vary  with  the  external  circumstances  under  which  we  study  it ;
but,  nevertheless,  for  a  slight  change  of  external  conditions  (especially
of  pressure  and  temperature)  there  corresponds  only  a  slight  change
in  the  physical  properties  of  a  substance.  On  the  other  hand,  if
we  bring  together  different  substances,  as,  for  example,  sugar  and
water,  or  sulphur  and  iron,  even  when  the  same  external  conditions
are  maintained,  there  commonly  occurs  a  deep-seated  change  in  their
properties,  producing  substances  which  on  comparison  with  the  ori-
ginal are  very  different  in  many  respects.  Thus  it  is  possible  for
the  same  substance  under  the  same  external  conditions  to  assume
entirely  different  external  properties  :  the  substance  is  convertible  into
another.

But  according  to  our  experiments  hitherto,  the  convertibility  of
matter  is  limited  to  certain  conditions.  The  law  of  the  indestructi-
bility of  matter  furnishes  the  first  limitation,  viz.  that  in  any  event,
this  change  in  physical  property  concerns  only  identical  masses  of  the
substances  [i.e.  that  in  the  change  there  is  neither  gain  nor  loss
of  mass].  Further  experience  gained  in  this  direction, — the  result
of  a  vast  amount  of  painstaking  work  of  the  chemical  laboratory,
from  the  attempts  of  the  alchemists  to  change  base  metals  into
gold,  to  the  wonderful  syntheses  performed  by  our  organic  chemists  of
the  present, — this  experience  has  brought  the  further  knowledge  that,
in  general,  even  identical  masses  of  substances  essentially  different  are
not  convertible  into  each  other.

Simple  and  Compound  Matter. — Innumerable  investigations,
which  have  had  for  their  object,  on  the  one  hand,  by  chemical  analysis,
to  reduce  compound  matter  into  simpler,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  by
chemical  synthesis,  to  bring  together  different  substances  to  make  a  new
one,  have  led  to  the  conviction  that,  in  decomposing  the  substances
occurring  in  nature,  one  always  comes  to  a  number  of  substances  incap-
able of  further  decomposition,  the  so-called  "ground-stuffs"  or  elements;
of  these  we  can  thus  far  isolate  about  seventy.  Every  attempt  at  the
further  decomposition  of  these  "  ground- stuffs "  has  thus  far  been
fruitless ;  but  from  these  ground-stuffs "  can  be  made  synthetically
all  the  substances  collectively  known  to  us.  Only  those  substances
are  convertible  into  each  other  which  contain  the  same  elements,  and
indeed  each  element  in  the  same  proportion.

The  Indestructibility  of  Energy.  (The  first  law  of  thermo-
dynamics).— Many  fruitless  attempts  to  find  a  perpetuum  mobile — i.e.  a
machine  which  of  itself  is  able  to  perform  external  work  continuously,
and  to  an  unlimited  degree, — have  finally  led  to  the  conviction  that

INTRODUCTION  7

such  a  thing  is  impossible,  and  that  the  fundamental  notion  of  making
such  a  machine  is  in  opposition  to  some  law  of  nature.  This  law  of
nature  is  stated  in  the  following  way : — If  one  subjects  any  selected
system  to  a  reversible  process,  i.e.  if  he  allows  any  changes  whatsoever
to  occur  so  that  finally  it  shall  return  to  its  original  condition,  then  the
external  work  A,  performed  by  the  system  during  the  reversible  process,
is  proportional  to  the  amount  of  heat,  W,  absorbed  at  the  same  time,  i.e.

A-JW. . . . . (a)

The  coefficient  J,  the  mechanical  equivalent  of  heat,  is  independent  of  the
nature  of  the  system  selected,  and  its  numerical  value  varies  only  with  the
scale  of  measurement  employed  to  determine  the  amount  of  heat  and
external  work.

If  any  system  whatever  is  subjected  to  any  desired  changes,  these
are,  in  general,  identified  with  the  following  changes  in  energy  :  firstly,
a  certain  amount  of  heat  is  either  absorbed  or  given  out ;  secondly,  a
certain  amount  of  external  work  is  either  performed  by  the  system  or
is  performed  against  it ;  thirdly,  the  internal  energy  of  the  system  will
either  diminish  or  increase.  In  general  in  any  event  the  diminution
of  the  internal  energy  U  must  be  equal  to  the  external  work  A  accom-
plished by  the  system,  minus  the  amount  of  heat  Q  absorbed  :  i.e.  the
following  relation  exists —

U  =  A-Q . .,.,,  _,.: (b)

In  this  equation  all  the  quantities  must  be  expressed  in  terms  of
the  same  unit  of  energy,  e.g.  heat  must  be  put  into  work-units.

Of  course  each  of  these  three  quantities  may  be  negative :  thus
when  by  the  changes  there  occurs  a  development  of  heat  Q  is  negative,
when  there  occurs  an  increase  of  internal  energy  U  is  negative,  and  when
there  occurs  an  introduction  of  external  work  A  is  negative.  When
the  system  considered  consists  of  substances  capable  of  reaction,  and
when  the  change  is  a  chemical  decomposition,  then  respectively  -  Q
signifies  the  heat  of  reaction,  U  the  change  of  the  substances'  internal
energy  occasioned  by  the  decomposition,  and  A  the  external  work  per-
formed by  the  reaction,  and  which  consists  in  overcoming  the  external
pressure,  and,  as  above,  is  positive  when  the  reaction  is  accompanied  by
an  increase  of  volume  of  the  system,  but  negative  when  accompanied  by  a
diminution  of  volume.  When,  as  often  happens,  the  external  work  is
negligibly  small,  U  is  equal  to  the  heat  evolved  in  the  reaction.

If  we  bring  a  system  that  has  suffered  any  change  back  to  its
original  state,  the  work  done  by  the  system  is,  according  to  equation
(a),  equal  to  the  heat  supplied.  Hence  by  (b)  U  must  be  zero,  or  the
system  possesses  the  same  content  of  energy  as  before  the  change;
the  energy  contained  at  any  moment  is  therefore  completely  de-
termined by  the  state  of  the  system  at  that  moment.

8  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

U  must  therefore  be  a  single  valued  function  of  the  variables
characterising  the  system;  and  dU  be  capable  of  being  put  in  the
form  of  a  complete  differential.  If,  for  example,  the  only  external  work
done  is  against  an  external  pressure,  the  system  is  in  general  completely
defined  by  the  temperature  T  and  volume  v,  and  we  may  put

As  already  stated,  equation  (b)  is  applicable  to  every  occurrence  ;
for  it  is  the  direct  analytical  expression  of  the  law  of  the  conservation
of  energy.  A  change  of  the  internal  energy,  or,  as  also  designated,
"  the  total  energy  "  of  a  system  can  occur  in  very  many  ways  ;  as
partly  by  a  simple  change  of  temperature,  partly  by  isothermic  changes
of  condition,  and  partly  by  the  two  together.  In  the  first  case,  the
change  of  energy,  which  is  usually  determined  easily  and  exactly,  is
measured  by  the  product  of  the  heat  capacity  of  the  system  and  the
change  of  temperature  ;  in  the  second  case,  by  a  certain  quantity  of
energy  (as  the  latent  heat,  heat  of  reaction,  and  the  like),  +  the  external
work  ;  the  third  case,  finally,  can  always  be  ascribed  to  the  first  two
cases,  as  the  following  consideration  shows  :  —

Let  a  system  suffer  any  desired  change,  and  at  the  same  time  let
its  temperature  change  from  T  to  T  +  t.  Now,  let  us  think  of  this
process  as  conducted  in  the  two  following  ways  :  in  the  first  way,  the
process  is  finished  at  constant  temperature  T,  whereby  the  change  of
energy  amounts  to  UT,  and  then  the  system  is  warmed  to  T  +  1,
whereby  it  needs  the  introduction  of  Kt  calories,  if  K  denotes  the  heat
capacity  of  the  system  after  it  has  suffered  the  change  ;  in  the  second
way,  the  system  is  warmed  at  once  from  T  to  T  +  1,  whereby  it  needs
an  introduction  of  K0t  calories  of  heat,  if  K0  denotes  the  initial  heat
capacity,  and  after  this,  the  process  is  finished  which  is  associated  with
a  change  of  energy  amounting  to  UT+t-  In  both  ways,  we  pass  from
the  same  initial  to  the  same  final  condition  ;  then,  according  to  the
law  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  the  changes  of  energy  in  both  cases
must  be  equal  :  in  the  first  case,  the  diminution  of  total  energy
amounts  to  UT  -  Kt,  in  the  second,  to  UT+t  -  K0t,  and  therefore  we
have  the  following  equation  —

UT  -  Kt  =  UT+t  ~  K0t,
or

UT+t-UT

The  right-hand  expression  is  the  increase  in  the  energy  change
per  degree  rise  of  temperature,  and  for  small  temperature  differences

may  be written ;  this,  according  to  the  above  law,  is  equal  to

INTRODUCTION  9

the  difference  between  the  thermal  capacities  of  the  system  before  and
after  the  change.  If,  for  example,  we  consider  the  process  of  fusion,
the  proposition  given  above  declares  that  the  heat  of  fusion  of  one
gram  of  a  solid  substance  increases  as  much  for  every  degree  of
temperature  elevation  as  the  specific  heat  c,  of  the  fused  substance,
is  greater  than  that  c0,  of  the  solid.

If  a  homogeneous  substance  be  heated  through  dT,  at  constant
pressure,  the  heat  required  is  cpdT,  where  cp  means  the  thermal
capacity  at  constant  pressure  ;  the  process  may,  however,  be  conducted
in  this  way  :  raise  the  temperature  through  dT  at  constant  volume,
with  absorption  of  heat  cvdT  (cv  =  thermal  capacity  at  constant
volume),  then  allow  it  to  expand  isothermally  by  the  amount  dv,  for

which  the  quantity -  w-dv  +  pdv  will  be  required. Put  dv  equal

to  the  expansion  that  would  be  caused  by  rise  of  temperature  dT  at
constant  pressure,  and  we  arrive  in  each  case  at  the  same  final,  from
the  same  initial  state,  so  that  the  quantities  of  heat  absorbed  must  be
the  same —

$

or

The  law  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  above  all  other  laws,  has
introduced  a  new  epoch  of  investigation  of  nature ;  it  was  clearly
stated  for  the  first  time  by  Julius  Robert  Mayer  (1842),  but  was  first
recognised  in  its  full  significance,  and  in  its  legitimate  employment
was  first  applied  to  the  most  various  phenomena,  by  Hermann  von
Helmholtz,  in  his  paper  "On  the  Conservation  of  Force,"  1847.1  It
received  its  first  quantitative  confirmation  by  the  fundamental
investigation  of  Joule  (1850)  on  the  conversion  of  work  into  heat,
which  in  turn  led  to  the  determination  of  the  mechanical  equivalent
of  heat.

The  share  taken  by  these  investigators  in  the  common  work  is
well  characterised  by  Mach  (Prinzipien  der  JParmetheorie,  Leipzig,
1896,  p.  268):  "Mayer  brought  out  clearly  the  dependence  on  law,
and  showed  its  applicability  to  all  subjects.  To  Helmholtz  is  due
complete  critical  working  out  in  detail,  and  the  relation  to  previous
knowledge.  Joule  introduced  the  new  method  and  conception,  in  the
most  varied  manner,  into  the  region  of  quantitative  experiment."

Measurement  of  Energy. — Since  we  shall  have  much  to  do
with  energy,  some  special  remarks  on  its  measurement  may  be  in

1  Ostwakl's  Klassiker,  No.  1. Leipzig,  1889. Ueber  die  Erhattung  der  Kraft

cpdT  =  cvdT  +  (p-^)dv,

9U\3v

10  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

place  here.  The  absolute  system  gives  as  unit  the  work  that  is  done  in
moving  the  point  of  application  of  unit  force  throughout  1  cm.  The
unit  force  called  the  dyne  is  that  which  in  one  second  gives  to  one
gram  the  unit  velocity  (1  cm./sec.  called  "eel"  from  celeritas)  ;  it  is,

moreover,  nearly  the  weight  of  a  milligram  (more  exactly  ^  gm.
in  middle  latitudes).  The  corresponding  unit  of  work  is  called  the

"erg"  (c/oyov),  and  is  of  course  equal  to  the  kinetic  energy ^-v2j  of

two  grams  moving  with  a  speed  of  1  eel.

This  unit  of  work  is  often  inconveniently  small,  and  for  a  long
time  past  other  units,  suited  to  particular  purposes,  have  been  in  use.
The  "  kilogrammeter  "  is  used  in  technology,  i.e.  the  work  done  in
lifting  one  kilogram  through  one  meter,  the  unit  of  length  being  here
taken  as  the  meter,  and  that  of  force  as  the  weight  of  a  kilo.  But  as
work  can  be  done  in  increasing  a  volume  against  pressure,  or  causing
electricity  to  flow  against  a  difference  of  potential,  units  of  work  are
suggested  for  such  cases  in  the  form  of  products  of  pressure  by  volume,
and  quantity  of  electricity  by  potential.  If,  as  is  customary  in
scientific  calculations,  the  C.G.S.  system  is  adhered  to,  the  unit  of
work  is  of  course  always  the  same  ;  but  if,  as  we  shall  occasionally  do
for  clearness,  the  conventional  measures  are  used,  the  work  unit  will
of  course  be  different  in  different  cases.

The  unit  of  heat  is  determined  in  principle  by  the  law  of  conserva-
tion of  energy  as  being  equivalent  to  the  unit  of  work.  But  here
also  for  practical  reasons  the  reduction  is  often  avoided,  and  a  special
heat  unit,  in  closer  connection  with  the  methods  of  measurement,
adopted  ;  as  such  we  shall  always  use  the  gram  calorie  (cal.),  i.e.
the  heat  required  to  raise  one  gram  of  water  through  1°  on  the  air
thermometer  scale.1  But  as  the  specific  heat  of  water  is  appreciably
variable,  it  is  necessary  to  complete  this  definition  by  stating  the
temperature  of  the  water.  Now,  by  far  the  most  calorimetric  measure-
ments, especially  in  thermochemistry,  are  made  by  observing  the  rise
of  temperature  produced  in  water  at  atmospheric  temperature  by  the
heat  to  be  measured  ;  so  that  it  is  best  for  our  purposes  to  choose  as
unit  that  quantity  of  heat  which  will  raise  one  gram  of  water  at  15°
through  1°  Cels.  ;  and  between  15°  and  20°  the  specific  heat  of  water
may  for  most  purposes  be  regarded  as  constant.

Besides  the  calorie  given  above,  there  are  also  the  so-called  "  mean
calorie,"  i.e.  -j-J^-  of  the  quantity  of  heat  which  is  necessary  to  warm
1  g.  of  water  from  0°  to  100°;  the  so-called  "zero-calorie,"  i.e.  the
quantity  of  heat  which  is  necessary  to  raise  1  g.  of  water  from  0°  to

1  For  reduction  of  a  Jena  glass  mercury  thermometer  to  the  air  scale,  see  Wiebe,
Z.  S.f.  analyt.  Chem.,  SO.  1  ;  Chem.  CentralbL,  1891,  1.  249  ;  Z.  S.f.  Instrumentenk.,
10.  233,  435  (1890).

INTRODUCTION

11

1° ;  and  also  a  number  of  other  calories  which  refer  to  temperatures
arbitrarily  or  casually  chosen.1

It  appears  that  the  variation  of  the  specific  heat  of  water  has  been
determined  recently  with  satisfactory  exactness,  so  that  different
calories  can  be  compared  with  one  another ;  and  since  we  must
frequently  calculate  the  reduction  of  the  valuation  of  calorimetric
measurements  of  very  different  observers,  there  are  arranged  in  the
following  table  the  recent  results  of  some  observers  of  the  specific  heat
of  water.  In  the  first  column  are  the  figures  of  Rowland,2  obtained  by
Joule's  method  of  the  change  of  friction  into  heat  at  different  tempera-
tures ;  in  the  second  column  the  figures  of  Bartoli  and  Stracciati,3
obtained  by  the  method  of  mixing ;  in  the  third  those  of  Liidin  4  by  the
same  method ;  in  the  fourth  those  of  Callendar  and  Barnes,5  by  a
continuous  electric  calorimeter.

.

'L

II.

III.

IV.

0°

1-0080

1-0051

1-0044

5°

1-0054

1-0046

1-0027

1  -0027

10°

1-0019 1-0018

1-0010

1-0012

15°

i-oooo i-oooo

1-0000

1-0000

20°

0-9979 0-9994 Q'9994

0-9990

25°

0-9972

0-9997 0-9993

0-9982

30°

0-9969

1-0000

0-9996

0-9977

35°

0-9981

1-0003

0-9973

The  zero  calorie  is  consequently  T005  times  the  usual  calorie;
the  value  of  the  mean  calorie  according  to  the  older  measurements
of  Dieterici  is  TO  13,  whereas  Liidin  found  the  two  units  exactly
equal.

For  the  mechanical  equivalent  of  the  usual  calorie  at  latitude  45°,
Fernet  (I.e.)  reckons  42,555  gram  centimeters  from  the  experiments  of
Joule,  42,547  from  Rowland,  and  42,637  from  Miculesen ;  we  shall
adopt  42,600.  The  meaning  of  this  number  is  that  if  in  latitude  45°
a  gram  be  allowed  to  fall  through  42,600  centimeters  the  kinetic  energy
acquired  converted  into  heat  would  suffice  to  raise  the  temperature  of
a  gram  of  water  at  15°  by  1°  on  the  air  thermometer  scale.

1  Considerable  confusion  unfortunately  exists  here,  and  it  must  therefore  be  noted
as  inadmissible  for  one  to  publish  or  to  apply  numerical  values  on  the  mechanical
equivalent of  heat, on the  heat  of  fusion, etc., without  at  first  emphasising  which
calorie  'is  employed  as  the  unit  in  the  method  of  observation. Greater  care  on  this
point is the first step toward making the accuracy of  calorimetric  measurements
approach  the  accuracy  attained  long  ago  in  optical  and  electrical  measurements.

2  Mechanical  Equivalent  of  Heat,  etc. Cambridge,  1880.

3  Galore  specifico  dell'  aqua. Catania,  1892.

4  Dissertation,  Ziirich,  1895  ;  see  also  a  critical  discussion  by  J.  Fernet. Vierteljahr-
schrift  der  nat.  Ges.,  Zurich,  41,  Jubelband  II.  1896.

5  Brit.  Ass.  Kep.  Dover,  1899,  p.  624  ;  Z.  S.  /.  Instrumentenk.,  20.  276  (1900).

12  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

In  the  absolute  system  of  measurement  the  value  of  the  ordinary
calorie  is

42,600  x  980-6-41,777,000  ergs1

(980*6  =  acceleration  of  gravity  in  latitude  45°).

Very  often,  and  in  calculations  which  are  of  especial  importance  for
the  chemist,  the  problem  is  given  to  express,  in  units  of  heat,  the  work
performed  in  overcoming  the  pressure  on  a  definite  volume.  For
example,  in  a  cylinder  with  a  movable  piston  of  a  cross -section  of
1  sq.  dcm.,  on  which  the  atmosphere  presses  with  a  pressure  of  one
atmosphere,  let  the  piston  be  raised  1  dcm.  so  that  the  atmospheric
pressure  will  be  forced  back  from  the  space  of  a  liter.  This  unit  of
work,  after  the  analogy  of  the  "  meter  kilogram,"  we  appropriately  call
•a  "  liter-atmosphere."  The  pressure  of  an  atmosphere  on  a  sq.  cm.,  as  is
known,  is  1*0333  kg.,  and  on  a  sq.  dcm.  103*33  kg. ;  the  work  performed
in  raising  the  piston  is  as  great  as  though  103*33  kg.  were  raised  1
dcm.,  or  as  though  1  g.  were  raised  1,033,300  cm.  Therefore  the
work  sought,  in  calorimetric  units,  is

1,033,300
1  Litre-atmosphere  = .^  „„„ =  24'25  g.-cal.

Equations  of  Motion  of  a  Particle. — Some  remarks  on  this
point  will  be  inserted  here,  partly  to  elucidate  the  law  of  conservation
of  energy,  partly  because  we  shall  later  have  to  do  repeatedly  with  the
movement  of  particles.  If  a  particle  of  mass  m  move  in  a  direction
which  may  be  defined  as  that  of  the  axis  of  x  in  a  system  of
co-ordinates,  under  the  influence  of  a  force  X,  and  t  is  the  time,  then
the  fundamental  laws  of  dynamics  are  expressed  by

d2x Y

mdP=x

(or mass  x  acceleration  =  effective force). Multiplying (1) by the
identity

dx

Ttdt  =  dx,

and  remembering  that

dx
and  finally  replacing  the  velocity  -rr  by  the  symbol  v  we  have

d("VUxdx .  (2)

or  in  words  :  the  increase  in  kinetic  energy  of  the  particle  during  any
element  of  time  is  equal  to  the  work  spent  by  the  force.

1  According  to  Griffiths  (Phys.  Zeitsch.,  4.  176,  1902-3),  41840000  ergs.

INTRODUCTION  13

If  the  particle  is  travelling  in  the  direction  s  which  at  the  moment
considered  makes  with  the  axes  of  a  rectangular  co-ordinate  system
the  angles  ft  y,  then

dx  dy  dz

COS  a  =  -Y-' COS  p  =  ~-» COS  y  =  -=-  •

ds  ds  ' ds

If  forces  X,  Y,  Z  act  along  the  axes,  the  force  T  exerted  on  the
point  is

X  cos  a  +  Y  cos  /3  +  Z  cos  y,

and  equation  (1)  becomes  in  this  case

d2s vdx TTdy ^dz

m;yi2  =  x  T-  +  Y:T-  +  z:r»
dt2 ds ds ds

or,  by  a  similar  transformation  to  that  previously  used

in  which  the  velocity

ds

If  we  have  a  system  of  particles,  acted  on  by  no  external  forces,
the  work  done  depends  only  on  the  forces  between  the  particles  ;  and
if  the  right-hand  expression  is  a  complete  differential,  its  integral  is
called  the  potential,  and  in  this  case  the  work  is  done  exclusively  at  the
cost  of  the  potential  energy.  Then  the  increase  of  kinetic  energy  is
equal  to  the  decrease  of  potential  energy,  or  the  total  energy  of  the
system  is  constant  (law  of  conservation  of  energy  in  mechanical
systems).

If  the  particle  suffers  friction  in  its  course,  equation  (1)  requires  a
limitation.  The  friction  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  force  acting  in  the
direction  opposite  to  that  of  the  motion  of  the  particle  at  the  moment,
and  in  many  cases  is  proportional  to  the  velocity  v.  Hence  there  acts
on  the  particle  the  force  X  -  kv  where  k  is  the  opposing  force  for  unit
velocity.  Then  (1)  becomes

d2x
•4  =  X-kv .  (3)

and  (2)  becomes

(4)

When  X  is  constant,  v  must  obviously  increase  if  X>kv,  and

14  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

decrease  in  the  contrary  case,  so  that  in  both  cases  X  -  kv  approaches
zero,  and  v  approaches  the  limit

v|. • • -  "|  <»>

After  a  certain  (often  immeasurably  short)  time  the  velocity  is
equal  to  the  force  divided  by  the  frictional  resistance  ;  consequently  in
the  case  of  movement  under  sufficiently  great  friction  it  is  not,  as  in
pure  dynamics,  the  acceleration,  but  the  velocity  that  is  proportional  to
the  applied  force.

Writing  (4)  in  the  form

-v2)  +  kvdx  =  Xdx,

we  see  that  the  work  spent  by  the  (internal  or  external)  forces,  Xdx,
goes  partly  to  produce  kinetic  energy,  partly  to  do  work  against  friction.
The  larger  the  latter  portion  is  compared  to the former, the  more
nearly  true  is  the  very  simple  equation  (5).
Writing  (5)  in  the  form

kv0  =  X,

multiplying  by  dx  and  integrating  from  0  to  x  and  0  to  t  we  get

or

2

kv02t  =  Xx .  (6)

But  Xx  is  the  work  done  on  the  particle  in  time  t ;  this  frictional
heat  is  equal  to  the  product  of  resistance  (k),  velocity  squared,  and
time.  The  resemblance  of  (5)  to  Ohm's  law  and  (6)  to  that  of  Joule
is  obvious.

To  calculate  the  time  after  which  (5)  may  be  regarded  as  true,  we
will  write  (3)  in  the  form

dv _dt

and  integrate

-  r  log  (X  -  kv)  =  — h  const,
k  m

But  for  t  =  o

-  T-  log  X  =  const.

A

whence

•-K-  -'*) <"

INTRODUCTION  1 5

The  expression  in  brackets  increases  rapidly  with  time  towards
the  limit  1,  i.e.  (7)  passes  over  into  (5) ;  and  the  more  rapidly  the
larger  the  friction  k  and  the  smaller  the  mass  m.

The  Convertibility  of  Energy.  (The  second  law  of  the
mechanical  theory  of  heat). — While  the  law  of  the  conservation  of
energy  furnishes  us  with  the  quantitative  relations  which  must  necessarily
be  satisfied  in  changing  into  each  other  the  various  forms  of  energy,
as  external  work,  heat,  internal  energy,  etc.,  the  so-called  "  second  law
of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat"  teaches  us  the  limitations  of  the
convertibility  of  the  different  forms  of  energy.  Its  qualitative  side
may  be  fairly  expressed  in  the  following  statement  :  External  work,  such
as  the  kinetic  energy  of  moving  bodies,  may  be  transformed  in  many  ways
and  completely  into  another  form,  into  heat  (most  simply  in  this  way,
that  external  work  may  be  applied  to  moving  ponderable  masses,  and
this  may  be  spent  by  friction  and  converted  into  heat,  as  by  applying
brakes  to  a  railway  train)  ;  but  conversely  the  reconversion  of  heat  into  work
is  not  at  all,  or  only  partially,  possible  (principle  of  Carnot  and  Clausius).

The  order  of  thought  by  which  one  is  led  to  sift  this  question,  viz.
how  far  the  different  forms  of  energy  are  convertible  into  each  other,
and  to  the  conjecture  that  here  we  have  a  restricting  law  of  nature,  is
essentially  the  following : — As  fruitless  as  have  been  the  endeavours  of
innumerable  inventors  to  construct  a  machine  which  should  be  able  to
do  work  continually  without  ever  needing  an  expenditure  of  force  to
keep  the  machine  in  motion,  so  brilliant  is  the  knowledge  which
explains  this  miscarriage  by  a  law  of  nature.  On  the  ground  which
was  richly  fertilised  by  the  ruined  fancies  of  unlucky  inventors,  there
nourished  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  the  law  of  the  indestructibility
of  energy,  the  golden  fruit  of  which  was  plucked  by  Mayer  and  Helm-
holtz.  Yet,  in  the  judgment  of  some  inventors  who  are  completely
permeated  with  the  accuracy  of  this  law,  it  is  by  no  means  regarded
as  impossible  to  construct  a  machine  which  should  be  able  to  furnish
work  as  desired  and  free  of  cost.  According  to  this  law,  external  work
and  heat  are  equivalent  to  each  other — both  are  manifested  forms  of
energy.  But  energy  in  the  form  of  heat  is  in  abundance,  so  that  it
only  needs  an  apparatus  in  which  one  shall  apply  it  in  driving  our
machine,  to  use  up  the  energy  of  its  environment.  Such  an  apparatus,
for  example,  might  be  sunk  in  a  great  water  reservoir,  whose  enormous
quantity  of  energy  could  be  changed  into  useful  work ;  it  would,  for
example,  make  the  steam-engines  of  our  ocean  steamers  unnecessary,
and  would  keep  the  screw  of  a  ship  in  motion  as  long  as  desired,  and
at  the  cost  of  the  immeasurable  store  of  heat  in  the  sea.  Such  an
apparatus  would  be  in  certain  respects  a  perpetuum  mobile,  and  yet  no
impossible  thing  to  contradict  the  first  law  of  thermodynamics,  since,
acting  according  to  this  law,  it  would  extract  the  heat  of  its  environment
and  give  it  back  again  as  external  work,  which,  after  its  expenditure,

16  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

according  to  rule — in  this  case,  as  a  result  of  the  friction  of  the  screw
— would  change  itself  back  again  into  heat,  to  enter  on  the  cycle
anew.

Unfortunately  such  an  apparatus,  which  would  make  coal  worth-
less as  a  source  of  energy,  appears  to  be  a  chimera,  exactly  as  was  the
perpetuum  mobile  of  the  inventor  of  the  last  century ;  at  least  many
fruitless  attempts  have  made  this  more  than  probable.  Thus,  as  we
sum  up  the  numerous  abortive  endeavours,  we  come,  in  a  way
analogous  to  that  which  led  to  the  knowledge  of  the  first  law  of
thermodynamics,  to  the  proposition  that  an  apparatus  which  could  con-
tinually change  the  heat  of  its  environment  into  external  work,  is  in
contradiction  to  a  law  of  nature,  and  therefore  an  impossibility.
Although,  by  recognising  this  law,  the  human  spirit  of  invention  may
be  poorer  by  one  problem,  yet  natural  investigation  is  compensated  for
it  by  a  principle  of  almost  unlimited  application.

This  result,  which  at  first  appears  to  have  an  entirely  negative
character,  can  be  applied  in  finding  the  quantitative  statement  of  the
law,  only  by  the  aid  of  certain  considerations,  and  by  inference  from
some  empirical  facts  ;  this  law  which  limits  the  convertibility  of  energy
is  comprehended  under  the  name  of  the  "second  law  of  thermodynamics"

The  fundamental  considerations  which  led  to  this  law  were  stated
with  great  clearness  by  Carnot1  as  far  back  as  1824,  before  the  law  of
conservation  of  energy  was  precisely  understood ;  but  to  bring  the
second  law  into  the  form  of  a  universally  applicable  and  fruitful  law
of  nature,  and  to  give  it  exact  mathematical  expression,  was  the
undying  work  of  Clausius.2  The  following  is  a  brief  deduction  of  the
fundamental  formulae : —

The  earliest  applications  were  technical,  but  to  give  the  result  of
experience  in  the  form  most  suitable  as  a  physical  principle  we  may
say  : —

I.  Every  process  which  takes  place  in  a  given  system  by  itself,  i.e.  ivithout
application  of  energy  in  any  form,  can,  when  properly  used,  yield  a  finite
amount  of  woi*1c.

By  process  is  meant  a  change  in  the  system  by  which  it  passes
from  an  initial  state  to  a  different  final  state.  If  application  of  energy
from  without  is  not  excluded,  a  system  can  naturally  yield  an  indefinite
amount  of  work,  e.g.  an  electromotor  supplied  with  sufficient  current
may  be  regarded,  at  least  in  principle,  as  an  inexhaustible  source  of
work.

We  may  ask  now  what  is  the  best  use,  i.e.  how  the  process  may  be
made  to  give  the  maximum  amount  of  work.  For  this  it  is  obviously
necessary  that  the  apparatus  used  to  gain  the  work  must  be  technically

1  Reflexions  sur  la  puissance  motrice  du  feu. Paris, 1824. German  translation,
Ostwald's  Klassiker,  No.  37. Leipzig,  1892.

2  The separate papers from 1850 on were collected by Clausius in his  book,
Mechanische  Warmetheorie. Braunschweig,  1876.

INTRODUCTION  17

efficient,  so  that  loss  of  external  work  due  to  secondary  defects  is
avoided  (friction  and  similar  causes,  leakage  of  a  piston  in  a  cylinder
during  expansion  or  compression  of  gases,  faults  of  insulation  in
electrical  circuits,  loss  of  heat  in  thermal  machines,  etc.) ;  but,  next,
the  change  must  be  so  conducted  that  force  and  resistance  are  almost
equal  at  every  stage  of  the  process.  If  the  resistance  is  made  smaller,
the  process  will  go  in  one  sense ;  if  greater,  in  the  opposite ;  and  as
all  losses  are  avoided,  as  much  work  is  gained  in  the  one  case  as  is
absorbed  in  reversing  it.  In  such  cases  the  process  is  called  reversible  ;
we  shall  find  cases  in  which  this  ideal  limiting  state  can,  at  least  in
theory,  be  approached.  We  shall  assume  that  this  is  general,  and
postulate  that —

II.  A  process  yields  the  maximum  amount  of  work  when  it  is  conducted

We  may  easily  see  that  I.  and  II.  are  identical  with  the  law  that
no  arrangement  is  possible  by  which  work  shall  be  continuously  per-
formed at  the  expense  of  the  surrounding  heat.  According  to  I.,  since
a  process  can  yield  only  a  finite  amount  of  work,  such  an  arrangement
must  be  a  periodically  acting  machine,  which,  after  a  certain  time,,
returns  to  its  initial  slate  ;  according  to  II.,  such  a  machine  at  the  best
(ideally  perfect  construction),  after  a  period,  has  absorbed  no  external
work ;  it  can  never  yield  any,  because,  working  reversibly  in  order  to
avoid  losses,  the  work  given  out  during  the  outward  process  must  be
equal  to  that  taken  in  in  the  return.

Examples  of  self-acting  processes  in  the  sense  of  I.  are  :  the  falling
of  a  stone  to  earth,  mixing  of  two  liquids  or  gases,  solution  and
diffusion  of  solids  in  a  solvent,  and  all  chemical  reactions  that  take
place  of  their  own  accord.  The  problem  of  calculating  for  each
case  the  maximum  work  obtainable,  i.e.  when  the  process  is
conducted  reversibly  according  to  II. ,  is  of  the  highest  import-
ance, and  its  solution,  in  particular  instances,  has  led  to  fruitful
discoveries.

When  bodies  at  different  temperatures  are  put  in  contact,  a  transfer
of  heat  from  hotter  to  colder  occurs.  This  process,  it  is  well  known,
takes  place  of  itself,  for  no  work  need  be  done  to  make  it  go  ;  from  I.  it
follows  that  it  is  possible  to  gain  work  by  means  of  this  interchange
of  heat,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  that  work  is  required  to  reverse  it,
i.e.  to  transfer  heat  from  the  cold  to  the  hot  body.

Clausius  stated  the  last  result  as  a  separate  principle,  "that  heat
cannot  of  itself,  i.e.  without  compensation  by  means  of  external  energy,
pass  from  a  colder  to  a  hotter  body."  But  this  principle  is  really  only
a  case  of  a  more  general  law.

We  shall  now,  in  order  to  elucidate  these  general  discussions,
apply  them  to  two  specially  important  cases  :  first,  isothermal  pro-
cesses ;  second,  processes  consisting  essentially  in  transfer  of  heat
(equalisation  of  temperature  differences).

c

18  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

1.  Isothermal  Process.  —  Suppose  the  system  undergoing  a
change  to  be  throughout  at  the  same  temperature,  and  to  be  immersed
in  an  indefinitely  large  bath  at  the  same  temperature  ;  further,  that
all  processes  are  conducted  so  slowly  that  any  heat  evolved  is  given
up  to  the  bath,  and  any  required  is  absorbed  from  it,  without  appreci-
able temperature  differences  being  set  up.  The  system  is  then  clearly
not  isolated,  for  it  is  in  thermal  connection  with  the  bath  ;  but  we  may
treat  the  system  and  the  bath  together  as  a  new  isolated  system,  to
which  the  preceding  considerations  are  applicable.1  Also  let  it  be
possible  to  conduct  the  processes  in  question  reversibly.

The  last  condition  is  essential.  Moreover,  the  problem  of  con-
ducting a  process  isothermally  and  reversibly  has  not  been  solved  in
all  cases  in  which  it  appears  possible.  The  expansion  of  a  gas  or
evaporation  of  a  liquid  can  be  performed  in  this  manner  easily  by
means  of  a  cylinder  and  piston.  Certain  voltaic  cells,  such  as  the
Daniell,  can  be  used  isothermally  and  reversibly  by  combining  them
with  a  well-constructed,  i.e.  efficient,  electromotor  ;  if  the  cell  works  it
causes  the  motor  to  rotate  and  so  does  external  work  ;  if  the  motor  be
reversed  by  application  of  the  same  amount  of  work  from  without,  it
causes  a  current  to  flow  through  the  cell  in  the  opposite  sense,  which
reverses  the  chemical  process  that  produced  the  original  current.  But
in  other  cases  such  arrangements  are  not  known  ;  thus,  it  is  not  yet
possible  to  conduct  isothermally  and  reversibly  the  combustion  of
many  organic  compounds,  or  the  radiation  of  a  phosphorescent  body.

Let  A  be  the  external  work  that  a  process  in  a  given  system  is
capable  of  doing,  by  means  of  an  arrangement  working  isothermally
and  reversibly.  Imagine  now  another  arrangement,  which,  under  the
same  conditions,  but  by  a  different  mechanism,  performs  an  amount  of
work  A'  while  the  same  system  passes  through  the  same  change  ;  and
to  fix  the  ideas  let  A>A'.  Then,  by  combining  the  two,  we  can  con-
struct an  arrangement  of  this  kind  ;  by  the  first,  we  allow  the  process
to  take  place  with  production  of  external  work  A  ;  by  the  second,  we
reverse  it,  with  expenditure  of  work  A'.  The  system  has  then  passed
through  an  isothermal  and  reversible  cyclic  process,  leaving  it  in  its
initial  state  ;  this  may  be  repeated  any  number  of  times,  and  each
time  a  net  amount  of  work

A  -A'

is  performed.  This  would  be  a  machine  capable  of  yielding  an  in-
definite amount  of  work  at  the  expense  of  the  heat  bath  —  an  impossi-
bility. We  conclude,  therefore,  that  A'  cannot  be  different  from  A  or

1  Strictly,  the  system  +  heat  bath  must  fall  in  temperature  in  proportion  to  the
external  work  done,  according  to  the  law  of  conservation  ;  but  if  the  capacity  of  the  bath
is  great  enough,  the  fall  of  temperature  is  negligibly  small.

INTRODUCTION  1  9

This  equation,  of  which  we  shall  make  repeated  use,  expresses
that  —

III.  The  external  work  that  can  be  done  by  a  given  process  when  most
efficiently  used  is  independent  of  the  arrangement  by  which  the  work  is
obtained  ;  or,  more  briefly,  the  work  done  in  an  isothermal,  reversible,  cyclic
•process  is  zero.

During  such  a  cyclic  process,  certain  quantities  of  heat  are,  in
general,  given  to,  and  taken  from,  the  heat  bath  ;  according  to  the
law  of  conservation  of  energy  the  sum  of  these  must  be  zero.

2.  Transfer  of  Heat.  —  The  calculation  of  the  work  that  can  be
done  by  the  passage  of  heat  from  higher  to  lower  temperature  is  of
great  importance  ;  we  can  easily  solve  the  problem  for  a  simple  case  —
a  cyclic  process  performed  with  a  perfect  gas  —  since  here  the  quantities
of  energy  involved  are  known  from  the  laws  of  gases.

Let  there  be  two  reservoirs,  at  different  temperatures,  say  in  the
form  of  large  masses  of  water,  which  we  can  draw  on  for  supplies  of
heat.  For  simplicity  of  calculation  we  will  suppose  the  two  tempera-
tures to  differ  only  infinitesimal]  y,  and  that  they  are  (on  the  absolute
scale)  T  and  T  +  dT.  We  have  then  to  think  out  a  mechanism  by
which  heat  may  be  withdrawn  from  the  second  reservoir  (at  T  -f  dT)
and  given  to  the  first,  reversibly,  and  so  with  the  greatest  useful
effect.

For  this  purpose  we  take  a  cylinder,  closed  by  a  piston  and  con-
taining a  certain  quantity  of  a  gas  —  say  one  gram-molecule  or  "  mol  "
(32  g.  of  oxygen  or  28  g.  of  nitrogen,  etc.).  The  apparatus  is  put  in  contact
with  reservoir  I,  i.e.  immersed  in  the  large  vessel  of  water  at  T,  and
the  gas,  originally  occupying  a  volume  vls  compressed  to  v2.  Work  is
thus  spent  to  the  amount

where  K  is  the  gas  constant,

273

(p0  and  v0  the  pressure  and  volume  at  the  temperature  of  melting  ice).
The  heat  Q  required  for  this,  measured  in  the  same  unit  as  A,  is

given  to  the  first  reservoir.  Now  bring  the  cylinder  in  contact  with
reservoir  II.  so  that  it  is  warmed  to  T  +  dT  ;  the  heat  thus  absorbed  is
KdT,  where  K  is  the  thermal  capacity  of  the  cylinder  and  its  contents.
During  the  heating  the  volume  v2  is  to  be  kept  constant,  so  that  no
external  work  is  done.  Now,  on  allowing  the  gas  to  expand  from  v2
to  v1?  we  gain  the  external  work

20  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

A  +  dA  -  E(T  +  dT)  In  ^,

^2

and  withdraw  from  reservoir  II.  the  equivalent  quantity  of  heat

Finally,  put  the  apparatus  in  contact  with  the  colder  bath,  and
keeping  its  volume  constant  at  vp  allow  it  to  give  up  the  quantity
KdT  of  heat,  and  so  fall  to  T.  It  is  then  in  the  initial  state  again.

The  sum  of  the  work  done  by  the  gas  in  the  cycle  is

and  at  the  same  time  the  quantity  of  heat

Q  +  KdT

is  carried  from  reservoir  II.  to  L,  and  has  consequently  fallen  in
temperature  from  T  +  dT  to  T,  whilst  the  quantity  of  heat  dQ  =  dA  is
converted  into  useful  work.  KdT  is  an  infinitesimal  quantity  that
may  be  neglected  by  comparison  with  Q.

If  the  thermal  capacity  of  the  cylinder  and  its  contents  were  zero,
instead  of  Q  +  KdT  only  Q  of  heat  would  have  been  transferred  from
T  +  dT  to  T,  and  this  arrangement  would  increase  the  useful  effect,  it
is  true,  but  only  by  an  infinitesimal  percentage.  Hence  we  may  say,
without  appreciable  error,  that  the  quantity  Q  of  heat  has  fallen  from
T  +  dT  to  T  during  the  cyclic  process  ;  comparing  this  with  the  work
done  we  find

dA  =  Q^  . (d)

i.e.  of  the  quantity  Q  of  heat  transferred  from  reservoir  II.  to  L,  the  part

irp

Q-^  is  turned  into  external  work.

We  can  now  easily  show  that  this  result,  though  derived  from  a
special  case,  is  general.  Assume  that  some  other  reversible  cyclic
process  exists,  by  which  the  quantity  Q'  of  heat  falling  from  T  +  dT
to  T  accomplishes  dA'  of  work.  Then  we  may  combine  this  with  the
former  process,  choosing  the  quantity  of  gas  so  that  in  it  also  Q'  of
heat  suffers  the  temperature  change.  Now  let  the  two  systems  each
pass  through  a  cycle,  in  opposite  senses,  so  that  the  temperature  of  the
quantity  Q'  of  heat  falls  in  the  one  by  dT  but  rises  in  the  other  by
the  same  amount,  and  the  thermal  transport  is  thus  neutralised  ;  then
there  can  be  no  external  work  done,  otherwise  we  should  have  con-

INTRODUCTION

21

structed  a  machine  capable  of  converting  heat  into  work  indefinitely,
i.e.  we  must  have

Hence —

IV.  If  a  process  consists  merely  in  transfer  of  heat,  and  a  quantity  Q
be  carried  from  one  body  at  temperature  T  +  dT  to  another  at  T,  the  work

dT

that  can  be  accomplished  is  Q-jyT  in  whatever  way  this  work  is  obtained,  pro-
vided it  is  a  reversible  way.

There  are  few  results  so  fruitful  as  those  contained  in  (d)  and  (d')t
which  form  the  quantitative  expression  of  the  convertibility  of  heat
into  work,  and  have  been  applied,  especially  to  chemical  processes,  with
important  results.

It  will  be  worth  while  to  remark  further  on  the  meaning  of  the
quantity  dA  (or  dA').  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  in  the  equation

dT „ dA Q

or

dT T

dA  is  the  work  done  in  raising  the  temperature  of  the  system  by  dT.
This  is  not  the  case,  for  we  have  carried  out  the  cyclic  process  in  such
a  way  that  no  work  is  associated  with  the  rise  of  temperature.
Rather  dA  is  the  excess  of  work  spent  in  reversing  at  T  +  dT  the  same

dA
process  that  has  been  performed  at  T,  so  that  -==•  is  the  temperature

coefficient  of  the  availability  of  the  process  for  work.  We  should
obtain  a  wrong  value  for  dA  if  a  positive  or  negative  amount  of  work
were  associated  with  the  change  of  temperature  of  the  system,  and  so
a  change  in  its  availability  for  ,
work  took  place,  of  a  secondary
character  with  regard  to  the
present  argument.

Clapeyron's  graphical
method  is  very  instructive  in
this  matter.  The  work  done

in  an  expansion

/*

v is ex-

pressed  in  the  figure  by  the
area  between  the  curve
p  =  f(y),  the  two  ordinates,
and  the  axis  of  abscissae.
When  the  temperature  is  raised  this  curve  is  changed  to

Fig.  1.

as

22  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

and  we  thus  obtain  a  neighbouring  line  (dotted  in  the  figure). Then
clearly  the  shaded  portion  expresses  dA. If  in  any  case  other  than

t»0

expansion  the  work  is given  by  l^dft),  then & must  be  used

t»j

ordinate,  ft)  as  abscissa.

All  results  so  far  known  in  thermodynamics  can  be  deduced  by
means  of  cyclic  processes  ;  the  laws  to  be  stated  in  the  four  following
sections  contain  nothing  essentially  new,  they  are  merely  another  way
of  expressing  the  relations  already  dealt  with  in  this  section.  This
must  be  expressly  stated,  as  many  authors,  after  establishing  results
by  means  of  cyclic  processes,  repeat  them  by  means  of  the  entropy
principle,  thermodynamic  potential,  free  energy,  etc.,  and  seem  to
regard  this  as  a  more  convincing  proof.  In  a  pedagogic  sense  this
may  be  true,  but  usually  the  only  thing  that  is  proved  is  that  the  author
has  studied  the  work  of  his  predecessors  with  intelligence.  There
is  no  independent  scientific  value  to  be  attributed  to  such  discussions.

Which  method  is  to  be  preferred  —  the  explicit  discussion  of  a
cyclic  process,  or  its  abstraction  in  the  theory  of  functions  —  is  a
matter  of  taste;  it  should  be  remarked,  however,  that  while  the
prophets  ex  eventa  of  thermodynamics,  with  one  accord,  prefer  the
thermodynamic  functions,  investigators  have  mostly  used  the  original
method  of  Carnot  and  Clausius,  as  in  establishing  new  results  an  ex-
perimentally realisable  cyclic  process  offers  more  protection  against  <"  r.

Still,  any  one  who  wishes  to  go  deeper  into  the  problem^  u,
theory  of  heat  may  be  recommended  to  a  careful  study  of  thermo-
dynamic  functions, especially  in the admirably  clear  exposition of
M.  Planck  (TJiermodynamik,  Leipzig,  1897).1

Summary  of  the  Two  Laws.  —  The  results  arrived  at  in  the
foregoing  section  may  be  summarised  as  follows  :  —

1.  Every  natural process can,  by  the  most advantageous use,
yield  a  definite  amount  of  work,  and  by  the  expenditure  of  the  same
amount  of  work,  it  is  theoretically  possible  to  reverse  the  process  ;
here  by  "  process  "  we  mean  any  change  of  a  system  that  can  occur
without  application  of  work  from  without.

2.  If  the  process  takes  place  isothermally,  the  maximal  work  A
depends  only  on  the  initial  and  final  states,  and  not  on  the  path  between.

3.  If  the  process  consists  in  an  equalisation  of  temperature  by
which  a  quantity  of  heat  Q  falls  from  the  absolute  temperature  T  +  dT
to  T,  it  is  capable,  whatever  the  nature  of  the  system,  of  the  work

as  a  maximum. (A  and  Q  in  the  same  units.)

1  English  translation  by  Ogg  (London  1903).—  TR.

INTRODUCTION  23

Now,  the  first  law  gives  the  relation  (p.  7)

U  -  A  -  Q.
Eliminating  Q  from  the  two  last  equations,  we  have

rl  A

A-I7  =  Tgj  («>

Here  A  is  the  maximum  work  of  an  isothermal  process  at  tempera-
ture T,  U  the  simultaneous  decrease  in  the  energy  of  the  system  A  -  U
(called  Q  in  the  foregoing)  ;  or  the  heat  withdrawn  from  the  surround-
ings during  the  process,  to  which  the  old  term  "  latent  heat  "  may  con-
veniently be  given.

Hence,  according  to  (e),  the  excess  of  the  maximal  work  of  an  isothermal
process  over  the  decrease  in  total  energy  —  the  latent  heat  —  is  equal  to  the
absolute  temperature  multiplied  by  the  temperature  coefficient  of  the  maximal
work.

This  is  the  most  intelligible  statement  of  the  second  law,  because
i^  contains  only  quantities  with  a  direct  physical  meaning  ;  for  the
change  in  total  energy  is  always  simply  measurable  by  allowing  the
p^^ess  to  take  place,  without  .production  of  work,  in  a  calorimeter.
T  .  dmal  work  is  more  difficult  to  measure,  because  for  that  the
process  must  be  conducted  reversibly  ;  but  in  many  cases  this  quantity
also  can  be  directly  recorded  (e.g.  by  a  Watt  indicator,  or  a  Siemens
electrodynamometer),  so  that  there  can  scarcely  be  any  great  difficulty
in  making  its  meaning  clear  in  new  instances.  The  above  forms  of
statement  is  especially  to  be  preferred  in  application  to  chemical  and
electrochemical  reactions.

Remembering,  further,  that  on  account  of  the  relation  between  A
and  U,  both  x  these  quantities  are  independent  of  the  path,  and  com-
pletely defined  by  the  initial  and  final  states,  and  further,  that  A  -  U
is  the  latent  heat  of  the  system,  equation  (e)  may  be  regarded  as
including  both  fundamental  laws.

When  the  work  done  by  the  process  consists  merely  in  overcom-
ing a  pressure  during  an  expansion  of  the  system,  we  can  put  A  in
the  form

72

A  = pdv,

where  vp  v2  are  the  initial  and  final  volumes  respectively. Frequently

1  U  is  so  by  the  first  law.

24  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

the  pressure  remains  constant  during  this  change  (evaporation,  fusion,
dissociation  of  a  solid,  etc.)  and  then

A  =  (V2  -  vi)P  ; dA  =  (V2  -  vi)dP>
and

where  Q  is  the  heat  absorbed  during  the  expansion  from  v2  to  v1.

When  p  varies  during  the  expansion  (evaporation  of  a  mixture,
expansion  of  a  gas  or  liquid,  etc.),  we  may  regard  it  as  constant
during  an  infinitesimal  expansion  v2  —  v1  =  dv,  and  obtain  from  the  last
equation

Here  it  is  to  be  noted  that  dp  is  the  increase  of  pressure  at  constant
volume,  but  dQ  means  the  heat  absorbed  when  at  constant  tempera-
ture the  volume  of  the  system  increases  by  dv  (and  external  work  is
done).  This  is  indicated  by  the  symbols

dQ\ /dp\

V/T VdT/

or — -  =  1 •

Analytical Formulation of the Maximal Work. — The

greatest  difficulty  in  applying  the  fundamental  equation  (e)  lies  in
obtaining  an  analytical  expression  for  the  maximal  work ;  -for  there

dA

are  few  cases  in  which  A  and  —  can  be  measured  by  direct  experi-
ment, and  otherwise  the  quantities  must  be  determined  by  values
characteristic  of  the  initial  and  final  states,  and  these  values  differenti-
ated with  respect  to  temperature,  under  the  condition  that  during  the
temperature  change  no  external  work  is  done.

In  most  cases  there  is  only  one  set  of  variables  to  express  the
initial  and  final  states  of  a  system  when  the  temperature  is  given ;  but
in  case  of  choice  the  following  is  important.  The  quantity  A  of  work
can  in  general  be  decomposed  into  two  factors,  such  as  force  x
distance,  pressure  x  volume,  thermodynamic  potential  x  mass,  electric
potential  x  quantity  of  electricity,  and  so  on,  of  which  the  first  is  in
general  a  temperature  function,  but  the  second  can  be  made  inde-
pendent of  temperature  ;  the  latter  should  therefore,  with  the  tempera-
ture, be  chosen  as  independent  variable  for  expressing  A.

This remark needs elucidation. Let A0 be the expression
characterising  the  initial  state,  F  the  final ;  then

A  =  F-A0.  (1)

Let  A0  and  F  differ  only  infinitesimally,  so  that  A  becomes  the

INTRODUCTION  25

differential  dA.  If  we  can  find  a  variable  to  the  changes  of  which
dA  is  proportional,  we  may  put

dA  -  $dto  (T  const.) ... (2)

in  which  the  factor  $  is  equal  to  the  partial  differential  coefficient  of
A  with  respect  to  to  and  A  itself,  when  $  is  known  as  a  function  of  to
can  be  arrived  at  by  an  integration  from  the  initial  to  the  final  state

19]

A  = $dto.

The  simplest  case  is  when  a  force  X  acts  at  a  point  ;  if  the  point
of  application  moves  through  the  element  dx

dA  =  Xdx,

i.e.  for  small  displacements  the  changes  of  A  and  x  are  proportional.
Now  the  analysis  (2)  appears  to  be  always  possible,  so  that  by  analogy
we  may  call  «^  t\iQ  force  and  d$  an  element  of  path.

If,  then,  the  system  has  several  ways  of  doing  work,

dA  =  &1dto1+-£2dh>2+ .  •  .  (T  const.)  (3)

and  $v  $2  are  the  partial  differential  coefficients  of  A  with  respect
to  to15  to2,  etc.  Thus  the  derivative  of  A  with  respect  to  volume
is  pressure,  with  respect  to  quantity  of  electricity  is  electromotive

9A

force,  etc. So  that,  in  general,  ^—  is  the  force  with  which  the  system

dto

suffers  a  certain  change  ;  but  as  we  shall  be  concerned  almost
exclusively  with  changes  involving  great  friction,  by  analogy  with  (5)
(p.  14),  the  velocity  of  the  corresponding  change  is  equal  to  the  quotient
of  force  by  friction.  As  the  latter  depends  essentially  on  the  particular
system,  thermodynamics  gives  no  information  with  respect  to  it.

The  evaluation  of  —  ,  the  temperature  coefficient  of  the  maximal
work,  is  now  easy. After  the  value  of

is  arrived  at  by  integration,  we  have  to  differentiate  A  partially  with
respect  to  T  ;  since  according  to  equation  (3),  when  to  is  constant  no
work  is  done,  the  condition  (p.  21)  that  no  work  should  accompany
rise  of  temperature  is  necessarily  satisfied.

Again,  supposing F  and  A0 to differ only  infinitesimally, the
maximal  work  becomes

26  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

where  the  quantities  d<£  represent  small,  but  definite  displacements.
Applying  the  fundamental  equation  (e)  to  the  process  so  defined,  we
have

-  dU  =  Tdto!  + 2dtx)2  +  .

or

in  which,  therefore,  dU  is  the  change  of  total  energy  due  to  the  dis-
placements d</>.  The  equation  on  p.  24  is  a  particular  case  of  this
(fl  =  p,  to  =  v).

There  is  a  relation  between  the  values  of  $  that  we  will  develop
in  the  case  of  two  kinds  of  external  work  ;  then

dA  -  ^dtoj  +  $gdtt>2 (T  const-)

Since  dA  in  this  equation  is  a  complete  differential  (independent
of  the  "  path  ")  we  must  have

82A 82A

1 a  1  — *

8tt>2~8nV

a  relation  which  in  its  applications  coincides  with  equation  (c)  of  p.
18.  The  generalisation  for  more  than  two  variables  is  obvious,  but
has  so  far  hardly  found  any  application.

Finally,  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  assumption  of  reversibility
is  implicitly  made  in  all  equations  (such  as  (3))  which  express  the
external  work  by  means  of  variables,  and  do  not  contain  the  time.

Free  Energy. — The  quantity  A  expresses  that  part  of  the  energy
change  involved  in  any  process  that  can  be  turned  into  external  work,
kinetic  energy,  etc.,  without  limitation — a  fortiori  into  heat — and  is
therefore  freely  convertible.  Helmholtz  1  gave  to  this  the  name  "  change
of  free  energy"  and  to  A  -  U,  i.e.  the  difference  between  the  changes  of
free  and  total  energy,  the  name  "  change  of  bound  energy"

Physical  meaning  is,  of  course,  only  to  be  given  to  the  change  of
free  or  total  energy.  The  absolute  value  of  these  quantities  is  un-
known, and  without  interest  for  us,  since  probably  it  does  not  influence
the  course  of  surrounding  phenomena.  In  the  same  way,  we  speak
only  of  relative  movements  of  the  bodies  surrounding  us,  since  their
absolute  velocities  are  unknown  and,  so  far  as  we  know,  indifferent.

1  Sitzber.  d.  BerL  Akad.,  1882  ;  Ges.  Abh.,  2.  958.  See  also  Massieu,  Journ.  de
Phys.,  6.  216  (1877),  and  W.  Gibb's  Trans.  Connecticut  Acad.,  3.  1875-78.  German
translation  by  Ostwald,  Leipzig,  1892.

INTRODUCTION  27

Thus,  writing U  for the absolute value  of the  total energy,  and
A  for  the  free  energy,  we  measure  (calorimetrically)

and  (e.g.  by  a  Watt's  indicator)

A  »  2^-20

but  the  actual  values  of  U  and  21  escape  us.  We  may,  however,
count  U,  and  A  from  a  fixed  initial  condition,  and  speak  of  them  as
the  "  total  "  and  "  free  "  energy  ;  then  (e)  would  be  expressed  in  words
as  :  the  difference  between  the  free  and  total  energy  (also  described  as  the
bound  energy)  is  equal  to  the  absolute  temperature  multiplied  by  the
temperature  coefficient  of  the  free  energy.

According  to  the  first  law  the  total  energy  remains  constant  in
a  system  isolated  from  communication  of  energy  ;  according  to  the
second  law  the  same  would  be  true  of  the  free  energy  in  a  system
at  constant  temperature  in  which  all  the  processes  were  reversible.
In  reality  it  always  decreases,  for  this  ideal  limiting  case  can  never
be  strictly  realised,  but  friction  and  similar  processes  constantly  con-
vert free  into  bound  energy.

Clausius  introduced  a  function  which  is  useful  for  many  purposes,
viz.  the  entropy  —

i.e.  the  difference  between  free  and  total  energy  divided  by  the
absolute  temperature.  This  is  especially  useful  in  dealing  with
adidbatic  processes  (i.e.  when  no  heat  is  taken  in  or  given  out).
Clausius  showed  that  this  function  is  increased  by  all  irreversible
processes  that  occur  in  an  isolated  system,  so  that  the  second  law
may  be  put  in  the  form  of  the  principle  of  the  increase  of  entropy.
This  conception  is  not,  however,  more  general  than  that  of  the
decrease  of  free  energy;  the  former  principle  is  directly  applicable
only  to  isolated  systems,  the  latter  only  to  systems  at  constant
temperature  ;  but  as  from  each  we  may  deduce  the  impossibility
of  the  engine  described  on  p.  16,  each  of  these  special  principles
may  be  separately  regarded  as  the  most  complete  expression  of  the
second  law.

The  combination  of

it 9J  d9T

@  =  ^ and 11-31=  -Tj£

gives

dSl
-ffl.'

i.e. the  entropy  is the negative  temperature  coefficient  of  the free

28  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

energy.  We  shall  henceforth  always  work  with  the  intelligible
notion  of  the  maximal  work  (free  energy),  and  not  with  its  negative
temperature  coefficient  (entropy) ;  moreover,  as  Helmholtz  pointed
out,  it  is  preferable  to  use  the  integral  function  (free  energy)  rather
than  its  derivative  (entropy),  because  IX  can  be  determined  from
equation  (e\  and  (g>  can  easily  be  expressed  in  terms  of  51  by  the
preceding  equation.

Conditions  of  Thermodynamic  Equilibrium. — Finally,  it  may
be  remarked,  the  fundamental  equations  yield  an  easy  test  whether
a  system  is  in  equilibrium  or  not.  It  was  noticed  above  that  for  a
reversible  process  force  and  resistance  must  be  equal ;  if  one  slightly
exceeds  the  other,  a  change  takes  place  in  one  or  the  other  sense.
Hence  follows  that —

A  system  is  in  equilibrium  at  every  phase  of  a  reversible  process ;  and
for  a  system  to  be  in  equilibrium  it  is  sufficient  that  the  conditions  should  be
so  chosen  that  only  reversible  processes  are  possible.^

Thus,  a  mixture  of  chemically  indifferent  gases  in  a  closed  vessel
is  in  equilibrium  if  the  temperature  and  composition  are  the  same
throughout,  for  otherwise  the  irreversible  processes  of  diffusion  and
thermal  conduction  will  occur.  Further,  there  is  the  condition  that
the  containing  vessel  shall  not  burst  under  the  pressure  of  the  gas,
for  that  would  introduce  a  new  irreversible  process,  and  so  on.

Since  no  system  is  in  equilibrium  in  which  there  are  temperature
differences,  we  may  confine  ourselves  to  considering  isothermal
systems ;  for  on  bringing  a  system  at  uniform  temperature  into
a  bath  at  the  same  temperature,  no  existing  equilibrium  is  destroyed
nor  any  new  equilibrium  created.  But  as  by  p.  27,  if  all  changes
are  accompanied  by  an  increase  of  A,  irreversible  processes  are
excluded,  we  find  that —

A  system  at  constant  temperature  is  in  equilibrium  when  its  free  energy
is  a  minimum.

The  analytical  condition  is

82t  =  o (T  const.)  . (1)

Since  the  entropy  is  increased  by  all  irreversible  processes  in  an
isolated  system  (p.  27),  we  find  the  corresponding  condition  that  in
a  system  of  constant  energy  all  changes  involve  an  increase  of  the
entropy  @,  or  that  &  is  a  maximum

S(£  =  o (U  const.) ... (2)

The  two  equations  of  equilibrium  (1)  and  (2)  are  however
identical,  for  whether  the  equilibrium  of  a  system  is  disturbed  by

1  Conversion  of  potential  into  kinetic  energy  is  an  irreversible  process  in  all  systems
in  nature,  since  friction  is  never  entirely  absent.

INTRODUCTION  29

change of  temperature, or  by  introduction of heat, comes  to the
same  thing.

Physical  Mixtures  and  Chemical  Compounds.— Closely  con-
nected with  the  empirical  laws  given  above,  and  which  form  at  once
the  basis  of  both  physical  and  chemical  science,  there  is  another  law
which  concerns  compound  substances,  and  which  leads  us  at  once  into
the  region  of  chemistry.  Many  different  elements  can  unite  in  many
ways  so  as  to  form  new  homogeneous  substances,  i.e.  such  as  are
everywhere  alike,  and  which  when  examined  with  the  most  powerful
microscope,  present  the  same  properties  at  all  points.  Experience
teaches  us  that  in  all  cases  the  properties  of  compound  substances
vary  more  or  less  with  the  composition,  but  that  in  no  case  does
composition  alone  determine  the  properties.  Thus  "  knall-gas," 1
water  vapour,  liquid  water,  and  ice,  are  all  substances  having  the  same
composition,  but  having  very  different  properties  even  when  compared
under  the  same  external  conditions  of  temperature  and  pressure.

The  thorough  study  of  the  relations  of  compound  substances
regarding  their  dependence  upon  the  composition,  has  led  to  their
division  into  two  classes.  By  the  mixture  of  two  gaseous  elements,
as  of  hydrogen  and  iodine  vapour,  for  example,  we  can  obtain,  according
to  the  conditions,  two  very  different  gaseous  mixtures,  each  of  which
appears  homogeneous  in  all  physical  and  chemical  respects,  but  which
yet  offer  marked  chemical  differences.  In  one  mixture  we  can  easily
recognise  the  properties  of  each  particular  element :  the  iodine  vapour
by  its  colour,  and  the  hydrogen  by  its  enormous  diffusibility  through
porous  partitions.  In  the  other  mixture  many  properties  of  both
components  are  totally  changed ;  the  colour  of  the  iodine  vapour  has
vanished,  and  we  seek  in  vain  for  the  characteristic  diffusibility  of
hydrogen.  Further,  the  mixtures  conduct  themselves  in  a  notably
different  way  on  condensation  to  the  liquid  or  solid  form :  from  the
first,  by  cooling  or  by  suitable  compression,  there  is  at  once  separated
from  the  gas  mixture  solid  iodine,  a  substance  of  entirely  different
composition  from  the  gas  remaining  uricondensed ;  from  the  second
mixture,  by  similar  treatment,  we  obtain  a  homogeneous  liquid  of  the
same  composition  as  the  uncondensed  gas.

We  call  the  first  of  these  gaseous  admixtures,  a  physical  mixture  ;
the  second,  a  chemical  compound,  of  hydrogen  and  iodine,  viz.  hydriodic
acid ;  and  we  are  forced  to  conclude  that  the  union  of  the  two  gases  is
much  more  intimate  in  the  second  case  than  in  the  first.

We  make  the  same  distinction  in  the  union  of  different  compound
substances  with  each  other,  as  with  elements  ;  here  we  often  meet  with
homogeneous  aggregates  which  can  be  liquefied,  evaporated,  solidified,
recrystallised,  etc.,  without  change  of  composition,  and  whose  pro-

1  Knall-gas,  the  explosive  mixtiire  of  two  parts  of  hydrogen  and  one  of  oxygen  ;
it  might  be  well  for  us  to  adopt  this  concise  and  convenient  term  in  English. — TR.

30  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

parties  are  in  many  respects  totally  different  from  those  of  their
respective  components ;  these,  beyond  all  doubt,  can  be  affirmed  to  be
chemical  compounds.  Other  aggregates  are  of  such  a  sort  as  to  change
their  composition  very  easily  by  condensation,  volatilisation,  etc.,
their  particular  components  can  be  reobtained  in  many  ways  with-
out difficulty,  and  in  the  mass  we  can  recognise  many  properties
possessed  by  the  components  when  separated.  These  complexes,  with
all  certainty,  are  affirmed  to  be  only  physical  mixtures.

Further,  as  a  rule,  the  formation  of  chemical  compounds  is
attended  with  considerable  changes  of  volume  and  energy,  quite
different  from  the  case  of  simple  union  in  a  physical  mixture ;  more-
over, the  external  work  which  we  must  apply  in  order  to  separate
the  components  of  the  mixture,  is  much  greater  in  the  case  of  the
chemical  compound  than  in  that  of  the  physical  mixture.  All  this
means  that  the  union  of  the  components  of  the  first,  i.e.  the  physical
mixture,  is  much  less  intimate  than  in  the  second,  i.e.  the  chemical
compound.

Nevertheless,  the  distinctions  between  physical  mixtures  and  chemi-
cal compounds  are  only  relative,  and  we  find  in  nature  all  gradations
between  these  extremes.  Thus  we  are  inclined  to  speak  of  the  solu-
tion of  a  salt  in  water  as  a  physical  mixture,  on  account  of  the  ease
with  which  the  components  can  be  separated  from  each  other ;  thus
we  can  remove  pure  water  from  the  solution  both  by  evaporation  and
by  freezing ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  we  can  extract  the  pure  salt
without  difficulty  by  crystallisation.  At  the  same  time,  many  pro-
perties of  salts  may  be  changed  in  a  very  pronounced  way  by  the
process  of  solution  :  this  happens  in  a  very  manifest  way,  for  example,
on  dissolving  anhydrous  copper  sulphate  in  water ;  it  is  a  greyish-
white  substance  which  in  solution  assumes  an  intense  blue  colour.
These  and  other  phenomena  suggest  emphatically  that  there  is  a
chemical  process  associated  with  solution.  Nevertheless,  on  the  other
hand,  in  the  union  of  various  substances  to  form  a  new  homogeneous
complex,  which  for  good  reasons  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  chemical  com-
pound, we  find  that  certain  properties  of  the  components  are  un-
changed. Thus,  for  example,  in  the  union  of  iodine  and  mercury  to
form  mercuric  iodide,  we  find  that  the  heat  capacity  of  the  newly-
formed  complex  is  almost  exactly  the  same  as  before  the  union ;  thus
the  specific  heat  of  each  element  remains  unchanged  in  the  compound.

The  Law  of  Constant  and Multiple Proportions.— The

quantitative  investigation  of  the  amounts  in  which  the  different  elements
are  present,  has  led  to  a  much  sharper  distinction  between  physical
mixtures  and  chemical  compounds  :  the  former  usually  have  a  variable
composition  according  to  the  method  of  preparation,  but  the  com-
position of  the  latter  is  constant.  John  Dalton  (1808)  found  a
wonderfully  simple  law  to  express  the  relative  quantities  according  to

INTRODUCTION  31

Avhich  the  particular  elements  are  contained  in  compounds  of  constant
composition ;  this  is  called  the  law  of  constant  and  multiple  proportions.
This  states  that  one  can  find  for  every  particular  element,  a  certain
number  which  we  will  designate  as  the  combining  weight,  which  is  the
standard  unit  for  the  quantity  of  the  element  entering  into  all  its
various  compounds.  The  quantities  of  the  various  elements  in  their  respective
compounds  are  either  in  the  exact  ratios  of  their  combining  weights,  or  else
in  simple  multiples  of  these.

This  law  is  the  foundation  of  chemical  investigation;  thus  in-
numerable analyses,  and  also  especially  the  determinations  of  the  com-
bining weights  of  the  elements,  conducted  in  the  most  various  ways
and  with  the  greatest  possible  care,  show  that  this  law  holds  good
with  practically  absolute  exactness,  for  the  union  of  the  elements  in
all  compounds  which  are  shown  to  be  genuine  chemical  compounds.

The  Molecular  Hypothesis. — Although  it  appears  entirely  feas-
ible to  construct  a  methodical  chemical  system  on  the  basis  of  the
empirical  laws  of  the  exchange  of  matter  and  energy  as  given  above,
in  which  the  empirical  data  can  be  comprehensively  arranged,  yet  in
addition  to  these,  and  indeed  earlier  than  they,  there  was  introduced
a  hypothesis  concerning  the  constitution  of  material  aggregations ;
although  this  was  advanced  in  ancient  times,  yet  it  was  first  practically
employed  for  a  deeper  and  clearer  conception  of  chemical  processes  by
Dalton  and  Wollaston  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  and
since  then  it  has  remained  as  the  guiding  principle  of  Chemistry  and
Physics.  In  the  light  of  this  hypothesis,  a  material  aggregate  does
not  fill,  continuously  and  in  all  points,  the  gross  space  occupied  by  it ;
but  the  material  aggregate  is  composed  of  particles  which,  though
very  small,  are  yet  of  finite  dimensions  ;  these  are  situated  more  or  less
distantly  from  each  other,  and  are  called  the  molecules  of  matter.
The  fact  that  matter  appears  to  fill  space  continuously,  that  the
gaps  between  the  separate  molecules  escape  us,  and  that  these,  as  such,
are  inaccessible  to  our  immediate  knowledge,  much  more  to  our  un-
biassed senses,  all  this  is  easily  explained  by  the  smallness  of  the
molecule,  and  by  our  inability  to  grasp  such  tiny  dimensions.

Whether  the  molecular  hypothesis  can  be  squared  with  the  actual
facts,  or  whether  it  merely  owes  its  origin  to  our  existing  inability  at
present  to  come  at  a  deeper  knowledge  of  natural  phenomena  from  any
other  view — whether,  perchance,  the  further  building  up  of  the  doctrine
of  energy  will  lead  to  another  and  a  clearer  conception  of  matter,
this  is  not  the  place  nor  the  time  to  discuss.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  this
is  the  most  important  and  decisive  verdict,  viz.,  that  the  molecular
hypothesis,  more  than  any  other  theoretical  speculation,  has  given
powerful  and  varied  assistance  to  every  branch  of  natural  science,  and
to  chemistry  in  particular.  Therefore,  in  the  following  presentation
of  theoretical  chemistry,  the  molecular  hypothesis  will  receive  special

32  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

consideration,  and  also  in  some  cases  it  will  be  introduced  where,  perhaps,
one  can  advance  as  far  without  it  as  with  it,  but  where  by  the  intro-
duction of  molecular  conceptions  the  demonstration  gains  in  interest
and  brevity  of  expression.  Even  to  our  day,  the  further  extension  of
the  molecular  hypothesis  has  borne  remarkably  great  and  unexpectedly
fine  fruit  for  the  positive  enrichment  of  our  science ;  therefore  why
should  we  not  ever  strive  to  make  our  conception  of  the  molecule  more
tangible,  and  at  the  same  time  furnish  our  eyes  with  increasingly
powerful  microscopes  for  the  consideration  of  this  molecular  world  1

The  Atom  and  the  Molecule. — The  first  great  result  of  the
assumption  of  a  discrete  parting  of  matter  in  space,  was  the  simple  and
obvious  explanation  of  the  law  of  constant  and  multiple  proportions,
by  its  discoverer  Dalton.  This  hypothesis,  by  one  effort  of  modern
science,  arose  like  a  phoenix  from  the  ashes  of  the  old  Greek  philosophy.

The  formation  of  a  chemical  compound  from  its  elements,  in  the
light  of  the  molecular  hypothesis,  may  be  most  easily  conceived  in
this  way,  viz.,  that  the  smallest  parts  of  the  element  enter  into  the
molecules  of  the  compound.  Therefore  these  molecules  must  be
divisible,  and  such  a  separation  takes  place  when  a  compound  decom-
poses into  its  elements.  Thus  we  reach  the  assumption  that  a
molecule  does  not  continuously  fill  the  space  appropriated  by  it,  but  is
a  discrete  aggregate  of  separable  particles  in  its  total  space.  These
particles  we  call  "atoms."  These  atoms,  by  the  union  of  which,
molecules  are  made,  are  all  alike  if  they  belong  to  the  molecule  of  one
element,  but  different  if  they  belong  to  the  molecule  of  a  chemical
compound.  Only  in  the  first  case  [i.e.  of  an  element]  can  it  happen
that  a  molecule  may  consist  of  a  single  atom.  The  force  which  binds  the
atoms  in  molecular  union,  we  call  the  "  chemical  affinity  "  of  the  atom.
To  the  action  of  this  force  we  must  primarily  ascribe  the  fact  that  the
properties  of  the  atom  vary  so  much  according  to  the  molecular  com-
pound to  which  they  belong,  and  that  their  properties  in  the  compounds
are  commonly  so  different  from  their  properties  in  the  free  state.

Many  experimental  facts  are  in  favour  of  the  obvious  assumption
that  the  atoms  of  one  and  the  same  element  are  equally  heavy,  and
that  the  molecules  of  a  unitary  compound  have  the  same  composition.
Therefore  the  relative  weights  with  which  the  elements  enter  into  a
compound  must  be  those  according  to  which  the  elements  enter  into  the
molecule ;  and  as  a  definite  number  of  atoms  always  unite  to  form  a
molecule  of  a  compound,  so  will  the  composition  of  this  molecule  always
be  definite.  Further,  since  molecules  of  all  kinds  of  compounds  always
contain  a  whole  number  of  atoms,  and  usually  not  many,  therefore  the
relative  weights  with  which  the  elements  enter  into  union  to  form  the  different
compounds,  must  be  either  in  the  same  ratios  as  the  atomic  weights,  or  simple
multiples  of  these.  Experiment  confirms  these  demands  of  the  atomic
theory  to  the  greatest  degree  :  the  last  statement  contains  the  law  of

INTRODUCTION  33

constant  and  multiple  proportions,  but  it  is  an  essential  extension  of
this  empirical  statement,  in  that  the  combining  weights,  which  are  only
obtained  by  experiment,  are  given  a  more  obvious  meaning.  In  the
light  of  the  atomic  theory,  the  combining  weights  and  the  atomic
weights  must  obviously  stand  in  simple  ratios  to  each  other;  these
latter,  [i.e.  the  atomic  weights,]  cannot  be  ascertained  without  further
experimental  data,  not  always  free  from  arbitrariness,  and  only  by  the
comparison  of  the  atomic  weight  determinations,  is  the  way  assured
which  leads  to  the  adoption  of  the  relative  value  of  the  atomic  weights,
at  present  assumed  as  safe,  within  the  limits  of  the  error.

The  Table  of  the  Elements. — Since  we  cannot  obtain  the  absolute
atomic  weights  from  the  stoichiometric  combining  ratios,  but  only  the
relative  figures,  there  is  some  opportunity  for  the  choice  of  unity.  By
Dalton,  hydrogen  was  taken  as  the  basis  of  the  atomic  weights,  as  its
figures  are  the  smallest  of  all  the  elements.  But  as  the  exact  deter-
mination of  the  relative  combining  weights  of  the  other  elements
respectively  with  hydrogen,  offers  experimental  difficulties,  and  further-
more, as  most  combining  weights  of  the  elements  are  made  from  oxygen
compounds,  Berzelius  made  the  atomic  weight  of  oxygen  the  basis,  and
placed  it  at  100,  in  order  to  have  no  atomic  weight  less  than  unity.
Recently  there  has  been  a  return  to  Dalton's  unit  for  many  reasons  ;
but  the  misfortune  exists  as  before,  that  the  ratio  in  which  hydrogen
and  oxygen  unite  to  form  water  has  not  yet  been  satisfactorily  deter-
mined— at  least  to  one  part  in  a  thousand  ;  and  therefore,  after  every
new  determination  of  this  ratio  there  must  follow  a  recalculation  of  all
the  atomic  weights.  How  unsatisfactory  it  is  to  work  with  atomic
weights  of  a  selected  value  is  obvious.  The  fact  that  it  is  so  very
hard  to  obtain  pure  hydrogen,  and  to  weigh  it  with  satisfactory  accuracy,
explains  the  great  difficulty  of  a  sharp  determination  of  its  combining
weight.  Therefore  from  different  sources1  a  proposal  has  been  made  by
way  of  compromise,  the  universal  acceptance  of  whicli  will  be  only  a
question  of  a  short  time.  The  ratio  of  the  atomic  weights  of  hydrogen
and  oxygen  is  nearly  1:16;  if  then  we  assume  the  atomic  weight
of  oxygen  as  the  normal,  and  not  1,  but

0  =  16-000,

then  the  atomic  weight  of  hydrogen  will  be  nearly  but  not  exactly  1,
and  we  unite  the  advantages  of  the  units  chosen  by  both  Dalton  and
Berzelius  ;  thus  we  are  entirely  relieved  from  the  necessity  of  changing
the  atomic  weight  of  all  the  other  elements,  after  every  new  determina-
tion of  the  composition  of  water.

In  the  following  table  the  elements  are  arranged  in  alphabetical

1  Compare  Ostwald,  Alleg.  Chem.,  1.  20. Leipzig,  1891  ;  and  especially  the  Report
of  the  Commission  on  Atomic  Weights  (Ber.  d.  deutsch.  Chem.  Ges.  1898,  p.  2761).

D

34

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

order  with  their  symbols  and  their  atomic  weights  according  to  the
Commission : l —

Substance.

Symbol.

Substance.

Symbol.

Aluminium

Al

27-1

Neon

Ne

20-0

Antimony

Sb

120-2

Nickel .

Ni

58-7

Argon

A

39-9

Niobium  .

Nb

94

Arsenic .

As

75-0

Nitrogen  .

N

14-04

Barium .

Ba

137-4

Osmium .

Os

191

Beryllium

Be

9-1

Oxygen .

0

16-00

Bismuth  .

Bi

208-5

Palladium

Pd

106-5

Boron

B

11

Phosphorus

P

31-0

Bromine .

Br

79-96

Platinum  .

Pt

194-8

Cadmium  .

Cd

112-4

Potassium

K

39-15

Caesium .

Cs

133

Praseodymium  .

Pr

140-5

Calcium .

Ca

40-1

Radium .

Ra

225

Carbon . . .

C

12-00

Rhodium

Rh

103-0

Cerium

Ce

140

Rubidium

Rb

85-4

Chlorine .

€1

35-45

Ruthenium

Ru

101-7

Chromium

Cr

52-1

Samarium

Sm

150

Cobalt

Co

59-0

Scandium

Sc

44-1

Copper

Cu

63-6

Selenium  .

Se

79-2

Erbium .

Er

166

Silicon

Si

28-4

Fluorine .

F

19

Silver

Ag

107-93

Gadolinium

Gd

156

Sodium .

Na

23-05

Gallium .

Ga

70

Sulphur .

S

32-06

Germanium

Ge

72-5

Tantalum  .

Ta

183

Gold

Au

197-2

Tellurium

Te

127-6

Helium .

He

4

Terbium .

Tb

160

Hydrogen

H

1-008

Thallium  .

Tl

204-1

Indium .

In

114

Thorium  .

Th

232-5

Iodine

I

126-85

Thulium  .

Ta

171

Iridium .

Ir

193-0

Tin  . .

Sn

119-0

Iron

Fe

55-9

Titanium  .

Ti

48-1

Krypton .

Kr

87-8

Tungsten  .

W

184-0

Lanthanum

La

138-9

Uranium  .

u

238-5

Lead

Pb

206-9

Vanadium

V

51-2

Lithium .

Li

7-03

Xenon

X

128

Magnesium

Mg

24-36

Ytterbium

Yb

173

Manganese

Mn

55-0

Yttrium .

Y

89-0

Mercury .

Hg

200-0

Zinc.

Zn

65-4

Molybdenum .

Mo

96-0

Zirconium

Zr

90-6

Neodymium

Nd

143-6

Classification  of  Natural  Processes. — Natural  changes  have
long  been  grouped  into  physical  and  chemical,  in  the  former  the  com-
position of  matter  usually  plays  an  unimportant  part,  whereas  in  the
latter  it  is  the  chief  object  of  consideration.  From  the  point  of  view
of  molecular  theory  a  physical  process  is  one  in  which  the  molecules
remain  intact,  a  chemical  process,  one  in  which  their  composition
is  altered.  This  classification  has  real  value,  as  is  shown  by  the

Ber.  d.  d.  Chem.  Ges. 1903,  p.  8.

INTRODUCTION  35

customary  separation  of  physics  and  chemistry,  not  only  in  teaching,
but  in  methods  of  research  :  a  fact  that  is  all  the  more  striking  as  both
sciences  deal  with  the  same  fundamental  problem,  in  reducing  to  the
simplest  rules  the  complicated  phenomena  of  the  external  world.  But
this  separation  is  not  altogether  salutary,  and  is  especially  an  obstacle
in  exploring  the  boundary  region  where  physicists  and  chemists  need  to
work  in  concert.

But  since  thermodynamic  laws  appear  to  be  applicable  to  all  the
phenomena  of  the  external  world,  a  classification  based  on  them
suggests  itself.  The  fundamental  formula

A U-TdA
XdT

indicates  the  following  special  cases  : —

1.  U  =  A;  the  changes  in  free  and  total  energy  are  equal. Then
the  temperature  coefficient  of  A  and  therefore  also  of  U  is  zero,  i.e.
temperature  does  not  influence  the  phenomenon  in  question,  at  least
not  as  regards  its  thermodynamic  properties. Conversely,  if  the  last
condition  is  fulfilled  A  =  U. This  behaviour  is  shown  by  all  systems
in  which  only  gravitational,  electric,  and  magnetic  forces  act ; these
can  be  described  by  means  of  a  function  (the  potential)  which  is  inde-
pendent of  temperature. Also  in  most  chemical  processes  A  and  U
are  approximately  equal  (see  Book  IV.  chap.  v.).

dA

2.  U  =  0,  so  that  A  =  T-^,  or  A  is  proportional  to  the  absolute

temperature.  The  expansion  of  a  perfect  gas  and  mixture  of  dilute
solutions  are  instances  of  this  behaviour,  in  which  the  influence  of
temperature  comes  out  the  most  clearly  (gas  thermometer).

3.  A  =  0,  and  therefore  U  =  -  T-=.

This  condition  can  only  occur  at  single  points  of  temperature ;  but
A  can  be  small  in  comparison  with  U  over  a  considerable  range  of
temperature.  As  then  the  percentage  variation  of  A  must  be  large,
the  influence  of  temperature  must  be  very  marked  in  such  cases
(evaporation,  fusion,  dissociation),  i.e.  all  properly  " physico-chemical"
phenomena.

Case  3  is  of  course  not  so  strikingly  simple,  and  does  not  bring  to
life  such  important  hypotheses  as  Case  1,  which  introduced  attractive
forces  into  science,  and  Case  2,  which  was  decisive  for  the  development
of  the  molecular  theory.

The  case  U  =  0  and  A  =  0  would  not  be  a  process  in  the  thermo-
dynamic sense.  Such  cases,  however,  exist  and  are  of  importance
(movement  of  a  mass  at  right  angles  to  the  direction  of  gravity,
passage  of  one  optical  isomer  into  the  other,  etc.),  so  it  appears  that

36  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

though  thermodynamics  suggests  important  points  in  the  classification
of  phenomena,  it  is  too. narrow  l  to  cover  the  whole.

The  Principle  of  Arrangement. — As  we  have  thus  obtained  a
general  glimpse  in  this  introductory  sketch,  a  few  words  may  here  be
premised,  touching  the  division  of  the  material  to  be  considered  in  the
following  pages.  It  is  to  be  treated  in  a  series  of  four  books.  In  the
first  we  will  consider  the  universal  properties  of  matter,  devoting  our-
selves almost  exclusively  to  the  basis  of  facts  experimentally  verified
from  all  sides ;  the  doctrine  of  energy  will  also  here  do  useful  service,
inasmuch  as  it  will  not  only  throw  light  upon  the  empirical  data,  but
also  very  often  will  broaden  and  deepen  the  results  of  observations.
The  second  book  is  devoted  essentially  to  developing  the  molecular
hypothesis,  and,  accordingly,  more  than  the  first,  which  is  on  the  whole
physical,  leads  us  into  the  region  of  questions  characteristically
chemical ;  here  will  be  specially  considered  the  relations  between
chemical  composition  and  physical  behaviour.

As  we  shall  have  studied  the  systems  thus  considered,  in  the  light
respectively  of  their  properties  of  matter  or  of  energy,  we  will  then
direct  our  attention  to  the  changes  which  they  undergo  under  the
action  of  chemical  forces,  and  the  conditions  under  which  these  forces
find  themselves  reduced  to  equilibrium.  The  last  two  books  are,
accordingly,  devoted  to  the  doctrine  of  affinity,  and  according  to  the
twofold  nature  of  chemical  decompositions,  relate  respectively  to
the  properties  of  matter  and  of  energy  :  in  the  third  book  we  will  con-
sider the  transformations  of  matter ;  in  the  fourth,  the  transformations  of
energy.

1  This  of  course  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  two  laws  of  thermodynamics  are  insufficient
as  an  explanation  of  nature  (e.g.  they  take  no  account  of  the  course  of  phenomena  in
time) ;  unlike  the  molecular  theory,  in  which  such  a  limitation  has  not  so  far  been
shown  to  exist.

BOOK  I

THE UNIVERSAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER
CHAPTER I

THE  GASEOUS  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION

The  Universal  Properties  of  Gases. — Matter  occurring  in  the
gaseous  state  has  the  property  of  completely  filling  all  available  space,
and,  if  not  acted  upon  by  any  external  force,  as  gravity  for  example,
of  filling  it  at  all  points  in  equal  density.  The  gas  particles  are
easily  movable  against  each  other,  and  the  very  small  internal  friction
makes  it  easy  to  give  a  gas  mass,  at  constantly  maintained  volume,
any  desired  form  without  noticeable  expenditure  of  work.  For  the
vessel  in  which  the  gas  is  kept,  by  its  shape  and  capacity,  determines
the  form  and  density  of  the  enclosed  gas.

But  a  change  of  volume,  and  the  associated  change  in  density,  calls
for  an  important  expenditure  of  work.  Now,  since  gases  have  the
tendency  to  occupy  the  greatest  amount  of  space  possible,  or,  in  other
words,  as  a  result  of  this  tendency,  to  exert  a  pressure  on  the  walls
of  the  enclosing  vessel ;  therefore  by  diminishing  their  volume  external
work  must  be  performed,  and  by  an  increase  of  their  volume  external
work  is  gained.

In  their  reciprocal  relations,  gases  are  characterised  by  unlimited
reciprocal  permeability  :  one  can  mix  with  each  other  gases  most  dis-
similar in  composition,  in  all  proportions,  and  for  this  there  is  needed  no
expenditure  of  external  work ;  but  it  is  rather  a  process  which  takes
place  "  of  its  own  accord,"  and  therefore  by  the  right  utilisation,  it
can  perform  external  work.

A  further  characteristic,  at  least  under  the  conditions  commonly
employed  for  working  with  gases,  is  the  very  slight  density  exhibited
by  matter  in  the  gaseous  state ;  thus  1  c.cm.  of  atmospheric  air,  under
atmospheric  pressure  at  0°,  weighs  only  0 '001 293  times  as  much  as
1  c.cm.  of  water.  But  this  is  not  an  essential  characteristic  of  the

37

38  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

gaseous  condition  ;  since  under  certain  conditions,  by  raising  the
external  pressure,  we  can  bring  a  gas  to  any  desired  density  ;  but  by
reason  of  the  great  tenuity  of  matter,  which  we  meet  with  in  the  case
of  gases  not  too  strongly  compressed,  there  results  a  clearly  expressed
simplicity  of  the  laws  which  control  both  their  physical  and  their
chemical  relations,  —  laws,  moreover,  which  are  of  fundamental  signifi-
cance in  the  development  of  our  conceptions  of  matter  and  of  energy,
and  also  for  our  conceptions  of  chemical  processes.  As  we  will  make
continual  use  of  these  gas  laws,  they  will  be  enumerated  below,  and  in
a  form  suited  for  subsequent  application  ;  in  a  later  section,  reference
will  be  made  to  the  changes  which  these  laws  experience  in  the  case
of  gases  compressed  to  a  great  density.

The  Laws  of  Gases.  —  1.  The  pressure  p,  and  the  volume  v,  at
constant  temperature,  are  inversely  proportional  to  each  other,  i.e.  pv  =  a
constant  (law  of  Boyle  and  Mariotte).  If  wre  bring  successively  into
the  space  of  one  liter,  1,  2,  3,  ...  to  n  grams  of  oxygen,  then  we
obtain  1,  2,  3,  ...  to  n-fold  pressure  respectively  ;  every  gram  of
oxygen  presses  as  much  on  the  enclosing  vessel  as  though  it  were
there  alone.  We  can  express  this  result  thus  :  —  the  pressure  of
a  gas  is  proportional  to  its  concentration,  provided  its  temperature  be
constant.

2.  As  a  result  of  an  elevation  of  temperature,  at  constant  volume,  the
pressure  of  a  gas  increases  a  certain  amount  which  is  independent  of  the
nature  of  the  gas  and  of  the  initial  temperature:  —  or  what  is  almost
identical  in  the  light  of  the  first  law  of  gases,  at  constant  pressure,  the
volume  increases;  the  increase  of  pressure  corresponding  to  a  rise  of
1°  C.  is  2-i¥  [  =  0*003663]  of  that  pressure  which  the  gas  exerts  at
the  same  volume  at  0°.  Accordingly,  at  the  temperature  t°,  if  p0  and
v0  denote  respectively  the  pressure  and  volume  at  0°,  then  the  pressure
which  the  gas  exerts  at  the  constant  volume  V0,  is

and  the  volume  which  the  gas  would  assume,  at  constant  pressure  p0,
would  be  (law  of  Gay  Lussac)

V  =  v0(l  +  0-003663t).

"When  pressure  and  volume  both  change  during  the  heating,  if  at
t°  they  amount  respectively  to  p  and  v,  then,  according  to  the  first
law,

p  =  P^ and v  =  V^°;
v  p

and  if  by  one  of  these  equations  we  eliminate  P  and  V  in  the  equa-
tions given  above,  we  obtain

CHAP.  I  THE  GASEOUS  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  39

pv  =  p0v0(l  +  0-003663t),
and  if  we  reckon  from  —273°  instead  of  from  0°,  we  obtain

273 '

in  which  T  =  273°  + 1°, and  its  factor  is  a  constant  for  any  given
quantity  of  gas.

3.  When  different  gases  unite  chemically,  the  volumes  of  the  reacting
gases,  measured  of  course  under  similar  conditions,  bear  simple  ratios  to  each
other,  and  the  volume  of  the  resulting  compound,  if  gaseous,  also  stands  in  a
simple  ratio  to  the  volumes  of  its  components  (law  of  Gay  Lussac).

4.  The  total  pressure  exerted  by  a  gas  mixture  on  the  walls  of  a  vessel,
is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  pressures  which  each  gas  singly  would  exert
(Dalton's  law).

The  laws  given  above  are  the  immediate  expression  of  experi-
ment ;  as  to  their  universal  validity,  it  can  at  once  be  shown  that  they
are  not  absolutely  correct,  but  that  they  suffer  variations  (at  most  very
slight),  which,  however,  increase,  the  greater  the  pressure  and  the  lower
the  temperature.  Moreover,  they  are  not  free  from  great  exceptions,
inasmuch  as  there  are  gases,  as  for  example  nitrogen  di-oxide,  iodine
vapour,  etc.,  which  at  elevated  temperatures  certainly  cannot  be  con-
densed proportionally  to  the  external  pressure,  and  which  do  not
expand  in  proportion  to  their  distance  from  the  absolute  zero.  But
in  all  these  cases  it  has  been  shown,  as  we  will  see  by  the  laws  of
dissociation,  that  the  change  of  volume  or  temperature  is  accompanied
by  a  chemical  decomposition,  and  that  if  we  take  the  influence  of  this
into  consideration,  the  laws  of  gases  preserve  their  full  validity,  at
least  with  variations  of  small  amount.

The  Hypothesis  of  Avogadro. — To  explain  the  laws  of  gases,
and  especially  the  fact  that  the  union  of  gases  always  occurs  according
to  very  simple  proportions  by  volume,  Avogadro  (1811)  advanced  a
hypothesis  which,  after  much  opposition,  has  come  to  be  recognised
as  an  important  foundation  of  molecular  physics,  as  well  as  of  all
chemical  investigation.  According  to  this  hypothesis,  all  gases  under  the
same  conditions  of  temperature  and  pressure,  in  unit  volume,  have  the  same
number  of  molecules.  Thus  the  densities  of  gases,  measured  under  the
same  external  conditions,  have  the  same  ratios  to  each  other  as  their
molecular  weights.

Naturally  this  hypothesis  can  no  more  be  absolutely  proved  than
the  molecular  hypothesis ;  but  it  appears  at  the  outset  very  plausible,
and  it  explains  in  the  simplest  way  the  rationale  of  the  third  law  of
gases.  Further,  the  numerous  results  which  have  been  obtained  in
consequence  of  its  application,  are  telling  witnesses  in  its  favour ;  the
molecular  weights  inferred  from  investigations  of  a  purely  chemical

40  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  I

character,  are  commonly  in  surprising  accord  with  those  reckoned  from
the  vapour  density  of  gases.  The  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  as  will  be
further  shown  in  detail,  leads,  in  an  entirely  independent  way,  to
the  same  assumption.  The  utility  of  the  hypothesis  will  be  placed  in
such  a  clear  light  that,  as  will  be  shown  in  the  theory  of  solutions,
it  can  be  applied  to  the  case  of  substances  occurring  in  very  dilute
solution,  and  furnishes  proof  thereto,  the  applicability  of  which  was
formerly  entirely  unsuspected.  Finally,  a  fact  which  speaks  con-
vincingly in  favour  of  the  hypothesis,  is  that  it  has  been  very  successful
in  a  case  which  was  formerly  supposed  to  be  a  noted  exception,  viz.,
abnormal  vapour  densities,  as  will  be  explained  in  the  description  of
the  dissociation  phenomena  of  gases.

By  the  help  of  Avogadro's  rule,  the  laws  of  gases  l  can  be  summed
up  in  the  following  form  :  —

If  we  take  a  gram-molecule  of  the  various  gases  into  consideration,
i.e.  the  molecular  weight  expressed  in  grams,  as  for  example,  2g.  H2,
32g.  02,  18g.  H2O,  etc.,  then  for  every  gas  mixture  there  exists  the
following  simple  relation  between  p,  v,  and  the  temperature  T,
counting  from  -  273°,  thus,

in  which  the  factor  R  is  only  conditioned  by  the  unit  of  measure  chosen,  lut
is  independent  of  the  chemical  composition  of  the  gases  in  question.

According  to  measurements  of  the  density  of  various  gases  the
pressure  which  a  gram-molecule,  or  mol  (as  it  is  now  called)  of  a  gas
at  0°  would  exercise  is  22'42  atmospheres,  i.e.  22'42  x  760  mm.  of
mercury  at  0°  measured  at  sea-level  and  latitude  45°,  when  the  gas
occupies  one  litre.  Hence

The  numerical  factor  occurring  in  this  equation,  —  an  equation
which  finds  abundant  application  in  the  most  varied  calculations,  is
attended  with  a  slight  uncertainty  which  is  too  small  to  be  regarded
for  most  purposes.  The  cause  of  this  lies  not  so  much  in  the  measure-
ments from  which  the  numerical  factor  is  derived  as  in  the  deviation
that  the  various  gases  show  from  the  laws  according  to  which  the
formula  was  deduced  —  a  deviation  that  is  perceptible  within  the  limits
of  pressure  of  the  measurements.  Thus  oxygen,  hydrogen,  etc.  give
different  values  of  E-,  and  again  the  values  obtained  at  other  temper-
atures differ  from  those  for  0°.  But,  indeed,  if  we  employ  the
measurements  obtained  from  gases  of  normal  behaviour,  the  variations
of  this  numerical  factor  are  only  some  fractions  of  a  per  cent.

1  Horstmann,  B.  Berichte,  14.  1243  (1881).

CHAP.

THE  GASEOUS  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION

41

The  following  observations  serve  for  calculating  the  gas  constant.
According  to  the  measurements  of  Regnault,  Jolly,  Leduc,  and
Rayleigh  the  densities  of  the  following  gases  at  0°  and  760  mm.  at
sea-level  and  45°  latitude  are  : l —

Gas.

M.

Density.

Po-

Hydrogen

2-016

89-88  xlO~6

22-43

Oxygen .

32-00

1429-1

22-39

Nitrogen

28-08

1250-7

22-45

Nitric  oxide .

30-04

1342-65

2^-37

Carbon  monoxide

28-00

1250-7

22-44

Nitrous  oxide  .

44-08

1970-6

22-37

Methane  .

16-04

714-64

22-44

Ammonia

17-07

762-1

22-39

Of  course  only  such  gases  are  available  for  calculating  R  as  follow  the
laws  of  gases  closely,  and  in  particular  have  the  normal  coefficient  of
expansion.

Dividing  1000  times  the  density  (i.e.  mass  of  a  litre)  by  the
molecular  weight  M  we  obtain  the  numbers  given  under  p0,  i.e.
pressure  in  atmospheres  of  a  mol  contained  in  one  litre.  As  at
latitude  45°  the  acceleration  of  gravity  is  980'6  and  the  density  of
mercury  at  0°  is  13*596  the  atmosphere  is

76  x  980-6  x  13-596  =  1,013,250  absolute  units.

The  densities  of  the  first  three  gases  have  been  measured  with
remarkable  agreement  by  a  number  of  experimentalists2  (Regnault,
Jolly,  Leduc,  Rayleigh,  Morley,  etc.),  the  rest  are  from  the  observa-
tions of  Regnault.  The  mean  of  the  first  three  is  p0  =  22*42  of  the
others  2 2 -40.  We  shall  adopt  the  value  22'42.

The  density  of  atmospheric  nitrogen  (containing  argon)  is
1257'!  x  10~6  from  which  p0  =  22'34.  The  difference  between  this
value  and  2 2 '40  or  2 2 '4 2  was  sufficient — in  view  of  the  exactness  of
the  gaseous  laws — to  indicate  an  impurity  in  the  nitrogen,  and  so
lead  to  the  discovery  of  argon.

If  n  mols  of  different  gases  are  under  the  pressure  P,  and  if  they
fill  the  volume  V  at  temperature  T,  then,  of  course,  in  the  sense  of
Dalton's  law

PV  =  nRT.

The  counting  of  the  temperature  from  -  273°  is  called  the  "abso-
lute temperature  scale,"  and  T  the  "absolute  temperature."  If  we
regard  the  gas  equation  as  available  even  for  very  small  values  of  T,

1  For  the gravity  correction  see  Landolt  and  Bornstein, Physikalische-Chemische
Tabellen,  2nd  ed.,  p.  115,  table  59.

2  See  Lord  Rayleigh,  Chem.  News,  67.  183,  198,  211  (1893).

42  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

and  whether  this  is  allowable  or  not  is  generally  irrelevant  in  its
practical  application,  we  arrive  at  the  result  that  a  gas  cooled  to  -  273°
Celsius,  would  exert  no  pressure  on  the  walls  of  the  containing  vessel :
this  point,  viz.  -  273°,  is  called  the  "absolute  zero."

The  formula  given  above,  by  means  of  the  mechanical  theory  of
heat,  is  applicable  to  several  of  the  most  diverse  processes ;  thus
the  gas  law  is  employed  to  ascertain  the  convertibility  of  heat  into
external  work  (p.  20).  The  gas  equation  is  implicitly  contained  in
all  thermodynamical  formulae,  in  which  the  "  absolute  temperature "
almost  always  plays  an  important  part.  Scarcely  any  empirical  law
of  nature  has  as  yet  been  applied  to  such  an  extent  as  the  law  ex-
pressed by  this  gas  equation.

The  Content  of  Energy  of  a  Gas. — If  one  connects  two  vessels
containing  gas,  but  at  different  pressures,  so  that  an  equalisation  of
pressure  between  the  vessels  takes  place,  but  with  no  performance  of
external  work,  then  in  this  process  heat  will  be  neither  developed  nor
absorbed  (Gay  Lussac,  Joule,  Thomson) ;  one  will  obtain  the  same
result  if  one  vessel  is  exhausted  by  an  air-pump.

This  result,  expressed  most  simply  in  the  language  of  thermo-
dynamics, states  that  the  content  of  energy  of  a  gas  is  independent  of  its
volume.

If  one  allows  two  vessels  which  contain  two  different  gases  to
communicate  with  each  other,  these  gases  begin  at  once  to  diffuse  into
each  other,  and  the  final  condition  consists  in  a  complete  equalisation
of  the  difference  in  composition.  In  this  process,  as  well  as  in  the
mixing  of  two  gases,  neither  development  nor  absorption  of  heat
is  observed,  provided,  of  course,  that  no  chemical  action  takes  place.
The  content  of  energy  of  a  gas  mixture  is  accordingly  equal  to  the  sum  of  the
contents  of  the  ingredients.

These  laws  are  of  fundamental  importance  for  the  thermochemistry
of  gases  ;  they  are,  like  the  laws  mentioned  above,  available  only  in
the  case  of  ideal  gases,  and  become  inexact  with  lowering  temperature
and  increasing  pressure  of  the  gas  in  question.

The  Specific  Heat  of  Gases. — Experience  has  shown  that  the
quantity  of  heat  which  must  be  imparted  to  a  definite  quantity  (by
weight)  of  a  gas,  in  order  to  raise  its  temperature  1°,  varies  accord-
ingly as  the  heating  takes  place  at  constant  pressure,  or  at  constant
volume ;  in  the  first  case  the  volume  increases  from  the  increase  in
temperature  according  to  the  laws  of  gases  (p.  38),  and  in  the  latter
case  the  pressure  of  the  gas  increases  -^-5  of  the  pressure  exerted
at  0°.

Accordingly  we  must  distinguish  between  the  specific  heat  of  a
gas  at  constant  pressure,  and  that  at  constant  volume.  Regarding  the
experimental  determination,  the  simplest  way  to  measure  the  specific
heat  at  constant  pressure,  is  by  a  process  patterned  after  the  method

CHAP.  I THE  GASEOUS  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  43

of  mixture,  and  which  consists  in  leading  the  warmed  gas  through  a
spiral  calorimeter  tube,  which  is  surrounded  with  water,  and  so  deter-
mining the  quantity  of  heat  which  is  given  out  by  the  cooling.
Delaroche  and  Berard  first  worked  with  this  method  (1811);  then
Eegriault  very  extensively  (1853);  and  recently  (1876)  E.  Wiede-
mann,  who  considered  especially  the  influence  of  temperature  on  the
specific  heat  of  gases,  and  Lussana.1  who  investigated  the  influence  of
pressure.

For  the  direct  determination  of  the  specific  heat  of  a  gas  at  con-
stant volume,  one  must  enclose  it  in  a  vessel,  warm  it  to  a  measured
temperature,  and  then  cool  it  by  dipping  it  in  a  calorimeter ;  but  the
attempt  to  determine  it  exactly,  is  thwarted  by  the  fact  that  the  heat
capacity  of  the  vessel  must  be  subtracted  from  that  of  the  system,  in
order  to  obtain  that  of  the  contained  gas,  and  the  heat  capacity  of  the
vessel  is  much  greater  than  that  of  the  contained  gas.2  But  with  the
aid  of  thermodynamics,  we  can  at  once  derive  a  simple  formula  which
allows  the  calculation  of  the  specific  heat  at  constant  volume,  from
that  at  constant  pressure  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  we  will
be  led  to  certain  experimental  measures  which  show  how  the  ratio  of
the  two  specific  heats  may  be  determined.

Instead  of  the  specific  heat  itself,  i.e.  the  heat  capacity  of  1  g.,  we
will  commonly  work  with  the  heat  capacity  of  1  g.-mol,  the  so-called
"  molecular  heat."  If  cp  and  cv  denote  respectively  the  specific  heats
of  a  gas  of  mol  wt.  M,  at  constant  pressure  and  constant  volume,  then
the  two  molecular  heats  are  respectively

Cp  =  Mcp and Cv  =  Mcv,
and  between  these  two  we  find  the  relation

Cp-Cv=l-99g.-caL,
as  will  be  further  shown  below.

The  Specific  Heat  of  Gases  at  Very  High  Temperatures.—

A  number  of  French  investigators  have  recently  succeeded  in  deter-
mining the  specific  heats  of  gases  at  very  high  temperatures  with  quite
a  considerable  degree  of  accuracy.  Mallard  and  Le  Chatelier3  ex-
ploded a  gas  mixture  of  known  composition  in  a  closed  iron  cylinder,
and  determined  the  maximal  pressure  developed  thereby  :  this  last
measurement  was  performed  at  first  with  a  Bourdon's  manometer,
which  recorded  its  data  by  means  of  a  needle  on  an  evenly  rotating
cylinder.  Later  these  same  investigators  employed  "  the  crushing  mano-
meter "  constructed  by  Sarreau  and  Yieille,4  on  which  the  pressure  was

1  Lussana,  Nuor.  dm.  (3),  36 5,  70,  130  (1894).

2  But  Joly  (Proc.  R. S.  Land.,  55.  390,  1894)  showed  that  for  sufficiently  con-
densed gases  this  difficulty  could  be  overcome.

3  Compt.  rend.,  93.  1014,  1076  (1881).  4  Ibid.,  95.  26  (1882).

44  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

measured  by  the  permanent  deformation  of  a  small,  solid,  copper
cylinder  placed  between  an  anvil  face  and  a  piston  on  which  the  pres-
sure to  be  determined  acted ;  also  here  the  time  occupied  in  develop-
ing the  pressure  was  determined  by  means  of  a  needle  and  a  rotating
cylinder.  Thus  by  measuring  the  maximal  pressure  of  the  explosion,
one  can  calculate  the  maximal  temperature,  and  since  the  heat
developed  by  the  explosion  is  known  from  the  thermochemical  data,
there  is  given  at  once  the  heat  capacity  of  the  gas  mixture.  A  cor-
rection must  be  made  to  account  for  the  heat  given  off  to  the  walls
of  the  explosion  bomb,  which  on  account  of  the  quick  occurrence  of  the
explosion  is  in  considerable ;  this  correction  can  be  calculated  from  the
velocity  of  cooling  observed  by  the  decrease  of  pressure  after  the
explosion,  or  it  can  be  determined  quite  accurately  in  an  experimental
way  by  the  use  of  receiving  vessels  of  varying  size.

From  the  fact  that  the  maximal  pressure  of  a  gas  mixture,  for
example, "  knall  gas,"  when  exploded  with  admixture  of  equal  volumes  of
nitrogen,  or  oxygen,  or  hydrogen,  or  carbon  monoxide,  experiences  the
same  diminution  of  temperature,  it  follows  that  these  gases  possess  the
same  heat  capacity  up  to  the  maximal  temperature  of  explosion,  i.e.  up
to  2700°.  This  is  true,  provided  that  these  gases  have  the  same
coefficient  of  expansion  up  to  these  temperatures,  a  thing  which  can
scarcely  be  doubted  after  the  measurements  of  V.  Meyer  and  Langer.1

These  results  have  been  confirmed  as  well  as  broadened  at  several
points  by  Vieille,2  and  also  by  Berthelot  and  Vieille.3  It  was  shown
later  that  nitrogen  and  carbon  monoxide  have  the  same  heat  capacity,
by  the  explosion  of  a  mixture  of  cyanogen  and  oxygen,  which  led  to
the  formation  of  carbon  monoxide  and  nitrogen ;  thus

C2N2  +  02  =  N2  +  200  ;

from  the  heat  developed  by  this  reaction  and  the  maximal  temperature
observed,  there  could  be  calculated  the  specific  heats  of  nitrogen  and
carbon  monoxide.  Finally,  from  further  researches  which  were  con-
ducted with  an  excess  of  nitrogen,  there  could  be  stated  the  following
formula  for  the  molecular  heat  of  N2,  H2,  02,  and  CO  at  constant
volume,  and  which  can  be  regarded  as  good  from  1600°  to  4500° ;  viz.

4-76  +  0-00244t.

For  the  latter  temperature,  4500°,  this  formula  gives  15'7  ;  i.e.
the  molecular  heat  of  the  permanent  gases  increases  very  considerably  with
the  temperature.

From  observations  on  the  maximal  pressure  in  the  explosion  of
hydrogen  and  carbon  monoxide,  in  the  presence  of  varying  quantities

1  Pyrochem. Untcrss. Brunswick,  1885.
2  Cmnpt.  rend.,  96.  1358  (1883).  3  Ibid.,  98.  545,  601,  770,  852  (1884).

CHAP.  I  THE  GASEOUS  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  45

of  nitrogen, Berthelot  and  Vieille  calculated  the  molecular  heat  of
water  vapour  to  be

16-2  +  0'0038(t-2000),

and  for  that  of  carbon  dioxide

19-1  +  0'0030(t-2000).

Both  formulae  refer  to  the  molecular  heat  at  constant  volume.

Later  Mallard  and  Le  Chatelier  1  used  in  a  very  similar  way  the
maximal  pressures  of  various  explosives  as  observed  by  Sarreau  and
Vieille,  to  calculate  the  specific  heats  of  gases,  and  thus  obtained  results
showing  undoubtedly  that  the  molecular  heats  of  the  "permanent"
gases  increase  strongly  at  higher  temperatures.

For  the  mean  molecular  heats  at  constant  volume  between  0°  and
t°,  they  found  —

Carbon  dioxide  . . . 6  '50  +  0  '00387  t

Water  vapour .... 578  +  0  -00287  t
Permanent  gases . . . 4  76  +  0  '00122  t

It  has  recently  been  thought,  for  various  reasons,  that  the  specific
heat  of  gases  does  not  increase  so  rapidly  with  temperature  as  this  ;
further  measurements  of  these  highly  important  data  are  most
desirable.

The  Dependence  of  the  Specific  Heat  of  Gases  on  the  Tem-
perature. —  It  has  been  already  repeatedly  shown  that  the  specific
heat  of  gases  steadily  decreases  with  decreasing  temperature.2

As  Le  Chatelier  3  noticed,  this  decrease  indicates  a  tendency  for  the
specific  heats  of  the  most  different  gases  to  approach  the  closer,  the  more  the
temperature  sinks,  and  at  absolute  zero  the  values  of  the  molecular  heats  at
constant  pressure  seem  to  converge  at  about  6*5.  The  observations,  there-
fore, can  be  represented  by  the  formula

in  which  T  represents  the  absolute  temperature,  and  "  a  "  represents  a
coefficient  which  is  greater  according  as  the  molecule  is  more  complex.
The  following  values  have  been  calculated  for  "  a  "  :—

Ho,N2,CX,,CO . . 00010  C2H5Br . . . 0-0324

NH3. .  . 0-0071  C.,H60 . . . 0-0403

C02  .
N20  .
C2H4.
CHC13

0-0084  C6H6 ....  0-0510

0-0089  CH3COOC2H5 . .  0'0674

0-0137  (C2H5)20 . . .  0-0738
0-0305

If,  for  example,  one  calculates  the  mean  specific  heats  measured  by

1  Wied.  Beibl.,  14.  364  (1890).

2  The  apparent  exceptions  exhibited  by  the  vapours  of  acetic  acid  and  of  nitrogen
dioxide  at  certain  temperature  intervals,  have  been  referred  to  dissociation  phenomena.

a  Zeitschr.  phys.  Chew,,  1.  456  (1887).

46  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

E.  Wiedemann  between  20°  and  200°,  with  the  help  of  the  formula  given
abcwe,  he  will  find  very  good  agreement.  Also  the  values  found  by
Le  Chatelier  at  very  high  temperatures  (see  above)  are  in  good  agree-
ment, since  the  true  molecular  heats  at  constant  pressure,  calculated  for
-  273°,  for  the  following  substances  are

C02  ..... 6-39

H20  ..... 6-22

H2,  N2,  02,  CO .  .6-10

All  are  nearly  equal  and  not  far  removed  from  6 '5.

The  Thermodynamics  of  Gases :  First  Law. — As  we  have
thus  in  the  preceding  sections  familiarised  ourselves  with  the  most
important  empirical  fads,  to  a  knowledge  of  which  we  have  been  led
by  the  experimental  study  of  the  behaviour  of  gases,  we  will  now  con-
sider, from  the  standpoint  of  thermodynamics,  that  which  will  lead  to
a  broader  and  deeper  knowledge,  It  must  be  emphasised  here  that
the  results  so  obtained  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  inferior  in  accuracy
to  the  empirical  facts  on  which  they  are  based.

The  law  of  the  conservation  of  energy  insists  that  the  change  in
total  energy,  which  a  system  experiences  in  passing  through  any  chosen
process,  is  independent  of  the  way  by  which  it  passes  from  the  one  to
the  other  condition.  Let  us  imagine  1  g.-mol  of  any  selected  gas
enclosed  in  a  vessel  of  volume  v,  which  can  be  brought  into  communi-
cation with  another  [empty]  vessel  of  volume  v' ;  and  let  us  conceive
that  this  system  passes  in  the  two  following  ways  from  the  same
initial  to  the  same  final  condition.  In  the  first  way,  the  g.-mol  of  gas,
which  originally  occupies  the  volume  v,  is  warmed  1°  in  temperature,
and  then  a  communication  established  between  the  two  vessels.  In
the  second  way,  communication  is  established  at  once  between  the  two
vessels,  and  then  the  gas,  which  now  occupies  the  volume  v  +  v',  is
warmed  1°.  In  neither  case  is  the  flowing  over  of  the  gas  from  the
full  to  the  empty  vessel  accompanied  by  any  change  of  energy — neither
the  performance  of  external  work,  nor  the  development  of  heat — since
the  content  of  energy  of  a  gas  is  independent  of  its  volume  (see  p.  42);
and  in  both  cases  the  change  of  energy  consists  solely  in  the  amount
of  heat  which  must  be  introduced  to  raise  the  temperature  of  the  gas
1°.  But  in  both  cases  the  quantity  of  heat  is  equal  to  the  molecular
heat  of  the  gas  at  constant  volume,  and  the  only  difference  is  that  in  the
first  way  the  gas  is  warmed  at  the  volume  v,  in  the  second  at  the
volume  v  +  v'.  The  two  quantities  of  heat  must  be  equal  to  each
other,  i.e.  the  molecular  heat,  and  of  course  the  specific  heat  also,  of  a  gas  at
constant  volume,  is  independent  of  the  volume  at  which  the  warming  occurs.

If  1  g.-mol  of  an  ideal  gas  is  changed  from  the  volume  v  to  that  of
v  +  V  in  this  way,  viz.  that  a  vessel  of  volume  v  which  holds  the  g.-mol
is  connected  with  an  empty  vessel  of  volume  v',  then  there  occurs  no
change  in  the  total  energy ;  but,  as  in  the  case  of  every  automatic  pro-

OHAP.  I  THE  GASEOU6  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  47

cess,  there  is  a  decrease  of  the  free  energy,  and  this  can  therefore  be
used  to  do  external  work.  The  question  is  then  to  find  such  a
mechanism  as  shall  furnish  the  maximal  work  as  is  necessary  for
the  application  of  the  second  law.

Such  a  mechanism  would  be  very  simple  in  this  case :  a  cylinder
closed  at  one  end  by  a  strong  head,  and  shut  at  the  other  by  a
movable  air-tight  piston,  will  satisfy  the  demands.  When  we  raise
the  piston  the  enclosed  gas  does  work  because  it  presses  on  the  piston
from  within ;  when  we  lower  it  we  must  overcome  the  gas  pressure.
If  the  cylinder  is  only  capable  of  sufficient  expansion  we  can  bring  the
enclosed  gas  to  any  desired  volume ;  and  that  by  means  of  this
apparatus  we  really  obtain  the  maximal  work  capable  of  being
obtained  in  the  expansion,  we  may  know  in  this  way,  viz.  that  in  a
compression  we  must  apply  the  same  amount  of  work  which  we  obtain  •
in  the  dilation.  Thus  the  mechanism  described  is  "reversible."

When  a  gas  expands  without  performing  external  work,  one
observes  no  thermal  effect ;  but  if,  by  the  apparatus  above  described,
e.g.,  one  uses  the  expansive  force  of  a  gas  to  do  external  work,  then  the
gas  must  lose  the  equivalent  amount  of  energy ;  and  conversely,  if  one
compresses  the  gas,  it  must  absorb  an  amount  of  energy  equal  to  the
work  of  compression.  Therefore,  by  the  application  of  the  law  of
the  conservation  of  energy  to  the  ideal  gas,  we  find  the  following
result,  viz.  a  gas  when  expanding  absorbs  heat  equivalent  to  the
external  work  it  performs,  and  when  suffering  compression  generates
heat  equivalent  to  the  external  work  spent  on  it.

Let  us  now  imagine  1  g.-mol  of  a  gas,  enclosed  in  the  cylinder
above  described,  to  be  warmed  1°  by  the  addition  of  heat;  in  general,
the  pressure  exerted  by  the  gas,  as  well  as  the  volume  occupied
by  the  gas,  will  vary  with  the  temperature ;  the  amount  of  heat
necessary  for  a  definite  elevation  of  temperature,  will  also  vary  accord-
ing to  the  manner  in  which  these  values  change,  as  is  shown  both  by
experiment,  and  by  a  consideration  of  some  suggestions  afforded  by  the
law  of  the  conservation  of  energy.  Most  easily  considered  are  the  two
following  limiting  cases: — Firstly,  we  will  add  to  1  g.-mol  of  a  gas
the  amount  of  heat  Cp,  required  to  raise  it  1°  in  temperature,  the
warming  being  so  conducted  that  the  pressure  remains  constant : —
or,  Secondly,  we  will  add  to  1  g.-mol  of  a  gas  the  amount  of  heat
Cv,  required  to  raise  'it  1°,  the  warming  being  so  conducted  that  the
volume  remains  constant.  These  quantities  of  heat,  Cp  and  Cv,  as
already  observed,  are  called  respectively,  the  molecular  heat  at  constant
pressure,  and  the  molecular  heat  at  constant  volume ;  by  division  by  the
mol.  wt.  of  the  gas  in  question,  we  obtain  respectively,  the  specific  heat
at  constant  pressure,  and  the  specific  heat  at  constant  volume.

In  order  to  obtain  the  relation  between  these  two  specific  heats,
on  the  one  hand  we  heat  the  g.-mol  of  gas,  whose  volume  is  v,  at
constant  pressure,  1°:  this  requires  Cp  g.-cal.  But  since  the  gas

48  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  1

expands  during  the  heating,  and,  indeed,  overcomes  the  constant  pres-
sure p  which  is  weighting  it  down,  so  at  the  same  time  external  work
will  be  performed,  which  is  found  by  the  product  of  the  pressure  and
the  increase  of  volume  ;  and  since  the  former  is  p,  and  the  latter  is

V  13V

=,  it  amounts  to  7^-. If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  heat  the  gas  at  con-

stant volume,  there  occurs  no  performance  of  external  work,  and  it
requires  only  the  addition  of  Cv  g.-cal.

Now,  according  to  the  law  of  the  conservation  of  energy,

p  ~ rn — V5

or  if  we  combine  with  it  the  gas  equation  (p.  40),

pv  =  RT,

we  shall  have

Cp — R  = Cy.

If  the  molecular  heat  is  expressed  in  g.-cal.  the  constant  E  must
be  also  so  reckoned.

Now,  if  we  express  p  in  atm.  and  v  in  litres,  then

pv  =  0-OS21T,
in  which

ft  -  0-0821  :

the  left  side  of  the  equation,  which  represents  the  product  of  pressure
and  volume,  is  a  quantity  of  energy  which  we  estimate  according  to
the  method  given  above  in  liter-atmospheres  (p.  12);  in  order  to
transform  it  to  g.-cal.  we  remember  that

1  litre-atmosphere  =  24*25  g.-cal.,
and  we  shall  have

pv  =  0-0821  x  24-25T=l-991T,

and  consequently

K=  1-991.

The  -difference  of  the  two  molecular  heats,  therefore,  amounts  to

C1,-Cv=l-99lf] g"Ca>],
L  derees  Cel.J

]

degrees  Cel.

and  the  difference  of  the  specific  heats  will  we

r-991

Since,  for  the  calculation  of  litre-atm.  in  g.-cal.,  one  needs  to  know

CHAP.  I  THE  GASEOUS  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  49

the  mechanical  equivalent  of  heat,  so  conversely  one  can  determine
experimentally  this  equivalent  of  heat  from  the  difference  between
these  two  specific  heats  of  a  gas.  As  is  well  known,  this  is  the  way
used  by  Mayer  in  1842.

The  relation  between Cp  and  Cv  can  also  be  derived  from  the
equation  of  p.  9 —

If  this  be  applied  to  one  mol  of  gas,  and  it  is  remembered  that

8U_ _RT 8y_K
8v~~r°' :~jT' 8T~p'
it  follows  that

The  Ratio  of  the  Specific  Heats  of  a  Gas.  —  The  application
of  the  first  law  of  thermodynamics  to  the  ideal  gas,  has  led  further
to  two  very  important  experimental  methods,  which  make  possible
quite  an  exact  determination  of  the  quotient

--.
"Cv~cv

1.  THE  METHOD  OF  CLEMENT  AND  DESORMES.  —  In  a  large  glass
globe  is  enclosed  the  gas  to  be  investigated  under  the  pressure  Pp
which  is  made  a  little  greater  than  the  atmospheric  pressure  P.  The
globe  is  opened  for  an  instant  so  that  the  pressure  in  the  interior  of
the  vessel  sinks  to  that  of  the  atmosphere,  and  then  is  closed  again  as
quickly  as  possible.  In  consequence  of  the  expansion  of  the  gas  it  is
somewhat  cooled  :  then  heat  will  flow  in  from  without,  and  conse-
quently the  pressure  in  the  interior  of  the  vessel  will  increase  a  little
over  that  of  the  atmospheric  pressure,  to  the  value  P2.

We  develop  the  formula  for  the  case  when  Pl  (and  of  course  P2
also)  is  only  very  slightly  different  from  P,  so  that  if  we  make

then  px  and  p2  are  very  small  in  comparison  with  P,  a  proviso  which
must  be  realised  in  practical  experiment.

If  Y  is  the  volume  of  the  globe,  then  on  opening  it  at  atmospheric

pressure  P,  there  escapes  the  volume  V  x p which  accordingly

performs  the  work  V(px  -  p2)  against  the  atmospheric  pressure.  This
amount  of  work  refers  to  the  cooling  of  the  gas  in  consequence  of  the
outflow  :  on  the  supposition  that,  at  the  moment  of  the  outflow,  the

E

50  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  I

quantity  of  heat  introduced  to  the  gas  from  without  vanishes,  or,  as
we  say,  that  the  dilation  occurs  "  adiabatically,"  then  the  amount  of
undercooling,  by  which  the  gas  sinks  below  the  temperature  of  the
experiment  T,  can  be  calculated  from  the  equation

T P'

since,  in  consequence  of  the  subsequent  reheating  from  T  -  1  to  T,
which  occurred  from  the  heat  coming  in  from  without  after  closing  the
vessel,  the  pressure  of  the  gas  increased  from  P  to  P  +  p0.  This  re-
heating took  place  at  constant  volume  ;  now  as'  there  were  contained
in  the  vessel

PV
n  =  RT

so  accordingly  there  was  introduced

and  this  must  be  equal  to  the  work  performed  by  the  gas,  and
calculated  above,  [viz.  V(px  -  p2)]  ;  hence,  if  we  express  this  in
calorimetric  units  we  have

This  equation  will  serve  for the  experimental  determination of
Cv  ;  if  we  multiply  it  by  the  equation  developed  above  on  p.  49,  viz.,

Cp  -  Cv  =  E,
we  will  have

C

-  p2

In  consequence  of  the  unavoidable  fact  that,  during  the  outflow,
the  undercooled  gas  extracts  heat  from  the  walls  of  the  vessel,  the
value  found  for  t,  and  accordingly  that  for  p9,  and  also  that  for  k,  will
come  out  too  small.  One  can  reduce  these  sources  of  error  to  a
minimum  by  operating  with  as  large  a  globe  as  possible,  and  also  by
using  as  small  differences  of  pressure  as  possible.  In  this  way  Eontgen
(1870)  found  for  dry  air  k  =  1-4053,  Lummer  and  Pringsheim  (1894)
k=  1-4015,  Maneuvrier  and  Fournier  (1896)  k=  1'395.

2.  THE  METHOD  OF  THE  VELOCITY  OF  SOUND  WAVES  (Dulong,
Kundt).  —  According  to  a  formula  first  developed  by  Laplace,  the
velocity  u,  of  transmission  of  a  wave  is  given  by  the  following  equation  :

CHAP.  I THE  GASEOUS  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  51

in  which  d  is  the  density  of  the  gas  in  question.  The  ratio  of  the
wave  velocities  of  two  gases  ux  and  u2,  with  the  densities  dx  and  d2,
when  measured  under  the  same  conditions  of  pressure  and  tempera-

ture, is

/kjdg

V  k2d1l

or  if  we  replace  the  densities  of  these  gases  by  their  respective  mol
weights  (M1  and  M2),

i. /]

u.  v  i

Now  the  ratio  of  two  wave  velocities  is  capable  of  an  exact
measurement  by  a  method  given  by  Kundt.2  If  one  rubs  a  clamped
glass  tube  (see  Fig.  2)  with  a  slightly  moistened  cloth  till  it  sounds  its
longitudinal  tones,  the  air  contained  within  it  will  be  thrown  into  fixed
waves  which  can  be  rendered  visible  to  the  eye  by  the  introduction  of

-  •

Fig.  2.

fine  dust,  as  cork-powder,  precipitated  silica,  etc.,  and  thus  can  be
directly  measured.  By  adjusting  the  stops  E,  closing  the  end  of  the
tube  G,  one  can  easily  find  the  point  at  which  the  stationary  waves
are  most  sharply  defined.  The  distance  E  between  two  nodes  is  pro-
portional to  the  velocity  of  sound  in  the  gas.

The  ratio  for  the  specific  heat  of  any  desired  gas,  of  mol.  wt,  M,  is
given  by  comparison  with  the  similarly  determined  value  for  atmo-
spheric air  (viz.  1*400),  from  the  equation

k  =  1-400

•2'

— _ . 28'88l2i

when  lj  and  12  are  the  node  intervals  for  the  gas  in  question  and  for
air  respectively,  measured  under  the  same  conditions  of  temperature

M

and  pressure ;  instead  of  ^-5-^,  we  may  write  the  vapour  density.

2o'oo

We  will  return  later  to  the  results  obtained  experimentally  by
these  methods.

1  Since  pressure  and  density  are  proportional,  the  velocity  is  independent  of  pres-
sure ;  in  the  above  formula,  therefore,  only  equality  of  temperature  is  assumed.

2  Pogg.  Ann.,  127.  497  (1866)  ;  135.  337,  and  527  (1868).

52  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

The  Thermodynamics  of  Gases:  Second  Law.  —  The  appli-
cation of  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  will  in  this  case  teach  us
nothing  new,  since  we  derived  the  quantitative  side  of  this  law  from
the  relations  of  an  ideal  gas  to  pressure  and  temperature,  on  learning
that  one  could  at  once  generalise  the  experiments  conducted  in  any
one  system  ;  it  is  here  advisable  to  turn  this  about,  and  thus  to  convince
one's  self  how  the  following  universal  equation  is  handled,  viz.

A IJ-TdA

1

The  process  which  we  will  consider  will  be  the  flowing  over  of  a
gas  from  a  full  to  an  empty  space,  and  let  the  volume  of  1  g.-mol
increase  from  vl  to  v9  :  the  change  of  total  energy  is  equal  to  zero
(p.  42)

u=o.

The  maximal  external  work  to  be  obtained  in  this  process,  a  know-
ledge of  which  is  essential  for  many  purposes,  is  easily  found  ;  for  it
is  equal  to  the  work  (calculated  from  the  considerations  on  p.  47),
required  for  the  compression  of  1  g.-mol  at  constant  temperature,
from  v2  to  vr

If  we  diminish  the  volume  v  of  a  gas,  at  pressure  p,  by  an  amount
dv,  then  the  work  pdv  must  be  done  ;  if  we  diminish  the  volume  v2

Vo

of  1  g.-mol.  of  a  gas  to  v15  then  accordingly  the  work  I  pdv  must  be

Vl

done  ;  if  we  observe  that  pv  =  RT,  then  we  will  have

V2  V2

A-

in  which  In  denotes  the  natural  logarithm.  If  the  pressure  of  1  g.-
mol  at  the  volumes  va  and  v2  respectively,  amounts  to  p1  and  p2,  then
according  to  the  law  of  Boyle  and  Mariotte

and  therefore

P2

The  maximal  external  work  to  be  obtained  by  the  increase  in
volume  of  1  g.-mol  of  an  ideal  gas  from  v:  to  v0,  or  as  we  have  already
denned  it,  the  diminution  of  free  energy  associated  with  this  process
is,  accordingly —

CHAP.  I  THE  GASEOUS  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  53

1.  Only  dependent  on  the  relative  difference  between  the  initial

and  final  volumes  and pressures  respectively,  but  is  inde-
pendent of  their  absolute  magnitudes.

2.  Proportional  to  the  absolute  temperature.

3.  Equally  great  for  the  various  gases.

Of  course  n  fold  work  is  necessary  for  the  compression  of  n  mole-
cules. If  we  choose,  as  unit  of  work,  that  which  will  be  spent,  when
the  pressure  of  one  atm.  works  during  the  increase  in  volume  of  one
litre,  then  according  to  the  above  (p.  40),

A  -  0-0821T  In  ^  -  0'0821T  In  ^  litre-atm.

Vl  P-2

On  the  other  hand,  if  we  choose,  as  the  unit  of  work,  as  is  fre-
quently more  practical,  the  work  performed  when  1  g.  is  raised  1  cm.,
against  the  earth's  attraction,  then  it  must  be  noticed  that  the
pressure  of  one  atmosphere,  i.e.  of  a  column  of  mercury  76  cm.  high,
amounts  per  sq.  dcm.  to

100  x  76  x  13-596  =  103,330  g.  in  weight ;

and  that  therefore,  as  this  pressure  weighs  down  the  volume  of  a  litre,
and  as  the  force  mentioned  above  works  in  an  opposite  direction  a
distance  of  10  cm.,  then  A  assumes  the  value

=  84,800Tln-*cm.g.

Finally,  in  order  to  obtain  A  in  our  practical  scale  of  energy,  viz.,
the  g.-cal.,  we  must  divide  this  last  expression  by  the  mechanical
equivalent  of  heat,  42600,  and  we  obtain

A  =  84,800 v,^v__cah
42,600 vx  Vj&

Now,  observing  that

U  =  0; A  =  RTln^; and «=*Blli^,

vi  yi

then  the  equation  of  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  becomes  what
is  in  this  case  an  identity,  viz.,

dA

dT'

The  Behaviour  of  Gases  at  Higher  Pressures.— When  one
works  with  strongly-compressed  gases,  then  the  laws  which  we  have
thus  far  studied  can  be  applied  only  with  precaution;  and  at  high
pressures,  and  also  at  great  densities,  they  lose  their  value  entirely.

54

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  I

Slight  concentration,  the  dissemination  of  gaseous  material  throughout
a  relatively  great  volume,  give  the  conditions  for  the  simple  and
regular  behaviour  of  the  ideal  gas.

The  compressibility  of  highly-condensed  gases  has  been  investigated
by  Natterer,  Regnault,  Cailletet,  Andrews,  and  with  special  thorough-
ness recently  by  Amagat.  As  the  behaviour  of  strongly-compressed
gases  has  given  occasion  to  some  remarkable  investigations  on  the
molecular  theory,  this  subject  will  be  treated  more  thoroughly  in  the
second  book.  Here  will  be  given  a  series  of  observations  by  Amagat 1
on  nitrogen  at  22°,  as  follows  : —

p  in  Atm.

pv

p  in  Atm.

pv

i-oo

1-0000

126-90

1-0015

27-29

0-9894

168-81

1-0255

46-50

0-9876

208-64

1-0520

62-03

0-9858

251-13

1-0815

73-00

0-9868

290-93

1-1218

80-58

0-9875 332-04

1-1625

90-98

0-9893

373-30

1-2070

109-17

0-9940

430-77

1-2696

The  compressibility  is  at  first  much  greater  than  required  by  the
Boyle-Mariotte  law,  reaches  a  minimum,  then  increases  considerably,
and  at  about  124  atm.  pv  regains  and  passes  its  normal  initial  value.
This  behaviour  is  general  [i.e.  with  other  gases].

The  thermodynamic  treatment  of  highly -compressed  gases  offers
corresponding  complications.  If  we  consider  again  the  expansion  of
1  g.-mol.  of  a  gas  from  vx  to  v2,  it  must  be  at  once  observed  in  the
application  of  the  equation

that  U,  the  heat  developed  by  expansion  without  the  expenditure  of
external  work,  is  no  longer  equal  to  zero,  but  has  a  value  by  no  means
inconsiderable,  and,  after  the  analogy  of  the  heat  of  evaporation,  it  is
usually  negative.  A  is  again  given  by  the  integral

A  =

(2)

to  calculate  which  one  must  determine  p  as  a  function  of  v  in  any
given  case  by  experiment.  Finally,  the  first  law  of  thermodynamics
gives  for  change  of  U  with  the  temperature  (p.  9),

Ann.  chim.phys.  [5],  19.  345  (1880).

CHAP.  I  THE  GASEOUS  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  55

dU

dT

=  CV1~CV2 .... (3)

in  which  Cv  denotes  the  molecular  heat  at  volume  v.  The  differentia-
tion of  the  equation  (1),  and  also  the  direct  application  of  the  equation
developed  (on  p.  24)  give

a_Q_Ta_P  (4)

av'^T

in  which  Q  =  A  -  U,  which  denotes  the  heat  absorbed  in  isothermal
expansion  with  expenditure  of  work.  Equation  (3)  can  also  be  written
in  the  form

v  Ha)

8T8v~  "87

as  we  assume  v2  -  vl  to  be  very  small. Now

8Q  _  8(A  -  U)  _ _8U
8v~ 8v ~P 8v'
or  combined  with  (4)

au  T8P  /K\

8v^P-T8f '

and  this  differentiated  for  T  gives

82U

_  T r

8v8T " 8T2

or  finally  with  the  aid  of  (3a)

8C
"8^

Finally,  the  equation  of  p  9

(8)
8T2  (  '

3U\3v

=  p-

in  combination  with  (5)  yields

(7)

Although  hitherto,  applications  of  these  equations  have  been  ad-
vanced1 only  in  a  disjointed  way,  nevertheless  it  cannot  be  doubted
that  they  are  of  great  value  in  proving  and  extending  investiga-
tions conducted  on  highly-compressed  gases.  Moreover,  it  should  be
emphasised  that  these  equations  also  hold  good  for  the  compression  of  homo-
geneous bodies,  whether  liquid  or  solid.

1  Compare, for  example, Margules, Wiener Sitzungsber., 97. 1385 (1888),  and
especially  Amagat,  /.  de  Phys.  [3],  5.  114  (1896).

CHAPTEE  II

THE LIQUID STATE OF AGGREGATION

The  General  Properties  of  Liquids. — If  one  can  diminish  at
pleasure  the  available  volume  of  a  definite  amount  of  a  simple  gas,  by
increasing  the  external  pressure,  the  pressure  exerted  by  the  gas
on  the  surrounding  walls  grows  continually  with  the  diminution  of
volume :  if  one  works  at  a  temperature  sufficiently  reduced,  there
suddenly  comes  a  point  at  which,  by  diminishing  the  volume,  the
pressure  experiences  no  increase,  but  remains  constant.  At  once  it
is  observed  that  the  material  contained  in  the  vessel,  although  of  the
same  composition  at  all  points,  occupies  its  space  in  twofold  form,
distinguished  by  density,  refractive  index,  etc.  The  substance  has
passed  from  the  gaseous  state  of  aggregation  to  a  much  greater  state
of  condensation.  Thus  matter  has  the  property  of  existing  at  the
same  time  in  two  forms  together,  associated  with  certain  conditions  of
temperature  and  external  pressure  ;  and  for  every  temperature  there  is
a  certain  pressure,  the  so-called  "  vapour  pressure "  (also  called  the
vapour  tension,  maximal  pressure,  etc.),  at  which  the  gas  and  the  more
condensed  form  can  exist  side  by  side,  or,  as  is  said,  they  exist  in  equi-
librium with  each  other.  If  we  diminish  this  external  pressure,  the
whole  mass  goes  over  into  the  gaseous  state ;  if  we  increase  the
pressure,  it  goes  over  to  the  condensed  condition.  After  all  the  gas
is  condensed  at  constant  pressure,  then  by  a  further  increase  of
pressure  one  can  observe,  in  a  qualitative  way,  the  same  phenomena
which  appeared  before  the  beginning  of  condensation.  A  gradually
diminishing  volume  corresponds  to  an  increase  of  the  opposing  pres-
sure ;  only  now  the  diminution  of  volume,  corresponding  to  the  same
degree  of  increase  of  pressure,  is  much  smaller  than  before  the  con-
densation.

Now  it  is  possible,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  gas,  by  means
of  the  experimental  method  described  above,  to  condense  the  sub-
stance into  two  essentially  different  forms  ;  these  appear,  accordingly,
as  they  are  under  the  influence  of  external  forces,  gravity  especially,

56

CHAP.  II  THE  LIQUID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  57

either  in  the  spherical  form  or  else  crystallised  in  geometrical  forms  ;
in  the  first  case  the  substance  is  called  a  liquid,  in  the  latter  a  solid.
Matter  in  the  liquid  state,  like  that  in  the  gaseous  state,  has  a  relatively
easy  mobility  of  its  particles,  though  the  work  which  must  be  performed
in  this  reciprocal  mobility,  measured  by  the  "internal  friction,"  and
which  appears  in  the  form  of  heat,  is  always  much  greater  in  the
liquid  state  than  in  the  gaseous.  It  is  not  yet  shown  that  that  which
is  common  to  both  the  gaseous  and  liquid  states,  as  contrasted  with
.the  solid,  is  to  be  ascribed  to  any  lack  of  a  tendency  to  assume
a  definite  shape  ;  but  rather  a  liquid  when  left  to  itself,  as  when
suspended  in  another  liquid  of  tne  same  density,  and  so  removed
from  the  action  of  gravity,  by  virtue  of  those  inherent  forces,  which
we  will  presently  consider  under  "surface  tension,"  takes  the  sharply-
defined  form  of  a  sphere.

The  special  properties  of  the  solid  state  will  be  dealt  with  in  the
following  chapter.

Surface  Tension.  —  The  characteristic  tendency  of  substances  in
the  liquid  state,  when  left  to  themselves  to  take  a  spherical  form,  to
reduce  the  free  surface  to  a  minimum  under  all  circumstances,  can  be
clearly  explained  by  the  method  of  Young  (1804),  in  considering  that
certain  characteristic  forces  are  active  in  the  free  surface  of  liquids.
The  superficial  layer  behaves  like  a  tightly-drawn  elastic  skin  which
strives  to  contract.  The  force  exerting  itself  normal  to  a  section  1  cm.
in  length  of  the  surface,  is  called  the  surface  tension.  A  strip  of  the
superficial  layer  of  water  of  1  cm.  in  breadth,  for  example,  exerts  a
contracting  force  equal  to  0'082  -g.  weight.  Contrary  to  the  behaviour
of  an  elastic  skin,  this  force,  of  course,  is  unchanged  with  unchanging
temperature,  despite  an  increase  or  decrease  of  the  surface.

The  absolute  value  of  the  superficial  tension  can  be  directly
measured  in  several  ways  ;  thus,  for  example,  if  one  dips  a  moistened
cylindrical  tube  of  radius  v  vertically  into  the  surface  of  a  liquid,
then  the  superficial  tension  works  in  the  section  cut  off,  and  in  a
direction  at  right  angles  to  the  tube,  with  the  following  force,  viz.
the  length  of  the  section  times  the  superficial  tension  =  27rvy,  if  we
denote  the  latter  by  y  ;  this  force  will  raise  the  liquid  in  the  tube  to
a  sufficient  height  to  compensate  for  the  action  of  gravity  ;  it  will  be

and  if  h  is  the  height  of  the  liquid,  and  s  its  specific  gravity,  then  the
right  side  of  the  equation  represents  the  weight  of  the  liquid  raised.
Therefore  the  surface  tension,  expressed  in  terms  clearly  and  easily
definable,  is

58  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

Vapour  Pressure  and  the  Heat  of  Vaporisation. — If  we  bring
a  simple  liquid  into  a  vacuum,  evaporation  takes  place  at  once,  till  the
pressure  of  the  gas  formed  has  reached  a  definite  maximal  value,  viz.
the  corresponding  vapour  pressure.  This  pressure  increases  with  the
temperature,  and  usually  very  rapidly.  In  the  presence  of  another,
but  an  indifferent  gas,  evaporation  takes  place  till  now  the  partial
pressure  of  the  resulting  vapour  is  equal  to  the  vapour  pressure  (law
of  Dalton).

The  passage  from  the  liquid  to  the  gaseous  state,  under  the  pres-
sure of  the  saturated  vapour,  is  attended  with  very  important  changes
of  energy :  firstly,  external  work*  is  performed ;  secondly,  heat  is
absorbed  from  without.

Thus,  firstly,  let  there  be  enclosed  in  a  cylinder  with  a  movable
air-tight  piston,  a  simple  liquid,  the  vapour  of  which  has  the  same
composition  as  the  liquid  itself ;  the  vapour  pressure  which  it  exerts
at  the  temperature  T  in  question,  in  the  absolute  scale,  will  amount  to
p.  Now  we  will  raise  the  piston  so  far  that  1  g.-mol  of  the  substance
shall  pass  over  to  the  state  of  a  gas;  if  this  amount  as  a  liquid
occupied  the  space  v',  but  as  a  gas  under  the  pressure  p,  the  volume
v,  then  the  external  work  performed  in  its  evaporation  is  p(v  -  v').
When  p  is  not  too  great,  we  can,  firstly,  consider  v'  as  a  very  small
fraction  of  v,  and  which  can  be  neglected ;  and,  secondly,  we  can  apply
the  gas  equation,  pv  =  RT,  in  the  form  where  as  usual  the  volume  can
be  reckoned  in  litres  and  the  pressure  in  atmospheres.  The  external
work  which  can  be  gained .  by  the  evaporation  of  1  g.-mol  of  any
selected  liquid  under  these  conditions,  amounts  to  0*082 IT  litre-atmo-
spheres, or  1'991T  g.-cal.  (p.  48) ;  it  [i.e.  the  external  work]  is  independent
of  the  nature  of  the  liquid,  and  is  proportional  to  the  absolute  temperature.

Secondly,  the  evaporation  of  1  g.-mol  is  associated  with  the
absorption  of  heat.  That  quantity  of  heat,  which  is  identified  with
the  evaporation  of  1  g.  of  a  substance,  is  called  the  heat  of  vaporisation;
and  that  identified  with  the  evaporation  of  1  g.-mol  of  a  substance  is
called  the  molecular  heat  of  vaporisation.  They  vary  with  the  substance  ;
their  dependence  on  temperature  allows  of  their  calculation  on  thermo-
chemical  principles  (p.  8),  from  the  difference  of  the  specific  heats  of
the  liquid  and  of  the  saturated  vapour,  in  the  following  way.

According  to  what  has  been  said  above,  the  diminution  U  of  total
energy  in  the  evaporation  of  1  g.-mol  is  equal  to  the  external  work
performed  RT,  minus  the  heat  absorbed,  i.e.  the  molecular  heat  of
vaporisation  A ;  accordingly,  if  we  assume  that  we  can  calculate  the
external  work  from  the  gaseous  laws

U  =  RT  -  A,
and

dU  dA  _

dT  ~ ~  dT  ~ ( v'

CHAP.  II  THE  LIQUID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  59

if  we  denote  the  molecular  heat  of  the  vapour  at  constant  volume
by  Cv,  and  the  heat  capacity  of  1  g.-mol  of  the  liquid  by  Me.  If,
according  to  p.  49,  we  make  CP-CV  =  R,  and  if  we  substitute  the
value  of  K,  we  will  have

im  —  ^  v • -»-»' •**•*»  p

Cll

or  if  1  denotes  the  ordinary  heat  of  vaporisation,

dl

Now,  in  all  cases  hitherto  investigated,  the  specific  heat  of  a  sub-
stance is  greater  in  the  liquid  than  in  the  gaseous  state ;  therefore  the
heat  of  vaporisation  always  decreases  as  the  temperature  increases.

The  specific  heat  of  liquid  benzene  was  found  by  Regnault  to  be
0'436  between  21°  and  71°;  that  of  benzene  vapour  at  the  mean
temperature  (46°)  can  be  calculated  according  to  p.  45,  as

6-5 +  (273  + 46)  x  0-051

— jo  —  =UJyzy

so  that

Cp-c=  -0-144.

Actually  Griffiths  and  Marshall 1  found  for  the  heat  of  evaporation
of  benzene  between  20°  and  50°

1=  107-05 -0-158t,

the  difference  between  0*144  and  0'158  lies  within  the  limits  of
experimental  error.  The  specific  heat  of  liquid  water  at  100°
is  1'03,  that  of  water  vapour  (at  constant  pressure)  0'48,  whence  the
latent  heat  ought  to  fall  off  by  1'03  -  0'48  =  0'55  per  degree,  whilst
Regnault  found  the  decrease  to  be  0*7  per  degree.  It  should  be
remarked  that  water  vapour  deviates  from  the  laws  of  gases  appreciably
on  account  of  polymerisation  (formation  of  double  molecules).

The  second  law  of  thermodynamics  gives  an  important  connection
between  the  heat  of  vaporisation  and  the  change  of  vapour  pressure
with  the  temperature :  in  the  same  way  in  which  we  considered  the
flowing  of  a  gas  into  an  empty  space  (p.  47),  we  will  now  apply  to
the  evaporation  of  1  g.-mol  of  a  liquid  in  a  vacuum,  the  equation

dA
clT'

the  volume,  which  is  at  the  disposal  of  the  evaporating  liquid,  we  will
1  Phil.  Mag.  (5),  41.  1  (1896).

60  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

choose  as  equal  to  the  difference  between  the  specific  volumes  of  the
saturated  vapour  V  and  of  the  liquid  V ;  then  we  will  have

and  accordingly

an  equation  first  developed  by  Clausius,  and  also  given  by  the  im-
mediate application  of  the  equation  on  p.  24.

Kegnault  (1847)  found  for  water,  for  example,  the  heat  of  vapor-
isation at  100°  to  be  536-5  g.-cal.

The  vapour  pressure  of  water  at  99*5°  is  746*52,  at  100'5°  is
773*69  mm.  (Wiebe,  Tables  of  Water  Vapour  Pressure,  Brunswick,
1894);  hence1  at  100°

^  =  773-69  -746-52-27-17  mm.  =  0'03570  atm.
at

The  specific  volume  V  of  saturated  water  vapour2  at  100°,  amounts
to  1658  c.cm.,  somewhat  greater  than  that  calculated  from  the  theo-
retical vapour  density  of  water  (viz.,  0-623  compared  with  air),  the
volume  V  of  liquid  water  being  1*0  cm.  ;  therefore  we  find

V-V'=  1-657  litre,
and

1=373  .  0-03570  .  1-657  =  22-065  litre-atm.,
or

1  =  22-065  x  24-25  =  535-1  g.-cal.,

a  result  in  satisfactory  agreement  with  observation.

As  in  the  example  given  above,  one  can  very  often  neglect  V
in  comparison  with  V,  and  can  calculate  V  with  satisfactory  accuracy
from  the  laws  of  gases.  The  specific  volume  v,  of  1  g.-mol  of  saturated
vapour  amounts  to

,TTT RT
v  =  MV  =  —  ,
P

and  therefore

1M A

: p dT'

or  transformed  and  expressed,  like  E-,  in  g.-cal.  (p.  48),

1  On  determining  differential  coefficients  in  such  cases  see  Nernst  and  Schonflies,
Einleitung  in  die  math.  Behandl.  der  Naturw.,  2nd  edit.,  Miinchen,  1898,  p.  266  ff.

2  Wvillner  and  Grotrian,  Wied.  Ann.,  11.  545  (1880).

CHAP.  II  THE  LIQUID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  61

A  =l-991T'dlnJ?-g.-cal., .  (3)

a  formula  well  suited  for  practical  applications.

Within  small  temperature  limits  T2  -  Tl  we  can  regard  A  as
constant ;  then  equation  (3)  suitably  transformed

A dT

logp  =  r99T'  T^

can  be  integrated  over  this  interval,  giving

1-991T/T, p2
A  =  ~T""T logD

L2~  Ll  Pi

in  which  p15  p2  are  the  vapour  pressures  at  T15  T2,  introducing  common
logarithms

A  =  1-991  x  2-303^^-  log  ^

L2~  Xl  Pi

For  benzene,  Kahlbaum  and  v.  Wirkner  (Dampfspannkraftmes-
sungen,  2.  17,  Basel,  1897)  found,  in  good  agreement  with  the  earlier
measurements  of  Regnault  and  Young,

Tx  =  273  +  20  P!  = 75*0  mm.

T2=273  +  30  p2=  118-0  mm.

whence  the  molecular  latent  heat  A  is  calculated  at  8010  cal.,  whilst
at  the  mean  temperature  (273  +  25)  the  measurements  referred  to  on
p.  59give(CaH6  =  78)

(107-05  -  0-158  x  25)78  -  8040.
For  the  temperatures

Tx  =  273  +  70  px  =  546-5

T2-273  +  80  p2  =  750-0,

whence  A  =7640  and  the  observed  value  is  7426.  The  appreciable
difference  in  this  case  is  due  to  benzene  vapour  being  more  dense  at
these  pressures  than  accords  with  the  gaseous  laws.

The  Form  of  the  Vapour  Pressure  Curve. — The  question,
how  the  vapour  pressure  of  a  liquid  changes  with  the  temperature,  or,
in  other  words,  what  is  the  form  of  the  vapour  pressure  curve,  has  been
the  subject  of  much  experimental  and  theoretical  investigation.  At
first  the  purely  empirical  result  was  found  that  the  vapour  pressure
increases  with  the  temperature,  and  indeed  very  rapidly,  and  accord-
ingly the  vapour  pressure  curve  is  convex  downwards  and  highly  bent ;
its  upper  extremity  is  found  at  the  critical  point  (see  below) ;  its  lower

62  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

extremity  in  all  probability  is  not  found  till  the  absolute  zero,  where  gases
cease  to  be  capable  of  existence,  and  the  corresponding  vapour  pressure
becomes  zero.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  one  chooses  the  vapour  pressures
as  the  abscissae,  and  the  corresponding  temperatures  as  the  ordinates,
he  obtains  the  curve  of  boiling-points  of  the  liquid.

There  have  been  a  very  great  number  of  researches  to  find  out  a
universal  law  which  should  express  the  dependence  of  the  temperature
of  boiling,  on  the  external  pressure,  with  satisfactory  accuracy.  Theo-
retically, indeed,  this  problem  was  solved  by  Clausius  in  the  formula
derived  above,  viz.  :  —

i=T—  rv-V}

in  so  far  that,  by  means  of  this  formula,  the  change  of  the  boiling-point
with  the  external  pressure  can  be  calculated  with  all  strictness,  and
doubtless  also  with  the  greatest  accuracy,  if  the  heat  of  vaporisation,
and  the  specific  volumes  of  the  liquid  and  of  its  saturated  vapour  in
their  dependence  on  the  temperature,  are  known.

Thus,  if  the  vapour  pressure  p0  at  some  one  temperature  is  known,

we  can  calculate  the  value  of  Y  belonging  to  it,  and  thence  -=-  by  the

Qt

above  equation. For  a  temperature  higher  by  the  small  amount  At,

the  vapour  pressure  is  p0  +  Atl-r—  I ,  whence  we  may  find  V  again,

Vat/pspj

and  so  on.  It  is  therefore  possible  to  calculate  the  vapour  pressure
curve  by  successive  steps.

If  the  gaseous  laws  are  applicable  to  the  vapour  (p.  60)

ir

and,  by  p.  59,

dA r r  /9.

dT-°p~

where  Op  is  the  molecular  heat  of  the  vapour  at  constant  pressure,  and
C  the  molecular  heat  of  the  liquid  ;  we  can  then  integrate  this  over
an  interval  of  temperature  such  that  Cp  and  C  can  be  regarded  as
constant,  i.e.  A  is  a  linear  function  of  the  temperature

A  =  A0-(C-CP)T  (3)

(1)  and  (3)  give

d  log  p  _ A0 _C-CP
dT RT" KI

CHAP.  II  THE  LIQUID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  63

from  which,  by  integration,

log  p  =  - - -^  log  T  +  const,

or

where  A  and  B  are  two  constants  that  can  be  calculated  by  means  of
two  pairs  of  values  of  p  and  T.  This  equation  is  suitable  over
intervals  of  temperature  that  are  not  too  great  and  are  well  removed
from  the  critical  point.1

In  general,  it  is  not  possible  to  apply  the  thermodynamic  calcula-
tion of  the  vapour  pressure  curve  for  want  of  data.  Another  method,
also  difficult  in  application,  is  that  of  Yan  der  Waal's  theory  (Book  II.
chap.  ii.).

Comparison  of  the  vapour  pressure  curves  of  different  substances
has  led  to  results  of  importance  that  are  very  convenient  in  applica-
tion. Dalton  2  pointed  out  such  a  relation,  and  by  reckoning  the
boiling-point  from  the  absolute,  instead  of  from  a  conventional,  zero,
more  striking  regularities  have  been  discovered.

As  was  shown  in  numerous  examples  by  Ramsay  and  Young,3
whose  extended  observations  on  the  evaporation  of  liquids  gave
important  information  on  many  points,  the  ratio  of  the  boiling-points
of  two  substances  chemically  related,  is  nearly  constant  when  measured
at  equal  pressures  and  absolute  temperatures,  i.e.  reckoned  from
-273°;  in  the  comparison  of  substances  chemically  different,  this
ratio  changes  with  the  temperature.

In  the  following  table,  the  figures  of  which  are  taken  from  the
measurements  of  Schumann,4  are  given  the  absolute  boiling-points
with  the  corresponding  pressures,  for  a  number  of  esters,  i.e.  [ethereal
salts]  of  closely  related  composition  :  —

1  For  an  application  see  Hertz,  Wied.  Ann.,  17.  193  (1882)  ;  Ges.  Abh.,  I.  215.

2  See  also  Diihring,  Wied.  Ann.,  11.  163  (1880);  52.  556  (1894),  and  a  criticism  on
Diihring's  rule  by  Kahlbaum  and  v.  Wirkner,  Ber.  d.  d.  chem,  Ges.,  27.  3366  (1894).

3  Phil.  Mag.  [5],  20.  515  ;  21.  33,  135  ;  22.  32  ;  and  Zeitschr.  physik. Chem.,
1.  249  (1887),  and  S.  Young,  Phil.  Mag.  (5),  34.  510  (1892)  ;  Groshans,  Wied.  Ann.,
6.127  (1879).

4  Wied.  Ann.,  12.  58  (1881).

[TABLE

64

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK I

Substance.

760  mm.

T2 Tj

200  mm. TO'

Methyl  formate

305-3

2737

1-115

Methyl  acetate

330-5

296-5

1-115

Methyl  propionate  .

352-9

316-7

1-114

Methyl  butyrate

375-3

336-9

1-114

Methyl  valerate . . 389  7

350-2

1-113

Ethyl  formate

327-4

293-1

1-117

Ethyl  acetate  .

350-1

314-4

1-114

Ethyl  propionate
Ethyl  butyrate

371-3
392-9

3337
352-2

1-113
1-116

Ethyl  valerate

407-3

365-3

1-115

Propyl  formate

354-0

318-0

1-113

Propyl  acetate

373-8

336-1

1-112

Propyl  propionate .

395-2

355-0 1-113

Propyl  butyrate

415-7

374-2 1-111

Propyl  valerate

428-9

385-6

1-112

According  to  the  rule  of  Ramsay  and  Young,  the  ratio  of  the
boiling-points  in  the  vertical  columns  for  any  two  substances  must  be

T

equal ;  therefore,  if  one  writes  the  quotient  ~  it  must  give  an  almost

constant  value  for  all  cases,  as  is  in  fact  strikingly  shown  in  the  last
column.

One  finds  other  relations  on  comparing  the  boiling-point  curves  of
two  substances  of  unlike  chemical  composition,  as,  for  example,  mercury
and  water.  In  the  following  table  are  given  some  boiling-points,  on
the  absolute  scale,  corresponding  to  the  pressure  p  :—

T

p

Hg

H2O

Ratio.

34-4

495-15

304-5

1-6262

157-15

553-2

334-2

1  -6553

760-83

631-68 373-03

1-6934

2904-5

721-0 415-36

1-7359

The  ratio  of  any  two  boiling-points  at  equal  pressures  is  here  by
no  means  constant,  but  increases  with  the  temperature  ;  but  if  one
obtains  the  quotient  of  the  increase  of  this  ratio,  divided  by  the  corre-
sponding rise  of  the  boiling-point  of  mercury,  he  finds  for  the  three
intervals  of  the  preceding  table,  0-00098;  OO009S;  O'OOIOO,  i.e.
the  ratio  of  the  absolute  boiling-points  corresponding  to  the  same
pressures,  increases  linearly  with  the  temperature.  If  one  calculates  the
relative  increase  corresponding  to  the  rise  of  the  boiling-point  of- water,
he  finds  0 '000 9 8 ;  and  one  can  calculate  the  absolute  boiling-point  T

0rTHf

CHAP.  II  THE  LIQUID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  1 *"*1VE9$g,j.

of  mercury  for  any  desired  pressure,  from  the  absolute  boilin^g^i^/I^
of  water  at  the  same  pressure,  from  the  equation,

T  =  1-6934T0  +  0'00098(T0  -  373)] ;

T
in  this  l*6934  =  rir» when  T0  =  373,  the  vapour  pressure  is  equal  to

one  atmosphere.

The  Boiling-Point. — A  vapour  is  constantly  ascending  from  the
surface  of  a  liquid  except  when  the  partial  pressure  of  the  vapour  is
greater  than,  or  equal  to,  the  tension  of  the  liquid  :  in  the  former  case,  a
reverse  condensation  takes  place;  while  only  in  the  latter  case  can
there  be  an  equilibrium  between  vapour  and  liquid.  Its  surface  is
always  weighted  down  with  a  pressure,  which,  according  to  Dalton's
law,  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  partial  pressures  of  the  vapour  and  of
the  other  gases  present.  If  one  heats  the  liquid  so  high  that  its  vapour
pressure  begins  to  overcome  the  external  pressure  weighting  it  down,
then  vapour  bubbles  begin  to  form  in  its  interior,  and  one  observes
the  phenomenon  of  boiling :  the  lowest  temperature  at  which  a  liquid
can  remain  steadily  boiling  is  called  the  boiling-point  corresponding  to
that  particular  pressure.  That  corresponding  to  the  pressure  of  760
mm.  is  called  the  normal  boiling-point,  or  simply  the  boiling-point ;  its
experimental  determination  is  so  simple  and  so  common  that  we  may
dispense  with  a  thorough  treatment  of  it,  but  attention  should  be
called  to  some  important  corrections.

Thus,  to  wit,  the  fact  should  be  noticed  that  the  boiling-point
conducted  at  the  prevailing  atmospheric  pressure,  must  be  reduced  to
the  normal  pressure.  The  change  dT,  which  the  boiling-point  experi-
ences by  a  variation  of  the  pressure  amounting  to  dp,  can  be  calculated,
at  least  theoretically,  from  the  formula  of  Clausius  (p.  60),  viz.  : —

but  since  the  heat  of  evaporation  1  is  as  a  rule  unknown,  it  is  proposed
to  introduce  a  method  recently  given  by  Crafts,1  which  is  based  on
the  laws  of  boiling-points  found  by  Ramsay  and  Young  (p.  63),
namely,  that  the  absolute  boiling-points,  corresponding  to  the  same
pressures,  of  two  substances  chemically  related,  stand  in  a  constant
relation.  In  the  following  table  are  given  the  changes  of  boiling-
point,  divided  by  the  absolute  boiling-point  of  the  respective  substances
at  normal  pressure ;  the  changes  refer  to  a  change  in  pressure  of  1
mm.  of  mercury,  calculated  from  the  change  of  boiling-point  which  the
substances  experience  in  varying  the  pressure  from  720  to  770  mm.

1  Berl.  Ber.,  2O.  709  (1887).

66

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

Water 0  '000100

Carbon  disulphide

Ethyl  alcohol . . 0  '000096

Ethylene  bromide  .

Propyl  alcohol

. 0-000096

Benzene

Amyl  alcohol

. 0-000101

Chlor-benzene

Methyl  oxalate

. O'OOOlll

m-Xylene

Methyl  salicylate

. 0-000125

Brom-benzene

Phthalic  acid  anhyt

Iride 0-000119

Oil  of  turpentine  .

Phenol .

. 0-000109

Naphthalene

Aniline  .

. 0-000113

Diphenyl-methane

Acetone

. 0-000117

Brom-naphthalene

Benzophenone

. 0-000111

Anthracene  .

Sulfobenzide .

. 0-000104

Triphenyl-methane

Anthraquinone

. 0-000115

Mercury

0-000129
0-000118
0-000122
0  000122
0-000124
0-000123
0-000131
0-000121
0-000125
0-000119
0-000110
0-000110
0-000122

If  one  has  determined  the  boiling-point  of  a  substance  at  a  pressure
removed  from  the  normal,  he  can  correct  for  it  approximately,  by
the  addition  of  the  absolute  temperature  273,  and  then  selecting  that
substance  most  closely  resembling  it  from  the  preceding  list :  the
auxiliary  factor  is  multiplied  by  the  absolute  boiling  temperature,  by
which  is  obtained  the  correction  which  must  be  applied  to  the
observed  variation  per  mm.  from  the  normal  pressure.

The  Critical  Phenomena. — If  one  heats  a  liquid  in  contact  with
its  saturated  vapour,  the  density  of  the  saturated  vapour  increases
very  quickly,  since  the  vapour  tension  rises  rapidly  with  the  tempera-
ture. But  the  density  of  the  liquid,  which  is  expanding  in  conse-
quence of  the  rise  in  temperature,  is  conversely,  continually  diminish-
ing. Now  the  question  arises,  Does  there  exist  a  point  at  which  the
densities  of  the  liquid  and  of  the  saturated  vapour  may  be  equal  to
each  other  1  The  study  of  this  question  led  to  the  discovery  of  the
critical  phenomena,  which  have  assumed  great  significance  in  our  con-
ceptions of  the  nature  of  the  liquid  state.

As  was  discovered  by  Cagniard  de  la  Tour,1  and  later  thoroughly
investigated  by  Andrews,2  in  the  compression  of  a  gas,  or  in  heating
a  liquid  enclosed  in  a  Vessel,  the  following  is  observed.  If  one  com-
presses a  gas,  carbon  dioxide  for  example,  at  a  suitably  high  pressure
and  low  temperature,  the  contents,  originally  homogeneous,  separate
into  two  parts  with  a  dividing  surface  sharply  defined ;  or  in  other
words,  it  is  partially  liquefied.  The  pressure  at  which  this  happens
is,  of  course,  the  corresponding  maximal  pressure  of  the  separated  liquid,
and  it  increases  very  considerably  with  the  temperature.  Now  the
question  arises  whether  liquefaction  can  occur  at  all  temperatures  with
a  suitably  high  pressure, — a  question  which  has  been  decided  in  the
negative  by  the  work  of  the  investigators  just  mentioned.  Thus,  for
example,  carbon  dioxide  is  convertible  into  a  liquid  by  the  application
of  a  pressure  of  70  atmospheres  below  30 '9° ;  but  above  that  tempera-
ture, one  can  increase  the  pressure  at  will,  without  observing  that  the
gas  loses  its  homogeneity,  and  without  liquefaction  taking  place.

1  Ann.  chim.phys.  [2],  21.  121,  178  ;  22.  411  (1821).
2  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.,  159.  583  (1869).

CHAP.  II  THE  LIQUID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  67

When,  on  the  other  hand,  one  heats  a  glass  tube  filled  with  liquid
and  gaseous  carbon  dioxide,  evaporation  takes  place  gradually  because
the  vapour  pressure  of  the  liquid  increases  faster,  with  a  rise  of
temperature,  than  the  pressure  of  the  gaseous  part.  But  at  30'90°,
when  the  vapour  pressure  has  reached  70  atmospheres,  suddenly  there
occurs  the  evaporation  of  all  the  liquid  part,  the  meniscus  which  sepa-
rated the  liquid  from  the  gas,  and  which  had  already  begun  to  flatten
out,  vanishes  at  this  temperature,  and  the  contents  of  the  tube  are
completely  homogeneous.  When  it  is  again  cooled,  at  the  same
temperature  a  fog  appears,  which  quickly  gathers  as  a  liquid  in  the
lower  part.

These  very  remarkable  phenomena  are  called  "critical."  That
temperature,  above  which  the  liquid  ceases  to  be  capable  of  existence,
is  called  the  "critical  temperature"  (or  the  "absolute  boiling-point");
the  vapour  pressure  of  the  liquid  at  this  point  is  called  the  "  critical  pres-
sure" and  its  specific  volume  the  "  critical  volume"  These  three  magni-
tudes are  the  characteristic  critical  data  for  every  simple  liquid,  and,  as
will  be  shown  in  the  second  book,  they  are  typical  of  the  entire  rela-
tions between  gases  and  liquids.

The  critical  phenomena  make  it  possible  to  change  a  liquid  into  9
gas  in  one  continuous  process,  i.e.  without  its  losing  its  homogeneity,
by  partial  evaporation  during  the  process,  and  the  reverse.  One  can
thus  heat  a  liquid  till  above  its  critical  temperature,  with  the  external
pressure  increasingly  greater  than  its  vapour  pressure,  and  finally
greater  than  its  critical  pressure ;  then  if  one  allows  the  volume  to
increase,  the  original  liquid  mass  remains  homogeneous  to  any  desired
tenuity ;  it  has  been  converted  continuously  into  the  gaseous  state.
In  order  to  convert  a  gas  continuously  into  a  liquid,  one  must  raise
its  temperature  above  the  critical  point,  while  the  pressure  is  kept
below  that  required  for  condensation ;  then  it  must  be  compressed
above  its  critical  pressure,  and  cooled  below  its  critical  temperature,
while  the  external  pressure  is  kept  greater  than  the  corresponding
maximal  pressure  of  the  liquid ;  if  now  one  allows  an  increase  of
volume,  then  the  original  gaseous  mass  loses  its  homogeneity,  gives
off  vapour,  and  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  liquid.

The  designation  "absolute  boiling-point"  took  its  origin  from
Mendelejeff;1  but  since  we  ordinarily  understand  that  to  be  the
boiling-point  of  a  liquid  reckoned  from  -  273°,  there  is  here  good
reason  for  a  change,  and  therefore  the  designation  "critical  tempera-
ture "  is  to  be  given  the  preference,  and  particularly  so  as  it  is  now
universally  accepted.

On  account  of  the  results  of  the  measurement  of  critical  data,  for
which  we  are  indebted  to  Cagniard,  Andrews,  Pawlewski,  Dewar,  and
others,  and  recently  to  Ramsay  and  Young  especially,  reference  should
here  be  made  to  the  very  complete  compilation  which  Heilborn 2  has

1  Lieb.  Ann.,  119.  1  (1861).  2  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  7.  601  (1891).

68  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

brought  out.  I  will  only  mention  here  a  simple  lecture  experiment,
which  I  consider  very  instructive  for  the  demonstration  of  critical
phenomena.  A  small  glass  tube  with  thick  walls,  partially  filled  with
liquid  sulphur  dioxide,  is  placed  in  a  larger  test-tube  which  contains
paraffin.  If  one  carefully  heats  this,  which  is  in  an  inclined  position,
from  the  side,  with  a  Bunsen  burner,  so  that  the  upper  part  of  the
inner  little  tube  shall  be  heated  above  the  critical  temperature  of
sulphur  dioxide  (155 '4°),  while  the  lower  part,  surrounded  by  unmelted
paraffin,  remains  considerably  cooler,  then  the  meniscus  vanishes.
Under  these  conditions  we  have  without  doubt  gaseous  sulphur  dioxide
in  the  upper  part  of  the  little  inner  tube,  and  liquid  in  the  lower  part,
yet  one  sees  nowhere  a  parting  surface.  Thus  this  spectacle  shows  how
liquid  and  gas  can  pass  into  each  other  continuously,  in  the  circuit
over  the  critical  point.  One  will  do  well,  while  conducting  this
experiment,  to  protect  himself  against  danger  from  explosion,  by  a
thick  plate  of  glass.

If  the  liquid  is  not  quite  pure  the  vapour  will  in  general  have  a
somewhat  different  composition,  and  as  owing  to  slowness  of  diffusion
the  state  of  equilibrium  is  only  very  gradually  reached,  the  meniscus
will  disappear  on  heating  at  a  different  temperature  to  that  at  which
it  appears  on  cooling,  unless  the  operations  are  very  carefully  con-
ducted. Some  experimentalists,  in  recent  times,  have  been  so  deceived
by  this  that  they  doubted  the  existence  of  a  well-defined  critical  point.
The  careful  experiments  of  Ramsay,1  Young,2  and  Villard3  have,
however,  put  this  beyond  question.

1  Zeitsclir.  phys.  Cheni.,  14.  486  (1894). 2  Trans.  Chem,  Soc. 1897,  p.  446.
3  Ann  chim.phys.  (7),  10.  387  (1897).

CHAPTER III

THE SOLID STATE OF AGGREGATION  l

General  Properties  of  Solid  Bodies. — If  we  condense  a  substance
occurring  in  the  gaseous  state,  at  a  sufficiently  low  temperature, — i.e
below  its  fusing -point, — or  if  we  cool  a  liquid  substance  to  its
hardening-point, — then  the  matter  appears  in  the  solid  state.  This,  in
common  with  the  liquid,  and  in  contrast  to  the  gaseous  state,  has
this  property,  viz.  that  a  change  of  volume  by  a  pressure  from  all
sides,  is  resisted  by  an  extraordinarily  great  force.  But  a  property
belonging  to  the  solid  state  alone,  must  be  mentioned  here,  viz.,  that
a  change  of  form  without  compression  encounters  the  so-called
elastic  forces.  Work  which  appears  again  as  heat,  must  be  expended
indeed  in  a  change  of  form  of  gases  and  liquids,  in  consequence  of
their  internal  friction.  But  in  the  case  of  solids,  it  happens  that  by
a  relative  distortion  (not  too  great)  of  the  particles,  the  system  is
placed  in  a  state  of  tension  which  is  associated  with  the  storage  of
considerable  potential  energy.  When  the  action  of  the  deforming
force  ceases,  then  the  body  resumes  again  its  original  form.

Melting-Point  and  Pressure. — In  the  same  way  that  at  a  given
temperature  a  substance  can  coexist  in  both  the  liquid  and  gaseous
states,  only  at  a  certain  definite  external  pressure,  so  a  solid  substance
can  exist  in  equilibrium  with  its  molten  product,  only  at  very  definitely
related  values  of  pressure  and  temperature.  We  find  this  quantitative
distinction,  viz.  that  while  the  boiling-point  varies  very  much  with
the  external  pressure,  the  melting-point  varies  very  little ;  so  that  for
practical  purposes  one  can  usually  regard  this  as  unchangeable,  and  for
a  long  time  it  was  not  observed.

This  was  established  by  William  Thomson2  in  1850  for  the  case

1  In  the  preparation  of  the  crystallographic  part  of  this  chapter  I  have  enjoyed
the  valuable  co-operation  of  Dr.  Pockels.

2  At  present  honoured  and  recognised  by  the  title  of  Lord  Kelvin  ;  this  correction
may serve once for all in all references to this great investigator in this book.
This  is  from  no  wish  to  disregard  the  present  title,  but  simply  because  most  of  his
work  is  to  be  found  in  literature  under  his  former  title. — TR.

70  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

of  water,  though  James  Thomson  had  previously  predicted  it  theo-
retically. The  process  of  melting  can  be  treated  thermodynamically,
similarly  to  that  of  vaporisation.

The  maximal  work  to  be  obtained  by  the  fusion  of  1  g.  of  a  solid
substance,  is  of  course  equal  to  the  product  of  the  increase  of  volume
V  -  V  (when  V  is  the  specific  volume  of  the  liquid,  and  V  that  of
the  solid  substance),  and  the  pressure  p,  at  which  both  states  are  in
equilibrium  ;  then  will

A  =  p(V  -  V), and dA  =  dp(V  -  V).

The  diminution  of  total  energy  U  is  equal  to  the  work  performed
A,  minus  the  heat  absorbed  r,  the  so-called  heat  of  fusion,  i.e.

U  =  p(V-V')-r,

the  change  of  which  with  the  temperature  (p.  8),  neglecting  the
insignificant  external  work,  is  calculated  to  be

dU  _  dr , „

~

when  c'  and  c"  denote  respectively  the  specific  heats  of  the  substance
in  the  liquid  and  solid  states. The  specific  heat  of  ice  is  0'5  ;  that  of
water  1  '00  ;  therefore  the  heat  of  fusion  of  ice  increases  per  degree  of
rise  in  temperature,  by  an  amount  equal  to  I'OO  -  0*5  =  0'5  g.-cal.
The  equation,

in  this  case  assumes  the  form,

p(V  -  V)  +  r  -  p(V  -  V)  =  T(V
or

or, as  is also given  by the direct  application of  the equation on
p.  24,

dT  _  T(V  -  V1)

dp  r

An  increase  of  pressure  corresponds  to  a  positive  value  of  dT,  i.e.
a  rise  of  the  melting-point,  if  V  -  V7  is  positive,  i.e.  when  the  change
to  the  liquid  state  is  accompanied  by  an  increase  of  volume  ;  on  the
other  hand,  it  corresponds  to  a  fall  of  the  melting-point  when  the
body  contracts  in  melting,  as  is  the  case  with  ice.

Carrying  out  the  calculation  for  water,  as  T=273°;  v  =  0'001;

CHAP. Ill

THE  SOLID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION

71

and  v'  =  0-001091  litre  ;  the  heat  of  fusion  r  =  80'3  cal.,  then  the  work
is  equal  to

r  =  -  ,  „, litre-atmospheres,

and  therefore

24-25
dT

-0-0077°,

i.e.  an  increase  of  an  atmosphere  in  the  external  pressure  corresponds
to  a  lowering  of  the  melting-point  of  water,  of  about  0*0077°.
William  Thomson  (1851)  showed  that,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  by  raising
the  external  pressure  about  8'1  and  16  "8  atmospheres,  the  temperature
of  melting  ice  sank  from  0°  to  -0*059°  and  -0*129°  respectively,
while  these  calculated  from  the  formula  given  above,  should  be
-  0-062°  and  -  0'127°  respectively.

On  the  other  hand,  that  the  melting-point  is  raised  by  applying
external  pressure,  in  the  case  of  substances  which  melt  with  increase
of  volume,  was  first  shown  by  Bunsen  (1857)  for  spermaceti  and
paraffin.  Recently  Batelli l  and  Demerliac 2  has  found  Thomson's
formula  to  be  well  established  for  a  number  of  organic  compounds.
Further,  L.  E.  0.  de  Visser3  has  succeeded  in  measuring  with  great
accuracy  the  change  in  melting-point
with  the  pressure,  for  acetic  acid  ;  since
he  did  not,  as  was  done  before,  determine
the  melting-point  corresponding  to  a
definite  pressure,  but  the  pressure  cor-
responding to  a  definite  temperature.
The  simple  apparatus  used  by  de  Visser,
and  which  he  named  a  Manocryometer,
consisted  of  a  large  thick-walled  ther-
mometer; this  was  inverted,  its  capillary
tube  bent  upwards,  and  then  horizontally
(Fig.  3).  According  to  the  temperature
of  the  surrounding  bath,  it  would  assume  that  pressure  at  which  the
substance  in  A,  partly  liquid,  partly  solid,  would  find  itself  in  equi-
librium ;  the  capillary  tube  filled  with  mercury  served  as  a  closed
manometer  with  which  to  measure  this  pressure.  The  direct  measure-
ments of  de  Visser  showed  that

Fig.  3.

o!T
¥

-0-02435°.

If  the  heat  of  fusion  is  46'42  g.-cal.,  the  fusing-point  T,  273°  +  16'6

1  Atti  del  R.  1st.  Yen.,  (3)  3.  (1886).  2  Compt.  rend.  124.  75  (1897).

3  Dissertation,  Utrecht,  1892  ;  ref.  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  9.  767  (1892).

72

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

=  289-6°,  and  the  increase  of  volume  V  -  V- 0-0001595  litre,  then
calculation  gives

^— =  0-0242°;
dp

the  coincidence  is  remarkable.

Recently  the  effect  of  pressure  has  been  studied  over  a  very  wide
range  by  G.  Tammann.1  The  curve  of  fusion  for  benzene  was  traced
to  pressures  of  more  than  3000  atmos. ;  the  heat  of  fusion  was  deter-
mined directly  and  shown  to  be  constant  within  1%  between  1  and  1200
atmos.  The  volume  change  V  -  V  was  also  measured  as  a  function
of  pressure  along  the  curve  of  fusion.  The  following  table  gives  the
results;  the  pressure  p  is  in  kg/sq.  cm.  ;  V  -  V'  in  c.c.  per  gram  of
substance  : —

t p V-V

r

5-43

1

0-1307

29-2

1012

161

0-1272

30-0

20-13

533

0-1118

29-6

29-59

925

0-1053

30-9

42-06

1455

0-0919

30-6

55-02

2040

0-0770

29-0

66-00

2620

0-0738

30-6

77-96

3250

0-0693

31-8

To  calculate  r  from  the  foregoing  formula  the  empirical  equation
p  -  34-4(T  -  5-43)  +  (H50(T  -  5'43)2

was  obtained  from  the  observations.  ~  deduced  and  then  r  for  various

dl

temperatures.  The  heat  of  fusion  appeared  constant,  in  harmony  with
the  result  of  direct  measurement;  the  mean  calculated  value  was  30-0,
the  mean  of  the  calorimetric  observations  30 '4.

The  fact  that  V  -  V  falls  off  rapidly  while  r  remains  constant
seems  to  be  general,  and  indicates  that  the  two  quantities  do  not
vanish  at  the  same  point.

The  Vapour  Pressure  of  Solid  Substances. — As  in  the  case  of
liquids,  so  also  for  every  solid  substance,  at  a  given  temperature,  there
is  a  correspondingly  definite  vapour  pressure,  although,  indeed,  in  most
cases  it  is  so  extraordinarily  small  as  to  escape  a  direct  measurement.
The  vaporisation  of  a  solid  substance  is  called  sublimation.  Sublimation,
like  evaporation,  takes  place  gradually  from  a  solid  substance  in  con-
tact with  the  free  atmosphere  under  all  conditions,  but  it  is  especially
rapid  if  the  sublimation  pressure  exceeds  that  of  the  atmosphere.  If

1  Ann.  d.  Phys.,  3.  161  (1900).

CHAP.  Ill  THE  SOLID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  73

this  point,  comparable  with  the  boiling-point  of  the  liquid  substance,
lies  below  the  melting-point,  then  when  heated  in  the  open  air  it  will
sublime  without  melting.  It  is  only  by  heating  the  substance  in  a
closed  vessel  that  it  is  possible  to  heat  the  substance  to  the  melting-
point,  and  thus  to  accomplish  its  liquefaction.1  But  ordinarily  the
sublimation  pressure  of  solid  substances  at  the  melting-point  is  much
smaller  than  the  atmospheric  pressure.

The  "heat  of  sublimation"  i.e.  the  quantity  of  heat  absorbed  in  the
vaporisation  of  1  g.  of  the  solid  substance,  can  be  derived  from  the

change  of  vapour  pressure  with  the  temperature  -^,  and  from  the  specific

volumes  V  and  V  of  the  vapour  and  substance  respectively,  in  the  same
way  that  was  used  for  the  calculation  of  the  heat  of  vaporisation
{p.  58),  since  the  considerations  there  advanced  hold  good  whether  a
solid  or  a  liquid  substance  is  evaporated,  and  accordingly

On  account  of  the  insignificance  of  the  vapour  tension  of  the  solid  sub-
stance, V  can,  almost  always,  be  neglected  in  comparison  with  V.

At  the  melting-point,  the  heat  of  sublimation  is  equal  to  the  heat
of  fusion  +  the  heat  of  vaporisation  of  the  melted  substance,  i.e.

and  further  for  the  vaporisation,  the  following  equation  holds  good  :  —

l-T^V
1dTV'

if  by  P  we  denote  the  vapour  pressure  of  the  liquid  substance  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  melting-point.  Subtracting  these  two  equations
gives

V

p_dp\

T dT/

The  part  in  the  parenthesis  indicates  the  angle  which  the  pressure
curves  of  the  substance  in  the  solid  and  the  liquid  states,  make  with
each  other  at  the  melting-point.  But  now  the  vapour  pressures  of  the
two  states  must  be  equal  at  the  melting-point,  because  it  is  the  point
at  which  the  solid  and  liquid  states  of  the  substance  are  in  equilibrium
with  each  other.  Otherwise  there  would  occur  an  isothermal  distilla-

1  A  simple  but  instructive  experiment  to  show  this,  is  to  heat  a  little  iodine
(which  usually  barely  melts  in  the  air)  in  a  test-tube  with  say  2  cm.  of  H2S04,  when
the  melted  iodine  is  clearly  seen  below  the  transparent  acid,  which  increases  the  external
pressure  to  the  required  point.  —  TR.

74  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY '  BOOK  I

tion  process  which  would  cease  only  with  the  disappearance  of  that
state  which  would  have  the  greater  vapour  tension,  i.e.  the  two  states
of  aggregation  would  not  be  in  equilibrium.  Therefore  the  pressure
curves  intersect  at  the  melting-point,  as  is  shown  in  Fig.  4.  Also  the
dotted  line  is  the  pressure  curve  of  the  under-cooled  liquid  substance,
and  forms  the  continuation  of  the  pressure  curve  of  the  liquid.

Probably  the  two  curves  would
intersect  asymptotically  at  abs.
zero,1  if  one  could  under-cool  a
liquid  so  far.  The  preceding
formula,  which  was  developed  by
W.  Thomson  (1851),  and  also
again  independently  by  Kirchhoff
(1858),  was  later  proved  by  ex-
periment  by  Ramsay  and  Young
(1884)  for  benzene,  and  by  W.
Fischer  (1886)  for  water;  also
recently  by  Ferche  2  (1891)  for  benzene.  From  the  latter's  measure-
ments are  taken  the  following  numbers.  In  accordance  with  theory
at  the  melting-point  (5'6°),  the  pressure  of  solid  and  liquid  benzoe
had  the  same  value,  viz.  35  -5  mm.  Hg.  The  measurement  gave

.  A;

-  1-905  =  0-523.

On  the  other  hand,  this  value  can  be  calculated  with  the  aid  og  the
formula  given  above,  from  the  heat  of  fusion,  which,  reduced  to  litre-
atmospheres,  was  30'18  g.-cal.  ;  and  thus  according  to  the  laws  of  gases
we  write

0-0821(273  +  5-6)2-  760
35-5-78

and,  finally,  this  pressure  in  atm.  when  reduced  to  mm.  of  Hg,  is

dp  _  dP  _ 30-18  •  35-5  •  78  - .

dT  ~  dT  ~  24-25(273  +  5'6)2  •  0'0821  '

a  result  in  satisfactory  accord  with  experiment.

The  Crystallised  State.—  Most  solid  substances  separate  by  con-
densation from  the  gaseous  state,  or  by  congealing  from  a  state  of
fusion,  or  by  precipitation  from  solutions,  in  regular  polyhedral  forms,
in  case  unfavourable  circumstances  do  not  interfere  with  their  normal
formation,  i.e.  they  crystallise.  All  the  physical  properties  have  the

1  There  is  no  evidence  in  favour  of  the  view,  often  expressed,  that  there  is  a  tempera-
ture below  which  solids  and  liquids  do  not  evaporate  at  all.

2  Wind.  Ann.,  44.  265  (1891).

CHAP.  Ill  THE  SOLID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  75

closest  connection  with  the  external  form ;  both  the  external  form
and  the  physical  properties  are  conditioned  by  the  structure  of  the  par-
ticular body.  Thus  a  crystal  can  be  defined  as  a  homogeneous  body,
in  which  the  different  physical  properties  conduct  themselves  differently,  in
the  different  directions  radiating  from  one  of  its  points.

The  proviso  of  homogeneity,  which  is  always  tacitly  assumed  in  the
following  sketch,  declares  that  the  physical  properties  depend  only  on
the  direction,  not  on  any  particular  portion,  of  the  crystal,  and  accordingly
they  are  the  same  for  all  parallel  directions.  It  is  well  to  notice  that
this  definition  of  a  crystal  does  not  consider  the  geometrical  form  of
the  limiting  surface ;  this  latter  is  the  most  obvious  external  sign
of  the  crystallised  condition,  but  it  occurs  only  when  the  formation  is
undisturbed.

Crystallised  bodies  are  contrasted  with  the  amorphous,  in  which  all
directions  are  alike  respecting  the  physical  properties.  Yet  certain
facts,  and  especially  their  elastic  behaviour,1  have  led  to  the  suspicion
that  many  amorphous  solid  substances  are  composed  of  crystal  frag-
ments too  small  for  detection.  Should  this  be  established  in  future
for  all  such  substances,  then  a  crystal  structure  would  be  regarded  as
"laracteristic  of  the  solid  state  of  aggregation.

If  two  or  more  directions  radiating  from  one  point  of  a  crystal  are
equivalent,  we  say  that  the  crystal  possesses  symmetry.  The  symmetry
o  a  crystal,  as  regards  the  different  physical  properties,  varies  accord-
in  j  to  the  nature  of  the  physical  process  considered.  Experience  has
sh-  wn  that  the  lowest  grade  of  symmetry  is  always  shown  in  the  pro-
cesses of  growth  and  disintegration  of  crystals,  especially  in  the  external
polyhedral  form  attending  undisturbed  growth.  Therefore  the  latter,
which  lends  itself  easily  to  observation,  is  especially  suited  for  the
characterisation  and  classification  of  crystals.  We  will  consider  next,
on  the  aforementioned  basis,  the  laws  which  regulate  the  forms  of
crystals.

The  Fundamentals  of  Geometrical  Crystallography. — As  is

known,  normally-formed  crystals  are  bounded  by  flat  planes,  which
make  convex  polyhedra,  i.e.  such  polyhedra  as  are  cut  by  any  straight
line  in  only  two  points  at  most ;  [or  we  may  say  that  convex  poly-
hedra have  no  re-entrant  angles].  It  follows  from  the  definition  of  a
crystal  as  a  homogeneous  body,  that  planes  having  the  same  direction
are  equivalent.  It  must  be  noticed  that  in  a  plane  the  two  sides
are  to  be  distinguished,  and  therefore  two  planes  of  the  bounding
surface  can  be  similarly  directed  only  when  the  direction  of  their  ex-
ternal normals  are  coincident.  Therefore,  in  the  following  sketch,  it
must  always  be  borne  in  mind  that,  in  studying  the  form  of  a  crystal,

1  See  W.  Voigt,  Wied.  Ann.,  88.  573  (1889) ;  Gott.  Nachr.,  1889,  519,  and  1890,
154.

76  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY '  BOOK  I

the  bounding  planes  can  always  be  imagined  to  be  moved  at  will
parallel  with  themselves.

The  first  fundamental  law  of  geometrical  crystallography  is  the  "  law
of  the  constancy  of  interfacial  angles  "  (discovered  by  Steno  in  1669) ;  this
declares  that  the  inclination  of  two  definite  crystal  planes  to  each  other,  for
the  same  substance,  and  measured  at  the  same  temperature,  is  constant,  and
independent  of  the  size  and  development  of  the  planes.

The  abundant  data  obtained  in  crystal  measurement  by  means  of
the  reflection  goniometer,  have  taught  us  that  this  law  has  only  an
approximate  value,  for  not  infrequently  on  good  crystals  of  the  same
chemically  pure  substance,  which  have  apparently  formed  under  the
same  conditions,  and  even  on  the  same  crystal,  the  corresponding
angle  is  liable  to  variations  of  over  0'5°.

.  By  the  term  "  zone "  is  understood  a  set  of  planes  which  intersect
with  parallel  edges;  the  common  direction  of  the  latter  is  called  the
"  zonal  axis."  A  zone  is  fixed  by  any  two  of  its  planes.  Conversely,  if
it  is  known  concerning  a  plane  that  it  lies  in  two  known  zones,  it  is
completely  determined,  for  it  is  parallel  to  the  two  zonal  axes,  viz.  two
straight  lines,  which  intersect.  Experience  has  led  to  the  following
law,  formulated  by  F.  E.  Neumann  (1826),  which  is  called  the  "law
of  zones,"  and  which  is  the  characteristic  fundamental  law  of  crystallo-
graphy ;  viz.  all  planes  which  can  occur  on  a  crystal  are  related  to
each  other  in  zones ;  or,  in  other  words,  from  any  four  planes,  no  three
of  which  lie  in  one  zone,  all  possible  crystal  planes  can  be  derived  by  means
of  zones.

Presumably  there  might  be  an  unlimited  number  of  bounding  planes
on  a  crystal ;  but  by  no  means  can  every  arbitrary  geometrical  plane
be  a  face  of  a  crystal.  We  must  mention  two  other  forms  of  this
aforementioned  law  which  will  make  this  point  clearer.  Regarding
this  law  of  zones,  it  must  be  considered  that  it  insists  on  the  zone
relation  only  for  all  possible  crystal  faces.  The  planes  then  actually
occurring  on  a  single  crystal  need  not  necessarily  stand  in  complete
zone  relation  to  each  other.

In  order  to  state  properly,  i.e.  by  numbers,  the  position  of  a  face
of  a  crystal,  it  can  be  compared  with  any  system  of  co-ordinates
fixed  relatively  to  the  crystal.  There  are  now  selected  as  the
co-ordinate  planes  (on  grounds  to  be  explained  below),  any  three
crystal  faces  not  lying  in  the  same  zone  (such  faces,  for  example,
as  are  remarkable  for  their  prevailing  occurrence,  or  as  cleavage
planes),  and  to  correspond  to  the  co-ordinate  axes,  three  crystal
edges,  viz.  the  lines  of  intersection  of  the  three  planes,  OX,  OY,
and  OZ  in  Fig.  5.  In  general  this  system  of  co-ordinates  will
be  oblique  angled.  Then  the  position  of  any  given  fourth  crystal
plane  (E15  E2,  E3),  is  determined  by  the  length  of  the  inter-
sections OEy  OE2,  and  OE3,  which  it  makes  on  the  co-ordinate  axes ;  if
a,  b,  and  c  respectively  are  these  lengths,  the  equation'  of  the  plane  is

CHAP. Ill

THE  SOLID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION

77

X V Z

-  +  r  +  -=l- As  only  the  direction  of  the  face is in question we

3d D C

are  only  concerned  with  the  ratios  of  a  :  b  :  c,  which  remain  constant

if  the  plane  is  moved  parallel  to  itself. Usually  one  selects  as  units,

the  axial  intersections  a,  b,  and  c,  of  any  face  (the  unit  plane),  which

does  not lie in  the  same zone  with  two  of the  co-ordinate  planes

(fundamental planes)  ; and

by  means  of  these  units,  the

intersections  of  all  other  faces

are expressed. These  "axis

units  "  a,  b,  and  c,  are  usually

unequal, and stand in irra-

tional proportions to each

other. Now  if  ma, nb,  and

pc,  are  the  axial  intersections

(parameters)  of  any  fifth  face

of a crystal (Hp H2, H3,

Fig. 5), one calls three

numbers h, k, ], which are

proportional  to 1/m, 1/n, YP>

respectively, the indices of

this  latter  plane,  and  so,  after

establishing  the  fundamental

planes  and the unit planes,

the direction of any other

will be determined by the

ratios of these three num-

bers h,  k,  1. Now  it  can  be

easily  shown  that  the  law  of

zones  leads  to  the  conclusion

that  1he  ratios  of  the  indices  of  all  possible  bounding  planes  occurring  on  a  crystal

are  rational  numbers. This  law  of  the  rationality  of  indices,  the  principle

of  which  was  first  advanced  by  Hauy  in  1781,  of  course  holds  good  for

any  arbitrary  choice  of  fundamental  planes  and  unit  planes,  provided

that  these  are  crystal  faces. The  arbitrary  common  factor  to  h,  k,  1

is  so  chosen  that  .h,  k,  1  shall  be  the  smallest  possible  whole  numbers  ;

in  the  case  of  a  plane  which  is  parallel  to  one  or  two  co-ordinate  axes,  one

or  two  indices  respectively  will  be  equal  to  zero. It  is  to  be  observed

that  the indices  are, in  almost  all  cases, the lowest  whole numbers

(usually  0,  1,2,  3,  4,  etc.),  and  from  this  the  law  of  the  rationality  of

indices  derives  its  significance  ;  for  if  they  were  indeed  irrational,  one

could  always  express  the  indices  in  sufficiently  large  whole  numbers

with  an  accuracy  corresponding  to  that  of  the  angle  measurements.

The  calculations  of  the  indices  from  the  angle  measurements  usually
give  at  first  irrational  proportions.  But  according  to  the  preceding
empirical  law,  one  is  seldom  left  in  doubt  as  to  which  whole  numbers

Fis-  5-

78  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

are  to  be  regarded  as  the  true  indices  ;  for  one  selects  those  whole
numbers  whose  ratios  are  nearest  to  the  irrational  values.  In  general,
for  the  determination  of  the  indices  of  a  face,  it  is  necessary  to  measure
two  angles  (see  the  paragraph  on  "  The  Determination  of  Crystal
Symmetry,"  p.  94)  ;  but  if  one  zone  is  known  in  which  the  plane  lies,
then  the  measurement  of  only  one  angle  is  necessary  ;  and  if  one
knows  two  zones  in  which  the  plane  lies,  then  the  indices  are  fully
given  without  the  measurement  of  any  angle.

Since  this  last  case  occurs  very  frequently  in  the  determination
of  crystals,  the  course  to  be  pursued  will  be  somewhat  elucidated.
For  this  purpose  we  must  first  consider  the  method  of  determining
the  direction  of  the  edges.  From  any  four  crystal  edges  (three  funda-
mental edges  and  one  unit  edge),  one  can  develop  all  other  possible  ones,
in  accordance  with  the  law  of  zones,  by  finding  out  successively  the
lines  of  intersection  of  the  planes  which  connect  two  zones  already
known.  Now  if  a,  /3,  y,  are  the  co-ordinates  of  a  point  of  the  unit
edge,  referred  to  the  fundamental  edges,  and  if  af,  /fy,  and  y£  are  the
co-ordinates  of  a  point  of  any  fifth  crystal  edge,  then  it  follows  from
the  preceding  law  that  the  ratios  £  :  77  :  £  are  rational.  We  call  £  ,  77,  £,
the  indices  of  the  edge  or  zone,  and  designate  this  latter  by  the  symbol
[f,  77,  f].  Now  if  one  selects  for  the  fundamental  edges  the  intersec-
tion lines  of  the  fundamental  planes,  and  for  the  unit  edge  the
resultant  from  the  axial  units  a,  b,  c,  so  that  a  :  /?  :  y  =  a  :  b  :  c,  then  to
express  the  relation  that  a  plane  h,  k,  1  passes  through  an  edge  [£,  77,  f],
or  lies  in  a  zone  [£,  ?/,  f],  we  have  the  equation

It  is  evident  from  this  how  the  indices  of  a  plane  lying  in  two
given  zones,  or  how  those  of  the  intersection  edge  of  two  given  planes,
can  be  calculated  from  the  solution  of  two  linear  equations,  and  also  at
the  same  time  how  the  law  of  the  rationality  of  indices  follows  from
the  law  of  zones.

A  third  method  of  expressing  the  fundamental  law  of  crystallo-
graphy, and  coming  from  Gauss  (1831),  is  the  law  of  the  rationality  of
compound  ratios  ;  this  declares  that  between  four  crystal  planes  lying  in
one  zone,  or  between  four  crystal  edges  lying  in  one  plane,  there  exists
such  a  connection  that  their  compound  ratio  is  rational.  By  the
compound  ratio  of  four  such  straight  lines  or  planes  a,  j3,  y,  8,  is  meant
the  following  quotients  of  the  sines  of  their  included  angles,  viz.  —

sin  (a  .  y) sin  (a  .  8)
sin  (ft.  y)  '  sin  (/Oy

That  this  quotient  must  be  rational  for  the  planes  and  edges  of  a
crystal,  is  easily  shown  by  the  fundamental  principles  of  projective
geometry  according  to  the  law  of  zones,  or  according  to  that  of  the

CHAP.  Ill  THE  SOLID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  79

rationality  of  indices.  In  consequence  of  this  relation,  if  we  know
three  planes  in  a  zone,  or  three  edges  in  a  plane,  then  all  the  planes
or  edges  possible  for  the  crystal,  lying  in  this  zone  or  plane,  are
completely  determined.  Since  the  compound  ratio  of  four  planes
lying  in  a  zone  can  be  expressed  by  their  indices,  one  obtains  formulae
which  are  of  fundamental  importance  for  the  calculation  of  crystals,

since  they  give  the  solution  of  the  two  following  problems,  viz.  : 1.

If  we  know  the  indices  of  four  planes  of  a  zone,  and  also  two  of  the
six  angles  between  these  planes,  to  calculate  the  other  four  angles  ;

2.  If we know the  angles  between  four  planes  of  a  zone,  and  the
indices  of  three  of  them,  to  find  the  indices  of  the  fourth  plane.1

In  order  to  describe  the  geometrical  form  of  a  crystal  it  is  clear
from  the  preceding  statements  that  one  must  specify  as  follows : —
1.  The  three  angles  between  the  fundamental  edges  or  between  the
fundamental  planes  ;  2.  The  relative  lengths  of  the  units  of  the  axes  ;

3.  The  indices  of  the  planes  (or  edges)  occurring  on  the  crystal. The
quantities  given  under  1  and  2,  which  are  the  so-called  axial  units  or
the  geometrical  constants  of  the  crystal,  are,  in  general,  characteristic
for  the  crystallised  substance  in  question  (compare  the  last  sections  in
this  chapter,  p.  86). The  choice  of  these,  as  already  observed,  is  to  a
certain  extent  arbitrary. At  the  same  time,  one  must  consider  not
only  the  fundamental  law  of  crystallography,  but  also  the  relations  of
the  crystal  regarding  its  symmetry  (see  also  p.  80).

As  Hauy  first  observed,  in  its  limitation  the  symmetry  of  crystals
holds  good  to  this  extent,  viz.  that  the  differently  directed  planes  on  a
well-developed  crystal,  which  are  regularly  related  to  each  other,  are
always  of  equal  value  and  physical  behaviour  (as  shown  by  the  glance,
striation,  etc.).  The  relations  of  symmetry  can  be  established  much
more  certainly  by  angle  measurements ;  for  the  angles  between  two
pairs  of  equivalent  planes  must  of  course  be  identical.  If  the  sym-
metry were  clearly  expressed  in  the  external  form  of  the  crystal  poly-
hedron, we  must  suppose  all  equivalent  planes  to  be  moved  parallel,
each  with  itself,  till  they  are  all  at  the  same  distance  from  a  fixed
point  in  the  interior  of  the  crystal.  This  ideal  geometrical  shaping,
which  occurs  in  nature  only  in  very  favourable  cases,  must  always  be
presupposed  in  the  study  of  the  symmetry  of  a  crystal  polyhedron.
Let  it  be  noticed  here  for  subsequent  use,  that  the  related  set  of
equivalent  faces  is  called  a  crystal  form  in  distinction  from  a  com-
bination, which  latter  is  a  crystal  polyhedron  made  up  of  dissimilar
planes.  It  is  not  necessary  for  a  simple  crystal  form  to  be  a  closed
polyhedron ;  but  it  can  consist  merely,  for  example,  of  a  pair  of
parallel  planes,  or  even  of  one  single  plane.

The  Classification  of  Crystals  according  to  Symmetry.— We

1  Compare  Th.  Liebisch,  Geometrische  Krystallographie,  chap,  iv.,  Leipzig,  1881.

80  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

now  turn  to  the  more  detailed  study  of  the  properties  of  the  symmetry
that  a  crystal  polyhedron  can  have.

Symmetry  is  conditioned  by  the  occurrence  of  the  three  following
sorts  of  symmetral  elements,  viz.  :  1.  A  centre  of  symmetry;  2.  One
or  more  axes  of  symmetry ;  3.  One  or  more  planes  of  symmetry.
These  symmetral  elements  have  the  following  meaning  in  crystal
structure  and  geometrical  form.

A  Centre  of  Symmetry  occurs  when  every  two  opposite  directions
are  equivalent.  In  that  case  the  crystal  polyhedron  is  bounded  by
pairs  of  parallel  planes  which,  in  ideal  construction,  are  at  an  equal
distance  from  a  fixed  [interior]  point.

An  Axis  of  Symmetry  is  thus  defined,  viz.,  that  by  a  rotation
through  a  certain  fraction  of  360°  about  this  axis,  every  direction  is
transferred  to  an  equivalent  one,  and  the  crystal  polyhedron  again

coincides  with itself. If -  •  360°  is the  smallest  angle  of  rotation

n

needed,  then  the  axis  is  described  as  n-fold.  According  as  its  two
opposite  directions  are  congruent  or  not,  this  axis  is  said  to  be  "  two-
sided  "  [bi-lateral],  or  "  one-sided "  [hemimorphic].  Three  sorts  of
"  one-sided  "  [hemimorphic]  axes  are  to  be  distinguished  according  as
the  groups  of  faces  lying  about  their  ends  are  enantiomorphic  directly,
or  only  after  a  rotation,  or  as  they  are  wholly  different ;  in  the  latter
case,  the  axis  of  symmetry  is  styled  "polar"  From  the  fundamental
laws  of  crystallography  it  follows  also,  among  other  deductions,  that
an  axis  of  symmetry  is  always  a  possible  crystal  edge,  and  the  plane
normal  to  it  a  possible  crystal  face  ;  and  further,  that  only  2-,  3-,  4-,
and  6-fold  axes  are  possible.

A  Plane  of  Symmetry  is  one  in  reference  to  which  the  two  equiva-
lent directions  lie,  like  an  object  and  its  reflected  image,  and  by  this
plane  the  crystal  polyhedron  is  divided  into  two  equal  halves  resemb-
ling each  other  as  object  and  image.  One  sees  easily  that  a  plane  of
symmetry  is  always  parallel  to  some  possible  crystal  face.

When  several  of  the  symmetral  elements  occur  in  certain  com-
binations with  each  other,  then  the  occurrence  of  certain  other  sym-
metral elements  is  conditioned  thereby.  Those  symmetral  elements
which  condition  the  others  are  styled  "generative"  An  important
example  of  this  is  the  law,  that  a  centre  of  symmetry,  a  plane  of
symmetry,  and  an  even-fold  axis  of  symmetry  normal  to  the  latter,
constitute  a  set  of  elements  such,  that  any  two  condition  the  third
absolutely.

Simple  forms  which  cannot  be  brought  into  coincidence  with  their
reflected  image,  and  which  therefore  possess  neither  a  centre  of
symmetry  nor  a  plane  of  symmetry,  are  said,  after  Marbach,  to  be
"turned  back  on  themselves."  Such  a  crystal  form  and  its  reflected
image  are  styled  enantiomorphic  (Naumann),  and  are  distinguished  as
right  and  left  forms.

CHAP. Ill

THE  SOLID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION

81

As  such  forms  are  of  considerable  theoretical  interest  in  stereo-
chemistry drawings  are  here  given  of  two  enantiomorphically  similar,
but  not  congruent  quartz  crystals.1

From  the  different  possible  combinations  of  the  generative  sym-
metral  elements,  there  comes  about  the  division  of  crystallised  substances
into  thirty-two  groups?  which  will  be  considered  below.  Of  the'se  groups,
each  of  which  is  characterised  by  special  symmetral  elements,  those
are  included  in  one  crystal  system  which  can  be  referred  to  the  same
system  of  crystallographic  axes.  By  a  system  of  crystallographic  axes  is
meant  such  a  system  of  co-ordinate  axes  as  shall,  on  the  one  hand,
satisfy  the  law  of  the  rationality  of  indices,  i.e.  such  axes  as  are
parallel  to  possible  crystal  edges ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  such  as
express  the  symmetral  behaviour  of  the  crystal,  in  that  this  crystal
is  always  brought  to  coincide  with  itself  by  all  those  operations  which
transfer  a  direction  over  to  an  equivalent  one.  In  reference  to  such

a  system  of  axes,  all  equivalent  faces  receive  indices  which  differ
from  each  other  only  in  their  order  of  succession  and  their  sign.
Therefore  one  can  concisely  designate  a  simple  crystal  form,  by  a  state-
ment of  the  indices  of  any  one  of  its  planes  (such  indices  are  enclosed
in  parentheses  to  distinguish  them  from  the  symbols  of  particular
faces).  (For  the  numerous  other  symbols  of  crystal  forms,  which  have
been  introduced,  see  the  text-books  of  Crystallography.)

Before  we  proceed  to  the  enumeration  of  the  thirty-two  groups,
and  of  the  crystal  forms  belonging  to  each,  we  must  call  to  mind
certain  geometrical  relations  which  exist  between  the  simple  forms  of
the  groups  belonging  to  the  same  system.  The  symmetral  elements

1  From  Bodlander,  Lehrbuch  d.  Chemie,  p.  427,  Stuttgart,  1896.

2  This  was  developed  by  J. F.  C. Hessel,  1830  ;  A. Bravais,  1850  ; A.  Gadolin,
1867  ;  P.  Curie,  1884  ; B.  Minnegerode, 1886  ;  a  thorough  presentation  is given in
Th. Liebisch's  Physikalischer  Krystallographie,  pp.  3-50,  Leipzig, 1891  ; also  in  the
work  of  A.  Schoenfliess,  Kry stall systeme  und  Krystallstruktur,  Leipzig,  1891. [For  a
brief  but clear presentation of this somewhat difficult subject, see chapter ix.,
"  Deduction  of  all  Theoretically  Possible  Classes  of  Crystal Forms " in  Elements  of
Crystallography,  3rd  edit.,  by  G.  H.  Williams,  New  York  (1892).— TR.]

G

82  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

of  the  groups  of  lower  symmetry  of  every  system,  form  a  part  of  the
symmetral  elements  of  the  groups  of  highest  symmetry  of  the  same
system  ;  hence  from  the  simple  forms  of  the  latter  groups  (holohedral),
we  can  geometrically  derive  all  the  other  groups  by  causing  one-half,
or  three-fourths,  or  seven-eighths  of  the  planes  of  the  holohedral  forms
to  disappear,  according  to  well-defined  laws.  The  forms  so  obtained
are  called  respectively  hemihedral,  tetartohedral,  ogdohedral,  and  those
which  have  one  polar  axis  of  symmetry  hemimorphic.  It  must  be
noticed  that  not  all  the  simple  forms  of  the  hemihedral  and  tetarto-
hedral groups  are  geometrically  different  from  the  corresponding
holohedral  forms ;  thus,  for  example,  the  hexahedron  [cube]  and  the
dodecahedron  appear  in  all  the  groups  of  the  regular  system.  But
the  lower  symmetry  of  such  crystals  can  always  be  recognised  by
their  physical  behaviour,  and  especially  by  the  position  and  shape  of
the  etched  figures  on  their  faces.  The  notation  of  the  hemihedral
forms  is  accomplished  by  prefixing  certain  Greek  letters,  as  (K,  TT,  y,  r,  p),
before  the  symbols  of  the  holohedral  forms  from  which  they  are
derivable ;  in  the  case  of  tetartohedral  forms,  two  such  letters  are
prefixed,  since  these  forms  can  be  developed  by  the  combined  applica-
tion of  two  sorts  of  hemihedrism.  The  correlated  complementary
forms  of  the  hemihedral  and  tetartohedral  groups  respectively,
corresponding  to  the  holohedral  forms,  which  are  always  physically
different,  but  only  geometrically  different  in  case  they  are  enantio-
morphic,  these  are  designated  by  prefixes,  or  by  arrangement  of  the
indices.  In  the  accompanying  abstract  of  the  thirty-two  groups,  the
following  abbreviated  symbols  will  be  used  for  the  symmetral  elements,
viz.  : —

C,  for  a  centre  of  symmetry ;

for  m  equivalent,  n-fold,  two-sided  axes  of  symmetry,  mLn  (in
which  the  opposite  directions  are  both  counted,  so  that  m  at
least  is  equal  to  2) ;

for  m  equivalent,  one-sided  axes,  and  their  opposites,  mLn  and
mln  ,  mLn*  and  mln*,  and  mLn  and  rnln  respectively,  accord-
ingly as  they  are  one-sided  of  the  first  variety,  or  of  the  second
variety,  or  polar ;  and,  finally,

for  a  plane  of  symmetry  which  is  normal  to  no  axis  of  symmetry,
P ;  and  for  one  which  is  normal  to  an  n-fold  axis,  Pn.

Unequal  axes  of  symmetry  or  planes  of  symmetry  of  the  same  sort
should  be  distinguished  by  accents.  Of  the  simple  crystal  forms  of
the  groups  of  lower  symmetry,  only  those  will  be  mentioned  which
differ  geometrically  from  the  corresponding  holohedral  forms.  Further,
the  forms  of  the  hemimorphic  groups  will  not  be  especially  mentioned,
since  it  is  clear  in  these  cases  that  they  can  be  derived  from  the  holo-
hedral forms  by  allowing  the  planes  grouped  about  one  end  of  the
polar  axis  to  disappear.  Those  groups  of  which  no  examples  are
known,  will  be  given  in  brackets  without  stating  the  forms  ;  in  the

CHAP,  in THE  SOLID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  83

other  cases  there  will  be  instanced  a  number  of  the  most  important
minerals  and  artificially-prepared  substances  belonging  to  them.

I.  Regular  System

Crystallographic  system  of  axes ;  three  equal  axes  at  right  angles  to
each  other  (parallel  to  the  edges  of  the  hexahedron  [or  cube]).

1.  Holohedrism. C; 6L4,  8L3,  12L2;  3P4,  6P2.
Hexakis-octahedron  (hkl)  h>k>l ; triakis-octahedron  (hhl) ; icosi-

tetrahedron (hll) ; tetrakis- hexahedron (hkO) ; octahedron (111);
rhombic-dodecahedron  (110);  hexahedron  (100).

Examples:  P,  Si,  Fe,  Pb,  Cu,  Ag,  Hg,  Au,  Pt ;  PbS,  Ag2S ;
As203,  Sb203  ;  NaCl,  AgCl,  AgBr,  CaF2,  K2PtCl6 ;  Fe304 ;  MgAl204,
and  the  other  spinels  :  garnet,  analcite,  perofskite,  sodalite,  etc.

2.  Tetrahedral  Hemihedrism. 6L2,  4L3,  413 ;  6P.
Hexakis-tetrahedron,  K(hkl) ;  deltoid-dodecahedron,  /c(hhl) ;  triakis-

tetrahedron,  /<(hll) ;  tetrahedron,  /<(111),

Examples  :  Diamond  ;  ZnS  as  zinc-blende  ;  tetrahedrite  ;  boracite  ;
helvite.

3.  Plagiohedral  Hemihedrism. 6L4,  8L3,  12L2.
Pentagonal  ikosa-tetrahedron,  y(hkl).
Examples  :  Cu20 ;  KC1,  (NH4)C1.

4.  Pentagonal  Hemihedrism. C ;  6L2,  4L3*,  413*  ;  3P2.
Dyakis-dodecahedron,  Tr(hkl) ;  pentagonal  dodecahedron  Tr(hkO).
Examples  : FeS2  (as  iron  pyrites),  CoAs2,  etc. ;  SnI4 ;  the  Alums.

5.  Tetartohedrism. 6L2,  4L3,  413.

Tetrahedral  pentagonal  dodecahedron,  KTr(hkl) ;  the  other  forms  as
in  2,  excepting  (hkO),  which  appears  as  the  pentagonal  dodecahedra.

Examples:  NaC103,  NaBr03,  Ba(N03)2,  Sr(N03)2,  Pb(N03)2 ;
Na3SbS4  +  9H20  ;  NaU02(C2H302)3.

II.  Hexagonal  System

System  of  crystallographic  axes ;  one  principal  [vertical]  axis,  and
three  others  [lateral]  normal  to  it :  these  are  equal  to  each  other,  and
intersect  each  other  at  an  angle  of  120°.  Each  plane  has  four  indices,
viz.  i,  h,  k,  1,  three  of  which,  referring  to  the  lateral  axes,  are  related
thus — i  +  h  +  k  =  0.

6.  Holohedrism. C;  2L6,  6L2,  6L2';  P^,  3P2,  3P2'.

Dihexagonal  pyramids  (ihkl),  i>h,  -  k  =  k  =  i  +  h ;  hexagonal  pyra-
mids, 1st  order  (iOil),  and  2nd  order  (i.i.2i.l);  dihexagonal  prisms
(ihkO) ;  hexagonal  prism,  1st  order  (lOlO),  and  2nd  order  (1120) ;  basal
plane  (0001).

Examples  :  Beryl,  Milarite.

84  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

7. Hemimorphic  Hemihedrism. L6,  16 ;  3P,  3P'.

Examples  :  ZnO  ;  ZnS  (as  Wurtzite),  CdS  (Greenockite) ;  KLiS04.

[8.  Trapezohedral  Hemihedrism. 2L6,  6L2,  BLg'.]1

9.  Pyramidal  Hemihedrism. C  ;  L6,  16 ;  P6.

Hexagonal  pyramids,  3rd  order,  Tr(ihkl) ;  hexagonal  prisms,  3rd
order,  Tr(ihkO).

Examples :  Ca5Cl(P04)8,  PbfiCl(P04)8>  Pb5Cl(A_s04)3,  Pb5Cl(Vd04)8.

10.  First  Hemimorphic  Tetartohedrism. L0,  lr
Examples  :  Sr(SbO)2(C4H406)2  and  Pb(SbO)2(C4H406)2.
[11.  Sphenoidal  Hemihedrism. 2L3,  3L2,  312 ;  P3,  3  P.]
[12. Sphenoidal  Tetartohedrism. L3,  13 ;  P3.]

13.  Rhombohedral  Hemihedrism. C;  2L3,  3L2,  312 ; 3P2.
Skalenohedron,  /a(ihkl),  rhombohedron,  p(iOil).

Examples :  P,  Te,  As,  Sb,  Bi,  Mg,  Pd,  Os  ;  H90,  A1203,  Fe.703,
Cr203,  Mg(OH)2 ;  NaN03,  CaC03  (as  calcite),  MgC03,  FeC03,  ZnC03,
MnC08 ;  eudialite,  chabazite,  etc.

1 4.  Second  Hemimorphic  Tetartohedrism  (Hemimorphism  of  Group

13). L8,T8;3P.

Examples :  Ag6Sb2S6  and  Ag6As2S6  (ruby  silver),  tourmaline ;
NaLiS04 ;  tolyl-phenyl-ketone,  C14H130.

15.  Trapezohedral  Tetartohedrism. 2L3,  3L2,  312.

Trigonal  trapezohedron,  /or(ihkl) ;  rhombohedron  (1st  variety),
yor(iOil)  ;  trigonal  pyramids,  /xr(i.i.2i.l) ;  ditrigonal  prisms,  /or(ihkO),  tri-
gonal prisms,  pr(1120).

Examples:  Si02  (as  quartz) ;  HgS  ;  K2S2Ofl,  PbS206  +  4H20,  SrS200
+  4H20,  CaS206  +  4H20 ;  benzil  C14H1002,  matico-stearoptene,  C10H160.

16.  Ehombohedral  Tetartohedrism. C;  L3*,  13*.
Rhombohedron,  3rd  order, /37r(ihkl),  1st  order,  /oTr(iOil),  and  2nd  order,

/)7r(i.i.  2i.l) ;  hexagonal  prisms,  3rd  order,  /oTr(ihkO).

Examples  :  CaMg(C03)2  (dolomite),  titaniferous  iron  ;  H2CuSi04,
Zn2Si04,  Be2Si04.

17.  Ogdohedrism. L3,  13. Hemimorphism  of  15  or  16.
Example  :  NaI04  +  3H20.

III.  Tetragonal  System

System  of  crystallographic  axes ;  one  chief  [vertical]  axis  to  which
the  third  index  refers,  and  two  equal  lateral  side  axes  at  right  angles
to  it  and  to  each  other.

18.  Holohedrism. C;  2L4,  4L2,  4L2' ;  P4,  2P2,  2P27.
Di-tetragonal  pyramids  (hkl),  tetragonal  pyramids,  1st  order  (hhl),

1  According  to  recent  work,  tri-methyl  tri-mesitate  is  an  example  of  trapezohedral
hemihedrism.  — TR.

CHAP,  ill  THE  SOLID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  85

and  2nd  order  (hOl) ;  di-tetragonal  prisms  (hkO),  tetragonal  prisms,  1st
order  (110),  and  2nd  order  (100);  basal  plane  (001).

Examples :  B,  Sn  ;  Sn02,  Ti02  (rutile  and  anatase),  ZrSi04 ;
Hg2Cl2,  HgI2,  Hg(CN)2;  MgPt(CN)6  +  7H20 ;  NiS04  +  6H20 ;
KH2P04,  (NH4)H2P04,  Pb2Cl2C03;  vesuvianite,  melilite,  gehlenite,
apophyllite.

19.  Hemimorphic  Hemihedrism. L4, 14  ;  2P,  2P'.
Example :  lodo-succinimide. C4H402NI.

20.  Trapezohedral  Hemihedrism. 2L4,  4L2,  4L2'.
Tetragonal  Trapezohedron,  r(hkl).

Examples  : Guanidine  carbonate,  Strychnine  sulphate.

21.  Pyramidal  Hemihedrism. C;  L4,  14;  P4.

Tetragonal  pyramids,  3rd  order,  Tr(hkl),  and  prisms,  3rd  order,
Ti-(hkO).

Examples  :  CaW04,  PbMo04 ;  scapolite  ;_  erythrite,  C4H1004.

22.  Hemimorphic  Tetartohedrism. L4, 14.
Example:  Ba(SbO)2(C4H406)2  +  H20.

23.  Sphenoidal  Hemihedrism. 2L2,  4L2 ;  2P.
Tetragonal  di-sphenoid,  K(hkl),  and  sphenoid,  fc(hhl).
Examples  :  CuFeS2  (copper  pyrites) ;  CH4N20  (urea).
[24. Sphenoidal  Tetartohedrism. L2*,  12*.]

IV.  Orthorhombic  System

System  of  crystallographic  axes  ;  three  unequal  axes  at  right  angles
to  each  other.

25.  Holohedrism. C;  2L2,  2L2',  2L2" ;  P2,  P2',  P2".
Orthorhombic pyramids  (hkl) ;  prisms (hkO), (hOk), and  (Ohk) ;

pairs  of  planes  (pinacoids)  (100),  (010),  and  (001)  the  basal  plane.

The  great  majority  of  minerals,  and  especially  also  of  artificially-
prepared  substances,  crystallise  partly  in  this  group  and  partly  in
group  28.

Some  examples  are :  S,  I,  HgCl2,  HgI2 ;  FeS2  (marcasite),  Cn2S ;
Sb2S3;  TiO2  (brookite) ;  BaC03,  CaC03  (aragonite),  SrC03,  PbC03 ;
KN03,  AgN03;  CaS04,  BaS04,  SrS04,  PbS04;  K2S04 ;  Mg2Si04,
Fe2Si04  ;  topaz,  andalusite  ;  MgSi03.

26.  Hemimorphism. L2,  T2  ;  P,  P7.

Examples  :  Zn2(HO)2Si03,  Mg(NH4)P04  +  6H20  ;  resorcin,  C6H60,,
tri-phenyl-methane  (C6H5)3CH.

27.  Hemihedrism. 2L2,  2L2',  2L2".
Orthorhombic  sphenoid,  K-(hkl).

Examples  :  MgS04  +  7H20,  ZnS04  4  7H20 ;  K(SbO)C4H406,
KHC4H406,  KNaC4H406  +  4H20,  NH4NaC4H406  +  4H20,  C3H803,  as-
paragine,  mycose,  etc.

86  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  1

V.  Monoclinic  System

System  of  crystallographic  axes ;  two  inclined  axes,  and  another
(ortho-axis)  normal  to  the  plane  of  the  first  two ;  the  middle  index
refers  to  this  ortho-axis  :  all  three  axes  are  unequal.

28.  Holohedrism. C,  L2 ;  12;  P2.

Prisms  (hkl),  (hkO),  (Okl) :  pairs  of  planes  out  of  the  zone  of  the
ortho-axis  (hOl);  special  orthopinacoid  (100),  and  basal  plane  (001)  ;
clinopinacoid  (010).

Examples  very  numerous  ;  among  others  :  S  (two  modifications),
Se;  AsS;  As2O3  ;  Sb203  ;  NaCl  +  2H20  ;  KC103 ;  Na2C03  +  10H20  ;
BaCa(C03)2 ;  (CuC03)2  +  H2Cu02 ;  Na2S04  +  10H20  ;  CaS04  +  2H,0
(selenite),  FeS04  +  7H2O  ;  MgK2(S04)2  +  6H20  ;  ^and  its  isomorph,
CaNa2(S04)2;  PbCr04  ;  (MnFe)W04  (wolframite) ;  Fe4(P04)2  +  8H20 ;
Na2B4O7  -i  10H0O  ;  CaSi03  (wollastonite) ;  augite,  hornblende,  euclase,
epidote,  orthite,  datholite,  orthoclase,  mica,  titanite,  heulandite,  har-
motome,  etc. ;  most  organic  substances,  as  C2H904  +  2  H20  ;  KHC204  +
2H20 ;  C7H603  ;  C6H402,  C10H8,  C14H10.

29.  Hemimorphism. L2,  12.

Examples  :  Tartaric  acid,  quercite,  cane  sugar,  milk  sugar,  etc.
[30. Hemihedrism. P.] l Example  : skolezite.

VI.  Triclinic  System

System  of  crystallographic  axes ;  three  obliquely  inclined,  unequal
axes.

31.  Holohedrism. C.

All  the  simple  forms  are  only  pairs  of  [parallel]  planes.

Examples:  B(OH)3 ;  CuS04  +  5H20,  K2Cr2O7,  CaS203  +  6H20  :
MnSi03,  Al2Si05  (disthene),  axinite,  microcline,  albite  and  anorthite,
racemic  acid,  C4H606  +  2H20.

[32.  Hemihedrism. No  element  of  symmetry.]

Example  :  d.  monostrontium  tartrate,  Sr(HC4H406)2  +  2H20.

One  can  also  deduce  these  thirty-two  groups,  without  assuming
the  law  of  the  rationality  of  indices,  by  starting  with  the  conception
of  homogeneity.  This  method  of  treatment  is  considered  in  the
"  theories  of  crystal  structure,"  2  which  rest  on  molecular  conceptions,
and  according  to  which  there  occurs  an  arrangement  of  the  molecules
of  a  crystal  about  its  centre  of  gravity  in  a  regular  system  of  points.
All  the  possible  regular  point-systems  can  be  developed  by  the  interpene-

1  Pyroxene is au example of  monodinic hemihedrism. See G. H. Williams,
Crystallography,  pp.  168  and  195.— TR.

2  Frankenheim, 1835  ; Bravais, 1850  ; Camille  Jordan, 1868  ; Sohncke, 1876  ;
Fedorow, 1890  ;  and  with  special  thoroughness  in  Schoenfliess'  Krystallsysteme und
Krystallstruktur.

CHAP.  Ill  THE  SOLID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  87

tration  of  congruent,  parallelopi pedal  space-gratings,  of  which  latter
there  are  fourteen  varieties,  and  according  to  their  symmetry,  the
point-systems  arrange  themselves  in  the  well-known  thirty-two  groups.
This  theory  leads  also,  in  an  obvious  way,  to  the  law  of  the  rationality
of  indices,  by  regarding  the  faces  of  a  crystal  as  net-planes  of  the  point-
system.

Twinning  and  Growths  of  Crystals. — We  must  now  consider
those  regular  growths  called  twins,  [threelings,  fourlings,  etc.],  which
consist  respectively  of  two  or  more  individuals,  and  which  allow  the
production  of  forms  of  apparently  higher  symmetry  than  corresponds
to  their  crystal  structure.  These  growths  can,  as  a  rule,  be  recognised
by  the  presence  of  re -entrant  angles,  which  never  occur  on  simple
crystal  individuals,  or  else  by  a  varying  behaviour  of  different  parts
of  the  same  face.

We  distinguish  between  twins  with  parallel  axes,  and  those  with
axes  which  are  not  parallel.  The  former  are  growths  of  two  hemi-
hedral  (or  tetartohedral)  forms  respectively  which  bear  the  same  rela-
tive position  to  each  other  as  in  the  [theoretical]  derivation  from  their
holohedral  (or  hemihedral)  forms.  They  are  called  complementary
twins.  Examples  are  the  interpenetration  of  two  pentagonal  dode-
cahedra  of  iron  pyrites,  or  the  intergrowths  of  right-  and  left-handed
quartz  crystals.  For  the  second  class  of  twins  [viz.  with  axes  not
parallel],  which  are  by  far  the  more  common,  the  regularity  is  that  the
two  crystal  individuals  lie  symmetrically  with  reference  either  to  one  of
their  possible  faces  or  one  of  their  edges.  In  the  case  of  those  twins  which
are  symmetrical  to  a  plane,  this  plane  is  called  the  twinning  plane  ;  in  the
case  of  those  twins  which  are  symmetrical  with  reference  to  a  straight
line,  the  plane  normal  to  this  line  is  the  twinning  plane ;  the  line
normal  to  this  plane  is  the  twinning  axis ;  in  crystals  which  are
centrally  symmetric  it  is  a  symmetric  axis  of  twinning.  The  two
twinning  individuals  may  either  penetrate  each  other  (interpenetration
twins),  or  they  may  touch  each  other  along  a  plane  (contact  twins) ;
and,  as  is  often  the  case,  it  is  not  necessary  that  this  plane  should  be
the  twinning  plane.

Repeated  twinning  growths  frequently  occur  in  parallel  planes ;  in
this  case  the  alternating  individuals  (often  as  thin  sheets),  occur  in
parallel  arrangement ;  in  this  way  arise  the  twinning  lamellw,  for  in-
stance, of  calcite,  aragonite,  and  especially  of  the  triclinic  feldspars
(polysynthetic  twinning).  Twins  or  fourlings  may  show  forms  which
apparently  belong  to  crystal  systems  of  a  higher  symmetry  than  that
possessed  by  the  single  individuals ;  important  illustrations  are  the
pseudohexagonal  prisms  (or  pyramids)  of  orthorhombic  aragonite  and
witherite  ;  also  the  crystals  of  chrysoberyl,  harmotome,  and  phillipsite  ;
such  forms  are  called  pseudo-symmetric  or  mimetic.

It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  twinning  growth  may  occur  not  only  in

88  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

the  original  make-up  of  a  crystal,  but  also  in  a  secondary  way  from
external  pressure ;  calcite  is  a  remarkable  example  of  this.

The  growth  of  crystals,  i.e.  the  relative  development  of  the  different
faces,  is  very  variable,,  and  often  irregular,  so  that  equivalent  faces
often  have  a  very  different  size  ;  these  are  distortions.  The  conditions
controlling  these  distortions  are  not  well  understood.  P.  Curie
(1885)  and  others  have  suggested  as  a  controlling  factor  a  certain
"  surface  energy,"  analogous  to  that  on  the  surface  of  liquids,  which
would  be  different  for  the  unequal  planes  of  the  same  crystal ;  but
except  for  the  observation  that  larger  crystals  grow  at  the  expense  of
smaller  ones,  when  placed  in  the  same  saturated  solution,  this  hypo-
thesis has  led  to  hardly  any  results  in  harmony  with  experiment.

The  solubility  of  a  crystal  is  not  the  same  in  all  directions.  This
can  be  shown  by  treating  the  surfaces  for  a  short  time  with  a  solvent.
Regularly  bounded  marks  are  thus  formed  (Aetzfigureii)  whose  arrange-
ment shows  the  same  symmetry  as  the  ideally  developed  crystal,  and
often  offers  the  only  means  of  determining  the  crystallographic  group.1
Of  two  dissimilar  faces  of  the  same  crystal,  one  may  show  the  greater
solubility  in  one  solvent,  the  other  in  another.  This  may  explain  the
varying  habitus  of  crystals  of  the  same  substances,  e.g.  sodium
chloride,  which  usually  crystallises  in  cubes,  comes  down  with
octahedral  faces  from  a  solution  containing  urea.

The  Physical  Properties  of  Crystals. — In  the  case  of  all
physical  properties  which  are  directed  quantities,  there  appears  in
crystals  a  dependence  on  direction  which,  in  the  elementary  laws  of
the  processes  in  question,  is  expressed  by  a  number  of  constants
characteristic  for  each  crystal.  As  already  stated,  the  symmetry,
which  in  the  behaviour  of  a  crystal  appears  correlated  with  some
physical  action,  is  always  the  same  as  that  of  its  geometrical  form,
or  higher ;  and  the  division  into  groups  which  one  obtains  by  a
classification  based  on  any  physical  property,  is  always  in  harmony
with  the  classification  previously  developed  from  the  crystalline  form.
In  the  following  section  we  will  consider  the  physical  properties
particularly  in  their  relations  to  symmetry  :  and  we  will  consider  the
physical  laws  themselves  only  in  so  far  as  they  are  of  especial  import-
ance for  the  determination  of  crystallographic  symmetry.  For  any-
thing more,  reference  must  be  made  to  the  text-books  of  physics ;  and
here  special  mention  should  be  made  of  Th.  Liebisch's  Physikalische
Krystallographie.

The  physical  properties  of  crystals  may  be  divided  into  two  groups,
according  as  they  possess  a  higher  or  lower  symmetry.  But  the
symmetry  of  the  physical  properties  is  never  lower  than  that  shown
by  the  processes  of  growth  and  solution.  Higher  symmetry  is  shown
by  all  those  physical  properties  whose  elementary  laws  in  crystals  can

1  Liebisch,  Grundriss  den  physikcrfischen  Krystallographie,  p.  43,  Leipzig,  1896.

CHAP.  Ill  THE  SOLID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  89

be  expressed  by  an  ellipsoid  (for  which,  therefore,  regular  crystals
behave  as  isotropic) ;  lower  symmetry  by  those  for  which  this  is  not
possible.

To  the  first  class  belong  thermal  expansion  and  compression  by  equal
pressure  from  all  sides  ;  the  conduction  of  heat  and  electricity,  dielectric  and
magnetic  polarisation,  and  finally  the  thermo-electric  phenomena.

The  significance  of  the  ellipsoid  in  these  cases  is  essentially  as
follows : —

In  thermal  expansion  the  inner  part  of  the  crystal,  conceived  to  be
originally  a  sphere,  is  distorted  to  an  ellipsoid,  the  principal  axes  of
which  are  proportional  to  1  +  Att,  1  +  A2t,  1  +  A3t ;  in  these  formulae
Ap  A9,  and  A3  respectively  are  the  principal  coefficients  of  expansion,
and  t  is  the  amount  of  the  change  of  temperature.  If  this  ellipsoid  of
dilatation  is  given  for  a  definite  temperature  interval  t,  then  one  can
calculate  the  changes  of  the  dimensions  and  of  the  angles  of  the
crystal.

In  the  case  of  the  phenomena  of  conduction,  suppose  that  at  a
point  of  a  crystal  (of  unlimited  extension),  there  is  a  source  of  heat  or
of  electricity ;  then  the  surfaces  of  equal  temperature  (or  potential
respectively)  will  be  similar  and  similarly  arranged  ellipsoids,  the
principal  axes  of  which  are  proportional  to  the  square  roots  of  the
principal  conductivities.

Finally,  the  relations  between  the  intensity  and  the  direction  of  di-
electric polarisation  (or  of  the  magnetic  polarisation)  of  a  crystal,  in  a
homogeneous  field,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  direction  of  the  lines  of
force  on  the  other  hand,  can  be  shown  by  the  aid  of  an  ellipsoid  ;  its
principal  semi-axes  are  the  square  roots  of  the  reciprocals  of  the
principal  di-electric  coefficients  (or  magnetic  constants  respectively).
Similarly,  an  ellipsoid  serves  to  show  the  connection  between  thermo-
electric force  and  the  direction  of  the  greatest  fall  in  temperature.

Inasmuch  as  six  magnitudes  must  be  determined  in  order  to  fix
the  directions  and  lengths  of  the  principal  axes  of  an  ellipsoid  of  un-
equal axes,  so  processes  of  this  sort,  in  the  most  general  cases,  depend
on  six  physical  constants,  the  values  of  which  will  vary  with  the
temperature  (and  the  pressure).  Thus,  from  the  consideration  of  each
of  the  physical  properties  enumerated  above,  there  results  the  classifi-
cation of  crystals  into  the  six  following  groups  : —

I.  Eegular  System  : the  ellipsoid  is  a  sphere;  no  distinction  from
the  behaviour  of  amorphous  bodies. 1  constant.

II.  Hexagonal and  Tetragonal  Systems: the  ellipsoid  is  one of
rotation,  where  the  chief  crystallographic  axis  is  the  axis  of  rotation ;
the  length  of  this  axis  and  of  the  equatorial semi-diameter  are  alone
to  be  determined  ;  therefore  2  constants. For  every  physical  property
one  can  make  two  subdivisions  of  this  class,  according  as  the  ellipsoid
of  rotation  is  oblate  or  prolate.

III.  Orthorhombic  System  : the  ellipsoid  has  three  unequal  axes

90  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

having  a  fixed  direction,  but  of  variable  lengths  ;  these  are  the  crystal-
lographic  axes. 3  constants.

IV.  Monoclinic  System  : one  of  the three  unequal  axes of  the
ellipsoid  coincides  with  the  ortho-axis  ;  the  directions  of  the  two  others
vary. 4  constants.

V.  Triclinic System  :  all  three  axes  of  the  ellipsoid  vary  in  length
and  direction. 6  constants.

In  relation  to  the  properties  considered  here,  the  crystals  of  group
I.  are  isotropic,  those  of  group  II.  have  one  axis  of  isotropy,  those  of
groups  III.,  IV.,  and  V.  have  no  axis  of  isotropy.

The  Optical  Properties  of  Crystals. — A  somewhat  greater
multiplicity  of  the  relations  of  symmetry  appears  in  the  optical  pro-
perties of  crystals.  Here  also,  as  will  be  seen  below,  the  behaviour  of
the  great  majority  of  transparent  crystals  can  be  explained  by  the  aid
of  an  ellipsoid,  but  there  are  two  groups  of  transparent  crystals,  viz.
the  "optically  active,"  for  which  the  ellipsoid  is  not  suitable  ;  also  in
the  case  of  the  absorption  of  light  by  crystals,  the  relations  are  very
complicated.  The  latter  subject  we  must  pass  by  with  a  reference  to
P.  Drude's l  presentation  of  the  subject,  only  it  should  be  observed
that  an  absorbing  crystal  has  always  twice  as  many  optical  constants
as  a  [perfectly]  transparent  one  of  the  same  grade  of  symmetry.

The  division  of  crystals,  then,  according  to  their  optical  behaviour,
is  as  follows  : —

A.  Optically  Isotropic  Crystals

I.  Singly  refracting :  regular  system. — The  wave-surface  is  a  sphere  ;
1 constant. (Very  often  regular  crystals  also  show  weak,  irregular
double  refraction ;  this  belongs  to  the  so-called  "  optical  anomalies,"
the  cause  of  which,  though  certainly  of  a  secondary  nature,  has  not
been  satisfactorily  explained.)

II.  Having  the  power  of  rotation  [rotary  polarisation]. — A  part  of
the  crystals  of  group  5  belong  here. The  wave-surface  consists  of  two
concentric  spheres. 2  constants.

B.  Optically  Anisotropic  Crystals  with  One  Axis  of  Isotropy

III.  Optically  Uni-axial  without  Circular  Polarisation  (hexagonal  and
tetragonal  system). — The  wave-surface  (Huygheris')  consists  of  an
ellipsoid  of  rotation  (the  rotation  axis  of  which  coincides  with  the
chief  crystallographic  axis),  and  of  a  sphere  which  touches  the  former
at  the  poles.  The  optically  uni-axial  crystals  are  subdivided  into

1 Wied.  Ann.,  40.  665  (1890).

CHAP,  ill  THE  SOLID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  91

positive  and  negative  varieties,  according  as  the  ellipsoid  of  rotation
is  prolate  or  oblate. 2  constants.

IV.  Optically  Uni-axial  with  Circular  Polarisation  (groups  15,  17,
and  20). — The  wave-surface  consists  of  two  rotation-surfaces,  one
differing  but  little  from  an  ellipsoid,  and  the  other  but  little  from  a
sphere.  3  constants.

C.  Optically  Anisotropic  Crystals  without  Axis  of  Isotropy

The  wave-surface  (FresneFs)  is  universally  a  surface  of  the  fourth
degree,  with  three  twofold  axes  of  symmetry  at  right  angles  to  each
other.  It  is  cut  by  its  planes  of  symmetry  in  a  circle  and  in  an
ellipse,  and  has  two  pairs  of  singular  tangential  planes  touching  it
in  circles.  The  normals  to  these  tangential  planes  are  the  optic  axes.
Distinctions  arise  here  if  we  take  into  consideration  the  crystallo-
graphic  orientation  of  the  optic  axes  of  symmetry,  and  their  connection
with  the  temperature  and  with  the  wave-length  of  light.  There  are
the  three  following  classes  : —

V.  Optically  Bi-axial-  Crystals  of  the Orthorhombic System. — Fixed
directions  of  the  optic  axes  of  symmetry,  coinciding  with  the  crystallo-
graphic  axes. 3  constants.

VI.  Optically  Bi-axial  Crystals  of  the  Monoclinic  System. — Only  one
optical  axis  of  symmetry  is  fixed,  viz.  that  having  the  same  direction
as  the  ortho-axis. 4  constants.

VII.  Optically  Bi-axial  Crystals  of  the  Triclinic  System. — All  three  of
the  optic  axes  of  symmetry  have  variable  positions. 6  constants.

The  law  of  double-refraction  in  inactive  anisotropic  crystals,  or
those  of  categories  III.,  V.,  VI,  and  VII. ,  can  be  easily  developed  in  the
following  way  with  the  help  of  the  so-called  "  index-ellipsoid."  Its
semi-axes  coincide  in  direction  with  the  optic  axes  of  symmetry,  and
their  values  can  be  easily  derived  from  the  three  or  two  chief  indices
of  refraction  as  follows.

One  obtains  the  velocity  of  transmission,  and  the  polarising  direc-
tions of  those  plane  waves  which  advance  in  a  given  direction,  by  pass-
ing, through  the  middle  point  of  the  index  ellipsoid,  a  plane  normal
to  this  direction,  and  then  determining  the  principal  axes  of  the
resulting  elliptical  section.  These  axes  are  the  polarising  directions
sought,  and  their  reciprocals  are  the  velocities  of  transmission,  com-
pared with  these  in  air  as  unity ;  here  it  is  to  be  observed  that  the
velocity  of  transmission  of  every  wave  is  determined  by  that  ellipse
axis  which  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  polarisation.  The  two
directions  for  which  the  ellipse  section  is  a  circle,  when  the  polarisa-
tion direction  is  indefinite  and  the  two  wave  velocities  are  equal  to  each
other,  are  the  optic  axes.  On  this  method  is  based  the  derivation  of
many  phenomena  of  double  refraction,  which  cannot  be  entered  into

92  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

here,  but  which  will  be  found  thoroughly  presented,  for  example,  in
Liebisch's  Physikalische  Krystallographie.

Optical  activity  is  superimposed  on  ordinary  double  refraction,  in
the  case  of  crystals  of  category  IV.  ;  this  leads  to  the  result  that  in
the  direction  of  the  axis  of  isotropy  there  occurs  circular  polarisation,
but  elliptic  polarisation  in  all  other  directions  inclined  to  this.  An
analogous  superposition  of  optical  activity  on  ordinary  double  re-
fraction, might  occur  in  the  case  of  those  optically  U-axial  substances
which  have  crystal  forms  "  turned  back  upon  themselves  " ;  but  such
instances  have  not  been  recognised  hitherto,  perhaps  because  the
circular  polarisation  may  be  obscured  by  the  double  refraction,  in  all
directions  highly  inclined  to  the  optic  axis.  Optical  activity  is  theo-
retically possible  in  all  groups  having  neither  centre  nor  plane  of
symmetry,  i.e.  apart  from  those  mentioned,  in  the  groups  3,  8,  10,  22,
24,  27,  29,  and  32.  Experience  shows  that  in  the  case  of  crystals
"  turned  back  upon  themselves,"  it  does  not  follow  conversely  that
there  must  be  circular  polarisation  ;  instances  of  this  are  found  in  the
regular  tetartohedral  nitrates  of  Pb,  Ba,  and  Sr.  It  is  worthy  of  remark
that  those  (organic)  substances  which  are  optically  active  in  solution
always  crystallise  in  the  inverted  forms  (Pasteur,  1848);  but  most
crystals  with  circular  polarisation  (for  example  NaClO3,  NaBr03)  give
inactive  solutions.  Optical  activity  in  both  crystallised  and  dissolved
states  is  shown  only  by  a  few  organic  compounds  such  as  strychnine
sulphate,  rubidium  tartrate,  etc.1

The  Physical  Properties  of  Lower  Symmetry. — The  most
important  property  by  which  all  regular  crystals  are  distinguished  from
amorphous  substances  is  elasticity.  According  to  the  theory  of  elasticity,
the  potential  energy  of  unit  volume  of  a  deformed  homogeneous  crystal
is  a  quadratic  function  of  the  moduli  of  deformation  (as  named  by
Kirchhoff ) ;  the  coefficients  occurring  here  are  the  so-called  elasticity
constants  of  the  crystals,  provided  that  the  crystallographic  axes  are
chosen  as  the  co-ordinate  axes.  As  Minnegerode 2  first  showed,  ac-
cording to  the  symmetry  of  their  behaviour  respecting  elasticity,  the
following  nine  classes  of  crystals  are  to  be  distinguished  : —

(a)  Regular  system ;  groups  1-5,  with  3  elasticity  constants.

(b)  Hexagonal  system;  groups  6-12,  with  5  elasticity  constants.

(c)  Hexagonal  system;  groups  13-15,  with  6  elasticity  constants.

(d)  Hexagonal  system;  groups 16 and 17,  with  7 elasticity  con-

stants.

(e)  Tetragonal  system;  groups  18,  19,  20,  and  23,  with  6  elasticity

constants.

(/)  Tetragonal  system;  groups 21,  22,  and  24,  with 7 elasticity,
constants.

1  See  H.  Traube,  Jahrb.  f.  Mineralogie,  1896,  p.  788.
2  Minnegerode,  Gott.  Nachr.,  1884.

CHAP.  HI  THE  SOLID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  93

(g)  Orthorhombic  system ;  groups  25-27,  with  9  elasticity  con-
stants.

(li)  Monoclinic  system  ;  groups  28-30,  with  13  elasticity  constants.

(*)  Triclinic  system;  groups  31  and  32,  with  21  elasticity  con-
stants.

That  no  more  groups  occur  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  elastic  pres-
sure, as  well  as  the  amount  of  deformation,  are  magnitudes  centrally
symmetric.  The  elastic  symmetry  is  expressed  with  especial  clearness
in  the  dependence  of  the  coefficient  of  elongation  (i.e.  the  elongation
effected  by  the  pull  1,  in  the  direction  of  this  pull)  upon  the  direction.
This  relation  can  be  shown  by  means  of  a  closed  surface,  by  plotting
through  a  fixed  point  each  pall-direction  corresponding  to  the  co-
efficients of  elongation.  Similarly  the  torsion  coefficient  of  a  circular
cylinder  can  be  represented  as  a  function  of  the  crystallographic
orientation  of  the  axis  of  the  cylinder.  (Reference  should  be  made
to  the  numerous  researches  of  W.  Voigt,  a  summary  of  which  is  given
in  Liebisch's  Phys.  Kri/st.,  chap,  ix.,  and  especially  the  account  in  §  7
of  Voigt's  Kristallphysik,  Leipzig,  1898).  It  is  especially  worthy  of
mention  that,  in  the  case  of  the  groups  of  the  hexagonal  system,  under
(b)  in  the  preceding  classification,  the  elasticity  is  the  same  in  all  direc-
tions having  the  same  inclination  to  the  principal  axis.  This  does  not
hold  good  for  the  other  groups  of  the  hexagonal  system,  nor  for  those
of  the  tetragonal  system.  Moreover,  there  are  very  remarkable  varia-
tions of  the  coefficients  of  elongation  and  of  torsion  respectively,  in
different  directions,  as  appears  from  the  observations  on  calcite,  dolo-
mite, tourmaline,  and  barite,  for  example.

The  properties  associated  with  cohesion,  as  cleavage  and  hardness,  in
respect  to  which  the  regular  crystals  also  seem  to  be  anisotropic,  have
not  as  yet  yielded  to  mathematical  treatment.

A  physical  process,  which  is  not  centrally  symmetrical,  and  which
therefore  leads  to  an  entirely  different  classification  of  crystals,  is  that
of  electrical  excitement  by  elastic  or  thermal  deformation  (piezo-electricity
and  pyro-electricity).  As  long  as  one  considers  only  homogeneous
deformation,  these  phenomena  can  only  occur  on  crystals  without  a
centre  of  symmetry.  Pyro-electric  excitement  by  uniform  heating  or
cooling,  is  particularly  characteristic  of  the  groups  having  a  character-
istic polar  axis  of  symmetry,  viz.  7,  10,  14,  17,  19,  22,  27,  and  29
(groups  30  and  32  have  not  been  observed  as  yet);  this  property,
therefore,  is  a  good  sign  whereby  to  recognise  these  groups,  apart  from
their  crystalline  form  and  etched  figures.  Remarkable  examples  are
tourmaline,  calamine,  struvite,  cane-sugar,  and  tartaric  acid ;  also
quartz,  in  which  the  three  side-axes,  and  boracite,  in  which  the  four
threefold  axes  are  polar,  these  can  take  electrical  charges  only  by
uneven  heating  or  cooling,  with  +  and  -  alternately  on  the  ends  of  the
polar  axes.

94  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

The  Determination  of  the  Crystallographic  Symmetry.—

If  one  is  studying  transparent  crystals  he  will  properly  begin  with  an
optical  test.  It  should  first  be  determined,  by  a  polarisation  apparatus
for  parallel  light,  or  by  a  microscope  fitted  with  polarising  and  analys-
ing nicols,  whether  the  crystal  is  optically  isotropic  (singly  refracting
or  circularly  polarising),  or  doubly  refracting ;  and  in  the  latter  case,
how  the  directions  of  extinction  are  orientated  with  reference  to  the
bounding  crystal  faces  :  (these  extinction  directions  are  the  directions
which  must  be  parallel  to  the  polarising  planes  of  the  crossed  nicols,
when  the  crystal  appears  dark,  and  they  are  also  the  polarisation
planes  of  the  waves  transmitted  in  the  direction  of  observation).

Next  follows  an  examination  in  converging  polarised  light  (with
the  Norremberg's  apparatus,  or,  in  the  case  of  small  objects,  with
a  microscope  fitted  for  converging  light),  when  the  light  is  passed
through  crystal  sections  with  parallel  planes,  which  are  either
naturally  suited  for  this,  or  artificially  prepared,  by  grinding  or
splitting.  Usually  it  will  be  advantageous  and  save  polishing  if
one  immerses  the  crystal  in  a  liquid  having  nearly  the  same  re-
fractive index.  The  following  is  a  description  of  the  characteristic
phenomena  which  one  first  observes  in  homogeneous  light ;  it  will  be
noticed  whether  the  crystal  is  optically  uni-axial  or  bi-axial,  and  in  the
latter  case  how  the  optic  axes  lie.  In  the  case  of  uni-axial  crystals,  in
plates  cut  perpendicularly  to  the  optic  axis,  between  crossed  nicols  one
sees  a  series  of  concentric  circles,  alternately  light  and  dark,  which  are
intersected  by  two  dark  bands  which  are  at  right  angles  to  each  other ;
in  plates  cut  parallel  to  the  axis,  the  rings  become  equilateral  hyper-
bolas ;  a  section,  cut  from  a  crystal  in  any  other  direction,  shows
excentric  systems  of  ellipses  or  hyperbolas,  according  to  its  inclination
to  the  optic  axis.  In  the  case  of  crystals  optically  bi-axial,  in  sections
normal  to  the  "first  middle  line"  (i.e.  the  line  bisecting  the  acute  angle
of  the  optic  axes),  in  case  the  angle  is  not  too  great,  one  sees  a  system
of  lemniscates  which  are  crossed  by  two  dark  bands  at  right  angles  to
each  other,  or  by  two  equal  dark  hyperbolic  brushes,  accordingly
as  the  plane  of  the  axes  coincides  with  the  principal  section  of  one
nicol  (normal  position),  or  as  it  makes  an  angle  of  45°  with  it  (diagonal
position).  With  sections  normal  to  "  the  second  middle  line  "  (i.e.  the
line  bisecting  the  obtuse  angle  of  the  optic  axes),  or  parallel  to  the
plane  of  the  optic  axes,  there  are  seen  systems  of  concentric  hyperbolas
which  are  exactly  symmetrical  in  the  latter  case,  but  not  so  in  the  former.
Finally,  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  sections  normal  to  one  axis  of  a  bi-axial
crystal  show  an  interference  figure  consisting  of  almost  circular  curves
which  are  crossed  by  one  dark  band.  Interference  curves  are  visible  in
white  light,  but  only  in  sufficiently  thin  sections,  or  such  as  are  nearly
normal  to  one  optic  axis ;  the  symmetry  of  the  distribution  of  colour
observed  in  the  normal  or  diagonal  position  of  the  plate,  and  which
depends  on  the  position  of  the  middle  lines  of  each  particular  colour,

CHAP.  Ill  THE  SOLID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  95

allows  one  to  determine  whether  the  crystal  system  is  orthorhombic,
monoclinic,  or  triclinic.  We  distinguish  in  the  case  of  monoclinic
crystals  three  varieties  of  the  "dispersion  of  the  optic  axes  of  sym-
metry," viz.  1,  inclined  dispersion  when  the  optic  axes  lie  in  the  plane
of  symmetry ;  2,  horizontal,  and  3,  crossed  dispersion  when  the  plane
of  the  optic  axes  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  symmetry,  and  the
first  and  second  middle  lines  respectively  lie  parallel  to  this  latter
plane.

After  one  has  thus  made  himself  certain  by  the  study  of  these
optical  phenomena,  or  at  least  has  gained  some  idea  regarding  the  sym-
metry of  the  crystal  to  be  determined, — as  will  be  of  great  value, —
especially  in  complex  combinations  with  the  irregular  development  of
planes, — he  will  next  proceed  to  the  measurement  of  angles  on  a  re-
flection goniometer,  having  previously  made  a  perspective  sketch
showing,  as  far  as  possible,  the  arrangement  of  the  particular  planes,
each  of  which  is  marked  with  a  letter.

The  angular  measurements  will  now  afford  more  disclosures  respect-
ing the  symmetry  of  the  geometrical  form  (because  equal  angles  lie
between  similar  planes) ;  and,  further,  they  will  serve  to  determine
the  elements  of  the  axes  (i.e.  the  geometrical  constants)  of  the  crystal.
In  the  case  of  monoclinic  and  triclinic  crystals,  the  choice  of  funda-
mental planes  is  purely  arbitrary  (for  the  former,  100  and  001,  and
also  for  the  latter  010),  but  one  can  give  to  any  fourth  plane  not
lying  in  a  zone  of  any  two  of  the  first  planes,  arbitrary  indices,  for
example  111,  and  can  calculate  from  the  inclination  to  the  fundamental
planes,  directly  or  indirectly  obtained,  the  axial  units  a  :  b  :  c.  The
angles  between  the  axes  are  already  known  by  establishing  the
fundamental  planes.  To  determine  the  indices  of  the  other  crystal
planes,  one  needs  at  most  two  angles,  measured  from  different  zones;
but  it  is  the  custom  to  have  more,  if  possible,  in  order  to  have  a
control  of  the  calculated  elements  of  the  axes  and  indices.

If  the  occurrence  of  the  faces  gives  rise  to  doubts  as  to  which
group  of  the  system  a  crystal  belongs,  we  must  proceed  to  study  the
etched  figures,  the  pyro-electric  properties,  etc.  Finalty,  to  ascertain
the  symmetry  and  the  geometrical  constants,  one  must  test  still  further
the  characteristic  physical  properties,  especially  the  character  (i.e.
whether  positive  or  negative),  and  the  strength  of  the  double-refraction
must  be  determined ;  in  the  case  of  crystals  optically  bi-axial,  the
angle  between  the  optic  axes ;  and  in  monoclinic  and  triclinic  crystals,
the  orientation  of  the  optic  axes  of  symmetry  must  be  determined  for
the  different  colours ;  also,  when  it  is  possible,  one  must  measure  the
principal  indices  of  refraction  by  the  method  of  total  reflection,  or
by  the  prism  method,  and  eventually  one  must  study  the  absorption
phenomena  (pleochroism).

Polymorphism. — Although,  in  general,  each  substance  occurs  in

96  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  I

a,  definite  crystallographic  symmetry  and  form,  which  is  characteristic
for  itself,  yet  many  instances  occur  where  the  same  substance  exhibits
different  crystal  forms.  The  appearance  of  one  and  the  same  sub-
stance, having  not  only  the  identical  composition,  but  also  the  identical
constitution,  in  two  or  more  crystal  forms,  i.e.  forms  with  different
symmetries,  and  also  with  different  elements  of  the  axes,  this  is  called
dimorphism  or  polymorphism  respectively.  This  phenomenon  was  first
recognised  by  E.  Mitscherlich,  in  the  salt  NaH2P04 -f  H20  (1821),
and  in  sulphur  (1823).  The  different  kinds  of  crystals  of  a  poly-
morphous substance  are  to  be  regarded  as  different  modifications
analogous  to  the  different  states  of  aggregation;  they  are  therefore
designated  as  physical  isomers,  in  contrast  to  chemical  isomers.

The  following  are  among  the  important  examples  of  polymorphic
substances.  For  the  particular  group  to  which  each  modification
belongs,  see  the  preceding  summary  of  the  thirty-two  groups.

C,  S,  Se,  Sn ;  Cu2S,  ZnS,  HgS,  FeS2 ;  As203,  Sb903,  Si02  (quartz
and  tridymite),  Ti02  ;  Agl,  HGI2,  IC1 ;  CaC03,  KN03,~NaC103,  KC103,
NH4N03;  K2S04,  NiS04+6H20,  MgS04+7H20,  FeS04+7H26,
NaH2PO4  +  H20,  boracite,  Al2Si05  (andalusite,  disthene,  and  silli-
manite),  the  humite  group,  zuisite  and  epidote,  leucite,  potassium
feldspar ;  also  many  organic  compounds,  as  chlor-m-di-nitro-benzene,
chlor-o-di-nitro-benzene,  benzo-phenone,  /3-di-brom-propionic  acid,  mono-
chlor-acetic  acid,  mono-nitro-tetra-brom-benzene,  benzoin,  carbon  tri-
chloride, hydroquinone,  malon-amide,  m-nitro-para-acet-toluide.

Polymorphism  (unlike  chemical  isornerism)  is  restricted  to  the
solid  state  ;  on  sublimation,  polymorphic  modifications  yield  the  same
vapour ;  on  solution,  the  same  liquid,  just  as  the  vapour  from  ice  or
water  is  identical,  and  the  solution  of  ice  or  water  in  alcohol  gives  an
identical  aqueous  alcohol.

But  the  vapour  pressure  (and  solubility)  of  two  polymorphic  modi-
fications is,  in  general,  different ;  hence,  in  general,  two  polymorphic
forms  are  not  in  equilibrium  together,  for  vapour  would  pass  from  the
form  with  the  higher  to  that  with  the  lower  pressure,  and  the  one
would  grow  at  the  cost  of  the  other.  Equilibrium  can  occur  only  at
the  temperature  at  which  the  vapour  pressure  of  the  two  forms  is  the
same,  i.e.  at  the  point  of  intersection  of  the  two  vapour  pressure
curves,  just  as  (p.  74)  coexistence  of  the  solid  and  liquid  states
depends  on  equality  of  vapour  pressure.

The  point  at  which  the  two  modifications  coexist  is  called  the
transition  temperature;  above  that,  only  one,  below  it  only  the  other,
form  is  stable,  just  as  below  0°  water  freezes,  and  above  0°  ice  melts.
But  an  important  difference  is  that  solids  cannot  be  heated  above  their
melting-point  without  melting,  whereas  most  polymorphs  can  be  kept
for  some  time  above  their  transition  temperature  before  being  entirely
converted,  and  some  even  show  no  tendency  to  be  converted.  Thus,
calcite  and  aragonite  can  exist  together  through  a  wide  range  of

CHAP.  Ill  THE  SOLID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  97

temperature,  and  others,  such  as  diamond  and  graphite,  have  not  so
far  been  converted  by  mere  change  of  temperature.  The  transition  is
usually,  facilitated  by  contact  with  substance  that  has  been  already
converted,  just  as  the  solidification  of  an  undercooled  liquid  is  brought
about  by  contact  with  the  frozen  substance.1

The  energy  of  two  modifications  is  usually  considerably  different,
as with the solid and liquid
states ;  the  evolution  of  heat  in
passing  from  one  into  the  other
is  called  the  heat  of  transition.

These  relations  can  best  be
studied  with  the  aid  of  Fig.  8*
which,  like  Fig.  4  (p.  74),  shows
the  vapour  pressure  curves  of
the  different  modifications.  The
point  of  intersection  of  curves  a
and  b  which  represent  the  poly-
morphic forms  A  and  B  is  the

transition point, for there the

vapour  pressure  of  both  is  the  same.  Below  that  point  A -has  the
smaller  vapour  pressure,  and  is  stable ;  above,  the  conditions  are  re-
versed, and  B  is  stable.

The  melting-point  of  each  modification  is  at  the  intersection  with
the  vapour  pressure  curve  of  the  liquid.  Two  cases  are  possible.2
Either  the  latter  curve  cuts  a  and  b  above  the  transition  point  (I,  Fig.
8)  or  below  (II).  Only  in  the  former  case  is  the  transition  point
actually  attainable ;  in  the  latter,  both  modifications  would  melt  first.
Sulphur  is  an  example  of  the  first  case ;  rhombic  sulphur  on  heating
to  95*6  passes  over  into  the  monoclinic  form,  and  the  latter  on  cool-
ing reverts  to  rhombic.  Benzophenone  is  an  instance  of  the  second ;
two  modifications  with  different  melting-points  are  known,  and,  as
appears  from  Fig.  8,  that  with  the  higher  melting-point  must  be  the
more  stable.  In  this  case,  then,  it  is  not  possible  to  pass  from  either
modification  to  the  other  by  mere  heating  or  cooling ;  the  unstable
modification  has  to  be  prepared  by  crystallisation  from  suitably  under-
cooled  liquid.3

Liquid  Crystals. — To  explain  crystalline  structure,  we  must
obviously  assume  that  forces  act  between  the  molecules  which  compel
their  regular  arrangement.  The  stronger  these  forces,  the  more  rigid
the  molecular  structure  will  be,  and  the  more  the  crystal  will  resist
deformation.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  these  forces  become  very  weak,
it  is  conceivable  that  deformation  should  occur  even  under  the

1  See  ''Synopsis  of  Literature  and  Researches,"  by  W.  Schwarz,  Umkehrbare  Um-
wandlungeM  poly morpher  Korper,  Preisschrift  de.r  phiL  Fakultdt,  Gottingen,  1892.

2  Ostwald,  Attg.  C/iem.,  1st  ed.,  1.695  (1885)  ;  2nd  ed.,  1.948  (1891).

3  K.  Schaum,  "Arteu  der  Isomerie,"  HaUlitationsschrift,  Marburg,  1897.

H

98  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

influence  of  gravity  or  capillarity,  i.e.  we  should  have  a  liquid
crystal.

Actually  Reinitzer,1  some  years  ago,  observed  a  peculiar  liquid,  but
cloudy,  modification  of  cholesterylbenzoate,  which  appeared  bright
between  crossed  nicols,  and  is  therefore  doubly  refracting.  The
optical  behaviour  of  this  substance,  and  of  some  others,  discovered
by  Gattermann,2  which  show  similar  phenomena,  was  thoroughly
studied  by  0.  Lehmann.3  It  appeared  that  these  compounds  are
liquid,  and  that  free  drops  show  the  structure  of  sphere-crystals,  and
like  sphero-crystals  give  a  black  cross  between  crossed  nicols.4  We
may  perhaps  assume  a  radial  arrangement  of  molecules  in  such  liquid
drops.

On  heating,  the  cloudiness  disappears  at  a  definite  temperature,
and  with  it  the  double  refraction.  This  may  be  described  as  the
melting-point  of  the  crystal,  i.e.  the  arrangement  of  molecules  breaks
down  there.

Recently,  however,  G.  Tammann  5  has  put  forward  objections  that
appear  well  founded  against  these  observations  and  conceptions.
More  careful  observation  of  cholesterylbenzoate  showed  that  the
milky  liquid  slowly  deposited  small  solid  sphero-crystals  and  became
clear,  so  that  the  "  liquid  crystal "  was  nothing  more  than  a  mixture
of  isotropic  liquid  and  innumerable  small  crystals.  In  other  cases,
according  to  Tammann,  formation  of  layers  does  occur  on  melting,  i.e.
the  liquid  crystal  is  an  emulsion,  possessing,  however,  the  property  of
appearing  light  between  crossed  nicols.  But  these  phenomena  are  the
less  noticeable  the  more  carefully  the  preparation  is  purified.  On  the
hypothesis  of  an  emulsion,  it  has  to  be  assumed  that  clear  crystals
separate  into  parts  on  melting — a  hitherto  unknown  phenomenon.
We  must  then  await  further  investigation,  especially  whether  it  is
possible  to  reproduce  the  phenomena  of  "  liquid  crystals  "  artificially
by  appropriate  mixtures.

Amorphous  State. — On  cooling  a  homogeneous  liquid  sufficiently,
it  acquires,  in  general,  the  property  of  crystallising ;  at  points  of  its
interior,  nuclei  arise  which  grow  more  or  less  fast,  and  eventually
cause  the  whole  liquid  to  become  crystalline.  A  liquid  can  therefore
be  undercooled  (i.e.  cooled  below  the  melting-point)  the  more  easily  the
fewer  the  nuclei  in  it,  and  the  more  slowly  they  grow.

If  a  liquid  were  suddenly  cooled  to  the  absolute  zero,  the  facility
for  crystallising  would  not  occur  ;  for  then  molecular  movement  would

1  Monatsschrift  f.  Chem.,  9.435  (1888).

2  Ber.  d.  d.  Chem,  Ges.,  23.  1738  (1890).

•  ner.  a.  a.  i/nem.  uct>.,  &o.  i/oo  \ic»u;.

3  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  4.  462  ;  5.  427  if.  ; Ber.  d.  d.  Chem.  Ges.,  23.,  1745  ; Wied.
Ann.,  40.  401  (1890).

4  See also  R. Scheuck, "  Die  Kristallinischeu Flussigkeiten,"  Habilitationsschrift,
Marburg,  1897.

5  Ann.  d.  Phys.,  4.  524  (1901);  8.  103(1902).

CHAP,  ill  THE  SOLID  STATE  OF  AGGREGATION  99

cease,  and  the  favourable  collisions  of  molecules  (Book  II.,  chap,  ii.)
needed  for  the  formation  of  a  crystal  nucleus  would  be  wanting  ;  nor
could  a  nucleus  grow,  since  the  velocity  of  crystallisation  must  vanish
too.  It  appears,  then,  that  at  the  absolute  zero  the  state  of  under-
cooled  liquid  must  be  practically  stable ;  it  is  further  obvious  that,
with  the  cessation  of  molecular  movement,  the  easy  mobility  of  the
parts  of  a  liquid  must  cease  too,  whereas  its  isotropy  must  remain  (in
contrast  with  the  crystalline  state).

Numerous  observations  show  that  such  a  state  is  possible  for  many
substances  at  atmospheric  and  higher  temperatures,  i.e.  great  under-
cooling can  be  relatively  stable ;  this  condition  has  long  been  called
amorphous1  (in  opposition  to  crystalline).

The  characteristics  of  the  amorphous  state  follow  from  what  we
have  said  ;  externally  it  has  the  properties  of  a  solid,  owing  to  great
viscosity  and  considerable  rigidity,  produced  by  strong  mutual  action
of  the  molecules.  An  amorphous  body  differs  from  a  crystal,  however,
in  its  complete  isotropy  and  absence  of  a  melting-point ;  on  heating,
it  passes  continuously  from  the  amorphous  to  the  usual  liquid  state,
as  its  properties  show  steady  change  with  rise  of  temperature,  and  no
breaks  anywhere.

Since  amorphous  bodies  (such  as  glasses)  show  rigidity,  it  would
follow  from  this  hypothesis  that  ordinary  liquids,  and  even  gases,
must  also,  though  to  a  very  slight  extent ;  so  far,  this  has  not  been
proved,  possibly  owing  to  the  extreme  smallness  of  the  property.

Quartz,  silicates  (glasses),  and  many  metallic  oxides,  are  good
examples  of  the  amorphous  state.  Amorphous  precipitates,  difficult
to  wash  and  apt  to  bring  down  impurities  with  them,  are  frequent  in
chemical  work  and  disadvantageous.

Sometimes  crystallisation  of  amorphous  bodies  cannot  be  observed
within  ordinary  limits  of  time ;  sometimes  it  occurs  slowly,  as  in  the
devitrification  of  glass  ;  occasionally  with  almost  explosive  violence.
Tammann  (loc.  cit.)  quotes  a  good  example  of  this  in  Grove's  discovery
(1855)  of  explosive  antimony.  This  metal  is  deposited  in  amorphous
form  (always  containing  some  chloride)  by  electrolysis  from  solutions
of  antimonious  chloride  ;  on  passing  over  into  the  crystalline  state  an
evolution  of  21  calories  per  gram  occurs.  If  a  part  of  the  antimony
be  heated  to  100  -  160°,  rapid  crystallisation  takes  place,  and  this,  on
account  of  the  heat  developed,  is  propagated  like  an  explosive  wave.

1  This  view  of  the  amorphous  state  is  developed  and  discussed  by  G.  Tammann,
Schmelzen  Knd  Kristallisieren,  Leipzig,  1903  (Ambrosius-Bartl)).

CHAPTER IV

THE PHYSICAL MIXTURE

General  Observations. — In  the  preceding  chapters  we  have  con-
sidered chiefly  the  behaviour  of  substances  having  a  simple  chemical
composition :  in  the  following  chapter  will  be  considered  the  most
important  properties  of  the  physical  mixture.  By  the  term  physical
mixture  we  mean  a  complex  of  different  substances,  which  is  at  all
points  homogeneous,  both  in  a  physical  and  a  chemical  sense.
According  to  the  state  of  aggregation,  we  must  distinguish  between
gaseous,  liquid,  and  solid  mixtures ;  in  special  cases  we  call  them
gas-mixtures,  solutions,  isomorphous  mixtures,  alloys,  and  the  like.

The  physical  mixture  must  not  be  confounded  with  the  coarse
mechanical  admixtures  of  solid  or  liquid  substances,  as  powders,
emulsions,  and  the  like,  the  various  ingredients  of  which  can  be
separated  from  each  other  without  much  difficulty,  as  by  detection
with  the  microscope,  separation  by  gravity,  by  washing  out,  etc.
They  originate  by  the  mutual  molecular  intermingling  of  the  various
substances  of  which  they  are  composed,  and  the  separation  of  their
components  is  for  the  most  part  conditioned  by  the  expenditure  of  a
very  considerable  degree  of  work,  a  knowledge  of  which  is  of  the
very  greatest  importance.  In  terms  of  the  molecular  hypothesis,
physical  mixtures  differ  from  chemically  simple  substances,  in  that
the  latter  consist  of  the  same  kind  of  molecules,  while  the  former
consist  of  different  kinds  of  molecules.

The  gases  alone  possess  collectively  the  property  of  unlimited
miscibility.  The  solvent  power  of  different  liquids  for  each  other,
and  also  of  liquids  for  solids,  is  much  more  limited ;  and  still  more
rarely  are  crystallised  substances  able  to  form  mixed  crystals  in  all
proportions.

Gas  Mixtures.— As  would  be  expected,  the  most  simple  rela-
tions are  found  in  the  case  of  mixtures  arising  from  the  mutual  inter-
penetration  (diffusion)  of  different  gases.  In  those  cases  where  there
is  no  chemical  action  associated  with  the  intermingling,  the  properties

100

CHAP.  IV  THE  PHYSICAL  MIXTURE  101

of  each  particular  gas  remain  unchanged  in  the  mixture,  i.e.  each
gas  conducts  itself  as  though  the  others  were  not  present ;  the  pressure
exerted  upon  the  containing  walls,  the  capacity  of  absorbing  and
refracting  light,  the  solubility  in  any  selected  solvent,  the  specific  heat,
etc.,  all  of  these  properties  experience  no  change  in  the  intermixture.
Thus  one  can  predict  the  [physical]  properties  of  a  gas  mixture  of  known
composition,  if  he  has  previously  determined  the  properties  of  each
particular  ingredient.  These  relations  should  be  regarded  as  charac-
teristic only  of  ideal  gases.  As  all  the  laws  of  gases  are  only  approxi-
mate rules,  one  will  find,  presumably,  by  exact  measurement,  small
deviations  from  the  rules  given  above.  At  least  it  is  already  proven
that  the  pressure  exerted  by  a  gas  mixture  does  not  strictly  obey
the  law  of  the  sum  of  their  pressures.

If  one  mixes  two  gases,  at  the  same  time  allowing  them  to  diffuse
into  each  other,  at  a  volume  which  is  kept  constant,  there  occurs  no
development  of  heat,  and  also  no  expenditure  of  external  work ;
consequently  the  total  energy  [U],  remains  unchanged  in  this  process.
But,  nevertheless,  the  process,  if  rightly  directed,  can  do  external
work,  as  it  may  be  already  inferred  that  the  mutual  intermingling  of
two  gases  is  a  process  occurring  automatically ;  and  as  is  universally
true,  so  here,  the  maximum  of  external  work  may  be  obtained  by
making  the  intermingling  reversible.

Now,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  a  very  simple  mechanism  may  be  con-
trived to  work  in  the  desired  way,  and  which  depends  upon  a  property
possessed  by  certain  partition  walls,
of being  permeable for certain sub-
stances, but  not  for  others ;  partitions cc
of this sort are called "  semi- per-
meable "  ;  they  have  recently  proved  of
immense  service  in  the  advance  of  both  Kg  9

theory  and  experiment. Let  there  be

nt  g.-mol  of  a  gas  in  the  division  I  of  a  cylinder  (Fig.  9),  the  volume  of
which  is  vp  and  in  division  II,  the  volume  of  which  is  v2,  n.2  g.-mol
of  another  gas.  During  the  process  the  system  is  maintained  at  the
constant  temperature  T.  In  the  cylinder  are  two  closely -fitting,
movable  pistons  a  and  b ;  let  piston  a  be  permeable  for  the  first  gas,
but  not  for  the  second ;  and,  conversely,  piston  b  should  give  free
passage  for  the  second  gas,  but  not  for  the  first.  Two  piston  rods,  a
and  fi,  which  pierce  the  two  air-tight  cylinder  heads,  serve  to  carry
the  motion  of  the  contents  to  the  outside.  At  first  the  pistons  should
be  pushed  up  close  to  each  other ;  then  the  first  gas  will  exert  a
pressure  on  piston  b,  but  not  on  a,  since  it  can  freely  pass  through
the  latter ;  and  conversely  for  a  similar  reason,  the  second  gas,  by
virtue  of  its  expansive  force,  will  tend  to  move  only  the  piston  a.  If
we  offer  no  resistance  to  the  piston  rods,  as  a  result  of  this  pressure
action,  there  will  occur  a  movement  of  the  pistons  to  the  ends  of  the

102  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

cylinder,  as  is  shown  in  Fig.  10;  at  the  same  time  there  has  occurred
the  intermingling  of  the  two  gases.  If,  conversely,  we  press  in  the  two
piston  rods,  the  first  gas'  will  offer  resistance  only  to  the  movement  of
piston  b,  and  the  second  gas  only  to  the  movement  of  piston  a ;  if  we
push  back  the  pistons  to  their  original  positions,  there  occurs  a  separa-

Fig.  10.

tion  of  the  gases,  and,  at  the  same  time,  we  bring  the  two  gases  back
to  their  original  volumes. The  process  is  thus  completely  reversible.

Now  the  work  which  can  be  obtained ,  by  the  intermingling  is
easily  calculated :  during  the  expansion  each  gas  presses  with  its
actual  partial  pressure  on  the  piston  opposing  its  passage,  and
accordingly  performs  exactly  the  same  work,  as  though  the  other  gas  were
not  present.  Since  the  nx  molecules  of  the  first  gas  expand  from  Vj  to
vi  +'V2»  the  work  performed  by  them  according  to  p.  52  is

A  =  i\  KT  invi  +  V2,

vi
and  for  the  second  gas  the  work  is

•\T -4- \T

A2  =  n2RT

V2

and  for  the  sum  of  the  two

A  =  A-^  +  A2  =  HT(  njln— 1 —  +  n2ln—  . . (I.)

This  formula  was  first  developed  by  Lord  Rayleigh,1  but  after-
wards independently  and  more  thoroughly  by  Boltzmann.2  Of  course,
if  the  system  were  not  maintained  at  constant  temperature,  it
would  be  cooled  during  the  performance  of  the  work,  since  there  re-
sults no  heat  from  the  simple  intermingling  of  the  gases ;  under  these
circumstances,  the  equivalent  quantities  of  heat  would  be  absorbed
from  the  environment,  exactly  as  in  the  expansion  or  compression  of
a  single  gas.

From  the  equation  (p.  23),  viz.—

A  -  TT  -  T— ,
nT

1 Phil.  Mag.,  49.  311  (1875).  2 Wiener  Sitzungsber.,  1878,  II.  p.  733.

CHAP,  iv  THE  PHYSICAL  MIXTURE  103

since  in  our  case  U  is  equal  to  zero  (p.  52),  it  follows  that

A-TdA,
1dT>

or  integrated

In  A  -  InT  +  C,

in  which  C  denotes  an  unknown  constant ;  from  this  it  follows  that

A-cT,

in  which  c  denotes  a  new  constant.

Thermodynamics  also  establishes  the  correctness  of  the  result  given
above,  inasmuch  as  it  requires  a  ratio  between  A  and  the  absolute
temperature,  which,  in  fact,  coincides  with  the  formula  obtained  by  the
method  described.

Though  the  derivation  given  above  is  obviously  correct,  yet  it  must
not  be  overlooked  that  it  cannot  be  used  in  demonstration  until  it  has
been  proven  that  the  semi-permeable  walls  used  in  the  process  can  be
realised  in  the  actual  cases  :  thermodynamic  considerations  must  be
employed,  not  in  fictitious  cyclic  processes,  but  only  in  those  which
are  possible  in  nature,  if  they  are  to  attain  to  the  rank  of  scientific
proof,  and  not  merely  to  that  of  arbitrary  speculation.  I  would
emphasise  this  the  more,  because  hitherto  the  question  of  the  prac-
ticability of  the  process  in  question  has  been  disposed  of  rather  too
easily.  Now,  inasmuch  as  the  "  semi -permeable  partitions "  have
played  a  very  important  role  in  many  lines  of  research  in  recent  times,
and  as  their  introduction  into  calculation  has  simplified  and  strengthened
the  proof,  a  few  words  will  be  offered  concerning  their  legitimate  use
in  thermodynamic  conclusions.

For  certain  cases  there  are  undoubtedly  partitions  having  the
quality  desired  ;  thus,  palladium  foil  at  high  temperatures  possesses  the
property  of  allowing  hydrogen  to  pass  through  easily,  but  of  hindering
other  gases.  A  gas  very  soluble  in  water  can  easily  diffuse  through  a
membrane  moistened  with  water,  while  a  gas  which  is  soluble  with
difficulty  in  water  cannot  so  diffuse.  Thus  if  one  ties  a  bit  of  moist
pig's  bladder  over  the  mouth  of  a  funnel,  fixed  with  the  mouth
upwards,  and  with  the  tip  in  connection  with  a  mercury  manometer,
and  then  leads  ammonia  gas  under  a  jar  held  inverted  over  the  funnel,
he  will  at  once  see,  as  I  have  demonstrated  many  times,  a  rise  of  the
manometer  amounting  to  a  tenth  of  an  atmosphere,  occasioned  by  the
partial  .pressure  of  the  diffused  ammonia.1  Thus  the  experiment
shown  in  Figures  9  and  10  is  realised,  if  the  question  concerns  the
mixture  of  ammonia  and  hydrogen.  Thereby  at  the  same  time  it
becomes  probable  in  the  highest  degree  that  the  formula  (I),  obtained  on
p.  102,  holds  good  universally;  and  since  it  is  strongly  proven  for  one

1  This  simple  experiment  is  recommended  for  the  lecture  desk.

104  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  I

case,  it  can  hardly  be  assumed  that  a  nature  law  of  that  kind  is
dependent,  so  to  speak,  upon  the  casual  question  as  to  whether  we
possess  the  desired  partition  or  not  for  all  special  cases.

Further,  we  next  observe  the  more  striking  argument,  in  that
another  cyclic  process  has  been  devised  by  which  the  intermingling
can  be  conducted  isothermally  and  reversibly,  and  which  affords  the
same  final  result,  as  was  thoroughly  proven  by  Boltzmann  in  1878.
A  cyclic  process  of  this  sort  can  be  represented  in  a  much  simplified
form,  as  seems  to  me.  Let  us  suppose  that  we  have  a  solvent  which
easily  dissolves  one  of  two  gases  which  are  to  be  mixed,  but  the
other  with  great  difficulty.  Thus  water,  for  example,  is  a  solvent
having  the  desired  properties  for  the  gas  pair,  nitrogen  and  hydrogen
sulphide,  and  still  better  for  nitrogen  and  hydrogen  chloride.

Suppose  we  are  to  consider  the  separation  of  hydrogen  chloride
and  nitrogen  :  we  first  bring  the  mixture  of  gases  to  a  large  volume
V,  and  then  connect  it  with  a  large  volume  of  a  water  solution  of
hydrogen  chloride,  choosing  such  a  concentration  for  the  latter
that  the  partial  pressure  of  its  hydrochloric  acid  is  equal  to  the
partial  pressure  of  this  gas  in  the  gas  mixture  of  volume  V.  Then
when  we  bring  the  gas  mixture  and  the  hydrochloric  acid  solution
into  contact  with  each  other,  hydrogen  chloride  will  neither
enter  nor  leave  the  solution.  [Or  rather,  the  quantities  of  hydro-
chloric acid  entering  and  leaving  the  solution  will  be  equal,  and
thus  will  balance  each  other. — TR.]  Now  we  will  compress  the  gas
mixture,  which  is  in  constant  contact  with  the  solution,  to  a
volume  which  is  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  original  volume  V ;
during  this  the  hydrogen  chloride  will  practically  go  completely  into
solution.  Then  we  will  separate  the  nitrogen,  which  remains  behind
in  a  state  of  almost  complete  purity,  from  the  solution,  and  then  will
liberate  from  the  solution  the  amount  of  hydrogen  chloride  dissolved ;
thus  the  desired  separation  has  been  effected.  If  we  neglect  the  vapour
tension  of  the  water,  which  can  give  rise  to  no  doubt  if  we  work  at
low  temperatures,  and  if  we  consider  that  the  water  vapour  mixed  with
the  two  gases  may  be  almost  completely  removed  by  compression,
and  if  we  also  neglect  the  nitrogen  dissolved  in  the  solution,  then  it
can  be  easily  proven  that  the  work  expended  in  the  separation  of  the
gases  is  given  by  formula  (I).

If  we  select  a  solvent  in  which  the  solubility  of  nitrogen  cannot
be  neglected,  but  one  in  which  the  solubility  of  the  two  gases  is
very  different,  we  can  effect  the  separation  of  the  two  gases  iso-
thermally and  reversibly  by  the  repeated  application  of  a  cyclic
process  similar  to  the  one  just  described,  i.e.  by  "  fractionation  of  the
solution " ;  and  it  is  not  necessary  to  follow  out  the  calculation,
to  conclude  from  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics,  that  the  work
to  be  applied  can  be  calculated  from  formula  (I.),  since  its  efficiency  has
been  already  proven  for  the  mixture  of  nitrogen  and  hydrogen  chloride.

CHAP.  IV  THE  PHYSICAL  MIXTURE  105

Now  we  can  take  any  arbitrary  pair  of  gases,  and  can  find  some
suitable  solvent  which  will  dissolve  the  two  gases  in  different  degrees,
for  otherwise  they  would  be  chemically  identical  ;  and  thus  a  cyclic
process  can  always  be  realised  which  can  be  calculated  by  formula  (I.).
This  formula  therefore  holds  good  universally,  and  thereby  it  is  proven,  at
the  same  time,  that  it  is  permissible  to  work  with  semipermeable  partitions  in
all  cases  concerning  the  mingling  or  the  separation  of  two  gases  which  are
chemically  different.

The  Physical  Properties  of  Liquid  Mixtures.  —  The  relations
of  liquid  and  solid  mixtures  are  much  more  complicated  than  in  the
case  of  gases.  Here,  in  the  case  of  liquids,  there  is  usually  associated
with  the  mingling,  a  change  of  the  properties  belonging  to  the  particular
ingredients  of  the  mixture.  The  volume  of  the  mixture  of  two
liquids  is  in  general  different  from  the  sum  of  the  volumes  of  the
individual  ingredients,  since  with  the  mingling  there  is  associated  a
contraction  or  a  dilation  which,  to  be  sure,  is  not  very  considerable  ;
and,  moreover,  the  colour,  refractive  index,  specific  heat,  etc.,  of  the
mixture  are  slightly  different  from  these  properties  of  the  ingredients,
calculated  as  though  they  persisted  in  the  mixture.  But  one  commonly
obtains  results  at  least  approximately  coincident,  by  calculating  the
properties  of  a  physical  mixture  from  those  of  the  ingredients,  as
though  these  remained  unchanged  in  the  mixing.

In  accordance  with  a  proposal  of  Ostwald,  we  will  call  properties
of  this  sort  additive;  the  essential  idea  will  be  best  made  clear  by
examples.

Many  liquids  can  unite  with  each  other,  as  also  many  solid  bodies
with  liquids,  to  form  homogeneous  liquid  aggregates,  the  volumes  of
which  are  very  .nearly  equal  to  the  sums  of  the  volumes  of  the
respective  ingredients.  If  we  denote  the  volume  of  the  mixture  by
V,  and  the  volumes  of  the  particular  ingredients  by  V1?  V2,  etc.,  then
it  is  approximately  true  that

V  =  Vx  +  V2  +  .  .  .  .

Let  the  weights  of  the  particular  ingredients  be  m1,  m9,  etc.  ;  let
us  denote  the  volume  of  the  unit  of  mass  of  the  mixture,  the  so-
called  "specific  volume,"  by  v,  and  the  respective  volumes  of  the
particular  ingredients  by  v1,  v2,  etc.  ;  then  the  preceding  equation
becomes

or

The  specific  volume  of  the  mixture  can  also  be  calculated  from
the  specific  volumes of  the  particular  ingredients,  by  the  so-called

v(m1  +  m2  +  .  .)  -  v^  +  V2m2  +  .  .  ,

106  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

"  partnership  "  calculation,  viz.  as  though  each  particular  ingredient
entered  the  mixture  with  the  specific  volume  which  it  had  in  the  free
state.  The  specific  volume  under  these  circumstances  is  an  additive
property.  Of  course,  on  the  basis  of  the  purely  algebraic  nature  of
the  specific  gravity,  the  reciprocals  of  the  aforesaid  values  cannot  be  an
additive  property  ;  l  and  this  example  teaches  that  it  is  only  necessary
to  effect  an  algebraic  transformation  of  values  determined  experi-
mentally, to  meet  with  much  simpler  relations.

The  heat  capacity  of  a  liquid  mixture  is  likewise  as  a  rule  equal  to
the  sum  of  the  heat  capacities  of  the  ingredients.  If  we  denote  by  c
the  specific  heat  of  a  mixture  containing  ml  g.  of  one  ingredient  of  a
specific  heat  cp  and  m0  g.  of  another  ingredient  of  a  specific  heat  c0,
then  according  to  the  preceding  law

c(m1  +  m2)  =  C1m1  +  c9m0  ;

but  since  — —  -  denotes  the  value  of  the  weight  per  cent  of  the  first
nij  +  m2

component,  we  obtain,  as  the  formula  to  calculate  c  —

jp_ 100  -p

:  ClToo  +  C2~~

As  a  matter  of  fact,  in  the  case  of  particular  mixtures,  as  for
example  chloroform  and  carbon  disulphide,  this  calculation  proves
very  good,  the  differences  between  the  observed  and  the  calculated
values  being  less  than  one  per  cent  ;  but  in  other  cases,  as  in  the
mixture  of  acetic  acid  and  water,  the  results  are  only  tolerable.  Indeed,
we  find  in  the  case  of  a  mixture  of  alcohol  and  water,  that  the  real
specific  heat  is  greater  than  it  should  be  according  to  the  preceding
formula  ;  thus  a  mixture  of  equal  parts  does  not  have  a  mean  of  the
specific  heats,  thus,

+ -  =  0-806,  but  the  specific  heat  is  0'910.

Mixtures  of  salt  and  water  have  as  a  rule  a  considerably  smaller
heat  capacity  than  the  sum  of  the  ingredients,  and  sometimes  smaller
than  what  should  correspond  to  the  amount  of  water  contained  in  the
mixture  (Thomsen,  1871,  Marignac,  1873).  In  the  case  of  solutions
not  too  concentrated,  one  can  estimate  the  heat  capacity  as  nearly
equal  to  that  of  the  contained  water,  a  very  important  rule  for
practical  thermochemistry.

The  optical  relations  of  mixtures  have  been  investigated  with
especial  thoroughness  ;  these  will  be  dealt  with  in  the  next  chapter.
It  need  only  be  noticed  here  that  excepting  one  case,  when  one  works

1  That  is  not,  if  as  above  the  calculation  is  performed  according  to  per  cent  by
weight  ;  but  it  will  be  additive  if  calculated  according  to  per  cent  by  volume.

CHAP.  IV  THE  PHYSICAL  MIXTURE  107

with  great  exactness,  lie  always  finds  differences  exceeding  the  limits
of  error,  between  the  results  of  observation  and  those  calculated  on
the  assumption  of  a  simple  additive  relation.  From  all  that  we  know
up  to  date,  in  the  case  of  liquid  and  solid  mixtures,  there  is  only
one  strictly  additive  property,  viz.,  that  of  mass,  which  of  course
both  in  a  simple  mixture  as  well  as  in  the  case  of  a  chemical  com-
pound, must  remain  unchanged,  according  to  the  law  of  the  in-
destructibility of  matter.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  deviations  observed  in  the  simple
additive  relations  of  liquids,  will  some  day  be  of  great  significance  in
determining  the  nature  of  the  force  concerned  in  the  mingling  of  two
liquids,  and  of  the  kind  of  mutual  action  occurring.  That  commonly,
and  especially  in  the  use  of  water  in  particular  as  a  solvent,  there
occurs  a  chemical  action,  i.e.  the  formation  of  new  molecules  or  the
splitting  of  those  previously  existing, — this  is  well  established  beyond
all  question  ;  it  will  be  especially  treated  of,  in  the  section  on  incomplete
reaction  (see  the  Doctrine  of  Affinity) ;  but  hitherto  it  has  been
impossible  to  prove  this  with  certainty.  Perhaps  this  much  may  be
maintained,  viz.  that  in  cases  where  the  properties  of  the  mixture
differ  very  considerably  from  the  mean  value  [of  those  of  the
ingredients],  a  chemical  action  is  probable ;  and  in  the  case  of  such
mixtures,  a  certain  parallelism  can  be  asserted  in  the  variations
attending  their  different  properties ;  at  least  in  those  mixtures  where
we  find  a  strong  contraction,  there  being  a  deviation  from  the  simple
additive  relations  of  the  specific  volumes,  the  specific  heat  seems  to
be  considerably  removed  from  the  mean  value.  Certainly  the  fact  on
the  other  side,  viz.  that. certain  compounds  which  are  undoubtedly
chemical,  show  properties  having  an  additive  character, — this  warns
us  not  to  be  premature  in  drawing  conclusions  like  the  above.  (See
Second  Book,  Chap.  V.)

The  Optical  Behaviour  of  Mixtures. — The  specific  refractive
power  of  a  mixture,  by  which  is  meant  the  quotient  of  the  refractive

index  minus  one,  divided  by  the  density  [i.e.  — ^—  J,  can  be  determined

from  the  corresponding  values  of  the  particular  components  in  exactly
the  same  way  as  the  specific  volume  :  and  as  Landolt x  has  shown,  the
calculated  value  of  the  specific  refractive  power  of  the  mixture  coin-
cides so  well  with  that  determined  experimentally,  that  one  conversely,
can  usually  determine  with  great  certainty  the  composition  of  a  mixture
from  its  optical  behaviour.  This  example  shows  how  sometimes,  by  a
skilful  combination  of  two  physical  properties  (in  the  preceding  case
these  being  the  refractive  index  and  the  specific  gravity),  one  can
arrive  at  simple  arid  universal  relations.

1  Lieb.  Ann.,  Suppl.,  4.  1  (1865). Also  compare  Gladstone  and  Dale,  Phil.  Trans.,
1858,  p.  887.

108

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK I

If  we  denote  by  n,  the  refractive  power  of  a  mixture,  measured
for  any  selected  line  of  the  solar  spectrum,  and  if  its  specific  gravity
is  d,  and  if  it  contains  p  per  cent  by  weight  of  one  ingredient,  and
100-p  of  the  other;  and  moreover,  if  the  corresponding  values  for
these  ingredients  when  pure  are  nx  and  dv  and  n2  and  d2  respectively  ;
then  the  specific  refractive  power  of  the  mixture  can  be  calculated
by  the  formula

n-1  _  n^l p
d  d, 100

ng ^_1  100  -p
~~<L 100

As  an  example  of  the  accuracy  with  which  this  formula  corresponds
to  observations,  there  is  given  the  following  series  of  measurements
of  mixtures  of  ethylene  bromide  and  propyl  alcohol,  for  the  tempera-
ture 18-07°  and  the  sodium  line.1

THE  REFRACTIVE  POWERS  OF  MIXTURES  OF  ETHYLENE  BROMIDE
AND  PROPYL  ALCOHOL.

Ethylene  Bromide
per  cent  (p).

Sp.  Gr.

Refraction
Coefficient.

Calc.-
Diff.  I.

-Obs.
Diflf.  II.

0

0-80659

1-386161

o-ooooo o-ooooo

10-0084

0-86081

1-391892

+ 32 1

20-9516 0-92908

1-399136

+ 66

3

29-8351 0-99300

1-405958

+ 95

5

407320

1-08453

1-415815

+ 128

12

49-9484

1-17623

1-425748

+ 155

18

60-0940

1-29695

1-439013

+ 171

34

70-0123

1-44175

1-455063

+ 180

46

80-0893

1-62640

1-475796

+ 169

57

90-1912

1-86652

1-503227

+ 116

59

100

2-18300

1-540399

o-ooooo

o-ooooo

In  the  fourth  column  are  given  the  differences  between  calcula-
tion and  observation,  which  one  obtains  if  he  develops  the  values
of  n  according  to  the  preceding  formula,  from  the  experimentally
determined  values  of  p,  np  n2,  dp  d2,  and  d.  The  differences  all  lie
on  the  same  side,  and  almost  reach  two  units  of  the  third  decimal
place,  thus  being  a  hundredfold  greater  than  the  errors  of  observation,
which  can  be  assigned  as  ±  0 '00002.  We  conclude  from  this  example
that  the  law  of  mixtures  just  described,  by  no  means  represents  a  strict
law  of  nature,  but  yet  that  as  an  approximate  rule  it  frequently  finds
practical  application.

1  Schiitt,  Zeitschr.  phys.  Chem.,  9.  349-377  (1892).  For  an  extended  form  of  the
law  of  mixtures,  from  the  introduction  of  a  new  constant,  compare  Pulfrich,  ib.  4.  161
(1889),  and  Buchkremer,  ib.  6.  161  (1890).-

CHAP,  iv  THE  PHYSICAL  MIXTURE  109

Now  it  has  been  investigated,  as  to  whether  another  function  of
the  refractive  power  may  be  better  suited  to  represent  the  phenomena,
and  in  fact  H.  A.  Lorentz  and  L.  Lorentz  (1880),  guided  by  certain

n2  -  1 1

theoretical  considerations,  found  that  the  expression  -^  —  -  •  -  is  more

accurate  than  the  expression  -~-r~  ,  although  it  is  not  so  simple. In

the  last  column  of  the  preceding  table  are  given  the  differences  between
calculation  and  observation,  which  one  obtains  by  solving  the  value  of
n  from  p,  nr  n2,  dp  d2  and  d,  by  the  formula

n2^! ]L  =  n12_:Ll  p n^-J. 100  -p

' ~  '  "n2-h2  ' 100d ;

as  a  matter  of  fact  the  result  so  obtained  coincides  much  better  with
experiment.

These  results  have  a  practical  interest  to  this  extent  ;  viz.  that  by
means  of  the  result  of  mixtures,

R K P

K'ioo  +

n  __  } n2  —  1 1

in  which  the  specific  refraction  R  denotes  either  —  =  —  ,  or  -  —  -  •  -

d ' n2  +  2 d

one  is  enabled  from  the  specific  refraction  of  a  mixture  to  calculate  the  specific
refraction  of  one  ingredient,  provided  lie  knows  the  composition  of  the  mixture
and  the  refraction  of  the  other  ingredients.  If  this  method  of  calculation
should  give  only  approximate  results,  even  then  the  relation  between
the  specific  refraction  and  the  chemical  composition  (see  this  section)
will  be  of  great  value  in  ascertaining  these  values  for  substances
which  one  cannot  study  pure  in  the  liquid  condition,  but  only  in  the
presence  of  a  solvent.

Finally,  it  has  been  attempted  to  obtain  results  harmonising  better
with  experiment,  by  introducing  into  the  formula  for  the  rule  of
mixtures  certain  constants  suitably  chosen  for  each  particular  case  ;

n2  —  1 1  n2  —  1 1

thus,  for  example,  instead  of  —  2-  —  -  •  -=-,  let  R  =  —  5  —  ~  •  -r. But  how-

ever useful  such  an  equation  might  be  as  an  exact  interpolation  for-
mula in  special  cases,  it  would  not  possess  universal  interest,  until  from
the  deviations  from  simple  additive  relations,  given  by  the  numerical
value  of  these  constants,  it  could  furnish  a  deeper  insight  into  the
nature  of  the  mixture  to  be  investigated.

One-sided  Properties.  —  The  study  of  the  relations  of  mixtures
is  of  especial  importance  for  those  physical  properties  which  belong
to  only  one  compound  of  a  mixture  ;  if,  for  example,  one  mixes  a
coloured  with  an  uncoloured  substance,  or  one  optically  active  with

110  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  I

one  optically  inactive,  he  can  obviously  answer  for  such  cases  with
all  safety  the  question  whether  a  change  of  property  occurs  by  the
mixture  or  not ;  and  therefore  in  such  cases  one  would  have  the  best
chance  to  reach  a  universal  point  of  view.  If,  for  example,  we  find
that  the  refractive  power  of  a  mixture  is  the  same  as  that  calculated
on  the  supposition  of  a  simple  additive  relation,  although  at  first  sight
it  appears  so,  yet  in  reality  there  is  no  sharp  proof  that  the  specific
refractive  power  of  each  component  in  the  free  state  remains  un-
changed in  the  mixture,  since  it  is  possible  that  the  property  of  one
component  might  have  increased  to  the  same  degree  to  which  that  of
another  has  diminished.  But  if,  for  example,  the  specific  rotatory
power  of  an  active  substance  in  the  mixture  is  exactly  the  same  as
in  the  free  state,  then  the  conclusion  is  unavoidable  that  every
molecule  rotates  as  strongly  in  the  mixture  as  in  the  free  state.
In  fact,  "  one-sided  properties  "  of  this  sort,  as  they  are  called,  are  of
the  greatest  importance  in  the  investigation  of  solutions ;  besides
the  rotation  and  the  absorption  of  light,  there  should  be  mentioned
particularly  the  electrical  conductivity  and  the  osmotic  pressure  of
dissolved  substances.

As  shown  in  the  case  of  the  two  optical  properties  just  referred  to,
so  also  is  the  absorption  of  light  greatly  altered  by  intermixture  with
colourless  liquids  ;  as  a  rule,  but  not  always,  the  absorption  bands  of
a  dissolved  substance  are  displaced  the  more  toward  the  red  end,
accordingly  as  the  refractive  power  of  the  solvent  is  greater  (Kundt's
rule).1  Also,  as  a  rule,  the  optical  rotation  of  active  molecules  is
greatly  influenced  by  the  presence  of  inactive  molecules ;  and  this
influence,  which  may  consist  in  a  strengthening  or  a  weakening  of
the  rotatory  power,  varies  with  the  quantity  of  the  inactive  substance
added  ; 2  a  universal  conformity  has  not  as  yet  been  found.  Further,
the  surmise  is  advanced  that  every  important  influence  of  this  sort  in
mixtures  may  be  ascribed  to  the  formation  of  new  molecular  groupings
in  the  way  of  incomplete  reactions,

The  Vaporisation  of  Mixtures. — One  property  of  liquid  mix-
tures, which  changes  with  the  proportions  of  the  ingredients  in  a  much
more  complicated  way  than  those  hitherto  described,  is  their  vapour
pressure.  The  vapour  emitted  by  a  mixture  will  in  general  have  the
same  components  as  the  liquid  remaining  behind  :  therefore  we  must
notice  the  partial  pressures  of  the  ingredients,  the  sum  of  which  is  the
vapour  pressure  of  the  mixture.  Sometimes,  of  course,  the  volatility
of  one  ingredient  is  so  very  small  that  its  pressure  can  be  neglected ;
thus  the  vapour  pressure  of  water  solutions  of  salts  is  simply  equal
to  the  pressure  of  the  water  vapour  in  equilibrium  with  the  solution.

1  Compare  P.  Stenger,  Hied.  Ann.,  33.  577  (1888\

2  For further particulars see Landolt, Optisches Drehung&vermogen organischer
Substanzen,  Brunswick,  1879,  p.  50  and  following.

CHAP.  IV  THE  PHYSICAL  MIXTURE  111

The  following  law  holds  good  universally,  and  is  of  fundamental
significance  :  the  partial  pressure  of  each  component  of  a  mixture  is  always
smaller  than  its  vapour  pressure  in  the  free  state  (liquid  or  solid)  at  the  same
temperature.  If  this  were  not  the  case  the  vapour  of  the  component
whose  partial  pressure  was  greater  than  in  the  pure  state  would  be
supersaturated ;  it  would  deposit  from  the  vapour,  and  we  should  thus
have  spontaneous  separation  of  the  mixture.  But  this  would  mean
that  a  self-acting  process — the  formation  of  a  mixture — was  reversed
without  any  compensation,  and  this  is  not  possible  (see  also  below  on
the  thermodynamic  treatment  of  liquid  mixtures).  In  the  following
chapters  we  shall  see  that  the  vapour  pressures  of  dilute  solutions
follow  very  simple  laws.

Regarding  the  vapour  pressure  of  mixtures  of  two  liquids  which
dissolve  each  other  in  all  proportions,  on  the  basis  of  the  law  just  given,
the  following  may  be  stated  : — If  we  add  to  a  liquid  A  a  small  quantity
of  another  liquid  B,  then  on  the  one  hand  the  vapour  pressure  of  A
will  be  diminished,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  total  vapour  pressure
of,  the  resulting  solution  will  be  increased  by  the  circumstance  that
the  quantity  of  B  dissolved  also  gives  out  vapour  ;  and,  moreover,  the
partial  pressure  of  B  in  the  vapour  existing  in  equilibrium  with  the
resulting  solution,  will  be  so  much  greater  as  the  coefficient  of  solu-
bility of  the  vapour  of  B  in  the  liquid  A,  is  smaller.  Accordingly  as
the  first  or  second  action  of  the  added  liquid  preponderates,  the  vapour
pressure  of  the  solution  will  be  smaller,  or  greater  than  that  of  A.  Of
course  the  same  holds  good  for  the  solution  arising  from  the  addition
of  a  slight  quantity  of  A  to  B,  which  likewise,  according  to  circum-
stances, can  have  a  smaller  or  a  greater  vapour  pressure  than
the  liquid  B  in  the  pure  state.  But  now  since  the  properties  of
mixtures  must  always  vary  with  the  composition,  the  three  follow-
ing characteristic  cases  must  be  distinguished,  regarding  the  depend-
ence of  the  vapour  pressure  upon  the  varying  proportions  of  the
two  liquids  : —

I.  The  vapour  of A  is  easily  soluble  in  B,  and  that  of  B  in  A.
Then  in  the  case  of  the  addition  of  a  slight  amount  of  A  to  B,  as  also
of  B  to  A,  the  vapour  pressure  of  the  resulting  solution  will  fall. If  we
start  with  the  pure  solvent  A  (the  vapour  pressure  of  which  at  the
temperature  employed  amounts  to  px),  and  add  in  succession  small  but
increasing quantities of B,  then the vapour  pressure  will  at first
diminish,  will reach  a  minimum, then will begin  to increase, and,
finally, on the addition of  large  quantities  of  B  will  approach  the
vapour  pressure  p-2,  that  of  the  pure  solvent  B.

II.  The  vapour  of  A  is  only  slightly  soluble  in  B,  as  well  as  that  of
B  in  A. Then  by  the  addition  of  a  slight  amount  of  A  to  B,  as  well
as  that  of  B  to  A,  the  vapour  pressure  of  the  resulting  solution  will  in-
crease. By  the  gradual  addition  of  B  to  A  the  vapour  pressure  of  the
solution  will  at  first  become  greater  than  p1,  will  then  reach  a  maximum,

112

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK I

O
iOO

60

60

80
20

o%A

Fig.  11.

and,  finally,  by  the  addition  of  a  great  excess  of  B,  will  sink  and
approximate  the  value  p2.

III.  The  vapour  of  the  first  liquid  is  easily  soluble  in  the  second,
but  that  of  the  second  is  soluble  with  difficulty  in  the  first.  Then  by
the  addition  of  a  slight  quantity  of  B  to  A  the  vapour  pressure  of  the
resulting  solution  will  be  slightly  smaller ;  by  the  addition  of  a  small

quantity  of  A  to  B  it  will
be  slightly  greater  than
that  of  the  pure  solvent.
Now  if  the  vapour  pressure
pi  of  A  is  greater  than  p2
of  B,  then  by  the  successive
additions  of  B  to  A  the
vapour  pressure  of  the  solu-
tion will  fall,  passing  con-
tinuously without  maximum
or  minimum  from  pl  to  p2
(IIP.).  But  let  the  case
be  imagined  where  the  first
addition  of  B  to  A  raises
the  vapour  pressure,  but
that  of  A  to  B  diminishes
it;  then  'by  the  gradual
addition  of  B  to  A  the  vapour  pressure  will  at  first  increase,  will
reach  a  maximum,  will  then  decrease  till  it  becomes  smaller  than
p2,  will  pass  a  minimum,  and  finally,  with  the  great  excess  of  B,
will  approach  the  vapour  pressure  p.2  (IIIb.).

These  various  relations  have  been  explained  by  the  excellent  theo-
retical and  practical  work  of  Konowalow  ; l  the  curve  tracings  (Fig.  1 1 )
will  assist  the  general  statement.  The  abscissae  are  the  varying  pro-
portions of  the  mixture  in  percentages  of  B ;  the  ordinates  are  their
varying  vapour  pressures.  Case  I.  illustrates  mixtures  of  formic  acid
and  water  from  the  measurements  of  Konowalow ;  case  II. ,  of  water
and  propyl  alcohol  from  the  same  source  ;  case  IIP.,  from  the  same,
experimentally  proven  for  ethyl  or  methyl  alcohol  and  water.  The
dotted  line  curve  illustrating  case  IIP.,  so  far  as  I  know,  has  not  been
realised.2

The  Theory  of  Fractional  Distillation. — We  can  now  easily
perceive  what  must  be  the  relations  in  the  isothermal  evaporation  of  a
solution,  as  we  imagine  it  to  be  effected  by  the  raising  of  a  piston
in  a  cylinder  containing  the  solution.  In  general  the  vapour  of  the
solution  will  have  a  different  composition  from  that  of  the  solution

1  Wied.  Ann.,  14.  34  (1881).

2  Ostwald  has  shown  (Lehrb.  d.  Allg.  Chem.,  2nd  ed.,  II.,  2.  642  (1899)  that  this  case
is  only  possible  for  dissociating  vapours  ; a  very  clear  account  of  the  evaporation  of
mixtures,  including  some  new  matter,  is  given  (p.  617  ff. )  in  this  work.

CHAP,  iv  THE  PHYSICAL  MIXTURE  113

itself,  and  therefore  as  a  result  of  the  evaporation,  the  composition
and,  at  the  same  time,  the  vapour  pressure  of  the  solution  will  vary.
Now  the  change  in  composition  of  the  mixture  must  be  such  that  its  vapour
pressure  resulting  from  the  evaporation,  must  be  diminished.  If  this  were
not  the  case,  by  raising  the  piston  the  pressure  would  increase  some-
what ;  by  lowering  the  piston  it  would  diminish ;  so  that  a  more
stable  equilibrium  between  the  pressure  on  the  piston  from  the  vapour,
and  that  exerted  from  without,  is  debarred.  The  evaporation  proceeds
in  such  a  way  that  the  more  volatile  ingredients  evaporate  first.  Thus
in  case  L,  the  mixture  must  remain  behind  with  a  minimal  vapour
pressure  ;  in  case  II.,  one  of  the  two  solvents,  according  to  the  relative
proportions  of  the  original  solution  ;  in  case  IIP.,  since  we  neglect
the  case  IIIb.,  which  is  riot  as  yet  realised  (and  may  be  unrealisable  ?),
after  a  sufficiently  long  evaporation,  that  solvent  with  the  smaller
vapour  pressure  remains  behind.

In  practical  laboratory  work  one  does  not  as  a  rule  boil  and  distil
the  mixture  at  constant  temperature,  but  rather  evaporates  it  usually
at  constant  pressure,  viz.  that  of  the  atmosphere.  Since,  as  a  rule,  the
vapour  has  a  different  composition  from  the  remaining  solution,  we
thus  possess  one  of  the  most  powerful  and  convenient  methods  of
separating  substances.  Of  course  the  separation  will  never  be  com-
plete by  one  distillation,  but  may  usually  be  carried  to  a  high  degree
by  interrupting  the  process  and  separating  the  parts  which  pass  over
at  the  successive  temperatures  ("  fractional  distillation  "),  and  by  suit-
able repetition  of  the  operation.  The  law  that  a  change  of  composition
of  the  solution  must  result  in  decreasing  the  vapour  pressure,  results  in
this  case  that  the  boiling-point  must  rise  during  the  distillation.  We  can
now  easily  see  that,  in  case  I.,  one  will  finally  obtain  as  the  least  volatile
residue,  the  mixture  with  the  minimal  vapour  pressure ;  and  as  the
product  of  the  sufficient  repetition  of  the  fractional  distillation,  the
distillate  will  be  one  of  the  pure  solvents ;  and  that  component  will
form  the  ultimate  distillate,  which  was  in  excess  in  the  mixture  at
its  minimum  of  vapour  pressure.  In  case  II,  on  the  other  hand,  one
obtains  as  the  final  distillate,  a  mixture  corresponding  to  the  maximum
of  vapour  pressure,  and  as  the  less  volatile  residue,  that  one  of  the
pure  solvents  which  was  present  in  excess.  Only  in  case  IIP.  is  it
possible  to  effect  a  complete  separation  of  the  two  ingredients  of  the
mixture  by  repeating  the  operation  sufficiently.

It  is,  moreover,  possible,  under  certain  definite  conditions,  which
will  be  discussed  later,  to  obtain  mixtures  having  constant  boiling-points  :
thus  such  mixtures,  as  for  example  the  water  solution  of  hydrochloric
acid  which  distils  at  constant  boiling-point,  have  occasionally  been
wrongly  claimed  as  chemical  compounds,  as  hydrates,  since  their  chief
characteristic  was  the  property  of  being  unchanged  by  distillation.
Aside  from  the  fact  that  this  property  of  such  a  mixture  is  ascribed,  so
to  speak,  to  the  casual  coincidence  that  the  partial  pressures  of  the  two

I

114  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

ingredients  of  the  mixture  stand  in  such  relations  that  the  vapour
emitted  has  the  same  composition  as  the  mixture  itself,  it  must  also
be  remembered  that  the  relative  proportions  of  the  ingredients  change
with  the  pressure  at  which  the  distillation  is  conducted,  which  is  not
the  case  with  genuine  chemical  compounds.

A  quantitative  theory  of  fractional  distillation  —  not  applicable  to
case  IIP.  however  —  is  given  by  Barrell,  Thomas,  and  Young  (Phil.
Mag.  (5),  37.  8  (1894);  it  rests  on  an  assumption  justified  by  the
experiments  of  F.  D.  Brown  (Trans.  Chem.  Soc.,  1879,  p.  550;  1880,
pp.  49,  304  ;  1881,  p.  517),  that  the  ratio  of  the  components  passing  off
in  vapour  at  any  moment  is  proportional  to  the  ratio  of  the  com-
ponents in  the  liquid  mixture  at  that  moment.  Thus  if  x  and  y  are
the  masses  of  the  components  in  the  liquid,  the  quantities  dx  and  dy
passing  off  as  vapour  satisfy  the  condition

dx x

where  c  is  a  constant  factor  depending  on  the  nature  of  the  liquids.
See  also  researches  on  the  separation  of  ternary  mixtures  by  dis-
tillation.

The  Therm  odynamic  Treatment  of  Liquid  Mixtures.—  In
the  preparation  of  a  mixture,  a  certain  amount,  Q,  of  heat  will  usually
be  developed  or  absorbed.  The  external  work  produced  thereby,  and
which  is  measured  by  the  product  of  the  external  pressure  and  the
change  of  volume,  has  a  negligible  value,  so  that  we  can  make  the
diminution  of  the  internal  energy  U,  as  a  result  of  the  mingling,  equal
to  the  heat  of  mixture  Q  ;  this  can  be  experimentally  determined  by
means  of  a  very  simple  calorimetric  measurement  ;  and  thus

U  =  Q.

If  there  are  x  mol.  of  the  second  component  to  1  mol.  of  the  first,
then  Q  is  a  function  of  x,  i.e.

U  =  Q(x);

this  can  sometimes  be  expressed  by  a  simple  formula  ;  thus  the  de-
velopment of  heat  observed  on  mixing  1  mol.  of  H2S04  with  x  mol.
of  water,  was  found  by  J.  Thomsen  l  to  be  very  accurately  expressed
by  the  formula,

The  variation  of  the  heat  of  mixture  with  the  temperature,  is  given
by  the  difference  between  the heat  capacities  of  the  components,  and

1  Thennochem.  Untersuchungen,  Bd.  III.  34.

CHAP.  IV  THE  PHYSICAL  MIXTURE  115

of  the  mixture  :  if  K0  denotes  the  heat  capacity  of  the  components
before  the  mixture,  and  K  that  of  the  liquid  resulting  from  their
mixture,  then  we  have

dU dQ

= =  K~

This  equation  shows  that  only  when

i.e.  it  demands  as  a  necessary  and  sufficient  condition,  that  the  specific
heat  of  the  mixture  shall  be  calculated  in  an  additive  way  from  that
of  the  components  (p.  106).

Very  much  harder,  but  very  much  more  interesting,  is  the  de-
termination of  the  diminution  of  free  energy  associated  with  the  inter-
mixture ;  to  calculate  this  we  must  find  some  way  to  accomplish  the
intermixture  isothermally  and  reversibly  ;  if  it  is  possible  to  find
several  methods  of  this  sort,  then  all  must  give  the  same  result,  a
law  which  will  give  particularly  valuable  results  in  the  discussion  of
dilute  solutions.  Now  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  possible  to  effect
the  operation  of  mixing  two  liquids  isothermally  and  reversibly,  in
very  many  ways,  viz.  by  isothermal  distillation  (Kirchhoff),  by  electrical
transference  (Helmholtz),  by  osmose  (van't  Hoff),  by  selective  solubility,
and  the  like  ;  this  operation  of  intermixture  occurs  spontaneously
as  soon  as  the  liquids  are  brought  into  contact  with  each  other,
provided  that  they  are  mutually  soluble.  But  since  these  methods
for  the  most  part  first  found  practical  application  in  the  case  of
dilute  solutions,  which  will  be  thoroughly  treated  in  the  following
chapter,  there  will  be  given  in  this  place  only  a  short  description
of  the  method  which  is  most  universal  and  most  important,  viz.
mingling  by  means  of  isothermal  distillation.

We  will  take  as  the  basis  of  our  considerations,  the  mixture  formed
by  the  mingling  of  1  mol.  of  the  first  component  with  x  mols.  of  the
second,  and  it  is  also  assumed  that  the  gas  laws  are  applicable  both  to
the  vapours  emitted  by  the  mixture,  and  also  to  the  vapour  emitted
by  each  component.  Moreover,  in  case  of  necessity,  one  can  easily
generalise  the  formula  for  the  case  so  that  another  equation  of  condition
—  an  equation  of  dissociation,  or  the  van  der  Waals'  equation,  for
example—  holds  good  for  the  case  of  the  vapour.

Now  let  us  imagine  there  to  be  brought  into  the  mixture  two
semi-permeable  partitions,  one  of  which  is  permeable  by  the  first,  the
other  by  the  second  ingredient.  The  vapour  emitted  by  the  mixture
contains  both  ingredients  ;  and  let  P  be  the  pressure  of  the  first
ingredient  of  the  saturated  vapour  standing  in  equilibrium  with  the
liquid  mixture,  at  the  absolute  temperature  T  ;  and  let  p  be  the

116  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

pressure  of  the  second  ingredient;  then,  according  to  Dalton's  law,
P  +  p  is  the  maximal  pressure  of  the  mixture.  Let  the  two  ingredients,
at  the  same  temperature,  in  the  pure  state  have  the  pressure  P0,  arid
p0,  respectively.

Now  let  us  imagine  the  following  process  to  take  place  :  —  We  will
allow  1  g.-mol.  of  the  first  component,  in  the  pure  liquid  state,  to
evaporate  to  saturated  vapour  ;  the  work  thus  obtained  will  be  —

then  let  it  expand  till  the  pressure  p0  shall  have  fallen  to  p,  whereby
the  work  performed  by  the  gas  will  be  —

RT  In  £o  ;

finally,  bring  it  into  contact  with  the  membrane  which  is  permeable  by
it  and  compress  it  ;  in  consequence  of  this,  it  passes  through  the
membrane  and  is  condensed  in  the  mixture  ;  if  this  condensation  is
performed  under  constant  pressure  p,  we  nee&to  introduce  the  external
work,  pv  =  RT.

In  order  to  realise  the  condition  that  the  composition  of  the
mixture,  and  hence  that  the  value  of  p  shall  not  change  during  this
condensation,  we  cause  x  mol.  of  the  second  ingredient  to  evaporate
at  the  same  time  ;  thus  we  obtain  the  work,

and  if  we  let  this  expand  whereby  pressure  P0  sinks  to  P,  there  is
performed  the  work,

xRT  In  ?*,

and  at  the  same  time  we  condense  it  with  1  g.-mol.  of  the  first  in-
gredient by  forcing  it  through  the  second  semipermeable  partition.
The  two  vapours  meet  in  the  space  enclosed  by  the  two  semipermeable
membranes  with  the  pressures  P  and  p.  Thus  we  have  it  always
completely  in  our  power  to  send  through  the  partitions  such  quantities
that  there  will  condense  a  mixture  having  the  composition  just
described  ;  and  if  we  do  this,  there  will  condense  the  1  g.-mol.  of  the
first  ingredient  under  the  constant  pressure  p,  and  the  x  g.-mol.  of
the  second  under  the  constant  pressure  P  ;  as  just  stated,  there  is
needed  to  condense  the  first,  an  introduction  of  external  work  RT,
and  for  the  second,

The  external  work  in  the  transference  of 1 g.-mol.  of  the  first
component  to  the  mixture,  is

RT  +  RT  In  ^  -  RT  =  RT  In  ^>,
P  P

CHAP.  IV  THE  PHYSICAL  MIXTURE  117

and  for  the  transference  of  x  g.-mol.  of  the  second  ingredient,

xRT  +  xRT  In  ?p  -  xRT  =  xRT  In  ?p  ;
and  the  sum  of  the  work  accomplished  by  the  system  is

Now,  since  the  processes  above  described  can  all  be  completed  re-
versibly  and  isothermally,  the  last  expression  refers  to  the  maximal
external  work  or  the  diminution  of  free  energy  A.  This  last  ex-
pression, which  may  be  suitably  designated  by  A  (x),  thus  becomes

A(x)  =  KTln >  +  x  In > .  (1)

and  this  gives

Introduced  into  the  formula  (p.  23),

A IT TdA

TdT;

and  remembering  that  U  =  Q(x)  on  p.  11  4,  we  have

-  (2)

This  formula  affords  the  calculation  of  the  heat  of  mixture  of  two
liquids,  from  the  temperature  coefficients  of  their  vapour  pressures  and
that  of  their  mixture,  and  the  pressure  of  the  vapour  emitted  by  the
mixture.

Moreover  A(x)  can  be  found  by  allowing  x  g.-mol.  of  the  second
ingredient  to  distil  over  into  1  g.-mol.  of  the  first  liquid  ingredient ;
then  the  vapour  pressure,  TT,  of  the  second  ingredient  in  the  mixture
rises  from  0  to  P,  and  the  work  obtained  thereby  is  given  by  the
integral,

X

A(x)  =  RT|ln??dx ... (3)

o

in  the  evaluation  of  which,  TT  must  be  known  as  a  function  of  x.
From  (1)  and  (3)  we  obtain

118  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

Introducing  this  into  (2),  we  obtain

or,  differentiated  for  x,

8Q(x)

_

This  last  equation,  which  one  can  easily  derive  directly  by  con-
sidering the  isothermal  distillation  of  one  component  into  a  large
quantity  of  the  mixture,  was  first  derived  by  Kirchhoff,1  and  is
a  special  case  of  the  preceding  generalisation,  which,  so  far  as
I  know,  has  not  been  developed  before  this  ;  it  was  applied  by
him  to  the  calculation  of  Kegnault's  vapour-pressure  curve,  measured
for  mixtures  of  water  and  sulphuric  acid,  the  mixing  heat  of  which  is
known  (p.  114);  the  calculation  gives  a  fairly  satisfactory  result.

The  physical  significance  of  •=—  is  given  by  the  development  of  heat

C/X.

observed  on  the  addition,  for  example,  of  1  mol.  of  water  to  a  very
large  quantity  of  a  mixture  having  the  composition  of  H2S04  +  xH2O.
Now,  if  one  tries  to  calculate  the  quantity  of  heat  from  Eegnault's
vapour  pressures  measured  for  such  a  mixture,  and  from  the  vapour
pressure  of  pure  water,  he  obtains  widely  differing  results.2  This  is
due  to  the  fact  that  small  variations  in  the  value  of  P  —  the  measure-
ment of  which,  by  the  way,  is  very  difficult  —  change  the  results  of
the  calculation  very  greatly  ;  this  is  also  the  reason  why  hitherto
the  successful  quantitative  application  of  Kirchhoff's  formula  for  the
calculation  of  the  heat  of  dilution,  has  failed,  viz.  on  account  of  the
difficulty  of  measuring  the  vapour  pressures  of  mixtures  with  sufficient
accuracy.  But  this  result  can  be  inferred  from  Tammann's  3  measure-
ments —  at  least  in  a  qualitative  way  —  viz.,  that  in  the  sense  of  Kirch-
hoff's formula,  and  in  the  case  of  solutions  which  develop  heat  on  the
addition  of  water  (as  H2S04,  CaCl2,  and  the  like),

P  P -  P

and  that  -=J,  and  accordingly  -~ —  also,  the  so-called  "relative  lowering

"o

of  the  vapour  pressure,"  decreases  with  increasing  temperature;  but  that

1  Pogg.  Ann.,  104.  (1856) ;  Ges.  Abh.  (Separate  Papers),  p.  492.

2  Compare  R.  von  Helmholtz,  Wied.  Ann.,  27.  542  (1886).

3  Mem.  d.  Petersburger  Akad.,  35.  No.  9  (1887).

CHAP.  IV  THE  PHYSICAL  MIXTURE  119

these  values  increase  with  increasing  temperature,  in  the  case  of  solu-
tions exhibiting  an  absorption  of  heat  on  the  addition  of  water.

The  above  formulae  show,  as  was  first  pointed  out  in  the  second
edition  of  this  book,  that  the  composition  of  the  vapour  can  be  cal-
culated, when  the  vapour  pressure  curves  of  the  components  (solid  or
liquid)  are  known,  and  the  partial  pressure  of  one  component  as  a
function  of  the  composition  of  the  liquid.  A  number  of  other  deduc-
tions will  be  found  in  Duhem,  "  Solutions  and  Mixtures,"  Trav.  et
M6m.  des  facultds  de  Lille,  Nos.  12  and  13  (1894);  also  M.  Margules,
Wien.  Ber.,  104.  1243  (1895)  who  calculated  examples.  See  also
Lehfeldt,  Phil.  Mag.  (5),  40.  397  (1895),  and  Dolezalek,  Z.  S.  phys.
Chem.,26.  321  (1898).

On  differentiating  (1)  and  (3)  we  get  from  (1)

dx  \ dx  dx

from  (3)

^
dx

whence follows  at once the  differential equation given  by  Duhem

(loc.  cit.)  —

d  In  p d  In  P
_  JL i  Y  _ —  0
j  T — •

dx  dx

For  applications  of  this  equation  see  Gahl,  Z.  S.  pliys.  Chem.,  33.  178
(1900);  and  Zawidzki,  ibid.  35.  129  (1900).

The  Critical  Point  of  Mixtures.  —  In  the  warming  of  mixtures,
there  are  observed  certain  characteristic  phenomena  which  we  have
usually  called  "critical"  (p.  67).  But  hitherto,  of  the  critical  data,  in
the  case  of  mixtures,  only  the  temperature  has  been  measured  for
considerable  ranges  ;  from  this  the  law  1  was  observed  that  the  critical
temperature  t,  of  a  solution  containing  n  per  cent  by  weight  of  one
liquid  having  the  critical  temperature  tp  and  100-n  per  cent  by
weight  of  another  liquid  having  the  critical  temperature  t2,  can  be
calculated  by  the  mixing  rule,

_ntj  +  (100-n)t2

OO

This  formula  can  also  be  used  conversely  to  calculate  the  critical
temperature  of  one  ingredient,  provided  that  of  the  mixture  and)  also
that  of  the  other  ingredient  be  known.

Gr.  C.  Schmidt2  has  recently  found  the  preceding  rule  very  well

1  Pawlewski,  B.  B.,  16.  2633  (1883).  2  Lieb.  Ann.,  266.  266  (1891).

120  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

established  for  a  number  of  mixtures,  which  places  the  critical  point  on
the  list  of  the  additive  properties  ;  the  variations  between  calculation  and
experiment  never  amount  to  more  than  4°,  and  as  these  lie  irregularly
on  both  sides  of  the  mean,  it  is  possible  that  they  may  be  explained  as
due,  at  least  in  part,  to  the  uncertainty  of  observation.

Kuenen l  has  recently  found  that  the  critical  temperatures  of
mixtures  of  ethane  and  nitrous  oxide  sometimes  lie  considerably  below
that  of  the  components.

Isomorphous  Mixtures. — The  capacity  of  two  crystallised  sub-
stances for  uniting  to  form  a  homogeneous  mixed  crystal,  is  observed
quite  rarely,  although  this  property  is  not  so  exclusively  limited  to
substances  related  chemically  and  crystallographically  (i.e.  substances
possessing  the  same  properties  of  symmetry  and  almost  the  same
geometrical  constants),  as  was  formerly  supposed  ;  but  since  it  has  been
found  that  pairs  like  ferric  chloride  and  ammonium  chloride,  tetra-
methyl-ammonium  iodide  and  chrysoidine  hydrochloride,  etc.,  are  able
to  form  mixed  crystals,  and  also  substances  in  which  one  seeks  in
vain  for  any  analogy  of  composition  and  constitution,2  no  doubt  can
be  entertained  that  further  investigation  will  considerably  increase  the
list  of  such  instances.  (Compare  the  section  on  Isomorphism.)

It  is  undeniable  that  such  solid  mixtures  are  to  be  classified  with
liquid  mixtures  in  many  respects  :  thus  we  find  liquids,  as  for  example
water  and  alcohol,  which  are  miscible  in  all  proportions,  and  also
liquids  of  limited  miscibility,  as,  for  example,  water  and  ether,  which
are  able  to  dissolve  each  other  only  slightly ;  and  there  are  also
substances  which  can  crystallise  together  in  all  proportions,  as,  for
example,  the  alums,  and  also  other  substances  where  gaps  exist  in  the
series  of  mixtures,  as,  for  example,  the  sulphate  and  the  selenate  of
beryllium.

Very  often  two  salts  can  crystallise  together  in  molecular  propor-
tions when  they  have  only  a  partial,  and  sometimes  hardly  any
recognisable  miscibility  in  each  other ;  thus  the  double  salts  form  a
particular  point  in  the  gap  exhibited  by  the  series  of  mixtures.  An
analogy  to  this  in  many  respects,  is  found  in  certain  pairs  of  liquids
which  mutually  dissolve  each  other  only  to  a  limited  decree,  and  which
at  the  same  time  are  able  to  form  a  homogeneous  molecular  mixture
in  the  shape  of  a  chemical  compound.  Thus,  for  example,  amylene,
C5H10,  and  water,  H20,  are  almost  mutually  insoluble  towards  each
other  ;  yet  they  are  able  to  unite  with  each  other  in  molecular  pro-
portions to  form  amyl  alcohol,  C5H10  +  H20  =  C5H120,  and  thus  this
substance  appears  as  a  particular  point  in  the  gap  exhibited  by  the
series  of  mixtures  of  amylene  and  water.  But,  of  course,  the  question

1  Phil.  Mag.,  40. 173  (1895).
2  See  especially  the  work  of  0.  Lehmann,  Molekular-physik.,  Bd.  I.  and  II.

CHAP,  iv  THE  PHYSICAL  MIXTURE  121

as  to  whether  the  kind  of  chemical  union  in  the  two  cases  is  not
essentially  different, — this  cannot  be  determined  by  this  analogy.

Moreover,  the  property  of  water  of  uniting  in  molecular  proportions
with  many  substances,  as  water  of  crystallisation, — a  property,  by  the
way,  not  limited  to  water  alone,  as  is  shown  by  alcohol  of  crystallisa-
tion, benzene  of  crystallisation,  etc., — this  may  be  referred  to  the  list  of
the  double  salts  just  mentioned.

Of  course,  in  the  case  of  the  crystallised  mixtures,  their  relations
are  more  various  than  in  the  case  of  liquid  mixtures,  since  there  the
crystal  form  is  a  new  factor  of  standard  significance.  Following  a
classification  given  by  Eetgers,1  I  give  here  a  list  of  the  different  cases
observed  in  the  mutual  miscibility  of  two  crystalline  substances.

1.  The  two  substances  form  a  complete  series  of  mixtures,  i.e.,  it
is  possible  to  make  mixed  crystals  of  them  in  every  desired  propor-
tion •  pure  isomorphism. Example: ZnS04-7H20  and  MgS04-7H20.

2.  On  account  of  slight  differences  in  the  crystal  angles  or  in  the
molecular  volume,  the  two  substances  can  intermix  only  to  a  limited
degree  ;  this  case  also  is  usually  called  pure  isomorphism. Example  :
BaCl2-2H20  and  SrCl2-2H20.

3.  The  different  substances  have  forms  more  or  less  different,  but
mix  with  each  other  in  considerable  quantities ;  the  gap  in  the  series
of mixtures is relatively small. Example : NaC103 regular and
AgClO8  quadratic.

4.  Intermixture  occurs  only  to  a  very  slight  extent,  and  can  be
recognised  only  by  micro-chemical  reactions  on  fragments  free  from
inclusions ;  the  gap  in  the  series  is  relatively  very  large. Example :
KN03  and  NaN03.

Cases  3  and  4  are  instances  of  Iso-di-morphism  ;  this  term  designates
the  phenomenon  where  both  of  the  two  different  substances  occur  in
two  crystal  modifications  which  are  isomorphous  in  pairs.  Very  often
the  two  modifications  are  not  both  known  in  the  free  state,  but  one
may  be  known  in  the  form  of  an  isomorphous  mixture.  Thus  in  such
mixtures  as  are  instanced  in  3  and  4,  that  substance  which  is  in  excess,
forces  its  crystal  form  in  some  degree  upon  the  other  substance.

5.  There  occurs  an  isolated  double  salt  standing  in  the  middle  of
the  series,  which  crystallises  differently  from  the  end  members,  and
does  not  mix  with  either  of  the  simple  salts ;  the  gap  between  the  end
members  is  usually very  great. The  recognition  of  this  case  is  of
great  importance,  since  by  a  superficial  examination  of  the  double  salt,
and  especially  if  it  resembled  one  of  the  end  members,  one  would  easily
mistake  it  for  an  isomorphous  mixture,  and  the  phenomenon  as  one  of
pure  isomorphism.

(Example  :  Gal  cite  and  magnesite  which  crystallise  in  molecular
proportions,  as  dolomite.)

6.  The  two  substances  do  not  mix  with  each  other  appreciably.

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem:,  5.  461  (1890),

122

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  I

In  order  to  decide  the  degree  of  miscibility  by  a  practical  case,
according  to  Ketgers,  one  should  prepare  a  number  of  solutions  hold-
ing each  ingredient  in  greatly  varying  proportions,  and  by  evaporation
of  the  solvent  obtain  crystals  which  should  be  investigated  regarding
their  behaviour.  In  order  to  obtain  a  product  as  homogeneous  as
possible,  it  is  best  to  use  a  large  quantity  of  solvent,  and  to  study  only
the  crystals  which  separate  first.  For  the  more  the  composition  of
the  solution  changes  with  the  separation  of  the  earlier  portions,
so  much  greater  is  the  danger  of  the  formation  of  heterogeneous
products.

Hereafter  by  an  "  isomorphous  mixture  "  will  be  understood  a  mixed
crystal,  the  composition  of  which  is  capable  of  a  constant  change
within  certain  limits ;  every  member  of  a  complete  or  incomplete
series  of  mixtures  we  will  also  call  an  isomorphous  mixture,  but  not
the  isolated  double  salt.

The  Physical  Properties  of  Mixed  Crystals.— The  analo-
gies between  a  liquid  and  a  solid  mixture  extend  thus  far,  viz.,  that
in  both  cases  many  properties  of  the  mixture  are  additive,  i.e.  they
can  be  calculated  from  the  properties  of  the  particular  ingredients
according  to  the  so-called  "partnership"  calculation  (p.  106).

This  holds  good  especially  for  the  volume  of  mixed  crystals,  which
is  frequently  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  volumes  of  the  ingredients  in
the  free  state ;  in  other  words,  in  the  intermixture  of  two  crystals  there  is
observed  neither  contraction  nor  dilation ;  as  an  example  there  is  given
below  a  table  of  the  specific  volumes  of  mixed  crystals  of  potassium
and  ammonium  sulphates,  by  Retgers,1  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for
these  very  exact  measurements.

Composition.

Spec.

Volume.

Difference.

(NH4)2S04. K2S04.

Obs.

Calc.

0

100

0-3751

(0-3751)

5-45

94-55 i 0-3885

0-3855 +0-0030

8-33

91-67

0-3879

0-3906 -0-0027

15-03

84-97

0-4042

0-4037

+  0-0005

18-45

81-55

0-4080

0-4098 -0-0018

20-55

79-45 0-4112

0-4138

-0-0026

26-47

73-53 0-4270

0-4250

+  0-0020

29-30

70-70 0-4305

0-4307

-0-0002

42-67

57-33 0-4572

0-4556

+  0-0016

65-35

34-65

0-4990'

0-4988

+  0-0002

83-37

16-63 0-5311

0-5324

-0-0013

100

0 0-5637

(0-5637)

...

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  3.  497  (1889);  see  also  3.  289;  4.  189;  5.  436;  6.
193  (1890);  8.  6  (1892).;

CHAP.  IV  THE  PHYSICAL  MIXTURE  123

Although  the  law  given  above,  as  far  as  known,  holds  good  and
with  great  exactness  for  the  case  of  isomorphous  mixtures,  yet  a
modification  is  necessary  in  the  case  of  iso-di-morphous  mixtures.  Thus
the  sulphates  of  magnesium  and  iron,  MgS04  .  7H20,  and  FeS04  .
7H20,  the  first  being  orthorhombic,  the  second  being  monoclinic,  are
able  to  form  orthorhombic  and  monoclinic  mixed  crystals,  and  yet  are
miscible  to  only  a  limited  degree,  since  mixed  crystals  containing  more
than  54  per  cent,  or  less  than  81*22  per  cent  of  magnesium  sulphate
cannot  be  obtained,  at  least  at  ordinary  temperatures ;  and,  moreover,
the  mixed  crystals  having  the  magnesium  sulphate  in  excess  are
orthorhombic,  and  those  having  the  iron  salt  in  excess  are  monoclinic.
If  one  tries  to  calculate  the  specific  volume  of  the  mixed  crystals  from
that  of  the  two  salts  in  the  pure  state  (Fe  0*5269,  Mg  0*5963),  he
meets  one-sided  deviations  *  but  if  one  takes  the  specific  volume  of
the  iron  salt  in  the  orthorhombic  crystals  as  0*5333,  and  in  the  mono-
clinic  crystals  as  0*5269,  and  similarly  the  volume  of  the  magnesium
salt  in  the  monoclinic  crystals  as  0*5914,  and  in  the  orthorhombic
crystals  as  0*5963,  the  deviations  vanish  almost  completely.  It  is
very  probable  that  the  two  values  assumed  above  represent  respectively
the  specific  volume  of  theoretical  orthorhombic  iron,  and  of  the  mono-
clinic  magnesium  salts  which  have  not  yet  been  produced  in  the  free
state.  Probably  in  general  every  salt  in  iso-di-morphous  mixtures  possesses
a  specific  volume  more  or  less  different  from  that  in  the  free  state ;  this  is  in
harmony  with  the  fact  that  di-morphous  modifications  in  the  free
state  have  different  specific  gravities.

It  follows  from  the  observations  of  Dufet  (1878),  Fock  (1880),
Bodlander  (1882),  and  others,  that  the  optical  properties  of  mixed
crystals  are  emphatically  additive ;  but  of  course  the  crystal  structure
is  attended  with  certain  complications.1

Fusion  and  Solidification  of  Mixtures. — Investigation  of  the
laws  regulating  the  solidification  of  liquid  mixtures  are  of  much  practical
importance,  on  account  of  the  method  of  fractional  crystallisation  that
is  so  often  used.  The  theory  of  this  phenomenon  cannot  be  developed
so  far  as  that  of  fractional  distillation,  at  present,  and  also  experimental
study  is  still  much  needed.  Still  the  leading  principles  are  well
established  and  will  be  given  here.

When  a  mixture  freezes  the  solid  deposited  may  be  homogeneous,
i.e.  it  may  be  a  single  component  of  the  liquid,  or  an  isomorphous
mixture  ;  or  else  more  than  one  solid  may  separate  at  the  same  time  •
thus  from  an  aqueous  solution  either  ice,  salt,  or  hydrate  may  crystallise
out,  or  more  than  one  of  these  may  appear  together.  In  this  lies  a
complication  that  is  absent  in  evaporation,  for  gases  are  always  homo-
geneous.

We  will  take  first  the  simple  case  that  one  component  separates

1  See  especially  F.  Pockel's  Jahrb.  f.  Mineral,  8.  117  (1892).

124  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

out  in  the  pure  state ;  then  we  have  the  simple  rule  that  the  freezing-
point  of  such  a  mixture  is  always  lower  than  that  of  the  separated
substance  in  the  pure  state.

The  proof  of  this  follows  from  the  consideration  (p.  Ill)  that  the
vapour  pressure  of  a  substance  in  a  mixture  is  always  less  than  in  the
pure  state;  the  melting-point,  being  the  intersection  of  the  vapour
pressure  curves  of  solid  and  liquid  (pp.  74  and  97),  is  accordingly
always  lowered.

Numerous  examples  of  this  rule  are  to  be  found.  Salt  solutions
freeze  (i.e.  deposit  ice)  at  a  lower  temperature  than  pure  water ;  on
the  other  hand,  if  they  deposit  salt,  it  is  at  a  temperature  below  the
melting-point  of  the  salt,  so  that  we  may  look  on  the  crystallisation
of  a  dissolved  salt  as  freezing  at  a  temperature  very  much  lowered  by
addition  of  water.  Phenol  liquefies,  when  wet,  much  below  its  proper
melting-point  (42°) ;  this  too  may  be  simply  regarded  as  a  lowering
of  melting-point  due  to  mixture  with  water.  Again  the  fusibility  of
alloys  is  a  well  known  and  technically  important  fact  of  the  same
order ;  iron  rich  in  carbon  melts  at  a  lower  temperature  than  when
containing  little ;  and  the  alloys  of  Rose,  Wood,  Lipowitz,  etc.,  are
striking  instances  of  how  greatly  the  components  of  a  mixture  can
lower  each  other's  melting-point.  Similarly,  mixtures  of  salts,  of  fatty
acids,  and  so  on,  are  noticeable  for  their  low  melting-point.  The  latter
case  was  fully  investigated  by  Heintz.1

It  will  appear  in  the  following  chapter  that  the  lowering  of  the
melting-point  of  dilute  solutions  follows  very  simple  laws.

It  is  essentially  different  when  an  isomorphous  mixture  or  a
chemical  compound  in  molecular  proportions  (hydrate,  double  salt,
substance  with  alcohol  of  crystallisation,  benzene  of  crystallisation,  etc.)
separates  from  a  mixture ;  then  the  melting-point  of  the  mixture  may,
according  to  circumstances,  lie  higher  or  lower  than  that  of  the  pure
substances.  For  example,  the  melting-point  of  naphthalene  is  raised
by  addition  of  /3-naphthol,  and  accordingly  pure  naphthalene  does  not
freeze  out  from  the  liquid,  but  an  isomorphous  mixture.2  It  is  note-
worthy that  under  these  circumstances  the  freezing-point  of  a  liquid,
like  the  boiling-point,  may  be  either  raised  or  lowered.  If  the  solid
mixture  separating  out  changes  continuously  in  composition  with
change  in  that  of  the  liquid,  the  freezing-point  varies  continuously
from  that  of  one  component  to  that  of  the  other.  This  case  is  rare ;
often  there  is  a  sudden  change  in  the  composition  of  the  solid  owing
to  replacement  of  one  component  by  the  other,  or  by  a  compound  in
molecular  proportions  (e.g.  a  new  hydrate)  ;  for  instances  see  the  work
of  Vignon  3  and  Miolati.4

1  Pogg.  Ann.,  92.  588  (1854).

2  Van't  Hoff,  Z.  8.  f.  phys.  Chem.,  5.  388  (1890)  ;  Van  Bijlert.  ibid.,  8.  343  (1891)

3  Butt.  soc.  chim.  (3),  7.  387,  656  (1892).

4  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem,,  9.  649  (1892).

CHAP. IV

THE  PHYSICAL  MIXTURE

125

In  a  few  cases  we  find  the  phenomenon  of  continuous  change  in
the  solid  deposit  as  the  composition  of  the  liquid  is  continuously
changed ;  then  the  freezing-point  curve  is  continuous,  showing  no
sudden  changes  of  slope.  This  happens  in  the  case  of  mixtures  of
isomorphous  and  chemically  similar  materials.  Kiister 1  was  the  first
to  observe  this  case,  and  found  that  the  nielting-point  could  be  calcu-
lated from  the  composition  by  the  simple  rule  of  mixtures.  The
agreement  between  observed  and  calculated  melting-points  is  better
when  the  composition  is  expressed  in  molecular  percentage  (inols.  in
100  mols.  of  mixture)  than  in  percentage  by  weight.  It  is  necessary,
in  order  that  this  rule  be  true,  that  the  composition  of  the  frozen  part
should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  liquid ;  this  can  be  tested  by  seeing
whether  the  melting-point  is  independent  of  the  quantity  melted  or
not.  Only  if  the  temperature  does  not  change  during  the  fusion,  is
the  rule  true.  When  there  is  much  difference  in  composition  between
the  liquid  and  the  frozen  mass,  the  melting-points  differ  considerably
from  the  values  calculated  by  the  (linear)  rule.  The  regular  behaviour
is  well  shown  by  mixtures  of  hexachlor-a-keto-y-R-pentene  (C5C160)
and  pentachlor-monobrom-a-keto-y-R-pentene  (C5Cl5BrO)  (Kiister).

Molecular  per-

Freezing-point.

centage  of

C5Cl5BrO.

Obs.

Calc.

o-oo

87-50

5-29

87-99

88-04

8-65

88-30

88-38

25-32

89-85

90-09

42-26

91-61

91-81

71-33

94-59

94-78

90-45

96-67

96-74

98-00

97-49

97-50

100-00

9771

Often,  however,  more  than  one  solid  separates  from  the  liquid ;  in
this  case  it  is  not  at  present  possible  to  give  a  rule  for  the  position  of
the  melting-point,  but  experience  seems  to  show  that  it  may  lie  above
or  below  those  of  the  components.  In  general  the  composition  of  the
remaining  liquid  is  altered  by  the  separation ;  and  whatever  the  com-
position of  the  solid  that  separates,  the  change  must  always  be  in  such
a  direction  that  the  melting-point  of  the  remaining  liquid  is  lowered.
This  is  the  analogue  of  the  law  that  during  distillation  the  temperature
always  rises  (p.  113).  If,  then,  a  mixture  be  repeatedly  fractionally
crystallised,  a  liquid  will  eventually  be  reached  with  minimum  freezing-
point  ;  if  this  is  frozen,  the  solid  separating  must  have  the  same  com-

1  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  5.  601  (1890)  ;  8.  577  (1891).

126

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  I

position,  otherwise  we  should  obtain  a  liquid  of  still  lower  freezing-
point.  Conversely,  the  solid  has  a  melting-point  that  is  constant,  i.e.
independent  of  the  amount  melted.  Such  a  substance  was  called  by
Guthrie l  who  discovered  these  relations,  an  eutectic  mixture  ;  it  melts
and  freezes  like  a  chemically  simple  substance,  and  is  comparable  with
the  mixture  of  constant  boiling-point  mentioned  on  p.  113;  there  are
no  grounds  for  assuming  that  it  is  a  chemical  compound,  nor  does
experiment  point  in  that  direction.

Thus  Guthrie  found  that  a  mixture  of  46*86  per  cent  lead  nitrate
and  5 3' 14  per  cent  potassium  nitrate  melts  at  207°,  and  that  by  altering
these  proportions  in  either  sense  a  higher  melting-point  is  obtained.
The  following  table  gives  the  melting-point  t  of  eutectic  compounds
of  bismuth  containing  p  per  cent  of  the  metal  alloyed  with  bismuth: —

P

t

Lead ....

44-42

122-7

Tin

53-30

133

Cadmium

40-81

144

Zinc ....

7-15

248

In  the  same  way,  by  repeated  partial  freezing  eutectic  mixtures  of
more  than  two  components  can  be  obtained,  e.g.  the  mixture

Bi  47-75,  Pb  18'39,  Cd  13-31,  Sn  20'00  per  cent.

melts  at  71°,  the  lowest  melting-point  known  of  any  alloy  except
those  containing  alkali  metals  and  the  amalgams.

"  Cryohydrates  "  are  also  examples  of  eutectic  mixtures.  When  a
salt  solution  is  cooled  it  first  deposits  ice,  and  so  becomes  more  con-
centrated;  hence  on  cooling  further  a  point  must  be  reached  when
the  salt  in  solution  has  become  saturated ;  then  a  mechanical  mixture
of  ice  and  salt  will  come  down,  and  necessarily  in  the  same  proportions
as  they  occur  in  the  liquid.  This  temperature  is  at  the  intersection
of  the  curve  of  saturation  with  the  curve  of  lowering  of  freezing-point ;
the  solution  freezes  completely  and  at  constant  temperature,  as  if  it
were  a  single  substance.  It  was  at  one  time  supposed  to  be  such,  and
described  as  a  cryohydrate.

The  temperature  at  which  the  solution  freezes  as  a  whole,  to  form
a  mechanical  mixture,  is  also  the  lowest  that  can  be  obtained  by  mix-
ing ice  and  salt.  Thus,  according  to  Guthrie2  ice  and  NaCl  give
-  22°,  ice  and  Nal  -  30°;  the  cryohydric  temperature  is  clearly  lower,
the  more  the  salt  lowers  the  freezing-point  of  water,  and  the  more
soluble  it  is.  The  temperature  can  be  still  further  reduced  by  using

1  Phil.  Mag.  (5),  17.  462  (1884).
2  Ibid.  (4),  16.  446  ; (5),  2.  211  ;  6.  35,  105.

CHAP.  IV  THE  PHYSICAL  MIXTURE  127

more  than  one  salt  simultaneously ;  Mazotto l  investigated  the  case
of  water,  NH4C1  and  NaN03,  and  found  the  cryohydric  point
at  -31°-5.

Apparently  the  solid  that  deposits  from  eutectic  mixtures  arrived
at  in  this  way  consists  always  of  a  mechanical  mixture  of  two  or  more
substances ;  there  are,  however,  cases,  as  mentioned  above,  in  which
a  liquid  mixture  freezes  to  a  single  homogeneous  substance  (double
salt,  hydrate,  etc.).  If  the  composition  of  such  a  mixture  be  altered,
then  unlike  an  eutectic  (i.e.  easy  melting)  mixture,  the  freezing-point  is
lowered ;  therefore  the  mixture  is  one  of  maximum  melting-point,  and
may  be  described  as  dystedic.  Thus  Roozeboom 2  found  that  a  mixture
of  composition  FeCl3+12H20  freezes  constantly  at  37°  to  a  solid
hydrate ;  if  the  composition  is  varied,  within  certain  limits,  whether
by  addition  of  FeCl3  or  of  water,  a  mixture  of  lower  freezing-point  is
obtained.

From  what  has  been  said  it  may  be  seen  that  the  different  kinds
of  mixtures  that  we  have  distinguished  must  show  characteristic
differences  when  allowed  to  solidify  gradually.  Both  eutectic  and
dystectic  mixtures,  like  simple  substances,  solidify  at  one  temperature.
When  the  solid  separating  out  changes  in  composition  continuously
with  the  change  in  the  residual  liquid,  the  fall  of  temperature,  on
cooling,  will  be  made  slower  as  soon  as  the  separation  begins,  and  the
latent  heat  comes  into  play ;  this  condition  lasts  until,  after  a  longer
or  shorter  interval  of  temperature,  the  whole  has  become  solid.  In
cases  in  which  this  condition  is  not  satisfied,  but  new  substances  appear,
twice  or  more,  in  the  solid  deposit,  the  fall  of  temperature  will  be  made
slower  each  time,  a  phenomenon  noticed  in  1830  by  Rudberg  ("re-
peated melting-point").  Further,  the  course  of  the  cooling  may  be
influenced  by  phenomena  of  undercooling,  and  by  subsequent  gradual
allotropic  modification  of  solid  deposits.3

Finally,  this  difference  may  be  noted  between  the  behaviour  of  a
simple  substance  and  a  mechanical  mixture.  A  simple  substance
always  melts  at  the  same  temperature,  and  it  is  not  possible  to  keep
it  solid  even  for  a  short  time  at  a  higher  temperature.  It  is  otherwise
with  a  mixture  ;  a  finely  powdered  mixture  of  two  metals  can  often  be
kept  a  long  time  at  a  temperature  above  the  melting-point  of  the  alloy
that  would  result  from  it.  Thus  in  a  mixture,  melting-point  and  freez-
ing-point are  not  identical,  as  they  are  for  a  single  substance.

On  the  other  hand,  even  a  rough  mixture  will  sometimes  liquefy  at
a  temperature  below  the  melting-point  of  either  pure  substance.  Thus
if  a  mixture  of  tin  and  lead  be  kept  for  some  hours  at  200°  it  liquefies,
although  the  melting-point  of  tin  is  230°  and  lead  325° ;  and  a  mixture
of  1  part  Cd,  1  part  Sn,  2  parts  P6,  4  parts  Bi  (Wood's  metal),  all  the
components  of  which  melt  above  200°  can  be  liquefied  by  keeping  for

1  BeibL,  15.  323  (1891).  2  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  10.  477  (1892).

3  See  Ostwald,  Lehrb.  d.  (dig.  Chem.,  2nd  ed.,  1.  1023  (1891).

128  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  I

some  hours  or  days  in  a  water-bath,  under  slight  pressure  (Hallock) ; l
a  mixture  of  sodium  acetate  and  potassium  nitrate  melts  when  keot  for
some  hours  at  100°,  though  the  melting-point  of  the  components  is
above  300°  (Spring).2

The  Thermodynamics  of Isomorphous Mixtures.  —  The

observations  which  we  have  advanced  above  (p.  Ill)  concerning  liquid
mixtures,  from  the  standpoint  of  energy,  can  be  applied  directly  to
solid  mixtures,  in  their  essential  principles.  With  the  union  of  two
crystals  to  form  a  new  homogeneous  mixed  crystal,  there  is  usually
associated  a  certain  diminution  of  the  total  energy  U,  which  may  be
designated  here  as  the  heat  of  mixing.  To  be  sure,  as  far  as  I  know,
experimental  data  on  this  subject  have  riot  yet  been  obtained  ;  but
without  this,  the  heat  of  mixing  could  doubtless  be  ascertained  easily
and  exactly  from  the  difference  between  the  heat  of  solution  of  the
mixture,  and  that  of  the  ingredients.  Further,  concerning  the  diminu-
tion of  free  energy  associated  with  the  mixing,  we  must  find  some  method
of  making  the  mixed  crystals  reversibly  and  isothermally.  Strictly
speaking,  if  we  could  employ  here  the  same  methods  which  were  suc-
cessfully used  in  the  case  of  liquid  mixtures,  viz.  isothermal  distillation
or  direct  sublimation,  we  should  obtain  the  same  formulae  as  in  the
preceding  case.  But,  since  the  vapour  pressure  of  crystals  is  far  too
small  for  us  to  hope  to  measure,  we  must  devise  some  other  way :
there  is  such  a  desired  method  in  isothermal  solution  and  crystallisation.
By  distilling  over  into  the  two  ingredients,  sufficient  water  isother-
mally and  reversibly,  we  can  at  the  same  time  bring  the  crystals  iso-
thermally and  reversibly  into  solution.  Then  we  mix  the  two
solutions.  This  is  a  process  which  can  be  conducted  isothermally  and
reversibly,  as  we  will  see  in  the  theory  of  dilute  solutions  (next  chapter).
Now,  if  we  withdraw  both  ingredients  from  the  resulting  solution  by
the  isothermal  distillation  of  water,  we  can  obtain  the  mixed  costal.
If  we  know  the  conditions  of  solubility  of  the  mixed  crystal  and  its
ingredients,  as  well  as  the  vapour-pressure  of  their  respective  solutions,
it  is  possible  to  calculate  the  maximal  work  obtained  by  mixing,  as
there  is  here  no  difficulty  in  applying  the  second  law  of  thermo-
dynamics. Of  course,  instead  of  water,  we  can  select  any  other  solvent
desired,  where  we  get  the  same  maximal  work.  The  condition  for  the
identity  of  this  work  leads  to  certain  conditions  of  solubility  for  the
different  solvents  that  have  recently  been  tested  and  verified  by  E.
Sommerfeldt.3  It  appears  that  the  maximal  work  is  of  the  same  order
of  magnitude  as  in  the  case  of  liquid  mixtures,  and,  therefore,  there
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  isomorphous  mixtures  arise  by  mutual  mole-
cular penetration,  and  not  by  a  variable  intercalation  of  very  thin
lamellae,  as  is  sometimes  supposed.

1  Z.  S,  phys.  Clhem.,  2.  378  (1888).  2  Ibid.  536.

3  Neues  Jahrb.f.  Mineral,  1900,  vol.  ii.

CHAP.  IV  THE  PHYSICAL  MIXTURE  129

The  analogy  between  liquid  and  isomorplious  mixtures  is  also
shown  in  this,  viz.  that  in  the  same  way  that  the  maximal  pressure,
and  the  composition  of  the  vapour  emitted  by  the  liquid  mixture  vary
steadily  with  the  relative  quantities  of  the  ingredients,  so  also  do  the
concentration  and  the  composition  of  the  saturated  solution  of  the
mixed  crystals  vary  steadily  with  the  relative  quantities  of  the  in-
gredients. In  the  third  book  we  will  return  again  to  this  subject,
which  would  take  us  at  the  present  too  far  into  the  region  of  the
doctrine  of  affinity.

Adsorption. — Charcoal  shaken  with  an  iodine  solution  or  placed
in  an  atmosphere  of  iodine  vapour  condenses  appreciable  amounts  of
iodine  on  its  surface ;  this  is  known  as  "  adsorption."  The  quantity
adsorbed  increases  with  the  partial  pressure  (gas  or  osmotic)  of  the
iodine.  A  definite  state  of  equilibrium  is  set  up ;  this  was  shown
among  others  by  Chappius,1  who  found  that  a  definite  amount  of
charcoal  took  up  a  quantity  of  carbon  dioxide  that  depends  only  on
the  pressure  of  that  gas.  The  adsorption  of  dissolved  substances  by
solids  has  been  studied  especially  by  Bemmelen.2  The  thermo-
dynamics of  the  subject  will  not  be  discussed  here ;  but  it  is  easy  to
see  that  the  heat  of  adsorption  may  be  calculated  from  the  influence
of  temperature  on  equilibrium.

Lagergren 3  has  lately  put  forward  remarkable  experiments  and
views  on  the  phenomena  of  adsorption  in  aqueous  solutions.  Here  it
is  probable  that  the  most  important  influence  is  the  formation  of  an
aqueous  layer  on  the  surface  of  the  adsorbing  powder,  and  that  this  is
in  a  highly  compressed  state  owing  to  cohesive  forces.  The  heat
evolved  by  wetting  insoluble  powders  would,  according  to  this  view,
be  due  to  compression  of  the  adsorbed  water.

If  foreign  substances  are  present  in  the  water  their  solubility  may
be  greater  or  less  than  in  ordinary  water ;  greater  if  the  solubility
increases  with  pressure,  and  vice  versa.  Hence  the  dissolved  substance
will  be  concentrated  or  diluted  in  the  water  film,  i.e.  positive  or
negative  adsorption  will  occur.  Lagergren  actually  demonstrated
negative  adsorption,  e.g.  when  sodium  chloride  solution  is  shaken
with  charcoal  its  concentration  is  raised.  The  data  so  far  collected
seem  to  support  this  view.

1  W-ied.  Ann.,  12.  161  (1881).

2  X.  S.  phys.  Cheat.,  18.  331  (1895)  ;  Z.  S.  anorg.  O/iem.,  13.  233  (1896)  ;  see  also
G.  C.  Schmidt,  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  15.  56  (1894)  ;  George  wics  u.  Lowy, Wien.  Akad.,
104.  (1895)  ;  Walker  and  Appleyard,  /.  Chem.  Soc.,  69.  1334  (1896).

3  Bihang  till.  K.  Sv.  Vet.  Akad.  Handl,  Band  24.  Afd.  II.  Nos.  4  and  5  (1898).

CHAPTEK V

DILUTE SOLUTIONS

General  Remarks. — One  class  of  liquid  and  solid  mixtures,  which
has  attracted  great  attention  in  recent  investigation,  because  their
behaviour  is  very  simple  in  many  respects,  is  that  of  the  dilute  solu-
tions, i.e.  mixtures  containing  one  ingredient  greatly  in  excess  of  the
others.  This  ingredient  is  called  the  "  solvent "  ;  the  other,  or  others,
the  "  dissolved  substances."

On  studying  the  relations  of  dilute  solutions  more  closely,  they  ex-
plain themselves  on  several  grounds.  In  the  first  place,  the  laws  of
thermodynamics  can  be  applied  here  with  especially  good  results,
which  are  simple  and  obvious,  and  which  by  reflection  clear  up  old
principles,  and  throw  light  on  new  subjects.  The  method  proposed
by  van't  Hoff  for  the  study  of  solutions,  holds  good,  in  a  typical  way,
for  the  treatment  of  questions  like  this.  Also,  the  study  of  dilute
solutions  attracts  great  practical  interest  from  the  consideration  that
most  chemical  processes  which  the  analyst  uses,  and  also  those  which
claim  attention  in  animal  and  plant  physiology,  take  place  in  dilute
water  solutions.  Finally,  although  most  of  the  results  here  obtained
were  obtained  independently  of  the  molecular  hypothesis,  yet  the  study
of  the  properties  of  dilute  solutions  has  led  to  a  development  of  our
conceptions  regarding  molecules,  which  presents  this  subject  in  an
entirely  new  phase.

The  investigations  on  this  subject  had  for  a  starting-point,  the
attempt  to  answer  this  question,  viz.,  What  is  the  maximal '  work  to  be
obtained  by  the  addition  of  a  pure  solvent  to  a  solution  ?  After  methods
of  solving  the  problem  were  found,  the  experimental  work  gave
general  results  of  an  unexpected  nature,  the  very  simplicity  of  which
required  a  theoretical  explanation ;  it  lay  close  at  hand,  and  consisted
in  such  an  extension  of  the  rule  of  Avogadro  as  was  previously  un-
expected.

Osmotic  Pressure. — In  order  to  answer  the  question — What  is
the  maximal  work  capable  of  being  obtained  by  mixing  a  dilute  solu-

130

CHAP,  v  DILUTE  SOLUTIONS  131

tion  with  a  pure  solvent  1 — we  may  propose  the  same  way  as  that  em-
ployed by  us  above  (p.  114),  where  we  met  a  similar  problem  concern-
ing the  mixing  of  two  liquids  ;  the  same  formulae  developed  there  can
be  transferred  without  further  change  to  this  case,  if  we  cause  the  pure
solvent  to  distil  over  isothermally  into  the  solution.  We  will  return
to  this  a  little  later,  but  will  next  consider  a  simpler  and  plainer
apparatus  which  permits  the  mixing  and  the  separating  to  be  con-
ducted isothermally  and  reversibly.  The  fortunate  use  of  this
apparatus  was  the  artifice,  by  means  of  which  van't  Hoff  (1885)  dis-
covered the  laws  prevailing  here  almost  by  one  stroke  ;  this  artifice,
moreover,  has  already  advantageously  served  us  in  a  similar  question
(p.  102).

Let  us  imagine,  for  example,  a  sugar  solution  covered  with  pure
water ;  as  is  well  known,  such  a  system  at  once  suffers  a  change,  since
the  sugar  begins  to  wander  from  the  lower  to  the  upper  part,  i.e.  from
places  having  a  higher  to  those  having  a  lower  con-
centration ;  this  diffusion  process,  as  this  phenomenon  is
called,  does  not  cease  till  the  concentration  has  become
the  same  in  all  parts  of  the  solution.  Now  let  us
imagine  the  solution  to  be  separated  from  the  layer
of  water  above  it,  by  a  so-called  "  semi-permeable "
partition,  i.e.  such  a  partition  as  allows  free  passage  to
the  water,  but  not  to  the  dissolved  sugar;  it  must
happen,  of  course,  that  the  sugar  will  exert  a  pressure
on  the  partition,  which  opposes  its  endeavour  to  fill  the
whole  solution.  If  the  partition  is  movable  in  a  cylinder,
as  shown  in  Fig.  12,  in  which  L  is  the  solution  and  W  the  layer
of  water  above,  and  which  are  separated  by  the  partition  just
described,  then  we  have  the  desired  apparatus  to  conduct  the
mixing  isothermally  and  reversibly.  When  the  piston  is  pressed
do wn wards  the  sugar  in  L  is  compressed,  and  the  water  passes  over
from  L  to  W  ;  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  piston  is  raised,  water  passes
from  W  to  L,  and  the  sugar  solution  is  correspondingly  diluted.  But
from  the  fact  that  the  sugar  will  wander  up  into  the  pure  water
by  means  of  diffusion,  if  we  imagine  the  piston  to  be  removed,  it
necessarily  follows  that  there  will  be  exerted  a  pressure  on  the  piston
in  the  direction  of  the  arrow  ;  and  the  greater  this  pressure  is,  so  much
greater,  of  course,  is  the  work  which  the  dissolved  sugar  can  perform
in  its  expansion,  i.e.  as  it  takes  up  new  solvent  material  through  the
"semi-permeable"  partition;  the  amount  of  this  work  can  be  cal-
culated from  the  product  of  the  pressure,  by  the  volume  through
which  the  piston  is  displaced.

We  will  call  the  pressure  measured  by  such  an  apparatus  "  the
osmotic  pressure  of  solution.'.'  There  is  at  once  called  to  mind  the
analogy  with  the  pressure  exerted  by  a  gas  on  its  enclosing  walls.  If
we  imagine  the  solvent  to  be  removed,  and  the  space  L  to  be  filled

132  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  i

with  a  gas,  and  the  space  W  to  be  made  vacuous,  then  we  have
obviously  an  entirely  analogous  experimental  arrangement,  since  the
ordinary  gas  pressure  is  acting,  instead  of  the  osmotic  pressure.  More-
over, the  molecules  of  a  dissolved  substance,  just  the  same  as  the
molecules  of  a  gas,  have  the  tendency  to  occupy  the  greatest  possible
space  ;  and  just  as  the  molecules  of  a  gas  can  remove  from  each  other
to  any  desired  distance,  so  the  same  is  true  of  the  tendency  of  the
molecules  of  a  dissolved  substance,  provided  that  we  constantly  add
more  pure  solvent  material.

The  Direct  Measurement  of  the  Osmotic  Pressure. — The

question  now  arises,  whether  we  are  able  to  realise  the  conditions  of  the
experiment  just  described,  whether  we  can  construct  partitions  having
the  desired  properties.  Now,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  such  is  really  the
case  ;  the  semi-permeable  partitions  do  occur  in  nature  ready  formed,
and  can  also  be  artificially  prepared,  at  least  in  certain  cases.  Accord-
ing to  the  researches  of  M.  Traube,1  the  membranes  of  precipitation,
which  are  formed  on  the  surface  separating  a  solution  of  cupric  sulphate
from  one  of  potassium  ferro-cyanide,  and  which  consist  of  cupric  ferro-
cyanide,  do  possess  the  property  of  being  permeable  for  .water,  but  not
for  many  substances  soluble  in  water,  as  cane  sugar,  for  example.
Therefore  when  Pfeffer 2  dipped,  into  a  weak  solution  of  potassium  ferro-
cyanide,  a  porous  jar  filled  with  a  solution  of  sugar  containing  a  little
copper  sulphate,  and  fitted  with  an  upright  tube,  there  was  formed  at
once  on  the  interior  of  the  porous  jar  a  precipitated  membrane.  By
means  of  this,  the  outward  passage  of  the  sugar  molecules  through  the
cell  wall  is  hindered,  but  not  so  the  inward  passage  of  the  water.  As
a  result  there  follows  the  pressure  action  on  the  semi-permeable  mem-
brane, as  above  described ;  but  the  membrane  cannot  yield  since  it  is
fastened  to  the  resistant  porous  cell ;  therefore,  according  to  the  prin-
ciple of  action  and  reaction,  there  will  be  exerted  on  the  solution  an
impulse  which  will  tend  to  drive  it  away  from  the  membrane.  This
impulse  will  cause  the  solution  to  rise  in  the  upright  tube  from  the
simultaneous  influx  of  the  water ;  and  if  the  upright  tube  be  long
enough,  the  opposing  hydrostatic  pressure  will  increase  till  it  stops  the
further  inflow  of  water.  Of  course  after  the  equilibrium  is  established,
this  opposing  hydrostatic  pressure  is  equal  to  the  osmotic  pressure  of
the  solution.  But  since  the  pressure  amounts  to  several  atmospheres,  as
we  will  see  later,  Pfefter  used,  instead  of  an  open  manometer,  a  closed
mercury  manometer,  and  thus,  besides  having  the  advantage  of  a
quicker  adjustment,  he  also  succeeded  in  avoiding  the  influx  of  large
quantities  of  water  and  the  associated  changes  of  concentration  which
are  difficult  to  control.

If  one  uses  the  cupric  ferro-cyanide  membrane,  it  must  be  noticed

1  Archivf.  Anatomie  und  Physiologic,  1867,  p.  87.
2  Osmotische  Untersuchungen. Leipzig,  1877.

CHAP. V

DILUTE  SOLUTIONS

133

Fijr.  13.

that  it  is  permeable  for  many  soluble  substances,  such  as  saltpetre,
hydrochloric  acid,  and  many  colouring  substances,  and  therefore  it
does  not  satisfy  the  desired  conditions  for  these  substances.  As
would  be  expected,  the  osmotic  pressure  in  such  cases  is  too  small.
The  circumstance  that  Adie,1  in  repeating  the  experiments  of  Pfeffer,
did  not  give  sufficient  attention  to  this,  although
Pfeffer  clearly  recognised  the  significance  of  this
point  and  clearly  emphasised  it,  makes  a  large
part  of  Adie's  results  useless,  in  the  calculation
of  the  theory  of  osmotic  pressure.  Some  other
precipitated  membranes,  such  as  zinc  ferro-cyanide,
tannic  acid  sizing,  etc.,  likewise  find  application.

The  efficiency  of  a  semi-permeable  membrane
used  by  the  author,2  depends  on  the  principle  of
selective  solubility;  thus,  for  example,  ether  can
diffuse  into  water  since  it  is  partially  soluble  in
water;  but  a  substance  dissolved  in  ether,  and
which  is  also  insoluble  in  water,  cannot  so  diffuse
into  water.  In  order  to  give  stability  to  the
separating  me.mbrane,  just  as  Pfeffer  arranged  the
membrane  of  cupric  ferro-cyanide  in  a  porous  cell,
so  I  arranged  the  water  in  contact  with  a  plant
or  animal  membrane.  By  means  of  the  simple  apparatus  shown  in  Fig.
13,  the  efficiency  of  an  osmotic  cell  can  be  very  easily  demonstrated,
for  lectures  for  example.  A  is  a  glass  tube  (for  example,  a  -piece  cut
from  a  test  tube),  with  a  bit  of  pig's  bladder,  moistened  with  lukewarm
water,  tied  over  the  lower  end ;  it  is  closed  at  the  upper  end  with  a
well-fitting  cork,  provided  with  one  hole  bored  through.  After  filling
the  cell  A  completely,  with  ether  containing  a  considerable  amount  of
benzene,  the  opening  in  the  cork  is  closed  with  a  narrow  upright  tube
which  fits  tight ;  the  cell  is  then  dipped  into  a  wider  glass  filled  with
ether.  The  cork  B,  which  is  not  air-tight,  serves  both  to  hinder  the
evaporation  of  the  outer  ether,  and  also  to  hold  the  cell  in  place.  Both
the  solution  and  the  solvent  must  be  previously  saturated  with  water,
in  order  that  the  solvent  action  of  the  ether  may  not  injure  the  delicate
partition  membrane.  Also,  it  is  well  to  add  a  colouring  substance
which  is  insoluble  in  water,  to  the  ether  in  the  inner  cell,  so  that  the
action  of  the  experiment  will  be  visible,  and  one  can  also  be  thus
assured  that  .the  membrane  is  tight.  After  the  cell  has  been  left  to
itself  for  some  time,  one  will  notice  the  rising  of  the  ether  column
from  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the  benzene ;  this  usually  amounts  in  an
hour  to  more  than  a  decimetre.

A  very  elegant  method  for  the  investigation  of  solutions  having
the  same  osmotic  pressure,  viz. the  so-called  is-osmotic  solutions,  in  an

1  Jour.  Chem.  Soc.,  1891,  p.  344.
2  Nernst,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  6.  37  (1890).

134  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

optical  [visual]  way  is  described  by  Tammann,1  who  placed  a  drop  of
a  solution  of  potassium  ferro-cyanide  in  a  solution  of  copper  sulphate.
The  drop  is  at  once  surrounded  with  a  membrane  of  precipitation ;
accordingly  as  the  osmotic  pressure  is  greater  in  the  inner  or  the  outer
solution,  the  cell  will  expand  or  contract,  with  the  inflow  or  outflow  of
water.  Tammann  observed  the  osmotic  stream  produced  by  the
changes  of  concentration  by  means  of  a  so-called  schlieren  apparatus.2
When  the  schlieren3  (i.e.  the  heterogeneous  layers)  disappear,  the  osmotic
pressure  is  the  same  outside  and  inside.  If  one  adds  to  both  solutions
something  foreign  to  both  substances  producing  the  membrane,  and
which  does  not  diffuse  through  the  membrane,  then  the  osmotic  action
remains  in  equilibrium.  These  phenomena  can  be  beautifully  used
for  demonstration.  If  one  adds,  by  means  of  a  capillary  pipette,  a  drop
of  a  strong  solution  of  potassium  ferro-cyanide  to  a  moderately  strong
solution  of  copper  sulphate,  one  can  see  with  the  naked  eye  that  a
schliere*  (i.e.  thin  layer)  of  concentrated  solution  of  copper  sulphate
flows  downwards  from  the  cell ;  this  is  a  proof  that  the  inner  solution
continually  extracts  water  from  the  outer  one.  This  very  instructive
phenomenon  can  be  shown  to  a  large  audience  by  the  aid  of  a  sciopticon.
Semi-permeable  partitions  and  the  associated  action  of  the  osmotic
pressure  play  a  very  important  role  in  the  economy  of  living  nature,
and  it  should  be  emphasised  that  the  investigations  in  plant  physiology,
and  among  others,  those  of  Traube,  of  de  Vries,  and  especially  of
Pfeffer,  made  possible  the  more  detailed  study  of  osmotic  pressure  ;  and
this  forms  the  basis  of  the  modern  theory  of  solutions.  Thus  the  living
protoplasmic  layer,  which  entirely  surrounds  the  surface  of  the  cell-sap
of  plants,  is  very  permeable  for  the  solvent,  water,  but  is  an  almost
completely  impermeable  membrane 5  for  the  substances  dissolved  in
the  cell-sap,  such  as  glucose,  calcium,  and  potassium  malates,  etc.,  as
well  as  some  inorganic  salts.  If,  therefore,  some  plant  cells,  taken  for
example  from  the  leafy  part  of  Tradescantia  discolor,  are  sprinkled  with
a  water  solution  having  a  greater  osmotic  pressure  than  that  exerted
by  the  substances  dissolved  in  the  cell -sap  in  the  protoplasts,  then  the
latter  will  contract,  i.e.  plasmolysis  is  said  to  occur  :  if,  on  the  other
hand,  a  smaller  osmotic  pressure  exists  in  the  outer  solution,  then  the
protoplasmic  sheath  expands  as  far  as  the  cell  wall  permits.  Thus,  by
means  of  microscopic  observation,  one  can  prepare  solutions  of  selected
substances  which  are  is-osmotic  (iso-tonic)  with  the  cell-sap.  Thus  osmotic
action  cannot  only  be  recognised  in  the  red  blood  corpuscles,6  and

1  Wied.  Ann.,  34.  229  (1888).

2  This  term,  for  which  I  find  no  concise  English  equivalent,  is  in  common  use  in
Germany  to  denote  a  delicate  apparatus  of  To  pier  used  to  detect  small  differences  in  the
refractive  power  of  the  different  layers  ("schlieren")  of  heterogeneous  media. — TR.

3  Ibid.  4  Ibid.

5  See  especially  the  treatise  written  for  those  who  are  not  professional  botanists  by
de  Vries,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  2.  414  (1888).

6  Hamburger,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  6.  319  (1890). See  also  Lob,  ibid.,  14.  424
(1894)  ;  Koppe,  ibid.,  16.  261  ;  17.  552  (1895)  ;  Hedin,  17.  164  ;  21.  272  (1896).

CHAP,  v

DILUTE  SOLUTIONS

also  very  recently  in  bacteria  cells,1  and  nerve  cells,  but  these  can  also
be  applied  to  the  study  of  osmotic  solutions.  Of  course  these  methods
are  debarred  when  the  dissolved  substances  either  exert  a  specific
poisonous  action  on  the  protoplasmic  sheath  of  the  cells  in  question,
or  else  diffuse  through  them.  It  is  not  without  interest  to  observe
that  the  pressure  in  animal  and  plant  cells  under  the  most  diverse
conditions,  amounts  to  from  four  to  five  atmospheres ;  and  that  some-
times it  is  even  four  times  as  great  in  those  protoplasts  which  serve
as  the  storehouse  of  dissolved  substances  held  in  reserve ;  examples
of  the  latter  are  the  cell  contents  of  beets,  and  also  the  cells  of  bacteria.
It  is  evident  how  these  bacteria  are  supported  in  their  destructive  action
by  their  abnormally  high  pressure.2

In  concluding  this  sketch,  I  give  the  results  obtained  by  Pfeffer,  in
measuring  the  osmotic  pressure  in  a  water  solution  of  cane  sugar,  which
was  the  substance  most  thoroughly  investigated  by  him.  The  cupric
ferro-cyanide  membrane  used  by  Pfeffer,  satisfied  most  completely  the
conditions  of  impermeability  for  this  substance.

OSMOTIC  PRESSURE  OF  A  ONE  PER  CENT  WATER  SOLUTION  OF
CANE  SUGAR  AT  DIFFERENT  TEMPERATURES

Pressure.

Obs.

Calc.

6-B

0-664  Atm.

0-665  Atm.

+  0-001

137

0-691

0-681

-o-oio

14-2

0-671

0  682

+  0-011

15-5

0-684

0-686

+  0-002

22-0

0-721

0-701

-0-020

32-0

0-716

0-725

+  0-009

36-0

0-746

0-735

0  Oil

The  figures  in  the  third  column  are  calculated  from  the  formula
P  =  0-649(1  +  0-00367t)  atm.,

which  is  well  suited  to  express  the  results  of  the  investigation,  as  is
shown  by  the  smallness  and  irregularity  of  the  differences  given  in  the
last  column.  The  measurements  arranged  for  varying  concentration,
can  be  also  conversely  calculated  from  the  formula

P  =  n.  0-649(1  +0-00367t),

in  which  n  denotes  the  per  cent  strength  of  the  solution,  i.e.  the  number
of  g.  sugar  in  100  g.  of  the  solution  ;  thus  the  pressure  of  a  4  per  cent
solution,  measured  at  13 '7°,  amounted  to  2*74  atm.,  while  according

1  Wladimiroff,  Zeitschr.  physik.  C/iem.,  7.  524  (1891).

2  See  Tammann,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  8.  685  (1891).

136  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

to  the  preceding  formula  it  should  be  2*73  atm. It  is  obvious  that
we  have  to  do  here  with  pressures  of  considerable  magnitude.

Indirect  Methods  for  the  Measurement  of  Osmotic  Pres-
sure.— In  most  cases  where  one  tries  to  measure  osmotic  pressures
directly,  he  meets  very  great  experimental  difficulties,  which  depend
upon  the  successful  accomplishment  of  making  a  semi -permeable
membrane  of  sufficient  stability  and  osmotic  activity.  Fortunately
the  measurement  in  almost  all  cases  can  be  easily  and  certainly
obtained  by  indirect  methods.

The  indirect  methods  in  general  depend  on  the  measurement  of  the
expenditure  of  work  which  is  necessary  to  separate  the  dissolved  sub-
stance from  the  solvent.  Now,  according  to  what  was  said  above,
since  the  osmotic  pressure  is  a  direct  measure  of  this  expenditure  of
work,  it  is  evident  that  if  we  know  one  we  also  know  the  other.

Of  the  many  methods  which  can  be  employed  for  the  reversible
separation  of  solvent  and  dissolved  substance,  we  will  consider  the
following,  viz.  : —

1.  Separation  by  evaporation.

2.  Separation  by  selected  solubility.

3.  Separation  by  crystallisation.

But  since  each  of  these  methods  can  be  used  in  a  double  sense,  i.e.
we  can  remove  either  the  solvent,  or  the  dissolved  substance  from  the
solvent,  we  have  the  six  following  methods  for  the  indirect  measure-
ment of  osmotic  pressure  : —

A.  The  Separation  of  the  Pure  Solvent  from^the  Solution

1.  Separation  by  Evaporation. — We  can  see  at  once  without  further
remark,  that  the  partial  pressure  of  the  solvent  above  a  solution,  must
always  be  less  than  that  over  the  pure  solvent,  at  the  same  tempera-
ture. Now,  let  us  imagine  a  solution  and  a  solvent  at  the  same
temperature,  to  be  separated  only  by  a  semi-permeable  membrane ;
then  the  solution  will  add  to  itself  at  the  expense  of  the  solvent.  If
we  assume  that  the  partial  pressure  of  the  saturated  vapour  of  the
solvent  is  greater  over  the  solution,  then  there  must  necessarily  occur
a  process  of  isothermal  distillation,  whereby  some  of  the  solvent  would
be  forced  back  from  the  solution  to  the  pure  solvent.  In  that  case  we
would  have  a  perpetually  automatic  cyclic  process,  i.e.  aperpetuum  mobile,
which  would  perform  work  at  the  expense  of  the  heat  of  the  environ-
ment, which  is  contrary  to  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  (p.  1 5).

In  what  follows  we  will  limit  ourselves  to  solutions  of  non-volatile
substances,  i.e.  solutions  the  vapour  pressure  of  which  is  equal  to  the
partial  pressure  of  the  solvent,  as  described  above.  The  diminution
of  pressure  experienced  by  a  solvent,  on  dissolving  a  small  quantity  of
a  foreign  substance,  is  obtained  as  follows  : 1—

1  See  Gouy  and  Chaperon,  Ann.  chim.  phys.  [6],  13.  124  (1888)  ;  and  Arrhenius,.
Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  3.  115  (1889).

CHAP. V

DILUTE  SOLUTIONS

137

Iff

An  upright  tube  for  osmotic  action  holds  the  solution  L  (Fig.  14),
.and  is  dipped  into  the  solvent,  W,  water  for  example.  Water  will  enter
through  the  semi-permeable  membrane  A,  which
closes  the  upright  tube  below,  till  the  liquid  has
mounted  to  the  height  H  above  the  outer  level,
corresponding  to  the  osmotic  pressure  prevailing
in  the  solution.  The  whole  system  must  be  closed
air-tight,  and  must  be  maintained  at  the  same
temperature  at  all  points,  reckoned  in  absolute
temperature  T.  Then  between  the  vapour  pressure
p  of  the  water,  and  the  vapour  pressure  p'  of  the
solution,  there  must  exist  the  relation  that  p',  in-
creased by  the  vapour  column  acting  on  W  of  the
height  H,  must  be  equal  to  p.  This  relation
merely  states  that  the  system  is  in  equilibrium.
For  if  we  assume  that  p'  is  greater  than  that  corre-
sponding to  this  relation,  then  water  would  con-
stantly distil  over  from  the  upright  tube  into  W,
to  be  again  transported  by  osmotic  pressure  into
L ;  in  short,  the  water  would  constantly  traverse  a  cyclic  process,  i.e.
the  system  would  represent  a  perpetuum  mobile,  which  would  be  able  to
perform  any  desired  amount  of  external  work  at  the  expense  of  the
heat  of  the  environment,  and  the  existence  of  which  would  con-
tradict the  second  law  of  thermodynamics.

Also,  conversely,  if  p'  were  smaller  than  would  correspond  to  the
preceding  relation,  then  water  would  distil  over  from  W  into  the  up-
right tube,  would  pass  below  from  L  into  W,  and  again  around  in  this
reverse  cycle.  Equilibrium,  therefore,  can  exist  only  when  the  excess
of  pressure  of  p  over  p'  is  compensated  by  the  hydrostatic  pressure  of
a  vapour  column,  equal  in  height  to  the  difference  between  the  levels.1

The  pressure  of  this  vapour  column  can  be  easily  calculated.  If
we  denote  the  molecular  weight  of  the  solvent  by  M,  then  from  the
gas  formula,  pv  =  0 '08 2 IT,  we  obtain  the  specific  weight  of  the  vapour,
compared  with  that  of  water  as  unity,  and  since  there  are  M  g.  of  the
vapour  in  v  liters,  the  weight  of  one  c.c.  in  g.  amounts  to

Mo  M0p

Fig.  14.

lOOOv 0-0821T  1000'

Instead  of  p  we  can  introduce  p',  since,  according  to  the  proviso  that
the  solution  is  very  dilute,  their  difference  can  be  neglected.  In  the
same  way,  considering  that,  although  strictly  speaking,  the  density  of
the  vapour  column  varies  along  the  upright  tube,  yet  the  hydrostatic
pressure  can  be  simply  expressed  by  the  formula

1  It  is  of  course  noticed  that  the  hydrostatic  pressure  of  the  liquid  column  H  is  a
measure  of  the  osmotic  pressure  ;  and  that  the  pressure  of  a  rapour  column  of  height
H  is  a  measure  of  the  difference  in  the  vapour  pressure.  — TB.

138  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

HM0p'

0-OS21T.  1000.  76o-

atm.,

where  H  is  measured  in  cm.,  and  o-  denotes  the  specific  gravity  of
mercury.  The  .osmotic  pressure  of  the  solution  corresponds  to  the
pressure  of  the  elevated  column  of  liquid  H.  Therefore  between  H,
and  the  osmotic  pressure  P  expressed  in  atmospheres,  there  exists  the
relation

HS

7  60-'

where  S  denotes  the  specific  gravity  of  the  solution,  or  also  that  of  the
slightly  differing  solvent.

If  we  eliminate  H  in  the  expression  for  the  hydrostatic  pressure  of
the  vapour  column,  by  introducing

P76o-

for  H,  then  we  obtain  the  following  expression  for  the  relation  of  p
and  p'  (developed  as  above  from  the  conditions  of  equilibrium),  viz.,

/  PM0p'

P~P  +  1000SO-0821T'

and  thus  obtain  the  expression  sought,  for  the  osmotic  pressure,  viz.,
p-p' 0-0821T1000S

V  ~MT  '

which  was  found  by  van't  Hoff  (1886),1  by  a  method  not  differing  in
principle  from  the  preceding.

The  vapour  pressure  of  a  solution,  containing  2*47  g.  of  ethyl
benzoate  to  100  g.  of  benzene,  was  found  to  be  742*60  mm.  at  80°,
while  that  of  pure  benzene  at  the  same  temperature  amounted  to
751-86  mm.  ;2  the  molecular  weight  M  of  benzene  is  78  ;  its  specific
weight  at  the  preceding  temperature  is  0*8149  ;  therefore  the  osmotic
pressure  of  the  aforesaid  solution  is  calculated  to  be

9-26 0-0821.  (273 +  80).  814-9
P  =  7-42^6  -78-  -*

The  simple  yet  obvious  derivation  given  above  for  the  fundamental
relation  between  osmotic  pressure  and  vapour  tension  is  not  sufficiently
rigorous,  because  it  assumes  that  p  -  p'  is  only  a  small  fraction  (say
the  hundredth  part)  of  p,  a  condition  satisfied  only  in  the  case  of  very
dilute  solutions.  We  obtain  a  more  exact  formula  in  the  following  way.

By  means  of  the  apparatus  figured  on  p.  131  (Fig.  12),  we  remove

1  Van't  Hoff,  "Lois  de  1'eqnilibre  chimique  dans  1'etat  dilue  on  dissous." Stock-
holm, 1886. An  abstract  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  Zeitschr.  phys.  Chem.,  1.  481  (1887).

2  Beckmann,  Zeitschr.  phys.  Chem.,  6.  439  (1890).

CHAP.  V  DILUTE  SOLUTIONS  139

a  small  quantity  of  the  solvent  from  the  solution.  The  expenditure
of  work  necessary  for  this  amounts  to  Pdv,  in  which  dv  is  the  volume
through  which  the  piston  is  lowered.  Let  the  quantity  of  solvent
removed  from  the  solution  be  dx  g.-mol.  Now  we  can  also  remove  tlfte
same  quantity  of  solvent  from  the  solution  by  means  of  isothermal
distillation,  and  denoting  by  p  and  p'  the  respective  vapour  tensions
of  the  pure  solvent,  and  of  the  solution,  at  the  temperature  T,
the  expenditure  of  work  necessary,  according  to  the  equations  on
p.  116,  is

p

Now  since  the  work  must  be  the  same  in  these  two  isothermal  and
reversible  ways,  it  follows  that

P  =  dvRTlnp' '  (2)

Now  if,  on  adding  dx  g.-mol.  of  the  pure  solvent  to  a  solution,  there
does  not  occur  either  contraction  or  dilation,  then  dv  is  obviously
equal  to  dx  g.-mol.,  i.e.  it  follows  that

dv  =  ^°dx . . • ••: (3)

if  M  and  S  denote  respectively  the  molecular  weight,  and  the  specific
gravity  of  the  solvent.

From  (2)  and  (3)  we  find

In  order  to  obtain  P  in  atmospheres,  we  must  express  the  volume
of  1  g.-mol.  of  the  solvent  in  litres,  and  must  write  0*0821  for  K,
when  it  follows  that

0-0821T  1000S  . p
P  =  — — ^ — —  In  —  atm.  . . (5)

M0  p'

For  log  — ,  in  equation  (5)  we  may  write

since  - — £-  is  very  small,  cf.  with  1. Equation  (5)  gives,  with  the

former  data  for  the  pressure  of  ethyl  benzoate  in  benzene

P  =  376  atms.,

while  the  less  exact  formula  gives  378  atm.

It  is  recommended  in  practice  to  determine  the  boiling-point  instead

140  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

of  the  vapour  pressure.  Instead  of  the  lowering  of  the  vapour
pressure  p  -  p',  one  can  measure  much  more  simply  and  accurately  the
elevation  of  the  boiling-point  produced  by  the  addition  of  soluble  sub-
stances. If  the  determination  is  conducted  at  the  atmospheric  pressure
B,  then  the  vapour  pressure  of  the  solution  at  its  boiling-point  will  be
p'  =  B.  The  vapour  pressure  p  of  the  pure  solvent  at  the  temperature
of  the  aforesaid  B,  is  increased  by  the  amount  necessary  to  raise  the
temperature  of  the  boiling-point  of  the  solvent  to  that  of  the  solution ;
this  can  be  obtained  from  the  vapour-pressure  tables  made  by  Regnault
and  others  with  satisfactory  accuracy  for  the  most  available  solvents.

For  small  elevations  of  the  boiling-point  t,  we  can  calculate  p,  by
means  of  the  formula  of  Clausius  on  p.  62,  viz.,

d  In  p  _ A

which,  when  integrated,  becomes

In  p  =  -  ^  +  const.

Now,  at  the  boiling-point  T0  of  the  pure  solvent,  we  have

A

In  B  =  -——  + const,,
K10

and  therefore  p p  _  A  F 1

This,  introduced  into  formula  (4),  gives

This,  simplified,  becomes

MO TO

_, Sit _ 1000S.1 t  ,  .

P  =  ^  or  P  = 24.95 •  ^  atm. .  (6)

where  A

=  M0

denotes  the  heat  of  evaporation  of  1  g.  of  the  solvent,  reduced  to
litre-atmospheres  by  2 4 '25,  the  factor  for  1  litre-atmosphere  in  g.-cal.
(p.  12);  and  t  =  T  -  T0  denotes  the  elevation  of  the  boiling-point  of
the  solution.  As  before  S  denotes  the  specific  gravity  of  the  solvent.
The  factor  1000  is  due  to  expressing  this  volume  of  a  mol.  in  litres.
This  formula  does  not  depend  on  the  condition  that  the  vapour  of
the  solvent  must  follow  the  laws  of  gases ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,
it  takes  no  account  of  the  slight  change  of  the  heat  of  vaporisation
with  the  temperature ;  yet  it  can  be  used  for  elevations  of  boiling-
point  of  5°  -  10°,  within  1  per  cent  of  the  correct  value  of  the  osmotic
pressure  prevailing  at  the  temperature  T0  +  t.

CHAP,  v  DILUTE  SOLUTIONS  141

Tims  the  elevation  experienced  by  the  boiling-point  of  benzene,  on
the  addition  of  2  '4  7  g.  of  ethyl  benzoate  to  100  g.  of  the  solvent,  is
0'403°.  If,  according  to  Schiff  (p.  61),  we  put  the  heat  of  vaporisa-
tion of  benzene  as  equal  to  9  4  -4  cal.,  it  follows  that

814-9.94-4 0-403

iThe  difference,  as  compared  with  the  value  3'76  found  on  p.  141,
•can  be  attributed  to  a  slight  uncertainty  in  determining  the  heat  of
vaporisation.

The  osmotic  pressure  of  a  water  solution  at  the  boiling-point
100  +  t°,  may  be  estimated  as  equal  to

0-959.536-4  t

24-25 "  273  +  100'

or  P  =  56-8tatm.

2.  Separation  by  Selected  Solubility.  —  The  far-reaching  ana-
logy existing  between  the  process  of  solution  and  that  of  evapora-
tion, and  to  which  repeated  reference  must  be  made,  extends  thus  far,
viz.,  that  in  the  same  way  that  the  vapour  pressure  of  a  solvent  A.
is  depressed  by  the  addition  of  a  foreign  substance  B,  so  also  the  solu-
bility of  B  in  A.  is  diminished  by  dissolving  a  third  substance  in  B  ;  and
this  happens  according  to  the  same  laws.  Thus,  if  we  mix  together
two  liquids,  as  ether  and  water,  which  are  only  slightly  soluble  in  each
other,  and  if  we  denote  by  L  the  solubility  of  pure  ether  in  water  at
the  temperature  T,  and  by  L'  the  solubility  in  water  of  ether  con-
taining a  foreign  substance  at  the  same  temperature,  then  L'  must
always  be  smaller  than  L  ;  and  we  may  derive  the  relation  for  the
osmotic  pressure  P,  prevailing  for  the  foreign  substance  dissolved  in
the  ether,  as  being

L-L/0-0819T.  1000S

L/- -nr atm>  ()

where,  as  above,  S  and  M  denote  respectively,  the  specific  gravity
and  the  molecular  weight  of  the  ether  ;  this  relation  is  completely
analogous  to  the  relation  between  the  lowering  of  vapour  pressure  and
osmotic  pressure,  equation  (5).1

The  proof  of  equation  (7)  is  most  easily  arrived  at  from  the  obser-
vation that  the  solubility  of  ether  in  water  must  be  the  same  as  that
of  ether  vapour.  But  as  the  latter,  according  to  Henry's  law,  must
have  a  solubility  proportional  to  its  partial  pressure

L  :  I/  =  p  :  p'

equation  (7)  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  this  and  (5).
1  Nernst,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  6.  16  (1890).

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK I

3.  Separation  by  Crystallising  (Freezing  Out). — From  the  law
that  solutions  of  various  substances  in  the  same  solvent  are  is-osmotic
when  they  have  the  same  vapour  pressure,  it  follows  directly  that  the
same  osmotic  pressure  must  prevail  in  solutions  of  the  solvent  which
have  the  same  freezing-point.  For  inasmuch  as  the  freezing-point  is
that  temperature l  at  which  the  solid  solvent  (ice)  and  the  solution  are
capable  of  existing  together,  it  must  also  be  the  point  at  which  the
curves  of  the  vapour  pressures  of  the  solution  and  of  the  solid  solvent
cut  each  other,  i.e.,  where  both  have  the  same  vapour  pressure.  For  if  we
suppose,  for  example,  that  the  vapour  pressure  of  ice  and  that  of  the
water  solution  were  different  at  the  freezing-point,  then  a  process  of
isothermal  distillation  would  commence  which  would  not  cease  till
equilibrium  should  have  been  established ;  but  this  could  not  happen
till  both  the  vapours  of  the  solvent  should  have  the  same  density.
Solutions  of  equal  freezing-point  have  therefore  equal  vapour  pressures,
and  are  isotonic.

These  relations  are  shown  in  Fig.  15,  in  which,  as  in  Fig.  4,  the

vapour  pressure  curves  of  solid
and  liquid  are  shown,  but  also
— dotted — the  vapour  pressure
curve  of  the  solution.  The
latter  must  lie  below  the  curve
for  the  solvent,  according  to  the
foregoing  argument ;  hence  its
intersection  T,  with  the  curve
for  the  solid,  must  lie  below
T0.  T0  -  T  =  t  is  the  lowering
of  the  freezing-point.

The relation existing be-
tween the  lowering  of  the  freez-
ing-point and of the osmotic pressure of  a solution, is  found  by
combining  the  equation  for  the  molecular  heat  of  sublimation  o-  (p.  73),
with  that  for  the  heat  of  vaporisation  A  (p.  62),  viz.,

(8)

in  which  p'  denotes  the  vapour  pressure  of  the  solidified  solvent,
equivalent  to  that  of  the  solution  according  to  the  aforesaid  law ;  and
where  p  denotes  the  vapour  pressure  of  the  pure  (undercooled)  liquid
solvent,  both  values  being  referred  to  the  freezing-point  of  the  solu-
tion :  by  integration  we  obtain

InP'=- +  c'; lni'=  - +  a

1  It  is  assumed  in  all  this  argument  that  pure  solvent  crystallises  out  of  the  solution,
as  is  usually  the  case. But  see  "  Solid  Solutions,"  p.  170.

OF

CHAr.  V  DILUTE  SOLUTIONS

Now,  according  to  p.  74,  at  the  freezing-point  of  the  pure  solvent,
the  temperature  of  which  is  T0,  the  vapour  pressures  of  the  solid
and  of  the  liquid  solvent  are  the  same,  i.e.,  at  T0,  we  have  p'  =  p  =  p0,
and  therefore

If  we  eliminate  the  integration  constants  C'  and  C  respectively,  by  the
subtraction  of  the  equations  standing  under  each  other  in  the  same
column,  we  obtain

.  p o-p in p ATI i

In  ^  =  - ^  -  ^  h ln^-=-=-J--^
Po KL1 10J  Po J^Lr

and  by  the  subtraction  of  these  last  two  equations  we  obtain

thus  we  obtain  a  formula  which  affords  us  the  relation  between  the
lowering  of  the  vapour  pressure  and  of  the  freezing-point  of  a  solution,
as  well  as  the  molecular  heat  of  fusion,  a-  -  A,  of  the  solution  ;  this
was  found  by  Guldberg1  as  early  as  1870;  R  here  amounts  to  1*99
if  we  express  the  heat  of  fusion  in  g.-cal.

In  formula  (4),  p.  139,  putting  p  =  a-  -  A  we  have

P  =  M~S

or  simply  as  in  equation  (6),  p.  140

Swt  1000  S.w t

P  =  — or P  =  - — —  =-  atm. . . (10)

In  this  formula  w  denotes  -^f—,  the  heat  of  fusion  of  1  g.  of  the  solvent

expressed  in  g.-cal.  ;  T0  is  the  fusing-point ;  S  is  its  specific  gravity ;
and  t  denotes  T0  -  T,  the  lowering  of  the  freezing-point.

Thus  by  the  addition  of  2*47  g.  of  ethyl  benzoate  to  100  g.  of
benzene,  the  freezing-point  5*5°,  of  the  solvent  is  lowered  about  0'840° :
its  heat  of  fusion  amounts  to  30*08  g.-cal.,  and  its  specific  gravity  at  the
freezing-point  is  0'8875.  The  osmotic  pressure  of  the  solution  is  thus

_  887-5.  30-08 0'840_ _
24-25  273  +  5-5"

A  similar  value  for  water  is

1000S  .  w 1000  x  79-6  _
24-25  T0 ~~  24725T273

1  Cnmpt.  rend.,  70.  1349  (1870).

144  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

and  therefore  the  pressure  of  a  water  solution  freezing  at  T0  - t,  is
P=  12-03  t  atm.

According  to  the  very  accordant  measurements  of  Abegg1;  Ponsot 2;
and  Raoult 3 ;  the  freezing-point  of  a  1  per  cent  sugar  solution  is  about
-  0'0546°.  Its  osmotic  pressure  is  therefore  0'657  atmos.,  in  good
agreement  with  Pfeffer's  direct  measurement  of  0*649.

Moreover,  we  observe  from  the  preceding  formula  that  the
thousandth  part  of  a  degree  of  temperature,  a  quantity  quite  difficult  to
measure,  corresponds  to  a  pressure  of  0'012  atm.,  i.e.  about  91  mm.  of
mercury ;  this  latter  value  could  be  determined  to  one  part  in  a
thousand,  provided  one  had  a  semi-permeable  membrane  sufficiently
sure  and  rapid  in  its  action.

On  account  of  the  simplicity  of  determining  the  lowering  of  the
freezing-point,  in  practice  the  method  above  described  finds  application
almost  always,  in  preference  to  the  measurement  of  the  osmotic  pressure  :
its  experimental  treatment  will  be  considered  in  the  chapter  on  the
determination  of  the  molecular  weight.

B.  The  Separation  of  the  Dissolved  Substance  from  the  Solution

1.  Separation  of  Evaporation. — We  will  consider  two  solutions
of  the  same  substance  in  the  same  solvent,  of  very  nearly  the  same
degree  of  concentration.  Let  P  be  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the
substance  dissolved  in  solution  I.  ;  let  p  be  its  vapour  pressure  over  the
solution ;  let  V  be  the  volume  of  the  solution  containing  1  g.-mol.  of
the  substance  dissolved ;  and  let  v  be  the  volume  assumed  by  the
g.-mol.  in  the  gaseous  state  at  the  pressure  p.  Let  the  corresponding
magnitudes  in  solution  II.,  be  P  +  dP,  p  +  dp,  V  -  dV,  and  v  -  dv,
respectively.  We  will  now  conduct  the  following  cyclic  process  at  the
constant  temperature  T.  We  will  first  set  free  from  solution  I.,
1  g.-mol  of  the  dissolved  substance,  whereby  the  work  PV  will  be
performed  against  the  osmotic  pressure,  and  the  work  pv  by  the  vapour
pressure  p.  Then  we  will  compress  the  g.-mol  now  existing  in  the
gaseous  state  from  v  to  v  -  dv,  whereby  there  will  be  performed  the
work  pdv.  Next  we  will  bring  the  g.-mol  into  solution  II. ,  whereby
there  must  be  applied  the  work  (p  +  dp)  (v  -  dv)  against  the  gas
pressure,  and  the  osmotic  pressure  performs  the  work  (P  +  dp)
(V  -  dV).  Finally,  we  bring  the  g.-mol  from  solution  II.  back  again
to  solution  I.,  whereby  the  osmotic  pressure  expends  the  work  PdV,
and  then  all  is  reduced  to  the  original  condition.

Now,  since  the  sum  of  the  work  expended  on  the  system,  diminished
by  the  work  performed  by  the  system,  in  a  reversible,  isothermal,
cyclic  process  must  be  equal  to  zero,  we  have  the  equation,

PV  -  pv  +  pdv  +  (p  +  dp)  (v  -  dv)  -  (P  +  dP)  (V  -  dV)  -  PdV  =  0,

1  Z.  S.  Phys.  Chem.,  20.  221,  1896.  2  Bull.  Soc.  Chim.  (3),  17.  395,  1897.  '

3  Z.  S.  Phys.  Chem.,  27.  617,  1898.

CHAP.  V  DILUTE  SOLUTIONS  145

or  simplifying  it  and  neglecting  the  small  magnitudes  of  the  second
order,

vdp-VdP . . . . (11)

2>  Separation  by  Selective  Solubility.  —  We  bring  together  two
liquids  which  are  only  slightly  soluble  in  each  other,  as,  for  example,
carbon  disulphide  and  water  ;  we  then  dissolve  a  third  substance,  as
iodine,  which  is  divided  between  the  two  solvents.  We  will  denote  by
Pl  and  V-p  the  osmotic  pressure  and  the  volume  respectively,  assumed
by  1  g.-mol  of  the  dissolved  substance  in  one  solvent,  and  by  P2  and
V2,  the  corresponding  values  in  the  second  solvent.  Then  by  means  of
a  cyclic  process  completely  analogous  to  that  just  described  above,  we
can  at  once  derive  the  relation

V^P^V.dP,  .  (12)

3.  Separation  by  Crystallisation.  —  The  method  employed  alto-
gether most  frequently  in  practice  to  separate  a  dissolved  substance
from  its  solution,  consists  in  crystallising  it  out  from  its  saturated
solution,  by  means  of  a  suitable  change  of  temperature.

This  process  reminds  us  of  the  condensation  of  a  substance  from  its
saturated  vapour,  and  we  also  easily  see  that  the  analogy  between  the
processes  of  solution  and  of  vaporisation  is  not  merely  external,  but
that  it  is  really  a  deep-seated  one.  For  if  we  vaporise  a  solid  or  a
liquid  body,  its  molecules  are  driven  by  a  expansive  force,  called  the
"vapour  pressure,"  into  a  space  where  they  arrive  under  a  certain
pressure,  viz.,  the  pressure  of  the  vapour  saturated  for  the  temperature
in  question.  The  conditions  are  similar  when  a  solid  goes  into  solution  ;
in  this  case  also  the  molecules  are  driven  by  a  certain  expansive  force,
called  the  solution  pressure,  into  a  space  where  they  arrive  under  a
definite  pressure,  viz.,  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the  saturated  solution.

We  have  developed  on  p.  62  a  formula  of  Clausius,  giving  a  simple
relation  between  the  change  of  vapour  pressure  with  temperature,  the
increase  of  volume  from  vaporisation,  and  the  heat  of  vaporisation.  In
a  precisely  similar  way,  by  effecting  the  solution  of  a  substance  —
instead  of  its  vaporisation  into  a  vacuum  —  and  by  making  the  process
reversible  by  means  of  a  semi-permeable  partition,  we  can  derive  a
relation  between  the  change  of  "  solution  pressure  "  with  the  temperature,
the  increase  of  volume  from  solution,  and  the  heat  of  solution-  of  a
solid  substance  :  thus  we  obtain  directly

Here  L  denotes  the  amount  of  heat  absorbed  when  1  g.-mol  of
a  solid  substance  goes  into  solution,  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the  satu-
rated solution  being  kept  constant  for  the  temperature  T  ;  v'  denotes

L

1 46  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

the  volume  occupied  by  1  g.-mol  of  the  aforesaid  substance  before  going
into  solution,  and  V  the  volume  assumed  by  1  g.-mol  of  the  same
substance  in  the  saturated  solution  (van't  Hoff).1

In  case  the  substance  going  into  solution  is  a  liquid,  there  arises  a
complication  from  the  solution  of  the  solvent  itself  in  this  substance ;
but  this  can  be  overcome  by  easy  calculation.

The  Law  of  Osmotic  P  ressure. — The  law  of  osmotic  pressure
naturally  must  consider  these  questions,  viz.,  how  is  it  conditioned  (1)
by  the  volume  of  the  solution,  i.e.  the  concentration  1  (2)  how  by  he
temperature  ?  (3)  how  by  the  nature  of  the  substance  dissolved  1  (4)
how  by  the  nature  of  the  solvent  ?  The  answer  to  these  questions,
which  of  course  can  be  obtained  only  by  experiment,  i.e.  by  the
direct  or  indirect  measurement  of  the  osmotic  pressure  in  the  most
numerous  and  various  conditions  possible,  is  very  simple,  and  has  led
to  the  following  remarkable  statement,  viz.  the  osmotic  pressure  is  inde-
pendent of  the  nature  of  the  solvent,  and  in  general  obeys  the  laws  of  gases
(van't  Hoff).  The  various  proofs  requisite  for  establishing  this  law
will  be  given  in  the  following  sections.

Osmotic  Pressure  and  Concentration. — Pfeffer  found  that  the
pressure  of  solutions  of  cane  sugar  was  proportional  to  the  concentra-
tion (p.  144);  the  rules,  according  to  which  the  lowering  of  vapour
tension  (law  of  Wullner),  and  the  lowering  of  the  freezing-point  (law
of  Blagden),  vary  with  the  concentration  of  the  dissolved  substances,
have  long  been  known ;  these  rules,  in  the  light  of  the  formulae
developed  on  pages  140  and  144,  mean  that  the  same  holds  good  for
the  osmotic  pressure.  If  we  denote  by  c  the  number  of  g.-mol
dissolved  per  litre,  then

P  =  c  x  const. ;
and  we  notice  that

1

if  V  denotes  the  volume  of  the  solution  containing  1  g.-mol  of  the
dissolved  substance ;  then

PV  =  constant ;

i.e.  the  Boyle- Mariotte  law  holds  good  for  the  osmotic  pressure.

Osmotic  Pressure  and  Temperature. — Pfeffer's  measurements
of  the  pressure  of  solutions  of  cane  sugar  can  be  well  represented  by
the  formula

P- 0-649(1  +  0'00367t).

But  the  temperature  coefficient  0 '003 6 7  is  the  same  as  in  the  case

1  See also van Deventer and van der Stadt, Zeitschr. phys. Cfiem., 9. 43
(1891).

CHAP.  V  DILUTE  SOLUTIONS  147

of  gases,  i.e.  the  osmotic  pressure  is  proportional  to  the  absolute  temperature.
This  result  will  be  established  by  a  simple  law  which  was  discovered
by  Babo  as  early  as  1848,  and  which  has  been  verified  repeatedly  by
experiment  in  recent  times ;  viz.  tluit  the  relative  lowering  of  the  vapour

pressure,  —,  of  a  dilute  solution,  and  also  the  quotient,  ~n  is  independent
of  the  temperature.  For  if  we  observe  in  the  equation

_  0-0821  T  1000  S p

Jr  —  — — ^r,p — —  In  —f

M0  p

that  S  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  volume  V,  of  the  quantity  of
solvent  containing  a  definite  amount  of  the  dissolved  substance,  say
1  g.-mol,  and  if  we  also  notice  that  according  to  Babo's  law,  the
expression

0-0821. p

^vr —  ln '
M0 P

is  independent  of  the  temperature,  then  it  also  follows  in  this  way
that

PV  =  T  x  const.  ;

i.e.  the  law  of  Gay-Lussac  holds  good  for  the  osmotic  pressure.

This  law  will  later  be  established  more  rigorously  by  thermo-
dynamic  considerations ;  but  remark  should  here  be  made  that  from
numerous  coincident  determinations  of  the  elevation  of  the  boiling-
point  and  of  the  lowering  of  the  freezing-point  of  dilute  solutions,
there  follows  this  law,  viz.,  that  the  osmotic  pressure  of  solutions  of
similar  dilutions  at  these  two  points  referred  to  the  same  spatial  con-
centration,1 have  the  same  ratio  as  the  absolute  temperatures  of  the
boiling-point  and  melting-point.

Osmotic  Pressure  and  the  Heat  of  Dilution. — When  one  adds
more  solvent  to  a  dilute  solution,  there  is  no  heat  developed,  neither  is
external  work  performed.  The  total  energy  remains  unchanged  in  this
process.  But  if  one  conducts  the  operation  in  such  a  way  that
external  work  is  obtained  at  the  same  time,  then  the  solution  must
cool  itself  an  equivalent  amount,  exactly  as  was  the  case  with  gases
(p.  49).  And  if,  on  the  other  hand,  one  compresses  the  solution  by
the  osmotic  apparatus  figured  on  p.  131  (Fig.  12),  then  the  work  applied
will  reappear  as  heat,  according  to  the  law  of  the  conservation  of
energy.  We  may  express  this  law  also  in  this  way,  viz.  that  the
content  of  energy  of  a  dissolved  substance  is  independent  of  the
volume  of  the  solution.

If  we  displace  an  osmotic  piston  through  the  volume  v  and  apply
the  equation  (e)  on  p.  23,  viz.

1  Such a  reduction  is necessary, since the  expansion of  the  solution from heat
increases  the  volume  of  the  substance  dissolved.

148  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

when

u  =  o,

then

A TdA

A  =  TdT'

or  integrated,  we  have

A  =  T  x  const.  ;

i.e.  A  is  proportional  to  the  absolute  temperature.  Now  A  =  Pv,
when  v  is  the  volume  of  1  g.-mol.  ;  then  the  osmotic  pressure  must
also  be  proportional  to  the  absolute  temperature,  conversely  calculated
for  constant  volume.  We  found  this  latter  law  established  by  experi-
ence. Now  we  see,  moreover,  since  its  validity  is  necessary  and
sufficient,  that  the  heat  of  dilution  is  equal  to  zero  (van't  Hoff,  1885).

Quite  generally,  in  the  case  of  concentrated,  and  sometimes  also
in  the  case  of  dilute  solutions,  where  the  process  of  dilution  is
associated  with  the  formation  of  new  molecular  complexes,  or  with  the
decomposition  of  those  already  occurring,  the  heat  of  dilution  may
have  a  positive  or  a  negative  value.  In  such  cases,  observation  shows
no  ratio  between  the  osmotic  pressure  and  the  absolute  temperature
(see  section  on  ideal  concentrated  solutions).

The  Osmotic  Pressure  and  the  Nature  of  the  Substance
dissolved.  —  In  1883,  on  the  basis  of  a  very  extended  series  of
observations,  Raoult  advanced  the  theorem  that  by  dissolving  equi-
molecular  quantities  of  the  most  various  substances  in  the  same  solvent,
its  freezing-point  is  lowered  the  same  amount.  Soon  after,  1887,
the  same  investigator  saw  that  the  same  holds  good  for  the  lowering
of  the  vapour  pressure,  and  therefore  of  course  for  the  raising  of  the
boiling-point.  But  solutions  having  the  same  freezing-point  and  the
same  vapour  pressure,  have  the  same  osmotic  pressure  ;  and  thus  the
rules  of  Raoult  can  be  condensed  into  the  statement  that  solutions  having
the  same  osmotic  pressure  can  be  obtained  by  dissolving  equi-molecular
quantities  of  the  most  various  substances  in  the  same  solvent.

Osmotic  Pressure  and  Gas  Pressure.  —  It  has  been  shown  in
the  preceding  sections  on  the  basis  of  many  experimental  results,  that
the  osmotic  pressure  of  dissolved  substances  depends  on  the  volume
and  on  the  temperature,  in  the  same  way  that  the  gas  pressure  does  ;
further,  that  in  both  cases  the  amount  of  pressure  is  determined  by
the  number  of  molecules,  dissolved  or  gaseous,  contained  in  unit
volume  ;  and,  finally,  that  the  analogy  between  the  behaviour  of
dissolved  and  gasified  substances  is  expressed  in  the  theorem,  that  in
both  cases  the  content  of  energy  at  constant  temperature  is  independent

CHAP.  V  DILUTE  SOLUTIONS  149

of  the  volume  occupied.  Now  it  is  but  a  step  to  identify  the  osmotic
pressure  in  its  absolute  amount,  with  the  gas  pressure  which  would
be  observed  under  similar  relations.

From  the  observations  conducted  by  Pfeffer  on  water  solutions  of
cane  sugar,  and  satisfying  the  formula  (p.  135),  viz.,

P  =  n  0-649(1  +  0'00366t)  atm.,

the  pressure  of  a  1  per  cent  solution  at  0°  is  estimated  to  be  0'649  atm.
The  volume  of  a  100  g.-solution  at  0°  is  9  9  '7  c.c.,  and  the  volume,
therefore,  containing  1  g.-mol  of  cane  sugar  (C12H22On  =  342),  is
342  x  99'7  c.c.  =  34"!  litres.  But  the  pressure  in  a  volume  v,  con-
taining 1  g.-mol  of  a  gas,  as  calculated  from  the  gas  laws  (p.  38),  is

RT 0-0821.273
P= v : -34^--=  0-656  atm.

This  value  coincides  in  a  striking  way  with  that  found  directly  (viz,
0"649  atm.)  ;  i.e.  the  osmotic  pressure  is  exactly  the  same  as  the  gas  pressure
which  would  be  observed  if  the  solvent  were  removed,  and  the  dissolved  sub-
stance were  left  filling  the  same  space  in  the  gaseous  state  at  the  same  tem-
perature.

Thus  the  same  equation  of  condition  holds  good  for  the  dissolved
cane  sugar,  as  for  a  gas,  viz.,

PV  =  RT  =  0-0821  Tlitre-atm., . . (13)

if  P  denotes  the  osmotic  pressure  of  a  solution  containing  1  g.-mol  of
the  substance  dissolved  in  V  litres,  and  measured  in  atmospheres,  at
the  absolute  temperature  T.

It  is  proven  by  the  numerous  indirect  measurements  of  the  osmotic
pressure,  that  this  result  has  a  universal  value.  We  will  next  pro-
ceed to  discuss  a  purely  empirical  law  discovered  by  Raoult,1  according
to  which  the  relative  lowering  of  vapour  pressure  experienced  by  a  solvent  on
dissolving  a  foreign  substance,  is  equal  to  the  quotient  obtained  by  dividing  the
number  of  dissolved  molecules  n,  by  the  number  of  molecules  N,  of  the  solvent.
This  law,  especially  well  established  for  the  case  of  dilute  ethereal
solutions,  leads  thus  to  the  conclusion  that

If  we  introduce  this  value  for  the  relative  vapour  pressure,  in  the
formula  (1)  on  p.  138,  we  obtain

n  0-0821  Tx  1000  S

N  M0

But  NM0  denotes  the  number  of  grams  of  the  solvent  containing  n-mol
1  Kaoult,  Zeitsclvr.  phys.  Chem.,  2.  353  (1888).

150  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

of  the  dissolved  substance,  and " ^  denotes  the  volume  of  this  in

litres,  and S denotes  the sp.  gr.  of  the solvent  ; and  therefore,  it
follows  that

NM0
nlOOOS

the  volume  of  the  solution  in  litres,  containing 1  g.-mol.  ;  and  thus
again  we  obtain  the  equation  of  condition

rv  .

P  =  -  l±f or  PY  -  0-0821T  litre-atm.

The  analogous  law  for  the  lowering  of  solubility  has  been  proven
by  researches  with  various  solvents,1  viz.  the  relative  lowering  of
solubility  is  equal  to  the  number  of  molecules  of  the  dissolved  substance,
divided  by  the  number  of  molecules  of  the  solvent,  i.e.

I  -IS  _  n_

L' ~N'

If  we  introduce  this  equation  into  the  considerations  given  on
p.  142,  thus  combining  the  lowering  of  the  solubility  with  the  osmotic
pressure,  we  again  obtain  precisely  as  above,  the  equation

Finally,  this  is  proved  by  the  measurements  of  the  osmotic
pressure  conducted  according  to  the  method  of  freezing.  In  particular
Blagden  (1788),  Kiidorff  (1861),  and  Coppet  (1871)  studied  the  lower-
ing of  the  freezing-point  experienced  by  water  from  dissolving  salts,
but  without  arriving  at  any  simple  laws  of  general  applicability.  The
reason  of  this,  as  will  be  shown  later,  is  that  on  account  of  the  electro-
lytic dissociation  of  salts  in  water,  the  relations  are  much  more  com-
plicated, and,  therefore,  the  laws  are  much  more  obscure  than  in  the
use  of  other  dissolved  or  solvent  materials.  Therefore,  as  soon  as  Raoult
turned  his  attention  particularly  to  the  study  of  the  substances  of
organic  chemistry,  he  discovered  the  validity  of  the  following  remark-
able law,  which  is  supported  by  very  numerous  observations  ;  viz.  if
one  dissolves  in  any  selected  solvent,  equi-molecular  quantities  of  any  selected
substances,  the  freezing-point  is  lowered  the  same  amount  in  all  cases.

If  we  denote  the  lowering  of  the  freezing-point  occasioned  by  the
addition  of  m  grams  of  the  dissolved  substance  in  100  g.  of  the  solvent,
by  t,  then,  by  combining  the  proposition  of  Kaoult  with  the  law  of
Blagden  (p.  146),  we  have

.... (15)

Nernst,  Zeitschr.  phys.  Chem.,  6.  19  (1890).

CHAP.  V  DILUTE  SOLUTIONS  151

where  M  denotes  the  molecular  weight  of  the  dissolved  substance  \  i.e.
the  lowering  of  the  freezing-point  is  proportional  to  the  molecular  content  of
dissolved  substance.  The  factor  E  is  independent  of  the  particular
substance  dissolved,  but  varies  with  the  solvent  used.  Raoult  called
this  factor  E  the  "  molecular  lowering  of  the  freezing-point  "  of  the  solvent
in  question.  Its  physical  meaning  is  simply  this,  viz.  that  it  furnishes
the  lowering  of  the  freezing-point  observed  on  dissolving  1  g.-mol  of
any  selected  substance  in  100  g.  of  a  solvent,  provided  that  it  is
used  only  in  such  concentrations  that  the  ratio  between  the  mole-
cular content  and  the  freezing-point  remains  strictly  constant,  as  in
dilute  solutions.

Compare  Raoult's  rule  with  equation  (10),  p.  143,

Swt

which  gives  the  relation  between  osmotic  pressure  and  lowering  of
freezing-point  ;  multiply  both  sides  by  V,  i.e.  the  volume  of  solution
that  contains  1  mol.  of  dissolved  substance,  then  the  gas  equation
(13)  gives  at  the  freezing-point  T0

0

Now  SV  is  the  mass  of  solvent  in  which  1  mol.  of  dissolved  sub-
stance is  found;  but  as  there  are  m  grains,  i.e.  —  mols.  for  100  g.
solvent,  we  must  have

m
Hence

lOOMwt

or

t-ET°2  •  m
lOOw M

Equations  (15)  and  (16)  become  identical  when  one  puts

TCT  2

E= °  (17)

lOOw

Thus  Eaoulfs  empirical  molecular  lowering  of  the  freezing  -  point  is
calculated  in  equation  (1  7),  from  the  gas  constant  (R),  the  absolute  melting-
point  (T0),  and  the  heat  of  fusion  (w)  of  the  solvent  (van't  Hoff,  1885).

If  w  is  expressed  in  calories  R  must  be  in the  same  unit,  i.e.
is  1'991  (p.  48). For  water  we  have

w  =  80-3  cal.

152

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK

Hence

1-991x273'
8030

whilst  the  latest  determinations  on  very  dilute  solutions  give  (p.  144)
as  the  most  probable  value

E-18'4.

The  agreement  would  be  precise  if  w  has  been  underestimated  and
should  be  80'7  instead  of  80 '3.

The  following  table  gives  for  a  number  of  solvents  the  molecular
lowering  of  the  freezing-point  as  observed  and  as  calculated  according
to  van't  Hoff: —

Solvent.

E l

observed.

cale.

TO  -273.

2
W.

Water

18-4

18-5

0°

80-3

Nitrogen  dioxide

41

43-47 -  10°

32-37

Formic  acid . . . . 27  '7

28-4

8'5°

55-6

Acetic  acid .... 39

38-8

16-7°

43-2

Stearic  acid .... 44 48

64°

47-6

Laurie  acid . . . . 44 45  '2

43-4°

437

Palmitic  acid . . .

44

55

55°

39-2

Capric  acid ....

47

27°

Phenyl-propionic  acid

88

48-5°

Stearin .....

51

55'6°

...

Ethal

62

46-9°

Ethyl  ene-dibromide  .

118 119

7-9°

13

Chloral  alcoholate

78

46-2°

Benzene .....

49 51

5'5°

30'

Diphenyl  .....

82 84

70-2°

28-5

Diphenyl-methane

67

26°

Naphthalene ....

71

69-4

80°

35-5

Phenol

74

76

39°

25

p-Mono-brom-phenol

107

63°

p-Cresol . . . ...

74

73

34°

26

Thymol

83

85

48-2°

27-5

Anethol .....

62

20-1°

Benzo-phenone  . . .

95

96 48°

21-5

Urethane  .....

50

50 487° 41

Urethylane .... 44

50°

Acetoxime .... 55

59-4°

Azo-benzene ....

82

82

66° ! 27-9

Nitro-benzene ....

707

69-5

5'3° j 22-3

p-Toluidine ....

52

49

42-5° 1 39

Diphenyl-amine

88

88-8

54°

24

N  aphthyl-amine

78

81-2

50-1°

25-6

1  From  the  measurements  of  Raoult,  Ann.  chim., (5)  28.  (6)  11.  ; Beckmann,
Zeitschr.  phys. Chem., 2. 715  ; Eykman, ib. 3. 113  and  203,  4. 497  ; Ramsay,
ib.  5.  222.

2  w,  the  heat  of  fusion,  from  the  measurements  of  Berthelot,  Pettersson,  Eykman,
Battelli,  Bruuer,  and  others. See  especially  Stillmann  and  Swain,  Z.  S.phys.  Chem.,  29.
705  (1899).

CHAP,  v  DILUTE  SOLUTIONS  153

At  first  Raoult  suspected  that  the  relation  between  the  molecular
lowering  of  the  freezing-point  and  the  molecular  weight  of  the  various
solvents  was  a  simple  one,  represented  by  the  equation  E  =  0'62M0.
This  was  not  supported  by  further  observations.  It  was  van't  Hoff
who  first  showed  how  the  value  of  E  could  be  calculated  from  the
melting-point  and  the  heat  of  fusion  of  the  solvent.

The  Law  of  Absorption  of  Henry  and  Dalton.  —  A  simple  law
has  long  been  known  regarding  the  vapour  pressure  of  a  substance  in
solution,  according  to  which  there  is  a  ratio  between  this  vapour
pressure  and  the  concentration.  It  is  usually  formulated  thus  :  gases
dissolve  in  any  selected  solvent  in  the  direct  ratio  of  their  pressure  (Henry's
Law  of  Absorption,  1803).  So  far  as  the  law  was  proven,  as  was  done
chiefly  for  the  solubility  of  the  permanent  gases,  he  established  a
genuine  law  of  nature.  The  law,  of  course,  holds  good  in  a  similar
way  for  dissolved  liquids,  and  thus,  to  take  an  example,  the  partial
pressure  of  alcohol  in  the  vapour  over  its  dilute  water  solution,  is  pro-
portional to  its  concentration  in  water.

In  the  sense  of  Henry's  law  there  must  exist  between  the  vapour
pressure  p,  and  the  osmotic  pressure  P,  of  the  dissolved  substance,  a
ratio  which  can  be  expressed  by  the  equation

dp_dP

if  we  compare  these  with  the  equation  developed  on  p.  145,  viz.,

vdp  -  VdP,
it  follows  that

pv  =  PV,
i.e.  we  again  obtain

PV  -  RT.

Thus  for  all  gases  or  vapours  which  dissolve  in  any  selected  solvent  pro-
portionally to  their  pressure,  i.e.  for  those  which  obey  Henry's  law  of  absorp-
tion, their  osmotic  pressure  is  equal  to  the  corresponding  gas  pressure?-  From
the  —  so  far  as  is  known  —  high  accuracy  of  the  law  of  absorption  it  may
be  concluded  that  the  osmotic  pressure  follows  the  laws  of  gases  with
equal  accuracy.  The  exactness  of  the  law  of  absorption  offers  the
simplest,  and  also  the  most  exact  experimental  proof,  that  the  dissolved
substance  exerts  the  same  pressure  on  a  semi-permeable  partition  that
it  would  exert  on  an  ordinary  partition,  were  it  a  gas  at  the  same
temperature  and  concentration.

As  Daiton  discovered  in  1807,  each  gas  dissolves  in  a  gas  mixture
in  accordance  with  its  own  partial  pressure  ;  and  this  can  only  mean
that  each  of  the  dissolved  gases  exerts  the  same  pressure  that  it  would

1  Van't  Hoft  I.e.

154  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

if  it  were  alone  ;  i.e.  the  same  simple  law  of  summation,  as  found  by
Dalton,  holds  good  for  the  osmotic  pressure  of  a  solution  of  several
substances,  as  for  gases ;  and  therefore  the  total  lowering  of  the  freez-
ing-point occasioned  by  two  dissolved  substances  in  the  same  solution
is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  lowerings  which  each  would  occasion  were  it
alone ;  the  same  holds  good  also  for  the  lowering  of  the  vapour  pres-
sure, and  of  the  solubility,  provided,  of  course,  that  no  chemical  action
occurs  which  would  effect  a  change  in  the  number  of  the  molecules.

The  Nature  of  the  Solvent. — The  question  as  to  how  the
nature  of  the  solvent  influences  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the  dissolved
substance,  is  at  once  settled  by  the  fact,  that,  inasmuch  as  it  is  identical
with  the  gas  pressure,  there  is  no  dependence  at  all  between  the
osmotic  pressure  and  the  nature  of  the  solvent.

A  direct  proof  is  afforded  by  investigation  of  the  partition  of  a
substance  between  two  solvents ;  in  analogy  to  Henry's  law  it  is  found
that  the  concentrations  in  the  two  solvents  are  proportional,  just  as  in
the  partition  between  gas-space  and  solvent ;  thus,  for  example,  if  one
mixes  together  carbon  disulphide,  water,  and  iodine,  then  the  ratio
of  the  concentration  of  the  iodine  in  the  carbon  disulphide,  to  that  in
the  water,  at  a  temperature  of  15°,  is  410,  regardless  of  the  quantity
of  iodine  used.

If  we  introduce  this  relation  into  the  equation  given  on  p.  145,
viz.  V^Pj  =  V2dP2,  then  by  a  method  exactly  similar  to  that  given  in
the  preceding  section,  we  obtain  the  result

PV —  P  V •
1  V  1  ~~ 2 2  >

i.e.  under  the  same  spatial  concentration  the  osmotic  pressure  is  the
same  in  the  two  solutions.  We  must  conclude,  therefore,  that  if  we
could  dissolve  the  same  quantity  of  iodine  in  a  litre  of  water  as  in  a
litre  of  carbon  disulphide,  we  should  obtain  the  same  osmotic  pressure
in  the  two  solutions.1

It  is  of  course  assumed  in  this  that  the  dissolved  substance  has  the
same  molecular  weight  in  the  two  solvents ;  otherwise  the  osmotic
pressure  of  equally  concentrated  solution  would  be  different  (e.g.  if
double  molecules  are  formed  in  one  solvent — as  by  acetic  acid  in
benzene,  whilst  in  another,  such  as  water,  the  molecular  weight  is
normal).  If  the  molecular  weight  is  not  the  same,  the  ratio  of  parti-
tion is  not  constant  (Book  III.  chap.  iii.).

The  earliest  experiments  on  partition  between  two  solvents  are
due  to  Berthelot  and  Jungfleisch  (Ann.  chim.  phys.  (4),  26.  396,  1872) ;
as  they  investigated  many  substances  that  did  not  satisfy  the  above
condition,  Berthelot  concluded  that  the  partition  coefficients  vary  with
concentration  even  in  dilute  solution.  It  was  shown  by  the  present

1  Nernst,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Cheni.,  8.  16  (1891).

CHAP,  v  DILUTE  SOLUTIONS  155

writer  in  1891  that  constancy  of  the  partition  coefficient  is  associated
with  similarity  of  molecular  condition  of  the  dissolved  substance  in
the  two  solvents  (Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  8.  110,  1891).

Since  for  a  given  concentration,  osmotic  pressure  is  independent
of  the  nature  of  the  solvent,  it  follows  that  it  is  not  altered  by  com-
pression of  the  solvent,  provided  that  no  change  of  molecular  state  is
produced.  This  result  may  be  easily  proved  thermodynamically.

Molecular  State  of  Bodies  in  Solution. — The  results  of  the
preceding  sections  may  be  summarised  as  an  extensive  material  for
proving  the  law  of  osmotic  pressure  :  the  law,  that  is,  that  the  osmotic
pressure  is  equal  to  the  gas  pressure  which  could  be  observed  mano-
metrically  if  the  solvent  were  removed  and  the  dissolved  substance
left  in  gaseous  form  occupying  the  same  space.

From  this  follows  a  practical  application  of  the  methods  for
measuring  osmotic  pressures  that  is  of  great  importance.  If  the
osmotic  pressure  of  a  substance — not  too  concentrated — in  any  solvent
is  measured,  the  corresponding  gas  pressure  is  known,  and  all  the  data
are  at  hand  for  determining  the  vapour  density,  and  so  by  Avogadro's
law  the  molecular  weight.  We  have  thus  methods  of  finding  the
molecular  weight  of  substances  whose  vapour  density  it  is  difficult  or
impossible  to  measure,  because  they  only  evaporate  at  high  temperatures
or  not  at  all  without  dissociation.  Moreover,  it  is  to  the  advantage
of  these  methods,  that  with  a  proper  choice  of  solvent  the  osmotic
pressure  is  usually  more  convenient  to  measure  in  this  way  than  the
vapour  density.

It  must  be  observed,  however,  that  determination  of  molecular
weight  by  osmotic  pressure  is  purely  empirical.  It  is  only  a  result
of  experience  that  the  osmotic  pressure  is  equal  to  the  pressure  that
the  dissolved  substance  would  exert  as  a  gas  in  the  same  space  if  the
solvent  were  removed.  It  is,  moreover,  indifferent  whether  the  experi-
ment can  be  realised  or  not,  i.e.  whether  the  dissolved  substance  is
capable  of  existing  as  a  gas  under  the  given  conditions ;  it  is  true
that  we  can  reckon  the  molecular  weight  of  any  chemically  well-defined
material  by  means  of  Avogadro's  law  from  the  gas  pressure,  or  in-
directly by  the  gas  pressure  corresponding  to  the  observed  osmotic
pressure.  But  the  calculation  has  no  other  basis  than  the  equality
that  is  often  observed  between  gas  and  osmotic  pressure ;  no  assump-
tion can  be  made  beforehand  as  to  the  molecular  state  of  the  substance
in  solution.

The  remarkable  relation  between  osmotic  pressure  and  molecular
weight  demands,  however,  a  theoretical  explanation ;  and  the  explana-
tion evidently  must  turn  on  the  molecular  state  of  the  substance  in
solution.  Hypothesis  must  of  course  come  in  here,  because  everything
about  the  molecular  state  is  hypothetical,  and  rests  on  the  hypothetical
assumption  of  a  discrete  arrangement  of  matter  in  space.  The  choice

156  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

met  with  in  establishing  a  suitable  hypothesis  is  not  often  more  easily
made,  however,  than  in  this  case.

The  knowledge  that  dissolved  substances  follow  the  laws  of  gases
leads  by  analogy  to  the  conclusion  that  the  molecular  state  of  a  dissolved
substance  is  like  that  of  a  gas ;  or  in  other  words,  that  Avogadro's  law
applies  to  the  former.  Thus  we  arrive  at  the  following  hypothesis  : —

Is-osmotic  solutions  contain  the  same  number  of  molecules  of  dissolved
substance  in  a  given  volume,  at  a  given  temperature,  and  the  number  is  the
same  as  in  an  equal  volume  of  a  perfect  gas  at  the  same  temperature  and
pressure  (van't  Hoff).

The  extraordinary  importance  of  this  extension  of  Avogadro's  law
is  obvious  ;  as  to  its  trustworthiness,  this  is  rendered  the  more  probable
by  the  simplicity  of  its  deduction  by  analogical  reasoning.  But  more
important  than  the  probability  of  a  hypothesis  is  its  fruitfulness,  for
its  existence  is  only  justified  by  leading  to  new  knowledge  confirmed
by  experience.  We  shall  therefore  accept  van't  Hoff's  extension
of  Avogadro's  law  and  use  it,  especially  in  Book  II. ,  for  further
conclusions.

It  is  often  stated  that  experiment  shows  the  osmotic  pressure  to
follow  the  laws  of  gases,  namely,  those  of  Boyle,  Gay-Lussac,  and
Avogadro  ;  this  is  an  error  in  principle  and  must  be  especially  guarded
against.  Only  the  two  first  are  the  expression  of  experimental  facts.
Avogadro's  rule  is  equally  hypothetical  for  solutions  and  gases,  and
one  can  hardly  see  how  this  can  be  altered  by  experimental  facts.

Osmotic  Pressure  and  Hydro-diffusion. — Reference  has  already
been  made  regarding  the  well-known  phenomenon  that  substances  in
solution,  when  left  to  themselves,  wander  from  places  of  a  higher  to
those  of  a  lower  concentration,  and  it  should  be  emphasised  here  anew
that  this  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  external  work  can  be  developed
by  diluting  a  solution.  The  osmotic  pressure,  which  we  have  come  to
regard  as  a  most  convenient  help  in  calculation  to  express  the  value  of
this  work  numerically,  must  also  be  regarded  as  exerting  a  great  in-
fluence in  the  phenomenon  just  described  ;  this  is  generally  known  as
"hydro-diffusion"  or  simply  as  "diffusion" ;  it  plays  a  very  important
rdle  in  many  processes  of  sub-organic  structures  in  nature,  but  especially
in  plant  and  animal  organisms.

This  was  first  discovered  in  its  general  signification  by  Parrot
(1815),  but  was  first  applied  by  Graham1  in  the  thorough  study  of  the
subject,  considering  especially  water  solutions.  It  was  shown  that  the
coefficient  of  diffusion  varies  with  the  nature  of  the  substance  dis-
solved, and  in  all  cases  increases  strongly  with  increasing  temperature.
Later  investigations  showed  that  a  simple  law  may  be  formulated  for
the  process  of  diffusion,  which  is  completely  analogous  to  that  advanced
by  Fourier  for  the  conduction  of  heat.  This  states  that  the  mechanical

1  Lieb.  Ann.,  77.  56  and  129  (1851)  ; 80.  197  (1851).

CHAP.  V  DILUTE  SOLUTIONS  157

force  which  drives  the  dissolved  substances  from  places  of  higher  to
those  of  a  lower  temperature,  and  also  that  the  velocity  with  which
the  dissolved  substance  wanders  in  the  solvent,  are  proportional  to
the  degree  of  concentration.  It  is  this  fundamental  law  which  makes
possible  a  complete  mathematical  description  of  the  process  of  diffusion,
as  was  first  suspected  by  Berthollet,1  but  was  later  and  independently
restated  by  Fick,2  who  subjected  it  to  a  thorough  theoretical  and  ex-
perimental proof.  In  the  sense  of  the  preceding  law,  we  may  express
by  the  following  equation,  the  quantity  of  salt  dS,  which  passes  in  the
time  dz,  through  a  diffusion  cylinder  having  the  cross-section  q,  and
when  c  is  the  concentration  of  the  whole  cross-section  at  the  point  x,
and  c  +  dc  at  the  point  x  +  dx  ;  thus

D  denotes  a  constant  peculiar  to  the  particular  substance  dissolved,  and
called  the  "  diffusion  coefficient"  Fick's  law  has  nothing  to  say  con-
cerning the  nature  of  the  mechanical  force  :  it  is  simply  the  "  nature
of  the  case."  Moreover,  later  and  thorough  investigations  of  this  have
led  to  the  result3  that  it  can  claim  to  hold  good  only  approximately,
since  the  coefficient  of  diffusion  in  general  varies  more  or  less  with  the
concentration.

The  author4  has  sought  to  develop  the  theory  of  the  phenomena  of
diffusion,  on  the  basis  of  the  modern  theory  of  solution.  Thus,  for
example,  we  will  consider  the  diffusion  of  cane  sugar  in  water  :  if  we
pour  a  layer  of  pure  water  over  a  solution  of  carie  sugar,  the  dissolved
sugar  at  once  begins  to  pass  from  points  of  higher  to  those  of  lower
concentration,  and  this  process  does  not  cease  till  the  differences  of
concentration  are  completely  equalised.  This  obviously  concerns  the
action  of  the  same  expansive  force  which  we  have  learned  to  call
the  osmotic  pressure  ;  the  nature  of  process  is  completely  analogous  to
the  equalisation  of  differences  in  density,  developed  by  any  cause  what-
ever, in  gases  ;  and,  moreover,  under  corresponding  conditions  the  active
forces  are  of  the  same  magnitude.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  equalisa-
tion of  density  comes  about  very  quickly  in  gases,  while  the  substances
dissolved  in  a  liquid  move  very  slowly  and  lazily.  The  reason  for  this
is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  gas  molecules  in  their  movement  meet
with  only  very  slight  resistant  friction,  which,  however,  in  the  case  of
liquids  is  enormous.

The  efficiency  of  the  law  of  Fick  is  shown  by  the  fact,  that  the
mechanical  force  occasioned  %  differences  of  pressure,  is  proportional  to  the
11  head"  of  the  concentration.  But  since  we  can  also  calculate  the  absolute

1  Essai  de  statique  chimique. Paris,  1803. Part  I.  chap.  iv.

2  Pogg.  Ann.,  94.  59  (1855).

3  See  especially  Scheffer,  Zeitschr.  phys.  C/iem.,  2.  390  (1888).

4  Nernst,  Zeitschr.  phys.  Chem.,  2.  613  (1888).

158

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK I

value  of  the  mechanical  force,  from  the  law  of  osmotic  pressure,  and
since  we  can  measure  directly  the  velocity  of  diffusion,  it  is  possible  to
calculate  on  the  absolute  scale  the  resistant  friction  experienced  by  the
dissolved  substance  in  its  movement  through  the  solvent.  By  carrying
out  the  corresponding  calculation  for  the  resistant  friction  K,  we  obtain
the  formula

1  '99
K  =  -=—  x  109(1  +  0-00367  t)  ;

where  D  denotes  the  coefficient  of  diffusion  measured  for  the  tempera-
ture t.  Thus,  for  example,  K  for  cane  sugar  at  18°  is  calculated  to  be
4'7  x  109  kg.  in  weight;  i.e.  it  requires  this  enormous  force  to  drive
1  g.-mol  of  cane  sugar  ( =  342  g.)  through  the  solvent  (water)  with  a
velocity  of  1  cm.  per  second  :  this  enormous  value  finds  its  explanation
in  the  smallness  of  the  molecules.

Osmosis  by  Isothermal  Distillation

A  very  interesting  experiment  made  by  Magnus  (1827)  has  recently
been  brought  into  notice  again  by  Askenasy,1  who  carried  it  out  in  the
following  form.  A  glass  tube  is  widened  to  a  funnel  at  one  end  and
closed  there  by  a  layer  of  gypsum ;  it  is  filled  full  of  water  and  placed
with  the  gypsum  plate  uppermost  and  its  lower  end  dipping  in  a  dish
of  mercury.  The  water  used  may  conveniently  be  saturated  with
gypsum  to  avoid  solution  of  the  plate.  The  water  evaporates  slowly
through  the  layer  of  gypsum — the  process  can  be  hastened  by  leading
dry  air  over  the  plate.  As  the  evaporation  proceeds  the  mercury  rises
in  the  tube  and  may  reach  a  height  considerably
exceeding  that  of  the  barometer  at  the  time.

In  a  recorded  experiment  the  mercury  rose  in
fifteen  hours  to  89*3  cms.,  the  barometer  being  at
75 '3  ;  it  then  touched  the  gypsum  layer  and  so
closed  the  experiment.  The  diameter  of  the  tube
was  3 '3  mm.  and  evaporation  took  place  in  free
air.  Usually  the  end  of  the  experiment  was  caused
by  formation  of  an  air  bubble  under  the  gypsum,
which  consequently  dried ;  then  the  mercury
gradually  fell  again.

Equilibrium  was  apparently  not  reached  in  these
experiments  :  a  simple  thermodynamic  argument
will  show  what  the  equilibrium  should  be.  Clearly
evaporation  will  go  on  till  it  is  stopped  by  the  ten-
sion of  the  mercury  column,  and  the  tension  will  be
greater  the  drier  the  air  over  the  gypsum  layer.
For  definiteness  consider  the  following  arrangement  (Fig.  16):—

1  E.  Askenasy,  "Beitrage  zur  Erklarung  des  Saftsteigens,"  Verhandl.  des  naturh.  med.
Vereins  zu  Heidelberg,  5.  (1896).

Fig.  16.

CHAP.  V  DILUTE  SOLUTIONS  159

At  a  is  a  thin  layer  of  pure  water,  under  it  mercury,  over  it  a  thin
partition  which  has  the  property  of  being  impermeable  for  gaseous,
but  permeable  for  liquid  water.  This  property  is  possessed  by
Askenasy's  moist  gypsum  through  the  pores  of  which  water  passes
easily  through,  it  is  air-tight  even  for  moderately  high  pressures.1
Let  the  pressure  above  the  gypsum  be  p',  which  may  be  that  of  a
solution  bb  ;  the  vapour  pressure  of  the  pure  solvent  being  p.  To
determine  equilibrium  apply  the  law  of  p,  that  at  constant  tempera-
ture variations  in  the  neighbourhood  of  equilibrium  must  be  reversible.
If  dx  mols  of  water  are  distilled  from  the  funnel  to  the  solution,

the  system  loses  free  energy  to  the  extent  dxRT  In  —  ,  ;  at  the  same  time
mercury  is  raised  through  the  height  H  and  so  free  (potential)  energy
is  stored  up  to  the  extent  H^-^dx,  where  g  is  the  acceleration  of
gravity,  M  the  molecular  weight  of  the  solvent,  S  its  density,  and  that

of  mercury,  so  that :  =-  dx  is  the  mass  of  mercury  lifted. Since  the

o

process  is  reversible,  i.e.  involves  no  loss  in  power  to  do  work  of  the
system  (free  energy),  these  quantities  of  work  must  be  equal,  or

p
or  the  pressure  P  of  the  mercury  column  is

in  other  words,  it  is  simply  equal  to  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the  solution
inbb  (p.  139).2

Conversely,  measurements  of  the  rise  in  the  tube  —  which,  it  is  seen
is  quite  large  —  would  be  a  means  of  determining  osmotic  pressure,  or
lowering  of  vapour  pressure.

Osmotic  Pressure  in  Mixture.  —  If  for  1  mol  of  dissolved
substance  there  are  v  mols  of  a  simple  solvent  then  according  to  p.  149r
we  have

-  =  ln^,  or  l  =  vln£>  (1)

P  P

where  p  is  the  vapour  pressure  of  the  solvent,  p'  that  of  the  solution.
If  a  substance  occurs  in  a  mixture  of  several  solvents,  a  formula
may  be  found  on the  very  reasonable  assumption  that  the  osmotic

1  The  same  property  would  be  possessed  by  any  solid  partition  that  can  dissolve
water.

2  An  elementary  proof  analogous  to  that of  p.  138,  is  given  by  Reingauum, Wied.
Ann.,  59.  764  (1896).

160  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

pressure  of  a  substance  (in  normal  molecular  state)  being  independent
of  the  solvent,  follows  the  gaseous  laws  in  mixed  solvents  also.  It
may  be  shown  thermodynamically  that  if  there  be  vv  v2  mols.  of  the
solvents  containing  1  mol.  of  dissolved  substances,  p1?  p2  their  vapour
pressures,  p\,  p'2  the  same  after  addition  of  the  dissolved  substance  1

Formula  (3)  which  is  a  generalisation  of  the  Raoult-van't  Hoff
formula  (1)  was  satisfactorily  verified  by  Roloff,2  so  one  may  conclude
that  the  osmotic  pressure  follows  the  gas  laws  in  mixtures  also.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Roloff  found  some  of  the  terms  in
the  summand  (2)  may  be  negative.  Thus  when  KC1  is  dissolved  in  a
mixture  of  water  and  acetic  acid  the  vapour  pressure  of  the  acid  is
raised;  P2/>P2>  and  consequently  the  corresponding  logarithm  is
negative.

It  is  to  be  observed  that  so  far  the  considerations  of  this  chapter
relate  only  to  very  dilute  solutions  ;  we  will  now  deal  with  the
problem  of  calculating  the  osmotic  pressure  of  concentrated  solutions.

Osmotic  Pressure  at  High  Concentrations

The  osmotic  pressure  reaches  considerable  amounts  even  for
moderate  concentrations  ;  a  solution  of  1  mol  (e.g.  46  grams  of  alcohol)
in  a  litre  gives  22'4  atmospheres  at  the  freezing-point,  according  to
the  laws  of  gases  (p.  38).  As  there  is  no  prospect  of  making  semi-
permeable  partitions  capable  of  standing  this  or  higher  pressures,  we
are  driven  to  indirect  means  of  measurement  for  the  osmotic  pressure
of  concentrated  solutions.

The  calculation  of  this  quantity  gives  the  work  needed  to  separate
a  mixture  —  as  a  concentrated  solution  may  be  called  —  a  problem
already  considered  in  a  general  way  on  p.  114.  The  following  calcula-
tions form  therefore  a  special  application  of  the  principles  developed
there,  but  with  the  aid  of  the  experience  gained  of  a  special  class  of
mixtures,  viz.  dilute  solutions.

It  was  found  on  p.  139,  equation  (4),  by  means  of  isothermal
distillation,  that

or

P^BTto^

b  p

in  the  latter  form  the  left-hand  side  stands  for  the  osmotic  work,  the  right-
1  Nernst,  Z.  S.  phys.  Cfiem.,  11.  1  (1893).  2  Ibid.,  17.

CHAP.  V  DILUTE  SOLUTIONS  161

hand  that  done  in  isothermal  distillation  ;  equality  of  the  two  follows,
in  all  cases,  from  the  second  law  as  expressed  in  equation  (e)  of  p.  23.

Now  the  expression  for  the  work  in  isothermal  distillation  holds
good  for  any  range  of  concentration,  provided  only  the  vapour  of  the
solvent  follows  the  laws  of  gases  and  the  difference  between  the
specific  volumes  of  the  solution  and  solvent  can  be  neglected  by  com-
parison with  that  of  the  saturated  vapour.  The  latter  condition  is
practically  always  satisfied,  and  if  the  former  is  not,  a  correction  can
easily  be  applied  to  the  calculation  if  the  characteristic  equation  of
the  vapour  is  known.

The  osmotic  work,  on  the  other  hand,  is  equal  to  the  osmotic
pressure  multiplied  by  the  volume  through  which  the  semi-permeable
piston  must  be  lowered  to  press  out  1  mol  of  solvent ;  this  volume
however  is  not  necessarily  equal  to  that  of  the  expelled  solvent,  as  is
the  case  in  dilute  solutions.  That  is  only  the  case  when  on  adding  a
small  amount  of  solvent  to  the  mixture  the  volume  of  the  latter  is
increased  by  the  volume  of  the  solvent  added,  i.e.  if  the  mixture
occurs  without  contraction  or  expansion.  Still  this  assumption  is
usually  permissible  even  for  strong  solutions.

E.g.  if  2  grams  of  water  are  added  to  100  g.  of  a  50  per  cent  sugar

50
solution  we  get  a — —  =  49 '02  per  cent  solution;  the  density  of  the

former  at  17-5°  is  1-2320  S,  of  the  latter  1-2275  S  where  S  is  the
density  of  water  at  the  same  temperature.  The  change  of  volume  is
therefore

100  +  2  _ 100 _  1-987
1-2275  S  ~  1-2329  S  -  ~S~'
2
whilst  -  is  what  it  would  be  if  there  were  no  contraction. Calculation

of  a  number  of  such  cases  shows  that  equation  (3),  p.  139,

dv  =  ~»dx,

may  be  applied  even  to  20  to  30  per  cent  solutions  with  an  error  of  less
than  1  per  cent.  Moreover,  the  circumstance  that  a  compressed  solu-
tion (inside  the  osmotic  cell)  is  mixed  with  an  uncompressed  solvent,
matters  little,  for  the  compressibility  of  liquids  is  always  minute.  In
what  follows  we  shall,  to  avoid  complication,  assume  the  liquid  to  be
incompressible,  though  that  is  of  course  not  the  case.

If  II  be  the  osmotic  work  for  a  solution  of  any  concentration,  we
have

M

n  =  Pg(i  +  <) .  (i)

in  which  e  is  the  relative  increase  in  volume  due  to  mixture  of  a  mol

M

162  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

of  solvent  with  a  large  quantity  of  solution  (under  pressure  P) — con-
sequently a  mostly  negligible  amount.  Further

II  =  RTln?-, .  . (2)

P

with  the  restrictions  already  mentioned,  and  which  are  of  no  practical
consequence.

According  to  the  second  law  (equation  e,  p.  23)

n-q-ig .... 0)

in  which  q  is  the  heat  evolved  on  adding  a  mol  of  solvent  to  a  large
quantity  of  solution.  From  (2)  and  (3)  follows  the  relation  already
given  on  p.  118,

jf-  (4)

The  meaning  of  q  as _ has been  referred  to. If  q  =  0  In  — >  is

ox  p

independent  of  T,  so  that  according  to  (2)  II  is  proportional  to  T  even
for  concentrated  solutions.

The  osmotic  work  may  also  be  calculated  from  the  freezing-point
of  strong  solutions  without  much  difficulty.

To  integrate  equation  8,  p.  142,  more  exactly,  set,  according
to  p.  142,

\ \ /P P \T  /^\

A  =  AQ  —  (\-J-i  —  vp/A  .  .  .  \v)

and  the  heat  of  sublimation

<r  =  a-0-(C2-CI,)T  (6)

where  Cv  C2  are  the  molecular  heats  of  the  liquid  and  solid  solvent.
The  integrals  become

ln  p  =  "  Sr  ~  ~il~£  ln  T  +  KI  (7)

To  determine  the  integration  constants  KI}  K.,  we  have  (p.  142)  that
atT0

P'  =  P  =  Po,
and  therefore

DILUTE  SOLUTIONS  163

lnPo'  =  ~-  -"PlnTo  +  K8 .  (10)

(7)  -(8)  -(9)  +  (10)  gives

lnp_-o-A0n n  +  c1-o2  TO

np'~~^~  LT~TOJ+  ~1T~  nT

If  we  put  t  =  T0  -  T  and  develop  in  series

T  t\ t t2 t3

retaining  only  three  terms  (11)  becomes

n
3J (

T0T  2 T  3 T3

Now

where  p  is  the  heat  of  fusion  at  the  melting-point  of  the  solution  ;
hence  (12)  becomes

>_ Ol-c2  *.-c£gt.£]  a  ,

2 T2+ 3 T3J

and the  osmotic  work  at  temperature  T, the  freezing-point of  the
solution  is

n-RTinP-tf^ ^-c.t c.-c^n
P' LT; ^2"T+~y~~T2J

If  we  require  the  osmotic  work,  not  at  the  variable  freezing-point  of
the  solution,  but  always  at  the  same  temperature,  say  the  freezing-
point  of  the  pure  solvent  T0,  we  must  integrate  equation  (4)  and  get

In  2-,  =  ^,  +  const  (15)

for  as  we  are only  concerned  with  a  small correction, q may  be
regarded  as  constant  with  sufficient  accuracy.
Then  for  T0  (15)  becomes

(13)  -(15)  +  (16)  gives

-
pVTo  ~  K T0T  2 T2 3 T3 '

and  the  osmotic  work  at  temperature  T0

164

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK I

p-q

T2

']

This  formula  was  obtained  by  Dieterici  (Wied.  Ann.,  52.  263,
1894)  who  also  showed  by  examples  that  (2)  and  (17)  give  values
for  the  osmotic  work  in  satisfactory  agreement.  The  formula  was  also
given  independently  by  Th.  Ewan  (Z.  S.  Phys.  Chem.,  14.  409,  1894)
who  in  integrating  (4)  paid  attention  to  the  variation  of  q  with
temperature ;  the  correction  term  thus  obtained  however — involving
the  specific  heats  of  solution  and  solvent — is  almost  always  negligible.
To  show  the  usefulness  of  equation  (17)  we  will  take  the  case  of  some
potassium  chloride  solutions,  whose  vapour  pressures  (Dieterici,  WwA.
Ann.,  42.  513,  1891  ;  50.  47,  1893)  and  freezing-points  (Roloff,  Z.  S.
Phys.  Chem.,  18.  572,  1895)  have  been  accurately  measured.  In  the
following  table  m  signifies  the  number  of  grams  to  100  grams  solvent,
t  the  lowering  of  freezing-point,  q  the  heat  of  dilution,  p'  the  vapour
pressure  of  the  solution  at  0° ;  p  that  of  pure  water  at  the  same
temperature  is  4 '6 20  mm.  :—

111

t

g

P'

Ho

calc.j

calc.2

0

0

0

4-620

3-72

1-667

-1-63

4-546

8-80

8-75

7-45

3-284

-5-96

4-472

17-55

17-67

14-90

6-53

-19-5

4-326

35-18

35-71

22-35

9-69

-34-3

4-190

52-64

53-12

Under  calc.j_  are  given  the  values  derived  from  equation  (17)
assuming  that

T0  =  273 p  =  18  x  80-3  -  1445 C2  -  C:  =  18  x  0'475  -  8'55.
Under  calc.2  are  the  values  derived  from  equation  (2)  assuming  that

R=  1-991.

In  both  cases  we  obtain  the  osmotic  work  in  ordinary  calories ;  the
agreement  is  very  satisfactory  and  would  be  made  still  better  by
taking  the  heat  of  fusion  of  ice  —  which  unfortunately  is  still
uncertain — as  80'7  instead  of  80'3  (see  p.  152),

Vapour  Pressure  of  Concentrated  Solutions. — The  thermo-
dynamic  treatment  of  concentrated  aqueous  solutions  is  simple — as
Dolezalek *  lately  showed — if  we  make  use  of  the  rule,  that  seems  to
be  pretty  generally  true,  that  the  logarithm  of  the  vapour  pressure  p

1 Verh.  d.  Deutsch.  phys.  Ges.,  5.  4  (1903).

CHAP. V

DILUTE  SOLUTIONS

165

is  approximately  a  linear  function  of  the  number  x  of  salt  mols  per
mol  of  water,  i.e.

dx

where  a  is  a  characteristic  constant  for  the  dissolved  substance.
Now  (p.  119)

dlnp dlnP
dx  dx

(i)

(2)

where  p  is  the  vapour  pressure  of  water  and  P  that  of  the  dissolved
substance. From  this  and  (1)  we  have

dlnP
x — - — -  =  a,

or  integrated,

In  P  =  a  In  x  +  const.

Thus  the  vapour  pressure  of  HC1  over  concentrated  solutions  of
hydrochloric  acid  is  satisfactorily  given  over  a  wide  range  by  the
expression

Iog10  P  =  7'9  Iog10  x  4-  6-6421

as  is  shown  by  the  following  table  : —

X

P

beob.

her.

0-288

277

230

0-257

112

95

0-226

31-5

34

0-198

11-2

12

0-173

4-1

4-1

0-146

0-96

1-1

0-122

0-52

0-6

For  the  work  required  to  remove  1 mol  of  dissolved  substance
from  solution  I.  to  solution  II.  we  have  (p.  117)

^1-aRTln-1

(3)

for  the  work  required  to  remove  1  mol  of  water  from  I.  to  II.  we
have  from  (1)

t-v  V 2  I/  \ /

Equation  (1)  is  only  approximate. The  simplicity  of  equations

166

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  I

(3)  and  (4)  is  noticeable,  for  they  contain  only  a  constant  characteristic
of  the  dissolved  substance. Dolezalek  gives  the  following  table  : —

a-

a

a

H2S04 .
HC1  . .

8-4
7'9

KJ . .
KBr  . .

2-5
1'8

NaNO.,
LiBr  .'

1-6

5'8

H3P04

3-0

KC1 . .

1-8

LiCl  .

4'6

NaOH

7-4

KN08 -

1-2

NH4Br

2-1

KOH

K2C03

3'9

7'1

NaJ . .
NaBr .

4-1
3'5

NH4C1
ZnCl, . .

17
8-4

KF !

4-8

NaCl. .

2-8

C.H803 . .

1-01

Ideal  Concentrated  Solutions. — It  is  natural  to  compare  the
change  in  total  with  that  in  free  energy,  or  in  other  words,  the  heat
of  reaction  with  the  osmotic  work,  in  concentrated  solutions.

If  a  mol  of  water  be  taken  from  solution  I.  to  II.  then  the  heat
evolved  is

3Q(n)\  /0Q(n)\

/n^'l  an  yn=111

if  there  are  nx  mols.  of  water  to  one  of  salt  in  solution  I.  and  n2  in  II.
The  osmotic  work  according  to  equation  (2),  p.  165,  is

H  =  KT  In  &

(2)

where  pp  p.2  are  the  vapour  pressures  of  the  two  solutions.

Comparison  shows  that  there  are  concentrated  solutions  for  which
these  two  quantities  differ  very  little  from  each  other,  and  as  we  shall
see,  such  solutions  have  a  remarkably  simple  behaviour,  it  is  con-
venient to  describe  them  as  "  ideal  concentrated  solutions." l

For  example,  take  solutions  of  sulphuric  acid  containing  29 '2  mols
and  4'7 6  mols  of  H20  for  one  of  H2S04.  The  heat  of  dilution  can
be  found  from  the  equation  of  p.  11 4.

17,860n 8Q(n)= 32,150
^n'  "  n  +  1  -8  ' 8n ~  (n  +  1  -8)2
Hence  for  (1)  we  get

and  for  (2)

747-0 -33-5  =  713-5  cal.

A  «O  Q  A

11=  1-991  x  273  In— —  =  690-5  cal.,

taking  the  vapour  pressures  (at  0°)  from  Dieterici ; 2  these  numbers
agree  within  the  limits  of  error  of  measurement.

1  W.  Nernst,  Wied.  Ann.,  53.  57  (1894).

2  Wied.  Ann.,  50.  47  (1893)

CHAP. V

DILUTE  SOLUTIONS

167

In  the  following  table  the  calculation  is  made  for  a  number  of
solutions : —

n.

P-

I2521ogio?l

P2

3Qa°'

/3Q(n)  \ /dQ(n)  \

91-6
29-2
14-66
9-93

5-89
4-76
2-51

4-620
4-535
4-284
3-664
2-952
1-679
1-206
0-164

10-1

31-0

85-2
117-6
307-1
180-6
1084-0

0
3-96
33-48
118-6
235-5
544-0
746-0
1728-0

3-96
29-5
85-1
116-9
308-5
202-0
982-0

i

In  the  third  column  is  the  osmotic  work,  in  the  last  the  corre-
sponding heat  of  dilution,  both  quantities  relating  to  the  pair  of
solutions  between  which  they  are  placed.  The  comparison  shows
that  for  n  =  9T6  even  the  region  of  ideal  concentrated  solutions  is
reached  ;  the  agreement  between  that  point  and  n  =  2 -51  is  striking —
the  deviations  are  so  irregular  that  they  probably  are  due  for  the
greater  part  to  error  of  measurement.1

Just  as  in  ideal  dilute  solutions  the  lowering  of  vapour  pressure
and  change  of  boiling-  and  freezing-points  can  be  calculated  from  the
osmotic  pressure,  and  consequently  also  from  the  rise  in  boiling-point
or  fall  in  freezing-point,  so  here  in  ideal  concentrated  solutions  the  same
things  can  be  deduced  from  the  heat  of  dilution.  The  relations  are
simple  in  both  limiting  cases  because  in  the  fundamental  equation

A-U  =  T

dA
dT

one of the terms vanishes — in ideal dilute solutions  'U in  ideal
dA

concentrated  solutions

dT

If  now  the  identical  equations
dA

dT

=  0  and  A  =  U

are  to  hold  not  merely  at  a  singular  point  but  over  a  considerable
range  of  temperature  we  must  also  have

dT

1  The  new  numbers  of  Dieterici  agree  a  good  deal  better  than  the  earlier  ones  of
Regnault  used  in  the  above  calculation.

168  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  I

i.e.  the  heat  of dilution  of  an ideal concentrated solution is inde-
pendent of  temperature.
Thus

H2S04 .  4H20  +  5H20  -  H2S04  .  9H,0

gives  2559  cal.  ;  the  thermal  capacity  before  mixture  is  according  to

Thomsen

H2S04  +  4H20 .... 92-7
5H20 90

1827  cal.
and  after

H2S04.  9H20  182-0  cal.

The  difference  (0'7  cal.)  is  according  to  p.  8  the  change  of  heat
of  dilution  per  degree  of  temperature;  so  the  heat  of  dilution  2550
cals.  varies  only  3  parts  in  10,000  per  degree.

The  Extent  of  the  Domain  of  the  Laws  of  Solutions. — The

question  now  arises  whether  the  laws  of  osmotic  pressure,  which  have
been  developed  in  part  directly,  and  in  part  have  been  developed  on
the  basis  of  thermodynamic  considerations,  hold  good  for  all  cases
strictly  and  without  exception.  Although  both  the  direct  and  the
indirect  measurements  of  osmotic  pressure  need  improvement  in  point
of  exactness,  yet  it  may  be  assumed  with  considerable  probability
that  the  law  holds  good  only  approximately,  and  that  it  constantly
loses  its  exactness  with  the  increasing  concentration  of  the  substance
dissolved.  The  analogy  with  the  laws  of  gases  holds  good  also  in  this
case,  for  it  is  noticeable  that,  according  to  experiments  up  to  date,  the
osmotic  pressure  of  concentrated  solutions,  like  the  pressure  of  strongly
compressed  gases,  increases  more  rapidly  than  it  should  according
to  the  Boyle-Mariotte  law.

Solid  Solutions. — We  have  already  seen  (p.  120)  that  the  aggre-
gates produced  by  mutual  molecular  interpenetration,  existing  in  the
solid  state,  and  concisely  designated  "  isomorphous  "  mixtures,  can  be
compared  with  liquid  mixtures  in  many  respects.  The  supposition  is
thus  at  once  forced  upon  us,  that  the  behaviour  of  a  solid  mixture,  like
that  of  a  liquid  mixture,  would  be  very  simple  in  the  case  where  one
of  its  components  is  present  in  great  excess,  i.e.  where  we  are  con-
sidering a  "  dilute  solid  solution"

Experiment  shows  that  this  supposition  is  fulfilled.  At  least  van't
Hoff,1  to  whom  we  are  indebted  not  only  for  the  theory  of  solid  solu-
tions, but  also,  on  the  whole,  for  its  introduction  into  science,  has
made  it  appear  in  the  highest  degree  probable  that  we  may  venture  to

1  Zeitschr.  phys.  Ohem.,  5.  322  (1890).

CHAP,  v  DILUTE  SOLUTIONS

speak  of  the  osmotic  pressure  of  substances  existing  in  solid  solution,  as
being  analogous  to  that  of  the  liquid  solution,  and  as  obeying  the  same
laws.

To  be  sure  there  is  no  opportunity  to  measure  this  directly  by
means  of  a  semi-permeable  partition,  since  the  chance  of  its  realisation
in  a  solidified  system  is  as  good  as  impossible ;  but  it  is  to  be  hoped
that  we  may  obtain  measurements  of  these  enormous  pressures  by
indirect  methods.  Indeed,  the  property  of  substances  dissolved  in
solidified  systems,  of  spreading  through  the  solid  by  diffusion,  certainly
speaks  clearly  and  beyond  all  doubt  in  favour  of  the  existence  of  an
inherent  expansive  force,  which  can  be  regarded  as  comparable  to  the
osmotic  pressure.

Various  facts  point  to  diffusion  in  solids.  Hydrogen  dissolved  in
platinum  and  palladium  gradually  spreads  through  the  whole  metal,
as  has  long  been  known.  Bellati  and  Lussana1  observed  a  clear
instance  in  the  easy  passage  of  nascent  hydrogen  through  iron  at
ordinary  temperatures,  with  various  experimental  arrangements.  E.g.,
a  barometer  was  closed  at  the  top  by  an  iron  plate,  and  by  cementing
a  glass  ring  on  this,  an  electrolytic  cell  was  made  in  which  hydrogen
was  generated  at  the  iron  plate ;  the  mercury  at  once  fell  by  diffusion
of  the  hydrogen  through  the  plate  into  the  barometric  vacuum.
Carbon  finds  its  way  into  hot  iron,  and  can  even  pass  through  a
porcelain  crucible.  Further,  Koberts- Austen2  observed  that  gold
diffuses  through  lead  at  251°  (75°  below  the  melting-point  of  the
latter),  and  even  to  a  perceptible  extent  at  atmospheric  temperature  in
the  course  of  several  years.  According  to  experiments  by  Spring
(1886),  solid  barium  sulphate  and  sodium-carbonate  react  to  the  extent
of  reaching  a  state  of  equilibrium,  which  appears  hardly  possible
without  molecular  interpenetration.

Again  the  fact  that  many  substances  conduct  electrolytically
indicates  the  possibility  of  diffusion  in  solids,  for,  as  we  shall  see  later,
ionic  transport  and  diffusion  are  intimately  connected.

It  must,  however,  be  remarked  that  there  are  other  cases  that  da
not  show  the  slightest  trace  of  diffusion  in  the  solid  state.  Thus  in
petrography  sharply  bounded  portions  are  sometimes  found  in  a
homogeneous  crystal  that  show  different  colouring  to  the  rest ;  here
no  appreciable  equalisation  by  diffusion  has  taken  place  in  thousands
of  years,  although  the  colouring  matter  must  be  regarded  as  in  a  state
of  solid  solution.  If  osmotic  pressure  can  be  assumed  in  such  cases
the  dissolved  molecules  must  suffer  quite  extraordinary  resistance  to
displacement  in  their  solvent.

When  one  brings  a  liquid  solution  to  the  freezing-point,  as  is  well
known,  the  solvent  separates  as  a  rule  in  the  pure  state  ;  the  Eaoult-
van't  Hoff  formulse  hold  good  for  this  case.  But  in  some  cases  there

1  Atti  R.  1st  Veneto  (7),  1.  1173  (1890)  ;  abstract  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  7-  229  (1891).
2  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  Lond.,  67.  101  (1900).

170  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK

are  observed  considerably  smaller  lowerings  of  the  freezing-point,  than
those  calculated  from  the  molecular  proportions  of  the  dissolved  sub-
stance, according  to  the  preceding  formulae ;  usually  this  is  explained
by  polymerisation  of  the  dissolved  substance.  But  there  are  cases
in  which  such  an  explanation  is  highly  improbable  or  even  quite
inadmissible,  and  then  it  appears  that  a  mixture  of  solid  solvent  and
dissolved  substances  crystallises  out  in  place  of  the  pure  solvent — the
hypothesis  originally  put  forward  by  van't  Hoff.

It  is  easy  to  see  that  in  such  cases  the  lowering  of  the  freezing-
point  must  be  too  small.  According  to  the  considerations  of  p.  124  the
freezing-point  of  a  mixture  must  sink  continuously,  only  becoming
constant  when  the  part  crystallising  out  has  the  same  composition  as
that  remaining  liquid.  Thus  if  the  solid  separating  out  contains  more
of  the  dissolved  substances  than  the  residual  liquid  the  latter  is  diluted
by  freezing,  i.e.  the  freezing-point  must,  in  this  case,  rise  with
increasing  concentration ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  frozen-out  solid  is
less  rich  in  the  dissolved  material  than  the  residual  liquid,  the
freezing-point  must  fall  with  increase  of  concentration ;  but  clearly
not  so  fast  as  when  the  pure  solvent  crystallises  out,  i.e.  the  lowering
of  freezing-point  is  lessened.

If,  after  van't  Hoff,  we  apply  the  notion  of  osmotic  pressure  to
solid  solutions,  the  vapour  pressure  of  the  solid  solvent  must  be
reduced  by  the  taking  up  of  dissolved  substance.  If  the  vapour
pressures  of  solid  and  liquid  solvent  suffer  equal  change  the  freezing-
point  remains  unaltered,  since  this  point  is  characterised  by  equality
of  vapour  pressure  in  the  two  states  of  aggregation.  The  freezing-
point  must  rise  if  the  vapour  pressure  of  the  solid  is  more  affected
than  that  of  the  liquid,  fall  in  the  contrary  case.  These  relations  can
be  easily  followed  by  means  of  Fig.  15,  p.  142,  if  the  vapour  pressure
of  the  solid  solution  be  introduced  by  a  line  lying  below  and  parallel
to  the  curve  of  vapour  pressure  of  the  pure  solid  solvent.

It  is  found  in  fact  that  some  abnormally  small  freezing-point
depressions  are  produced  by  co- crystallisation  of  dissolved  material.
Thus,  according  to  van  Bijlert,1  a  solid  solution  freezes  out  of  solutions
of  thiophene  in  benzene ;  its  composition  is,  according  to  Beckmann,2
practically  0'42  times  the  concentration  in  the  liquid,  for  all  strength
of  solution ;  there  is  thus  a  constant  ratio  of  partition  of  thiophene
between  the  liquid  and  solid  solvent.  Solution  of  antimony  in  tin
and  /3-naphthol  in  naphthalene  raises  the  melting-point,  and  van
Bijlert  found  that  the  crystals  contain  a  larger  percentage  of  the
dissolved  substance  than  the  liquid,  in  accordance  with  the  above
theory.  Beckmann  and  Stock 3  found  that  iodine  which  gives
abnormally  small  depressions  in  benzene  is  shared  between  solid  and
liquid  solvent,  and  in  an  approximately  constant  ratio,  like  thiophene.

1  Z.  S.phys.  Chem.,  8.  343  (1891).  2  Ibid.,  22.  609  (1897).

3  Ibid.,  17.  107  (1895).

CHAP.  V  DILUTE  SOLUTIONS

V  OF

Ferrantini and Garelli1 have made  extensive  investig^fons^pn
crystallisation of dissolved substances, especially of cycT"
compounds.

Respecting  the  measurement  of  the  osmotic  pressure  P,  of  solid
solutions,  we  must,  of  course,  consider  the  accomplishment  of  the
reversible  separation  of  the  solvent  and  the  dissolved  substance.  If
dA  is  the  minimum  work  to  be  expended  and  that  necessary  for  the
removal  of  a  volume  dv,  of  the  pure  solvent  from  the  solution,  then
there  exists  the  relation

Pdv  =  dA.

If  a  gas  dissolves  in  a  solid  in  proportion  to  its  pressure,  then  it
may  be  concluded  by  analogy,  with  what  is  stated  on  p.  155,  that  its
osmotic  pressure  is  equal  to  the  corresponding  gas  pressure.  If  a
substance  distributes  itself  in  constant  ratio  between  a  liquid  and  a
solid  solvent,  then,  according  to  what  is  stated  on  p.  155,  for  equal
spatial  concentration  the  osmotic  pressure  must  be  the  same  ;  therefore
it  must  be  inferred  from  the  measurements  of  van  Bijlert,  that  this  is
at  least  approximately  true  for  the  solutions  of  thiophene  in  solid  and
liquid  benzene.

According  to  the  considerations  stated  on  p.  128,  we  have  a
method  capable  of  universal  applicability  for  effecting,  in  a  reversible
way,  the  separation  of  the  components  of  a  solid  mixture.

Further  expression  (7)  of  p.  141  may  be  at  once  applied  to  the
relative  lowering  of  solubility  which  is  experienced  in  any  solvent  by
a  solid  to  which  another  soluble  in  it  has  been  added.

It  should  be  added  that  Kiister  (Z.  S.  pliys.  Chem.,  17.  367,  1895)
maintains  the  very  reasonable  view  that  a  distinction  should  be  made
between  solid  solutions  and  isomorphous  mixtures.  Only  in  the
former  is  diffusion  of  a  dissolved  substance  possible,  according  to  this
view,  while  in  the  latter  the  molecules  of  the  added  material  form
part  of  the  crystalline  structure  and  are  held  in  fixed  positions  of
equilibrium  by  the  forces  that  produce  orientation  of  the  crystal
molecules.  Again  an  opinion  of  Bodlander  should  be  noted,  that  in
the  formation  of  solid  solutions,  e.g.  separation  of  iodine  with
crystallising  benzene,  absorption  phenomena  play  an  important  part
(see  for  this  and  the  theory  of  solid  solutions  generally  Bodlander,
News  Jahr buck  fiir  Mineralogie,  Beilage-Band,  12.  25,  1898).

1  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  13.  7  (1894),  communicated  by  Ciamician  ;  see  also  Garelli,
Cfazz.  chim.,  23.  354  ;  24.  229  (1894).

BOOK  II

ATOM AND MOLECULE
CHAPTER I

ATOMIC THEORY

Combining  Weight  and  Atomic  Weight. — The  question  whether
a  well  -  defined  chemical  substance  is  an  element  or  a  compound
of  several  different  elements,  and  in  the  latter  case  to  what  extent
each  element  is  contained  in  unit  weight  of  the  substance,  is  a
problem  of  a  purely  experimental  nature  :  this  problem,  according
to  the  case,  can  be  answered  with  great  certainty  and  exactness  by
means  of  an  equipment  for  analytical  chemical  methods,  without  re-
course to  theoretical  speculation.  The  elementary  analysis  of  a  com-
pound is  included  among  the  commonest  operations  of  a  chemical
laboratory,  and  a  description  of  the  purely  chemical  methods  of  such
an  investigation  does  not  lie  in  the  province  of  this  treatise.1

The  question  as  to  the  relative  number  of  atoms  in  the  molecule  of  a
compound  is,  however,  entirely  different.  To  answer  this  question,
besides  knowing  the  combining  weights,  which  may  be  obtained
directly  from  experiment,  we  must  also  know  the  relative  weights
of  the  atoms  which  make  up  the  compound  considered :  this  can  be
learned  only  by  the  aid  of  theoretical  speculation,  and  even  then  not
with  absolute  certainty, "but  only  with  more  or  less  probability.  From
the  principles  of  the  atomic  theory  stated  on  p.  30,  it  follows  that
the  atomic  weights  and  the  combining  weights  are  related  to  each  other
in  the  simple  ratios  of  rational  numbers ;  but  the  values  of  these
numerical  ratios  remain  undetermined.  But,  if  one  obtains  the  same
results  by  very  different  methods,  the  probability  is  very  great  that

1  A  critical  summary  of  the  combining  weight  determinations  thus  far  made  will  be
found  in  Ostwald's  Lehrbuch  der  Allgemeinen  Ghemie,  Leipzig,  1891,  vol.  i.  p.  18
and  fol.  [See  also  a  condensed  statement  in  Walker's  translation  of  Ostwald's  smaller
Outlines  of  General  Chemistry,  Book  I.  chap.  iii. — TR.]

172

CHAP.  I  ATOMIC  THEORY  173

theoretical  considerations  will  lead  to  safe  conclusions.  The  question
of  the  relative  weights  of  the  atoms  has  been  established  with  such
certainty  that  its  general  correctness  is  at  present  no  longer  called  in
question  ;  it  is  very  instructive  to  study  the  different  methods  pursued,
by  means  of  which  different  investigators,  without  wandering  very
much  from  the  direct  path,  have  finally  attained  the  same  desired  goal.

If  one  wishes  to  explain  facts  obtained  by  experiment,  by  means  of
an  hypothesis,  as  here,  for  instance,  where  we  call  in  the  atomic  hypo-
thesis to  aid  us  in  explaining  the  laws  of  definite  and  multiple  pro-
portions, it  should  be  remembered  that  that  method  of  explanation  is
to  be  chosen  which  is  the  simplest.  This  can  afterwards  be  expanded,
if  later  discoveries  force  us  to  adopt  more  complicated  conceptions.
Thus  Dalton  (1808) x  proceeded  in  this  way  when  he  arranged  the  first
table  of  the  atomic  weights.2  In  the  case  of  those  compounds  which
consist  of  only  two  elements,  it  is  the  simplest  to  assume  that  the  same
number  of  atoms  of  the  two  elements  have  united  to  form  the  com-
pound. Thus  it  was  [provisionally]  assumed  that  carbonic  oxide  con-
tained the  same  number  of  atoms  of  oxygen  as  of  carbon,  and  that
water  contained  the  same  number  of  atoms  of  oxygen  as  of  hydrogen,
etc.  In  this  way  Dalton  tried  to  learn  the  relative  atomic  weights
of  the  most  important  elements,  and  in  the  same  way,  advancing  to
compounds  consisting  of  more  than  two  elements,  he  sought  to
determine  the  number  of  atoms,  and  thus  to  obtain  a  consistent
system  of  the  atomic  weights.

But  this  method  was  by  no  means  free  from  arbitrary  assumption  ;
for  the  same  logic  that  regarded  carbonic  oxide  .as  composed  of  an
equal  number  of  atoms  of  oxygen  and  carbon,  would  regard  carbon
dioxide  as  containing  twice  as  many  atoms  of  oxygen  as  of  carbon  ;  and,
on  the  other  hand,  if  Dalton  had  regarded  carbon  dioxide  as  containing
the  same  number  of  atoms  of  carbon  and  oxygen,  then  carbonic  oxide
must  contain  twice  as  many  atoms  of  carbon  as  of  oxygen.  Thus
there  was  an  opportunity  for  choice  in  selecting  the  atomic  weight.
That  the  choice  in  the  preceding  case  was  the  right  one  was  purely  a
matter  of  chance.  We  need  to  consult  other  experimental  facts  and
their  meaning,  on  the  basis  of  a  more  extended  development  of  the
atomic  hypothesis,  in  order  to  obtain  a  system  of  the  atomic  weights
which  shall  be  free  from  arbitrariness.

In  judging  of  the  fruitfulness  of  atomistic  conceptions  it  is  of
interest  to  note  that  Dalton  did  not  invent  the  atomic  theory  as  a
subsequent  explanation  of  the  laws  of  constant  and  multiple  proportions,
as  was  formerly  thought ;  on  the  contrary,  he  was  led  by  considerations
of  molecular  theory  to  the  discovery  of  the  fundamental  laws  of
chemistry  (see  Roscoe  and  Harden,  Daltoris  Atomic  Theory).

1  Ostwakl's  Klassiker,  No.  3. Leipzig,  1889.

-  The  first  table  -was  arranged  in  1804. See  Thomson, History  of  Chemistry,  vol.
ii.  p.  289.— TR.

174  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

The  Rule  of  Avogadro. — The  necessary  experimental  facts
were  found  in  Gay-Lussac's  laws  [combination  by  volume],  accord-
ing to  which  the  volumes  of  those  gases  which  combine  with  each
other  stand  in  simple  ratios  to  each  other,  and  also  the  volumes  of
the  resulting  compounds,  if  gaseous,  show  such  simple  ratios.  The
theoretical  interpretation  of  this,  in  the  light  of  the  atomic  hypothesis,
led  to  the  law  which  was  first  introduced  by  the  hypothesis  of  Avogadro
(1811);  this  states  that  all  the  different  gases,  both  simple  and  com-
pound, contain  the  same  number  of  molecules  in  the  same  unit  of
space  (p.  40).  After  a  method  was  found  for  determining  the  relative
weight  of  the  molecules  by  measuring  the  vapour  densities,  by  applying
the  principle  of  the  simplest  explanation,  it  was  easily  possible  to
obtain  constant  determinations  of  the  atomic  weights  of  all  elements,
at  least  of  all  having  a  sufficient  number  of  volatile  compounds.  If
the  molecules  of  a  compound  are  really  produced  by  the  union  of  a
small  number  of  the  atoms  of  each  particular  element,  then  it  may
be  safely  assumed  that  among  a  large  number  of  molecules,  whose
molecular  weights  can  be  determined  from  their  vapour  density,
some  molecules  will  occur  containing  only  one  atom  of  the  particular
element  in  a  molecule.  Thus  we  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  the
smallest  relative  quantity  of  an  element  which  can  enter  into  the  molecule  of
a  compound,  or  the  smallest  quantity  representing  the  difference  between  the
combining  weights  of  the  element  in  different  compounds,  corresponds  to  the
atomic  weight.  But  even  if  only  a  few  compounds  of  an  element  are
investigated  there  is  hardly  any  doubt  as  to  the  atomic  weight ;  thus
if  the  quantity  of  that  element  present  in  a  inol  of  the  first  compound
is  a,  in  the  second  3a,  in  the  third  4&,  then'a  may  be  taken  as  the  atomic
weight.  In  practice,  as  other  tests  are  not  wanting,  a  few  vapour-
pressure  measurements  suffice,  and  the  atomic  weight  is  taken  as  that
weight  which,  multiplied  by  whole  numbers,  as  small  as  possible,  gives
the  amount  present  in  each  molecule.  To  be  sure  in  this  way,  strictly
speaking,  one  can  arrive  only  at  the  upper  limit  of  the  atomic  weight ;
but  with  the  investigation  of  a  large  number  of  compounds,  the  proba-
bility that  one  is  not  dealing  with  a  multiple  of  the  atomic  weight,
but  with  the  desired  value  itself,  becomes  very  great.  Thus  it  follows
that  in  a  gram  molecule  of  the  numerous  chlorine  compounds,  there  is
contained  at  least  either  35 '4  g.  of  chlorine,  or  an  exact  multiple  of  this,
and  similarly  in  the  case  of  many  other  elements.

After  determining  the  relative  atomic  weights,  the  vapour  density
determination  of  an  element  shows  the  number  of  atoms  contained  in
its  molecule.  The  fact  that  the  molecule  consists  of  one  atom,  in  the
case  of  only  a  few  elements,  where  the  atomic  and  molecular  weights
are  identical  with  each  other,  such  not  being  the  case  for  all  the
elements,  this  occasions  only  passing  doubts  ;  for  a  broader  development
of  the  doctrine  of  valence  shows  at  once  that  similar,  as  well  as  dissimilar,
atoms  can  unite  firmly  with  each  other  by  means  of  chemical  forces.

CHAP.  I  ATOMIC  THEORY  175

The  Law  of  Dulong  and  Petit. — Another  series  of  experimental
facts,  the  theoretical  significance  of  which  certainly  holds  good,  is  the
relation  between  the  atomic  weight  and  the  specific  heat  of  the  respec-
tive element  in  the  solid  state ;  this  was  discovered  by  Dulong  and
Petit  in  1818.  The  product  of  the  atomic  weight  by  the  specific  heat
is  called  the  atomic  heat ;  by  this  is  to  be  understood  the  amount  of
heat  expressed  in  g.-cal.,  which  must  be  added  to  1  gram  atom  of  an
element  in  order  to  raise  its  temperature  1°.  The  following  is  the
simple  statement  of  the  law,  viz.  : — The  atomic  heat  of  elements  in  the
solid  state  of  aggregation  is  approximately  constant,  and  amounts  to  about  6  '4.

This  law  is  not  strictly  exact,  for  some  of  the  elements  having
atomic  weights  smaller  than  35,  have  atomic  heats  considerably  re-
moved from  the  mean.  H.  F.  Weber  in  1875  showed,  in  the  case
of  the  most  marked  examples,  viz.  boron  (2'6),  carbon  (2  to  2'8,
according  to  the  modification),  and  silicon  (about  4),  that  the  atomic
heats  of  these  elements  increase  strongly  with  increasing  temperature,
and  approach  the  values  necessitated  by  the  Dulong -Petit  law.1
Beryllium,  which  is  also  a  marked  exception  (its  atomic  heat  being
3'7l),  according  to  the  measurements  of  Nilson  and  Pettersson  (1880),
shows  a  strong  increase  of  the  atomic  heat  with  rising  temperature.
The  law  finds  its  most  exact  application  in  the  case  of  the  metals,
where  it  holds  good  for  even  those  having  a  low  atomic  weight,  as
lithium,  magnesium,2  etc.  Thus  it  takes  about  the  same  amount  of
heat  (6*6  cal.)  to  raise  the  temperature  of  1  g.  atom  of  lithium  (7*03),
1°,  that  is  required  to  raise  1  g.  atom  of  uranium  (239),  1°.  This
clearly  shows  that  we  have  here  to  do  with  a  very  remarkable  law.3

Accordingly  in  this,  by  measuring  the  specific  heat  of  a  new
element,  we  have  a  simple  and  a  perfectly  sure  method  for  the  deter-
mination of  its  atomic  weight,  provided  that  special  attention  is  given
to  certain  points ;  viz.  firstly,  the  specific  heat  must  be  measured  at
different  temperatures  in  order  to  make  sure  that  it  does  not  vary
too  much  with  the  temperature  ;  secondly,  the  determination  must  not
be  made  too  close  to  the  melting-point ;  and,  finally,  the  atomic
weight  of  the  element  in  question  must  not  be  too  small.

Thus  recently  4  an  investigation  of  the  specific  heat  of  the  element
germanium,  discovered  by  Winkler,  gave  the  atomic  heat  of  5 '6,  which
speaks  in  favour  of  the  atomic  weight  7  2 '3,  assumed  for  the  element.

It  is  very  remarkable,  and  also  of  great  assistance  in  determining
the  atomic  weight,  that  the  constancy  of  the  atomic  heat  also  holds  good  for

1  Moisson  and  Gautier  found  the  same  result  for  boron  (Ann.  chim.  phys.,  (7),  7.
568,  1896).

2  See  especially  Waterman,  "Specific  Heat  of  Metal,"  Phys.  Rev.,  4.  161,  1896.

3  For  a  very  clear  summary  of  this  subject  in  English,  see  M.  M.  P.  Muir,  Prin.
of  Chem.  2nd  edit.,  pp.  49-67,  Cambridge  (1889)  ;  Remsen,  Theoret.  Chem.  4th  edit.,  pp.
65-75  ;  and  Lothar  Meyer,  Mod. Theories  of  Chem.,  trans,  by  Bedson  and  Williams,
pp.  63-95,  London  and  New  York  (1888).— TR.

4  Nilson  and  Pettersson,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  1.  34  (1878).

176  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

compounds  existing  in  the  solid  state.  By  means  of  the  painstaking  work
of  F.  Neumann  (1831),  of  Regnault  (1840),  and  especially  of  Kopp,1  who
in  his  classic  work  on  the  specific  heat  of  solid  salts  added  a  great  deal
to  the  subject,  the  principle  has  been  formulated  in  a  remarkably
broad  generalisation.  According  to  this,  the  specific  heat  of  solid  sub-
stances is  expressly  an  additive  property :  the  molecular  heat  of  a  solid
compound  (i.e.  the  product  of  the  specific  heat  and  the  molecular  weight)  is
equal  to  the  sum  of  the  atomic  heats  of  the  elements  contained.

The  atomic  heats  have  the  following  values,  viz.  for  C,  T8;  H,  2*3;
B,  2-7;  Be,  37;  Si,  3'8;  0,  4-0;  P,  5'4;  S,  5*4;  Ge,  5'5;2  and  for
the  other  elements  approximately  6 '4.

Thus,  for  example,  the  specific  heat  of  solid  water,  i.e.  ice,  amounts
to  0'474,  and  the  molecular  heat  therefore  isl8xO'474  =  8'5;  while
the  molecular  heat  calculated  from  the  figures  given  above  for  the
formula  H20,  is

2  x  2-3  +  4  =  8-6.

The  specific  heat  of  calcium  carbonate,  CaC03,  is  0'203,  correspond-
ing to  a  molecular  heat  of  20*4,  while  that  calculated  according  to
Kopp's  law  is

6-4+  1-8  +  3  x~I=20-2.

Conversely,  if  one  calculates  the  specific  heat  by  dividing  by  the  mole-
cular weight,  he  obtains  0'201  instead  of  0*203;  and  similar  coin-
cidences are  found  in  hundreds  of  other  cases  investigated,  and,
although  small  errors  are  not  wanting,  yet  they  do  not  exceed  the
errors  of  observation.

Thus  we  find  that  the  atomic  heats  of  the  elements,  as  calculated  from
the  specific  heats  of  their  compounds,  coincide  with  the  atomic  heats  of  the
elements  in  the  free  state,  in  so  far  as  these  can  be  studied  in  the  solid  state.
It  may  therefore  be  concluded,  with  great  certainty,  that  chlorine  in
the  solid  state  has  the  specific  heat

' =0-180,

35-5

and  thus  obeys  the  Dulong-Petit  law.  Thus,  in  general,  it  is  pos-
sible to  calculate  the  atomic  heats  from  the  specific  heats  of  solid  com-
pounds.

The  following  facts,  viz.  that  the  heat  capacity  of  solid  substances
remains  the  same  before  and  after  chemical  union ;  that  the  increase
of  the  kinetic  and  potential  energy,  experienced  by  a  rise  of  1°  in
temperature,  is  the  same  for  the  atoms  of  a  free  element  as  for  those
in  chemical  union  with  other  elements ;  and,  further,  that  this
increase  of  energy — law  of  Dulong  and  Petit — is  nearly  the  same  for

1  Lieb.  Ann.,  Supplement,  3.  1  and  289  (1864). 2  Nilson  and  Pettersson,  I.e.

CHAP.  1  ATOMIC  THEORY  177

the  atoms  of  most  elements ; — all  these  will  undoubtedly  be  of  funda-
mental significance  in  developing  a  future  theory  of  the  solid  state  of
aggregation.

Kopp's  law  is  of  value  in  atomic  weight  determinations  because
by  it  the  atomic  heat  of  elements  can  be  deduced  from  the  specific
heat  of  their  solid  compounds.

It  will  be  useful  to  illustrate  this  point  by  an  example.  Analysis
of  corrosive  sublimate  shows  it  to  contain  100  gr.  mercury  to  35  gr.
(1  gr.  atom)  of  chlorine.  The  specific  heat  according  to  Regnault  is
0'069.  The  molecular  heat  according  to  possible  formulae  would  be —

Molecular  weight.

Molecular  Heat  Observations.

Calc.

HgCl  =100+ 35
HgCl2  =  200  + 70
HgCl3  =  300  +  105

135x0-069= 9-3
270x0-069  =  18-6
405x0-069  =  28-0

12-8
19-2
25-6

Only  the  triatomic  formula  HgCl2  gives  a  molecular  heat  (accord-
ing to  Kopp's  law)  in  accordance  with  the  facts :  the  atomic  weight
of  mercury  must  therefore  be  200.  Such  a  calculation  does  not  give
any  information  as  to  molecular  weight,  for  if  the  formulae  were
(HgCl9)u  both  observed  and  calculated  molecular  heats  would  be  n
times  as  great,  and  the  agreement  would  still  hold.

The  specific  heat  of  liquids  is  of  a  more  complicated  character,  or
at  any  rate  no  simple  results  have  so  far  been  arrived  at.  That  of
gases,  which  is  sometimes  of  high  importance  in  atomic  weight
determinations,  will  be  dealt  with  in  the  next  chapter.  We  will
only  remark  here  that  the  specific  heat  of  monatomic  gases  is  3'0,  i.e.
about  half  that  of  solid  atoms  according  to  Dulong  and  Petit's  law.

Isomorphism. — The  relation,  discovered  by  Mitscherlich  (1820),
between  atomic  weight  and  isomorphism,  affords  another  independent
way  of  determining  the  atomic  weight.  This,  to  be  sure,  alone  is  in-
sufficient, but  as  an  accessory  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance,  and  has
repeatedly  furnished  practical  results.

The  following  points  may  be  cited  as  the  most  important  charac-
teristics of  isomorphism : —

1.  This  term  primarily  denotes  identity  of  crystal  form,  which  must
show  complete  coincidence  of  the  properties  of  symmetry,  and  approxi-
mate coincidence  of  geometrical  constants.

2.  The  property  of  forming  mixed  crystals  in  any  selected  propor-
tion, at  least  within  certain  limits.

3.  The  property  of  mutual  overgrowth,  i.e.  a  crystal  of  one  sub-
stance  (as  a nucleus)  increases  in  size  in  a  solution of  the  other
substance.

N

178

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

Ostwald  (Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  22.  330,  1897)  has  proposed  as  a  test
of  isomorphism  the  ability  of  a  crystal  to  remove  supersaturation  of
a  solution  and  so  act  as  nucleus  for  its  crystallisation.  This  note-
worthy criterion  seems  to  be  a  combination  of  2  and  3  ;  but  it  will
not  be  further  considered  here,  as  experimental  tests  of  it  are  wanting,
and  that  is  precisely  what  is  needed  for  any  application  in  the  study
of  isomorphism — at  present  an  entirely  empirical  region.

There  are  a  great  number  of  examples  known  where  different
elements  are  exchanged  in  proportion  to  their  atomic  weights,  and  thus
far  no  clear  example  has  been  found  where  the  exchange  implies  any
inconsistency  of  the  accepted  atomic  weights.1

The  following  table  contains  the  isomorphous  series  of  elements,
according  to  Arzruni.2  The  elements  (or  radicals)  in  a  series  can
appear  isomorphically  in  their  analogous  compounds,  often  in  the
ratio  of  their  atomic  weights  (without  change  of  crystalline  form,  and
with  little  change  in  the  geometric  constants) ;  the  elements  separated
by  a  semicolon  show  isomorphism  only  in  a  few  compounds.
Regularly  crystallising  compounds  are  but  little  suited  for  showing
isomorphism  even  when  they  have  the  same  habitus.

ISOMORPHIC  SERIES

I.  H(?),  K,  Eb,  Cs,  NH4,  Tl ;  Na,  Li ;  Ag.

Example  : —

T12S04 rhombic

(NH4)2S04

Rb2S04

K2S04

Cs2S04

KHS04

NH4HS04

Ag2S04
Na2S04

II.  Be,  Zn,  Cd,  Mg,  Mn,  Fe,  Os,  Eu,  Ni,  Pd,  Co,  Pt,  Cu,  Ca.

Example  :  CoPtCl6 .  6H20,  FePtCl6 .  6H.20,  etc.

III.  Ca,  Sr,  Ba,  Pb.

Example  :  CaC03,  SrC08,  BaC03,  PbC03.

IV.  La,  Ce,  Di,  Y,  Er.

Example  :  Di2(S04)3 .  8H20,  etc.
V.  Al,  Fe,  Cr,  Co,  Mn,  Ir,  Eh,  Ga,  In,  Ti.
Example :  Cr203,  A1203,  Fe203,  Ti203.

1  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  exchange  of  one  element  for  another  occurs  not
only  in  accordance  with  the  ratio  of  their  accepted  atomic  weights,  but  also  the  sub-
stituting element must assume the valence of the element substituted  ; thus in
the thallium alums, thallium has the valence of a monad, imitating the monad
valence  of  K,  Na,  etc.  ;  in  short,  it  is  a  thallous,  not  a  thallic  compound. — TR.

2  "Relations  between  Crystalline  Form  and  Chemical  Composition,"  Braunschweig,
1893. Tn  vol.  i.  of  Graham  Otto,  Lehrbuch  d.  Chemie.

a:b

:c  =  0-5539

1  :  0-7319

0-5643

1  :  0-7310

0-5723

1  :  0-7522

0-5727

1  :  0-7464

0-5805

1  :  07400

0-5806

1  :  0-7489

10-6126

1  :  0-7436

0-5713

1  :  1-2382

0-5914

1  :  1-2492

CHAl'.  1  ATOMIC  THEORY  179

VI.  Cu,  Hg,  Pb,  Ag,  Au.

VII.  Si,  Ti,  Ge,  Zr,  Sn,  Pb,  Th,  Mo,  Mn,  U,  Eu,  Eh,  Ir,  Os,  Pd,
Pt,  Te.

Example  :  K2PtCl4,  K2Pd014.

VIII.  N,  P,  V,  As,  Sb,  BL

Example  :  As2S3,  Sb2S3,  Bi2S3.
IX.  Nb,  Ta.

X. S,  Se,  Cr,  Mn,  Mo,  Wo ;  Te(?),  As,  Sb.
XL F,  Cl,  Br,  I ;  Mn  :  CN.

The  elements  B,  Sc,  C,  0  cannot  be  classified.

Usually  isomorphism  appears  the  more  readily  the  more  complex
the  compound;  obviously  because,  as  Kopp  (1863)  remarked,  the
dissimilar  influence  of  the  element  on  the  crystalline  form  is  over-
powered by  the  influence  of  the  remaining  components.  Thus  the
usual  potassium  and  sodium  salts  are  not  isomorphous,  but  such
complicated  compounds  as  the  alums  K2A12(S04)4. 24H20  and
Na2Al2(S04)4.  24H20  are.

Mitscherlich  discovered  isomorphism  from  the  four  following
salts  crystallising  in  the  tetragonal  system,  viz.  H9KP04,  H2KAs04,
H2(NH4)P04,  H2(NH4)As04,  and  also  from  corundum  and  hematite.

Some  of  the  best  known  series  of  isomorphous  substances  are  the
alums ;  CaC03  (as  aragonite),  BaC03,  SrC03,  and  PbC03  (ortho-
rhombic)  ;  BaS04,  SrS04,  PbSO4  (in  the  same  forms) ;  MgSO4  .  7H20,
ZnS04  .  7H20,  NiS04 .  7H20  (orthorhombic  hemihedral).  A  complete
classification  has  been  given  by  H.  Topsoe.1

It  should  also  be  noticed  that  elements  and  radicals  may  be  mutu-
ally isomorphous,  as  for  instance  K  and  NH4.

There  is  no  doubt  that  isomorphism  expresses  a  very  remarkable
law,  but  on  further  consideration,  and  especially  by  a  careful  examina-
tion of  the  abundant  observations2  made  in  this  department,  certain
misgivings  arise.

The  condition  of  "  approximate  coincidence "  of  geometrical  con-
stants at  once  brings  up  the  question  :  Where  shall  we  draw  the  line
between  identity  and  difference  of  crystal  form  1  Or  if  one  seeks  the
decisive  criterion  for  legitimate  isomorphism  in  the  capacity  for  mixed
crystals  wherever  this  is  possible,  he  at  once  meets  the  same  difficulty
that  we  have  already  seen  in  the  mutual  miscibility  of  solid  substances
(p.  120),  viz.  of  finding  all  conceivable  gradations.  Or  finally,  regard-
ing the  third  mark  of  isomorphism,  viz.  the  property  of  overgrowth,
it  has  been  observed  that  substances  which  do  not  possess  the  slightest

1  Tidskriftf.  Fysik  og  Ghemi,,  8.  5,  193,  321  (1869),  and  9.  225  (1870) ;  see  also
the  monograph  on  "  Isomorphism,"  by  Arzruni  referred  to  above.

2  It  is  especially  recommended  to  read  the  work  of  Ketgers  already  cited. A  resumti
maybe  found  in  the  Jahrbuch  fur  Min.  (1891), 1.  132,  and  in  the  Chain.  Centralbl.
(1891-92).

180  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

chemical  or  crystallographic  analogy  [as  far  as  known],  exhibit  this
property;  and  therefore,  on  this  ground,  its  value  as  a  criterion  of
isomorphism  has  been  criticised  by  Retgers.1

Therefore,  no  criterion  will  be  found  in  the  future  to  decide  in  all
cases,  with  an  unequivocal  yea  or  nay,  whether  isomorphism  is  present
or  not ;  but  investigation  should  primarily  be  directed  to  the  degree  of
isomorphism,  since  the  discussion  of  such  vague  and  idle  questions  as
whether  isomorphism  is  shown  in  any  given  case  or  not,  is  not  a
subject  for  deliberate  investigation.  The  only  question  at  issue  is  :
What  are  the  properties  suitable  for  adoption  as  standard  for  the
degree  of  isomorphism,  ?

Of  all  the  properties  of  a  crystal,  its  form  is  very  important  and
very  striking  to  the  eye  ;  but  that  is  no  reason  for  conceding  to  it
a  significance,  in  precedence  above  the  density,  elasticity,  optical  con-
stants, etc.  That  the  first  relations  studied  were  those  between  crystal
form  and  chemical  composition,  was  obviously  because  this  property
obtruded  itself  upon  the  observer ;  as  thus  discovered  it  was  an  un-
doubted acquisition,  even  though  it  could  not  always  be  retained  as  a
rule  without  an  exception ;  but  to  elevate  that  discovery  to  the  grade
of  a  guiding  principle,  would  amount  to  voluntarily  assuming  the
fetters  of  a  historical  accident.

The  analogy  between  two  crystals  is  shown  more  clearly  in  their
miscibility  than  in  their  crystal  form,  and  thus  the  statement  appears
to  be  completely  established,  as  Retgers  so  strongly  emphasised  in  his
investigations,  that  though  a  more  or  less  complete  similarity  of  form
is  not  without  interest,  yet  the  whole  problem  appears  to  centre  about
the  question  of  miscibility.  The  various  grades  of  miscibility,  accord-
ing to  Retgers,  may  be  represented  as  follows  : —

1.  Miscibility  in  all degrees,  a  rather  rare  case. The physical
properties — as  well  as  the  crystal  form — vary  gradually  and  evenly,
in  the  series  of  mixtures,  and  are  decidedly  additive.

2.  Limited  miscibility,  without  the  formation  of  double  salts ;  the
physical  properties  of  the  mixed  crystals  are  emphatically  additive,
i.e.  they  can  be  calculated  from  those  of  the  two  substances  when  pure.

3.  Limited miscibility, without double salt formation; the
physical  properties  of  the  mixed  crystals  are  additive  here  also,  but
in  calculating  the  properties  of  the  series  of  mixtures,  it  is  necessary
to  ascribe  properties  to  the  end  member  on  one  side  of  a  gap,  which
are  different  from  those  of  the  end  member  on  the  other  side,  and
moreover properties different  from those  which actually  occur,  e.g.
another  crystal  form. Sometimes  there  is  a  labile  (unstable)  form  for  one
end  member  which  conducts  itself  in  the  free  state  as  though  it  were  produced
by  intermixture  ivith  the  mixed  crystal,  the  properties  of  which  have  been
transpoi'ted  beyond  the  gap  by  extrapolation  ;  the  so-called  iso-di-morphism  or
iso-poly-morphism.

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  5.  460  (1890.)

CHAP.  I  ATOMIC  THEORY  181

4.  Limited  miscibility,  with double  salt  formation, such  that  it
indicates  an  important  chemical  contrast ;  the  properties  of  the  double  salt
are  more  or  less  different  from  those  calculated  from  its  end  members.

5.  The  last  degree ;  no  marked  miscibility,  either  with  or  without
double  salt  formation.

Thus  in  the  series  of  mixtures  of  ammonium  and  potassium
sulphates,  the  specific  volumes  of  the  mixed  crystals,  which  can  be
produced  in  every  desired  proportion,  can  be  calculated  quite
accurately  from  the  specific  volumes  of  the  end  members,  as  was
shown  on  p.  123;  this  pair  of  salts  would  be  included  under  the
first  class  just  enumerated.  The  sulphates  of  iron  and  magnesium,
which  form  an  iso-di-morphous  mixture,  are  doubtless  to  be  referred
to  class  3.

It  is  obvious  that  a  sharp  line  can  be  drawn  at  least  between
classes  1  and  2  ;  the  question  as  to  the  existence  of  a  gap  in  the
series  of  mixtures,  can  be  decided  definitely  by  experiment,  provided
we  possess  a  solvent  common  for  both  of  the  crystals  to  be  mixed.
On  this  basis  one  should  attempt  to  obtain  miscibility  in  all  pro-
portions, as  the  decisive  criterion  of  isomorphism.  But  this  would
amount  to  emphasising  isomorphism  as  one  particular  phenomenon,
and  very  unsuited  for  the  purpose,  because  many  crystals  showing
only  a  limited  miscibility  can,  in  all  probability,  be  made  miscible  in
all  proportions  by  changing  the  temperature ;  just  as  many  liquids,
as  water  and  phenol,  which  show  limited  miscibility  at  certain  tem-
peratures, at  others  dissolve  each  other  in  all  proportions.

The  study  of  mixtures  is  doubtless  to  be  preferred  to  the  narrow
study  of  the  crystal  form,  as  shown  by  many  of  the  cases  observed  by
Retgers.  "Thus  if  we  were  shown  a  prism  of  KN03,  a  rhombohedron
of  NaN03,  a  tabular  crystal  of  KC103,  and  a  cube  of  NaC103,  the
chemical  composition  of  all  four  of  these  being  unknown,  no  one  would
suppose,  from  this  exhibit,  that  they  were  substances  chemically  analo-
gous. But  that  this  is  the  case  is  shown  beyond  a  doubt  by  their
crystallising  together."

On  the  other  hand  certain  cases  suggest  caution,  because  the
property  of  forming  mixed  crystals  does  not  belong  exclusively  to
substances  which  are  chemically  analogous ;  this  ammonium  chloride,
which,  according  to  all  experience  hitherto,  has  shown  unvarying
properties,  can  unite,  to  a  certain  extent,  with  substances  which  are
entirely  different  chemically ; l  solid  benzene  and  iodine  can  crystallise
together  (p.  171).

In  conclusion,  let  me  define  the  present  state  of  crystallography  as
it  appears  to  the  writer,  in  the  following  statements  : —

The  property  of  forming  solid  molecular  mixtures  is  a  very
common  property  of  solid  substances ;  but  in  general,  in  most  cases,

1  Lehmann,  Zeitschr.  /.  KrystalL,  8.  438  (1883)  ;  Ketgers,  Zeitschr.  -physik.  Chem.,
9.  385  (1892).

182  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

mixed  crystals  can  be  prepared  only  up  to  certain  limits,  which  limits
are  the  points  of  mutual  saturation.  Every  solid  substance  may
contain  traces,  at  least,  of  another  substance,  and  thus  there  is  formed
a  solidified  solution  (p.  169),  even  though  very  dilute.  When  the  solid
substance  is  a  metal  and  the  dissolved  substance  is  a  non-metal,  or
vice  versa,  the  concentration  is  excessively  small,  and  though  it  may
be  much  greater  in  the  preceding  case,  which  deals  with  the
solution  of  a  solid  salt  in  a  salt,  usually  escapes  notice.  The  degree  of
misdbility  grows  with  increasing  chemical  relationship,  so  that  the  property
of  forming  mixed  crystals,  within  broad  limits  or  in  all  proportions,
finally  appears  in  the  case  of  substances  which  are  completely
analogous  chemically.  But  in  the  case  of  complete  miscibility,  all  the
properties  of  the  mixed  crystal,  including  the  crystal  form,  must  be  a
regular  function  of  the  composition,  exactly  as  in  the  cases  of  liquids
and  gases  ;  but  since  a  gradual,  regular  coincidence  of  crystalline  form
is  capable  of  being  experimentally  realised,  only  when  the  two  pure
crystallising  substances  have  an  original  similarity  of  form,  it  therefore
follows,  as  a  special  case  of  the  aforesaid  more  general  rule,  that  the
rule  of  Mitscherlich  is  true,  viz.  that  chemically  analogous  substances
usually  have  similar  crystal  forms.

If  the  series  of  mixtures  shows  a  gap,  the  crystal  forms  of
the  end  members  may  be  very  different  from  each  other,  since  the
chemical  analogy  may  be  very  remote ;  but  since  each  crystal  on  the
one  side  of  the  gap  is  forced  to  adapt  itself  to  the  other  crystal
respectively,  the  very  fact  of  a  great  extension  of  the  series  of  mix-
tures indicates  that  each  crystal  shows  this  tendency ;  as  a  matter  of
fact,  it  is  often  observed  that  one  crystal,  even  when  in  a  perfectly
pure  state,  may  assume  a  labile  form  of  the  other  (iso-di-morphism  or
iso-poly-morphism).

The  rule  that  miscibility  varies  directly  with  increasing  chemical  relation-
ship, is  hidden  in  buried  foundations,  so  to  speak ;  it  is  a  rule  more-
over which,  in  the  case  of  liquids,  is  expressed  in  the  statement  that
closely  related  substances  dissolve  each  other  in  all  proportions.  Now,
other  things  being  equal,  since  a  solid  mixture  is  formed  with  greater
difficulty  than  a  liquid  one,  and  especially  so  since  the  crystal  form
here  exerts  a  limiting  influence,  much  greater  demands  are  made  upon
chemical  analogy  in  the  case  of  solids,  than  in  the  case  of  liquids.

The  Periodic  System  of  the  Elements.1 — In  addition  to  the
facts  already  described,  by  means  of  which  the  tables  of  the  atomic
weights  can  be  completed  with  a  large  degree  of  confidence,  there  now
appears  a  strong  support  in  the  shape  of  the  so-called  "natural"  or
"  periodic "  system  of  the  elements ;  this  unites  certain  relations
between  the  atomic  weights  and  the  physical  properties  which  have

1  In  the  preparation  of  this  section  use  was  made  of  Lothar  Meyer's Grundzuge
der  theoretischen  Ghemie. Leipzig,  1890.

CHAP. I

ATOMIC  THEORY

183

been  long  suspected,  into  a  complete,  well-rounded  system,  and
broadens  our  knowledge  in  many  respects.  But  the  fact  that  most  of
these  regularities  would  disappear  only  by  a  radical  change  of  the
atomic  weights,  makes  it  appear  that  no  attempt  of  that  kind  will  be
made  within  the  immediate  future.

As  early  as  1829  Doebereiner  called  attention  to  the  fact  that
there  are  certain  triads  of  elements  which  show  close  analogies  in
their  physical  properties  and  certain  regularities  in  their  atomic
weights.  The  following  table  shows  series  of  such  similar  triad  groups,
the  atomic  weights  of  which  exhibit  differences  which  are  fairly
constant : —

Atomic  Weights.

Diff.

Lithium » . .
Sodium  . . . .
Potassium . •» .

7-03
23-05
39-15

16-02
16-1

Calcium
Strontium . • .
Barium  .

40-10
87-6
137-4

47-5
49-8

Sulphur. . .
Selenium
Tellurium

32-06
79-2
127-5

47-14
48-4

Chlorine
Bromine
Iodine . * .

35-45
79-96

126-85.

44-51
46-89

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  following  table  we  find  triad  groups
of  related  elements  having  only  slightly  different  atomic  weights : —

Iron  .
Cobalt  .
Nickel  .

Ruthenium

Rhodium

Palladium

Osmium
Indium
Platinum

55-9
59-0

58-7

101-7
103-0
106-5

191-0
193-0

194-8

Attempts  were  not  wanting  to  advance  farther  along  the  line  of
these  regularities.  But  the  thorough  generalisation  and  consequent
utilisation  of  this  did  not  come  till  there  appeared  a  simple  classifica-
tion of  the  elements  in  the  works  of  Mendelejeff  and  of  Lothar  Meyer
(1869) ;  these  two  by  slightly  different  ways  arrived  at  the  same  con-
clusion, viz.,  that  the  properties  of  the  chemical  elements  are  periodic
functions  of  their  atomic  weights ;  this  will  appear  in  detail  from  the
following  arrangement : —

o  °  ^

2  PHrH t>rH

eg  CO

£00

0§  „* ~*

^— '  Aj CC  oo p-  oo

r>
PH  o

£CI

(M

as

<D  01

BK. II. CH. 1

ATOMIC  THEORY

185

In  column  0  are  the  new  elements  discovered  in  the  atmosphere
(the  so-called  "  noble  "  gases) ;  they  were  of  course  unknown  to  Meyer
andMendelejeff,  and  have  only  recently  been  introduced  into  the  periodic
system  by  Ramsay.  We  shall  return  to  this  column  later ;  in  what
follows  here,  it  will  be  left  out  of  consideration.

In  each  of  the  first  two  periods  (horizontal  rows)  are  seven
elements,  the  respective  members  of  which  in  the  same  column  are
very  similar.  In  the  four  following  rows  we  find  some  similarity  of
the  elements  in  the  same  column ;  but  we  find  the  greatest  similarity
by  omitting  one,  and  comparing  with  each  other  K  with  Eb,  Cu  with
Ag,  Zn  with  Cd,  Br  with  I,  etc.  The  seventh  and  eighth  rows  are
very  incomplete ;  but  perhaps  elements  as  yet  not  much  investigated
will  be  found  to  follow  in  after  Ce.  The  elements  of  the  ninth  row,
as  far  as  known,  accord  well  with  the  corresponding  members  of  the
sixth.

The  elements  in  the  eighth  column,  and  including  the  iron  and
platinum  groups,  occupy  an  exceptional  position  :  the  atomic  weights  of
each  group  of  three  stand  nearer  together  than  most  of  the  elements  in
the  horizontal  rows,  and  a  similar  statement  may  be  made  of  their
[physical]  properties.  The  three  triad  groups  together  play  the  part
each  of  an  element,  but  at  the  same  time  of  elements  which  do  not  fit
well  into  the  preceding  scheme.  This  arrangement  shows  very  clearly,
as  Mendele jeff  emphasised,  the  relation  between  their  respective  chemical
values,  as  compared  with  oxygen,  and  their  atomic  weights,  as  the
following  table  of  the  oxides  instead  of  the  elements  still  further
illustrates  : —

I.

II.

1
III. IV.

v.

vi.

VII.

VIII.

Li20

Be202

BA

CA

N205

Na20 | Mg202

A1A

Si2o4

^05

SA

CIA

K20 { Ca2O2

Sc203

TiA

VA

Cr2U6

MnA

Cu20

Zn202

Ga203

Ge204 As20r)

Se206

Br207

Rb20 Sr202
Ag20 i Cd202
Cs20 Ba202

YA

in  A

La203

Zr204 !  Xb2*05
SnA 1  Sb205
Ce204 Ta2f05

Mo206
Te206
W2f06

IA

R208

OSA

Au20

Hg202

T1A

Pb204

BiA

U2t06

1

But  in  spite  of  this  regularity  we  must  take  warning  not  to  follow
it  blindly ;  for,  as  is  well  known,  many  elements  form  other  oxides  than
will  fit  into  the  preceding  table,  and  also  some  elements  which  do  not
fit  into  this  table,  are  omitted.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  arrangement  given
above  does  show  certain  contradictions  which  still  wait  for  explana-
tion. Thus  there  is  no  great  chemical  analogy  clearly  expressed  for
the  copper,  silver,  and  gold  row,  and  the  elements  of  the  eighth

186  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

column  have  not  a  fortunate  location.  Therefore,  many  modifications
of  Mendele Jeff's  arrangements  have  been  suggested,  as  in  recent  times
by  Walker  (Chem.  News,  63.  251,  1891),  and  J.  Thomsen  (Z.  S.  anorg.
Chem.,  9.  190,  283,  1895).  The  latter  lays  stress  chiefly  on  the
electropositive  or  negative  character  of  the  elements,  and  brings  this
out  more  clearly  in  his  arrangement ;  Walker  accentuates  the  dis-
tinction between  metals  and  metalloids  by  the  following  scheme  : —

Groups.  4  6  8  10  12

I.

II.

III.

IV.  Ti  Zr  Ce  ...  Th

V.
VI.

VII.

VIII.

I.

II.

III.

IV.

V.

VI.

VII.

Uneven  Series.

In  this  way  oxygen  comes  with  sulphur,  fluorine  with  the  halogens,
etc. ;  also  lithium  is  near  the  closely-related  magnesium,  beryllium  is
near  aluminium,  boron  near  silicon,  etc.  The  non-metals  are  sharply
divided  from  the  metals :  it  is  possible  to  draw  a  line  separating  these
two  groups.  To  be  sure  there  are  certain  irregularities  in  this  classi-
fication, as  the  placing  of  lithium  and  sodium  beside  the  metals  copper,
silver,  and  gold,  instead  of  with  potassium,  rubidium,  and  caesium,  to
which  they  are  obviously  more  closely  related.

The elements  discovered by  Ramsay — helium,  argon,  etc. — are

Even  Series.

s^  ' "

4

"^^•^^^•^

6

—  /*>•  —  —  ^«^^^^
8 10

K

Rb

Cs

Ca

Sr

Ba

Sc

Y

La Yb

Ti

Zr

Ce

V

Nb

Di Ta

Cr

Mo

V?

Mn

Fe

Ru

Os

Co

Ni

Rh
Pd

Ir

Pt

Li

Na Cu

Ag

Au

Be

Sw

Mg Zn

Cd

Hg

, Al Ga

In

Tl

c

Si\^Ge

Sn

Pb

N

P A^

^Sb

Bi

0

S Se

Te^

\.

F

Cl Br

I

^\.

i

3 5

7

^\.

9 11

CHAP.  I  ATOMIC  THEORY  187

completely  neutral  in  chemical  behaviour ;  Ramsay  therefore  arranges
them  in  a  new  column,  as  having  the  valency  zero.  The  atomic
weights  (only  approximately  known)  harmonise  with  this  view,  as  may
be  seen  from  the  table,  p.  184 ;  actually  these  elements  form  a  transition
between  the  strongly  positive  and  strongly  negative  univalent  elements,
being  themselves  neutral  on  account  of  their  chemical  indifference ;
the  following  table  given  by  Ramsay  illustrates  these  points : —

H  He  Li  Be

1479
F  Ne  Na  Mg

19  20  23  24

Cl  A  K  Ca

35  40  39  40

Br  Kr  Rb  Sr

80  82  85  88

I  X  Cs  Ba

127  128  133  137

Remembering  that  hydrogen  according  to  its  physical  properties
is  throughout  of  a  metalloid  character,  and  also  in  many  compounds,
such  as  the  hydrocarbons,  stands  much  nearer  chemically  to  the
halogens  than  to  the  univalent  metals,  its  position  at  the  head  of  the
univalent  metalloids  is  not  without  reason.  A  certain  number,  at  any
rate,  of  the  elements  are  satisfactorily  arranged,  then,  in  the  above
order  (see  Ramsay,  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  13.  311  (1898),  and  Modern
Chemistry,  London,  1900,  p.  50).

Staigmiiller's  (Z.  S.  pliys.  Chem.,  39.  243,  1902)  similar  arrangement
of  the  elements  is  given  on  p.  185  ;  the  noble  gases  are  introduced  in
it  in  the  same  way  as  in  Ramsay's.  Various  difficulties  of  the  old
arrangement  are  thus  avoided;  the  elements  in  the  last  vertical  column
occur  naturally ;  the  metalloids  are  separated  from  the  metals  by  the
heavy  line ;  moreover,  C,  B,  Si,  may  very  well  be  looked  upon  as
metals,  and  in  this  way  the  grouping  gains  in  simplicity  of  outline.
By  a  slight  rearrangement,  already  made  in  this  table,  the  analogy  is
clearly  brought  out  between  the  three  triads,  Fe,  Ru,  Os ;  Co,  Rh,  Ir ;
Ni,  Pd,  Pt  (see  the  remarkable  observations  of  H.  Biltz,  Ber.  chem.  Ges.,
35.  562,  1902).

It  should  be  mentioned  that  Newlands,  as  far  back  as  1864,
attempted  to  arrange  the  elements  systematically  according  to  their
atomic  weights ;  for  further  history  of  the  periodic  system  see
K.  Seubert,  Z.  S.  anorg.  Chem.,  9.  334  (1895).  On  the  didactic  value
of  the  periodic  system,  see  Lothar  Meyer  (Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,
26.  1230  (1893).

It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  atomic  weights  of  a  number  of
elements,  especially  those  of  low  atomic  weight,  approximate  closely
to  whole  numbers  ;  a  hypothesis  put  forward  on  the  strength  of  this  by
Prout  (1815),  that  they  are  exact  multiples  of  the  atomic  weight  of

o s

« s

0

PH ^

CO

0.

02 ®

W) T*1

o

o

02 ^

o ^

s

oj <31

H S

•^ oo

«

<1 0

fi  I

BK.  ii.  CH.  I  ATOMIC  THEORY  189

hydrogen  is  certainly  false ;  but  the  fact  remains  that  many  elements
nearly  satisfy  the  hypothesis  in  a  way  that  cannot  possibly  be  accidental.

Rydberg  (1886)  undertook  to  follow  out  these  unmistakable
regularities,  and  in  a  recent  very  thorough  study  (Z.  S.  anorg.  Chem.,
14.  66,  1897)  has  brought  to  light  a  whole  series  of  striking  rules
that  will  doubtless  be  of  meaning  in  the  future  development  of  the
periodic  system.  The  atomic  weights  P  can  be  put  in  the  form
P  -  N  +  D,  where  N  is  a  whole  number  and  D  is  a  quantity  always
small  compared  with  N  and  for  the  elements  of  low  atomic  weight,
small  compared  with  unity.  If  M  be  a  whole  number — Rydberg
calls  it  the  ordinal  number  of  the  element — elements  of  odd  M  have
odd  valency  and  odd  values  of  N  =  2M  +  1  ;  elements  of  even  M  have
even  valency  arid  even  values  of  N  =  2M.  The  values  of  D,  which
can  be  pretty  accurately  determined  in  view  of  the  above  rules,  form
a  pronounced  periodic  function  of  the  atomic  weight.  From  this
follows  the  suggestion  that  in  studies  on  the  periodic  system  either  N
or  perhaps  better  M  should  be  taken  as  the  independent  variable
instead  of  the  atomic  weight.  Adopting  this  principle  the  difficulty
disappears  that  is  due  to  the  newly  determined  atomic  weight  of
tellurium  (127 '6  instead  of  125).  According  to  the  views  hitherto
adopted,  tellurium  (12  7  "6)  would  come  after  iodine — in  a  quite  hopeless
position  :  according  to  Rydberg,  it  should  stay  in  its  natural  place
with  M  =  60,  N  =  120,  D  =  7*6,  the  last  value  being  more  satisfactory
than  D  =  5,  as  compared  with  the  values  of  D  for  neighbouring
elements.  For  hydrogen  (with  odd  valency)  M  =  0,  which  well
characterises  its  exceptional  position.  Neon  and  argon  also  come
satisfactorily  into  the  system  if  their  atomic  weights  are  taken
as  20  and  40.  Where  the  curve  showing  the  relation  of  any
property  E  to  M  passes  through  a  maximum  or  minimum,  the  value
of  E  of  course  varies  little  with  M,  and  as  such  maxima  and  minima
occur  in  about  the  same  place  for  the  most  varied  properties,  elements
arise  with  little  difference  in  character  ("twin  elements,"  according
to  R.  Lorenz,  who  has  worked  out  a  number  of  rules  for  these,  Z.  S.
anorg.  Chem.,  12.  329;  14.  103,  1897).

For  further  observations  on  regularity  in  atomic  weights  see
Jul.  Thomsen  (Bull.  Acad.  Danemark,  Dec.  14,  1894),  and  M.  Topler
(Ges.  his  Dresden,  1896,  Abh.  4).

Physical  Properties  of  the  Elements. — Some  physical  pro-
perties also  stand  in  more  or  less  definite  relation  to  the  atomic
weights.  A  superficial  consideration  shows  at  once  that  the  metallic
elements  (except  the  last  series)  are  collected  in  the  outer  vertical
columns  only,  while  the  metalloids  are  in  the  middle.  The  atomic
volume,  i.e.  volume  of  1  gram-atom  of  the  element  in  the  solid  state,
also  comes  clearly  in  its  relation  to  atomic  weight,  as  appears  from
Fig.  17.

190

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

The  higher  periods,  which  are  very  incomplete,  are  not  included,
as  regular  change  of  atomic  volume  cannot  be  recognised  in  them  ;
the  maximum  is  for  the  alkali  metals,  the  minimum  for  the  group  C,
Al,  Ni,  Ru,  Os.  Melting-points  behave  in  the  same  way,  as  may  be
seen  from  the  following  table.

Melting-point  of  Elements  on  the  Absolute  Scale  (from
—  273°) — (n.g.  not  melted,  s.li.  very  high,  s.n.  very  low,  iib.  over,
u.  under,  h.a.  higher  than,  n.a.  lower  than,  r.  red,  /.  colourless).

MELTING-POINTS  OF  THE  ELEMENTS  IN  ABSOLUTE  TEMPERATURE
(i.e.  FROM -273°).

I.

II.

III.

IV.

v.

VI.

VII.

VIII.

H

13

Li

453

Be

iib.  1270

B

s.h.

C
n.g.

N
59

0
38

F

s.n.

Na
369

Mg
1070

Al
1000

Si
s.h.

P

r.  528
f.  317

S
388

Cl
171

K
335

Ca
h.a.  Sr

Sc
f

Ti

n.g.

V

n.g.

Cr
iib.  2270

Mn
2170

Fe Co Ni
1977  2070  1870

Cu
1355

Zn
691

Ga
303

As
iib.  773

Se
490

Br

266

Rb

311

Sr
h.a.  Ba

Y

?

Zr

h.a.  Si

Nb
n.g.

Mo
s.h.

Ru  Rh  Pd
2070  2270  1973

Ag
1241

Cs

Cd
591

Ba

In

449

La Ce

Sn
503

Sb
700

Te
800

I
387

299

1123

Lib.  710  u.  1273

Ta

n.g.

W

s.h.

Os Ir Pt

2770  iib.2500  2050

An
1345

Hg
233

.  Tl
563

Pb

597

Bi

542

...

Th

?

U

s.h.

\

If  the  atomic  weights  are  taken  as  abscissae  and  melting-points  as
ordinates  of  a  curve,  the  regularity  comes  out  more  clearly  ;  the  curve
is  wave-shaped,  with  maxima  in  the  fourth  or  fifth  columns.  The  curve
of  atomic  volumes  in  Fig.  17  has  a  similar  course,  and  comparison

CHAP. I

ATOMIC  THEORY  191

of  the  two  shows  that  all  the  gaseous  and  easily  fusible  (liquid  below
red  heat)  are  on  the  rising  branches  and  maximal  points  of  the  volume
curve ;  while  the  elements  that  are  melted  with  difficulty,  or  are  not
fusible  at  all  with  the  means  now  available,  are  on  the  descending
branches  and  at  the  minima.  Comparing  the  elements  in  each  vertical
series,  i.e.  each  natural  family,  the  melting-point  is  usually  found  to
rise  with  increasing  atomic  weight ;  but  the  alkalis  Li,  Na,  K,  Eb,  the
group  Zn,  Cd,  Hg,  and  probably  the  alkaline  earths,  Be,  Mg,  Ca,  Sr,
behave  in  the  opposite  manner.  Indeed,  all  the  rules  based  on  the
periodic  system  are  of  this  approximate  and  uncertain  character.

Of  other  physical  properties  that  have  a  more  or  less  marked
periodic  character  we  may  note  crystalline  form  (see  the  Isomorphous
Series  (p.  179)  which  has  clear  relations  to  the  vertical  columns  of  the
periodic  system  (see  also  G.  Winck,  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  19.  193  (1896),
Ortloff,  ibid.,  201),  extensibility,  thermal  expansion,  conductivity  for
heat  and  electricity,  heat  of  formation  of  oxides  and  chlorides,  magnetic
and  diamagnetic  properties,  refraction  equivalents  (see,  on  these
properties,  Lothar  Meyer,  Modern  Theories  of  Chemistry,  1883,  p.  144  ff.),
"  Hardness  of  the  Free  Elements  "  (Rydberg,  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  33.  353,
1900),  "  Change  of  Volume  on  Fusion  "  (M.  Topler,  Wied.  Ann.,  53.  343,
1894),  "Viscosity  of  Salts  in  Aqueous  Solution"  (Jul.  Wagner,  Z.  S.
phys.  Chem.,  5.  49,  1890),  "Colour  of  Ions"  (Carey  Lea,  Sitt.  Am.
Journ.  [3],  49.  357,  1895),  "Ionic  Mobility"  (JBredig,  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,
13.  289,  1894),  etc.  The  relations  between  emission  of  light  and
atomic  weight  are  dealt  with  in  the  last  section  of  this  chapter.

Attempts  to  find  quantitative  relations  in  this  region  have  so  far
proved  almost  without  result.  It  is,  however,  possible  that  so  far
properties  have  always  been  compared  under  arbitrary  conditions  of
temperature  and  pressure,  and  that  exact  laws  are  not  to  be  expected
thus ;  if,  too,  the  elements  have  much  more  power  of  existing  in
several  modifications  than  we  know  at  present,  this  would  introduce
another  factor  of  arbitrariness  as  the  comparison  is  made  between  the
modifications  that  happen  to  be  known  to  us.  Thus  we  find  the  most
marked  regularity  in  the  solid  state,  which  offers  the  safest  basis  of
comparison,  as  the  density  of  solids  varies  but  little  with  temperature,
pressure,  or  even  with  change  of  molecular  condition.

Significance  of  the  Periodic  System  in  the  Table  of  Atomic
Weights. — At  first  the  establishment  of  the  periodic  system  was
regarded  as  a  discovery  of  the  highest  importance,  and  far-reaching
conclusions  as  to  the  unity  of  matter  were  expected  from  it ;  more
recently  a  disparaging  view  has  been  taken  of  these  noticeable,  but
unfruitful,  regularities.  One  now  often  finds  them  underrated,  which
is  intelligible  enough,  since  this  region,  which  especially  needs  scientific
tact  for  its  development,  has  become  the  playground  of  dilettante
speculations,  and  has  fallen  into  much  discredit.  It  is  all  the  more

CHAP.  I  ATOMIC  THEORY  193

satisfactory  an  intelligent  and  thorough  investigation  of  this  subject  of
fundamental  importance  in  theoretical  chemistry  has  begun  anew.

The  periodic  system  is  of.  especial  importance  in  settling  atomic
weights.  Although  the  rules  so  far  known  do  not  possess — any  of
them — completely  convincing  validity,  between  them  they  give  a
striking  proof  that  the  choice  of  atomic  weights  underlying  them  is  a
happy  one,  and  constitute  a  valuable  indication  in  studying  new  or
little  known  elements.  It  is  usually  possible  to  find  the  place  of  a
new  element  in  the  periodic  system  by  the  analogies  it  shows  to  better
known  ones.  Thus  it  was  long  doubtful  whether  beryllium  had
atomic  weight  9'08  =  2x4'54  or  13-62  -  3  x  4'54 ;  but  only  the
former  value  fitted  without  strain  into  the  periodic  system,  and  since
Nilson  and  Pettersson  measured  the  vapour  pressure  of  beryllium
chloride  and  showed  it  to  have,  most  probably,  the  formula  BeCl2r
the  lower  atomic  weight  has  been  considered  alone  admissible.  On
the  other  hand,  obvious  gaps  in  the  system  lead  to  searches  after  new
elements ;  scandium,  gallium,  and  germanium,  discovered  since  the
establishment  of  the  periodic  system,  have  fitted  in  in  this  way.  In  such
cases  the  chemical  behaviour  and  some  of  the  physical  properties  of
still  unknown  elements  can  be  predicted — Mendelejef  did  so  for  the
metals  just  mentioned ;  this  must  be  regarded  as  a  second  practical
consequence  of  knowing  the  relations  between  the  atomic  weights  of
the  elements  and  their  properties.  The  periodic  system,  as  may  be
seen  from  this,  is  of  the  greatest  service  to  chemists  as  a  mnemonic
help  in  dealing  with  the  huge  mass  of  data  in  their  science.

Besides  the  reasons  mentioned  above,  there  are  other  grounds  for
accepting  the  usual  atomic  weights  as  correct.  The  numerous  recent
measurements  of  molecular  weight  in  solution  have  never  led  to  con-
tradiction with  those  values ;  again  dissociation  has  been  shown  to
occur  in  many  of  the  polyatomic  gases,  but  never  in  those  regarded  as
monatomic  by  the  usual  molecular  theory.

The  Spectra  of  the  Elements.— At  the  end  of  this  chapter  we
are  forced  to  this  question,  viz.  in  what  way  may  we  hope  best  to
obtain  a  deeper  insight  into  the  nature  and  more  intimate  behaviour
of  these  atoms,  the  relative  magnitude  of  which  we  have  already
learned  to  determine  by  a  number  of  distinct  and  safe  methods.  As
far  as  we  can  judge  at  present,  of  all  the  physical  properties,  the
consideration  of  the  spectra  of  the  elements  offers  altogether  the  best  way
to  attack  this  problem.

An  attempt  to  consider  the  phenomena  of  spectrum  analysis,  with
even  partial  thoroughness,  of  course  is  beyond  the  limits  of  our  task,
which  is  to  consider  only  those  investigations  which  have  served  as  a
broader  standpoint  for  the  theoretical  treatment  of  chemistry.  But
although  spectrum  analysis  has  been  a  great  practical  help  in  chemistry,
and  especially  by  its  aid  in  the  discovery  of  new  elements,  yet  the  hopes

194  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

entertained  of  a  theoretical  explanation  remain  thus  far  unfulfilled.
For  this  reason  this  section  will  give  only  a  short  summary  concerning
the  emission  spectra  of  the  elements.  Concerning  the  absorption
spectra  of  organic  compounds,  another  important  class  of  spectrum
phenomena,  some  reference  will  be  made  in  a  later  chapter.

Irrespective  of  the  so-called  phenomena  of  "  luminescence,"  by  which,
after  a  proposal  made  by  E,  Wiedemann,1  there  is  understood  the
property  of  certain  substances  of  becoming  luminous  at  very  low
temperatures,  from  external  conditions,  as  illumination  (photo-lumin-
escence), electric  discharge  (electro-luminescence  of  gases),  chemical
processes  (chemico-luminescence),  crystallisation  (crystallo-luminescence),
gentle  heating  (thermo-luminescence),  etc. ;  the  normal  development  of
light,  i.e.  light  produced  by  the  heat  movement  of  molecules,  and  which
we  will  consider  exclusively  in  this  section,  is  due  to  the  high  tempera-
ture of  the  substance  emitting  the  light.  According  to  Draper's  law,
all  solid  and  liquid  substances  radiate  light  of  shorter  wave-lengths
with  increasing  temperature,  and  at  about  525°  they  all  begin  to  glow
with  a  dark  red  light,  then  become  bright  red,  and  finally  "white
hot."  If  one  observes  this  gradual  increase  in  glow  with  a  spectroscope,
there  appears  at  first  the  red  end  of  the  spectrum,  which  gradually
stretches  over  to  the  violet  end  with  increasing  temperature.  Also
all  solid  and  liquid  substances  give  continuous  spectra ;  but  the  erbium
and  didymium  earths  give  continuous  spectra  crossed  by  certain  bright
lines.

The  glowing  gases  conduct  themselves  in  a  different,  but  a  character-
istic, way.  These  give  out  only,  or  at  least  mostly,  rays  of  a  definite
wave-length ;  and  therefore  they  give  spectra,  which  consist  of  single
bright  bands  sharply  separated.  According  to  the  number  and  breadth
of  these  bright  bands,  they  are  called  band-spectra  or  simple  line-spectra.
Emission  spectrum  analysis,  the  introduction  of  which  into  science  was
the  immortal  work  of  Bunsen  and  Kirchhoff,  and  whose  first-fruit  was
the  discovery  of  several  new  elements,  is  based  on  this  fact,  viz.  that
under  certain  conditions  of  temperature  and  pressure  every  gas  gives
a  definite,  and,  to  a  large  degree,  a  characteristic  spectrum.  Therefore,
in  order  to  examine  a  substance  by  spectrum  analysis,2  it  is  necessary
bo  bring  it  into  the  state  of  a  glowing  gas.  For  easily  volatile  sub-
stances, such  as  the  salts  of  the  alkalies,  the  flame  of  a  Bunsen  burner
is  sufficient;  for  substances  volatile  with  great  difficulty,  one  uses,
according  to  the  circumstances,  the  oxy-hydrogen  blow-pipe,  the  electric
spark,  or  the  electric  arc.  As  is  well  known,  the  production  of  mono-
chromatic light,  which  is  necessary  for  so  many  optical  investigations,
depends  upon  the  selected  rays  emitted  by  incandescent  gases.  It

1  Wied.  Ann.,  34.  449  (1888).

2  For  spectral  analysis,  see  especially  the  review  by  Kayser  in  Winkelmann's  Handbuch
der  Physik>  Breslau,  1894,  vol.  ii.  pp. 390-450. Of  later  work  may  be  mentioned  the
extensive  collection  of  references  by  Landauer,  Spektralanalyse,  Braunschweig,  1896.

CHAP.  I  ATOMIC  THEORY  195

should,  however,  also  be  pointed  out  that  gases  can  give  continuous
spectra.  Thus,  according  to  Frankland,  hydrogen,  e.g.  when  burnt  in
oxygen  under  a  pressure  of  twenty  atmospheres,  gives  a  continuous
spectrum.

It  cannot  be  doubted  that  each  molecular  species,  whether  represent-
ing isolated  atoms  or  chemical  compounds,  has  its  own  characteristic
spectrum  ;  but  the  question  as  to  which  particular  molecular  species
corresponds  to  an  observed  spectrum,  can  be  very  rarely  answered
with  certainty.  The  difficulties  which  are  met  consist  especially  in-
this,  viz.  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  discriminate  in  regard  to  the
molecular  condition  of  an  incandescent  gas  ;  that  this  is  usually  very
much  complicated  at  high  temperatures  where  the  capacity  of  the
substance  for  reaction  is  apparently  very  much  increased,  and  certainly
is  totally  changed  ;  and  that  the  spectrum  observed  where  a  compound  or
even  an  element  is  volatilised,  consists  of  the  superimposed  spectra  belonging  to
different  molecular  species.  The  dissociation  phenomena,  which,  from  all
that  is  known,  occur  more  often  at  high  temperatures  than  under
ordinary  conditions,  play  an  especially  important  rdle.  It  is  certain
in  many  cases  that  the  volatilised  substance,  by  reaction  with  the  gases
of  the  flame  or  with  atmospheric  air,  forms  new  molecular  species,  and
although  only  very  slight  quantities  of  these  may  be  present,  yet  such
is  the  great  sensitiveness  of  the  spectroscope,  that  these  may  be  sufficient
to  produce  clearly  recognisable  lines.  We  have  good  reason  for  assuming
that  single  atoms  give  line  spectra,  and  atomic  complexes  give  band  spectra.

Regularities  in  the  Distribution  of  the  Spectral  Lines  of
the  Elements.  —  Inasmuch  as  there  is  scarcely  any  reason  to  doubt
that  there  is  the  most  intimate  dependence  of  emission  spectra  upon
the  configuration  and  state  of  vibration  of  the  molecule  and  atom  of  a
luminous  substance,  it  requires  only  a  glance  at  the  laws  (by  which,
on  the  one  hand,  the  lines  of  the  same  substance  arrange  themselves
in  the  spectrum,  and  by  which,  on  the  other  hand,  the  arrangement
varies  with  the  substance),  to  hope  that  very  soon,  perhaps,  we  shall
have  further  disclosures  concerning  the  behaviour  and  the  condition
of  movement  of  the  atom.  Although  at  present  we  are  far  removed
from  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  laws  concerning  the  subject,  yet
already  a  beginning  has  been  made  which  is  worthy  of  attention,  and
which  spurs  us  on  to  a  continued  search  for  the  goal.

The  most  important  result  thus  far  obtained  is  in  the  calculation
of  the  lines  of  the  first  hydrogen  spectrum  so-called,  which  is  obtained
by  a  Geissler's  tube,  for  example,  in  which  the  pressure  must  not  be
too  small.  As  Balmer1  discovered,  the  wave-length  A,  of  each  line
can  be  calculated  very  accurately  -from  the  simple  formula

1  Wied.  Ann.,  25.  18  (1885),

196

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

in  which  A"1  denotes  the  vibration  number;  the  successive  numbers
3,  4, 5,  etc.,  are  to  be  substituted  for  m. By  substituting  in  this

formula  the value 3 647 '20  of  the constant  -r-, for the calculated

A

values  corresponding  to  m,  the  following  wave-lengths  are  obtained  : —

THE  HYDROGEN  SPECTRUM

Line.

in

Calculated.

Observed.

Difference.

Ha

3

6564-96

6564-97

o-o

H/3

4

4862-93

4862-93

o-o

H7

5

4341-90

4342-00

+  0-1

H5

6

4103-10

4103-11

o-o

He

7

3971-40

3971-40

o-o

Hf

8

3890-30

3890-30

o-o

Rrj

9

3836-70

3836-80

+0-1

H0

10

3799-20

3799-20

o-o

Hi

11

3771-90

3771-90

o-o

UK

12

3751-40

3751-30

-o-i

HX

13

3735-60

3735-30

-0-3

HM

14

3723-20

3722-80

-0-4

H>

15

3713-20

3712-90

-0-3

The  wave-lengths  in  the  "observed"  column  are  taken  from  the
latest  measurements  by  Ames,1  and  are  expressed  in  ten-millionths
of  a  millimetre;  the  correspondence  between  the  wave-lengths
observed,  and  those  calculated  from  Balmer's  formula,  is  very  remark-
able.

The  preceding  formula  does  not  apply  at  all  to  the  so-called
second  hydrogen  spectrum  ;  this  consists  of  very  numerous  fine  lines ;  it
is  suspected  that  the  two  spectra  belong  to  two  different  molecular
conditions  of  hydrogen.  It  is  possible  that  the  discovery  of  further
regular  cases  of  this  sort  may  be  rendered  difficult  from  the  fact,  that
the  production  of  the  spectra  of  other  elements  is  due  to  the  super-
imposition  of  spectra  belonging  to  several  different  molecular  condi-
tions, and  that  their  separation  does  not  take  place  automatically,  as
in  the  case  of  hydrogen,  where  we  obtain  the  first  spectrum  by
itself.

Concerning  the  relations  which  should  exist  between  the  spectra
of  allied  elements,  it  has  been  shown  by  Lecoq  de  Boisbaudran,  that
the  spectra  of  the  alkali  metals  are  displaced  towards  the  red  end  of
the  spectrum,  with  increasing  atomic  weight.  Recently  Kayser  and
Eunge  2  volatilised  a  number  of  metals  by  means  of  the  electric  arc,

1  Phil.  Mag.  (5),  30.  (1890)  ;  see  also  Cornu,  Journ.  de  phys.  [2],  5.  341.

2  Wied.  Ann.,  41.  302  (1890),  43,385  (1891),  more  completely  in  Abh.  d.  Berl.  Akad.
1890,  1891,  1892  ;  collection  of  results  on  p.  200  of  the  section  of  Winkelmann's  hand-

CHAP.  1  ATOMIC  THEORY  197

and  photographed  their  spectra  by  means  of  a  Rowland  concave
grating;  the  wave-lengths  of  the  lines  were  exactly  determined  to
within  a  hundred-millionth  of  a  millimetre.  They  showed  that  the
lines  may  be  fairly  well  calculated  by  means  of  the  formula,

this  formula  is  a  generalisation  of  Balmer's  formula  ;  yet  although  it
has  two  more  constants  than  the  other,  the  observations  of  the  metals
are  not  attended  with  the  same  degree  of  success  as  was  the  case  with
hydrogen.  Moreover,  it  is  not  possible  to  obtain  the  spectrum  of  a
metal  by  a  formula  like  this  ;  but  it  must  be  resolved  into  a  number
of  series  in  order  to  calculate  the  values  of  the  constants  A,  B,  C.

Now  it  happens  that  for  the  elements  of  Mendelejeff's  first  group,
the  series  (of  which  each  element  has  several),  consists  not  of  lines,
but  of  pairs  of  lines.  Kayser  and  Runge  distinguish  the  following
series  :  —

1.  The  Principal  Series;  their  pairs  are  the  strongest  lines  of  the
spectrum,  and  are  easily  reversible,  i.e.  they  appear  dark  when  the
vapour  has  a  sufficient  density  ;  their  vibration  difference  diminishes
with  increasing  "  m."

2.  The  First  Subordinate  Series  ;  strong  but  very  hazy  pairs  of
lines  ;  they  have  a  constant  vibration  difference.

3.  The  Second  Subordinate  Series  ;  weaker  pairs  of  lines,  but  better
defined,  with  a  constant  vibration  difference,  as  in  2.

The  first  pair  of  the  principal  series  has  also  this  same  vibration
difference  :  this  difference  is  the  most  important  spectroscopic  constant
of  the  element  in  question,  and,  as  will  appear  in  a  moment,  it  seems
to  stand  in  a  definite  relation  to  the  respective  atomic  weight.  The
principal  series  appears  to  be  found  only  in  the  case  of  the  alkali
metals  ;  the  spectra  of  all  other  metals  seem  to  consist  only  of  second-
ary series  ;  no  series  are  found  in  the  spectrum  of  barium  ;  the
spectrum  of  lithium  seems  to  consist  of  only  simple  lines.

The  elements  that  belong  to  the  same  vertical  column  of  the
periodic  system  show  an  obvious  similarity  in  the  construction  of
their  spectra  ;  this  is  established  at  any  rate  for  the  first  two  groups
and  a  part  of  the  third  ;  in  the  others  it  is  as  yet  little  known.  These
three  groups  can  each  be  divided  into  two  parts  that  show  special
chemical  analogy  ;  thus  we  have  I.  Li,  Na,  K,  Rb,  Cs  ;  II.  Cu,  Ag  ;
III.  Mg,  Ca,  Sr;  IV.  Zn,  Cd,  Hg;  V.  Al,  In,  Tl.  .The  relations
inside  each  of  these  groups  are  particularly  close,  as  may  be  seen  from
the  following  table.  Within  each  group  the  spectrum  is  displaced
towards  the  red  by  increase  in  atomic  weight  ;  but  in  passing  from
one  group  to  the  next,  strongly  towards  the  blue.  The  rules  that

book  quoted  above.  Rydberg  put  forward  similar  views  independently  of  Kayser  and
Runge,  see  Svenska  Akad.  HandL,  23.  (1889-1891);  Wied.  Ann.,  50.  629  (1893);
Astrophysical  Journal,  6.  233  (1897).

198

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

hold  are  best  seen  from  the  numbers  in  the  accompanying  table,
which  give  the  constants  A,  B,  C  (multiplied  by  108)  for  the  first
line  of  each  pair  or  triplet  in  the  subsidiary  series  : —

Allied  Serie

3.

Allied  Series-

V

A.

B.

C.

A..

B.

C.

a?

Li

Na
K
Rb
Cs

28,587
24,475
21,991
20,939
19,743

109,625
110,065
114,450
121,193
122,869

1,847
4,148
111,146
134,616
305,824

28,667
24,549
22,021

122,391
120,726
119,363

231,700
197,891
62,506

17
57
234
545

325
381
322
309

Cu

Ag

31,592
30,712

131,150
130,621

1,085,060
1,093,823

31,592
30,696

124,809
123,788

440,582
394,303

249

921

622
794

Mg
Ca

Sr

39,796
33,919
31,031

130,398
123,547
122,328

1,432,090
961,696
837,473

39,837
34,041

125,471
120,398

518,781
346,067

41
102
394

713
638
517

Zn
Cd
Hg

42,945
40,755
40,159

131,641
128,635

127,484

1,236,125
1,289,619
1,252,695

42,955
40,797
40,218

126,919
126,146
326,361

532,850
555,137
613,268

386
1159
4633

918
929
1161

Al
In
Tl

48,308
44,515
41,542

156,662
139,308
132,293

2,505,331
1,311,032
1,265,223

48,245
44,535
41,506

127,527
126,766
122,617

687,819
643,584
790,683

112
2213
7795

1534
1721
1879

These  numbers  show  that  A  falls  off  with  increase  of  atomic
weight  within  each  series — A  being  the  frequency  for  m  =  GO  or
limiting  frequency ;  each  series,  therefore,  is  pushed  towards  the  red  end
by  increasing  atomic  weight.

B  and  C  are  nearly  the  same  for  the  lines  of  a  pair  or  triplet
belonging  to  the  same  series.  The  B  values  vary  but  little — especially
those  of  the  second  series.

The  constant  difference  between  pairs  (or  the  first  two  lines  of
triplets)  in  both  series  is  given  under  the  heading  v  ;  in  the  last  column
this  quantity  is  divided  by  the  square  of  the  atomic  weight  a.  Within
each  of  the  five  groups  this  quotient  is  roughly  constant,  i.e.  the
width  of  the  pairs  and  triplets,  measured  in  frequency  of  vibration,
is  approximately  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  atomic  weight
within  each  group.

Series  of  subsidiary  character  have  also  been  found  in  the  spectra
of  oxygen  and  sulphur.  The  lines  of  the  series  are  triplets.

There  are  likewise  found  in  the  band  spectra  of  the  metalloids
certain  regularities  which  are  partially  related  to  the  preceding.
Thus  Deslandres1  found  that  the  distribution  of  the  bands  can  be

1  C. R., 104. 972  (1887);  106.  842  (1888);  110. 748  (1890);  112. 661
(1891); Ann.  chim.  Phys.  [6],  14.  5  (1888).

CHAP.  I  ATOMIC  THEORY  199

expressed  by  the  formula

when,  again,  "  m  "  denotes  the  vibration  number,  and  A  and  B
constants  which  are  characteristic  for  the  respective  series  of  the
element  in  question  ;  A,  denotes  the  wave-length  of  some  characteristic
line  of  the  band  which  serves  as  its  representative  :  thus  the  distribu-
tion of  lines  within  any  one  band  is  given  by  the  formula

where  again  "  a  "  and  "  b  "  are  constants.  By  making  m  =  0,  we
obtain  the  fundamental  vibration  of  the  band,  i.e.  the  line  which,  as
stated  above,  was  chosen  by  Deslandres  to  represent  the  band.  This
last  rule  requires  that  each  of  the  bands  belonging  to  the  same  series
of  an  element,  shall  show  a  manifest  similarity  as  regards  the  number
of  their  maxima  and  minima  of  brightness,  and  also  as  to  their
relative  distances  and  arrangement;  while  the  former  rule  requires
just  what  was  found  to  appear  in  the  case  of  the  line-  spectra  of  the
metals.

As  is  obvious  from  what  has  preceded,  the  following  law  holds
good,  viz.  the  farther  we  advance  toward  the  violet  (more  refrangible)  end  of
the  spectrum,  the  closer  do  the  lines  .approach  each  other,  so  that  the  line-
spectrum  prevails  almost  exclusively  at  the  ultra-violet  end.

According  to  Biecke,1  the  difference  between  line  and  band  spectra
is  that  in  the  former  the  frequencies  in  the  series  form  a  simple  pro-
gression, like  those  of  a  string  or  an  organ  pipe  ;  the  waves  are  there-
fore due  to  atomic  or  molecular  vibrations  similar  to  those  of  linear
systems  ;  while  the  vibrations  of  molecules  producing  band  spectra  are
determined  by  three  independent  conditions,  and  are  thus  analogous  to
the  vibrations  of  bodies  possessing  extension  in  space.

1  Lehrbuch  d.  Physik,  2  edit.  Bd.  1,  pp.  518  and  520  (1903).

CHAPTER II

THE KINETIC THEORY OF THE MOLECULE

General  Observations. — As  we  have  thus,  in  the  preceding  chapter,
considered  the  properties  of  the  atoms,  which  are  to  be  regarded  as  the
building  stones  which  by  their  union  produce  molecules,  we  will  in  this
and  the  following  chapter  seek  to  frame  a  conception  of  the  structures
which  these  building -stones  form.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  we
depart  from  simple  experiment  at  the  outset :  if  it  were  possible  to
construct  a  system  of  theoretical  chemistry  without  speculations  of
that  sort,  but  under  the  safe  guidance  of  thermodynamics,  even  then
much  important  knowledge  would  escape  us.  "It  is  certainly  an
advantage  that  the  laws  of  thermodynamics  contain  truths  which
cannot  be  shaken,  since  they  do  not  rest  upon  any  hypothesis  of  the
constitution  of  substances.  But  if  one  should  refrain  from  a  thorough
investigation  into  the  being  of  substances,  from  a  fear  that  he  must
thereby  abandon  the  region  of  indestructible  truths,  he  would  wilfully
ignore  a  path  leading  to  new  truths."1

There  are  two  very  different  ways  which  lead  to  conceptions
regarding  the  world  of  the  molecule.

Thus,  on  the  one  hand,  we  may  seek  to  derive  many  properties  of
molecules,  and  at  the  same  time  the  properties  of  the  substances
formed  from  them,  by  means  of  purely  mechanical  principles  :  this
procedure  primarily  would  have  a  purely  deductive  nature ;  but  with
the  further  development  of  this  method,  since  it  serves  to  bring  the
properties  of  the  substance  into  an  increasingly  intimate  connection
with  the  properties  of  the  molecule,  here  also  one  must  work
inductively,  as  is  invariably  true  in  science.  We  regard  it  as  the
greatest  result  of  this  method  of  investigation,  that  it  makes  the
nature  of  heat  intelligible  by  means  of  simple  kinetic  conceptions.

On  the  other  hand,  by  studying  the  innumerable  carbon  com-
pounds, one  is  led  to  thorough  conceptions  regarding  the  arrangement
of  the  atoms  in  the  molecule.  The  conjectures  which  at  first  were

1  Van  cler  Waals,  Kontinuitat,  etc.,  p.  119. Leipzig,  1881.
200

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  201

vague,  begin  to  assume  tangible  form,  and  they  support  the  work  of
the  investigators  so  effectively  that  the  fear  that  chemists  would
branch  out  into  hypotheses  almost  too  daring,  must  be  regarded  as
groundless  in  view  of  the  undeniable  results  to  which  these  hypotheses
have  led  :  in  this  way  arose  structural  chemistry  and  its  consequence,
stereo-chemistry.

In  this  chapter  we  will  consider  the  molecular  theory  in  its
physical  aspect,  and  on  account  of  the  limited  space  in  this  work,
only  the  more  important  subject  will  be  noted.  It  should  be  noticed,
as  a  matter  of  historical  interest,  that  as  early  as  1740  Daniel
Bernoulli  entertained  conceptions  regarding  the  behaviour  of  gases
which  were  essentially  identical  with  the  views  universally  entertained
at  present;  but  it  was  not  till  1845  that  J.  J.  Waterson  presented
before  the  London  Royal  Society  a  paper  containing  a  very  happy  and
complete  development  of  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases.  Unfortunately
the  paper  at  that  time  was  not  printed,  and  its  publication  was
accomplished  only  lately  by  Lord  Rayleigh,1  who  found  it  in  the
archives.  Thus  it  happened  that  Kroenig  in  1856,  and  Clausius  in
1857,  developed  essentially  the  same  views  independently.  After  the
fundamental  ideas  were  thus  clearly  established,  Clausius,  Maxwell,
Boltzmann,  van  der  Waals,  and  others,  participated  in  the  further
development  of  the  theory.

For  the  literature  see  0.  E.  Meyer,  Kinetic  Theory  of  Gases,  in
which  weight  is  laid  on  simplicity  of  presentation  and  experimental
proof;  and  especially  Boltzmann,  Gas  Theory,  i.  and  ii.  (Leipzig,  1895-
1898),  which  aims  rather  at  the  most  exact  working  out  of  the
fundamental  hypotheses,  also  the  remarkable  work  of  Clausius,
Mechanical  Theory  of  Heat,  iii.  (Braunschweig,  1889-1891),  which  un-
fortunately was  never  finished.

The  Kinetic  Theory  of  Gases. — This  theory  represents  the  first
successful  attempt  to  explain  a  number  of  the  material  properties  of
substance,  by  means  of  assumptions  concerning  the  nature  of  the
molecule  which  are  characterised  by  simplicity  and  clearness ;  the
theory  starts  out  by  assuming  that  the  molecule  of  a  gas  is  indeed  very
small,  but  yet  has  a  certain  finite  extension,  so  that  the  space  occupied
by  the  molecule  itself,  or  by  its  sphere  of  activity,  is  very  small  as
compared  with  the  volume  occupied  by  the  gas  as  a  whole.  The
molecules  are  separated  by  distances  which  are  very  large  in  comparison
with  their  own  size,  and  therefore  exert  no  marked  influence  on  each
other.  Only  when  they  come  very  close  to  one  another  do  colliding
forces  appear,  and  these  at  once  cause  them  to  separate ;  or,  in  other
words,  the  molecules  conduct  themselves  on  collision  like  absolutely
•elastic  bodies.

Let us consider the path  of any  selected  molecule; this  will

1  PhU.  Trans.,  183.  1  (1892).

202  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

continue  to  move  with  a  certain  uniform  velocity,  since  it  is  not  subject
to  the  action  of  any  force,  until  it  collides  with  another  molecule ;
after  rebounding  from  this,  it  will,  as  a  rule,  move  with  a  uniform
velocity,  but  changed  in  direction  and  magnitude,  till  there  follows
another  collision,  etc.  The  path  of  a  molecule  will  be  a  zigzag,  the
component  parts  of  which  will  range  through  fluctuating  velocities
which  vary  around  a  certain  mean  value.  Thus  the  length  of  the  free
path,  i.e.  the  path  traversed  without  colliding  with  any  other  molecule,
the  so-called  "  free  path,"  is  constantly  subject  to  change ;  but  when
the  external  conditions  are  maintained  constant,  it  varies  about  a
definite  mean  value,  viz.  the  "mean  free  path."

The  mean  kinetic  energy  of  the  motion  of  translation  of  any  particular

molecule  amounts  to —  u2,  if "  m " denotes  its mass,  and  "  u "  its

a

mean  velocity.  But  besides  the  energy  of  the  motion,  the  molecule
has  a  certain  internal  energy  which  is  given  by  the  kinetic  energy
both  of  the  rotatory  motion  of  the  molecule,  and  also  of  the  vibration
of  the  atoms  composing  the  molecule.  Regarding  the  internal
energy  of  a  molecule,  we  must  assume  that  it  is  by  no  means  con-
stant, but  that  it  also,  in  the  course  of  time,  varies  about  a  certain
mean  value.

That  pressure,  under  which  an  enclosed  volume  of  gas  stands,  and
which  it  conversely  exerts  on  the  walls  of  the  enclosing  vessel,  can  be
at  once  calculated  from  this  assumption  without  knowing  anything
more ;  it  is  occasioned  by  the  blows  of  the  molecules  on  the  walls  of
the  vessel  as  they  strike  and  bound  back  from  it ;  and  it  is  obvious
that,  other  things  being  equal,  the  number  of  these  blows  is  propor-
tional to  the  quantity  of  the  molecules  in  unit  volume,  i.e.  to  the
density  of  the  gas.  But  this  only  amounts  to  saying  that  the  pressure
exerted  by  an  enclosed  quantity  of  gas  must  be  inversely  proportional
to  the  space  occupied  by  it,  as  is  explained  by  the  Boyle-Mariotte
law  (p.  38).

In  order  to  calculate  the  pressure  quantitatively,  let  us  suppose  a
cube,  the  content  of  which  represents  unit  volume,  and  the  sides  of
which  therefore  represent  unit  area,  to  contain  any  selected  quantity
of  a  simple  gas ;  let  the  mass  of  one  molecule  of  the  gas  be  "  m,"  and
the  number  of  molecules  be  N ;  then  the  density  of  the  gas  will  be
represented  by  the  equation

The  mean  square -velocity  u2  of  the  molecule  determines  the
pressure  exerted,  as  is  easily  seen ;  for  both  the  force  and  the
frequency  of  the  blows  of  the  gas  molecules  depend  upon  u.  A
molecule  striking  in  a  direction  normal  to  a  cube  face,  will  be  thrown
back  in  a  reverse  direction,  but  with  the  same  velocity,  and  has  there-

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  203

fore  the  same  degree  of  inverse  momentum  ;  the  momentum  therefore
of  the  wall  experiences  the  change

2mu.

Now  if  we  denote  the  number  of  molecules  striking  the  cube  wall
in  unit  time  by  v,  then  the  pressure  exerted  on  unit  of  surface
amounts  to

p  =  2muv.

In  order  to  calculate  v,  let  us  imagine  the  irregular  movement  of
the  molecules  to  be  arranged  in  order,  for  an  instant  ;  and  during
this  time,  let  them  all  move  in  the  same  direction,  and  that  at  right
angles  to  one  of  the  sides  of  the  cube,  and  with  the  mean  velocity  u  ;
then  during  this  moment  the  number  of  molecules  which  will  bound
back  from  the  wall,  provided  the  external  conditions  remain  constant,
will  be

Nu,

and  it  is  obvious  that  during  this  time,  this  wall  only  will  be  subjected
to  the  total  pressure  exerted  by  the  gas.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  this
total  pressure  distributes  itself  between  the  six  cube  faces  in  the
movements  actually  taking  place  ;  then  in  reality  we  will  obtain  l

and  the  pressure  sought  therefore  will  be

p  =  -Nmu2  =  -^u2.

From  this  equation  there  can  be  calculated  the  mean  velocity  u
for  all  sorts  of  gases.  For  example,  let  us  consider  a  quantity  of
hydrogen  enclosed  in  1  c.c.  at  0°  and  under  atmospheric  pressure  ;  the
weight  of  this  amounts  to  0  '00008988  g.  and  the  pressure  exerted  by
this  upon  1  sq.  cm.  amounts  to  1033*3  g.  weight,  or  1033*3  x  980'6
absolute  units  (980'6  =  gravity  acceleration).

Thus  the  value  of  u  is  found  to  be

3  x  1033-3  x  980-6 lsoQAncm
^0-00008988  "• ™. we

According  to  this  the  hydrogen  molecules  move  with  a  velocity
which  averages  about  the  enormous  mean  value  of  1'84  kilometers  per
second.  Since,  according  to  Avogadro's  rule,  p  is  proportional  to  the

1  This  conclusion  can  really  be  based  upon  more  satisfactory  reasoning  (p.  207  of  the
above  quoted  work  of  Boltzmann).

204  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

molecular  weight  M,  we  can  find  the  velocity  for  other  gases  by  the
formula

u0=183,

M sec.

We  observe  that  u  is  independent  of  the  pressure ;  but  u  increases
with  increasing  temperature;  and  since  p  is  proportional  to  the

absolute  temperature,  then  -^-u2,  the  mean  kinetic  energy  of  the  translators/

2

motion,  is  proportional  to  the  absolute  temperature;  and  conversely  the  mean
kinetic  energy  of  the  molecules  of  a  gas  is  a  measure  of  the  temperature.

Now  this  definition  of  temperature  has  led  to  entirely  new
conceptions  of  the  nature  of  heat.  The  content  of  heat  of  a  body,
no  matter  what  the  state  of  aggregation,  in  the  sense  of  these  kinetic
considerations,  is  represented  by  the  sum  total  of  the  kinetic  energy
of  its  molecules.  The  kinetic  energy  consists  of  the  energy  of  progression
of  the  molecules  (or  more  correctly,  of  their  centres  of  gravity),
together  with  their  internal  energy;  this  latter  consists  of  the
kinetic  energy  of  the  rotatory  movements  of  all  the  molecules,
and  also  of  the  movements  performed  by  the  atoms  in  the  molecular
groups.  Apparently  the  former  variety  [the  molecular  movement]  is
proportional  to  the  absolute  temperature,  not  only  in  the  case  of  gases,
but  also  universally.  According  to  this,  at  absolute  zero,  -  273°,  all
movements  of  the  molecule  would  cease,  and  matter  would  lapse  into
the  death  of  heat.

The  irregular  movement  of  the  molecule,  which  constitutes  the
heat  content  of  a  substance,  primarily  is  not  different  from  the  orderly
movement  of  a  body,  i.e.  a  movement  whereby  all  the  molecules  move
through  space  in  the  same  direction,  and  with  the  same  velocity,  when
the  body  moves  as  a  whole.  But  from  the  practical  point  of  view,  it
makes  a  great  difference  whether  the  problem  given  to  the  experimenter
is  to  determine  the  work  expended  in  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  regular,
or  of  the  irregular  movements  of  matter.  Let  us  imagine  kinetic
energy  to  be  introduced  into  any  body  in  two  forms  :  first,  in  the  form
of  orderly  motion,  whereby  it  attains  a  definite  velocity  either  of  pro-
gression or  of  rotation,  as  a  whole  ;  second,  in  the  form  of  irregular
motion  (heat),  whereby  the  particular  molecules  of  the  body  attain
velocities  of  progression  and  rotation  which  vary  in  degree  and
direction, — in  other  words,  the  temperature  of  the  body  is  raised  a
certain  amount  depending  on  its  specific  heat.  There  is  no  difficulty
in  the  first  case  in  ascertaining  the  amount  of  energy  in  the  substance,
as  by  applying  it  to  the  accomplishment  of  a  certain  amount  of  work,
or  in  causing  it  to  warm  another  substance,  or  even  itself.  But  to
apply  the  total  energy  of  irregular  motions  to  the  performance  of  any
kind  of  work,  to  change  it  completely  into  energy  of  progressive

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  205

motion  of  another  body,  this  is  at  present  an  insoluble  problem  for  our
human  powers  of  experimentation.  The  problem  could  be  easily  solved
by  a  being  small  enough  to  consider  energy  of  motion  of  molecules
in  the  same  way  that  we  consider  the  motions  of  large  bodies,  but  not
by  beings  like  us  to  whose  senses  the  molecules  are  imperceptible.
However,  if  we  cool  the  original  body  and  collect  the  heat  introduced,
by  suitable  intermediate  substances,  we  can,  at  least  in  part,  convert  this
into  energy  of  progressive  motion.  In  this  way,  by  the  aid  of  kinetic
considerations,  we  get  a  clear  conception  of  the  mutual  convertibility  of
heat  and  external  work;  and  as  the  first  law  of  thermodynamics,  i.e.
the  indestructibility  of  energy  and  the  equivalence  of  heat  and  work,
follows  directly  from  the  definition  of  heat  as  kinetic  energy,  which  is
obtained  from  kinetic  principles,  so  we  are  also  led  to  the  second  law
of  thermodynamics,1  i.e.  the  limited  convertibility  of  heat  into  external
work,  by  the  essential  difference,  which  is  noted  according  to  our
present  condition  in  the  art  of  experimentation,  between  the  realisa-
tion of  the  kinetic  energy  of  regular  (macroscopic)  and  of  irregular
(molecular)  motion.

The  Rule  Of  Avogadro.  —  Let  us  compare  two  different  gases  at
the  same  temperature  and  pressure  ;  and  let  us  denote  by  NI}  m15  and
up  the  number  of  molecules  in  unit  volume,  their  mass,  and  their  mean
velocity  respectively  for  one  gas,  and  similar  values  for  the  other  gas
by  N2,  m2,  and  u2  respectively  ;  then  the  common  pressure  p  of  both
gases,  by  the  formula  (p.  203),  must  amount  to

• . (1)

Now,  experiment  shows  that  by  mixing  different  gases  there  occurs
no  change  of  pressure  or  temperature  ;  the  different  molecular  species
preserve  their  kinetic  energy  unchanged  after  the  mixture.  We  might
make  the  very  improbable  assumption  that  one  kind  of  molecule  gains
as  much  kinetic  energy  as  the  other  loses,  on  mixture  ;  but  even  this
assumption  is  contradicted  by  experience,  for  each  gas  in  a  mixture  exerts
(e.g.  on  a  semipermeable  partition)  the  same  pressure  as  if  the  others
were  not  there,  and  that  would  not  be  possible  if  the  addition  of  another
gas  affected  its  kinetic  energy.  Hence  in  the  mixture  the  two  kinds

of  molecules  must  have  mean  kinetic  energy  -^i^  or  ,-m2u22  respec-

tively. But  as  the  two  gases  are  in  thermal  equilibrium  they  must
have  the  same  mean  kinetic  energy,  else,  according  to  the  laws  of
collision  of  elastic  spheres  an  interchange  of  energy  would  occur.

1  Boltzmann,  the  work  quoted  above,  p.  207. To  him  we  owe  also  the  deduction
of  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  from  kinetic  concepts  (1886).

206  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

Therefore  we  find  that

Imi<  =  Im2u2* .  (2)

and  accordingly

N1  =  N2  . (3)

That  is,  unit  volumes  of  all  the  different  gases,  at  the  same  temperature
and  pressure,  contain  the  same  number  of  molecules  ;  or  the  molecular  weights
of  gases  have  the  same  ratio  to  each  other  as  their  densities.  Thus  the  law
of  Avogadro  follows  from  the  standpoint  of  the  kinetic  theory,  a  result
of  fundamental  importance  for  physical  chemistry,  since  its  conclusions
are  largely  based  on  Avogadro's  law.

The  Ratio  of  the  Specific  Heats. — As  already  pointed  out,
the  heat  content  of  1  g.-mol.  of  a  gas  having  the  molecular  weight
M,  consists  of  the  energy  of  the  progressive  motion  of  the  molecule

f  =  —  u2  V  plus  the  energy  of  the  internal  movements  of  the  molecule.

If  we  denote  the  increase  of  the  internal  energy  per  degree  of  tempera-
ture by  E,  then  the  specific  molecular  heat  at  constant  volume  Cv
(see  p.  49)  will  be

and  the  specific  molecular  heat  at  constant  pressure  will  be

in  which

3MT~"Y

refers  to  the  external  work  performed ;  J  is  the  mechanical  equivalent
of  heat ;  the  ratio  of  the  two  specific  heats  is  given  by  the  equation

Cv  1 u2

2MT+E

Inasmuch  as  E,  from  necessity,  has  a  positive  value,  k  must  always

^
be  less  than  -  =  T667  ;  and  k  approaches  this  limiting  value  only  when

E  is  very  small.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  E  becomes  very  great,  then
k  approaches  the  value  1.  These  anticipations  are  most  perfectly
established  by  experiment,  as  the  following  table  shows  : —

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  207

k  k

Mercury  .  . 1'666  Chloroform  . I'lO

Oxygen  .  . 1-404  Methyl  ether . 1-113

Nitrogen  .  . 1'410  Ethyl  ether  . 1'029

Ammonia  .  . 1'30

In  only  one  case,  viz.  that  of  mercury,  in  which  k  was  measured
by  Kundt  and  Warburg1  by  the  "dust  figure"  method  (p.  51),  does
the  ratio  of  the  specific  heats  reach  its  upper  limit ;  but  mercury  is
a  monatomic  gas ;  and  it  was  to  be  expected  on  a  priori  grounds  that,
in  this  case,  the  internal  kinetic  energy  would  have  an  infinitesimal
value  as  compared  with  the  energy  of  progression.  This  brilliant
coincidence  between  anticipation  and  experiment  is  one  of  the  most
beautiful  results  of  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases.

In  case  of  the  other  gases  studied,  k  is  always  smaller  than  1'667,
and  in  general  it  falls  below  this  upper  limit,  i.e.  the  internal  energy
is  larger  as  compared  with  the  external  energy,  just  in  proportion  as
the  number  of  atoms  in  the  molecule  increases ;  and  this  is  in  accord
with  the  theoretical  explanation,  that  as  a  molecule  becomes  more
complicated,  a  greater  fraction  of  the  heat  introduced  will  be  used  in
increasing  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  atoms  in  the  molecule  :  thus  in
the  case  of  ethyl  ether,  the  relative  difference  between  the  specific  heats
is  very  small  in  comparison  with  their  absolute  magnitudes.

The  molecular  heat  at  constant  volume  may  thus  be  calculated
for  monatomic  gases,  for  which  E  =  0,  in  absolute  measure ;  it  is

n. M  u2 -0,0  ,

Cv=-  But  u*= ~--,  therefore

n (261, 100)2
(jv  =  ±-— — ' absolute  units
'2  x  27 6

(261,100)*

2  x  273  x  41-77  x  106

Direct  measurement  of  CP/CV  =  1'666  for  mercury  vapour  together
with  the  relation  CP-CV  =  1'991  (p.  49),  gives  Cv  =  2'989.
The  remarkable  agreement  of  these  numbers  is,  of  course,  only
another  version  of  the  test  of  theory  already  given.  The  mon-
atomic gases  do  not  fall  under  Le  Chatelier's  rule  (p.  46) ;  their
molecular  heat  at  constant  pressure  does  not  converge  to  6 "5  at  the
absolute  zero,  but  remains  at  2*99  +  T99  =  4'98  for  all  temperatures.
But  by  a  slight  change  in  the  value  of  d  the  rule  might  be  put  in  the
form  Cp  =  4--9S  +  aT  ;  it  would  then  have  a  very  simple  kinetic  mean-
ing, that  with  fall  of  temperature  the  energy  of  internal  movement
lessens  relatively  to  that  of  translation,  and  vanishes  at  the  absolute

1  Pogg.  Ann.,  157.  353  (1876).

208  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  1  1

zero  ;  this  would  point  —  in  harmony  with  kinetic  views  on  dissocia-
tion —  to  a  shrinking  of  the  molecules  to  massive  points  with  no  energy
of  rotation  at  the  absolute  zero.  Lord  Bayleigh,  it  is  well  known,
found  the  ratio  of  the  specific  heats  T667  for  the  newly  discovered
gaseous  elements,  helium,  argon,  etc.,  from  which,  by  analogy  with
mercury,  they  were  concluded  to  be  monatomic.  This  is  in  accoid
with  their  position  in  the  periodic  system  (p.  187).

The  Mean  Length  of  the  Free  Path.  —  The  kinetic  theory  of
the  gaseous  state  has  in  a  similar  way  led  to  a  clearer  conception  con-
cerning a  number  of  other  properties  of  gases,  and  in  particular  it  has
thrown  light  upon  the  properties  of  diffusion,  of  internal  friction,  and  of  the
conduction  of  heat.  All  of  these  properties  can  be  explained  by  the
backward  and  forward  motion  of  the  gas  molecules  ;  these  motions
cause  the  impinging  layers  of  gases  of  different  composition  to  mingle
with  each  other  (ordinary  diffusion)  ;  they  also  bring  about  the  equalisa-
tion of  the  different  velocities  of  the  various  gas  molecules  (internal
friction),  and  thus  effect  the  exchange  of  kinetic  energy  (conduction  of
heat).  These  three  properties  appear  to  be  very  closely  related  ;  we
may  define  the  first  as  the  diffusion  of  matter,  the  second  as  the
diffusion  of  momentum,  and  the  third  as  the  diffusion  of  kinetic
energy  (heat).1

Each  one  of  these  three  processes  has  a  very  close  dependence
upon  the  "mean  free  path,"  L,  of  the  molecule,  which,  according  to
Clausius,  is  calculated  to  be

where  we  denote  by  A  the  mean  distance  of  the  supposedly  spherical
molecules  ;  by  A3  the  cube  which  in  cross-section  contains  a  molecule  ;
and  by  s,  the  distance  of  the  centres  of  gravity  of  two  molecules  on
collision,  i.e.  when  at  the  nearest  approach  that  they  can  make  to  each
other.  The  free  path  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  number  of  mole-
cules in  unit  volume,  i.e.  it  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  density  of  the
gas.  In  deriving  this  formula,  it  is  presupposed  that  s  is  small  com-
pared with  L,  and  also  that  the  same  (mean)  velocity  of  progressive
motion  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  molecules.  If  one  dispenses  with  this
last  assumption,  then  in  the  preceding  formula,  according  to  Maxwell,
in  establishing  his  law  of  distribution,  there  is  obtained  \/(2  instead

of  ~  ;  (i.e.  1-41  instead  of  1'33).
o

The  first  determination  of  a  mean  free  path  was  made  by  Maxwell

1  See  Maxwell,  Theory  of  Heat,  chap.  xxii.

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  209

(1860),  who  obtained  for  the  value  of  77,  i.e.  the  internal'  friction  of  a
gas,  the  equation

12
where  p  denotes  the  density,  and  —  u  denotes  the  mean  velocity  cal-

I  o

culated  from  the  law  of  distribution.  Later,  the  mean  free  path  was
calculated  from  the  conductivity  of  heat  (Maxwell  and  Clausius),  and
from  the  diffusion  of  gases  (Maxwell  and  Stefan),  and  in  all  cases  the
values,  found  by  these  different  methods,  coincided  with  each  other,
at  least  approximately.

Thus  0.  E.  Meyer1  calculated  these  values  at  20°,  and  760  mm.
pressure,  for  the  following  substances  —

L

Hydrogen .  ... 0  '000185  ri

Methane  ...  .  . 0  '000085

Carbon  monoxide .  .  .  .  . 0  '000098

Carbon  dioxide  .  -  .  .  . 0  '000068

Ammonia .  .  . 0  '000074

The  Maxwell  law  of  distribution  is  this  :  out  of  N  molecules  of  a
gas,  the  number  whose  velocity  lies  between  v  arid  v  +  dv  at  any
moment  is

/27N;
V 8 u

-  e 2u'dv;

where  u  is  the  molecular  velocity  already  calculated  (p.  204),  u,  according
to  its  deduction,  expresses  the  velocity  corresponding  to  the  mean  kinetic
energy  of  the  molecules.  The  chief  fault  of  this  law  is  that  its  com-
plexity makes  it  almost  impossible  to  carry  out  extensive  numerical
calculations  based  on  kinetic  concepts.

Thus  the  theory  of  neither  thermal  conduction  nor  diffusion  can
be  regarded  as  complete.  The  only  certainty  is  that  the  coefficient  of
heat  conduction  K  takes  in  the  kinetic  theory  a  form

K = KTfCyj

where  K  is  a  numerical  factor  (apparently  depending  on  the  ratio  of
the  specific  heats),  and  cv  is  the  specific  heat  of  the  gas.  This  rela-
tion is  proved  by  Schleiermacher  (Wied.  Ann.,  36.  1889,  p.  346).

The following remarkable result is due to Maxwell. L being

inversely  proportional  to  the  density  of  the  gas,  the  viscosity  77,  and

consequently the thermal conductivity K, is independent of the

density. Unlikely  as  this  appears  at  first  sight  it  is  fully  confirmed

1  Kinetische  Theorie  der  Gase,  Breslau,  1877,  p.  142.

P

210  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

by  experience.  No  one  who  grasps  the  order  of  these  thoughtful
conclusions  and  their  exact  experimental  confirmation,  would  decide
to  give  up  the  kinetic  theory  until  some  other  self-contained  theory  of
the  phenomena  appears.

For  two  gases  of  equal  molecular  weight  and  equal  viscosity  the
coefficient  of  diffusion  is  found  to  be

e.g.  CO2  and  N02  gave  0'089,  whilst  the  calculated  value  from
77  =  0-000160  and  p  =  0'00195  is  0'082.  The  general  theoretical  treat-
ment of  gaseous  diffusion  involves  great  difficulties  (see  the  above-
mentioned  work  of  Boltzmann  quoted  on  p.  201).

The  Behaviour  of  Gases  at  Higher  Pressures.  —  When  we
reduce  a  gas  to  a  great  density  by  the  application  of  great  pressure,
as  we  approach  the  liquid  state,  the  gases  repudiate  the  gas  laws
entirely  (as  was  shown  on  p.  54),  and  we  meet  a  difficult  problem
in  attempting  to  account  for  this  modification  of  gases.  This  was
studied  with  extraordinary  success  by  van  der  Waals  ;  l  his  theoretical
explanation  of  the  deviations,  shown  by  strongly  compressed  gases,
from  the  Boyle-Mariotte  law,  have  given  us  some  wonderful  glimpses
into  the  nature  of  the  liquid  state.

The  accepted  view  of  the  kinetic  gas  theory  serves  as  the  guiding
idea.  In  ascribing  the  pressure  exerted  by  the  gas  on  the  walls,  to  the
bombardment  of  the  molecules  in  their  backward  and  forward  move-
ment, two  assumptions  were  made  ;  viz.  firstly,  that  the  whole  space
of  the  enclosing  vessels  is  utilised  by  the  moving  molecules,  or,  in
other  words,  the  volume  actually  occupied  by  the  molecules  is  very
small  in  comparison  with  the  whole  volume  ;  and,  secondly,  that  the
molecules  exert  no  very  great  reciprocal  action  on  each  other.  These
two  assumptions,  of  course,  would  be  realised  at  a  great  attenuation  of
a  gas,  and  they  would  become  less  exact  the  nearer  the  molecules
were  brought  together.  Thus  it  is  necessary  to  introduce  the  influence
of  these  two  factors  into  the  gas  equation

We  must,  under  all  circumstances,  hold  fast  to  the  corollary  that
the  kinetic  energy  of  the  translatory  motion  of  the  molecule  is  propor-
tional to  the  absolute  temperature,  and  is  independent  of  the  particular
nature  of  the  molecule  in  question.  Then  the  influence  of  a  spatial
extension  of  the  molecules  will  have  this  effect,  viz.  that,  as  a  result
of  the  consequent  contraction  of  their  "  play  space,"  they  will  strike

1  Kontinuitat  der  gasformigen und  flussigen Zustandes. German trans, by F.
Roth. Leipzig,  1831.

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  211

the  wall  so  much  the  oftener.  As  a  result  of  this  circumstance,  the
pressure  exerted  will  be  greater  than  that  calculated  from  the  gas
formula,  and,  indeed,  the  pressure  will  be  increased  in  the  same  ratio
that  the  mean  free  path  is  shortened  from  the  spatial  extension  of  the
molecules.  In  this  way  van  der  Waals  found  that,  as  a  result  of  the
increase  of  the  volume  of  the  molecule,  the  pressure  would  apparently

Y

increase  in  the  ratio  — , :  where  "b"  the  so-called  "volume  correc-
v  -  b

tion,"  is  fourfold  as  large  as  the  volume  of  the  molecules.  Apparently
"b"  diminishes  somewhat  when  the  molecules  are  very  close  to  each
other ;  but  the  important  question  of  the  rate  of  decrease  needs
further  study.

Moreover,  there  are  attracting  and  repelling  forces  active  between
the  molecules  as  they  approach  each  other  in  compression.  From  the
experimental  fact,  discovered  by  Joule  and  Thomson  (1854),  that
strongly  compressed  gases  are  noticeably  cooled  by  expansion  which
takes  place  without  doing  work  against  external  pressure,  it  is  to  be
inferred  that  the  expansion  performs  work  against  the  action  of
molecular  forces,  i.e.  .the  molecules  attract  each  other.  Therefore  we
must  ascribe  a  certain  cohesion  to  gases  also,  and  this  will  be  the  more
noticeable  the  greater  their  density.  Regarding  the  mode  of  action
of  this  molecular  attraction,  many  facts  lead  in  common  to  the  concep-
tion that  these  forces  are  active  only  when  the  molecules  are  very  near  each
other,  and  that  they  quickly  vanish  on  their  separation  from  each  other.
Thus  the  explanation  of  the  fact  that  the  gas  molecules  do  not
agglomerate  into  one  mass  in  spite  of  their  attraction,  and  of  their
being  separated  by  only  empty  space,  this  we  must  ascribe  to  the  heat
motion  which  resists  a  diminution  of  volume,  and  acts  like  a  repulsive
force.  Thus  likewise  the  moon,  though  attracted  to  the  earth,  does
not  fall  upon  it,  because  its  centrifugal  force,  resulting  from  its
circular  motion,  resists  the  attraction,  and  exactly  compensates  it,  at
least  in  finite  time.

A  molecule  in  the  interior  of  a  gas  mass,  experiences,  on  the  whole,
no  attractive  force,  because  the  molecules  are  distributed  around  it  in
homogeneous  density,  while  a  molecule  existing  in  the  surface  is
attracted  inwards.  This  attraction  acts  against  the  momentum  of  the
blow  with  which  the  molecules  strike  the  wall :  thus  from  the  molecular
attraction  there  results  a  diminution  of  the  pressure  acting  outwards.  In
view  of .  our  ignorance  of  the  law,  according  to  which  the  molecular
attraction  decreases  with  separation,  the  following  may  be  stated
regarding  its  dependence  upon  the  density  of  the  gas  in  question.

If  we  consider  a  part  of  the  surface,  then  the  force  attracting  it
inwards  will  be  proportional  to  the  number  of  molecules  in  the
interior,  i.e.  to  the  density  of  the  gas ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  this
force  is  also  proportional  to  the  number  of  molecules  existing  in  the
part  of  the  surface  considered,  and  this  also  increases  with  the  density  ;

212  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

hence  the  attraction  sought  varies  directly  with  the  square  of  the  density,  or
inversely  with  the  square  of  the  volume  of  the  gas  mass.  If  we  denote  by
p0  the  pressure  of  the  gas,  referred  to  its  density  and  the  kinetic
energy  of  its  molecules,  and  by  p  the  effective  pressure  of  the  gas
mass  as  actually  measured  by  the  manometer,  then  we  have  —

where  "  a  "  denotes  a  constant  which  refers  to  the  calculated  molecular
attraction  of  the  gas,  and  where  K  denotes  the  molecular  pressure.

The  Equation  of  van  der  Waals.  —  If  we  introduce  into  the
gas  equation  (p.  41),  in  place  of  the  volume  occupied  by  the  gas
mass,  the  volume  corrected  for  the  space  actually  occupied  by  the
molecules,  and  instead  of  the  pressure  actually  exerted  by  the  gas
mass,  the  pressure  which  would  exist  if  there  were  no  molecular
attraction,  then  the  equation  assumes  the  form

+  ^

v

This  is  van  der  Waals'  characteristic  equation,  which  also  applies  to
the  liquid  state,  as  will  appear  in  considering  the  kinetic  theory  of
liquids.

Now  the  formula  given  above  with  three  constants,  shows,  in  a
remarkable  way,  the  dependence  of  any  given  gas  mass  upon  the
pressure,  volume,  and  temperature.  If  we  consider  the  case  where  a
gas  is  compressed  at  constant  temperature,  experiment  shows  that
Boyle's  law  holds  good  for  large  volumes  ;  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
for  large  values  of  the  volume  v,  both  the  corrections  are  infinitesimally
small.  As  we  pass  over  to  conditions  of  greater  pressure,  gases  in
general  are  compressed  more  easily  than  they  should  be,  to  correspond
with  Boyle's  law  ;  this  is  explained  on  the  supposition  that  in  com-
pression the  molecules  are  drawn  more  closely  together  by  their
attractive  force,  which  thus  tends  to  aid  the  action  of  external  pressure.
At  very  great  compression,  on  the  other  hand,  gases  resist  a  diminu-
tion of  volume  more  strongly  than  they  should  to  correspond  with
Boyle's  law;  the  reason  for  this  is,  on  the  one  hand,  that,  with  a

slight  change  of  volume,  the  quantity  -^  increases  very  slowly  ;  and,

on  the  other  hand,  the  "  volume  correction,"  which  acts  in  the  sense
just  considered,  begins  to  be  an  important  factor,  and  becomes  more
so,  the  nearer  "v"  approaches  "b"  by  compression.

Amagat  found  (p.  54),  in  a  series  of  gases  (viz.  nitrogen,  methane,
ethylene,  and  carbon  dioxide),  that  the  product  pv,  instead  of  remain-
ing constant  as  it  should,  according  to  Boyle's  law,  at  first  began  to

CHAP. II

THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE

213

decrease,  and  afterwards  increased  very  strongly  :  this  is  very  well
explained  by  the  formula  of  van  der  Waals.

A  picture  of  the  degree  of  quantitative  coincidence  is  shown  in  the
following  table,  in  which  are  given  the  values  of  pv  as  calculated  by
Baynes 1  for  ethylene  according  to  the  formula

+  Q'°°J86Vv  -  0-0024)  =  0-0037(272-5  +  t),
and  the  corresponding  values  of  pv  observed  by  Amagat : —

TABLE  FOR  ETHYLENE

1COO  pv

1000  pv

1>

Obs.

Calc.

P

Obs.

Calc.

31-58

914

895

133-26

520

520

45-80

781

782

176-01

643

642

59-38

522

624

233-58

807

805

72-86

416

387

282-21

941

940

84-16

399

392

329-14

1067

1067

94-53

413

413

398-71

1248

1254

110-47

454

456

The  pressures  are  estimated  in  atmospheres  ;  the  measurements
are  referred  to  t°  =  20°.

But  hydrogen,  which  Regnault  called  a  "  more  than  perfect  gas  "
(gaz  plus  que  par/ait),  shows  at  the  very  first  that,  at  ordinary
temperatures,2  it  resists  compression  more  than  corresponds  to  Boyle's
law,  at  least  in  the  region  thus  far  covered  by  experiment  ;  thus  if
p  =  2  "21  and  px  =  4  '4  31  m.  of  mercury  pressure,  we  obtain

—  =  0-9986.
Pivi

It  follows  from  this  that,  in  the  region  studied,  this  gas  shows  the
influence  of  the  "  volume  correction  "  as  preponderating  over  that  of
the  molecular  attraction.  If  one  assumes  "  a  "  to  be  infinitesimally
small,  then  from  the  preceding  figures  "b"  is  calculated  to  be
0-00065.  It  must  therefore  be  inferred  from  van  der  Waals'  inter-
pretation of  the  volume  correction,  that  at  0°,  and  under  1  m.
pressure  of  mercury,  the  molecules  of  hydrogen,  as  a  matter  of  fact,

1  van  der  Waals,  I.e.  101.

2  Wroblewski  found  that  at  very  low  temperatures  even  hydrogen  began  to  show
evidence  of  a  diminution  of  the  value  of  pv.  —  Wiener  Monatshefte,  9.  1067  (1888).

214  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

occupy  only  --  — =0  '000  16  of  the  apparent  volume. We  must

therefore  conclude  that,  even  under  the  greatest  pressures  possible,
hydrogen  could  not  be  compressed  so  as  to  occupy  less  space
than  jq-'ooth  of  what  it  occupies  at  0°  and  under  1  m.  pressure.1

On  the  other  hand,  entirely  in  harmony  with  the  supposition  that
the  molecular  attraction  in  the  case  of  hydrogen  is  very  small,  is  the
observation  made  by  Joule  and  Thomson  (1854),  that  this  gas,
hydrogen,  was  the  only  one  of  all  those  investigated  that  showed  no
cooling  on  expanding  without  the  performance  of  external  work.

Finally,  it  must  be  emphasised  that  the  van  der  Waals'  formula
may  claim  to  hold  good  only  when  the  gas  experiences  no  change  in  its
molecular  condition  as  its  volume  changes  ;  for  the  theory  advanced  above
provides  that  the  molecules,  even  under  the  highest  degrees  of  con-
densation, must  remain  single  individuals,  and  not  unite  to  form
larger  groups.  It  cannot  be  stated  a  priori  whether  or  not  this  occurs
in  particular  cases,  but  the  accuracy  of  the  formula  makes  this  very
probable.  Deviations  of  this  sort  from  Boyle's  law,  which  are  shown  by
certain  gases,  are  to  be  ascribed  to  the  polymerisation  of  the  molecules
in  case  of  an  increase,  or  to  dissociation  in  case  of  a  decrease,  of
pressure  ;  such  deviations,  which  usually  belong  to  a  different  order  of
magnitude,  cannot  of  course  be  explained  by  van  der  Waals'  equation
of  condition.  The  explanation  of  this  will  be  found  in  the  laws  of
dissociation,  in  the  third  and  fourth  books.

If  we  consider  the  dependence  of  the  pressure,  at  constant  volume,
upon  the  temperature,  then  by  applying  the  equation  of  condition  to
two  temperatures,  Tl  and  T2,  there  is  obtained

and

and  by  subtraction  there  is  obtained

Pa  -  Pi

T2-T, v-b'

Since  there  are  no  quantities  on  the  right  side  of  the  equation  which
change  with  the  temperature,  the  increase  of  the  pressure  for  highly
compressed  gases  is  proportional  to  the  increase  of  the  temperature  ;
and,  indeed,  the  pressure  increases  more  rapidly  than  in  the  case  of  the

1  This  of  course  assumes  that  the  molecules  cannot  suffer  any  internal  condensation  ;
the  figures  given  above  would  place  0*824  -f  as  the  superior  limit  of  the  sp.  gr.  of  con-
densed hydrogen.  —  TR.

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  215

-I  TJ

ideal  gases,  i.e.  more  than  7=  per  degree,  since  instead  of  — ,  as  in  the

Tl

case  of  ideal  gases,  we  have  here  r- This  also,  substantiated  as

it  is  by  experiment,  proves  that  neither  a  nor  b  change  very  much
with  the  temperature.  The  proviso  is  also,  of  course,  made  here
that  there  is  no  change  of  molecular  condition  associated  with  the
temperature.

It  was  noticed  in  the  last  edition  of  this  book  that  van  der  Waals'
equation  can  be  reduced  to  apply  to  perfect  gases,  and  used  to  obtain
an  exact  value  of  the  gas  constant  R  (see  also  Leduc,  C.  R.,  124.  285,
1897).  This  has  been  done  meanwhile  by  Guye  and  Friedrich  (Arch,
scien.  pliys.  nat.,  9.  505,  1900)  as  follows.  For  p  =  1  atm.  and  T  =  273,
van  der  Waals  equation  becomes

where  VQ  is  the  volume  of  a  mol.  of  gas  under  normal  conditions,
whilst  the  equation

gives  the  volume  V0  of  an  ideal  gas  under  normal  conditions. Hence

T-

or,  accurately  enough,

The  correcting  factor  in  the  bracket  differs  by  one  per  mille.  or
less  from  unity  for  the  so-called  permanent  gases  ;  it  raises  the  mean
value  (p.  41)  for  H2,  02,  CO,  N2  from  22*42  to  22-43.1

The  Kinetic  Theory  of  Liquids.  —  The  views  advanced  by  van
der  Waals  to  explain  the  behaviour  of  gases  under  great  pressure,  lead
to  some  very  remarkable  conclusions  respecting  the  liquid  condition.
It  has  been  already  inferred  from  the  critical  phenomena  which  make
it  possible  to  transform  the  two  states  into  each  other  without  inter-
ruption (p.  66),  that  the  molecular  condition  in  the  two  is  not  very
different  ;  and,  in  fact,  the  following  considerations  lead  also  to  this
same  conclusion.

According  to  the  original  hypothesis  advanced  for  the  case  of
ideal  gases,  the  mean  kinetic  energy  of  the  translatory  motion  of  the
molecule  (in  distinction  from  the  kinetic  energy  contained  in  their

1  Guye  and  Friedrich  find  22  '41,  but  they  take  for  the  molecular  weights  of  H0  and
N.2  2-015  and  28'01  instead  of  2'016  and  28  "08.

216  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

atoms),  is  proportional  to  their  absolute  temperature,  but  independent
of  their  nature ;  this  hypothesis  can  now  be  also  applied  to  gases  of
any  desired  density ;  we  Avill  next  consider  the  consequences  resulting
from  assuming  that  it  also  holds  good  for  liquids.

In  the  light  of  this  hypothesis,  we  come  at  once  to  the  view  that
on  account  of  the  great  velocity  of  the  molecular  movement  (p.  203),
and  the  very  close  approximation  brought  about  by  the  condensation
of  the  gas,  the  molecules  must  collide  with  each  other  very  often,  and
therefore  must  exist  under  a  very  great  partial  pressure.  But  there
results  from  this  very  active  movement  a  tendency  of  the  individual
molecules  to  separate  from  each  other  ;  this  tendency  manifests  itself
unmistakably,  not  only  in  the  vapour  pressure,  but  also  in  the
resulting  property  of  liquids  of  filling  a  space  completely  with  its
molecules  by  way  of  evaporation ;  but  it  seems  very  small  in  com-
parison with  the  enormous  expansive  force  of  gases  compressed
gradually  into  liquids.  Associated  with  the  recognition  of  this,  the
further  question  at  once  arises,  viz.  in  that  case  what  hinders  the
liquid  molecules,  on  account  of  their  active  movement,  from  separating
from  each  other  explosively  1  or,  in  other  words,  how  is  the  enormous
partial  pressure  held  in  check  1

As  an  answer  to  this  question  this  suggestion  arises,  viz.  the
attractive  force  between  the  molecules  which  it  was  found  necessary
to  introduce  in  explaining  the  behaviour  of  gases  at  high  pressures.  It
was  shown  (p.  212)  that  this  force  of  attraction  vanished  [i.e.  was
counterbalanced]  in  the  case  of  molecules  existing  in  the  interior,  and
manifested  itself  only  in  the  case  of  molecules  at  or  near  the  bounding
surface,  inasmuch  as  the  force  gave  a  resultant  perpendicular  to
the  surface.  Now  the  resultant  directly  counteracts  the  expansive
force  resulting  from  the  heat  motion  of  the  molecules,  and  thus  appears
suited  to  hold  this  in  equilibrium.  In  general  a  molecule  coming
from  within,  to  the  free  surface,  will  be  held  back  by  the  molecular
attraction,  and  so  will  be  retained  within  the  liquid  mass.  Only  those
molecules  which  by  chance  reach  the  free  surface  with  a  very  great
velocity,  will  be  able  to  free  themselves  from  the  control  of  the
molecular  forces,  and  thus  to  evaporate.  If  there  is  a  free  space  above
a  liquid  this  will  always  become  filled  with  its  molecules,  but  it  must
l>e  noticed  that  the  pressure  of  the  evaporated  molecules  in  the
gaseous  state  cannot  pass  a  certain  maximal  limit.  On  the  other
hand,  any  of  those  molecules  in  the  gaseous  state,  which  approach
too  near  the  surface  of  the  liquid,  will  at  once  be  drawn  in  by  the
molecular  attraction ;  and  thus  there  results  a  continual  exchange
between  the  liquid  and  gaseous  parts  of  the  system.

Obviously  the  pressure  of  the  gaseous  molecules  can  go  only  so
far  that  the  number  of  molecules  striking  upon  and  retained  by  unit
area  of  the  surface  in  unit  time,  is  the  same  as  the  number  of  mole-
cules passing  from  the  liquid  to  the  gaseous  part  of  the  system  through

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  217

the  bounding  surface ;  it  is  also  easily  seen  that  this  maximal  pressure
must  be  independent  of  the  relative  amounts  of  the  gas  and  liquid,
and  therefore  this  pressure  corresponds  in  every  respect  to  the
saturation  pressure  of  the  liquid  (Clansius,  1857).

Only  those  molecules  can  evaporate  from  the  liquid  which  have  a
kinetic  energy  greater  than  the  mean,  since  only  these  can  overcome
the  molecular  attraction.  Also,  the  mean  kinetic  energy  of  the  liquid
molecules  must  be  diminished  by  evaporation ;  that  is  to  say,  the
evaporation  is  attended  with  an  absorption  of  heat,  which  of  course  is
in  accord  with  experiment.

Moreover,  the  phenomena  exhibited  by  the  surface  tension  of
liquids  (p.  57)  are  to  be  ascribed  to  molecular  attraction.  In  order
to  bring  a  molecule  from  the  interior  part  into  the  free  surface,  work
must  be  expended  against  the  attractive  force  :  it  follows  directly  from
this  that  a  force  must  be  overcome  in  order  to  produce  a  free  surface,
namely,  the  surface  tension,  and  that  the  free  surface  of  a  liquid  tends
to  reduce  itself  to  a  minimum.

The  way  to  obtain  quantitative  results  from  the  preceding  con-
siderations is  obvious.  The  following  formula  of  van  der  Waals,
viz. —

holds  good  both  for  a  simple  homogeneous  gas  and  for  a  simple  homogeneous
liquid.  In  both  cases  a  refers  to  the  molecular  attraction  ;  b  refers  here
to  the  correction  to  be  made  for  the  total  volume  of  the  liquid,  resulting
from  the  contracted  "  play  space  "  of  the  molecules.  Now  the  constants
a  and  b  can  be  determined  from  the  behaviour  of  gases  under  high
pressure,  arid  thus  the  theory  leads  to  the  surprising  result,  that  from
the  behaviour  of  the  gas  as  a  gas,  we  can  quantitatively  derive  its
behaviour  when  it  shall  have  been  condensed  into  a  homogeneous
liquid.

Let  us  test  the  requirements  of  the  preceding  law  by  some  special
practical  example.  Thus  van  der  Waals,  from  the  compressibility
of  gaseous  carbon  dioxide,  calculated  the  value  of  a  to  be  0'00874,  and
b,  0'0023,  when  the  atmospheric  pressure  is  the  unit  of  pressure,  and
the  unit  of  volume  is  the  volume  containing  1  g.  of  a  gas  at  0°  and

under  1  atm.  pressure. We  then  have  —  mol  of  gas  and

If  we  make  p  and  v  both  equal  to  one,  then  T  will  equal  273,  and
-p

there  follows  for the  equation

218

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

M  =  ^  +  °'00874X1  ~  °'0023)  =  1*00646,
and  we  thus  obtain  for  the  equation  of  condition  of  carbonic  acid,

=  1-00646

.

Zi  I  O

where  t  denotes  the  temperature  on  the  ordinary  Celsius  scale.  This
formula  represents  very  satisfactorily  the  observations  made  by
Kegnault  and  Andrews  on  the  compression  of  gaseous  carbon  dioxide.
Let  us  also  see  whether  the  formula  represents  the  behaviour  of  liquid
carbon  dioxide.

For  this  purpose  we  will  calculate  a  series  of  isothermals  for
different  temperatures,  putting  the  above  equation  into  the  more  con-
venient form

_T00646 273+  t  _  Q-Q0874
P~v-  0-0023' 273" "^ '

and  substituting  various  values  of  v,  whilst  t  is  kept  the  same.  Thus
for  t  =  -  1  '8  we  get

V

P

V

P

o-i

9-37

0-008

38-8

0-05

17-47

0-005

20-9

0-015

39-9

0-004

42-0

o-oi

42-6

0-003

457-0

Here  p  at  first  increases  with  decrease  of  v,  reaches  a  maximum
(for  about  v  =  O'Ol),  decreases,  and  finally  increases  rapidly.

For  this  purpose  we  will  plot  the  curves,  corresponding  to  the
definite  temperatures  t,  on  a  system  of  co-ordinates  where  the  abscissae
represent  volumes,  and  the  ordinates  represent  the  corresponding
pressures.  These  curves  are  the  so-called  "isotherms,"  and  are  shown
in  Fig.  18.  On  studying  these  we  are  impressed  by  the  fact  that  above
32-5°  only  one  pressure  corresponds  to  one  volume,  i.e.  the  latter  is
determined  unequivocally  by  the  former.  But  below  this  temperature,
within  the  limits  of  a  pressure  interval  (which  is  marked  by  a  heavy
curve  for  the  isotherm  of  13'1°),  for  the  same  particular  pressure  there
correspond  three  different  volumes.  At  first  glance  this  would  appear  to
be  absurd.  But  we  know  that  at  these  vapour  pressures,  and  only  at
these  pressures,  the  same  substance  is  capable  of  occupying  two
different  volumes,  viz.  the  one  as  a  homogeneous  gas,  and  the  other  as
a  homogeneous  liquid  ;  but  what  is  indicated  by  the  third  1  Of  course
to  suggest  the  volume  of  the  substance  in  the  solid  state  is  out  of  the
question.  The  van  der  Waals'  formula  does  not  consider  this.

CHAP.  II

THE  KINETIC THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE

219

The  matter  will  become  clearer  by  considering  this  in  the  light  of
experiment.  The  behaviour  of  gaseous  and  liquid  carbon  dioxide  was
studied  very  exactly  by  Andrews  for  those  temperatures  the  isotherms
of  which  are  plotted.  Let  us  consider,  for  instance,  the  isotherm
corresponding  to  13'1°.  Andrews  found,  by  beginning  with  small
pressures  and  large  volumes,  that  the  gaseous  carbon  dioxide  could  be
condensed  to  volume  v0  and  pressure  p0,  corresponding  exactly  to  the

P

Vo

Fig.  18.

path  of  the  curve.  The  constants  a  and  b,  as  in  the  van  der  Waals'
formula,  were  so  determined  as  to  make  the  compressibility  of  the
gas  coincide  as  well  as  possible  with  the  calculation.  That  these
constants  may,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  be  so  chosen  has  been  previously
shown  .(p.  213).  But  when  the  pressure  was  made  greater  than  p0,
the  diminution  of  volume  did  not  correspond  to  the  pressure  of  the
advancing  curve  a  J3  y  8  e,  but  there  occurred  a  partial  liquefaction,
corresponding  to  the  vapour  pressure  of  carbon  dioxide  at  13*1°.  The
pressure  remained  constant  until  the  volume  of  the  saturated  vapour
had  fallen  from  v0  to  the  volume  of  the  liquid  v0',  i.e.  until  the  whole
of  the  substance  was  condensed.

After  this  any  farther  diminution  of  volume  was  attended  by  an^
increase  of  pressure,  and  a  very  great  increase  too,  as  must  be  the  case

220  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

from  the  magnitudes  of  the  coefficients  of  compressions  of  liquids.
Beyond  e,  Andrews  found  the  path  as  given  by  the  rest  of  the  curve ;
beyond  e,  the  figures  of  the  formula  go  hand  in  hand  with  those  of
observation,  and  the  rapid  ascent  of  this  part  of  the  curve,  as  compared
with  that  part  before  a,  is  due  to  the  fact  that  liquid  carbon  dioxide
is  much  less  compressible  than  the  gaseous  form.

The  formula  rejects  only  the  part  of  the  curve  from  a  to  e.
Instead  of  passing  from  the  first  point  to  the  second  by  the  serpentine
path  a  /3  y  8'c,  investigation  shows  that  the  substance  passes  from
the  condition  at  a  to  that  at  e  by  the  direct  line.  The  formula  does
not  hold  good  here.  The  substance  from  a  to  e  is  not  homogeneous ;
it  is  part  gas  and  part  liquid.  The  formula  is  applicable  to  both
gaseous  and  liquid  forms,  but  it  insists  that  each  shall  be  homogeneous.
The  process  of  gradual  liquefaction  is  such  that  the  adequacy  of  the
formula  must  be  temporarily  interrupted,  and  it  is  interrupted.

The  question  now  arises  whether  it  is  possible  to  realise  the  portion
of  the  curve  a  p  y  8  e,  i.e.  whether  it  is  possible  to  change  a  gas  into
a  liquid  isothermally  and  continuously.  A  glance  serves  to  make  this
appear  improbable ;  for  in  the  part  of  the  curve  /3  y  8,  an  increase  of
pressure  would  be  attended  with  an  increase  of  volume,  arid  conversely
a  decrease  of  pressure  with  a  decrease  of  volume  ;  thus  the  substance
would  appear  to  be  in  an  unstable  form,  the  realisation  of  which  is
impossible.

But  cannot  the  portions  of  the  curve  a-/3  and  S-e  at  least  be
realised  1  These  portions  represent  respectively  the  conditions  of
supersaturated  vapour  and  of  over-heated1  liquid.  In  the  first  case,  the
pressure  is  in  fact  greater  than  p0,  and  the  volume  less  than  v0 ;  and
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  conditions  of  a  vapour  after  saturation
represent  a  continuance  of  those  before  saturation.  Thus  the  fact  that
the  advance  of  a  sound  wave  in  a  saturated  vapour  gives  no  evidence
of  interruption,  shows  conclusively  that  the  vapour  conducts  itself  in  a
normal  way  in  the  compression  associated  with  supersaturation.  On
the  other  hand,  the  part  of  the  curve  e-S  expresses  the  capacity  of  a
liquid  for  existing  under  a  lower  pressure  than  that  corresponding  to
the  vapour  pressure  of  the  respective  temperature,  a  condition  which
would  be  unstable,  as  shown  by  many  observations.

The  further  study  of  the  curves  plotted  in  Fig.  18  shows  also  that
the  three  volumes  (at  which  carbon  dioxide  can  exist  at  the  tempera-
ture in  question,  and  designated  by  the  points  aye,  for  the  temperature
13'1°),  approach  each  other  with  increasing  temperature,  and  finally
at  the  isotherm  corresponding  to  3 2 '5°  coincide  in  the  point  k.  If  we
connect  the  points  corresponding  to  a  and  e,  for  the  other  isotherms,
(i.e.  the  points  where  liquefaction  begins  and  ends  with  increasing
pressure),  we  obtain  the  dotted  siphoidal  (berg-formige)  curve  shown  in

1  How  "over -heated"  when  the  curves  are  isotherms? Rather  it  is  a "super-
attenuated  "  liquid,  so  to  speak. — TR.

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  221

the  figure.  The  isotherm  of  32  '5  is  tangential  to  this  at  the  point  k.
The  serpentine  curve  a  /3  y  8  e,  here  is  crowded  together  into  a  point;
the  physical  interpretation  of  this  obviously  is  that  the  specific  volume
of  the  liquid  carbon  dioxide  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  gaseous  carbon
dioxide  condensed  to  this  vapour  pressure.  Here,  and  here  only,
is  it  possible  to  convert  the  gas  into  a  liquid  continuously  and  iso-
thermally,  and  the  reverse  ;  k  corresponds  to  the  critical  point  of
carbon  dioxide  (p.  66).

We  thus  arrive  at  the  conclusion,  viz.  that  by  the  aid  of  the  con-
stants a  and  b,  of  van  der  Waals'  formula,  all  the  critical  data  can  be
obtained.  For  this  purpose  we  need  only  to  plot  a  few  isotherms
until  we  arrive  at  the  clearly  marked  k,  where  the  curve  portions
a,  /3,  y,  8,  e  are  crowded  together  in  one  point  of  inflection.

We  can  obtain  the  same  result  more  simply  and  easily  by  the
analytical  discussion  of  the  van  der  Waals'  formula,

or  solved  for  v

f, BT ) a ab

v3  -  4  b  +  -  >  v2  +  -v  --  =  0.
p 3 p p

The  equation  is  of  the  third  degree  for  v. Then  if  the  three  roots
are  x1?  x2,  and  xg,  we  will  have,  as  is  well  known,

(v  -  xx)(v  -  x2)(v  -  x3)  -  0.

The  roots  may  be  real  and  imaginary.  Of  course  only  the  first
have  any  physical  significance.  Since  the  product  of  the  three  (v  -  x)
values  is  real,  then  either  two  or  none  of  the  roots  can  be  imaginary,
because  it  is  only  by  the  product  of  two  imaginary  quantities  that  a
real  quantity  can  result.  Therefore  for  one  value  of  p  at  a  given
temperature,  there  are  either  one  or  three  values  of  v.  This  is  seen
at  once  from  an  inspection  of  Fig.'  18  on  p.  219.  Thus  at  32*5°,  in
general,  for  one  value  of  p  there  is  only  one  value  of  v.  For  lower
temperatures,  as  at  13'1°,  for  example,  in  general  the  case  is  similar,
and  it  is  only  in  the  interval  from  p1  to  p2,  that  there  may  be  three
values  of  v  for  one  of  p.

The  critical  point  k  sought  is  that  where  the  three  real  roots
become  equal  to  each  other,  i.e.  if  <£0  denotes  the  critical  volume,  it
must  follow  that

Xj = Xg = Xg = <PQ ,

and  it  follows  also  that

222  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

In  this  equation  TTO  denotes  the  critical  pressure,  and  #0  the  critical
temperature.  And  since  the  coefficients  of  the  different  powers  of  v
must  be  equal,  we  obtain  the  following  equations  :  —

These,  when  simplified,  give

Thus  the  constants  a  and  b  in  the  equation  given  above  determine  the
critical  volume  </>0,  the  critical  pressure  TTO,  and  the  critical  temperature
00,  and  in  this  way  are  found  the  co-ordinates  and  the  point  k  of  the
curve  tracing,  and  also  the  particular  isotherm  in  which  k  falls.

The  critical  temperature  of  carbon  dioxide  was  calculated  from  the
values  for  "a"  and  "  b,"  assumed  above,  to  be  273°  +  32*5°  ;  while
Andrews,  by  direct  observation,  found  273°  +  30'9°.  The  critical
pressure  was  calculated  to  be  61  atm.,  while  Andrews  found  70  atm.
by  observation  ;  and  the  theoretical  critical  volume  was  0*0069,  while
Andrews  observed  0*0066.  1

Of  course  conversely,  "  a  "  and  "  b  "  can  be  calculated  from  the
critical  data,  a  fact  of  great  importance  in  practical  work.  Thus  the
fact  that  the  critical  data  can  be  calculated  so  approximately  by  the
deviations  of  gases  from  Boyle's  law,  harmonises  with  the  remarkable
fruitfulness  of  van  der  Waals'  theory,  as  already  mentioned.

By  calculating  the  molecular  volume  -  from  the  critical  data,  there

is  obtained  this  simple  result,  viz.  that  at  their  respective  boiling-points
and  at  atmospheric  pressure,  the  molecules  of  the  most  various  liquids,
such  as  water,  ether,  carbon  disidphide,  benzene,  chlor-ethane,  ethyl  acetate,
sulphur  dioxide,  etc.,  occupy  a  space  very  nearly  O'Sths  of  the  total  apparent
volume.  (See  Chap.  V.,  Molecular  Volumes.)

Finally,  let  us  calculate  the  superficial  molecular  tension  K,  which
resists  the  expansive  force  resulting  from  the  heat  motion  of  the
molecules  ;  and  from  the  preceding,  we  have

K--

-V2"

1  Guye  and  Friedrich  give  a  valuable  collection  of  numerical  data  on  critical  pressures
and  temperatures  (Arch,  sci.phys.  imt.,  9.  505  (1900)  ;  reference  in  Z.S.  phys.  chem.,  37.
380,  1901).

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  223

Liquid  carbon  dioxide  at  21*5°  takes  up  about  O003  of  the  volume
occupied  by  the  substance  as  a  gas  at  0°  under  atmospheric  pressure.
From  this  K  is  calculated  to  be  970  atm.,  and  this  value  indicates  the
enormous  forces  of  pressure  which  are  met  here.  These  pressure
forces  have  thus  far  eluded  a  direct  determination.

The  Reduced  Equation  of  Condition. — The  combination  of  the
general  equation  of  condition,  viz. —

with  relations  derived  as  above,  between  the  critical  data  of  a  substance
on  the  one  hand,  and  the  constants  "  a"  and  "  b"  on  the  other  hand,
has  led  to  a  very  simple  result.  By  introducing  into  the  equation  of
condition  the  following  values  derived  on  p.  222,  viz.—

a  =  37r0^>02, and

b  -  % and
o

then  instead  of  the  constants  a,  b,  and  R,  there  appear  the  critical  data,
thus

8 T

By  dividing  the  left  and  right  side  of  the  equation  by  -^,  we

o

obtain

p

Vo

V

Now  if  we  make,  as  follows  :  —

^-o5 *
we  obtain

That  is,  by  expressing  the  pressure,  volume,  and  temperature  respectively
in  fractions  of  the  critical  pressure,  volume,  and  temperature,  the  equation  of
condition  assumes  the  sam,e  form  for  all  substances.

If  one  plots  the  values  of  TT  and  <£  for  a  definite  value  of  B  in  a

224  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

system  of  co-ordinates,  where  the  abscissae  represent  values  of  <£,  and
the  ordinates  values  of  TT,  he  will  obtain  isotherms  similar  in  form  to
those  plotted  in  Fig.  18  (p.  219),  and  which  will  hold  good  for  all
substances.  Thus,  for  example,  for  0=1,  when  TT  =  1  and  <j>  =  1,  this
isotherm  passes  through  the  critical  point.

The  pressure  divided  by  the  critical  pressure,  we  will  call  the
reduced  pressure,  in  accordance  with  van  der  Waals  ;  and  also  the
respective  quotients  of  the  volume  by  the  critical  volume,  and  of  the
temperature  by  the  critical  temperature,  we  will  call  the  reduced  volume
and  the  reduced  temperature.  Such  reduced  pressures,  volumes,  and
temperatures,  when  identical  are  better  called  corresponding  for  short,
and  we  may  speak  of  two  substances  whose  pressures,  volumes,  and
temperatures  "  correspond  "  in  the  sense  of  what  precedes,  as  being  in
a  corresponding  condition  (ubereinstimmenden  Zustanden).

It  is  not  at  all  easy  to  form  a  conception  of  the  boldness  of  this
equation,  which  claims  to  express  the  general  behaviour  of  all  homo-
geneous liquid  and  gaseous  substances,  as  regards  their  changes  in
pressure,  temperature,  and  volume.  Of  course  those  cases  are
excepted  where  changes  result  in  a  chemical  reaction,  such  as  poly-
merisation [condensation],  or  dissociation.  Therefore  it  will  be  useful
to  follow  out  some  application  of  this  equation  in  order,  on  the  one
hand,  that  we  may  add  to  its  examples,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to
effect  its  proof  from  experiment.

Application  of  the  Theory  of  Corresponding  States.  —  If  we

solve  the  following  equation  :  —

for  <£,  we  will  obtain

0  =  f(T, 0),

in  which  the  function  f  is  the  same  for  all  substances.  By  raising  the
temperature  from  0l  to  02,  the  expansion  produced  at  constant  pressure
TT  will  amount  to

^  -(/^  f(7T, 02)  -  f(7T, ^).

Dividing  both  sides  of  the  equation  by

4>!  =  %, #l),

and  observing  that

f-£,

4>o
we  obtain

V2-V!  _  f  fa 0g)  ~  ffo *i)
V,  f(7T, 0,)

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  225

Here  v1  and  v2  denote  the  specific  volumes  of  the  liquid  according
to  the  ordinary  standards,  and  therefore  the  fractional  expansion,
experienced  by  the  substance  on  raising  the  temperature,  is  equal  to
the  quotient  given,  viz. —

The  right  side  of  the  equation  is  independent  of  the  special  nature  of
the  substance,  and  therefore  the  left  must  be  so  also  ;  i.e.  the  fractional
expansion,  experienced  by  the  most  diverse  liquids  or  gases,  will  be  the  same
when  they  are  heated,  at  a  constant  corresponding  pressure,  from  one  corre-
sponding temperature  to  another.

This  relation  gives  the  calculation  of  the  specific  volume  of  any
selected  liquid  at  all  temperatures,  if  its  critical  temperature,  and  also
if  its  specific  volume  at  some  one  temperature  are  known,  inasmuch  as
we  can  compare  it  with  any  other  liquid  which  is  already  well  in-
vestigated. Such  a  liquid,  for  example,  is  fluor-benzene,  the  specific
volumes  of  which  have  been  measured  even  up  to  its  critical  point

Thus  the  specific  volume  of  ethyl  ether  at  10°  above  the  freezing-
point  of  ice  is  1-3794,  and  suppose  that  we  wish  to  calculate  its  value
at  3  3  '8°.  For  this  purpose,  from  the  values  of  61  and  02,  viz.  —

and

273  +  33-8

__  =  0-6564,

467-4

let  us  calculate  the  two  absolute  temperatures,  expressed  in  fractions
of  the  critical  temperature  (467  '4°).  At  the  temperatures  6l  arid  #2,
i.e.

Tj-560  0!  =  339-1,
and

T2  =  560  02  =  367-6,

the  specific  volumes  of  fluor-benzene,  in  absolute  numbers,  are  1-0339
and  1"0741  (p.  231),  and  the  relative  increase  in  volume  of  fluor-
benzene,  in  consequence  of  a  rise  in  temperature  from  339*1°  to
367-6°  (abs.),  amounts  to

Now this is the increase of the volume of ether sought, and
therefore  its  specific  volume  at  3  3  '8°  amounts  to

1-3794  •  1-0389  =  1-4331,

which  is  very  close  to  the  value  as  determined  by  experiment,  1*4351.

Q

226  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

All  the  preceding  specific  volumes  are  measured  at  atmospheric
pressure,  which,  strictly  speaking,  does  not  give  the  same  reduced  or
corresponding  pressure ;  since  the  critical  pressure  of  fluor-benzene  is
about  20  per  cent  greater  than  that  of  ether,  then  in  the  calculation
the  specific  volume  of  the  former  must  be  measured  at  1  '2  atmospheric
pressure  ;  but  this  is  insignificant  in  view  of  the  very  slight  compressi-
bility of  liquids.  In  general,  in  this  sort  of  calculation  of  liquid
volumes,  the  atmospheric  pressure  can  be  regarded  as  one  which  is  corre-
sponding/or all  liquids.

In  a  precisely  similar  way  we  derive  the  result  that  the  per  cent
diminution  of  volume  experienced  by  the  most  diverse  substances,
whether  liquid  or  gaseous,  is  the  same  when  one  corresponding  pressure
is  raised  to  another,  the  corresponding  temperature  remaining  constant.

The  coefficient  of  compression  (i.e.  the  diminution  of  volume  of  one
c.c.  resulting  from  raising  the  external  pressure  one  atmosphere)  for
ether  amounts  to  O'OOOll  at  0°.  Now,  according  to  the  preceding
law,  the  coefficient  of  compression  for  all  liquids,  at  corresponding  tem-
peratures, must  'be  inversely  proportional  to  the  critical  pressure.
Thus,  the  compression  coefficient  for  chloroform,  for  instance,  is
calculated  to  be

0-00011^-0-000072,

55  and  36  atm.  being  the  critical  pressures  for  chloroform  and  for  ether
respectively.  This  refers  to  the  value  of  chloroform  at  a  temperature
of  about  40°,  corresponding  with  that  of  ether  at  a  temperature  of  0°,
since  the  absolute  critical  temperature  of  ether,  increased  by  about
one-seventh  of  its  amount,  gives  that  of  chloroform.  Observations  at
this  temperature  gave  about  0 '0000 7 6.

Amagat  has  given  (0.  R,  123.  30,  83,  1896)  a  particularly  clear
test  of  the  law  of  corresponding  states.  If  isothermals  of  two  sub-
stances are  drawn  in  such  a  way  as  to  take  for  units  of  volume  and
pressure  the  critical  values,  the  two  series  of  curves  must  fit,  i.e.  in
combination  they  must  look  as  if  they  belonged  to  one  substance  :  no
two  such  reduced  isothermals  can  cut,  however  close  they  may  lie.
Without  knowing  the  critical  values,  this  can  be  tested  by  drawing  the
isothermals  in  the  usual  manner  (not  reduced)  and  seeing  if  it  is
possible  to  alter  the  scale  so  as  to  bring  the  isothermals  to  form  a
series  without  intersection.  Amagat  accomplished  the  change  of  scale
by  projecting  one  diagram  on  the  other  with  (nearly)  parallel  light ;
the  diagram  to  be  projected  was  at  the  same  time  turned  round  one
or  other  axis  in  order  to  alter  the  relative  proportions  of  ordinates  and
abscissae ;  by  a  combination  of  the  two  changes,  any  derived  change  of
scale  could  be  arrived  at.

C.  Raveau  (/.  de phys.  [3],  6.  432,  1897)  reached  the  same  object
by  an  even  simpler  and  more  ingenious  means.  He  plotted  the

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  227

logarithms  of  the  volumes  and  pressures  as  co-ordinates  ;  now  the  unit
of  pressure  or  volume  can  be  altered  by  merely  adding  a  constant
quantity  to  the  logarithm  ;  it  must  therefore  be  possible  to  make  the
two  diagrams  fit  by  merely  displacing  one  relatively  to  the  other.

Amagat  and  Raveau  both  find  a  remarkably  close  fit  between  the
diagrams  of  various  substances  [C2H4,  C02,  (C2H5)20,  air],  i.e.  a
striking  confirmation  of  the  theory  of  corresponding  states.

To  test  further  how  far  the  special  form  of  the  function  f  (TT,  <£,  6)  =  0,
given  by  van  der  Waals,  is  applicable,  Raveau  drew  a  diagram  of  iso-
thermals,  using  the  logarithms  of  p  and  v  from  that  equation.  It
appeared  that  this  diagram  would  not  fit  those  for  carbon  dioxide  and
acetylene  without  intersections  extending  to  somewhat  widely  separated
isothermals.  This  shows  —  in  harmony  with  the  preceding  —  that  van
der  Waals'  formula  is  only  an  approximation  to  the  truth;  it  naturally
deviates  more  from  the  truth  the  smaller  v,  and  consequently  the

o  T-i

greater  the  correction  terms  -5  and  —  .

v^ v

It  was  remarked  by  Meslin  (C.  R.,  116.  135,  1893)  that  the  theorem
of,  corresponding  states  must  be  true  for  any  characteristic  equation
that  contains  only  as  many  constants  as  there  are  determining  quantities
(i.e.  three-volume  temperature  and  pressure),  and  which  includes  the
critical  point.  For  it  is  always  possible  to  put  the  equation  with
three  constants  a,  b,  R,

f  (p,  v,  T,  a,  b,  R)  =  0
into  the  form

f  (p,  v,  T,  TTO,  c£0,  80)  -  0,

as  was  done  with  van  der  Waals'  equation  on  p.  224.

Since  this  equation  must  hold  independently  of  the  units  adopted,
and  on  the  other  hand  it  is  not  possible,  without  a  fresh  condition,  to
express  one  of  the  three  determining  quantities  in  terms  of  the  other
two  (p.  5),  it  follows  that  the  equation  must  have  the  form

hence  the  equation  can  contain  nothing  characteristic  of  the  particular
substance  considered  except  the  critical  constants,  i.e.  can  only  contain
numerical  constants.  For  the  conditions  that  such  an  equation  must
satisfy  see  Brillouin  (/.  de  phys.  [3],  2.  113,  1893).

The  Coexistence  of  Liquid  and  Vapour.  —  As  has  been  re-
peatedly emphasised,  both  the  original  and  the  reduced  equations  of
condition  apply  only  to  homogeneous  substances,  whether  liquid  or
gaseous.  They  cease  to  hold  true  as  soon  as  there  occurs  a  partial
evaporation  or  partial  condensation  of  the  liquid  in  question,  and,

228  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

therefore,  the  equation  has  nothing  to  say  regarding  the  substance  as
soon  as  it  has  lost  its  homogeneity  through  evaporation  or  condensa-
tion ;  for  such  magnitudes  as  vapour  pressure,  boiling-point,  volume  of
the  saturated  vapour,  or  of  the  liquid,  these  lie  beyond  the  region  of
its  applicability.

If  we  consider  an  isotherm,  such,  for  instance,  as  that  plotted  by
van  der  Waals'  equation  for  13'1°  in  Fig.  18  (p.  219),  we  will  seek  in
vain  for  any  marked  point  which  indicates  the  beginning  of  liquefac-
tion ;  but  we  know  this  much  from  what  precedes,  viz.  that  for  a
vapour  pressure  p0  there  correspond  three  points  of  the  curve  [of
volumes],  viz.  a,  y,  and  e.  But,  nevertheless,  it  is  possible  to  develop  a
simple  law  in  a  thermodynamic  way,  for  the  position  of  the  straight
line  a-e.  Thus  we  can  imagine  a  gas  mass  to  be  carried  from  a  to  e  by
the  path  a-/3-y-8-c,  and  back  again  by  the  straight  path  e-o^  to  the
original  point.  The  sum  of  the  work  performed  by  the  system  and
upon  the  system  in  this  reversible  and  isothermal  cyclic  process  must
be  equal  to  zero  (p.  20).  But  since  the  former  refers  to  the  area
bounded  by  a-/3-y  and  the  straight  line  a-y,  and  the  latter  to  the  area
bounded  by  y-S-e  and  the  straight  line  y-e,  then  these  two  areas  must  be
equal  to  each  other,  and  the  line  a-e  must  be  chosen  so  as  to  satisfy  this
condition  (Maxwell,  1875  ;  Clausius,  1880).  To  be  sure,  we  cannot
regard  the  proof  on  this  basis  as  very  stringent  since  it  is  impossible
to  realise  this  cyclic  process,  but,  nevertheless,  the  law  appears  very
probable  from  this  consideration.  It  should  be  again  emphasised  here
that  there  has  entered  into  the  problem  an  element  which  is  foreign
to  what  was  originally  a  purely  kinetic  theory.

The  equality  of  the  area  embraced  within  the  three  straight  lines
av0,  v0v0',  v0'e,  and  the  curve  a-j3-y-8-e,  with  the  area  embraced  within
the  same  three  lines  and  the  straight  line  a-e,  gives  the  following  new
relation,  which  is  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  substance,
viz.  —

F(TT,  6,  </>1?  ^>2,)  =  0,

in  which  TT  denotes  the  reduced  vapour  pressure,  0  the  reduced  boil-
ing-point, and  <£j  and  <f>2  the  reduced  volumes  of  the  liquid  and  the
saturated  vapour.  This  equation  also,  like  that  developed  on  p.  224,
expresses  a  nature  law  of  unusually  wide  application,  since  it  requires
that  the  nature  of  the  function  F(TT,  0,  <f>v  </>2)  shall  be  the  same  for  all
substances.

Although  we  can  make  no  use  of  the  special  nature  of  this
function,  yet  we  will  briefly  show  its  universal  importance.  The
equality  of  the  two  areas  just  described  requires  that

pdv  =  Po(v0  -  v0'),

V

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  229

or,  by  substituting  in  accordance  with  the  equation  of  condition,

ET a

P  =

we  have,  on  integrating,

(y-b)

ET  In  V +  -  -  A  =  P0(v0  -  vA
v -  b v v

By  dividing  both  sides  by  TTO</>O,  and  by  substituting  the  values  of
"a"  and  "b"  (p.  223)  by  the  critical  data,  and  thus  introducing  the
reduced  pressure,  volume,  and  temperature,  the  preceding  equation
becomes

in  which

and  denote  respectively  the  corresponding  values  of  the  reduced  con-
dition, and  by  which  the  nature  of  the  universal  function  mentioned
above  is  explained.

Moreover,  aside  from  establishing  the  equation,

F(TT,  e,^v  <#>2)  =  o  .  . (i)

the  universal  equation  of  condition  (p.  224)  when  applied  to  the  case
of  a  saturated  vapour,  and  again  to  a  vapour  in  equilibrium  with  a
liquid,  gives  the  two  following  new  relations,  viz.—

*-l)-W ... (3)

By  eliminating  TT  and  <£2  from  equations  (1)  and  (3),  then  TT  and
<j>v  and  finally  ^  and  <£2,  we  obtain  the  three  following  equations,
viz.  —

m  fflftteA  again  the  three  functions  f1(^),  f2(#),  euuf  f3(^),  are
of  the  nature  of  the  substance  in  question.

If  we  estimate  the  temperature  in  fractions  of  the  critical  tempera-
ture, then  the  specific  volumes  of  the  saturated  vapours  of  all  sub-
stances form  a  constant  temperature  function,  provided  that  we  estimate
the  volumes  in  fractions  of  the  critical  volumes,  and  that  this  holds

230  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

good  for  both  the  volumes  of  liquids,  and  also  for  their  vapour
pressures.

We  may  formulate  this  law  thus :  at  equally  reduced  boiling -points,
the  respective  quotients,  of  the  specific  volume  of  the  saturated  vapour  by  the
critical  volume,  of  the  specific  volume  of  the  liquid  by  the  critical  volume,  and
of  the  vapour  pressure  by  the  critical  pressure,  are  identical  for  all  substances.

Of  course,  according  to  this  law,  the  reduced  specific  volumes  of
the  vapour  and  liquid  of  the  most  diverse  substances  must  be  the
same  when  they  are  compared  with  each  other  at  equal  fractions  of  the  critical
pressure.

The  Demonstration  by  Young. — These  laws  have  been  recently
subjected  to  a  thorough  test  by  S.  Young.1  Unfortunately,  space  does
not  permit  us  to  give  completely  the  material  brought  together  in  his
work,  which  furnishes  an  example  of  a  problem  subjected  to  investiga-
tion both  by  calculation  and  by  experiment ;  and  it  also  deserves  the
more  attention  because  it  has  such  a  fundamental  and  universal  signifi-
cance, as  is  illustrated  by  few  problems  in  the  whole  extent  of  physics
or  chemistry.

The  method  proposed  by  Young  consisted  in  the  comparison  of  the
specific  volumes  of  different  substances  in  the  liquid  state  and  the  state
of  saturated  vapour,  as  well  as  in  the  comparison  of  their  vapour
pressures,  with  the  corresponding  values  afforded  by  a  suitable
"normal"  substance  in  the  "corresponding  states."  Fluor-benzene
may  be  recommended  as  an  example  which  has  been  very  well
studied.  Below  are  given  its  complete  data  as  an  important  basis  for
future  calculations : —

1  Phil.' Mag.  [5],  33.  153  (1892).

[TABLE

CHAP. II

THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE

231

FLUOR-BENZENE
Mol.  Wt.  =  95-8.

T

P

Mv0

Mv0'

Obs.  vapour  density

Calc. „

272-27

20

91-47

289-3

50

93-20

303-9

100

94-92

320-25

200

96-80

33875 400  I

99-05

358-1 760  ;

101-59

367-3

1,000 22,000

102-90

1-037

382-0

1,500 15,000

105-10

1-056

393-25

2,000

11,400

107-00

1-073

410-4

3,000

7,680

110-03

1-107

423-8

4,000

5,785

112-64

1-138

434-85

5,000

4,634

114-98

1-166

444-25

6,000

3,857

117-06

1193

452-8

7,000

3,298

119-14

1-217

460-4

8,000

2,871

121-19

1-247

473-6

10,000

2,265

125-04

1-300

484-95

12,000

1,862

128-80

1-349

499-7

15,000

1,447

134-64

1-431

519-7

20,000

1,009

145-08

1-600

536-0

25,000

733

158-40

1-818

544-5

28,000

601

169-35

2-011

550-0

30,000

516

179-40

2-206

555-0

32,000

440

193-0

2-450

559-55

33,912

270-4

270-4

3-79

The  vapour  pressure  p  is  expressed  in  millimetres,  the  molecular
volumes  of  the  saturated  vapour  MvQ  and  of  the  liquid  Mv0'  in  c.c.
The  critical  data  of  the  substances  investigated,  measured  partly  by
Young  alone,  and  partly  together  with  Ramsay,  are  given  in  the
following  table  : l —

CRITICAL  DATA

Substance.

Formula.

Mol.  wt.

0o

•3D

fc

Finer-benzene  . .

C6H5F

95-8

559-55

33,912

2-822

Chlor-benzene  . " .

C6H5C1

112-2

633-00

33,912

2-731

Brom-benzene  . -7

C6H5Br

156-6

670-00

33,912

2-059

lodo-benzene .

C6H5I

203-4

721-00

33,912

1-713

Benzene  .

C6H6

77-84

561-50

36,395

3-293

Carbon  tetrachloride

CC14

153-45

556-15

34,180

1-799

Stannic  chloride

SnCl4

259-3

591-70

28,080

1-347

Ether .

(CaHB)20

73-84

467-40

27,060

3-801

Methyl  alcohol

CHoOH

31-93

513-00

59,760

3-697

Ethyl  alcohol  .

C2H5OH

45-90

516-10

47,850

3-636

Propyl  alcohol

C3H7OH

59-87

53670

38,120

3-634

Acetic  acid

CH3C02H

59-86

594-60

43,400

2-846

1  Phil.  Mag.  [5],  34.  505  (1892).

232  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  n

The  critical  volumes  are  not  observed  directly,  but  are  extra-
polated by  the  rule  of  Cailletet  and  Mathias ; l  according  to  this,  the
arithmetical  mean  between  the  densities  of  the  liquid  and  of  the  satu-
rated vapour  diminishes  linearly  with  the  temperature.  By  the  extra-
polation of  these  mean  values  to  the  critical  temperature  we  obtain
the  critical  data.

The  table  on  the  following  page  contains  an  extract  from  the  calcu-
lations of  Young.  The  first  three  horizontal  columns  contain  the
comparison  of  the  respective  substances  (given  in  column  I.)  with  fluor-
benzene  at  the  corresponding  temperatures,  which  are  given  under  the
horizontal  column  marked  0'}  the  absolute  temperatures  of  fluor-benzene
are  found  in  the  horizontal  column  marked  T ;  the  second  column
(marked  II.)  contains  the  molecular  volume  of  the  saturated  vapour  of
the  substance  divided  by  that  of  fluor-benzene  ;  the  third  column
(marked  III.)  contains  the  molecular  volume  of  the  substance  in  a
liquid  state  divided  by  that  of  fluor-benzene ;  the  fourth  column
(marked  IY.)  gives  the  vapour  pressure  of  the  substance  divided  by
that  of  fluor-benzene ;  the  sixth  column  (marked  VI.)  contains  the
boiling-points  of  the  substance  at  the  reduced  pressure  TT,  divided  by
that  of  fluor-benzene,  referred  to  the  same  reduced  pressure,  while
under  p  are  given  the  actual  vapour  pressures  of  fluor-benzene.

1  C.  7?.,  102.  1202  (1886).

TABLE

THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE
TABLE  OF  COMPARISON.

233

I.

II.

III.

IV.

V.

VI.

H

TJ<  00  kO  rH rH
Oi rH •* 00 M

oo  co  i;-  cp  cp

0 OO rH rH TH O
i—l Oi Oi  !>•  O rH
CM rH rH rH C^ CO

CO  CO  CO  CO  CO  CO

CO  00  Oi  CO  O  O
1^.  O  O  O  Oi  OO
^  1^  00  0  rH  CM

OO rH kO kO 00 CO
l^ kO ^ O r-l CM

???olo§

o

00000

K
|

00  -^  "O  CO
l^  rH rH Ttl '

co  i^  CM  oi :

OO rH CO rH
-* CO CO rH

1  1^  co  co  i^ ;

•^^2^^
I  CO 0 CO  O  rH

J>-  CM  t^  ^  O  CM

Oi  CO rH O  Oi  Oi

§•<* rH Oi CO kO
O  O  Oi.  Oi  Oi

d-

(M  i-i  r-l  O

0000

O O O  rH rH

rH rH rH 0 0 0

W

i

m

to  -#  oo  co

t^  rH  CM  CO ;

O  ^h  O  1— •

rH IO rH Oi
1--  Oi  CO  lO
•  Oi  OO  OO  OO

:  o  10  o  vo •

§rH <M CO rH
OO  CO  kO  rH
.  ^  CO  Oi  CM  -#

^ rH rH 1.^  t^  CO
Oi  CO  O  l^  ^  CM
Tfi  O  OO  O  CO  CM
O  O  Oi  Oi  Oi  Oi

3

(M  i—  i  rH  O

0000

0 0 0 rH rH

rHrHOOOO

W

1

•<#  kO  Oi  CM
rt<  Tf<  (M  t^ •
CM  Oi  ^  kO •

CO  1^  OO  t^

CO  00  rfl •*
• rH 0 0 0 ;

.  ^  •*  Tfl  ^ .

00  CO  Oi  CO  CM
•  l>.  CO  kO  OO  CO

:  co  oi  IM  o  t^

1>-  Oi  1^  kO  O  OO

CM  kO  CO  OO  CD  CO
rH 00 CO •<* ?M rH
O  Oi  OS  Oi  Oi  Oi

0

rH O O O

o  o  o  o

O O rH rH rH

rH O  O  O O  O

i

w

rH CO ^ 0

O  OO  10  CO •

r-i  o  o  o :

I-  Oi  C<1  t^

Oi  1--.  O  kO
•  <M  !M  CO  CO •

:  o  oo  o :

•  -^l  CO  OO  O  Oi

:  t-»  j>-  1^.  oo  !>•

rH  rt<  O  CO  CO
rH  Oi  l^  •*  *O

•'•* CO  CO  CO  CO

:  oo  oo  oo  oo  oo

0

rHrHrHrH

00000

00000

f

co  co  o  <M

co  T-H  o  co •

CO  CO  CO  CM •

t>-  Tfi  O  1^  CO

kO "tf 1^ Oi rH

CM  (T>5  C^  C^  (M I

CO  00  kO  rH  CO  CO
O  t^  O  CM ^1 CM

j>-  1->.  oo  oo  co  oo

oi  co  t^  o  •*  ITS

J>.  CO  O  OO  t>-  t—

CO CO CO O O k£J

p  p  p  o  p  p

rHrHrHrH

rHrHrHrHrH

1

oo  ko  oo  i^
CM  oi  co  t— ;

OO  OO  O5  O5

CO O  1^ rH
t^ CO O 00

?Q  (M  <N  CN •

•  o  o  p  p :

O  CO  t^  CO  Oi  CO
CO  0  rn  CO  CM  O
^h CM rH 0 O O

Oi  T^  CO  ^  O  Oi
Oi  t^  CM  CO  rH  JO

CO  t^-  OO  OO  Oi  Oi

Oi Oi Oi Oi Oi Oi

000000

|

o

<M  io  co  co  o

Tti  00  (M  (M  **

OO  OO  Oi Oi  O5

!>.  t-».  Oi  i—  1  Oi  O

O  OO  OO  OO  Oi  O
•HH <g1 -H/l TtH Ttl TjH
Oi  Oi  Oi  Oi  Oi  Oi

OO  O  Tfl  TJ<  OO  CO

CO O •* r-« 00 i^
CO CM rH rH O O

gCM  CO  l^  kO  kO
CO CO OO rH CO

00  Oi  Oi  Oi  O  O
Oi  Oi  Oi  Oi  O  O

00000

000000

OOOOrHrH

*"»

I

<M  CO

fcf* 1 ; !

rH CN  l»

CO  00  l^

1^.  t^.  (V.

CN  c<j  (M : : :

\a>  oo  t^

00  Oi  Oi • • •

oi  Oi  oi : : :

000

(M  Oi  O
O  OO  Oi

oi  co  co • • ;
CM  CM  CM : : :

rH rH rH

|y

«

U7

i
3

•^H rH Oi

i^  o  oo

rH CO rH .' I

(M  O  CO  ^ti
0  O  Oi  CM

oo  oo  j^  ao ; :

!>.  OO  OO  t^-

OO  Oi  00  O • •

oi  oi  oi  p : :

0 0 0 rH

kO  O  00  kO
CO  CO  OO  CO

oi  oi  ci  oi : :

rH i—  1 rH i—  (

|

00  O  CO

rH  10  ^ : :

l^  CO  CO  Oi
•># CO  CO  rf

CM  ^  <M  CM ; :

OO kO  CO  O  J>-

Oi O Oi O O

oi  o  oi  o  o :

lO  1>-  rH  kO  O
rH O CM rH O

co  co  co  co  co ;

0

rH rH r-

rH rH rH rH

0 rH 0 rH rH

fe

'O

o ~ ^ - ^

O

§~ ^ ^ ^ ^

O

Q

o
o - ~ - - -

B

U*

9 '

?O  CO  C<1  CO  O
0  TO  !M  <N  O
CO  1^-  OO  Oi  ^

CO  Oi  CO  (M  00  O
CO  CO CO  CM  CM O
rfl  CO  l^-  OO  Oi  O

CO  Oi CO  01  00  O
OO  CO  CO  CM  CM  O
Tfl CO  t>-  CO  Oi  O

CO  CO  kO  O  O  O

O  CM  00  CO  O  O
O  O  00  CO  Oi  O

0  0  0  0 rH

0  0  0  0  0  rH

OOOOOrH

P p  p  CM  kO  p

fc

o

CO Tfl -HH l->- kO

O O
CM rH rfl ^  t^  O

kO kO
(M rH  -* Tj*  t^  VTS

"i

0  O  O  O  O  (M

CM CO O O O rH

HW
cJ

X^  0  0  05  Oi
(O rH CO rH 10
CO  •*  TJH  iO  kO

CM  00  O  O  Oi  Oi
t-  kO rH CO rH kO
<M  CO  **  ^t<  VO  kO

CM  OO  O  O  Oi  Oi

t^  kO rH CO rH kO
CM  CO  •*  "*  kO  O

eg

u

1>-  p,0^p,0i

co"  oo"  o"  co"

CM  CO

234  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

Thus,  for  example,  the  molecular  volume  of  the  saturated  vapour  of
alcohol  at  the  absolute  temperature  T(  =  338'75),  is  45700  c.c.,  there-
fore, since  the  critical  temperature  of  alcohol  is  516*1  [see  preceding
table  of  critical  data],  the  reduced  temperature  is

the  corresponding  temperature  of  fluor-benzene  amounts  to
T  =  559-55  x  0  =  367-3°.

In  the  table  on  p.  231  the  molecular  volume  of  the  saturated  vapour  of
fluor-benzene  at  this  temperature  is  found  to  be  22,000,  and  thus  the
quotient  is

45,700

22,000  -

and  this  last  number,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  is  found  in  column  II.  (p.  233)
under  C2H5OH,  corresponding  to  the  value  0  =  0'656.

It  appears  from  a  study  of  the  preceding  table,  that  the  figures  for
the  three  halogen  derivatives  of  benzene  meet  the  demands  of  the
theory  as  the  comparison  requires  they  should  at  corresponding  tempera-
tures, as  shown  by  the  constancy  of  the  figures  in  the  vertical  rows  ;
but  that  the  numbers  for  benzene,  carbon  tetrachloride,  stannic  chloride,
and  ether,  given  in  the  vertical  rows  of  each  particular  column,  are
not  constant  as  they  should  be,  inasmuch  as  regular  deviations  can  be
recognised  ;  and  that  the  deviations  are  much  greater  still  in  the  case
of  acetic  acid  and  the  three  alcohols  ;  and  further,  that  the  require-
ments of  the  theory  are  well  satisfied  only  in  the  case  of  the  molecular
•volume  in  the  liquid  state  (see  column  III.)

The  comparison  of  the  boiling-points  at  corresponding  pressures,  again,
gives  very  good  results,  except  in  the  case  of  the  substances  last
mentioned.

Moreover,  the  fact  that  there  is  less  variation  in  comparing  the
quotients  of  the  boiling-points  at  corresponding  pressures,  than  in  com-
paring the  quotients  of  the  vapour  pressure  at  corresponding  temperatures,
is  easily  explained  as  follows  :  since  the  pressures  diminish  in  the  ratio
of  16,000  :  1,  when  the  reduced  temperature  0  sinks  from  1  to  0*5°,
the  inexactness  of  the  theory  will  be  rendered  more  apparent  by  those
quotients  which  are  developed  from  the  pressures,  than  by  those
developed  from  the  temperatures.

By  means  of  the  equations  on  p.  223,  the  critical  volume  </>0  is
estimated  to  be

<_> 7ro

"R/9
if  the  gaseous  laws  held  up  to  the  critical point  it  would  be  — °.

^o

CHAP. II

THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE

235

Thus  we  find  that  the  actual  critical  vapour  density  should  for  every

Q

substance equal -  of  the theoretical,  i.e. the density according to

Avogadro's  law.

This  law  holds  good  to  this  extent  as  actually  found  by  Young ; l
for  omitting  the  alcohols  and  acetic  acid  from  the  values  given  (p.  222)
for  the  critical  volume,  the  critical  vapour  density  of  all  the  substances
investigated  was  several  times  as  great  as  the  theoretical ;  thus  it  was

o

not  -(  =  2'67),  but  about  3 '8  times  as  great  as  the  theoretical. In

general  the  statement  holds  good  that  the  ratio  of  the  observed  to  the  calcu-
lated vapour  densities  is  the  same  at  corresponding  pressures  (but  not  quite  so
exact  at  corresponding  temperatures).  These  quotients  are  calculated  for
fluor-benzene  on  p.  231.

Young  and  Thomas2  have  studied,  further,  the  behaviour  of  a
series  of  esters.  The  reduced  temperatures  and  volumes  for  these,  as
well  as  for  the  substances  previously  investigated,  are  given  in  the
following  table,  for  reduced  pressure  0*08846  : —

Substance.

Reduced  Co-ordinates  (p.  229).

e

«.

«,

Methyl  formate  ....

07348

0-4007

29-4

Ethyl  formate ....

07385

0-4004

29-6

Methyl  acetate ....

0-7445

0-3992

30-2

Propyl  formate ....

07430

0-4010

29-4

Ethyl  acetate . .

0-7504

0-4006

30-3

Methyl  propionate

07485

0-4006

29-6

Propyl  acetate ....

0-7541

0-3994

2975

Ethyl  propionate

0-7540

0-3996

30-05

Methyl  butyrate

07522

0-4005

29-5

Methyl  isobutyrate .

0-7502

0-4021

29-2

Methyl  alcohol ....

07734

0-3949

34-2

Ethyl  alcohol ....

0-7794

0-4047

32-1

Propyl  alcohol ....

0-7736

0-4028

, 31-1

Acetic  acid ....

07624

0-4106

25-5

Ethyl  ether ....

0-7371

0-4044

28-2

Fluorbenzene ....

07334

0-4067

28-4

Chlorobenzene ....

0-7345

0-4046

28-65

Bromobenzene ....

07343

0-4041

28-4

lodobenzene ....

07337

0-4042

28-45

Benzene .....

0-7282

0-4053

28-2

Carbon  tetrachloride .

0-7251

0-4072

27-4

Tin  chloride ....

07357

0-4021

28-1

Within  each group the theorem of corresponding states holds
1  Phil.  Mag.  [5],  34.  507  (1892).  2  Trans.  Chem.  Soc.,  1893,  p.  1191.

236  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

remarkably  for  the  volume  of  the  liquid  fa,  and  fairly  for  the  vapour
volume  <£2,  and  temperature  0,

A  comparison  of  the  reduced  co-ordinates  for  isopentane  with  those
of  benzene  turned  out  quite  in  accord  with  the  theorem.1

The  special  form  of  the  characteristic  equation  developed  on  p.  229
for  coexistence  of  liquid  and  vapour  does  not  agree  at  all  with  the
observations,2  a  further  proof  that  van  der  Waals'  special  equation  for
matter  in  a  highly  compressed  state  is  only  true  qualitatively.

The  Heat  Content  of  Compressed  Gases  and  of  Liquids.—

We  will  now  finally  consider  the  answer  to  certain  questions  regarding
the  heat  content  of  gaseous  and  liquid  substances  in  the  light  of  the
kinetic  theory  of  van  der  Waals.  We  will  omit  the  question  regarding
the  amount  of  work  performed  against  the  external  pressure,  for  this
can  be  ascertained  in  all  cases  exactly  and  easily  in  calorific  equivalents,
in  the  case  both  of  gases  and  of  liquids  ;  on  the  one  hand,  the  heat
introduced  will  increase  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  molecules,  and
on  the  other  hand,  it  will  perform  a  certain  amount  of  work  against
the  molecular  forces,  because  in  consequence  of  the  associated  thermal
expansion,  the  molecules  remove  farther  apart.  But  now  since  the
molecular  forces  increase  greatly  with  condensation,  they  will  be  much
greater  in  liquids  than  in  gases,  where  they  are  inconsiderable  at
ordinary  condensation  ;  thus  we  explain  the  universal  phenomenon
that  the  specific  heat  of  a  liquid  is  always  greater  than  that  of  its
vapour  (p.  59).  If  a  liquid  is  kept  at  constant  volume  during  the
warming,  then,  provided  that  the  theory  of  van  der  Waals  is  rigorously
applicable  to  it,  its  specific  heat  must  be  exactly  the  same  as  that  of
its  vapour,  provided,  of  course,  that  this  latter  is  taken  at  constant
volume  ;  as  far  as  I  know,  no  experiments  have  been  made  in  this
direction.

The  same  conclusion  holds  good  for  compressed  gases  ;  it  was,  in
fact,  found  that  up  to  pressures  of  6000  to  7000  atm.  the  specific  heat
at  constant  volume  was  independent  of  the  volume  (p.  45).  As  is  well
known,  water  does  not  change  its  volume  very  considerably  by  being
heated  in  the  vicinity  of  4°,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  specific  heat
is  much  greater  in  the  liquid  condition  than  in  the  gaseous  condition  ;
we  have  here  an  exception  which  can  be  no  more  explained  by  van  der
Waals'  theory  than  can  all  the  anomalous  densities  of  this  substance.

On  the  other  hand,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  following  result  speaks
emphatically  in  favour  of  the  preceding  conclusion.  From  the  equa-
tion developed  on  p.  55,  viz.  —

8v

1  Youug,  Proc.  Phys.  Soc.  Land.,  1894-95,  p..  602.
2  Riecke,  Gott.  Nachr.,  1894,  No.  2.

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  237

x
when

8^  =  0,  it  follows  that  p  =  AT  -  B,

if  we  denote  by  A  and  B,  two  integration  constants.  As  a  matter  of
fact,  Ramsay  and  Young1  found  that  the  pressure  of  a  liquid  or  gaseous
substance,  when  kept  at  constant  volume,  varied  linearly  with  the
temperature ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  isochores  (i.e.  curves  which
are  obtained  from  varying  pressure  at  constant  volume)  are  straight
lines.

Moreover,  it  is  possible  to  derive  this  last  result  directly  from  the
equation  of  condition  (p.  212),  by  writing  it  in  the  form —

R  a

P~v~b v2'
thus  we  have

R  ,  _ a

A  = v  ; and  B  =  -=•

v  -  b  v2

As  was  shown  (on  p.  48),  the  work  performed  in  compressing  an
ideal  gas  appears  in  the  interior  as  heat.  This  law,  like  the  other  gas
laws,  becomes  inexact  with  a  high  degree  of  compression,  and  thus  the
interesting  question  arises,  as  to  how  we  are  to  conceive  of  these  devia-
tions in  the  light  of  the  theory  of  van  der  Waals.

The  answer  is  very  simple.  On  the  approach  of  the  molecules
towards  each  other  by  compression,  their  mutual  attraction  performs
a  certain  amount  of  work  which  appears  in  the  form  of  heat ;  the  con-
ditions, therefore,  require  that  a  greater  amount  of  heat  should  appear
from  compression  than  what  corresponds  exactly  to  the  work  applied.
The  molecular  pressure,

K a

**•  ~  ~~9>

V2

may  be  regarded  as  a  measure  of  the  force  of  attraction.  The  heat
developed  by  this  force,  by  compressing  the  volume  from  yl  to  v2,
amounts  to

If  a  gas  expands  without  performing  external  work,  as,  for  example,
when  it  flows  into  a  vacuum,  then  the  aforesaid  quantity  of  heat  must
be  absorbed.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  van  der  Waals 2  verified  the  preced-
ing formula  quantitatively  by  calculating  the  experiments  of  Joule  and
Thomson  with  air  and  carbon  dioxide.

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  1.  433  (1887)  ;  3.  49,  63  (1889). 2  I.e.  114  and  foil.

238  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

Moreover,  the  theory  affords  many  explanations  regarding  the  heat
of  evaporation.  For,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  at  once  obvious  that  the
heat  of  evaporation  must  become  zero  at  the  critical  point,  because
the  distinction  between  a  liquid  and  its  saturated  vapour  ceases  at
that  point.  Mathias  l  found  experimental  proof  for  this  corollary  from
measurements  conducted  with  carbon  dioxide  and  nitrous  oxide.
This  necessarily  follows  from  the  formula  of  Clausius  ;  for  at  the
critical  point,  when

v0  =  v0', therefore  1  =  0.

It  now  becomes  possible  to  go  a  step  farther  and  calculate  the
heat  of  vaporisation  from  the  molecular  forces.'2  If  a  gas  is  condensed,
the  molecular  forces  perform  the  work  calculated  above,  which  must
reappear  in  the  form  of  heat.  By  calculating  the  latter  for  1  g.-mol
(according  to  p.  58),  we  obtain

(1)
By  comparison  with  the  equation  deduced  on  p.  229.

KTln-^^  +  --—  ,  =  p(v0-v') ..'.  (2)

vo  -  b vo vo
we  get

A  =  RTlni^  . . ,..;• (3)

vo

From  the  critical  data  (according  to  p.  223),

_27R2fl02

*;«-.

now  on  considering  the  heat  of  evaporation  at  the  boiling-point,  it
follows  that  v0  must  be  very  large  compared  with  v0',  and  therefore

similarly  —  -,  as  compared  with —  ; and  we  thus  find  as  the  value  of

v0

the  molecular  heat  of  evaporation

A=  — — ;  +  Jfctl.

64  TTOVO
For  benzene  we  have

6»0  =  561°; 7r0  =  42  atm. ;
v0'  =  0-096  lit.; T  =  273  +  80:

now  by  writing  R  =  0'0821,  we  obtain  A  in  litre-atm.  (p.  48):  then
by reducing  to  g.-ca-l.,  by dividing  by  24'25,  we  obtain  A  =  54 13,

1  Ann.  chim.  phys.  [6],  21.  69  (1890).

2  Bakker,  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  18.  519  (1895).

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE , ~  »*  (  w  MUM*  . -

•/TV

i.  nc

instead  of  7200  g.-cal. Thus  the  demands  of  the  theory
only  a  very  remote  approximation ;  but  perhaps  the  deviatiolT
case  may  be  ascribed  to  the  partial  formation  of  complex  molecules
from  condensation,  which  would  greatly  increase  the  heat  of  evapora-
tion. Nevertheless,  it is  riot  without interest to  know that  it  is
possible  to  calculate  the  heat  of  evaporation,  at  least  approximately,  so
easily  from  the  critical  data ;  and  also  that  the  formula  is  in  harmony
with  experiment  in  showing  a  gradual  diminution  [for  the  value  of  A,],
till  the  critical  point  is  reached,  when  A  becomes  zero.
Similarly  is  found  for

Ether  A  =  4600  instead  of  6640  at  the  boiling-point.

Carbon  tetrachloride  A  =  5250 ,, 7100  „  ,,

Tin  tetrachloride A  =  6270 „ 7900
Ethyl  alcohol  A  =  5640 „ 10500  at  0°.

Ethyl  acetate  A  =  5500 „ 9000

In  all  cases  experiment  gives  a  higher  value  than  the  theory.

Equation  (3)  is  obtained  by  combination  of  (2)  derived  entirely
from  the  kinetic  theory  with  (1),  which  is  purely  thermodynamic;
it  can  also  be  deduced  kinetically  as  Kammerlingh  Onnes  showed
(Terh.  d.  Ak.  JFiss.,  Amsterdam,  1881  ;  Arch.  Nterl,  30.  101  (1897);
see  also  W.  Voigt,  Gott.  Nadir.,  1897,  Heft  3).  This  problem,
obviously  associated  with  that  of  the  kinetic  explanation  of  the  second
law  of  thermodynamics,  is  fully  treated  by  Boltzmann  (Gas  Theory,  ii.
p.  167  ff.).

Critique  of  the  Results. — By  means  of  the  numerical  material
given  above,  it  is  shown  that  the  theorems  of  van  der  Waals  do  not
find  a  stringent  proof  from  experiment,  but  that  there  are  certain
undoubted  deviations  between  theory  and  fact.

Now  the  question  arises  whether  these  deviations  are  of  such  a
sort  that  the  whole  theory  must  be  given  up,  or  is  it  possible  to
account  for  them  by  some  change  in  developing  the  theory.  The
verdict  cannot  be  doubted  for  a  moment;  for  the  results  of  the  theory
are  so  undeniable,  and  the  region  of  the  phenomena  which  it  claims  to
control  is  so  extensive,  that  it  would  be  a  very  profitable  problem  to
follow  up  these  deviations,  and  to  prove  carefully  what  is  necessary,
i.e.  whether  a  re-shaping  or  an  extension  of  the  theory  is  required.
The  study  of  the  changes  which  must  be  made  in  the  gas  laws  in
order  to  adapt  them  better  to  the  facts,  was  what  led  van  der  Waals
to  his  wonderful  discoveries.  Is  it  not  probable  that  the  desire  to
invest  the  laws  of  van  der  Waals  with  yet  greater  accuracy  would  be
rewarded  with  surprising  and  unexpected  results  1

The  results  so  far  arrived  at  with  regard  to  van  der  Waals'  theory
may  be  summarised  as  follows  :  the  equation

240  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

only  holds  exactly  for  not  too  strongly  compressed  gases  ;  it  quite  fails
near  the  critical  point.  The  theory  of  corresponding  states,  which  is
not  bound  up  with  any  special  characteristic  equation,  is  of  wider
applicability  ;  in  especial  it  allows  of  calculating  accurately  the  volume
and  thermal  expansion  of  liquids.  The  theorem  is  much  further  from
the  truth  as  regards  numerical  calculations  on  the  coexistence  of  liquid
and  vapour  (volume  and  pressure  of  saturated  vapour).  It  is  natural
to  conclude  that  in  this  the  deviation  is  due  to  a  polymerisation
of  the  molecules,  which  may  be  quite  small ;  it  is  therefore  quite
possible  that  the  theorem  of  corresponding  states  may  belong  to  the  class
of  exact  natural  laws.  Kirstine  Meyer  (Z.  S.  pliys.  Chem.,  32.  1,  1900)
adopts  the  same  view  in  a  numerical  discussion  of  the  theory.

It  is  of  course  a  question  whether  the  characteristic  equation  can
be  put  in  a  final  form  ;  the  changes  necessary  in  van  der  Waals'  formula
have  lately  been  critically  investigated,  at  my  suggestion,  by  Reinganum
(Theory  and  Deduction  of  a  Characteristic  Equation,  Diss.,  Gottingen,
1899).  The  descriptions  are  especially  great  in  reckoning  heats  of
expansion :  Reinganum  shows  that  the  attraction  constant  a  is
decidedly  a  function  of  the  volume,  and  to  a  certain  extent  of  the
temperature.  Now,  as  the  attractive  forces  exercise  an  influence  on
the  volume  constant  b  by  accelerating  molecular  collisions,  b  must  also
be  a  function  of  the  volume  and  temperature.  For  greater  density
van  der  Waals'  method  of  treatment  becomes  more  exact.  In  this  way
Eeinganum  arrives  at  an  equation  that  is  partly  deductive  and  partly
based  empirically  on  the  observations  of  Young.

a ffi  \ \ » f~'\j-  /  T>TI •

slC'l,

in  which  /3  is  the  volume  occupied  by  the  molecules,  and  e  and  y  are
given  by  the  expressions

f(v-  2/3)3+  12  -2^

0-0345a

0-0726a|  (v-  2,

7  =

f(

Reinganum  shows  by  the  method  of  Raveau  (p.  226)  that  his
equation  does  agree  strikingly  with  the  facts.

For  other  modifications  of  the  original  equation  of  van  der  Waals,
see  van  der  Waals,  Z.  S.  pliys.  Chem.,  38.  257,  1901.

The  Kinetic  Theory  of  the  Solid  State  of  Aggregation.—

The  attempt  to  press  forward  into  the  constitution  of  solid  substances

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  241

by  means  of  molecular  considerations  has  as  yet  only  begun.  The
assumption,  that  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  translatory  motion  is  pro-
portional to  the  absolute  temperature,  and  independent  of  the  nature
of  the  molecule,  may  possibly  be  introduced  here,  as  was  the  case  with
gases  and  liquids ;  but  here  the  belief  is  at  once  forced  upon  us  that
the  heat  motion  of  the  molecules  of  solid  substances  consists  of  an
oscillation  within  very  sharply  -  defined  limits,  in  which  they  are
restrained  by  the  forces  of  cohesion,  and  that  no  single  molecule  can
continue  to  change  its  place  as  is  the  case  with  gases  and  liquids.  In
fact,  the  peculiarities  of  the  solid  state  become  intelligible  in  this  way.
Thus  heat  introduced  may  become  effective  in  three  ways,  viz. —

1.  It  may  increase  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  molecule,  or  of  the
atoms  within  the  molecule.

2.  It  may  perform  work  against  the  forces  of  cohesion  between
the  molecules.

3.  It  may  perform  work  against  the  external  pressure.

On  account  of  the  slight  change  of  volume  occasioned  by  heating
solid  bodies,  in  general  the  third  mode,  and  the  second  also,  perhaps,
may  be  neglected.  Nothing  further  can  be  noted  here l  regarding  the
attempt  to  press  forward  on  the  basis  either  of  the  preceding  assump-
tion, or  of  other  assumptions.

The  process  of  crystallisation  is  especially  noteworthy  from  the
point  of  view  of  molecular  theory.  We  have  to  imagine  that  to  form
a  crystal  (e.g.  in  an  undercooled  fused  mass  or  a  supersaturated  solution)
a  considerable  number  of  molecules  have  to  meet  in  one  spot,  and  in
an  appropriate  constellation ;  most  probably  the  smallest  crystalline
individual  capable  of  existence  consists  of  very  many  molecules.  Thus
the  probability  of  formation  of  crystals  may  be  very  small ;  experience
shows,  in  fact,  that  it  may  take  a  very  long  time  before  crystals  appear
in  an  undercooled  fused  mass,  and  that  crystalline  precipitates  possess
a  number  of  centres  of  crystallisation  (nuclei)  that  is  excessively  small
compared  with  the  number  of  molecules  concerned.

The  circumstance  that  discrete  centres  of  crystallisation  can  arise
in  apparently  homogeneous  melts  or  solutions  is  a  striking  instance  of
the  appropriateness  of  the  molecular  theory ;  for  this  alone  makes  it
intelligible  that  even  in  the  interior  of  an  apparently  homogeneous
fluid,  local  differences  should  occur  due  to  special  constellations  of
molecular  movements,  and  that  these  should  be  very  sparsely  scattered
in  comparison  with  molecular  distances.

According  to  G.  Tammann  (Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  25.  441,  1898)  the
points  at  which  crystallisation  begins  in  a  melt  are  hardly  1000  per
minute  per  cubic  millimetre  under  the  most  favourable  circumstances.
With  increase  of  undercooling  the  number  of  these  nuclei  at  first
increases,  then  diminishes,  to  practically  zero.

1  See  H.  A.  Lorentz,  Wied.  Ann.,  12.  134  (1881)  ;  van  der  Waals,  Zeitschr.  physik.
Chem,,  5.  133  (1890).

R

242  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

The  molecular  explanation  of  this  remarkable  fact  seems  to  me
this.  The  greater  the  undercooling,  the  smaller  the  smallest  possible
crystalline  individual  must  be,  and  so  the  greater  the  probability  of
the  molecular  constellation  required  to  form  it.  But  on  the  other-
hand,  the  molecular  movements  fall  off  in  vigour  with  fall  of  tempera-
ture, so  that  the  occurrence  of  any  particular  constellation  is  rendered
more  difficult  and  at  the  absolute  zero,  impossible.  These  two  factors
in  combination  would  give  the  results  observed  by  Tammann.  See
especially  Kiister  (Z.  S.  anorg.  Chem.,  33.  363  (1903).

The  Kinetic  Theory  of  Mixtures.  —  In  all  our  theoretical  con-
siderations regarding  molecules  thus  far,  we  have  always  had  in  mind
a  substance  which  should  be  simple  from  a  chemical  standpoint,  i.e.  one
consisting  of  nothing  but  molecules  of  one  kind.  The  question  now
arises,  viz.  how  the  preceding  considerations  will  be  modified  when
we  study  a  mixture.

And  here  we  must  distinguish  between  two  cases,  viz.  the  different
kinds  of  molecules  may  react  chemically  upon  each  other,  or  they  may
hold  themselves  indifferent  towards  each  other.

It  must  be  noticed,  in  the  first  case,  that  the  condition  of  chemical
equilibrium  prevailing  in  the  mixture  will,  in  general,  vary  with  the
pressure,  volume,  and  temperature  ;  such  a  mixture,  for  example,  is  the
vapour  of  acetic  acid,  which  consists  partly  of  doubled  molecules  and
partly  of  normal  ones,  the  ratio  of  which  changes  with  the  external
conditions.  We  will  consider  such  mixtures  more  thoroughly  in  the
part  devoted  to  "  the  doctrine  of  affinity."  In  the  following  we  con-
sider only  mixtures  which  consist  of  molecules  which  are  chemically
indifferent.

Now,  the  van  der  Waals'  equation  of  condition,

can,  of  course,  be  applied  directly  to  a  homogeneous  mixture  of  this
last  sort,  whether  it  be  a  liquid  or  a  gas.  In  fact,  it  is  as  fully  appli-
cable to  strongly-compressed  atmospheric  air  as  to  a  simple  gas,  only  the
meaning  of  the  constants  "  a  "  and  "  b  "  is  somewhat  different  from  that
which  they  have  in  the  case  of  pure  substances,  and  their  magnitudes
also  change  with  the  relative  proportions  of  the  ingredients  in  the
mixture.

Van  der  Waals  (Z.  S.  pliys.  Chem.,  5.  134,  1890)  gives  the  following
equations  to  calculate  the  constants  ax  and  bx  of  a  mixture  containing
1  -  x  mols.  of  one  component  to  x  of  the  other.

ax  -  ax(l  -  x)2  +  2a12x(l  -  x)  +  a2x2
bx  =  b:(l  -  x)2  +  2b12x(l  -  x)  +  b2x2.

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  243

Here  aA  and  \  are  constants  of  the  first  component,  a2  and  b2  of
the  second  ;  a12  is  the  attraction  constant  between  the  two,  and  b19  the
volume  constant  for  the  combination.  Also,  for  b12,

holds.

According  to  this  the  properties  of  a  mixture  can  be  deduced  from
those  of  its  components  by  the  help  of  one  new  constant  a12  only.

The  treatment  of  the  question  regarding  the  coexistence  of  liquid
and  vapour  is  entirely  different  in  the  case  of  mixtures,  since  in  general,
in  distinction  from  simple  substances,  the  composition  of  the  liquid
and  vapour  differ.  As  shown  on  p.  228,  this  question  has  not  yet
been  treated  for  the  case  of  a  simple  substance  from  a  pure  kinetic
standpoint.  Much  less,  therefore,  would  this  be  the  case  for  mixtures  ;
and  this  is  also  true  -of  van  der  Waals'  quoted  work,  although  entitled
The  Molecular  Theory  of  Bodies  consisting  of  Two  Different  Substances;
this  is  emphatically  a  thermodynamic  study,  but  its  description  does
not  belong  to  this  chapter.  It  should,  however,  be  observed  that,  in
addition  to  the  investigation  of  the  coexistence  of  liquid  and  vapour
of  mixtures,  there  also  comes  up  the  question  regarding  the  coexistence
of  liquids  of  different  composition  (mutually  saturated  solutions).1

The  Kinetic  Theory  of  Solutions.—  We  learned,  in  the  last
chapter  of  the  first  book,  a  fact  drawn  from  experiment,  viz.  that  the
laws  of  gases  are  applicable  also  to  dissolved  substances,  and  that  there
is  a  very  far-reaching  analogy  between  the  condition  of  matter  in  dilute
solution,  and  in  the  gaseous  state.  Now  it  is  but  a  step  to  transfer  this
analogy  also  to  the  molecular  condition  ;  and  the  conception  is  at  once
suggested  that  the  osmotic  pressure  of  a  solution,  like  gas  pressure,  has
a  kinetic  nature,  i.e.  that  it  results  from  the  bombardment  of  the  mole-
cules of  the  dissolved  substance  against  the  semi-permeable  partition.
Boltzmann,2  Eiecke,3  and  Lorentz  4  have  made  attempts  of  this  sort  to
develop  the  laws  of  dilute  solutions  immediately  from  the  play  of
molecular  forces  and  of  molecular  movements,  without  having  recourse
to  the  aid  of  thermodynamics.

Each  of  these  investigators  assumed  that  the  mean  kinetic  energy  of
the  translator^  motion  of  the  molecules  in  solution  was  as  great  as  in  the  case
of  the  molecules  of  a  gas  at  the  same  temperature  as  the  solution.  This
assumption  appears  the  more  probable,  because  the  theory  of  van  der
Waals  has  been  already  applied  to  liquids  with  good  results.

According  to  Boltzmann,  in  the  calculation  of  the  osmotic  pressure,

1  See  the  important  new  work  of  van  Kuenen  (especially  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  24.  667,
1897  ;  41.  43,  1903)  and  the  second  part  of  v.  d.  Waals,  Continnitdt,  etc.  (Leipzig,  1900).

2  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  6.  474  (1890)  ;  7.  88  (1891).
*  Ibid.,  6.  564.  4  Ibid.,  7.  36.

244  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

one  must  take  into  consideration  not  only  the  mutually  opposed  action
between  the  wall  and  the  molecules  bounding  against  it,  as  was  done
in  explaining  gas  pressure,  but  also  the  mutual  action  between  the
dissolved  molecules  and  those  of  the  solvent.  But  it  is  a  difficult
problem  to  state  in  just  what  way  this  occurs,  and  to  make  such  a
supposition  as  shall  be  explanatory  and  shall  harmonise  with  the  facts,
and  the  satisfactory  solution  of  this  problem  remains  for  the  future.
Boltzmann  assumed,  on  the  one  hand,  the  distance  between  the  centres
of  two  neighbouring  salt  molecules,  to  be  very  great  as  compared  with
the  distance  between  the  centres  of  two  neighbouring  molecules  of  the
liquid  solvent ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  space  changed  by  the
presence  of  the  molecule  of  the  dissolved  salt,  to  be  small  in  comparison
with  the  total  space  occupied  by  the  liquid  solvent ;  and  in  this  way
he  obtained  this  result,  viz.  that  the  osmotic  pressure  exerted  by  the  dis-
solved substance  on  a  semi-permeable  membrane  is  equal  to  the  corresponding
gas  pressure.

Lorentz  assumed  that  the  dissolved  substance  is  subjected  to  an
attractive  force  proceeding  from  the  solvent,  which  is  equal  to,  and
opposite  to,  the  force  acting  upon  the  quantity  of  the  liquid  displaced.
Riecke  proceeds  upon  the  supposition  that  the  number  of  collisions
between  the  molecules  of  the  dissolved  substance  is  infinitesimally
small  as  compared  with  the  number  of  collisions  between  the  molecules
of  the  solvent.  Each,  on  the  basis  of  his  proviso,  arrived  at  the  same
conclusion  as  Boltzmann.

Boltzmann  and  Riecke  both  showed  in  this  way,  respecting  the
diffusion  of  dissolved  substances,  and  of  electrolytes  especially,  that  the
same  results  are  obtained  which  I  have  already  developed  independently
from  the  special  kinetic  conceptions  preceding  (p.  157).  Thus  Riecke
succeeded  in  deriving  the  mean  free  path  of  a  dissolved  substance  from
its  diffusion  velocity  :  the  following  is  the  value,  in  which  D  denotes
the  coefficient  of  diffusion  (p.  158),  and  "u"  denotes  the  mean
calculated  velocity  of  the  molecule,  viz.  :—

3D

8.64  x  104.u

In  this  way  he  found,  for  instance,  the  mean  free  paths,  at  8°  to  10°,
as  follows  : —

Substance.

D

Mean  Free  Path,  "L"

Urea

0-81

-  8

0'68  x  10  mm.

Chloral  hydrate

0-55

0-94 ,,

Mannite ....

0-38

0-68 „

Cane  sugar

0-31

077 „

CHAP.  II  THE  KINETIC  THEORY  OF  THE  MOLECULE  245

These  mean  free  paths  are  small  compared  with  the  dimensions  of
the  molecule  (Chap.  XII.)

The  explanation  recently  offered  by  J.  H.  Poynting  (Phil.  Mag.,
42.  289,  1896)  of  relative  lowering  of  vapour  pressure  as  due  to
association  of  the  dissolved  molecules  with  those  of  the  solvent  is  an
arbitrary  ad  hoc  hypothesis.  There  is  no  proof  that  this  hypothesis
can  explain  anything  but  the  particular  fact  it  was  brought  forward  to
explain,  e.g.  electrolytic  conductivity.  The  hypothesis  of  electrolytic
dissociation  gives  deductions  in  harmony  with  the  facts  of  conduction,
whereas  the  association  hypothesis  contradicts  them.

Finally,  I  will  refer  to  one  more  point  which  seems  to  have  some
importance.  It  was  shown  in  the  case  of  many  liquids,  for  example
ether,  at  the  temperature  of  a  dwelling-room,  that  the  space  actually
occupied  by  the  molecules  is  about  O'Sths  of  the  space  apparently
occupied.  If  we  dissolve  the  ether  in  any  selected  solvent,  then
the  space  at  the  disposal  of  the  oscillating  molecules  is  certainly
much  smaller  than  the  volume  of  the  solution  ;  therefore  it  would  be
expected  that  this  "  volume  correction  "  would  exercise  as  correspond-
ingly great  an  influence  on  the  osmotic  pressure  as  on  the  pressure  of  a
strongly  compressed  gas  ;  and  it  is  inconceivable  that  it  should  never-
theless be  so  nearly  equal  to  the  gas  pressure.  Yet  a  more  careful
examination  shows  that  this  correction  may  be.  neglected  in  the  methods
hitherto  applied  for  measuring  the  partial  pressures  of  the  dissolved  substances.
The  methods  thus  far  used  always  give  the  osmotic  work  P,  i.e.  the
work  required  to  remove  a  unit  volume  of  the  pure  solvent  from  the
solution,  and  this  value  of  the  pressure  (being  multiplied  by  the  unit
of  volume)  turns  out  to  be  equal  to  the  gas  pressure.  But  if  we
assume  that  the  pressure  of  the  dissolved  substance  must  be  increased
on  account  of  the  volume  correction,  in  the  ratio  of  1  :  1  -  /?,  when  /?
denotes  the  amount  of  the  diminution  of  the  space  at  the  disposal  of  the
movement  of  the  dissolved  molecules,  then  this  pressure  P  will  become

therefore  the  osmotic  work  required  to  remove  unit  volume  of  the
solvent  would  be  calculated  as  the  product  of  the  pressure  and  the
volume,  i.e.

since  the  volume  through  which  the  pressure  is  to  be  forced  back  is
also  diminished  in  the  ratio  !-/?:!,  and  for  the  same  reasons.  In  the
methods  thus  far  employed  for  measuring  the  osmotic  pressure,  the

246  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

volume  correction  is  thus  wholly  neglected.  It  would  be  very  interest-
ing to  find  a  method  for  measuring  directly  the  actual  pressure  of  the
dissolved  substance,  viz.,

P

On  osmotic  pressure  of  strong  solutions  in  terms  of  the  molecular
theory  see  Abegg  (Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  15.  209,  1894).

CHAPTER III

THE DETERMINATION OF THE MOLECULAR WEIGHT

The  Molecular  Weight  of  Gaseous  Substances. — Formerly  gases
were  the  only  substances  the  molecular  weights  of  which  could  be
directly  determined,  and  it  was  only  very  recently  that  the  possibility
was  suggested  of  measuring  the  same  values  for  substances  in  dilute
solution.  The  theoretical  reasons  which  underlie  these  methods  have
been  already  thoroughly  treated  in  discussing  the  theory  of  the  gaseous
state,  and  of  solutions.  The  chief  aim  of  this  chapter  will  be  devoted
to  the  experimental  realisation  of  these  methods.

Since,  according  to  Avogadro's  rule  (p.  205),  under  similar  conditions
of  temperature  and  pressure,  different  gases  contain  the  same  number
of  molecules  in  a  litre,  therefore  the  densities  of  any  two  gases  are
in  the  ratio  of  their  molecular  weights.  It  is  customary  to  refer  the
density,  D,  of  a  gas  to  atmospheric  air  at  the  same  temperature  and  pressure.
The  density  of  air  at  0°  and  atmospheric  pressure  in  latitude  45°  is
0*0012932,  compared  with  water  at  4°;  hence  the  density  of  the  gas
under  the  same  conditions  is

0-0012932D.

Since  1  mol  of  an  ideal  gas  under  normal  conditions  occupies
22,400  c.c.,  the  density  is

M

22,400

if  M  be  the  molecular  weight.
Hence

M  =  0'0012932.22,400D  =  28'994D,

or  nearly  enough

M  =  29-01).

All  the  practical  methods  for  the  determination  of  the  density  of
a  gas  amount  to  this,  viz.  one  determines —

247

248  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

1.  The  mass  of  a  gas  filling  a  measured  volume  at  a  known
temperature  and  pressure.

Or,  2.  The  volume  filled  by  a  weighed  amount  of  a  vaporised
substance.

Or,  3.  The  pressure  exerted  by  the  evaporation  of  a  known  amount
of  the  substance  in  a  measured  volume  at  a  given  temperature.

Moreover,  in  practical  work  in  the  laboratory,  it  is  not  so  necessary
that  a  vapour  density  method  shall  be  capable  of  measurement  with  a
high  degree  of  accuracy,  as  that  it  shall  be  certain  and  simple.  For
since  the  percentage  composition  is  furnished  by  the  analysis,  a  deter-
mination of  the  vapour  density  within  1  per  cent  is  amply  sufficient
to  determine  which  one  of  the  different  possible  molecular  weights  in
question  is  to  be  selected  as  the  correct  one.

Regnault's  Method. — For  the  determination  of  the  density  of  a
substance  which  is  already  gaseous  under  the  ordinary  conditions  of
temperature  and  pressure,  Regnault  used  two  glass  bulbs  of  nearly
the  same  size,  which  were  hung  from  the  arms  of  a  sensitive  balance.
One  of  the  bulbs  was  first  exhausted,  and  then  filled  with  the  gas  to
be  investigated  at  a  known  pressure.  The  second  bulb  merely  served  to
avoid  the  very  considerable  correction  due  to  the  buoyancy  of  the  air.1

As  is  well  known,  Regnault  in  this  way  was  able  to  measure  the
density  of  the  permanent  gases  with  satisfactory  accuracy  (p.  41).
But  for  use  in  the  chemical  laboratory,  when  liquid  and  solid  substances
are  to  be  investigated,  other  methods  are  employed,  of  which  the
following  are  the  most  important.

Dumas's  Method  (1827). — A  lightglass  bulb,  holding  about  0-25  1,,
is  drawn  out  at  the  opening  to  a  long  thin  point,  and  then  weighed.
After  partially  exhausting  it,  by  previous  warning,  about  1  g.  of  the
liquid  substance  is  caused  to  be  drawn  up  into  it.  It  is  then  placed
in  a  heating  bath,  which  has  a  measured  constant  temperature  which
must  be  above  the  boiling-point  of  the  substance  to  be  volatilised.
After  the  contents  have  been  completely  volatilised,  the  point  of  the
opening  is  sealed  by  melting  the  glass  with  a  blow-pipe.  The  bulb,
when  cooled  and  cleaned,  is  then  weighed  again.  Then  it  is  filled
with  water  by  breaking  off  the  sealed  point  under  water.  The  experi-
ment is  regarded  as  satisfactory,  only  when  it  is  filled  completely  with
water,  showing  that  only  traces  of  air  remain  in  the  bulb.  Its  volume
is  obtained  by  weighing  it  filled,  including  the  point  broken  off;  an
approximate  weight  suffices  here.

Let  m  denote  the  weight  of  the  bulb  filled  with  air,  m'  that  when
filled  with  the  vapour,  and  finally  M  that  when  filled  with  water.

1  This  method  has  been  used  recently  by  Rayleigh,  Crafts,  Leduc,  Morley,  etc.,  and
worked  out  more  thoroughly ;  see  Morley,  Z.  S.phys.  Chem.,  17.  87  (1895) ;  20.  68  and
242  (1896).

CHAP.  Ill THE  DETERMINATION  OF  THE  MOLECULAR  WEIGHT  249

Let  t  and  b  be  the  temperature  and  barometric  pressure  at  the
moment  of  sealing  the  opening,  and  t'  and  b'  the  corresponding  values
at  the  first  weighing.  Let  A  be  the  weight  of  1  c.c.  of  air  at  pressure
b'  and  temperature  t'.  Then  will  the  density  D  be  equal  to

I'-ml \b'l  +0'00367t

-r  +  1 ,-

-mA /b  1  +  0-003671/'

Since  1  c.c.  of  atmospheric  air  at  0°  and  760  mm.  weighs  0'001293g.,
therefore  A  amounts  to

0-001293 b'

1  +  0'00367t'760*

The  Gay-Lussac-Hofmann  Method  (1868).  —  A  measured
quantity,  m,  of  the  liquid  in  question  is  enclosed  in  a  tiny  bottle  with
a  glass  stopper.  This  is  then  introduced  into  an  upright  barometer
and  allowed  to  rise  into  the  vacuum  above  the  mercury.  By  means
of  a  steam  jacket,  heated  with  the  steam  of  a  suitable  liquid,  the
barometer  is  warmed  to  such  a  temperature  that  the  contents  of  the
tiny  bottle  are  vaporised.  From  the  volume  v,  finally  occupied  by  the
vaporised  substance  at  the  temperature  t,  the  density  D  is  found  to  be

where  again  the  value  of  A,  the  weight  of  1  c.c.  of  air,  at  the  temperature
and  pressure  of  the  vaporised  substance,  is  obtained  from  the  formula,

0-001293 b-h-e
~  F+  0'00367t 760

Here  the  pressure,  at  which  the  vapour  in  the  barometer  tube  stands,
is  equal  to  the  external  barometric  pressure,  b,  at  the  time  of  the
experiment,  reduced  to  zero,  minus  the  height,  h,  of  the  mercury
column  over  which  the  vapour  stands,  reduced  to  zero,  and  minus  also
the  vapour  tension  of  mercury  e,  at  the  temperature  t.

Victor  Meyer's  Method  by  the  Displacement  of  Air  (1878).

—  All  the  methods  thus  far  described  are  far  surpassed  in  simplicity
and  certainty  by  this  method.  It  shares  with  Hofmann's  method  the
advantage  of  being  able  to  use  a  very  small  quantity  of  a  substance.

A  long  "  pear-shaped  "  vessel,  A  in  Fig.  1  9,  is  heated  to,  and  kept
at,  a  constant  temperature,  which  must  be  above  the  boiling-point  of
the  substance  to  be  investigated,  either  by  means  of  a  heating  bath,1
or  in  any  other  suitable  manner.  It  is  not  necessary  to  know  this
temperature  in  order  to  calculate  the  vapour  density.  The  pear  tube

1  For  the  description  of  a  simple  bath,  see  V.  Meyer,  Eer.  deutsch.  cheni.  G'es.,  19.
1861  (1886).

250

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

extends  into  a  long  tube  of  smaller  diameter.  This  is  closed  at  its
upper  end,  near  which  are  two  side  tubes.  One  of  these  leads  to  a
small  delivery  tube  or  to  a  gas  burette.  The  other  carries  a  glass  rod
which  is  provided  at  the  opening  with  a  tightly-
fitting  rubber  tubing.  This  serves  to  drop  the
substance.  It  is  somewhat  enlarged  in  Fig.  19.
On  the  small  glass  rod  rests  the  substance  to  be
used,  enclosed  within  a  tiny  glass  flask  if  it  is  a
liquid,  or  if  a  solid,  in  the  form  of  a  little  rod,
obtained  by  sucking  the  molten  substance  up  into
a  glass  tube.

After  the  temperature  has  become  nearly  con-
stant, as  will  be  shown  by  the  cessation  of  bubbles
from  the  delivery  tube,  the  substance  is  dropped  by
slipping  back  the  glass  rod,  which  is  drawn  back
into  position  again  by  the  elastic  rubber.  The
substance  falls  to  the  bottom  of  the  pear-shaped
flask,  which  is  provided  with  a  cushion  of  asbestos,
spiral  wire,  mercury,  or  the  like,  to  avoid  its
being  broken.  The  substance  at  once  is  vaporised.
The  disengaged  vapour  displaces  the  air  above  it,
blocking  its  way ;  and  if  this  occurs  before  there
is  any  marked  diffusion  or  condensation  into  the
colder  part  of  the  apparatus,  then  the  vaporisation
occurs  quickly  enough.  The  volume  of  air  dis-
placed is  measured  in  the  eudiometer,  or  in  the  gas  burette ;  and
this  represents  the  volume  which  would  be  occupied  by  the  substance
at  the  same  conditions  of  temperature  and  pressure.  Thus  the  density
D  is

Fig.  IP.

760 1

b  0-001293

=  687,800

Here  m  denotes  the  quantity  of  the  substance  used  in  grams,  b
the  pressure  in  millimetres,  and  t  the  temperature  at  which  the
displaced  volume  v,  of  air  (measured  in  c.c.)  is  observed.  The  factor
0'004  is  taken  instead  of  the  usual  coefficient  of  expansion  0'00367,
in  order  to  take  account  of  the  moisture  of  the  air.

One  may  also  drop  the  substance  into  the  pear-shaped  flask,  by
opening  the  stopper  and  closing  as  quickly  as  possible.  A  heating-
jacket  of  glass  around  the  "  pear  "  may  be  used  when  the  temperatures
do  not  run  too  high.

It  must  also  be  observed  that  the  partial  pressure  at  which  the
vaporised  substance  stands  is  neither  definite  nor  constant;  but  that
from  the  bottom,  where  the  substance  is  only  slightly  intermixed  with
the  air  present,  and  therefore  where  the  pressure  is  almost  equal  to  the
atmospheric  pressure,  the  partial  pressure  gradually  sinks  to  zero  at

CHAP.  Ill THE  DETERMINATION  OF  THE  MOLECULAR  WEIGHT  251

the  top,  and  thus  that  it  diminishes  at  all  intermediate  points  with
increasing  diffusion.  But  this  variation  of  the  partial  pressure,  resulting
from  dilution  with  the  obstructing  air,  may  be  disregarded  in  the
measurement  (i.e.  in  the  measurement  of  the  displaced  air),  provided
that  the  disengaged  vapour  conducts  itself  as  an  ideal  gas  and  obeys  Boyle's
law.  Only  in  such  cases  will  the  quantity  of  displaced  air  be  as  great
as  though  no  intermixture  had  occurred  through  diffusion.

But  the  behaviour  is  entirely  different  when  the  substance  which
is  to  be  studied  exhibits  dissociation  (see  Chap.  VL),  and  when  it
dissociates  more  and  more  as  the  partial  pressure  diminishes.  In  that
case,  the  quantity  of  air  displaced  will  be  greater  the  more  quickly  the
mingling  occurs,  and  the  results  obtained  will  no  longer  bear  a  simple
interpretation,  because  one  does  not  know  how  far  the  mixture  had
gone  at  the  time  of  the  measurement,  and  therefore  what  the
relative  pressures  may  be  under  which  the  vaporised  substance  was
studied.

The  way  in  which  the  air  is  displaced  may  also  indicate  in  a
qualitative  way,  whether  the  vaporised  substance  is  conducting  itself
properly,  or  whether  dissociation  is  taking  place  ;  in  the  latter  case,  the
method  is  unsuitable  for  exact  measurements,  and  will  not  give  simple  results.
(See  Book  III.  Chap.  II.,  "  Influence  of  Indifferent  Gases.")

The  Determination  of  the  Vapour  Density  at  Very  High
Temperatures. — At  high  temperatures,  Hofmann's  method  is  debarred
on  account  of  the  great  vapour  tension  of  mercury,  and  also  for  other
reasons.  The  method  of  Dumas  is  here  quite  difficult  to  use,  since  we
are  debarred  from  using  a  glass  bulb  at  high  temperatures  (above
650°),  arid  if  a  porcelain  flask  is  used  according  to  the  modification  of
Deville  and  Troost,  its  point  must  be  sealed  with  the  oxyhydrogen
blow-pipe.  On  the  other  hand,  the  method  of  the  displacement  of  air
has  been  used  recently  with  very  good  results,  even  at  very  high
temperatures  (up  to  20009).

For  the  material  of  the  heating  bath,  there  may  be  used  boiling
sulphur  (444°),  or  boiling  phosphorus  pentasulphide  (518°),  or  boiling
stannous  chloride  (606°),  and  for  still  higher  temperatures  a  charcoal
furnace,  or  a  Perrot's  gas  furnace  which  is  fed  with  an  air  blast.
As  shown  by  the  researches  of  Nilson  and  Pettersson  (1889),  and  also
by  those  of  Biltz  and  V.  Meyer  (1889),  it  is  possible  in  this  way  to
reach  and  measure  high  temperatures  which  were  sufficiently  constant
during  the  investigation ;  these  temperatures  were  easily  regulated  by
controlling  the  supply  of  gas,  and  mounted  as  high  as  1730°.

Using  water-gas  in  a  Perrot l  furnace  Biltz  2  attained  a  temperature
of  1900°;  suitable  materials  for  a  vessel  to  use  at  this  temperature  are
not  known  however.

1  For  a  description  of  the Perrot  furnace  see  V. Meyer  and  C.  Meyer,  Ber.  d.
chem.  Ges.,  12.  1112  (1879).  2  Z.  S.  phys.  Ghent.,  19.  385  (1896).

252  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  n

The  pear-shaped  vessels  and  the  extension  tubes  were  protected
against  injury,  by  making  them  of  platinum  free  from  soldering  with
any  other  metal,  or  of  porcelain  glazed,  both  inside  and  outside.  The
latter  has  the  advantage,  as  it  can  be  subjected  directly  to  the  gas
flames  ;  while  the  former,  on  account  of  its  ready  permeability  by  gases
at  high  temperatures,  must  be  protected  from  direct  contact  with  the
flame  by  a  surrounding  mantle  of  porcelain.  Inasmuch  as  the  porcelain
"pears"  begin  to  soften  at  1700°,  it  is  recommended  that  they  be
wrapped  in  thick  platinum  foil  in  order  to  increase  their  resistance
to  heat.

The  dropping  apparatus,  and  the  tube  delivering  to  the  gas  burette,
were  as  before  made  of  glass,  and  provided  with  rubber  fittings  at  the
ends  of  extension  tubes  which  reached  far  enough  out  of  the  furnace ;
they  were  protected  from  being  heated,  by  a  screen  at  the  side  of  the
furnace.

In  general  the  measurement  differs  in  no  detail  from  that  con-
ducted at  lower  temperatures,  except  that  the  substance  cannot  be
vaporised  in  air  on  account  of  the  great  chemical  activity  of  oxygen  at
high  temperatures ;  therefore,  before  the  experiment,  the  apparatus
must  be  filled  with  some  neutral  gas,  as  nitrogen  or  carbon  dioxide.

Although,  as  previously  emphasised,  it  is  not  necessary  to  know
the  temperature  at  which  the  substance  is  vaporised,  yet  it  is  never-
theless of  great  advantage  in  the  case  of  substances  which  change  their
molecular  weight  with  rising  temperature.  As  a  matter  of  fact,
Nilson'and  Pettersson,  V.  Meyer,  and  others,  without  making  the
apparatus  very  complicated,  succeeded  in  making  vapour  density
determinations,  combined  with  quite  reliable  determinations  of  the
temperature.

This  experiment l  consisted  simply  in  using  the  "  pear  "  as  an  air
thermometer  by  heating  it  from  the  initial  temperature  (as  0°  or  the
temperature  of  the  room),  and  measuring  the  volume  of  the  air  dis-
placed ;  from  this  the  final  temperature  was  calculated  from  the  well-
known  expansion  coefficient  of  gases.

Finally,  it  is  necessary  to  introduce  a  correction  due  to  the
expansion  of  the  pear  with  the  temperature  ;  this  is  given  by  the
coefficient  of  volume  expansion  of  the  material  of  which  it  consists
Now  it  must  be  noticed  that  only  the  "pear"  itself  is  exposed  to
the  temperature  which  it  is  desired  to  measure,  and  this  temperature
diminishes  along  the  extension  tube  down  to  the  temperature  of  the
room.  Inasmuch  as  this  correction  introduces  much  difficulty  into
the  calculation,  it  is  determined  directly  by  means  of  a  compensator  ;
this  is  a  companion  tube  closed  below,  of  the  same  material  as  the
extension  tube,  of  the  same  form,  and  placed  parallel  to  it  and  as
near  it  as  possible.

1  Nilson  and  Pettersson,  /.  pr. Ch.  [2],  33.  1  (1886)  ;  Biltz  and  Meyer,  Zeitschr.
physik.  Chem.,  4.  249  (1889).

CHAP.  Ill THE  DETERMINATION  OF  THE  MOLECULAR  WEIGHT  253

By  subtracting  the  amount  of  gas  driven  out  of  the  compensator,
from  that  driven  out  of  the  vapour  density  apparatus,  one  obtains  the
amount  actually  driven  out  of  the  "pear"  by  the  elevation  in  tem-
perature, which,  reduced  to  760  mm.  and  0°,  amounts  to  v.  Further,
if  Y  denotes  the  content  of  the  pear  (  =  the  total  content  minus  the
content  of  the  compensator),  if  a  denotes  the  coefficient  of  expansion
of  gases  (0*00367),  and  if  y  denotes  the  cubic  coefficient  of  expansion
of  the  material  of  the  pear  (0*0000108  for  porcelain  and  0*000027
for  platinum),  then  the  final  temperature  is  given  by  the  simple
formula  :

V(a  —  y)  —  Va

At  very  high  temperatures,  when  only  about  -fth  of  the  original
air  remains  in  the  apparatus,  the  method  loses  its  accuracy,  because
here  with  a  very  great  increase  in  temperature  there  is  associated  the
expulsion  of  only  a  very  slight  quantity  of  air.

Another  method,  used  at  the  same  time  by  Crafts  and  V.  Meyer,1
works  much  better;  this  requires  a  more  complicated  apparatus,  and
consists  in  driving  out  the  air  or  nitrogen  contained  in  the  apparatus
at  atmospheric  temperature,  and  again  at  the  temperature  of  the
experiment  by  carbon  dioxide  or  by  hydrochloric  acid ;  measuring  the
former  in  a  gas  burette,  while  the  displacing  gas,  in  a  quick  stream,  is
absorbed  by  a  solution  of  caustic  potash,  or  by  water  in  a  gas  burette.
The  displacing  gas  is  introduced  into  the  apparatus  through  a  narrow
tube  which  is  fused  into  the  lower  part  of  the  pear,  and  runs  parallel
with  the  extension  tube  ;  and  similarly  the  introduction  of  the  gas  into
the  compensator  was  effected  by  means  of  a  tube  sealed  into  it,  and
running  parallel  with  the  extension  tube.  The  use  of  such  an
apparatus  was  rendered  impossible  in  the  case  of  porcelain  pears  by
reason  of  technical  difficulties,  but  pears  of  glass  and  platinum  proved
well  suited  for  this  purpose.

If  V  denotes  the  volume  of  the  pear  at  0°  and  760°  mm.,  and  v
that  of  the  heating  jacket  containing  dry  nitrogen  referred  to  0°
and  760  mm.,  then  the  temperature  of  the  experiment  (as  before),  is

v -rT *

Va  -  Vy

Of  course  V  and  y  are  regarded  as  corrected  by  the  subtraction  of
the  corresponding  quantity  of  air  driven  out  of  the  compensator.

The  author2  has  recently  succeeded  both  in  simplifying  the  pro-
cedure described  above  and  in  extending  the  range  of  temperature

1  Crafts  and  Fr. Meier,  C.  ft.,  90.  606  (1880)  ;  V.  Meyer  and  Zliblin,  B.  £.,  13.
2021  (1880). See  also  Lauger  and  V.  Meyer,  Pyrochemische Untersuchungen,  Bruns-
wick, 1885  ;  Mensching  and  V.  Meyer,  Zeitschr.  physik. Chem.,  1.  145  (1887).

2  W.  Nernst,  Z.  S.f.  Elektroch,,  1903,  p.  622.

254  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

available  to  2000°.  A  small  indium  vessel  (made  by  Heraeus  of
Hanau)  containing  about  3  c.c.  was  heated  by  an  electrically  heated
iridium  tube  :  the  small  amount  of  gas  driven  out  was  measured  by
the  movement  of  a  mercury  drop  in  a  calibrated  glass  tube.  The
substance  to  be  gasified  was  weighed — usually  a  fraction  of  a  milli-
gram— on  a  "  microbalance,"  constructed  like  a  letter  balance,  the  pan
being  fastened  at  right  angles  to  horizontally  stretched  quartz  fibre.
The  temperature  was  measured  by  the  emission  of  light  from  the
bottom  of  the  iridium  vessel ;  this  was  compared  with  a  photometric,
electrolytic  glower  (of  a  Nernst  lamp).  With  this  apparatus  fairly
accurate  measurements  could  be  taken  easily  and  rapidly.

The  Determination  of  the  Vapour  Density  at  Diminished
Pressure. — An  important  method  of  vaporising  substances  consists
not  only  in  raising  the  temperature,  but  also  in  diminishing  the
pressure ;  and  indeed  the  latter  alone  is  applicable  when  an  elevation
of  temperature  is  attended  by  a  decomposition  of  the  substance  which
makes  the  determination  of  its  vapour  density  impossible.  The
method  of  Hofmann  is  the  only  one  of  those  described  above,  which
permits  the  evaporation  of  the  substance  in  a  vacuum,  and  which
therefore  gives  a  determination  at  any  desired  diminished  pressure.
By  combining  the  bulb  used  in  the  method  of  Dumas,  with  a  water-
pump  and  a  manometer,1  the  pressure  can  be  reduced  very  low ;  but
it  is  obvious  that,  on  weighing  the  very  small  residue  remaining  in  the
bulb,  the  method  loses  in  accuracy  very  considerably.

Finally,  it  has  been  recently  shown  by  V.  Meyer,2  as  appears
from  his  experience  in  vapour  density  determination,  that  it  is  possible
to  vaporise  the  substance  in  question  at  temperatures  from  20°  to  40°
below  its  boiling-point  by  taking  pains  to  vaporise  it  quickly.  In  order
to  accomplish  this  it  is  necessary  to  spread  the  substance  out  quickly
on  the  bottom  of  the  pear.  This  is  accomplished  by  dropping  solid
substances  in  the  form  of  tiny  rods  ;  and  liquids  enclosed  in  little
flasks  of  Wood's  metal,  which  melt  immediately  on  arriving  at  the
bottom  of  the  pear.  Also  the  use  of  hydrogen,  as  the  packing  gas,
was  found  to  be  of  advantage  in  increasing  the  speed  of  vaporisation,
on  account  of  its  ready  diffusibility  [mobility].

Finally,  a  number  of  particular  methods  have  been  described  for
the  determination  of  vapour  densities  at  diminished  pressures.

Malfatti  and  Schoop,3  and  Eykmann  4  as  well  as  Bleier  and  Cohn  5
also  in  a  modified  way,  measure  the  increase  of  pressure  occasioned,
in  a  space  of  known  volume  and  which  is  almost  completely  exhausted,
by  the  vaporisation  of  a  known  quantity  of  the  substance  in  question.

1  Habermann,  Lieb.  Ann.,  187.  341  (1877).

2  Demuth  and  Meyer,  B. B., 23. 311 (1890)  ;  Krause  and  V.  Meyer,  Zeitschr.
physik.  Chem.,  6.  5  (1890).

3  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  1.  159  (1887).

4  B.  B.,  22.  2754  (1889).  5  Monatshefte  f.  Chem.,  20.  909  (1900).

CHAP.  Ill THE  DETERMINATION  OF  THE  MOLECULAR  WEIGHT  255

Schall l  compares  the  increase  of  pressure,  resulting  from  such  evapora-
tion as  that  just  described,  with  the  increase  of  pressure  from  the
admission  of  a  known  quantity  of  air  into  the  exhausted  apparatus,  or
from  the  escape  of  carbon  dioxide  from  a  known  quantity  of  soda ;  in
this  method  it  is  not  necessary  to  know  the  volume  of  the  apparatus.
An  apparatus  has  been  described  by  Lunge  and  Neuberg,2  which  con-
sists of  a  combination  of  V.  Meyer's  apparatus  with  a  Lurige  gas
burette,  and  allows  a  very  elegant  control  of  the  pressure  under  which
the  substance  is  vaporised.

The  gas  baroscope  of  Bodlander's  3  arrangement  using  the  method
of  displacement,  but  measuring  the  increase  in  pressure  at  constant
volume;  a  special  advantage  of  this  is  that  it  avoids  reduction  to
normal  volume.

Calculation  of  Atomic  Weight  from  Gas  Density.— Atomic

weights  can  be  calculated  from  the  molecular  weights  determined
according  to  Avogadro's  law  (p.  175) ;  usually  this  has  only  been  done
in  an  approximate  manner,  the  exact  value  being  subsequently
arrived  at  by  analysis.

Now,  according  to  all  probability  Avogadro's  law  is  strictly  true
for  ideal  gases ;  hence  if  the  measurements  on  ordinary  gases  and
vapours  can  be  reduced  to  the  ideal  state,  we  have  a  purely  physical
method  for  exact  determination  of  atomic  weights  from  gas  densities.

This  method  has  been  carried  out  with  remarkable  results  by  D.
Berthelot.4

Let  v0  be  the  actual  volume  of  a  mol  of  gas  under  normal  condi-
tions, V0  that  which  a  mol  of  ideal  gas  would  occupy  under  the  same
circumstances,  then  (p.  215)

b a  \

-  +  — A

vo vo  /

Hence  to  reduce  the  measured  density  of  a  gas  to  the  ideal  condition
and  obtain  the  exact  molecular  weight  it  must  be  multiplied  by

The  simplest  way  to  get  the  expression  in  brackets  is  by  measure-
ments of  compressibility. As  we  are  only  concerned  with  gases  in  a

b  a

condition approaching  the  ideal,  the quantities  —  and  —^  in  van  der

Waals'  formula  are  small compared  with  unity; we  may  therefore
write  with  sufficient  approximation

1  B.B.,  22.  140  ;  23.  919,  1701  (1892). 3  Ibid.,  27.  2263  (1894).

2  Ibid.,  24.  724  (1891).  4  J.  de  Phys.  (3),  8.  263  (1899).

256  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

i.e.  pv  must,  for  constant  temperature,  be  a  linear  function  of  the
pressure  p.  If,  then,  pv  be  measured  for  various  pressures  and
extrapolated  linearly  to  p  -  0,  we  shall  have  accomplished  the  reduc-
tion to  the  ideal  state.  D.  Berthelot  found  the  following  molecular
weights  : —

H2  N2  CO  02  C02

d 0-062865  "0-87508  0'87495  I'OOOO  1-38324

A -0-064  +0-038  0'046  0'076  0'674%

M 2-0145  28-013  28'007  32 '000  44  "000

N2O  HC1  C2H2  SO2

d 1-38450  1-14836  0-81938  2-04835

A +0-761  0-790  0-840  2'358%

M 44-000  36-486  26*020  64'050

Under  A  are  given  the  corrections  in  per  cent,  calculated  as
described  above ;  the  observed  densities  must  be  reduced  by  these
amounts  to  yield  correct  molecular  weights.  The  atomic  weights
deduced  from  the  latter  are  given  in  line  (I.)  below,  while  in  (II.)  are  the
atomic  weights  from  the  table,  p.  34.

o  H  ic  x  s  ci

(I.) 16-000  1-0075  12-004  14'005  32-050 35 '479

(II.) 16-000  1-008  12-00  14-04  32'06  35-45

The  remarkable  agreement  is  evidence  that  Avogadro's  law  is  true,
in  the  limit,  with  great,  or  perhaps  complete  accuracy.

The  Determination  of  the  Molecular  Weight  from  the
Osmotic  Pressure  of  the  Dissolved  Substance. — It  has  been
already  stated  that  it  is  possible  to  determine  the  molecular  weight  of
any  desired  substance  in  any  selected  solvent,  provided  the  concentra-
tion is  not  too  great  •  this  depends  upon  van't  Hoff's  generalisation  of
Avogadro's  rule  ;  according  to  this,  the  osmotic  pressure  of  a  substance  in
solution,  like  the  pressure  of  a  gas,  is  independent  of  the  nature  of  the
molecules,  but  simply  proportional  to  their  number,  and  this  is  identical  luith
the  corresponding  gas  pressure  (see  p.  155).  Thus,  if  there  are  c  grams
of  a  substance  dissolved  in  1  litre  of  any  selected  solvent,  and  if  the
pressure  at  the  temperature  t,  exerted  by  this  on  a  partition  (which  is
permeable  for  the  solvent,  but  not  for  the  dissolved  substance),
amounts  to  p  atmospheres,  then  the  molecular  weight  of  the  dissolved
substance  is  calculated  to  be

M- 22-42(1  +0'00367t)-;
for,  as  shown  by  Regnault's  determinations,  1  g.-mol  of  any  selected

CHAP,  ill THE  DETERMINATION  OF  THE  MOLECULAR  WEIGHT  257

gas,  when  enclosed  in  the  space  of  1  litre,  at  0°,  exerts  a  pressure  of
22-42  atm.,  and  at  t°  a  pressure  of  22'42  (1  +0'00367t);  and  the
osmotic  pressure  is  equal  to  this,  multiplied  by  the  relative  number  of

f»

molecules,  viz.  —  :  1,  from  which  we  derive  the  preceding  formula.

But  when  one  comes  to  the  experimental  determination  of  the
osmotic  pressure,  he  meets  with  great  difficulties  :  hence  osmotic
measurements  for  molecular  weight  determination  have  been  used
only  occasionally,  as  once  by  de  Yries,1  who  determined  the  molecular
weight  of  raffinose  by  comparing  a  solution  of  it  with  the  known
osmotic  pressure  of  a  plant-cell,  by  the  plasmolytic  method.

On  the  other  hand,  we  possess  several  methods  for  the  indirect
measurement  of  the  osmotic  pressure,  and  which  give  .simple  and  exact
results;  we  are  indebted  to  Raoult  especially  for  their  discovery.
Since  the  lowering  of  the  freezing-point,  of  the  vapour  pressure,  and
of  the  solubility,  experienced  by  a  solvent  on  adding  a  foreign
substance,  are  all  proportional  to  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the  sub-
stance added,  by  measuring  these  depressions  we  obtain  directly  the
molecular  weight  of  the  dissolved  substance.

The  Depression  of  the  Freezing-Point.  —  If  the  addition  of  m
grams  of  a  substance  to  100  g.  of  a  solvent  lowers  the  freezing-point
of  the  latter  t  degrees,  then  the  molecular  weight  of  the  dissolved
substance  is  calculated  from  the  formula

here  E,  the  "molecular  depression  of  the  freezing-point"  of  the
particular  solvent  used,  is  obtained  from  the  heat  of  fusion  w,  of  1  g.
of  the  solvent,  expressed  in  g.-cal.  and  from  its  fusing-point  T  in
absolute  temperature  ;  thus

The  molecular  depressions  of  the  freezing-point  for  the  solvents
thus  far  investigated  are  given  in  the  table  on  p.  153.  The  accuracy
of  the  formula  requires  that  the  pure  solvent  shall  freeze  out  of  the
solution,  and  not  a  mixture  of  the  solvent  with  the  dissolved  sub-
stance (p.  170).

A  great  variety  of  pieces  of  apparatus  which,  however,  are
essentially  the  same  in  principle  have  been  described  to  measure  the
depression  of  the  freezing-point.2  Of  these  we  will  describe  the

1  0.  JR.,  106.  751  (1888).

2  Raoult,  Ann.  chim.  phys.  [6],  2.  93  (1884)  ;  8.  (1886)  ;  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,
9.  343  (1892); Hollemann,  B,  B.,  21. 860 (1888); Auwers, ib.,  701;  Eykmann,
Zeitschr.  physik. Chem.,  4.  497  (1889);  Fabinyi,  'ib.,  2.  964  (1888);  Klobukow,  ib.f
4.  10  (1889).

258

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

apparatus  constructed  by  Beckmann,1  which  was  generally  adopted  in
a  very  short  time,  and  which  enables  one  to  measure  the  lowering  of
the  freezing-point  very  simply  and  accurately.

The  vessel  A,  Fig.  20,  which  is  designed  to  hold  the  solvent,  con-
sists of  a  thick-walled  test-tube,  having  a  side
tube.  After  pouring  in  the  solvent,  about
15  or  20  g.  being  weighed  out  or  measured
out  with  a  pipette,  there  is  introduced  a
stirrer  made  of  thick  platinum  wire,  and
then  the  thermometer  D,  fitted  with  a  cork.
In  order  to  hold  the  test-tube  in  place,  and
also  to  protect  it  with  an  air-jacket,  it  is
fitted  with  a  cork  ring  into  another  wider
test-tube  B.  The  whole  is  placed  in  a  glass
jar  C  filled  with  the  cooling  mixture,
the  temperature,  of  which  should  be  from
2°  to  5°  below  the  freezing-point  of  the
solvent.

\m  A measurement is conducted in the

following  way  :  First,  the  test-tube  contain-
A  ing  the  requisite  quantity  of  the  pure  solvent

is  dipped  into  the  cooling  mixture,  and  at
the  same  time  is  constantly  stirred  till  the
whole  is  a  little  undercooled,  and  there
occurs  a  separation  of  finely-divided  ice,
attended  by  a  sudden  rise  in  the  ther-
mometer to  the  freezing-point  of  the  solvent.
In  this  way,  when  the  test-tube  is  protected
by  the  air-jacket,  which  prevents  its  heat
from  being  given  off  too  suddenly,  we  obtain
an  exact  measurement  of  the  freezing-point
of  the  solvent  itself.  We  then  add,  through
the  side  tube,  a  weighed  amount  of  the
substance  to  be  investigated,,  and  determine
the  freezing-point  of  the  solution.  The  re-
sulting depression  of  the  freezing-point  is
obtained  by  subtraction.

Although  we  are  now  in  possession,  of
all  the  data  requisite  for  the  calculation  of
the  molecular  weight,  yet  it  is  recommended

that  a  series  of  observations  be  made  by  adding  successive  portions  of
the  substance,  in  order  to  determine  whether  the  molecular  weight  is
independent  of  the  concentration,  or  whether  the  degree  of  dissociation
varies  with  the  concentration.

Fig.  20.

1  Zeitschr.  physik. Chetn.,  2.  638  (1888). See  especially  G. Fuchs,  Anleitung'zu
^folekulargewichtsbestimmungen,  L3ipzig  (1895).

CHAP,  ill THE  DETERMINATION  OF  THE  MOLECULAR  WEIGHT  259

In  investigating  solutions  of  greater  concentration,  the  amount  of
ice  separated  must  be  as  little  as  possible,  in  order  to  avoid  the  errors
consequent  upon  too  great  a  change  of  concentration  from  the  freezing
out  of  too  large  a  portion  of  the  solvent.  This  can  be  accomplished
easily  with  a  little  practice.  The  side  tube  serves  to  introduce  the
solid  substances.  To  introduce  liquid  substances  one  may  use  as  a
wash  bottle  the  Sprengel-Ostwald  pycnometer.  More  recently  Beck-
mann  has  described  a  simple  apparatus  which  enables  one  to  use
solvents  which  are  strongly  hygroscopic.1

Inasmuch  as  the  measurement  of  the  freezing-point  can  be  accom-
plished with  a  little  practice,  within  some  thousandths  of  a  degree,  it
is  recommended  to  use  a  thermometer  divided  to  read  directly  to
hundredths  of  a  degree.  In  order  to  use  such  a  thermometer  over
wide  ranges  of  temperature  ( -  6°  to  +  60°),  Beckmann  devised  a
thermometer  where  the  capillary  above  passed  [through  an  enlargement
of  the  bore]  into  a  bent  mercury  reservoir  (see  Fig.  20).  Accord-
ing as  the  thermometer  is  to  be  used  with  solvents  having  a  higher
or  lower  freezing-point,  more  or  less  of  the  mercury  is  passed  from
the  capillary  into  the  lower  part  of  the  reservoir  by  warming  and
carefully  tapping  the  thermometer.  The  value  of  the  scale  of  the
thermometer  practically  remains  unchanged,  since  here  one  is  merely
concerned  in  measuring  differences  of  temperature.  [Hence  such
thermometers  are  called  differential.]

A  method,  given  by  the  author,  for  measuring  the  freez'ing-point
of  solutions,  especially  at  high  concentrations,  has  been  worked  out
by  M.  Koloff.2  The  principle  of  the  method  is  to  determine  the
composition  of  the  solution  that  is  in  equilibrium  with  the  frozen
solvent  at  a  given  temperature.  This  may  also  be  looked  upon  as  a
measurement  of  the  solubility  of  the  solvent  in  the  given  solution.
In  working  out  the  method  the  first  difficulty  met  with  was  to
maintain  constant  low  temperatures.  Cryohydrates  formed  by
mechanical  mixture  of  snow  and  salts  are  not  finely  enough  divided
to  give  really  constant  temperatures.  If,  however,  the  cryohydrate
be  formed  by  freezing  saturated  salt  solutions,  they  keep  their
cryohydric  temperatures  exactly  till  the  freezing  is  complete.  By
the  use  of  appropriate  salts  all  temperatures  from  0°  to  -  30°  can  be
obtained.

Freezing-point  of  very  Dilute  Solutions. — It  is  important  to
make  sufficiently  exact  measurements  on  very  dilute  solutions,  both
on  account  of  the  theoretical  importance  of  such  solutions  and
practically  to  obtain  the  molecular  weight  of  slightly  soluble  sub-
stances. Early  observers  obtained  somewhat  erroneous  values  for
the  aqueous  solutions  with  which,  in  the  first  place,  they  concerned

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  7.  323  (1891) ;  22.  616  (1897).
2  Ibid.,  18.  572  (1895).

260  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

themselves  ;  but  recently  results  of  value  seem  to  have  been
arrived  at.

It  has  been  found  that  the  influence  of  the  cooling-bath  and  of
the  heat  generated  by  stirring  produce  errors  of  some  thousandths  of
a  degree  or  more ;  this  is  of  no  consequence  in  careful  measurements
of  molecular  weight  of  substances  at  moderate  concentrations,  but
must — and  can — be  avoided  in  dealing  with  very  dilute  solutions.

The  following  is  a  brief  account  of  the  theory  of  the  establishment
of  equilibrium  on  freezing  : l — Given  a  large  mass  of  freezing  liquid  :  let
the  true  freezing-point  be  T0,  i.e.  the  temperature  at  which  the  separated
solid  and  residual  liquid  are  in  equilibrium ;  let  the  temperature  at
time  x  be  t.  Then  t  will  approach  T0  by  the  melting  or  freezing  of
some  of  the  solvent,  and  the  accompanying  absorption  or  evolution  of
heat,  according  as  t  is  above  or  below  T0.  The  outside  temperatures
exert  no  influence,  since  we  have  assumed  a  large  mass  of  liquid.

According  to  experience  on  the  solution  of  solids  (Book  III.
Chap.  V.),  the  rate  of  solution  of  the  solid  solvent  may  be  taken  as
proportional,  other  circumstances  being  equal,  to  its  difference  in
temperature  from  the  point  of  equilibrium ;  but  as  the  heat  absorbed
is  proportional  to  the  mass  dissolved,  the  rate  of  change  of  temperature
at  any  moment  may  be  put  proportional  to  the  difference  between

T0  and  t. Thus

=  K(T0-t)dz . . . . (1)

We  need  not  trouble  as  to  the  meaning  of  K  except  that  it  is
proportional  to  the  total  area  of  the  solid  solvent  and  its  heat  of
fusion.  On  integrating  we  get

where  tp  t2  are  the  temperatures  at  times  zp  z2.

Actually  the  mass  of  liquid  is  limited,  so  that  there  will  be  an
interchange  of  heat  with  the  surroundings  by  radiation,  etc.,  as  well
as  a  production  of  heat  by  stirring.  If  we  call  t0  the  temperature
that  the  solution  would  tend  towards  if  no  freezing  took  place  (the
"convergence  temperature"),  the  course  of  the  temperature,  if  there
were  no  separation  of  solid,  would  be  given  by  Newton's  law  as

dt  =  k(t0-t)dz .  . (3)

with  the  integral

.  (4)

Again  the  physical  meaning  of  k  is  unimportant;  we  need  only

1  Nernst  and  Abegg,  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  15.  681  (1894\  .

CHAP.  Ill THE  DETERMINATION  OF  THE  MOLECULAR  WEIGHT  261

remark  that  k  is  smaller  the  greater  the  ratio  of  thermal  capacity  of
the  solution  to  surface  exposed.

The  actual  course  of  the  thermometer  in  a  finite  mass  of  solution
is  found  by  adding  (1)  and  (3).

dt  =  [K(T0  -  t)  +  k(t0  -  t)]dz . .. -••. (5)

which  gives,  on  integration,

iznn ,  w /IT  ,  uu

. (6)

The  final  temperature  t',  which  may  conveniently  be  called  the
apparent  freezing-point,  is  given  by

dz
or

=  K(T0  -  t')  +  k(t0  -  t')  =  0,

(7)

The  thermometer  settles  therefore,  not  at  T0,  but  at  the  somewhat
different  temperature  t'  ;  the  latter  is  the  closer  to  the  former,  the
nearer  the  convergence  temperature  t0  is  to  the  freezing-point  T0,  and
also  the  larger  K  by  comparison  with  k.  The  true  and  apparent
freezing-points  are  only  identical  when

or

K=  oo.

Hence,  to  obtain  correct  values,  either  the  temperature  of  the  freezing
mixture  must  be  carefully  regulated,  so  that  the  convergence  tempera-
ture practically  coincides  with  the  point  to  which  the  thermometer

k
settles,  or  else  the  correction  Wt'  -  t0)  must  be  obtained  by  special

experiments  (see  the  work  of  Abegg  and  Raoult  already  quoted  on
p.  144).  It  should  be  observed  that  for  electrolytes,  as  for  water,
K  is  usually  so  large  that  the  correction  is  negligible  (though  K  of
course  varies  according  to  the  way  the  ice  separates).  It  is  otherwise
with  non-electrolytes,  such  as  sugar;  for  these  Raoult,1  Jones,2  and
others  found  erroneous  values,  which  were  only  corrected  by  means
of  experiments  conducted  in  accordance  with  the  above  theory  of
Abegg  and  the  present  writer.  Only  recently  have  Raoult1  and
Loomis  3  taken  up  the  same  standpoint  as  ourselves.  Hausrath  4  has
succeeded,  by  refinements  in  temperature  measurement,  in  measuring
the  freezing-point  of  solutions  to  0*00001°.

The  Lowering  of  the  Vapour  Pressure.  —  The  law  which

1  Z.  S.  phys.  Ckem.,  9.  343  (1892). 3  Ibid.,  32.  584  (1900).

2  Ibid,  11.  529  ;  12.  623  (1893). 4  Wied,  Ann.,  9.  522  (1902).

262  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

was  developed  theoretically  by  van't  Hoff,  and  experimentally  by
Raoult,  states  that  the  lowering  of  the  vapour  pressure  experienced
by  a  solvent  on  adding  a  non- volatile  substance,  is  equal  to
the  number  of  molecules  of  the  dissolved  substance  divided  by
the  number  of  molecules  of  the  solvent;  this  leads  at  once  to  the
determination  of  the  molecular  weight.  Let  p  be  the  vapour  pressure
of  the  pure  solvent  at  a  selected  temperature,  and  p'  that  of  a  solution
containing  m  grams  of  a  foreign  substance  dissolved  in  100  g.  of  the
solvent ;  then,  according  to  the  preceding  law,  we  shall  have

p-p'  =  mM0
p' Ml  00'

where  M  denotes  the  molecular  weight  of  the  dissolved  substance,
and  M0  that  of  the  solvent,  as  ascertained  from  a  determination  of
the  vapour  density.  Then  we  shall  have,  in  terms  of  those  quantities
only  which  are  directly  accessible,

-°ioo(P-Ply

But  very  great  experimental  difficulties  are  found  to  interfere  with
the  practical  application  of  this  formula.  For  many  reasons  the  exact
measurement  .of  the  vapour  pressure  of  a  solution  is  not  a  simple
problem.  Also,  since  the  difference  in  the  preceding  formula,  between
any  two  vapour  pressures  to  be  measured,  amounts  to  only  a  small
percentage,  it  is  necessary  that  this  measurement  should  be  very
exact.  Moreover,  the  selection  of  a  method1  for  measuring  simply
and  accurately  the  difference  between  the  vapour  pressure  of  a  solvent
and  of  the  solution  has  not  hitherto  been  attended  with  good  results.
It  is  only  recently  that  Beckmann  2  accomplished  this  in  another  way,
viz.  instead  of  determining  the  lowering  of  the  vapour  pressure  after
the  method  of  Raoult,  he  determined  the  corresponding  elevation  of  the
boiling-point.

It  follows  directly  from  the  equations,  developed  on  p.  1 40,  that

where  m  has  the  same  meaning  as  above,  and  t  denotes  the  observed
elevation  of  the  boiling-point.  E,  the  "molecular  elevation  of  the
boiling-point"  [for  the  particular  solvent],  is  calculated  as  follows,

1  Raoult,  Ann.  chim.  phys.  [6],  2O.  (1890)  ; Will  and  Bredig,  B.  B.,  22.  1084
(1888)  ;  Beckmann,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  4.  532  (1889).

2  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  4.  532  (1889)  ;  6.  437  (1890)  ;  also  Raoult,  C.  R.,  87
167  (1878).

CHAP.  Ill THE  DETERMINATION  OF  THE  MOLECULAR  WEIGHT

263

from  the  heat  of  vaporisation  1,  of  1  g.  of  the  solvent  at  its  boiling-
point  T,  in  the  absolute  scale  ;  thus

0-02T2

The  following  table  shows,  E,  calculation  and  experiment,  giving
results  in  agreement  for  the  solvents  thus  far  investigated : —

E

I
T

E

T

Benzene  .

26-7

273+ 80

Ethyl  alcohol  .

11-5

273+  78

Chloroform

36-6

273+ 61

Ethyl  acetate .

25-1

273+ 75

Ethylene  bromide
Carbon  disulphide

63-2
237

273  +  132
273+ 46

Ethyl  ether .
Acetone .

21-2
167

273+ 35
273+ 56

Acetic  acid

25-3

273  +  118

Aniline .

32-2

273  +  182

Phenol .

30-4

273  +  132

Water .

5-2

273  +  100

The  measurement  of  the  elevation  of  the  boiling-point  can  be  con-
ducted very  accurately  by  means  of  the  apparatus  shown  in  Fig.  2 1.1
The  three-neck  flask  A  serves  to  heat  the  liquid ;  the  bottom  is
pierced  with  a  short  thick  piece  of  platinum  wire,  set  in  with  cement
glass  (Einschmdzglas),  and  is  also  half -filled  with  glass  beads.  A
[differential]  thermometer,  provided  with  a  mercury  reservoir  as  in  the
freezing  apparatus,  and  thus  made  serviceable  for  temperatures  from
30°  to  120°,  is  fitted  in  one  opening.  An  inverted  condenser  is
fastened  into  the  middle  opening  (b) ;  this  condenser  has  an  opening
at  d,  which  serves  to  give  free  passage  for  the  steam.  On  account
of  its  ready  condensation,  the  apparatus  of  Soxhlet  is  used,  and  this
is  protected  from  the  moisture  of  the  air  by  a  chloride  of  calcium  tube.
A  third  opening,  C,  serves  to  introduce  the  substance  to  be  dissolved.

In  conducting  the  operation,  the  flask  is  first  partly  filled  with  a
definite  quantity  of  the  solvent,  which  is  either  weighed  or  measured
with  a  pipette.  It  is  then  heated  by  a  gas  lamp,  which  can  be  suitably
regulated,  and  is  protected  against  too  sudden  heating  by  an  asbestos
jacket.  The  flame  is  so  regulated  that  a  drop  shall  fall  from  the
condenser  B  every  ten  or  twenty  seconds.  The  upper  part  of  the
apparatus  is  protected  against  the  heat  by  two  pieces  of  asbestos  paper,
one  of  which  is  cut  out  with  a  circular  opening  for  a  support.  The
heat  is  largely  transmitted  through  the  platinum  wire  which  is  fused
into  the  bottom  of  the  flask,  and  which  touches  the  lower  asbestos
paper.  As  a  result  of  this,  bubbles  of  vapour  form  at  its  upper  end
when  the  liquid  boils,  and  on  account  of  the  glass  beads  present,  the
bubbles  must  pass  up  through  the  liquid  in  serpentine  courses,  thus
having  sufficient  time  to  bring  themselves  into  temperature  equilibrium

1  Beckmann,  Zeitschr.  physik.  OJiem.,  4.  543  (1889)  ;  see  also  the  short  monograph
by  Fuchs  and  Beckmann,  ibid.,  40.  129  (1902)  ;  44.  161  (1903).

264

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

corresponding  to  the  external  pressure,  and  to  the  concentration.
After  the  temperature  has  been  kept  constant  within  a  few  thousandths
of  a  degree,  the  substance  to  be  dissolved  is  introduced  in  a  weighed

quantity,  through  the  opening  C,  solid  substances  being  in  the  shape  of
little  sticks  or  lozenges,  and  liquids  being  introduced  by  means  of  the
pipette  shown  in  Fig.  22.  As  was  done  in  the  case  of  the  freezing-
point  method,  so  here  also  it  is  recommended  to  make  several  deter-
minations with  increasing  concentration.

CHAP.  Ill THE  DETERMINATION  OF  THE  MOLECULAR  WEIGHT

265

Beckmann l  has  since  described  a  modified  form  of  his  boiling-point
apparatus,  by  the  use  of  which  it  is  not  only  possible  to  employ  liquids
of  a  higher  boiling-point,  but  it  is  also  so  shaped  that  a  very  little  of
the  solvent  and  of  the  dissolved  substance  will  give  very  exact  results.
The  flask  A,  containing  the  liquid,
is  shaped  (Fig.  23)  like  the  flask
in  the  freezing-point  apparatus
figured  on  p.  258.  It  is  a  side-
necked  test-tube,  2*5  cm.  wide,  is
provided  with  a  thick  platinum
wire  sealed  into  the  bottom,  and
is  filled  to  a  depth  of  3-4  cm.
with  glass  beads.  The  ther-
mometer is  fitted  in  by  means  of
a  cork.  The  boiling-flask  is  sur-
rounded by  a  steam  jacket  of
glass,  B,  containing  about  20  c.c.
of  the  solvent,  and  shown  in  a
special  figure.  Between  the  boil-
ing-flask and  the  vapour  jacket
is  a  roll  of  asbestos  paper,  and
both  are  provided  with  return
condensers,  Kt  and  K2,  which  can
be  replaced  in  the  case  of  volatile
solvents  by  small  Liebig  con-
densers. Bunsen  burners  serve
for  heating,  and,  as  shown  in  the
figure,  these  are  placed  at  the
side  of  the  vapour  jacket.
Where  the  flames  strike  there
are  pieces  of  wire  gauze,  and  also
crescent-shaped  plates  of  asbestos
paper,  which  are  arched  above  by
a  little  asbestos  saucer  d ;  also  Fis- 23-

the rings \  and h2,  protect  the

boiling  -  flask  from  the  direct  flame ;  ss  are  little  chimneys  of
asbestos  paper  for  the  flame  gases.  If  necessary,  the  boiling-flask
itself  is  also  heated  directly  by  a  small  flame  which  does  not  touch  it,
but,  as  a  rule,  the  heat  introduced  from  the  outer  vapour  jacket  is
sufficient  to  bring  the  inner  liquid  to  complete  boiling.  The  right
condition  of  boiling  will  be  shown,  as  in  the  other  form  of  apparatus,
by  the  constant  reading  of  the  thermometer.

The  Investigation  of  Volatile  Substances.— The  use  of  the

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  8.  223  (1891)  ;  see  also  Beckmann,  Fuchs,  and  Gernharclt,
ibid.,  18.  473  (1895).

266  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

forms  of  apparatus  just  described  implies  that  the  substance  dissolved
is  not  lost  by  volatilisation.  Experience  shows  that  this  condition  is
met  when  its  boiling-point  lies  about  130°  above  that  of  the  solvent.

If  the  dissolved  substance  begins  to  volatilise  in  a  noticeable  way,
then,  according  to  the  statements  on  p.  154,  it  has  the  same  mole-
cular weight  in  the  state  of  a  vapour  and  in  the  solution,  if  the  partial
pressure  of  its  vapour  is  proportional  to  its  concentration  in  the
solution ;  or,  in  other  words,  if  the  vapour  of  the  dissolved  substance
follows  Henry's  law  of  absorption.  If  the  dissolved  substance  has  a
molecular  weight  different  from  that  in  the  gaseous  condition,  then
there  occur  the  most  glaring  deviations  from  a  simple  ratio.  We  will
consider  these  laws  further  in  the  third  book,  Chapter  III.

As  already  shown  by  the  writer,1  there  is  no  difficulty,  on  the  basis
of  these  considerations,  in  extending  the  th'eory  of  the  boiling-point
apparatus  to  the  case  where  the  dissolved  substance  has  its  own
vapour  pressure.  I  will  here  merely  indicate  briefly  that  the  boiling
apparatus,  in  this  case  also,  is  able  to  afford  information  regarding
the  molecular  condition  of  the  dissolved  substance.  Provided  the
dissolved  substance  is  sufficiently  volatile,  the  Henry's  law  will,  of
course,  lead  to  changes  of  the  boiling-point  proportional  to  the  con-
centration, which  in  this  case  (see  also  p.  105)  may  consist  in  an
elevation  or  a  lowering,  according  to  circumstances.  If  this  is  so,  the
substance  has  the  same  molecular  condition  in  the  state  of  vapour  as
in  solution.  If  the  latter  condition  is  not  fulfilled,  there  is  not  even
approximate  proportionality  between  the  changes  of  boiling-point  and
concentration.

Of  course  it  is  immaterial  for  the  freezing-point  method  whether
the  dissolved  substance  is  volatile  or  not.

The  Lowering  of  the  Solubility. — A  third  method,  recently
added,  to  the  two  so-called  Eaoult-van't  Hoff  methods,  by  the  author,
has  both  a  theoretical  and  an  experimental  basis  (see  pp.  141  and  148).
According  to  this,  the  relative  lowering  of  solubility  experienced  by  a  solvent,
as  ether,  in  anotlier  solvent,  as  water,  on  the  addition  of  a  third  substance
[which  is  soluble  only  in  the  first  solvent],  is  equal  to  the  number  of  dissolved
molecules  of  this  third  substance,  divided  by  the  number  of  molecules  of  the
[first]  solvent.  Thus,  let  L  denote  the  solubility  of  the  [first]  pure  solvent
in  the  second  solvent,  and  I/  its  solubility  when  there  are  100  g.  of
the  first  solvent  for  m  grams  of  the  [third]  substance ;  then  the  mole-
cular weight  of  the  [third]  dissolved  substance  can  be  calculated  as
accurately  as  from  the  lowering  of  the  vapour  pressure  (p.  260),  and
with  only  such  magnitudes  as  can  be  determined  directly,  as  follows  : —

,.. ,T ml/

=

1  Nernst,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem,,  8.  16  (1891)  ;  Beckmann,  ibid.,  17.  110  (1895).

CHAP.  Ill THE  DETERMINATION  OF  THE  MOLECULAR  WEIGHT  267

Here  M0  denotes  the  molecular  weight  which  the  first  solvent  has
when  dissolved  in  the  second.

There  are  several  chemical  and  physical  methods  which  can  be
used  to  determine  the  solubility,  and  it  is  not  necessary  to  determine
the  absolute  values,  but  only  the  ratio  of  the  solubility  before  and
after  adding  the  substance.  When  using  ether  and  water,  one  can
advantageously  employ  Beckmann's  freezing  apparatus  with  20  c.c.
of  ether  and  20  c.c.  of  water,  to  determine  the  change  of  solu-
bility.1 Then  the  freezing-point  of  water  is  at  that  temperature
which  corresponds  to  the  depressed  freezing-point  ( -  3*85°),
occasioned  by  its  saturation  with  ether.  Now,  if  a  third  substance
is  added  to  the  ether,  according  to  the  aforesaid  theorem,  the  solu-
bility of  ether  in  the  water  will  diminish  in  proportion  to  the  mole-
cular content  of  the  third  substance  that  it  [i.e.  the  ether]  absorbs,
and  thus  the  freezing-point  of  the  water  will  rise.  This  elevation  of
the  freezing-point  can  be  exactly  determined,  and,  as  numerous  experi-
ments have  shown,  the  method  is  capable  of  exactly  the  same  degree
of  accuracy,  as  in  the  case  with  the  Raoult-van't  Hoff  method.  As
the  non-volatility  of  the  substance  in  question  was  presupposed  in  the
boiling-point  method,  so  here  we  must  assume  that  the  [third]  sub-
stance is  insoluble  in  water  [or  in  the  second  solvent  used,  whatever  it
may  be].

The  above  method  has  been  worked  out  further  by  F.  W.
Ktister,2  who  used  phenol  as  one  solvent  and  saturated  common
salt  solution  as  the  other,  measuring  the  solubility  of  the  phenol  by
titration ;  also  by  Tolloczko,3  who  used  ether  and  a  relatively
large  quantity  of  water,  and  measured  the  change  in  volume  of  the
latter  due  to  solution  of  foreign  bodies,  directly ;  the  latter  method
leaves  nothing  to  be  desired  in  simplicity,  especially  for  strong
solutions,

The  Distribution  of  a  Substance  between  Two  Solvents.—

A  very  simple  and  exact  method  for  comparing  the  molecular  condition
of  a  substance  in  two  solvents,  which  are  only  partially  soluble  in  each
other,  is  to  determine  the  dependence  of  the  relative  distribution  upon  the
concentration.  If  dissolved  substance  has  the  same  molecular  condition
in  the  two  solvents  the  distribution  is  independent  of  the  concentra-
tion (p.  155).  If  the  molecular  condition  is  not  the  same,  then  the
coefficient  of  distribution  will  vary  with  the  concentration  in  a  very
pronounced  way.  This  subject  will  be  considered  again  in  the
third  book.

The  Role  of  the  Solvent. — All  the  methods  thus  far  described

1  Zettschr.  physik.  Chem.,  6.  5 73  (1890).

2  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  27.  324  and  328,  1894.

3  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  20.  389  (1896).

268  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

for  the  determination  of  the  molecular  weights  of  substances  in
solution  are  based  on  the  same  principle ;  this  consists  in  the
measurement  of  the  osmotic  pressure  and  its  evaluation,  in  the  sense
of  Avogadro's  rule  as  generalised  by  van't  Hoff.  Therefore  all  these
methods  thus  far  used,  though  apparently  very  diverse,  lead  to  the
same  results,  when  the  investigation  concerns  the  same  substances
in  the  same  solvents.  But  numerous  instances  are  known  where  the
aforesaid  substances  when  dissolved  in  different  solvents  show  a
different  molecular  condition.  Thus  acetic  acid  when  dissolved  in
benzene,  at  a  sufficient  degree  of  concentration,  consists  almost
entirely  of  molecules  having  the  formula  (CH3C0.2H)2  —  120  ;  when
dissolved  in  ether,  of  CH3C02H  =  60  ;  and  when  dissolved  in  water,

as  will  be  seen  later,  it  is  split  electrolytically  into  the  ions,  CH3COO

+  •

and  H. In  the  gaseous  state,  according  to  the  external  conditions,
we  find  acetic  acid  to  consist  more  or  less  entirely  of  the  "  normal
molecules,  CH3C02H.

This  result,  of  course,  speaks  neither  for  nor  against  the  correctness
of  the  methods,  neither  is  it  at  all  surprising.  The  molecular  con-
dition of  a  vaporised  or  of  a  dissolved  substance  varies  not  only  with
the  external  conditions  of  temperature  and  pressure,  as  shown  in
numerous  instances,  but  also  in  the  case  of  dissolved  substances  it
will  vary  with  the  nature  of  the  solvent  employed.

The  question  now  arises  whether  the  difference  between  the
molecular  condition  of  a  substance  in  the  gaseous  state,  and  of  the
same  substance  in  solution,  is  to  be  ascribed  to  a  chemical  action  by
the  solvent.  This  question  is  of  surpassing  interest,  but  it  is  im-
possible to  answer  it  at  present.  For  it  must  be  emphasised  that  any
compound  of  the  molecules  of  the  solvent  with  the  molecules  of  the
dissolved  substance,  at  slight  degrees  of  concentration,  would  have  no
effect  in  changing  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the  latter,  and  therefore  would
not  appear  in  the  figures  of  the  lowering  of  the  freezing-point,  and
the  like.

We  do  not  know  at  present,  and  we  have  no  good  reason  to  show
whether  the  possibility  that  the  "  dissociating  force  "  of  water,  in  its
capacity  as  a  solvent,  may  cause  it  to  form  compounds  with  the  dis-
solved substance  in  the  way  of  hydration,  is  well  grounded  or  not.1  In
general  this  holds  good,  though  it  is  often  overlooked,  viz.  that  the
osmotic  pressure  makes  no  disclosures  regarding  any  compounds  of
the  molecules  of  the  solvent  with  those  of  the  dissolved  substance.
(See  further  under  the  "  Doctrine  of  Affinity.")

We  must  be  forewarned  also  against  another  very  common  error
concerning  the  aforesaid  osmotic  method ;  it  has  been  supposed  that
it  afforded  some  information  regarding  the  molecular  condition  of  the

1  Briihl,  Z.  8.  phys.  Glum.,  18.  514  (1895)  ;  27.  319  (1898).

CHAP,  ill THE  DETERMINATION  OF  THE  MOLECULAR  WEIGHT  269

solvent  itself  in  the  liquid  state. Thus  Raoult  and  Recoura,1  instead
of  obtaining  the  formula  (as  on  p.  262),

for  the  lowering  of  the  vapour  pressure  of  acetic  acid,  where  60  denotes
the  [normal]  molecular  weight,  —  actually  obtained

M=l-f>l  .  60-

mp

ioo(P-Pr

from  which  they  concluded  the  molecular  weight  of  liquid  ascetic  acid
to  be

M0=  1-61  .  60  =  97.

This  conclusion  is  not  well  grounded ;  the  results  of  this  investi-
gator can  be  more  simply  explained,  by  supposing  that  the  density
of  the  saturated  vapour  of  acetic  acid  at  the  temperature  of  the
experiment  (118°)  was  1'61  times  as  great  as  the  theoretical  value,
2 '08;  and  therefore  that  their  calculated  molecular  weight  (97)
should  be  introduced  into  the  formula.  At  the  same  time,  these
experiments  show  that  the  osmotic  pressure  of  dissolved  substances
is  normal,  i.e.  that  it  obeys  the  gas  laws,  even  when  the  vapour  of  the
solvent  itself  is  abnormal.

The  relation  that  seems  to  exist  between  dissociating  power  of  a
solvent  and  its  dielectric  constant  is  discussed  in  Chapter  VII  of
this  book.

The  Molecular  Weight  of  Strongly  -  Compressed  Gases
and  of  Liquids. — We  are  not  at  present  in  the  possession  of  any
method  which  is  universally  applicable  to  strongly-compressed  gases
and  to  liquids.  The  application  of  the  rule  of  Avogadro  (that  equal
volumes,  at  the  same  temperature  and  pressure,  contain  the  same
number  of  molecules)  to  substances  like  these  is  not  only  destitute
of  good  support,  but  it  is  directly  improbable.  It  has  been  already
shown,  on  p.  239,  that  the  further  development  of  the  theory  of
van  der  Waals  will  lead,  perhaps,  to  the  solution  of  this  question  ;
but  at  present  this  much  may  be  safely  asserted :  viz.  that  those
substances  which  meet  the  requirements  of  the  theory  (as  for  example
the  halogen  derivatives  of  benzene,  p.  231),  have  approximately  the
same  molecular  condition  in  the  state  of  strongly-compressed  gases
and  of  liquids,  as  in  the  state  of  attenuated  gases  or  of  dilute  solutions ;
and,  moreover,  it  is  but  a  step  to  assume  that  when  a  substance
exhibits  great  deviations  from  the  theory  of  corresponding  states,

1  C.  R.,  11O.  402  ;  Zeitschr.  physik.  Ghent.,  5.  423  (1890).

270  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  n

this  is  probably  due  to  a  change  in  the  molecular  condition  resulting
from  condensation  or  rarefaction.

It  is  probable  that  a  comparison  of  the  pressure  and  of  the  molecular
wlume  of  the  saturated  vapour  of  a  substance,  with  the  corresponding
values  of  fluor-benzene  at  corresponding  states,  could  be  used
very  advantageously  to  decide  this  question ;  but  the  comparison  with
the  molecular  volume  of  the  liquid  could  not  be  used,  for  this  probably
would  be  only  very  slightly  affected  by  a  polymerisation  of  the
molecule.

A  series  of  important  criteria  from  this  point  of  view  have  been
suggested  by  Guye  i1 — (1)  The  critical  density  for  most  substances  is
3 '8  times  that  reckoned  from  the  laws  of  gases;  in  cases  in  which
this  ratio  is  noticeably  greater  (e.g.  4*0),  polymerisation  is  to  be
conclude'd.  (2)  The  same  when  the  law  of  Cailletet  and  Mathias  does
not  hold — that  is,  when  the  arithmetic  mean  between  the  densities
of  the  liquid  and  saturated  vapour  is  not  a  linear  function  of  the
temperature,  e.g.  alcohol  shows  a  noticeable  departure  from  this  law.
(3)  When  the  latent  heat  of  evaporation  reaches  a  maximum  on  rise
of  temperature,  the  liquid  is  more  polymerised  than  the  saturated
vapour.  (4)  When  the  vapour-pressure  curve  of  a  liquid  cuts  that  of
another  liquid,  which,  according  to  the  above  criteria,  is  not  poly-
merised in  tie  liquid  state,  the  first  is  to  be  regarded  as  polymerised.

A  very  promising  method  of  determining  molecular  weight  of
liquids  is  due  to  Eotvos,2  who  found  the  following  rule  confirmed  by  a
series  of  experiments,  calling  y  the  surface  tension  of  a  liquid  expressed
in.  dynes,  v  its  molecular  volume  (that  is,  the  volume  occupied  by
one  mol  in  the  liquid  state),  the  relation  holds  that

7Vi  =  k(T-T0)  (1)

where  T0  is  a  temperature  not  very  different  from  the  critical,  and  k
is  a  constant  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  liquid.  This  relation
was  later  tested  experimentally  by  Ramsay  and  Shields 3  in  a  very
thorough  manner,  and  found  in  good  agreement  with  the  observations.
Conclusion  (1)  was  put  in  the  form

7v»  =  k(T-d) .  . . (2)

where  r  is  reckoned  downwards  from  the  critical  temperature,  and  d
is  usually  about  6  ;  conclusion  (2)  only  holds  accurately  when  T  is
greater  than  35° ;  not,  therefore,  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of
the  critical  point.

Imagine  that  w^e  have  a  mol  of  the  liquid  in  question  in  spherical
form,  its  radius  is  \A>,  its  surface  is  proportional  to  i$,  and  accord-

1  Archives  des  Sciences  Phys.  et  Nat.  de  Geneve,  31.  38  (1894).
2  Wied.  Ann.,  27.  452  (1886).

Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  12.  433  (1893).

CHAP.  Ill THE  DETERMINATION OF  THE  MOLECULAR  WEIGHT  271

ingly  yi;S  is  a  quantity  proportional  to  the  molecular  surface  energy  of
the  sphere.  Conclusions  (1)  and  (2)  therefore  state  that  the  temperature
coefficient  of  the  molecular  surface  energy  (except  in  the  immediate
neighbourhood  of  the  critical  point)  is  independent  of  the  special  nature
of  the  liquid.

Putting  the  molecular  surface  energy  at  yv%,  then  the  temperature
coefficient  k  is  2 '2 7  according  to  Eotvos,  and  2*12  according  to
Ramsay  and  Shields.

Eotvos's  law  may  be  expressed  in  this  manner  :  to  form  the  surface
of  a  spherical  mol  of  a  liquid  the  work  required  varies  with  the
temperature  in  the  same  manner  for  all  liquids.  This  is  the  case
with  the  production  of  a  mol  of  gas  under  constant  pressure  according
to  Avogadro's  law ;  in  the  latter  case,  according  to  the  laws  of  gases,
the  work  required  is  simply  proportional  to  the  absolute  temperature.

The  following  liquids  behave  normally — that  is,  give  a  temperature
coefficient  of  the  molecular  surface  energy  in  the  neighbourhood  of
2-12:-—

k.
Benzene .  2  "17

Chloro-benzene  .
Tetrachloride  of  carbon
Ethyl  ether
Bi-siilphide  of  carbon
Benzaldehyde .
Nitrobenzene
Aniline
Pyridine .
Phosphorus  trichloride

2-08
2-11
2-17
2-02
2-16
2-09
2-05
2-23
2-10

and  a  large  number  of  esters.1

Anomalous  values  of  K  (lower  and  varying  with  the  temperature)
are  given  by  the  alcohols  (I'O  —  1*6),  organic  acids  ('8-  1'6),  aceton
(T8),  propionitril  (1'5),  nitro-ethane  (1'7),  methyl -urethene  (1'6),
valeroxime  (1'7),  water  (0'9  -  1'2).  To  obtain  the  normal  value  of
the  temperature  coefficient  for  these  liquids  their  molecular  weight
must  be  raised — that  is,  association  of  molecules  must  be  assumed.
But  it  does  not  appear  possible  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge
to  conclude  satisfactorily  the  degree  of  association  from  the  divergence
from  the  normal  value.  The  method  of  calculation  adopted  by
Ramsay,  in  particular,  is  subject  to  certain  objections.

There  is,  at  the  present  time,  no  satisfactory  theoretical  application
of  Eotvos's  law  ;  see  the  remarks  on  this  subject  by  the  author,2  and
especially  the  very  complete  study  of  van  der  Waals.3  It  may  be
concluded  from  the  results  at  present  obtained  :  (1)  When  a  substance
has  the  same  molecular  weight  in  the  gaseous  and  liquid  states,  k  is
about  2'12,  that  molecular  weight  being  used  to  calculate  the  molecular

1  Ramsay  and  Aston,  Zcitschr.  physik. Chem., 15.  98  (1894)  ; Guye  and Baud,
ibid.,  42.  379  (1903). Cf.  also  the  work  by  Schenk  mentioned  on  p.-  98.

2  Jahrb.  der  Chemie,  3.  18  (1893).  3  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem,,  13.  713  (1894).

272  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

surface  energy;  (2)  k  is  found  to  be  smaller  than  2'12  when  the
molecular  weight  in  the  liquid  state  is  smaller  than  in  the  gaseous.
It  is,  however,  an  open  question  whether  the  molecular  weight  in  the
liquid  state  alone  determines  k,  or  whether  also  that  in  the  vapour.
Possibly  this  may  be  tested  empirically  by  the  study  of  the  surface
tension  of  mixtures.  In  this  way  a  rule  for  deriving  the  average
molecular  weight  of  a  liquid  from  the  observed  value  of  k  might  be
deduced:  in  fact,  Pekar1  recently  found  that  in  some  mixtures  at
least  the  temperature  coefficient  of  the  molecular  surface  energy
determines  the  average  molecular  weight.

A  third  method  that  can  be  used  to  study  the  molecular  condition
of  a  liquid  is  given  in  Chapter  V.  of  this  book,  in  the  section  on  rules
of  boiling-point.  Linebarger2  has  given  an  interesting  study  of  the
vapour  pressure  of  mixtures,  and  uses  the  partial  pressure  of  the
components  to  decide  the  question  whether  association  exists.  Finally,
it  may  be  remarked  that  all  the  methods  here  quoted  agree  remarkably
in  showing  that  the  majority  of  liquids  studied  are  not  polymerised,
and  that  certain  classes  of  bodies,  such  as  acids,  alcohols,  and,  in
particular,  water,  form  complexes  (mostly  double  molecules)  in  the
liquid  state,  and  that  the  last-mentioned  substances  show  a  tendency
to  do  the  same  in  the  gaseous  and  dissolved  conditions.

(kiye3  has  investigated  the  application  of  the  critical  density  to
decide  the  question  of  molecular  condition  in  the  critical  state,  but
the  measurements  of  this  quantity  so  far  obtained  are  too  uncertain
to  form  the  basis  of  a  further  step  in  this  direction.

Molecular  Weight  of  Solids. — There  is  no  method  known  at
the  present  time  which  leads  to  a  knowledge  of  the  molecular  weight
of  solids ;  indeed,  our  molecular  conceptions  on  the  nature  of  the
solid  state  are  very  vague  (p.  240).  The  case  is  somewhat  more
hopeful  with  dilute  solid  solutions,  and  perhaps  Avogadro's  law  can  be
applied  to  them  (p.  170).

The  results  obtained  in  the  last-mentioned  way  are  not  free  from
objection ;  see  Nernst,4  Krister,5  Hoitsema,6  Wiirfel.7

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  39.  433  (1902).
12  Amer.  Chem.  Journ,,  17.  615,  690  (1895).

3  Gmnpt.  rend.,  112.  1257  (1891)  ;  more  fully,  These,  Paris,  1891.

4  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  9.  137  (1892).

5  Ibid.,  13.  445  (1894)  ;  17.  357  (1895).

6  Ibid.,  17.  1  (1895).  7  Dissertation,  Marburg,  1896.

CHAPTER IV

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE MOLECULE

Allotropy  and  Isomerism. — The  properties  of  all  substances  vary
with  the  external  circumstances  under  which  they  are  studied.  Those
external  conditions  which  exert  the  greatest  influence  upon  the
physical  and  chemical  conduct  of  substances  are  the  temperature  and
the  pressure ;  also,  according  to  circumstances,  the  properties  are
modified  in  one  way  or  another  by  magnetisation,  electrification,  illumina-
tion, etc.  In  describing  the  behaviour  of  a  chemically  simple  substance,
it  must  always  be  stated  what  the  external  conditions  are  under
which  it  is  studied.

Further,  under  all  circumstances  the  properties  of  any  two
substances  having  a  different  chemical  composition,  are  different :  if
only  one  atom  in  the  molecule  be  replaced  by  another,  even  then
there  is  a  difference  in  both  the  physical  and  the  chemical  behaviour
of  the  compound  ;  but  this  change  is  a  variable  quantity.  Those
atoms  whicli  can  replace  each  other  in  the  molecular  group  without
occasioning  a  deep-seated  change  in  the  whole  behaviour  of  the  com-
pound, are  said  to  be  related  chemically.  A  number  of  such  related
groups  of  elements  have  been  already  pointed  out  in  the  vertical
columns  of  the  periodic  system  (p.  184).  Although  the  change  in
the  properties  of  a  compound,  when  one  atom  is  replaced  by  one  of
another  element  of  similar  behaviour,  may  be  very  slight,  yet  it  is
definite  in  all  cases :  two  substances  which  behave  alike  in  all  their
properties,  must  have  the  same  composition.

But  the  converse  of  this  is  by  no  means  true ;  viz.  that  two
substances  which  conduct  themselves  differently  under  the  same
external  conditions  have  a  different  composition.  This  is  neither  true
of  elements  nor  of  compounds,  as  has  been  already  seen  in  the
capacity  of  substances  to  assume  different  states  of  aggregation  under
the  same  external  conditions.  It  is  also  known  that  many  elements
exist  in  the  solid  state,  in  different  modifications,  called  "allotropic
forms."  Phosphorus  is  an  element  known  to  us  in  two  modifications,
called  the  yellow  and  the  red  ;  and  these  varieties  are  so  different

273  T

274  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

under  the  same  external  conditions,  both  in  their  physical  and  in
their  chemical  behaviour,  that  one  might  easily  believe  that  he  had
two  essentially  different  substances.  Carbon  occurs  in  nature  in  the
forms  of  the  diamond,  of  graphite,  and  of  so-called  amorphous  carbon.
Sulphur  appears  in  crystalline  forms  of  the  orthorhombic  and  the
monoclinic  system,  according  to  the  method  of  formation,  etc.  etc.

We  do  not  certainly  know  the  reason  for  the  difference  between
the  allotropic  forms  of  solid  elements,  but  the  probability,  in  the
light  of  the  atomic  hypothesis,  is  very  strong  that  the  atoms  unite
either  with  a  different  number  in  the  molecule,  or  with  a  different
mode  of  union.  To  be  sure,  certain  proof  for  this  supposition  is
wanting  at  present,  since  hitherto  it  has  been  impossible  to  obtain  a
glimpse  into  the  molecular  constitution  of  solids.

More  often  we  find  the  case  where  a  chemical  compound  can  occur
in  different  modifications,  not  only  in  the  solid  state,  but  in  all  the
states  of  aggregation.  Such  compounds  are  called  isomeric.1  The
molecular  hypothesis  has  done  much  good  work  in  explaining  these
cases  of  isomerism,  by  showing  how  to  obtain  new  examples  of
isomerism  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  has  repeatedly  been  found  to  be
a  fact  in  the  history  of  theoretical  chemistry,  that  the  attempt  to
explain  isomerism  in  its  new  relations,  led  to  a  bold  extension  of  the
molecular  hypothesis,  which,  in  turn,  reacted  in  new  requirements  on
experimental  research.

These  are  some  of  the  points  in  the  history  of  the  knowledge  of
isomerism,  which  is,  at  the  same  time,  the  history  of  constitutional
theories:  in  1823  Liebig  remarked  that  the  silver  fulminate  analysed
by  him  had  the  same  constitution  as  the  silver  cyanate  discovered  by
Wohler  in  1822;  in  1825  Faraday  found  that  benzene,  discovered
by  him,  agreed  in  composition  with  acetylene;  and  in  1828  Wohler
succeeded  in  directly  converting  one  isomer  into  another,  namely,
ammonium  cyanate  into  urea.  The  number  of  cases  of  isomerism
grew  very  rapidly;  in  1832  Berzelius  discovered  the  isomerism  of
racemic  and  tartaric  acids,  and  very  many  instances  were  discovered
in  organic  chemistry,  especially  after  the  theoretical  explanation  had
been  given.  The  most  striking  advance  towards  the  development  of
stereochemistry  of  carbon  was  the  investigation  of  Wislicenus  on
isomerism  in  lactic  acids  (1871),  and  that  of  fumaric  and  maleic  acids
in  1887,  whilst  the  first  experimental  material  discovered  for  stereo-
chemistry of  nitrogen  was  in  the  isomerism  of  benzyl-dioxim  discovered
in  1832  by  Goldschmidt,  and  in  1888  by  v.  Meyer  and  Auwers.

The  Constitution  of  the  Molecule. — The  question  may  now  be
asked  at  once,  whether  or  not  the  differences  in  the  properties  of
isomeric  compounds  are  based  upon  a  difference  in  the  size  of  the  mole-
cule ;  i.e.  whether  the  atoms  unite  to  form  the  different  molecules

1  Oxygen  and  ozone  form  an  example  of  isomerism  amongst  the  elements.

CHAP.  IV  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  MOLECULE  275

in  the  same  relative  proportions,  but  not  in  the  same  number.
Experience  shows  that  this  circumstance  often  explains  some  material
differences,  but  by  no  means  can  it  explain  all  exhibitions  of  isomerism.
For,  on  the  one  hand,  there  are  isomeric  substances  having  the  same
per  cent  composition  and  different  molecular  weights,  as  acetylene
02H2,  and  benzene  C6H6  (isomerism  in  the  broader  sense  of  poly-
merism)  •  and,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  isomeric  substances
with  physical  and  chemical  properties  clearly  distinct,  and  these  are
found  especially  in  the  carbon  compounds,  which  have  both  the  same
per  cent  composition  and  the  same  molecular  weight  (isomerism  in  the
special  sense  of  metamerism).

The  existence  of  metameric  compounds  at  once  gives  us  a  chance
to  frame  more  definite  conceptions  regarding  the  mode  of  union  of  the
atoms  in  the  molecule ;  it  at  once  excludes  the  supposition  that  the
atoms  can  unite  in  a  chemical  molecule  in  all  conceivable  positions
with  reference  to  each  other,  like  the  molecules  in  a  homogeneous
liquid  mixture.  For  otherwise,  just  as  by  bringing  together  definite
quantities  of  different  substances,  there  can  result  only  one  physical
mixture  of  definite  properties,  so  also  by  the  union  of  a  certain  number
of  atoms  of  different  elements  into  a  molecule  there  could,  in  that
case,  result  only  one  chemical  compound,  having  the  same  properties ;
and  thus  the  formation  of  metameric  compounds  would  be  impossible.

Therefore  it  must  be  assumed  that  certain  forces  are  exerted
between  the  atoms  in  the  molecule,  which  determine  the  relative  posi-
tions of  the  atoms ;  also  that  the  relative  positions  of  the  atoms  can
vary  with  the  mode  of  union  of  the  atoms  with  each  other.

The  differences,  shown  in  the  physical  and  chemical  behaviour  of
metameric  compounds,  must  thus  be  ascribed  to  differences  in  the  arrangement
of  the  atoms  in  the  molecule,  or  as  is  said,  to  differences  in  the  constitution  of
the  molecule.

It  cannot  be  denied  that  in  attempting  to  develop  the  atomistic
science  from  this  standpoint,  and  to  frame  more  definite  conceptions
regarding  the  arrangement  of  the  atoms  in  the  molecule,  we  go  into  a
region  of  a  purely  hypothetical  nature — a  region  which  can  only  be
reached  by  a  leap  of  a  bold  phantasy.  The  usual  requirement
customary  in  the  careful  study  of  nature,  of  abstaining  from  such  an
attempt,  does  not  appear  to  be  justified  on  these  grounds  ;  for  such  a
requirement,  on  the  one  hand,  would  amount  to  a  refusal  to  obtain
many  obvious  conceptions  regarding  many  important  phenomena,  which
neither  the  experimental  nor  the  theoretical  student  can  explain  in
any  other  way ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  it  would  not  harmonise
with  the  fundamental  principle  of  the  method  of  natural  science
which  commands  us  to  follow  out,  to  the  ultimate,  such  a  practical
and  fruitful  hypothesis  as  the  atomic  hypothesis  is  well  known  to  be.

The  Chemical  Forces. — At  present  scarcely  anything  definite  is

276  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

LOOK  ii

known  regarding  either  the  nature  of  the  forces  which  bind  the  atoms
together  in  the  molecule  and  which  hinder  them  from  flying  apart  in
consequence  of  the  heat  motion,  or  regarding  their  laws  of  action ;  but
there  are  many  reasons  which  lead  us  to  suppose  that  these  forces,
like  the  forces  in  the  explanation  of  capillarity  and  related  phenomena,
act  only  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  atoms,  and  diminish
in  strength  very  rapidly  as  the  distance  from  the  atoms  increases.

Further,  in  order  to  explain  the  various  capacities  for  reaction  of
the  elements,  and  the  various  degrees  of  stability  with  which  the  atoms
are  linked  together,  we  must  assume  that  the  mutual  action  of  the
atoms  varies  greatly  with  their  nature ;  and  in  order  to  explain  the
fact  that  atoms  of  the  same  sort  unite  to  form  molecules,  we  must
assume  that  chemical  forces  are  active  between  the  atoms  of  the  same
element,  and  that  these  vary  very  much  with  their  nature.

The  answer  to  the  question,  how  these  forces  vary  with  the  react-
ing elements,  is  rendered  exceedingly  difficult  from  the  fact  that  in
the  great  majority  of  cases  we  have  to  explain,  not  a  single  exchange,
but  the  sum  total  of  several  exchanges.  Thus  in  the  formation  of
hydriodic  acid,

H2  +  I2=2H1,

we  find  that  the  reaction  is  determined  not  only  by  the  affinity  between
the  hydrogen  and  the  iodine,  but  also  before  a  single  atom  of  the
reacting  elements  can  enter  into  the  exchange,  the  bonds  holding  the
two  atoms  in  the  molecules  H2  and  I2  respectively,  must  be  loosened.
When  the  reaction  takes  place  from  left  to  right  in  the  sense  of  the
preceding  equation,  as  happens  at  temperatures  not  too  high,  then  it
works  against  the  affinities  holding  two  hydrogen  atoms,  and  two  iodine
atoms  together,  and  tends  to  come  to  rest  with  the  affinity  between
hydrogen  and  iodine  predominant.  But  when  the  reaction  takes  place
from  right  to  left,  as  happens  at  high  temperatures,  then  it  works
against  the  affinity  between  different  kinds  of  atoms,  and  tends  to
corne  to  rest  with  the  affinity  between  atoms  of  the  same  sort
predominant.  And  the  case  is  similar  in  almost  all  reactions  which
are  carefully  studied,  so  that  the  case  is  very  rare  where  the  course  of
the  reaction  can  have  but  one  issue  depending  solely  on  the  chemical
forces.  The  affinity  certainly  changes  with  the  external  conditions  of
temperature  and  pressure  in  all  cases,  although  it  may  be  very  different
in  a  qualitative  way ;  but  we  usually  are  entirely  ignorant  as  to  the
whereabouts  of  the  cause.  Thus,  in  the  preceding  case,  we  cannot
state  why  the  affinity  changes  between  the  like  and  the  unlike,  with
the  temperature;  we  can  merely  conclude  from  the  course  of  the
reaction,  that  at  lower  temperatures  the  affinity  between  unlike  atoms
prevails,  and  at  higher  temperatures  that  between  like  atoms.

In  order  to  obtain  a  deeper  insight  into  the  manner  of  the  action
of  the  forces  of  affinity,  it  is,  of  course,  necessary  at  first  to  direct  our

CHAP.  IV  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  MOLECULE  277

attention  to  those  reactions  where  the  simplest  conditions  find  expres-
sion. This  is  found  in  those  cases  where  a  complex  molecule  breaks
up  into  simpler  ones  (dissociation),  or  conversely  where  several  simpler
molecules  condense  into  a  more  complicated  one  (addition).  In  such
a  case  the  chemical  change  occurs  either  against,  or  with,  only  one
affinity.  The  simplest  case  is  where  two  elementary  atoms  unite  to
form  a  single  molecule,  or  conversely  where  a  diatomic  molecule  of  an
element  breaks  up  into  its  atoms ;  as  is  the  case,  for  example,  in  the
dissociation  of  iodine  vapour  ;  thus

I2  =  I  +  L

The  study  of  the  conditions  under  which  these  reactions  come  to  a
pause  will  give  us  some  light  regarding  the  affinity  which  is  acting
between  the  elementary  atoms  in  question.  We  may  perhaps  hope
that,  by  the  thorough  study  of  some  such  simple  case,  some  light  may
be  thrown  on  these  questions,  the  answer  to  which  has  hitherto  seemed
so  remote.

The  Doctrine  of  Valence. — Without  framing  any  definite  con-
ception of  the  nature  of  chemical  affinity,  it  is  possible  to  consider  the
mode  of  union  of  the  atoms  in  the  molecule,  according  to  a  certain
scheme,  which  not  only  gives  us  much  general  information  on  the
classification  of  chemical  compounds,  but  which  also  serves  to  make
their  capacities  for  reaction  intelligible  in  many  respects,  and  also
renders  it  easy  to  remember  them.

Much  observation  has  taught  us  that  often  certain  elements  and
radicals  may  replace  each  other  without  occasioning  a  deep-seated
change  in  the  properties,  and  especially  in  the  reaction  capacity  of  the
molecule.  Thus  in  many  instances  it  is  possible  to  replace  a  hydrogen
atom  in  a  molecule,  by  an  atom  of  F,  Cl,  Br,  I,  Li,  Na,  K,  etc.,  or  by
certain  radicals  as  NH2,  NH4,  CH3,  C2H5,  G6H5,  always  to  be  sure
with  some  associated  change  in  the  physical  and  chemical  behaviour
of  the  compound,  but  never  entirely  destroying  the  clearly  expressed
similarity  between  the  new  and  the  original  compound.1  The  experi-
ence based  on  an  enormous  amount  of  observation  is  embraced  in  the
statement  that  such  elements  or  radicals  are  chemically  equivalent.

Some  other  similarly  chemically  equivalent  elements  are  0,  Mg,
Zn,  Ca,  Sr,  Ba,  etc. ;  these,  as  a  rule,  easily  replace  each  other,  and
in  such  a  way  as  not  to  change  radically  the  whole  habit  of  the
compound.2  A  number  of  such  groups  of  elements  are  given  in  the
vertical  columns  of  the  table  on  p.  184.

A  further  observation  has  been  made,  that  elements  which  are  not

1  This  statement  must  be  taken  "with  a  grain  of  salt"  ;  as  a  rule,  it  may  be  said
that  the  least  change  is  produced  when  acidiferous  atoms  or residues replace  acidi-
ferous  ones,  and  basiferous  replace  basiferous  ;  and  the  greatest  change  when  basiferous
ones  replace  acidiferous  ones,  or  the  reverse. — TR.

2  See  last  footnote. — TR.

278  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

of  the  same  equivalent  group  can  replace  each  other,  but  not  in  such  a
way  that  an  atom  of  one  sort  can  replace  an  atom  of  another  sort  in
the  molecule ;  but  the  replacement  happens  in  this  wise,  viz.  that  in
the  place  of  a  certain  number  of  atoms  of  one  group,  there  are  substi-
tuted a  different  number  of  atoms  of  another  group.  Thus  two  atoms
of  H,  Li,  Na,  F,  Cl,  etc.,  can  usually  replace  one  atom  of  0,  Mg,  etc.

In  this  way  it  is  possible  to  compare  the  chemical  value  or  valence
of  the  elements  belonging  to  the  different  groups,  and  to  make  a
quantitative  determination  of  this.  Since  no  element  is  known  where
more  than  one  of  its  atoms  are  required  to  take  the  place  of  an  atom
of  hydrogen,  the  valence  of  this  latter  element  is  assumed  as  standard;
and,  accordingly,  hydrogen  and  the  related  elements  are  said  to  be
univalent ;  then  oxygen  and  the  related  elements  are  bivalent,  phosphorus
is  trivalent,  carbon,  silicon,  etc.,  are  quadrivalent,  and  the  like.

It  is  usually  assumed,  in  order  to  explain  these  relations,  that  the
chemical  force  of  the  elementary  atoms  does  not  act  equally  in  all
directions  in  space,  which  must  be  a  proviso  in  considering  the
attraction  of  a  gravitating  mass-point,  or  in  considering  the  mutual
attraction  of  the  molecules  of  a  liquid;  but  it  is  rather  to  be
assumed  that  the  affinity  is  entirely,  oi'  at  least  chiefly,  active  in  certain
directions ;  according  to  this  view,  the  number  of  these  directions  or  rays
corresponds  to  the  chemical  value  (valence)  of  the  atoms.  Thus  the  chemical
force  of  hydrogen  acts  in  one  direction,  that  of  oxygen  in  two,  that  of
carbon  in  four,  etc.  The  union  of  the  atoms  in  the  molecule  is  to  be
conceived  of  in  this  wise ;  viz.  the  outgoing  line  of  force  of  one  atom
coincides  with  one  from  another  atom,  or  in  other  words,  the  valences
of  the  different  atoms  mutually  and  oppositely  satisfy  each  other.

By  such  conceptions  as  these  it  is  possible  to  obtain  a  general
view,  if  not  of  all  the  possible  compounds,  at  any  rate  of  those  which
are  formed  most  readily,  and  which  are  characterised  by  great  stability.

Thus  two  univalent  elements,  as  hydrogen  and  chlorine,  or  two
bivalent  elements,  as  calcium  and  oxygen,  will  unite  in  the  sense  of
what  has  preceded,  and,  in  harmony  with  experiment,  in  very  stable
forms  in  such  compounds  as  the  following,  viz.  : —

H— Cl  and  Ca=0.

The  uniting  dashes,  as  commonly  used,  represent  the  force-lines
which  anastomose  into  each  other.  Similarly,  without  further  remark,
we  can  explain  the  ready  formation  of  such  molecules  as

H

/H  |

NAl or H— C— H,
XH  |

H

and  also  molecules  composed  of  the  same  kind  of  atoms,  as

H— H,  0=0,

CHAP.  IV  THE  CONSTITUTION OF  THE  MOLECULE  279

and  the  like  ;  for  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  same  scheme  will  be
used  to  explain  the  constitution  of  molecules  composed  of  like,  as
of  those  of  unlike,  atoms.  Regarding  the  saturation  capacity  of  the
valences,  it  must  be  supposed  that  each  valence  is  satisfied  by  another
valence,  whether  it  be  from  the  same  kind  of  element  or  from  a
different  kind,  although  there  do  occur  very  pronounced  quantitative
distinctions  in  the  complete  saturation  of  the  linking  of  the  atoms.

The  Dualistic  and  the  Unitary  View. — It  must  be  admitted
that,  according  to  previous  experiments,  the  power  of  saturation  of
valences  is  almost  unlimited,  that  as  all  observable  matter  produces
mutual  attraction  regardless  of  what  its  character  may  be,  so  also  two
valences  can  unite  their  lines  of  force  under  certain  circumstances  what-
ever the  atoms  may  be  from  which  they  arise.  On  the  other  hand,  the
intensity  of  these  is  in  the  highest  degree  dependent  on  the  nature  of
the  two  atoms  and  also  on  the  number  and  character  of  the  other
atoms  present  in  the  molecule.  It  is,  therefore,  remarkable  that  on
the  whole  the  atoms  and  atom  complexes  comparable  to  them  in
behaviour  (radicals)  may  be  placed  in  two  groups,  between  which  a
polar  distinction  is  recognisable.  Whilst  the  atoms  and  radicals
belonging  to  either  group  are  more  or  less  indifferent  to  one  another,
the  members  of  one  group  show  marked  affinity  towards  those  of  the
other  group.

The  existence  of  a  polaric  contrast  in  their  chemical  action  is
undoubted,  and  will  be  explained  more  clearly  in  the  subject  of
electrolysis,  where  it  will  be  shown  how  the  representatives  of  the  first
class  (positive)  "wander"  to  the  cathode,  and  those  of  the  second
class  (negative)  to  the  anode.  It  was  the  discovery  of  these  which  led
Davy,  and  especially  Berzelius  (1810),  to  the  advancement  of  the
electrochemical  theory ;  this  regarded  the  undeniable  dualism  in  the
mutual  affinity,  as  the  guiding  star  of  chemical  investigation,  and
explained  the  polaric  contrast,  as  resembling  that  between  the  positive
and  negative  electrostatic  charges.

But  very  soon  it  appeared  that  it  was  impossible  to  carry  out  this
supposition ;  for,  aside  from  the  faulty  consideration  of  the  physical
side  of  this  question  implied  in  the  theory,  and  which  shows  the
premises  to  be  inadmissible,  there  are  well-known  chemical  processes
which  occur  in  distinct  contradiction  to  an  exclusively  dualistic  con-
ception.

For  on  that  basis,  how  can  one  explain  the  mutual  and  very  active
capacity  for  union  shown  by  two  atoms  of  the  same  sort,  and  illus-
trated in  the  molecules  of  many  elements,  as  H2,  0.2,  C12,  etc.  1  Or
how  explain  the  abnormal  behaviour  of  carbon,  which  can  unite  firmly
with  such  characteristically  positive  and  negative  elements  as  hydrogen
and  chlorine.

Instead  of  drawing  the  conclusion  that,  in  chemical  action,  aside

280  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

from  the  polaric  forces  (analogous  to  electric  attraction  and  repulsion),
there  is  some  other  force  acting  simply  (like  the  Newtonian  attraction
of  ponderable  matter)  which  must  be  taken  into  account,  the  tendency
has  been  for  a  long  time,  and  also  is  at  present,  to  develop  a  one-sided
unitary  theory  in  opposition  to  the  one-sided  dualistic  theory  of
Berzelius ;  this  is  easily  explained  by  the  historical  consideration
that  the  dualistic  view  was  unsuited  to  the  treatment  of  the  carbon
compounds  which  form  the  subject  of  the  nourishing  department  of
organic  chemistry.  It  is  possible  in  the  immediate  future,  as  the
phenomena  of  electrolysis  are  exciting  an  awakened  interest,  that  this
dualistic  theory  will  receive  justice,  and  that  a  deeper  meaning  will  be
found  in  the  "  positive  "  and  "  negative  "  behaviour  of  many  atoms  and
radicals,  though  the  terms  "positive"  and  "negative"  are  intolerable  to
many  modern  chemists.

The  Changeableness  of  Chemical  Valence. — The  great  variety

of  chemical  transformations  are  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  pro-
perties of  the  chemical  forces  vary  with  external  conditions  of  tempera-
ture and  pressure,  with  the  presence  of  other  substances,  and  finally
and  especially  with  the  nature  of  the  atoms  concerned  in  the  exchange.
It  may  be  regarded  as  the  chief  problem  of  theoretical  chemistry,  to
express  the  mode  of  the  variation  of  the  affinity,  by  designated  factors
of  measure  and  number.  How  far  this  problem  has  been  solved  will
be  considered  under  the  subject  of  the  "  Doctrine  of  Affinity  "  ;  we  will
here  only  anticipate  what  is  most  important  from  the  standpoint  of
the  doctrine  of  valence.

Both  the  number  of  valences  acting  from  an  atom  in  a  molecular
group,  and  the  intensity  with  which  each  one  preserves  the  integrity
of  the  union,  vary  within  certain  limits.  There  has  hardly  ever  been
any  doubt  regarding  the  latter  [i.e.  the  variation  of  the  intensity  of
the  valences] ;  but  the  attempt  to  maintain  the  doctrine  of  a  constant
valence  was  very  general  till  recently ;  for  to  explain  the  cases  in
question,  it  was  urged,  on  the  one  hand,  that  certain  valences  remained
unsatisfied,  when  an  atom  used  less  valences  than  were  allotted  to  it ;
and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  conception  of  "  molecular  compounds  "  was
advanced  to  account  for  the  possibility  of  the  existence  of  those  mole-
cular complexes  where  the  number  of  effective  valences  seemed  too
small  to  explain  their  constitution.

We  cannot  discuss  here  how  far  in  this  method  of  investigation
mere  words  helped  on  the  faulty  conceptions  of  the  nature  of  valence ;
but,  at  all  events,  the  fact  remains  that  all  chemical  compounds  cannot
be  arranged  under  the  structure  plans  of  the  accepted  chemical  rubric,
and  also  that  nothing  else  primarily  remains  but  to  give  careful  atten-
tion to  any  change  in  the  chemical  valences,  since  this  implies  no  especial
encroachment  on  the  significance  of  valence  in  systematic  chemistry.

At  all events,  in the case of  many  compounds, where at first

CHAP,  iv  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  MOLECULE  281

glance  the  number  of  active  valences  appeared  to  be  too  small,  it  later
appeared  possible  to  devise  a  constitution  formula  which  harmonised
well  with  the  doctrine  of  valence  ;  this  is  shown  in  the  structure-plans
of  the  so-called  "unsaturated  compounds,"  which  maintain  the  four-
valence  theory  of  carbon.  The  simple  device  which  here  brought  about
the  desired  result  consisted  in  making  the  well-known  assumptions,
that  several  valences  may  be  mutually  satisfied  between  any  two  carbon
atoms,  and  that  the  carbon  atoms  also  can  form  rings.  This  assump-
tion has  been  accorded  great  triumph  both  in  theory  and  in  experiment.
But  such  results  as  these,  for  which  we  are  indebted  to  the  applica-
tion of  the  doctrine  of  constant  valence,  must  not  therefore  blind  our
eyes  to  the  fact  that  there  are  many  things  which  appear,  at  least
temporarily,  to  be  unexplained  by  this  same  view.  A  brilliant
example  of  this  is  shown  in  a  recent  discovery  of  Nilson  and  Petters-
son,1  in  which  they  proved  that  three  chlorides  of  indium  can  un-
doubtedly exist  in  the  gaseous  state,  viz.

In—  Cl,  In , In  f  Cl

XC1

even  among  the  carbon  compounds  change  of  valency  is  to  be  found,
although  it  is  rare.  Carbon  monoxide,

0-0,

has  long  been  assumed  to  contain  a  bivalent  carbon  atom  ;  recently
Gomberg'2  realised  the  first  case  of  obviously  trivalent  carbon  in
triphenylmethane  (C6H5)3C.  In  this  respect  porphyrexide  prepared
by  Piloty3  possesses  particular  interest,  as  nitrogen  in  it  appears
tetravalent  instead  of  either  tri-  or  penta-valent  as  usual.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  considerations  of  the  kinetic  theory  of
gases  lead  to  the  result  that  we  should  hardly  expect  to  find  such
simple  conduct  as  is  implied  in  the  doctrine  of  constant  valence.  The
so-called  stability  of  chemical  compounds,  accordingly,  appears  to  be
the  resultant  of  two  opposing  forces,  one  of  which,  the  chemical  force
proper,  tends  to  hold  the  atoms  in  the  molecular  group,  while  the
other,  controlling  the  atoms  by  heat  motion,  strives  to  break  the
molecule  apart.  It  is  probable  that  the  latter  force  changes,  and
probably  increases  with  the  temperature.  Regarding  the  former  [i.e.
the  chemical  force]  we  know  nothing,  and  nothing  can  be  stated
regarding  its  variation  with  the  temperature.  The  more  the  chemical
force  preponderates,  the  more  stable  will  the  compound  be.

Here  we  meet  with  relations  which  are  comparable  with  those
considered  in  the  kinetic  theory  of  liquids  (p.  215).  The  vapour

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  2.  669  (1888).
-  Her.  devtsch,  chem.  Ges.,  33.  3150  (1900).  3  Ibid.,  36.  1283  (1903).

282  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

tension  of  a  liquid  (which  results,  on  the  one  hand,  from  the  con-
currence of  the  forces  which  control  the  heat  motion  of  the  molecules,
and  which  results,  on  the  other  hand,  from  the  action  of  those  forces
which  exert  an  attraction  between  the  molecules),  can  be  regarded
as  a  standard  of  the  capacity  of  the  liquid  to  be  vaporised.  So  in
the  same  way,  the  capacity  of  compounds  for  dissociation,  and  for
chemical  reaction  also,  can  be  regarded  as  conditioned  by  the  con-
currence of  analogous  forces.  Thus  the  well-known  dependence  of
the  stability  of  molecular  groups  upon  the  external  conditions  of
temperature  and  pressure  is  at  once  explained  on  the  basis  of  these
considerations.  The  laws  which  prevail  here  will  be  thoroughly
considered  in  detail  in  the  section  on  the  Doctrine  of  Affinity.

Thus  we  can  easily  account  in  this  way  for  the  numerous  instances
observed  of  the  variation  of  the  chemical  valence,  by  supposing  that
the  heat  motion  of  the  atom  within  the  molecule  may  cause  some
particular  lines  of  force,  called  valences,  to  vanish.

Molecular  Compounds.1 — More  difficult  to  explain  than  those
cases  called  the  occurrence  of  unsaturated  valences,  or,  in  other  words,
where  elementary  atoms  in  many  compounds  employ  less  valences  than
the  normal  number,  according  to  the  valence  doctrine,  is  the  formation
of  those  well-characterised  chemical  compounds  where  more  valences
appear  to  be  active  than  can  be  ascribed  to  the  atoms  in  question  in
any  of  their  other  relations.

Water,  and  also  many  salts,  must  be  classified  under  the  com-
pounds which  are  completely  saturated,  in  which  no  more  free  valences
are  available  for  use  in  uniting  with  other  atoms ;  yet,  in  spite  of  this,
the  salts  containing  water  of  crystallisation  are  obviously  chemical
compounds  which  are  built  up  in  accordance  with  the  rules  of  multiple
proportion.  The  phenomenon  of  water  of  crystallisation  is  analogous
to  that  where  many  salts  crystallise  together  as  double  salts  in
stoichiometric  proportions.  The  property  of  not  being  volatile  with-
out decomposition  is  by  no  means  characteristic  of  these  compounds,
but  is  held  in  common  by  many  others  which  obey  the  rules  of  the
valence  doctrine  most  perfectly.

If  one  clings  to  the  notion  of  the  trivalence  of  phosphorus,  there  is
no  clear  reason  for  the  existence  of  the  molecule  PC15  in  the  gaseous
state.  Methyl  ether  is  able  to  unite  with  a  molecule  of  hydrochloric
acid,  which,  is  in  striking  contradiction  to  the  well-developed  valence
theory  of  organic  compounds.

If  we  regard  oxygen  as  regularly  divalent,  then  the  existence  of
the  molecules  (H90)2  is  unexplained,  and  yet  we  cannot  hesitate  to
assume  the  existence  of  molecules  of  this  size  both  in  water  vapour
and  also  in  solutions,  if  we  believe  that  Avogadro's  rule  also  holds
good  even  when  applied  to  solutions.

1  See  A.  Naumaun,  Die  Molekiih'erMndungen,  Heidelberg,  1872.

THE  CONSTITUTION OF  THE  MOLECULE  283

Molecular  complexes  of  this  sort,  occasioned  by  the  union  jof
saturated  compounds,  are  called  "  molecular  compounds."  It  is  assumed
on  the  basis  of  the  valence  doctrine,  that  the  components  of  this
aggregate  retain  to  a  certain  extent  their  individuality  in  the  new
complex,  and  that  the  binding  force  does  not  inhere  in  force  lines
passing  between  the  single  atoms,  but  that  the  union  centres  in  the
attraction  of  the  original  molecules  acting  as  units.

This  view  at  least  accounts  for  the  fact  that  the  so-called  "  mole-
cular compounds,"  in  general,  are  characterised  by  a  lower  degree  of
stability  than  that  shown  by  chemical  compounds.  On  the  other
hand,  it  should  be  remembered  that,  in  spite  of  all  attempts  in  this
direction,  no  characteristic  distinction  has  been  found,  either  in
physical  or  in  chemical  behaviour,  between  the  ordinary  compounds
and  the  molecular  compounds ;  and  therefore,  strictly  speaking,  from  the
phenomena  exhibited,  at  present  no  other  conclusion  can  be  drawn  except  that
chemical  compounds  do  undoubtedly  exist  which  cannot  be  included  in  the
structure  scheme  which  is  based  on  the  doctrine  of  a  constant  valence.

A  remarkable  research  of  A.  Werner's  towards  the  systematics  of
molecular  compounds  will  be  dealt  with  in  Chapter  VII.

The  Compounds  of  Carbon. — The  valence  doctrine  has  been
hitherto  applied  almost  exclusively,  but  with  great  and  undoubted
results,  to  the  carbon  compounds,  or  the  so-called  organic  compounds ;
and  thus  it  has  been  already  done,  or  it  is  already  possible,  to  con-
struct for  every  actual  compound,  whose  reactions  are  known  to  a
fairly  satisfactory  degree,  a  structure  scheme  which  represents  the
quintessence  of  its  chemical  reactions.  The  reason  of  this  is  to  be
found  in  the '  fact  that  the  theory  of  valence  here  found,  in  the
abundance  of  material  and  the  great  variety  of  behaviour,  ample
opportunity  for  an  experimental  "baptism  by  fire";  but  the  great
development  of  organic  structural  chemistry  is  to  be  explained,  as  far
as  we  know,  from  the  fact  that  the  behaviour  of  organic  compounds  is
actually  much  simpler  than  that  of  other  groups,  and  also  that  carbon
surpasses  other  elements  in  its  more  regular  behaviour,  and  in  the  great
variety  of  its  compounds.

The  quadrivalence  of  carbon  is  the  basis  of  organic  structural
chemistry ;  after  the  preparatory  work  of  Frankland,  this  was  dis-
tinctly emphasised  by  Couper  and  Kekule  contemporaneously  (1858);
its  fruitfulness  was  recognised  and  proven  by  the  latter  in  particular.

If  one  imagines  the  hydrogen  atoms  as  in  the  formula

H

H— C— H
H

284  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

to  be  substituted  by  other  atoms  or  radicals  successive!}^  or  two
hydrogen  atoms  to  be  replaced  by  one  divalent  atom  or  radical,  and
so  on,  it  is  possible  to  represent  structure  formula  for  the  whole  host
of  carbon  compounds ;  and  these  formulae  cannot  only  be  regarded
as  possible,  but  they  also  will  disclose  to  those  who  are  familiar  with
the  language,  much  regarding  the  reaction  capacities  and  the  physical
properties  of  the  compounds  in  question.

The  Peculiarities  of  the  Carbon  Compounds. — The  very  fact
that  there  is  an  "  organic  chemistry  "  gives  rise  to  the  question  regard-
ing the  peculiarities  which  so  characterise  the  compounds  of  this
branch  of  chemistry,  that  they  receive  a  special  method  of  treatment,
a  treatment  which  is  distinct  from  the  general  domain  of  chemistry,
not  only  on  the  part  of  the  teacher,  but  also  on  the  part  of  the
investigator.  We  see  here,  in  the  fact  that  the  materials  of  organic
chemistry  not  only  claim  the  interest  of  the  animal  and  plant
physiologist  in  particular,  but  also  in  that  they  are  of  value  for  the
physician  and  the  technologist, — a  circumstance  which,  though  perhaps
external  and  casual,  lias  nevertheless  a  most  impressive  significance.
But  let  us  rather  inquire  after  the  causes  which  make  the  organic
compounds,  in  their  physical  and  chemical  behaviour,  actually  appear
so  different  in  many  respects  from  other  compounds.

It  is  doubtless  carbon  itself  which  stamps  its  character  on  the
"chemistry  of  the  carbon  compounds."  We  must  consider  carefully
to  what  extent  this  element  occupies  a  special  position.  The  follow-
ing items  are  from  a  statement  of  van't  Hoff.1

1.  The  quadri valence  of  carbon  necessitates  an  enormous  number
of  derivatives  of  a  carbon  compound.

2.  The capacity  of carbon  atoms  uniting with  each  other,  and
in  very  many  ways,  allows  the  possibility  of  the  greatest  variety  of
combination.

3.  The  position  of  carbon,  standing  as  it  does  between  positive
and  negative  elements,  invests  it  with  a  peculiar  capacity  for  uniting
with the most different elements, as hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen,
chlorine,  etc. To  this  is  due  the  property  of  adapting  itself  alternately
to  the  processes  of  oxidation  and  reduction,  which  have  such  signifi-
cance in  animal  and  plant  life. If  we  consider  the  first  horizontal  row
of  the  periodic  system  (p.  184),  viz.

Li Be B C N 0 F,

we  find  carbon  well  balanced  between  the  affinity  extremes ;  for  the
elements  to  the  right  are  emphatically  negative;  and  those  to  the  left
are  emphatically  positive  in  character.'2  Moreover,  the  temperature

1  Ansichten uber  die  org. Chemie, I. p. 34 ff.  ; II. p. 240 ff. Braunschweig
(Brunswick),  1881.

2  The  statement  that  Be  and  B  are  positive  elements  must  be  taken  with  "a  grain  of
salt,"  in  view  of  their  well-known  passive  acidiferous  properties  — TR.

CHAP,  iv  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  MOLECULE  285

clearly  exerts  an  influence,  for  at  high  degrees  of  heat  the  affinity  of
carbon  for  oxygen  grows,  and  it  is  emphatically  positive  itself ; l
possibly  a  lowering  of  temperature  might  act  in  the  inverse  way.

4.  According  to  the  style  and  manner  of  the  saturation  of  three  of
the  carbon  valences,  the  fourth  will  have  a  decided  positive  or  negative
character, or  something  intermediate ; thus  the  free  valence  of the
following  group  is  usually  negative,

H2

C— ;

NO,

but  that  of  the  methyl  group,

H3=C-

is  most  nearly  comparable  to  hydrogen  in  its  reaction  value,  and  is
distinctly  positive ;  finally,  the  cyanogen  group,

N~C— ,  [or  C=N— ,  TB.],

may  be  at  times  positive  or  negative  in  reaction.

5.  Another  characteristic  property  is the  inertia  of  the carbon
compounds,  and the sloumess  of  reaction  associated  therewith, which
characterises  organic  chemistry  where  carbon compounds  come  into
play,  and  which,  therefore,  is  found  exhibited  in  the  life  activity  of
plants  and  animals. Thus  it  is  probable  that  the  existence of  the
compound

CH3
Znc(

CH3

its  analogous  hydrogen  compound  being  unknown,  viz.

/H
Zn<

XH

is  to  be  explained,  not  by  the  greater  affinity  of  the  methyl  groups
for  zinc  as  compared  with  hydrogen,  but  rather  in  that  the  former
compound  decomposes  much  more  slowly  than  the  latter.  Further,
the  fact  is  well  known  that  many  carbon  derivatives  are  more  stable
than  the  mother  substances  ;  thus  methyl  sulphonic  acid  CH3  •  S02  •  OH
is  much  more  stable  than  sulphurous  acid  H  •  S02  •  OH  ;  also  the  esters
are  well  known  in  the  case  of  the  unstable  ortho-carbonic  acid,  etc.

1  Yet  the  unsaturated  carbon  compounds,  like  propargyl  alcohol  and  phenol,  are
clearly  acidii'erous,  showing  that,  atom  for  atom,  carbon  is  more  negative  than  hydrogen
is  positive  ;  but  this  may  be  merely  a  relative  affair. — TK.

286  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK II

This  same  inertia  renders  it  possible  to  build  on  to  molecules,  the
arrangement  of  which  is  very  artificial,  so  to  speak,  and  therefore  un-
natural ;  by  a  more  or  less  energetic  blow,  there  occurs  a  transforma-
tion to  a  more  stable  form,  and  a  closer  union  of  the  atoms.  Usually
there  is  a  great  quantity  of  energy  set  free  in  this,  and  the  rearrange-
ment leads  to  an  explosion,  which  in  turn  leads  to  the  dissolution  of
the  molecule ;  in  this  way  we  find  the  explanation  for  the  large
number  of  explosive  compounds  produced  in  organic  chemistry.

The  Methods  for  the  Determination  of  the  Constitution.—

The  great  development  of  organic  chemistry  and  the  extraordinary
experimental  results,  for  which  we  are  indebted  to  the  most  deliberate
application  of  the  conception  of  the  "constitution  of  the  molecule,"
prove,  in  a  most  striking  way,  how  fortunate  the  application  of  this
idea  has  been.  In  what  follows  I  have  tried  to  represent,  in  brief,
according  to  van't  Hoff,1  the  principles  which  guide  the  organic
chemist  in  representing  the  structure  plans.

1.  The  composition  of  the  compound,  which  is  known  to  be  pure,
must  first  be  ascertained  from  an analysis, and from a  molecular
weight  determination  by  some  one  of  the  methods  described  in  Chapter
III. Next,  in  the  attempt  to  trace  the  method  of  union  of  the  atoms
in  the  molecule,  attention  must  be  given  to  the  valence  of  the  atoms
entering  into  the  compound  in  question ;  thus  carbon  has  a  valence  of
four,  nitrogen of  three  or  five,  oxygen  of  two, hydrogen  and  the
halogens  of  one,  etc. ; this  gives  a  foothold,  so  that  the  number  of
conceivable  formulae  is  seen  to  be  very  limited,  and  the  more  limited
according  as  the  number  of  valences  of  each  element  is  more  constant.

2.  The  method  of  preparation of  the  unknown compounds from
those  of  known  constitution,  or  conversely  the  transformation  of  the
former  into  the  latter,  gives  a  still  better  grasp  of  the  subject. It
may  be  assumed  in  many  cases  that  the  new  compounds  have  a  con-
stitution which  is  related  to  that  of  the  original,  and  this  is  the  more
probable  wrhen  the  change  and  the  retransformation  occur  easily,  and
when  the  changes  of  energy  associated  with the  decomposition  are
very slight. The  peculiar  inertia  of the carbon  compounds,  which
gives  the  chemistry  of  this  element  its  peculiar  character  (p.  284),  in
certain  cases  justifies  the  proviso  that  the  number  of  old  valences  dis-
charged, or  of  new  ones  attached,  is  reduced  to  a  minimum. This  method
of  determining  the  constitution  is  altogether  the  most  reliable,  and  the
one most  commonly  employed. On account of the readiness with
which  the  valences  in  inorganic  compounds  are  accustomed  to  change
their  rdles,  this  method  is  almost  entirely  limited  to  the  carbon  com-
pounds.

3.  On  the  basis  of  a  very  extended  experience,  showing  that  the
reaction  capacity  of  certain  atomic  groups,  as  OH,  CO, C6H5,  NH2,

1  Ansichten  liber  die  org.  Chem.,  Brunswick,  1881.

CHAP.  IV  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  MOLECULE  287

etc.,  usually  remains  unchanged,  irrespective  of  the  composition  of  the
rest  of  the  molecule,  one  may  make  certain  inferences  regarding  the
existence  of  these  groups  in  the  molecule  from  the  reaction  capacity
of  the  compound.  This  is  the  Principle  of  Analogous  Reactions.

4.  A  very  elegant  principle  consists  in  the  investigation  of the
number  of  isomeric  derivatives. Thus,  by  ascertaining  how  many  new
compounds can result  by  the same sort of substitution, as of a
hydrogen  atom  by  a  chlorine  atom,  one  may  safely  infer  whether  the
variously  substituted  atoms  exert  the  same  functions  in  the  molecular
group  or not. Thus the existence of only one phenyl- chloride,
C6H5 .  Cl,  led  to  the  recognition  of  the  identical  union  of  the  hydrogen
atoms  in  benzene. Similarly,  the  discovery  of  three  hydroxy-benzoic
acids  necessitated  the  distinction  between  the  ortho,  para,  and  meta
positions, which  is  of  fundamental significance in representing the
structure  of  benzene. See  also  the  discussion  on  p.  J292  regarding  the
number  of  methylene  chlorides.

5.  From  the  degree  of  readiness  with  which  a  cleavage  product  is
formed  from  a  compound,  a  probable  reference  may  be  drawn  as  to
the  contiguity  of  the  components  of  the  separated  products,  in  the
molecule,  of  the  original  compound. Thus,  other  things  being  equal,
the  nearer  together  that  the  hydroxyl  group  and  the  hydrogen  of  the
detached  water  molecule  are  in  the  original  compound,  so  much  the
more  readily  can  an  anhydride  be  found. It  will  be  seen  later  what
important  service  has  been  given  to  stereochemistry  by  this  principle  of
intermolecular  action.

6.  Sometimes  certain  elements  or  radicals,  in  the  molecule,  exert
a mutual influence on their aptitude  for  reaction.1 This  will be
manifested  more  clearly,  as the  reacting  atoms  are nearer to each
other. From  this  aptness  of  reaction  of  particular  atoms  or  radicals
in  a  compound  of  unknown  constitution,  one  may  make  some  inference
as  to  their  respective  distances  from  each  other,  and  thus  get  a  starting-
point for the representation of their structural formulae. Thus
Ostwald 2  has  systematically  studied,  and  also  used  with  good  success,
the  mutual  influence  exerted  by  various  atoms  and  radicals  on  the
reaction  aptitude  of  the  acid  hydrogen  atoms  in  organic  acids,  result-
ing from the relative location of  these  atoms  and  radicals in the
respective  molecular  groups. Methods  of  this  sort  have  become  very
important  in  determining  the  spatial  arrangement  of  atoms,  and they
are the more  important  inasmuch  as they  furnish  the  quantitative
determination  of  the  reaction  aptitude  of  many  radicals.

7.  All  isomeric  compounds  are  distinguished  more  or  less  by  their
properties,  such  as  the  melting-point, the  boiling-point, the  density,
the  refractive  index,  etc.  ;  and  the  constitution  is  no  less  a  standard

1  For  a  very  interesting  summary  of  this  line  of  argument  see Remseu, Theoret.
Che  in.,  4th  edit.,  chap.  xix. — TK.

*Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  3.  170,  241,  369  (1889).

288  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

factor  than  the  composition  in  determining  the  respective  physical
conduct.  Thus,  when  one  has  found  a  connection  between  the  con-
stitution and  the  physical  properties  of  a  large  number  of  compounds
which  are  known  to  be  related  in  their  structure,  then  conversely  from
the  physical  properties  of  an  unknown  compound,  he  can  safely  draw
some  inference  regarding  its  constitution.  Usually  such  relations  as
these,  as  for  instance  the  connection  between  the  constitution  and  the
refractive  index,  are  of  a  purely  empirical  nature,  and  the  safety  with
which  they  may  be  employed  in  any  given  case  will  depend  simply  on
the  number  of  the  analogous  cases.  But  again,  as  is  the  case  in  the
relation  between  the  constitution  and  optical  activity,  one  sometimes
obtains  a  deeper  insight  into  their  nature,  and  then  he  may  infer
with  a  large  degree  of  confidence.  The  material  thus  far  discovered
in  this  direction  will  be  found  grouped  in  the  following  chapter.

Benzene  Theory. — By  means  of  the  methods  described,  it  is
possible  to  ascertain  with  great  certainty  the  constitution  of  a  legion
of  carbon  compounds,  the  number  of  which  increases  every  day.
These  constitutional  formulae  so  obtained  have  much  significance  in
the  eyes  of  those  who  would  regard  them  as  established,  entirely
independently  of  all  molecular  and  theoretical  speculations ;  for  these
formula  represent  to  a  large  degree,  and  in  a  very  condensed  form,
their  "  facies "  in  many  empirical  relations,  and  he  who  is  skilled  in
reading  this  symbolism,  learns  very  much  regarding  the  nature  of  the
compound,  from  what  is  expressed  through  the  formula.

Thus,  for  instance,  in  considering  the  constitutional  formula  of
phenol,  thus

H

O

C

H— C C— H

H— C C— H

\  /
C

H

at  the  first  glance  it  is  apparent  that  one  hydrogen  atom  will  react
differently  from  all  the  others,  since  it  can  be  substituted  quite  readily
by  a  positive  radical ;  also  that  in  substituting  any  one  of  the  other
hydrogen  atoms  by  a  univalent  atom  or  radical,  it  is  possible  to
obtain  any  one  of  three  isomers,  according  to  the  location  of  the

CHAP,  iv  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  MOLECULE  289

substitution ;  also  that  a  dissolution  of  the  ring  union  would  be  accom-
panied by  a  fundamental  change  in  the  molecular  structure,  etc.,  etc.

The  three  isomers  that  can  be  formed  by  replacement  of  a
hydrogen  atom  directly  combined  with  carbon  in  phenol  and  analogous
compounds  are  distinguished  as  ortho-  meta-  and  para-compounds,
but,  strictly  speaking,  the  number  of  cases  of  isomerism  should  be
greater ;  for  example,  a  difference  should  exist  between  substitution
of  the  two  atoms  next  the  hydroxyl  group  in  phenol.  The  fact  that
this  case  of  isomerism  has  not  been  realised  has  led  to  many  explana-
tions and  to  the  suggestion  of  many  modified  forms  of  Kekule's  benzene
formula.1  Quite  recently  a  modified  view  of  the  nature  of  a  double
compound  has  been  developed  which  is  worth  inserting  here.

It  has  often  been  remarked  that  the  expression  "double
bond "  and  the  symbol  for  it  C  =  C  corresponds  but  little  to  the
actual  behaviour  and  does  not  lend  itself  to  calculation  of  the
characteristic  peculiarities  of  the  double  bond,  its  instability  and  its
tendency  to  addition  products.  J.  Thiele 2  has  offered  an  extension
of  the  concept  of  a  double  bond  which  certainly  brings  in  a  new
hypothetical  element,  but  is  well  suited  to  bring  together  a  number
of  observed  facts.  He  believes  that,  in  the  formation  of  a  compound
with  double  bond,  only  partial  saturation  of  the  two  valencies  occurs.
Thiele  found  the  strongest  support  for  this  belief  in  the  behaviour  of
the  so-called  conjugate  double  compounds.  When  a  hydrogen  or
bromine  molecule  is  added  to  the  atomic  complex  C  =  CH  -  CH  =  C,
the  result  is  not  the  elimination  of  one  double  bond  by  formation
of  a  group  like  CBr  -  CHBr  -  CH  =  C,  but  both  disappear,  and
another  double  bond  appears  in  the  middle  instead ;  thus  we  get
CBr  -  CH  =  CH  -  CBr.

This  is  difficult  to  understand  according  to  accepted  views.  Thiele
assumes  that  the  affinities  are  not  completely  used  up  in  the  formation
of  a  double  bond,  but  that  a  residue  of  affinity  or  partial  valency
remains  in  each  atom.  The  two  neighbouring  partial  valencies
saturate  each  other  mutually,  whilst  the  extreme  one  remains  un-
saturated  and  capable  of  forming  addition  products.  He  writes  the
following  symbol  for  it : —

The  addend  is  attached  to  the  carbon  atom  with  the  free  partial
valencies,  and  hence  the  product  BrC  —  CH  =  CH  -  CBr.  Other
phenomena  of  addition  that  have  been  noticed  in  the  aldehydes,
quinone,  benzyls,  and  so  forth,  are  explained  in  a  similar  manner.

An  especially  good  application  of  these  views  is  to  be  found  in

1  See  especially  the  critical  study  by  Marckwald, Benzoltheorie, Stuttgart,  1897.
F.  Enke.  2  Lieb.  Ann,,  306.  87  (1889).

U

290  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

the benzene problem. Thiele's  modification  of the  old formula  is
explained  by  the  symbol

H

HC CH

II I)
HC CH

H

or,  if  all  the  bonds  are  regarded  as  equivalent,  by

H

HC CH

II II
HC CH

H

Since  benzene,  according  to  this  formula,  contains  six  inactive
bonds,  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  saturated  compound  in  harmony  with
its  chemical  behaviour.

The  objection  made  against  Kekule's  formula  disappears  in  the
case  of  Thiele's,  on  account  of  its  complete  symmetry.

But,  at  the  same  time,  experience  has  shown  that  the  consti-
tutional formulae  are  not  adequate  to  the  complete  description  of
the  compounds  represented.  For  on  the  one  hand  it  appears  that
the  anticipated  compounds  cannot  in  all  cases  be  represented  by  the
constitutional  formulae ;  thus  the  two  isomers,  methyl  cyanide  and
methyl  isocyanide  (the  nitril  and  the  isonitril),  are  known,

N=C— CH3, and CE=N— CH3,

but  only  one  hydrocyanic  acid  is  known,  although  there  should  be
two,  corresponding  to  the  formulae

N=C— H, and C=N— H.

In  this  case  the  constitutional  formulae  cover  too  much  ground,
since  fewer  compounds  are  known  than  were  to  be  expected.  Yet
this  proves  nothing  against  the  formulae,  because  it  is  entirely  possible
that  the  desired  isomer  may  exist,  but  that  the  proper  method  of
preparation  has  not  as  yet  been  found,  nor  the  conditions  suitable  for
its  existence.  Also  the  assumption  is  not  improbable  that  both  mole-
cules may  exist  in  the  case  of  hydrocyanic  acid,  and  that  these
two  forms  are  converted  into  each  other  so  readily,  that  the  one

CHAP.  IV  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  MOLECULE  291

acid  may  be  able  to  react  in  the  sense  of  both  structural  formulae.
(For  further  details  see  Book  III.,  chapter  on  Chemical  Kinetics,
Tautomerism.)

On  the  other  hand,  it  would  be  an  entirely  different  case  if  more
isomers  were  known  than  were  required  by  the  theory,  or  than  could  be
accounted  for  by  it.

The  classical  case  is  that  of  lactic  acid.  This  was  shown  by  the
investigations  of  Wislicenus  l  to  have  several  distinct  forms  of  really
different  properties,  all  of  which  yet  had  one  and  the  same  formula,
viz.,

CH3CH(OH)C02H.

Being  greatly  disturbed  by  this  observation,  van't  Hoff2  proposed
this  question  (1877),  viz.,  What  change  or  extension  must  be  intro-
duced into  the  theory  of  structural  chemistry  in  order  to  adapt  it  to
all  the  observed  compounds'?  The  following  abstract  gives  the
essentials  of  the  order  of  thought  by  which  van't  Hoff  was  led
to  the  creation  of  stereochemistry.  Le  Bel  developed  these  views
simultaneously.

The  Stereochemistry  of  Carbon. — The  fundamental  assump-
tion on  which  all  the  following  considerations  are  based  is  this  :  viz.
that  the  four  valencies  of  carbon  are  like  each  other  in  every  particular.  The
correctness  of  this  is  shown  by  the  negative  proof  that  not  nearly  so
many  isomers  are  known  as  would  be  known,  if  one  or  several  of  the
valencies  of  carbon  were  different.  Thus,  for  example,  only  one  methyl
chloride  is  known ;  but  there  would  be  several  if  the  mode  of  union
with  the  chlorine  atoms  varied  with  their  location.

The  question  regarding  the  number  of  mono-substitution  products
has  been  treated  very  systematically  by  L.  Henry.3  We  will  briefly
indicate  the  course  pursued  by  this  investigator,  on  account  of  its
great  importance  as  the  basis  of  stereochemistry.

If  we  assume  that  the  four  valencies  of  carbon  are  different,  then
we  must  write  the  formula  of  methane  thus,  CHIHIIHmHIV ;  here  the
Roman  numerals  denote  that  the  respective  hydrogen  atoms  are
united  to  the  carbon  each  in  a  different  way ;  then  there  would  be
four  monosubstitution  products,  according  to  the  particular  hydrogen
atom  substituted.  Now,  let  the  univalent  radical  A  replace  HI}  pro-
ducing the  compound  CAHnHmHIv.  We  will  now  replace  A  by  the
radical  B,  producing  the  compound  CBHnHinHIV ;  and  again  in  this
latter  compound  introduce  A,  which,  let  us  say,  takes  the  place  of

1  Lid).  Ann.,  156.  3  ;  157.  302  (1871).

2  Dix  annZes  dans  Vhistoire  d'une  theorie,  Rotterdam,  1877. The  arrangement  of
atoms  in  space,  2nd  edition  (Braunschweig,  1894). See  also  A.  Hantzsch,  Grundriss  der
Stereochemie  (Breslau,  1893).

3  Butt.  Acad.  Belg.  (3),  12.  No.  12  (1886)  ;  15.  333  (1888).

292  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

Hn,  producing  CBAHmHIV ;  finally,  B  is  replaced  by  hydrogen,  pro-
ducing CHjAHmH^r.  Now  if  the  valencies  I  and  II  are  different,
then  CAHnHmHIV  and  CHAHmHIV  should  have  different  proper-
ties [as  is  not  the  case]  •  and  in  the  same  way  all  the  other  valencies  of
carbon  were  investigated.  In  this  way  Henry  successively  prepared
all  of  the  four  nitre-methanes,  and  always  obtained  the  same  substance
[showing  that  all  the  valencies  are  alike].

Let  us  next  advance  the  question  as  to  the  directions  in  which  the
four  valencies  radiate  from  the  carbon  atom.  Now  it  follows  from  the
likeness  of  the  four  valencies,  that  they  must  be  symmetrically  distri-
buted in  space,  and  there  are  only  two  conceivable  modes  of  such
arrangement,  viz.  :  the  four  valencies  must  either  lie  in  a  plane,
intersecting  each  other  at  angles  of  90°,  or  else  they  must  be
symmetrically  distributed  in  space  as  the  four  axes  of  an  equilateral
tetrahedron.1  Here  again  the  isomeric  forms  must  decide  between
these  two  possibilities.  Thus,  in  the  former  case  [the  arrangement  in
a  plane],  by  replacing  two  hydrogen  atoms  by  chlorine,  we  should
obtain  the  two  following  isomeric  methylene  chlorides  [dichlor-
methanes],  thus,

H  H

I  I

C1—C—C1,  and  Ci— C— H ;

I  I

H  Cl

these  should  be  distinguished  by  the  circumstance  that  in  one  the
chlorine  atoms  are  opposite  each  other,  while  in  the  other  they  are
beside  each  other.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  four  valencies  are
arranged  tetrahedrally,  two  chlorine  atoms  when  introduced  into  the
molecule  would  always  lie  beside  each  other,  and  the  conditions
would  allow  of  only  one  methylene  chloride.  Now,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  only  one  methylene  chloride  is  known.  [Hence  the  tetrahedron
formula  is  probably  the  correct  one.]

The  case  is  similar  when  two  hydrogen  atoms  in  methane  are
replaced  by  two  different  radicals,  or  when  three  hydrogen  atoms  are
replaced  by  two  radicals  of  one  kind  and  one  .of  another.  In  all
cases,  unless  we  assume,  as  is  very  improbable,  that  there  are  isomers
which  have  not  yet  been  observed,  we  are  forced  to  regard  the  tetrahedron
arrangement  of  the  valencies  in  space  as  correct.

1  These  axes  are  not  the  crystallographic  axes  (say  of  the  1st  system),  but  the
axes  converging  from  the  solid  angles  of  a  tetrahedron  to  the  centre  ;  their  distri-
bution in  space  may  be  most  readily  pictured  thus  ;  any  tivo  of  the  four  axes  being
taken  as  a  pair,  the  remaining  two  form  another  pair  ;  the  two  axes  of  any  pair
intersect  each  other  at  an  angle  of  120°  in  their  plane  like  a  very  obtuse  V  ;  the
planes  of  the  two  pairs  cut  each  other  at  an  angle  of  90°,  but  so  that  the  two  obtuse
Vs  shall  have  their  apices  pointing  in  opposite  directions. — TR.

CHAP. IV

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  MOLECULE

293

Optical  Isomerism. — The  only  possible  case  of  isomerism  of  the
substitution  products  of  methane,  in  the  sense  of  the  tetrahedron
proviso,  is  found  when  three  of  the  hydrogen  atoms  are  re-
placed by  different  radicals,  or  expressed  in  more  general  terms,
where  the  four  carbon  valencies  are  replaced  by  four  different  radicals
[or  atoms.]

By  denoting  the  four  different  atoms  or  radicals  which  satisfy  a
carbon  atom,  by  the  letters  «,  b,  c,  and  d,  we  obtain  such  formulae  types
as  those  shown  in  Fig.  24.

These  formulse,  in  all  probability,  should  correspond  to  two  different

Fig.  24.

compounds,  because  they  cannot  be  made  to  coincide  by  super-
position ;  the  difference  between  them  is  comparable  to  that  between
the  right  and  left  hand,  or  between  a  real  object  and  its  reflected
image.

A  single  glance  at  Fig.  24  shows  that  such  isomers  as  these  two
must  represent  the  slightest  conceivable  difference  between  their
respective  physical  'and  chemical  properties.  The  degree  of  separation
between  the  atoms  is  the  same  in  both  cases  ;  thus  the  distance  between
a  and  b  is  the  same.  The  sole  difference  consists  in  this,  viz.,  that  if
we  consider  any  selected  angle  as  that  marked  by  the  radical  d,  then
in  the  left  figure  the  course  a,  b,  c  is  directed  like  the  movement  of
the  hands  of  a  watch,  while  the  corresponding  order  a,  b,  c  in  the
right  figure  is  in  the  inverse  direction.  Inasmuch  as  these  two  types,
figured  above,  have  no  planes  of  symmetry,  such  a  carbon  atom,  the
valencies  of  which  are  satisfied  by  four  different  [atoms  or»]  radicals,  is
said  to  be  unsymmetrical.

In  1874  Le  Bel  and  van't  Hoff1  independently  and  contempo-
raneously suggested  that  the  right-  and  left-handed  optically  active
isomers  correspond  to  these  two  types.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the
physical  and  chemical  properties  are  exactly  the  same,  and  only
differ  in  their  property  of  rotating  the  plane  of  polarisation  equally
strongly  but  in  opposite  directions,  which  means  that  the  respective
substances  have  a  [fundamental]  difference  in  their  molecular
structure.  This  kind  of  isomerism  is  accordingly  called  "  optical " ;

1  See  references  on  p.  291.

294  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  n

the  subject  of  optical  rotation  will  be  further  considered  in  the  next
chapter.

This  kind  of  isomerism  usually  exhibits  itself  in  the  solid  state
by  occasioning  the  crystallisation  of  the  two  substances  in  two  respec-
tively opposite  enantiomorphic  forms  (forms  turned  back  upon  them-
selves).

The  two  isomers  shown  in  Fig.  24  obviously  have  the  same  consti-
tution, since  the  conditions  are  alike  in  every  respect ;  they  differ
only  in  the  spatial  arrangement  of  the  particular  groups  in  the  mole-
cule, or  they  are  said  to  have  a  different  "configuration."

Geometrical  Isomerism.  —  Another  variety  of  isomerism,  which
is  clearly  inexplicable  by  means  of  the  ordinary  structure  formulae,  is
met  in  the  case  of  compounds  which  have  a  "  double  linkage  "  between
two  carbon  atoms.  And  here  again  it  was  due  especially  to  the
experimental  work  of  Wislicenus  l  that  there  was  recognised  a  dis-
tinction between  isomers  of  this  sort,  and  again  it  was  to  van't  Hoff
that  their  theoretical  explanation  was  due.

When  two  valencies  of  two  different  carbon  atoms  mutually
satisfy  each  other,  or,  in  the  language  of  stereochemistry,  when  two
solid  angles  of  one  tetrahedron  are  joined  to  two  solid  angles  of
another  tetrahedron,  then  the  four  free  valencies  lie  in  one  plane;2
thus,  if  the  four  free  valencies  become  satisfied  by  the  four  radicals  Rp
R2,  R3  and  R4,  so  that  one  carbon  atom  holds  the  first  two,  and  the
other  the  last  two,  then  there  is  produced  the  compound

R2  R4

Now,  according  to  van't  HofFs  view,  two  compounds  of  this  sort
would  be  looked  for,  in  one  of  which  R1  and  R3,  in  the  other  Rj  and
R4,  would  lie  on  the  same  side  of  the  double  tetrahedron.

A  similar  case  of  isomerism  would  also  be  expected  when  the  two
free  valencies  of  each  of  the  doubly  linked  carbon  atoms  become
united  to  a  like  pair  of  radicals,  as  in  the  compound

R,

R,

—  c/

G

R.  R.

1  Abh.  d.  kgl.  sacks.  Akad.,  1887.

2  This  plane  is  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  edge  in  which  lie  the  saturated
valence  solid  angles  of  the  two  tetrahedra.  —  TR.

CHAP.  IV  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  MOLECULE  295

This  case  is  illustrated  in  the  following  diagram  of  the  isomerism
between  fumaric  and  maleic  acids,  as  in  Fig.  25.

This  case  of  isomerism  is  also  very  frequently  satisfactorily
expressed  by  the  following  constitutional  formulae,  where  the  spatial
relations  are  illustrated  : —

Maleic  Acid.  Fumaric  Acid.

H— C— COOH H— C— COOH,

II  II

H— C— COOH HOOC— C— H.

It  would  not  be  expected  that  this  variety  of  isomerism  would
exhibit  optical  activity,  because  the  four  radicals  satisfying  the  four

Maleic  Acid.  Fumaric  Acid.

[external]  valencies  of  the  double  tetrahedron  all  lie  in  the  same  plane.
Also,  since  the  relative  degree  of  separation  of  the  radicals  from  each
other,  as  shown  in  Fig.  25,  is  not  the  same,  the  two  isomers  will
behave  differently  as  regards  aptitude  for  reaction,  boiling-point,
melting-point,  solubility,  etc.  As  to  the  question  regarding  the
relative  contiguity  of  the  respective  groups,  in  any  such  case  of  which
Fig.  25  is  a  type,  this  can  be  decided  only  by  means  of  the  principle
of  intermolecular  reaction  (p.  287).

The  theory  suggests  no  new  case  of  isomerism  in  the  formation
of  a  triple  bond,  or  so-called  "acetylene  bond,"  but  as  in  the  case  of
di-methylene  (ethylene),  so  in  the  poly-methylenes,  cases  of  geometric
isomerism  must  occur.  Considering  the  simplest  carbon  ring,

CH2
tri-methylene /\ 5  it  may  be  seen  that  in  the  arrangement  of

CH2—  CH2

the  atoms  in  space,  geometrical  isomerism  must  be  possible  by  the
entry  of  two  substituting  groups,  according  as  they  take  a  "cis  "
position  on  the  same  side  of  the  plane  of  the  ring,  or  a  "  trans  "
position  on  both  sides  of  the  plane.  In  the  latter  case  two  isomers
are  possible,  forming  non-congruent  images  ;  we  get,  therefore,

296

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

altogether  three  isomers  which  can  be  understood  by  the  following
models  : —

H

H

H

Actually  two  different  tri-methylene  di-carbon  acids  have  been
observed,1  one  of  which  can  apparently  be  split  into  opposed  active
components.

Cases  of  geometrical  isomerism  are  also  known  in  derivatives  of
larger  rings ;  the  investigations  of  v.  Baeyer's 2  on  the  hydrogenised
phthalic  acids  have  been  largely  productive  of  material  confirming
this  theory.  Whilst  no  case  of  isomerism  is  known  in  the  singly
substituted  derivatives  of  hexa-methylene  two  hexa-hydro-teraphthalic
acids  are  known  corresponding  to  the  formula

C02H H

and

C02H H

H

The  first  is  analogous  to  fumaric,  the  second  to  maleic  acid.

The  Stereochemistry  of  Nitrogen. — There  has  recently  been
begun,  in  addition  to  the  stereochemistry  of  carbon,  a  stereochemistry
of  nitrogen,  which  has  already  led  to  considerable  results.  According
to  experiments  thus  far  made,  there  are  two  groups  of  stereo-isomeric
nitrogen  compounds,  which  are  completely  analogous  to  the  two  groups
of  stereo-isomeric  carbon  compounds  described  above.

Firstly,  Le  Bel3  has  recently  prepared  a  compound  which  con-
tains, instead  of  the  asymmetric  carbon  atom,  the  group  NX,  where
X  denotes  a  univalent  radical,  the  four  free  valencies  being  saturated
by  four  different  radicals.  The  compound  produced  by  Le  Bel  was
isobutyl-propyl-ethyl-methyl-ammonium  chloride,  which  was  obtained

1  Buclmer,  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  23.  702  (1890).

2  Lieb.  Ann.,  245.  103  (1888)  ;  251.  258  (1889) ;  258.  1,  145  (1890).

3  Le  Bel C.  R.,  112.  724  (1891)  ;  129.  548  (1899).

CHAP.  IV  THE  CONSTITUTION  OF  THE  MOLECULE  297

in  an  optically  active  form  by  means  of  a  fungus  (Pilz).  It  has  the
formula

CH3

C4H9—  NCI—  C2H5
C3H7.

The  activity  remained  even  when  the  chlorine  was  replaced  by  the
acetyl  radical.  The  preceding  compound  seems  to  be  completely
analogous  to  the  optical  isomers  of  carbon.

Secondly,  certain  compounds  were  prepared  before  that  of  Le  Bel,
and  were  claimed  to  be  geometrical  isomers  by  Hantzsch  and  Werner.1
These  compounds  can  be  regarded  as  analogous  to  the  corresponding
carbon  isomers,  by  supposing  the  group  CR  to  be  replaced  by
trivalent  nitrogen.  Now,  since  this  latter  is  very  often  possible,  accord-
ing to  experiments,  the  inference  is  a  direct  one  that  the  three  nitrogen
valencies  do  not  lie  in  a  plane,  but  that  they  occupy  relative  positions
which  are  similar  in  direction,  at  least  approximately  so,  to  the  three
free  valencies  in  the  group  CR.  Therefore  it  follows  that  when  two
nitrogen  valencies  are  bound  to  one  carbon  atom,  there  must  result  a  case
of  geometrical  isomerism  which  is  completely  analogous  to  that  described  on
p.  295,  and  which  may  be  expressed  by  spatial  formula?  written  as  follows  :

R!  —  C  —  R2  Rj  —  C  —  R2

and

R3—  N  N—  R3

Numerous  examples  of  this  interesting  variety  of  isomerism  have
been  found  among  the  asymmetric  oximes,  i.e.  compounds  where  the
hydroxyl  group  plays  the  part  of  the  radical  R3.

The  question  as  to  which  of  the  isomers  corresponds  to  which  of
the  configurations  given  above,  can  be  answered  by  means  of  the
principle  of  interrnolecular  reaction  between  groups  which  are  spatially
contiguous.  Thus  one  of  the  aldoximes,

produced  by  the  reaction  between  aldehydes  and  hydroxyl-amine,
decomposes  with  difficulty,  but  the  other  readily  into  the  nitril
R  —  C^N  ;  therefore  the  inference  is  drawn  directly  that  in  the  one,
the  H  and  the  OH,  expelled  as  water,  are  nearer  neighbours  than  in

1  See  references  on  p.  291.

298  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

the other; and therefore they  are given the  respective  formulas,
viz. —

Synaldoxime.  Antaldoxime.

E_C— H  R— C— H

N— OH  HO— N.

In  an  analogous  way  the  three  isomeric  benz-aldoximes  may  be
expressed  by  the  respective  formulae,  viz. : —

RC— CR  RC — CR RC — OR

II II  II  I  II  II

HON NOH  HON HON NOH HON.

CHAPTEE V

PHYSICAL PROPERTIES AND MOLECULAR STRUCTURE

General  Observations. — According  to  the  views  advanced  in  the
preceding  chapter  regarding  the  structure  theory  of  molecules,  there
are  three  circumstances  which  are  of  fundamental  significance  in
determining  the  physical  properties  of  any  compound.  These
are —

1.  The  chemical  composition.

2.  The  constitution,  i.e.  the  mode  of  linking  of  the  atoms.

3.  The  configuration,  i.e.  the  spatial  arrangement  of  the  atoms.

A  change  in  any  one  of  these  factors  occasions  a  more  or  less
extended  change  in  the  properties  of  the  compound.

The  knowledge  of  this  at  once  suggests  the  problem  of  deter-
mining the  relations  which  exist  between  the  physical  and  chemical
properties  of  a  compound,  and  the  structure  of  the  molecule  •  this  latter
expression  denotes  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  three  factors  mentioned
above.  The  complete  solution  of  this  problem  will  enable  us  to  infer
in  every  respect  the  behaviour  of  a  substance  from  its  structural  for-
mula ;  and  further,  to  predict  the  conditions  for  the  existence  of,  and
the  properties  of,  compounds  not  yet  prepared ;  and  this  would  mean
the  attainment  of  a  goal,  to  reach  which  has  been  the  chief  aim  of  all
chemical  investigation.

Even  at  present,  structural  chemistry,  at  least  among  organic
compounds,  has  already  progressed  so  far  that  the  structural  formula
of  a  substance  enables  us  to  draw  many  inferences  regarding  its  aptitude
for  reaction,  as  has  been  repeatedly  mentioned  in  the  preceding  chapter.
But  as  yet  the  science  is  wanting  in  the  formulation  of  sharp  and
precise  laws,  so  that  many  conclusions  which  are  drawn  are  the  insight
of  a  certain  "  chemical  instinct,"  rather  than  the  necessary  deductions
from  clearly  perceived  chemical  laws.  We  would  not  undervalue  this
"  chemical  touch,"  the  fortunate  possessor  of  which  doubtless  must
enjoy  an  unusual  scientific  intuition,  which  is  sharpened  by  long
experience ;  but  this  perhaps  might  be  replaced  by  something  better,
were  more  effort  directed  towards  translating  into  the  language  of

299

300

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK II

natural  science,  or  at  least  reducing  to  some  degree  of  regularity,  that
experience  by  which  this  instinct  is  developed.

In  this  state  of  the  case,  in  the  "doctrine  of  affinity"  we  can  only
incidentally  consider  the  question  regarding  the  relation  between  the
reaction-aptitude  and  the  structure  of  a  compound.  In  this  chapter
will  be  given  only  the  other  side  of  the  question,  which  is  certainly
a  growing  one,  viz.  concerning  the  regularities  which  have  been  found
thus  far,  regarding  the  connection  of  the  physical  properties  with  the
structure  of  the  molecule  of  a  substance.  Naturally  the  question  will
be  almost  entirely  limited  to  the  consideration  of  carbon  compounds,
because  thus  far  it  is  only  here  that  we  find  well-grounded  notions
regarding  the  arrangement  of  the  atoms  in  the  molecule.  As  was
true  in  the  case  of  the  salt  solutions,  so  here  also  it  should  be  noticed,
that  this  subject  occupies  a  special  position,  and  therefore  a  special
chapter  will  be  devoted  to  the  physical  relations.

But  at  the  same  time,  in  this  chapter  will  be  described  the  most
important  physical  methods  which  are  used  by  the  chemist  in  his
investigations ;  and  not  only  those  which  are  used  at  present,  but
also  those  which  will  be  used  to  a  much  greater  degree  in  the
future.

Specific  Volume  and  Molecular  Volume. — By  the  specific

volume  of  a  substance  there  is  meant  the  volume,  expressed  in  c.c.,
occupied  by  a  gram ; the  reciprocal  of  this  specific
0  volume,  i.e.  the  weight  of  a  unit  volume,  is  the  so-

called  specific  gravity. It  is  of  much  advantage,  for
0^ — XrT"1 —  b purely  algebraic  reasons,  to  derive  the  relations  be-
tween the  density  and  the  composition  of  substances
from  the  specific  volume.

The  essentials  of  the  determination  of  the  specific
volumes  of  gases,  and  their  relations  to  the  re-
spective molecular  weights,  have  been  already  de-
scribed in  the  chapter  on  the  determination  of  the
molecular  weight  (p.  247) ;  the  simple  result  was
obtained  that  the  molecular  volumes  of  the  most
Fig.  26.  different  gases  are  the  same,  under  the  same  external

conditions. We  will  consider  here  only  those  sub-
stances which  exist  in  the  liquid  and  solid  states.

The  specific  volume  of  liquids  can  be  easily  and  exactly  determined,
either  by  measuring  the  resistance  caused  by  the  immersion  of  a  solid
body  of  known  volume  (the  araometer,  Mohr's  balance,  etc.),  or  by
weighing  the  liquid  contained  in  a  vessel  of  known  volume  (the  pycno-
meter).  The  first  method  is  quicker  and  more  easy  to  execute,  but  the
second  is  much  more  exact,  and  therefore  to  be  preferred  for  all
scientific  purposes.  Of  the  many  forms  of  pycnometer  which  have
been  described,  that  shown  in  Fig.  26,  which  was  designed  by  Sprengel

CHAP.  V PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  301

and  modified  by  Ostwald,  is  at  once  the  simplest  and  the  most  convenient.
It  consists  of  a  small  bent  pipette,  provided  on  one  side  with  a  capillary
opening  at  a,  and  on  the  other  side  with  a  narrow  tube  b  with  a  mark  ;
it  is  filled  by  dipping  the  capillary  opening  a  into  the  liquid  in  question,
and  sucking  through  a  rubber  tube  which  is  attached  to  b  ;  it  is  then
hung  in  a  bath  which  has  the  temperature  of  the  determination,  the
liquid  meniscus  being  adjusted  to  the  mark  in  6,  either  by  sucking  out
the  excess  of  the  liquid  from  the  capillary  opening  at  a,  by  means  of  a
bit  of  filter  paper,  or  by  adding  what  liquid  is  wanting  by  a  drop  on  a
glass  rod  applied  at  a,  when  it  will  be  sucked  in  by  the  capillary  force.
Let  p,  pv  and  p2  be  the  weights  respectively  of  the  pycnometer
empty,  when  full  of  a  liquid  (as  water)  of  known  density  s,  and  when
filled  with  the  liquid  which  is  to  be  studied  ;  and  if  A  is  the  weight  of
the  air  displaced,  and  which  is  approximately  equal  to  (p2  -  px)  0'0012,
then  the  specific  gravity  sought  is

Pi  -  P  -

F.  Kohlrausch  and  Hallwachs  l  have  lately  perfected  the  areometric
method  to  such  an  extent  that  changes  in  the  specific  gravity  of
aqueous  solutions  of  one-millionth  can  be  distinguished  with  certainty,
a  notable  result  for  the  investigation  of  very  dilute  solutions.  Smooth
cocoon  silk  was  used  for  the  suspension,  and  as  immersed  body  a  glass
bulb  of  133  grammes  weight  and  129  c.cm.  content.

While  by  this  method  the  density  of  a  liquid  can  be  determined
without  any  difficulty,  yet  the  methods  used  to  determine  the  specific
gravities  of  solid  bodies  are  not  quite  satisfactory  in  accuracy,  for  the
reason  that  only  small  pieces  of  the  substance  can  be  used  ;  and  this
is  true  of  the  methods  which  depend  upon  the  measurement  by  means
of  the  buoyancy  in  a  liquid  of  known  density,  or  by  weighing  it  in  a
liquid  pycnometer,  or  by  the  application  of  gas  laws  (volumenometer),
or  by  its  swimming  free  in  a  liquid  mixture,  the  density  of  which  is
already  determined.  The  "  swimming  method  "  usually  gives  the  best
results  when  small  pieces  only  can  be  used.  This  method  has  at  the
same  time  this  advantage,  which  should  not  be  undervalued,  viz.,  that
from  the  way  the  substance  floats  in  the  liquid,  by  observing  whether
a  part  of  it  floats  at  the  top,  and  whether  another  part  sinks  to  the
bottom,  one  can  infer  very  much  regarding  the  purity  of  the  substance,
and  thus  one  can  raise  the  grade  of  purity.2

A  liquid,  in  which  the  substance  shall  swim  free,  without  either
rising  or  sinking,  can  be  made  by  a  mixture  of  methylene  iodide,
CH9I9,  which  has  a  sp.  gr.  of  3*3,  with  such  lighter  hydrocarbons  as
toluene,  xylene,  etc.  The  specific  gravity  of  the  solid  substance  is

1 Wied.  Ann.,  53.  14  (1894)  ;  see  also  F.  Kohlrausch,  WiecL  Ann.,  56.  185  (1895).
2  Retgers,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  3.  289  (1889).

302  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

then  equal  to  that  of  the  liquid  in  which  it  swims  free,  and  that  of  the
liquid  can  be  determined  by  a  suitable  method.

The  question  regarding  the  dependence  of  the  specific  volume  upon
the  composition  and  the  constitution  of  compounds  has  thus  far,  as  is
the  case  with  many  other  properties,  been  successfully  studied  only  for
carbon  compounds.  It  is  well  known,  as  shown  by  Kopp  (1855),  that  it
is  possible  to  calculate  the  volume  occupied  by  1  g.-mol  of  a  liquid
organic  substance  at  its  boiling-point  from  its  composition  ;  this  volume
is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  molecular  weight  and  the  specific  volume,
and  therefore  is  suitably  called  the  "  molecular  volume  "  ;  it  is  calculated
in  the  following  way.

If  a  molecule  of  the  substance  in  question  contains  m  atoms  of
carbon,  n:  atoms  of  "carbonyl  oxygen"  (i.e.  oxygen  with  both  its
valencies  united  to  the  same  carbon  atom),  n2  atoms  of  oxygen  which
has  its  two  valencies  distributed  between  two  carbon  atoms  or  between
two  atoms  of  other  elements,  o  atoms  of  hydrogen,  p  atoms  of  chlorine,
q  atoms  of  bromine,  r  atoms  of  iodine,  and  s  atoms  of  sulphur ;  then
its  molecular  volume  at  the  boiling-point,  amounts  to

M.  V.  =  1 1  -Om  +  1 2'2n1  +  7  "8n2  +  5  -5o  +
22-8p  +  27-8q  +  37-5r+22-6s.

This  formula  is  by  no  means  strictly  exact,  as  deviations  amounting
to  several  per  cent  are  not  uncommon ;  but  nevertheless  it  should  be
particularly  noticed  that  by  means  of  a  few  empirical  constants  it  is
possible  to  calculate,  at  least  approximately,  the  molecular  volume ;
and  thus  by  dividing  this  value  by  the  molecular  weight,  it  is  possible
to  obtain  the  specific  gravity  of  numerous  compounds  which  are  made
up  of  the  aforenamed  elements.  Thus  the  measurement  of  the
molecular  volume  of  acetone  at  its  boiling-point  gave  as  the  result

7 7 '5  ;  and  from  its  formula  COnTr3  it  wras  estimated  as  follows  : —

U±13

3  atoms  of  carbon  ....  33'0
1  atom  of  carbonyl  oxygen  .  .  .  12'2
6  atoms  of  hydrogen  .  .  .  .  33  *0

Sum . . . 78*2

The  presence,  in  the  molecule,  of  carbon  atoms  with  doubled  linkage
increases  the  molecular  volume  proportionally.1  Reference  should  be
made  to  the  thorough  epitome  of  this  material,  which  has  been  com-
piled by  Horstmann.2  He  has  shown  from  extended  researches  that,
in  general,  simple  additive  relations  really  exist  with  some  very  con-
siderable deviations,  and  has  ascribed  these  deviations  to  peculiarities
in  the  constitution.

The  specific  gravities  of  liquid  chlorine  and  bromine  at  the  boiling-

1  Horstmann,  B.  B.,  20.  766  (1887).
2  Graham  Otto,  Lehrbuch  der  Chemie,  3rd  edit.,  Braunschweig,  1893.

CHAP.  V PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  303

points  amount  respectively  to  1'56  and  2'96;1  the  atomic  volumes
deduced  from  these  figures  are  22*7  and  2  6  '9  respectively,  or  nearly  the
same  as  the  figures,  2  2  '8  and  2  7  '8,  which  Kopp  calculated  from  the  organic
compounds.

Moreover,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  we  must  regard  —  -  =  0'18

0  "0

as  the  specific  gravity  of  boiling  hydrogen.

Concerning  the  question  as  to  how  far  Kopp  was  justified  in
selecting  the  boiling-point  as  the  point  for  comparison,  we  will  obtain
information  from  the  following.  In  the  light  of  the  theory  of
van  der  Waals,  the  molecular  volume  at  the  critical  point  should  be
three-eighths  of  that  calculated  from  the  laws  of  ideal  gases.  Ex-
perience vindicates  this  law  (p.  235)  to  this  extent,  viz.  that  the
critical  volume  of  many  substances  amounts  to  the  same  fraction,

Further,  from  the  equation  given  on  p.  223,  viz.,

it  follows  that  the  molecules  of  all  substances  at  their  critical  points
occupy  the  same  fraction  of  the  critical  volume  ;  this  latter  therefore
may  be  regarded  as  a  measure  of  the  space  actually  occupied  by  the  molecules.
But  now  the  volume  of  liquids  in  corresponding  states  is  the  same
fraction  of  the  critical  volume.  Therefore  the  molecular  volumes  measured
in  corresponding  states,  i.e.  at  equal  reduced  pressures  and  temperatures,
may  be  regarded  as  a  measure  of  the  space  actually  occupied  by  the  molecules  ;
and  this  is  almost  the  same  thing  as  regarding  the  comparison
temperature  as  a  reduced  temperature,  or  making  it  equal  to  the
same  fraction  of  the  critical  temperature.  Less  value  is  to  be
attached  to  a  comparison  with  the  critical  pressure,  as  already  shown
on  p.  226,  because  the  volume  of  a  liquid  would  be  subject  to  only
very  slight  change  if  it  were  measured  at  a  pressure  of  one-half,  and
then  at  two  atmospheres  ;  and  no  greater  variations  of  pressure  are
concerned  here.

But  now  Guldberg2  called  attention  to  the  fact  that,  for  the  most
various  substances,  the  boiling-point,  on  the  absolute  scale,  is  about
two-  thirds  of  the  critical  temperature  ;  i.e.  for  the  most  various  substances,
the  boiling-point  at  the  atmospheric  pressure  is  itself  an  identical  reduced
temperature.  The  fact  that  the  identity  may  not  be  strictly  fulfilled,
is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  fact,  which  is  not  considered  enough,  viz.  that
the  volume  of  a  liquid  is  only  slightly  affected  by  changes  of  5°  or
1  0°  ;  and  only  such  variations  as  these  are  found.

We  thus  obtain  the  result  that  not  only  is the boiling-point  a

1  Dammer's  Nandbuch  der  anorg.  Chem.,  I.  pp.  474  and  520  (1892).
2  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  5.  374  (1890).

304

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

suitable  temperature  for  comparison,  but  also  that  the  molecular
volumes  so  determined,  for  the  most  different  substances,  represent
very  nearly  the  same  multiple  of  the  space  occupied  by  the  molecules.
Now,  inasmuch  as  we  must  regard  Kopp's  molecular  volumes  as  a
measure  of  the  volumes  actually  occupied  by  the  molecules,  therefore
we  must  conclude  that  the  volume  of  the  molecule  can  be  calculated  additively
from  the  volumes  of  the  atoms.  This  result  will  also  be  established  later
in  an  entirely  different  way.

The  Density  of  Solid  Bodies. — The  volume  relations  of  solid
compounds  have  as  yet  been  only  slightly  investigated.  The  molecular
volume  is  obviously  additive  in  certain  cases,  as  of  salts  of  analogous
constitution,  as  shown  by  the  following  table  : —

I.

Diff.

II.

Diff.

Diff.  I.—  II.

KC1  =  37'4

NaCl  =27-1

10-3

6-9

6-7

KBr  =  44-3

NaBr=33'8

10-5

97

9-7

KI =54-0

Nal =43-5

10-5

We  find  constant  differences  both  between  the  corresponding
potassium  and  sodium  salts,  and  also  between  the  corresponding
chlorides,  bromides,  and  iodides,  to  be  a  necessary  condition  for  the
calculation  of  the  molecular  volume  in  summation  from  the  atomic
volumes,  by  the  choice  of  suitable  constants.  Schroder,  who  has
done  good  service  by  investigating  these  relations,  stated,  in  1877,
in  harmony  with  the  preceding,  that  in  the  homologous  series  of  the
silver  salts  of  the  fatty  acids,  the  molecular  volume  increases  quite
constantly,  about  15'3,  for  every  additional  CH2  group.

The  question  as  to  what  is  the  proper  temperature  for  comparison
is  here  of  less  importance  on  account  of  the  slight  change  of  density
of  solid  substances  from  a  change  in  temperature.  The  relation  be-
tween the  atomic  weight  and  the  density  of  the  elements  in  the  solid
state  has  been  already  treated  in  the  description  of  the  periodic
system  (p.  192).

The  Refractive  Power. — The  optical  coefficient  of  refraction
for  homogeneous  gases,  liquids,  or  solids  can  be  measured  very
accurately  by  enclosing  them  in  a  hollow  prism  with  a  prismatic
cavity,  and  then  measuring,  by  means  of  a  spectrometer,  the  devia-
tion of  a  ray  of  monochromatic  light.  The  method  of  total  reflection,
which  is  employed  in  the  refractometers  devised  by  Kohlrausch,  Abbe,
and  others,  can  be  used  much  more  easily,  and  this  method  has  recently
been  applied  by  Pulfrich  in  the  construction  of  a  very  convenient

CHAP,  v PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE

305

apparatus  for  the  special  study  of  liquids.  Inasmuch  as  we  are  practi-
cally concerned  only  with  the  determination  of  the  optical  behaviour
of  liquids,  in  the  exigencies  of  the  chemical  laboratory,  and  inasmuch
also  as  the  Pulfrich 1  refractometer  combines  ease  of  manipulation  with
an  accuracy  which  is  more  than  sufficient
for  most  purposes,  we  will  give  here  a
description  of  this  apparatus.

The  monochromatic  light  given  out  by
a  Bunsen  burner,  fed  with  salt  for  instance,
and  concentrated  by  passing  through  a
[collimating]  lens  which  is  adjusted  to  the
apparatus  (but  not  shown  in  the  cut,  Fig.
27),  is  allowed  to  fall  on  the  horizontal
surface  of  a  prism  which  must  be  provided
with  a  refractive  angle  of  90°.  The  top  of
the  prism  is  adjusted  to  receive  the  glass
cylinder,  which  is  to  hold  the  liquid  to  be
studied  in  the  following  way  : — The  lower
edge  of  the  glass  cylinder  rests  a  little  lower
than  the  round  flat  upper  face  which  fits
into  it,  and  thus  the  cemented  edge  does
not  interfere  with  the  passage  of  the  light.
Then  it  is  necessary  to  moisten  the  upper
surface  of  the  prism  with  only  a  few  drops
of  the  liquid  to  be  investigated,  an  ad-
vantage which  is  not  to  be  undervalued  in
chemical  work.  The  prism,  with  its
smoothly  ground  hypothenuse  surface,
rests  on  a  bevelled  block  of  brass,  which
in  turn  rests  on  a  wooden  support,
tripod  base.  By  means  of  this  it  is  possible  to  obtain  very  certain
manipulation,  so  that  after  removing  the  prism  it  can  be  returned
again  to  its  original  position,  and  a  readjustment  is  not  required  even
after  long  use.  The  normal  positions  of  the  two  surfaces  of  the  prisms
are  determined  by  means  of  an  adjusting  apparatus  which  is  fastened,
with  the  wooden  support,  to  the  brass  block  on  which  the  prism  rests,
parallel  with  the  plane  of  rotation  of  the  divided  circle.  The  observer
may  convince  himself  of  the  correct  adjustment  most  easily,  by  observ-
ing the  refractive  index  of  pure  water  at  the  atmospheric  temperature,,
which  is  known,  and  deducing  from  it  the  small  correction  which  must
be  introduced  into  all  readings.

The  measurement  consists  simply  in  moving  the  telescope  which

is  attached  to  the  alidade  of  the  divided  circle,  until  the  cross  wires

coincide  with  the  sharply  defined  limit  between the  light  and the

dark  portions  of  the  field,  and  thus  obtaining  the  exit  angle  i  of  the

1  Zeitschr.f.  fnstrumentenkunde,  8.  47  (1888) ;  Zeitschr. phys.  Chem.,  18.  294  (1895).

X

This rests on a heavy

306  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

light  ray.  Then,  as  follows  from  the  simple  application  of  the  law  of
refraction,  we  have  for  the  desired  value  of  the  refractive  index  of  the
liquid  in  question  —

n  =

where  N  denotes  the  respective  value  of  the  index  of  refraction  of  the
glass  prism,  for  the  sort  of  light  used.  A  table  furnished  with  the
instrument  gives,  without  further  calculation,  the  value  of  the  refractive
index  for  the  angle  i  for  sodium  light.  Whenever  it  is  necessary  to
identify  an  unknown  substance,  this  determination  should  never  be
neglected,  inasmuch  as  scarcely  any  other  property  of  liquids  can  be
determined  so  easily  and  exactly.  The  apparatus  may  also  be  used
for  analytical  purposes,  as  in  the  study  of  solutions.

Recently,  Le  Blanc  l  has  suggested  a  very  simple  method  for  mea-
suring very  exactly  the  refractive  index  of  solid  bodies  which  are
optically  isotropic  by  means  of  this  same  instrument.  A  decigram
or  so  of  the  finely  powdered  substance  is  shaken  into  the  glass
cylinder  of  the  refractometer,  and  this  is  then  covered  with  a  mixture
of  two  liquids,  for  example,  brom-naphthalene  and  acetone,  between
the  refractive  indices  of  which  that  of  the  substance  in  question  must
lie  :  if  that  of  the  latter  is  very  far  removed  from  that  of  the  mixture,
the  field  of  the  telescope  will  remain  almost  uniformly  dark  ;  then
more  of  either  brom-naphthalene  or  acetone  is  added,  when  a  light
field  appears  after  the  addition  of  one  or  the  other  liquid.  If  the
desired  point  is  already  nearly  obtained,  so  that  two  parts  of  the  field
are  somewhat  different  in  brightness,  then  one  can  easily  judge  whether
the  liquid  of  the  greater,  or  of  the  lesser  refractive  index  must  be
added.  Thus,  if  the  refractive  index  of  the  liquid  mixture  is  greater
than  that  of  the  powder,  there  appears  a  light  band  at  the  limit
between  the  light  and  the  dark  parts  ;  this  band  is  due  to  the  total
reflection  of  the  incident  light  by  the  solid  substance  ;  it  is  wanting  in
the  opposite  case.  It  is  possible,  by  the  further  addition  of  the  required
liquid,  to  so  nearly  equalise  the  coefficients  of  the  solid  substance  and  of  the
mixture,  that  the  limit  between  the  light  and  dark  half  of  the  field  will  be  as
sharp  as  in  the  case  of  a  single  pure  liquid.  When  this  sharp  limit  shall
have  been  found,  the  refractive  index  of  the  solid  substance  can  at  once
be  obtained  from  the  table  furnished  with  the  apparatus.

This  method  is  also  applicable  to  the  measurement  of  the  refractive
index  of  the  ordinary  ray  of  optically  uniaxial  bodies  ;  but  not,  at
least  not  in  this  form,  to  the  measurement  of  the  extraordinary  rays,
nor  to  the  investigation  of  substances  which  are  optically  poly-axial.

The  Molecular  Refraction  of  Organic  Compounds.  —  The

refractive  coefficient  of  a  substance  changes  with  its  temperature,  and
also  especially  with  its  state  of  aggregation.  If,  as  in  the  preceding

1  Zeitschr.  pliysik.  Chem.,  10.  433  (1892).

CHAP.  V PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  307

case,  the  question  only  concerns  a  clear  statement  of  the  relations
between  the  optical  and  the  chemical  behaviour,  then  the  only  way  in
which  we  may  hope  for  results  is  to  find  some  function  of  the  refractive
index  which,  when  freed  from  other  influences,  shall  be  conditioned  essentially
by  the  chemical  nature  of  the  substance.

The specific  refractivity,  expressed  by the  index  minus  1,  and
divided  by  the  density,  thus

n-1

partially  satisfies  the  preceding  requirements,  as  shown  by  Gladstone
and  Dale,1  and  especially  by  Landolt.2  In  fact,  in  most  cases,  the
specific  refractivity  is  only  slightly  dependent  upon  the  temperature  ;
moreover,  each  particular  substance  in  a  mixture  preserves  its  own  specific
refractivity  nearly  unchanged,  as  already  shown  on  p.  107.  But  the
preceding  expression  does  not  apply  to  changes  in  the  state  of  aggrega-
tion, and  the  specific  refractivity  of  a  liquid,  in  general,  is  considerably
different  from  that  of  its  vapour.

This  condition  of  being  independent  of  changes  in  the  state  of
aggregation  is  very  well  satisfied  by  a  formula  which  was  suggested  at
the  same  time  (1880)  by  Lorenz  in  Copenhagen  and  by  Lorentz  in
Leyden  ;  it  was  developed  from  the  following  considerations.3

The  Clausius  -  Mossotti  theory  of  dielectrics  proceeds  upon  the
assumption  that  the  molecules,  assumed  to  be  spherical,  are  electrical
conductors,  and  that  to  this  is  due  the  weakening  action  experienced
by  the  mutual  attraction  or  repulsion  of  two  electrically  charged  points,
on  interposing  a  dielectric.  Let  u  denote  a  fraction,  assumed  to  be
very  small,  of  the  total  volume  which  is  actually  occupied  by  the
molecules  ;  then,  according  to  this  view,  the  dielectric  constant  4  is
calculated  to  be

from  which  it  follows  that

K-l

Now  according  to  the  electromagnetic  theory  of  light,

if  N  denotes  the  refractive  index  for  light  of  very  long  wave-length  ;
by  introducing  this,  and  thus  dividing  by  d,  we  obtain

u_N2^l 1

d N2  +  2 d

1  Phil.  Trans.,  1858,  p.  8  ;  1863,  p.  523.  2  Pogg.  Ann.,  123.  595  (1864).

3  Lorentz,  Wied.  Ann.,  9.  641  ;  Lorentz,  ibid.,  11.  70  (1880).
4  Clausius,  Oes.  Abh.  (Separate  Papers),  II.,  135  (1867).

308

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

and  this  expression  must  be  independent  of  the  temperature,  the  pres-
sure, arid  of  changes  in  the  state  of  aggregation,  because,  according  to

the  definition,  -r-  denotes  the  real  specific  volume  of  the  molecule,  i.e.

the  volume  actually  occupied  by  the  molecules  of  1  gram  of  the  sub-
stance. R  denotes  the  specific  refraction  for  light  of  infinitely  long  wave-
length.

In  order  to  determine  the  value  of  N,  for  want  of  anything  better,
use  is  made  of  Cauchy's  formula  for  dispersion,  viz. —

here  A  =  GO  ,  and  therefore

=  A.

This  extrapolation  will  of  course  give  less  exact  results,  the  more
the  light  is  dispersed  by  the  substance  in  question ;  but,  as  a  rule,  a
satisfactory  approximation  is  obtained  by  making  N  equal  to  the
refractive  index  of  red  light.

Now,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  experiment  leads,  in  a  very  remarkable
way,  to  the  result  that  the  specific  refraction  is  a  very  characteristic
quantity  for  the  given  substance,  irrespective  of  the  conditions  under
which  it  may  be  studied  ;  and  this  holds  true,  not  only  when  calculated
from  the  so-called  "refractive  index  of  light  of  infinitely  long  wave-
length," but  also  when  calculated  from  the  definite  refractive  index  of
any  selected  kind  of  light  in  the  visible  spectrum.  As  already  shown
on  p.  108,  the  rule  of  mixtures  gives  better  results  by  calculating
with  the  n2  formula  than  with  the  n  formula ;  and  all  experiment
speaks  in  favour  of  the  view,  viz.  that  the  former  decidedly  ought  to
be  preferred  in  studying  the  connection  between  the  chemical  composi-
tion and  the  optical  behaviour.

Both  expressions  are  very  satisfactory  in  the  relatively  small
changes  of  the  refractive  indices,  due  to  the  expansion  by  heat,  as  is
shown  by  the  following  table  of  values  for  water  from  the  determin-
ations of  Kuhlmann,  referred  to  the  D-Kne  : —

n-l

n2-i i

d

n2+2  "  d

0°

0-3338

0-2061

10°  -

0-3338

0-2061

20°

0-3336

0-2061

903

0-3321

0-2059

100°

0-3323

0-2061

CHAP,  v PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE

309

A  comparison  of  the  n2  expression  with  the  old  formula  shows
that  it  alone  is  independent  of  the  state  of  aggregation,  as  is  illustrated
by  the  following  example,1  in  which  again  the  refractive  index  n  is
referred  to  the  sodium  line.

n-l
d

!

n2-l l
n2+2  '  d

|
Vapour. Liquid.

Diff.

Vapour.

Liquid.

Diff.

Water
Carbon-disulphide .
Chloroform

0-3101 0-3338
0-4347  !  0-4977
0-2694 0-3000

-  0-0237
-0-0630
-0-0306

0-2068
0-2898
0-1796

0-2061
0-2805
0-1790

+  0-0007
+  0-0093
+  0-0006

The  temperature  of  the  liquid  was  10°,  of  the  vapour  100°.
The  product  of  the  specific  refraction  E,  and  the  molecular  weight
M  is  called  the  molecular  refraction ;  thus

n2-! M
n2  +  2 d

A  regularity  of  conduct  is  shown  in  the  case  of  the  molecular  re-
fraction, which  is  similar  to  that  in  the  case  of  molecular  volume ;  but
the  influence  of  the  constitution  on  the  optical  behaviour  is  manifested
much  more  decidedly  than  in  the  relations  between  the  density  and
the  nature  of  the  substance.  The  molecular  refraction  of  a  compound  can
be  calculated  ly  the  summation  of  the  atomic  refractions ;  but  the  atomic
refraction  is  fairly  constant,  i.e.  independent  of  the  other  elements
occurring  in  the  molecule,  only  in  the  case  of  the  univalent  elements ;
it  varies  considerably  for  oxygen  and  carbon  according  to  the  mode  of
union.

It  is  to  J.  W.  Briihl2  that  we  are  chiefly  indebted  since  1880,
together  with  Landolt,  for  the  development  of  the  science  of  the
molecular  refractions,  in  that  he  has  worked  up  and  calculated  a  great
number  of  observations.  The  following  table  contains  the  principal
atomic  refractions  recently  recalculated  by  Briihl.  The  figures  which
refer  to  sodium  light  are  taken  from  the  calculations  of  Conrady.3

1  Briihl,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  7.  4  (1891).

2  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  7.  140  (1891). See  also  the  voluminous  investigations
of  Kannonikoff,  J.  pr.  Chem.  [2],  31.  339  (1885).

3  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  3.  210  (1889).

[TABLE

310

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

TABLE  OF  SOME  OF  THE  ATOMIC  REFRACTIONS-

Atomic

For  the

For  the

Dis-

Red
H-line.

For  the
Na-line.

Blue
H-line.

persion
Blue-

Red.

Simply  bound  carbon ...

2-365

2-501

2-404

0-039

Hydrogen .  ' . . . .-.  . , .

1-103

1-051

1-139

0-036

Hydroxyl  oxygen  .

1-506

1-521

1-525

0-019

Ether  oxygen . . . , ..-.'

1-655

1-683

1-667

0-012

Carbonyl  oxygen . . . .  . .  - ,
Nitrogen  united  simply  and  only  to  carbon  .
Chlorine

2-328
2-76
6-014

2-287
5-998

2-414
2-95
6-190

0-086
0-19
0-176

Bromine . . .

8-863

8-927

9-211

0-348

Iodine . . . . .

13-808

14-12

14-582

0-774

Ethylene  union . . . . *

1-836

1-707

1-859

0-23

Acetylene  union . . . .. .

2-22

2-41

0-19

Atomic  refractions  of  a  great  number  of  other  elements  have  been
determined  mostly  from  their  organic  compounds  by  the  use  of  the
above  values.  They  have  generally  been  found  to  show  considerable
variation  according  to  the  { nature  of  the  chemical  combination  into
which  they  enter,  so  that  the  atomic  refractions  have  no  wide  range  of
applicability  for  the  other  elements.  The  variation  increases  naturally
with  the  variety  of  the  modes  of  combination ;  it  is  therefore  greatest
for  multivalent  elements.  On  the  other  hand,  this  constitutive  varia-
bility of  the  atomic  refraction,  if  only  its  dependence  on  constitution  is
thoroughly  studied,  serves  as  a  valuable  help  in  determining  the
constitution,  as  was  shown  especially  for  the  nitrogen  compounds  by
the  extensive  investigations  of  Bruhl.1

Oxygen  itself  in  some  states  of  combination  shows  an  atomic
refraction  different  to  that  given  above,  as  appears  from  the  investi-
gations of  Nasini,  Carrara,  Anderlini,  and  others.2

The  refractive  power  of  the  enol-  and  keto-  forms  are  markedly
different  in  a  number  of  solvents.3

The  use  of  these  figures  may  be  most  easily  explained  by  means
of  an  example ;  we  will  calculate  the  molecular  refraction  of  benzene,
C6H6,  referred  to  the  figures  for  the  red  H-line.

6  carbon  atoms  =6  x  2-365  =  14  '190
6  hydrogen  atoms  =  6x1  '103  =  6  '618
3  double  unions  —3x1  '836  =  5  '508

Sum

MR -26 -32

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  16.  193,  226,  497,  512  ;  22.  373  ;  25.  577  (1895-1898).

2  Gazz.  chim.  itaL,  24.  I.  (1894)  ;  25.  II.  (1895)  ;  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  17.539
(1895).  3  Bruhl,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  30.  61  (1899).

CHAP.  V PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  311

Observation with the same kind of light and at 20° gave
n  =  1-4967,  d  =  0'8799,  M  =  78,  and  therefore

which  coincides  fairly  well  with  the  value  as  calculated  above.

The  molecular  refraction  calculated  for  acetone  CO(CH3)2,  and  with
the  Na-light,  gives  3  carbon  atoms  +  6  hydrogen  atoms  +  1  carbonyl
oxygen-  16'10;  while  observation  gives  16'09.

n2  -  1
Small  variations  of  the  expression  -^  —  -  from  proportionality  with

the  density  on  change  of  temperature  have  been  found  which,  however,
exceed  errors  of  observation. Eykman  l  suggested  from  a  large  and

n2-  1
varied  collection  of  observations  the  expression  --  —  -  as  expressing

this  proportionality  more  completely,  but,  as  this  has  no  theoretical
foundation,  it  can  only  be  considered  as  an  interpolation  formula.

The  figures  given  in  the  last  column  of  the  preceding  table  (p.  310),
and  called  the  atomic  dispersions,  are  the  differences  of  the  respective
values,  referred  to  the  blue  and  the  red  hydrogen  lines.  Briihl  finds,
by  a  discussion  of  the  material  thus  far  observed,  that  the  molecular
dispersion  of  a  compound  for  a  definite  substance,  liquid  or  gaseous,  is
independent  of  the  temperature,  and  fairly  independent  of  the  state
of  aggregation  ;  this  molecular  dispersion,  in  a  manner  analogous  to
that  for  the  molecular  refraction,  may  be  defined  by  the  formula

n/-l na2-l\M
n2  +  2 na2  +  27d'

where  n and  n are  the  respective  refractive  indices  for  the  Ha  and
the H lines. Thus the  molecular  dispersion, like the  molecular

refraction,  becomes  of  value  as  a  specific  manifestation  of  the  material
nature  and  composition  of  chemical  substances.

As  far  as  the  available  data  extend,  it  is  possible  in  many  cases
to  calculate  the  molecular  dispersion  from  the  sum  of  the  atomic
dispersions ;  yet  in  this  case  it  appears  that  the  constitutive  influence
appears  more  often  and  in  a  more  decided  way  than  in  the  case  of
the  molecular  refraction.  A  comparison  of  atomic  refraction  and
atomic  dispersion  shows  that  there  is  no  simple  connection  between
refraction  and  dispersion.  The  atomic  refraction  of  carbon  is  about
twice  as  great  as  that  of  hydrogen,  but  their  atomic  dispersions  are
about  the  same.  The  atomic  refraction  of  bromine  is  once  and  a  half
as  large  as  that  of  chlorine ;  while  its  atomic  dispersion  is  twice  as
great.  The  iodine  atom  refracts  twice  as  strongly  as  the  chlorine

1  Rec,  Trav.  chim.  Pays-Bas,  14.  185  ;  15.  52  (1895  and  1896).

312  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

atom ;  but  it  disperses  four  times  as  strongly,  etc.,  etc.  It  is  interest-
ing to  know  that  the  influence  of  multiple  unions  of  atoms  in  the
molecule  is  manifested  more  clearly  in  the  case  of  dispersion  than  in
the  case  of  refraction.

An  observation  of  Briihl l  is  very  important,  to  the  effect  that  the
atomic  refractions  of  hydrogen  and  chlorine,  as  calculated  from
their  behaviour  in  their  compounds,  coincide  respectively  with  the
powers  of  refraction  of  these  gases  in  the  free  state ;  the  former,
according  to  the  table  on  p.  310,  are  respectively  T05  and  6 '00  for
Na-light ;  the  latter  are  found  by  observation  to  be  1*05  and  5 '78
respectively.  On  the  other  hand,  the  atomic  refraction  of  free  oxygen
amounts  to  2*05,  which  is  considerably  greater  than  the  value  for
hydroxyl  oxygen,  viz.  1'52.

Since  the  mixture  formula  on  p.  105  usually  holds,  solids  can  be
investigated  and  their  molecular  refraction  determined  in  a  suitable
solvent  (that  is,  a  chemically  indifferent  one).  It  is  not  improbable
that,  if  these  substances  were  studied  in  dilute  solution,  more  remark-
able results  might  be  obtained  than  by  the  investigation  of  pure  liquids.
For  in  the  latter  the  degree  of  polymerisation  introduces  complications
as  to  which  the  constitutional  formula  gives  us  no  indication.  To
perform  such  experiments  it  would  be  advisable  to  use  an  optical
differential  method  which  would  yield  directly  the  difference  of
refractive  index  between  solution  and  solvent.

The  following  may  be  said  in  brief,  regarding  the  theoretical  founda-
tion of  the  regularities  which  obtain  in  molecular  refraction.  According
to  the  results  given  on  p.  307,  the  molecular  refraction  is  a  measure  of
the  space  actually  occupied  by  the  molecules ;  it  had  been  previously
(p.  303)  inferred  that  the  molecular  volume  is  made  up  additively,  or
at  least  approximately  so,  from  the  volumes  of  the  atoms ;  and  the
same  must  also  be  true  for  the  molecular  refraction,  as  in  fact  was
found  to  be  the  case.

The  molecular  volumes  and  the  molecular  refractions  thus  appear  to  be
closely  related  values,  because  they  are  both  proportional  to  the  space  occupied
by  the  molecules.

Now,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  there  is  a  certain
parallelism  between  the  relations  of  the  molecular  volume  on  the  one
hand  and  of  the  molecular  refraction  on  the  other,  regarding  the
molecular  structure.  Both  properties  are  peculiarly  additive.  Also
the  influence  of  constitution  is  clearly  the  same  in  both  cases,  in  that
carbonyl  oxygen  has  a  greater  atomic  volume  and  a  greater  atomic
refraction  than  that  possessed  by  hydroxyl  oxygen,  or  by  ester  oxygen.
Also,  both  the  molecular  volume  and  the  molecular  refraction  are
increased  by  the  presence  of  a  doubled  carbon  union.

The  attempt  to  express  the  molecular  refraction  of  a  gaseous
compound  as  the  sum  of  the  molecular  and  atomic  refractions  of  its
1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  7.  1  (1891).

CHAP.  V PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE

313

components, employing the n'2 formula, has given the following
results  : x —

Molecular  Refraction.

Observed.

Calculated.

Hydrochloric  acid. . . 6  '70
Carbon  dioxide . . . 13  '32
Hydrocyanic  acid  . . . 6  '63
Water  3'82
Ammonia . . . . 5  '63
Carbon  dioxide . . . 6  '71
Ethyl  chloride . . . 16  '35
Nitric  acid . . . . 4  '46
Nitrus  acid . . . . 7  '58

H  +  C1= 6-83
CO  +  2C1  =  16'59
H  +  CN  = 7-21
2H  +  0  = 4-14
3H  +  N= 5-36
C0  +  0= 7-08
HC1  +  C2H4=17'49
N  +  0= 4-25
2N  +  0=  6-45

The  refractive  values  of  the  components  used  were  obtained  from
the  direct  measurements  which  Dulong,  Mascart,  Jamin,  and  others  have
made  on  the  free  gases,  and  are  as  follows : —

HO  N  Cl  CO CN C2H4

1-5 2-05 2-20 578 5'03 6'16 10'66

The  differences  between  experiment  and  calculation  are  less  than
the  errors  of  observation ;  at  the  same  time  the  molecular  refraction
is  not  a  purely  additive  property,  but  constitutive  influences  make
themselves  felt.  Thus  oxygen  in  the  free  state  has  undoubtedly  a  dif-
ferent atomic  refraction  than  in  the  carbon  compounds,  and  in  the  latter
there  is  a  difference  according  as  the  oxygen  has  both  its  valencies
saturated  by  the  same  or  by  two  different  carbon  atoms.  The  atomic
refraction  of  elements  such  as  sulphur  or  nitrogen  is  still  more  variable.

Dielectric  Constants. — The  mutual  electrostatic  action  of  two
electrically  charged  bodies  varies  with  the  nature  of  the  medium  in

which  they  are  placed ;  if  in  a  vacuum  they  attract  with  a  force  k,

k
then  in  another  medium  the  force  amounts  to  — ,  in  which  D,  the

dielectric  constant  of  the  medium  in  question,  is  always  greater  than
one,  though  in  gases  only  slightly  greater.  Electrostatics  teaches  that
the  mutual  action  of  two  bodies  kept  at  a  constant  potential  difference
is  proportional  to  the  dielectric  constant  of  the  medium,  that,  further,
if  c  is  the  capacity  of  a  condenser  in  a  vacuum  (or,  what  is  practically
the  same  thing,  air),  it  becomes  cD  when  the  condenser  is  placed  in  a
medium  of  dielectric  constant  D.  It  follows  from  the  theory  of
electric  oscillations  that  the  velocity  of  propagation  of  electric  waves
in  wires  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  dielectric
constant  of  the  surrounding  insulator.

1  Briihl,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  7.  140  (1891).

314

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

From  these  facts  arise  a  number  of  experimental  methods  for
determining  the  dielectric  constant ;  we  may  mention  the  following  : —

1.  The  electrometer  method  consists  in  observing  the  throw  of  the
needle  of  a  suitably  constructed  quadrant  electrometer,  first  in  air,
then  in  the  liquid  in  question  (Silow,  1875). Cohn  and  Arons1  used
alternating currents instead of continuous currents to charge the
electrometer. With  this  method,  slightly  conducting  liquids  may  be
investigated.

2.  The condenser  method consists  in comparing by  any  suitable
method  the  capacity  of  condensers,  first  in  air,  and  then  when  filled
with  the  liquid  to  be  studied. Measurement  by  means  of  a  telephone
and  Wheatstone's  bridge  is  to  be  recommended ;  the  chief  difficulty
which  arises  from  want  of  insulation  of  the  substance  under  investiga-
tion can  be  eliminated  by  the  use  of  variable  resistances  placed  in
parallel  to  the  condensers  to  be  compared. The  method  thus  becomes
suitable  for  the  investigation  of  slightly  conducting liquids,  and  is
simpler  and  more  exact  in  practice  than  the  electrometer  method.2

3.  Measurement of  the length of  stationary electric waves. — Some
arrangement  is  used  for  producing  stationary  electric  waves  and  for
measuring  their  length,  which  is  directly  proportional  to  the  velocity
of  propagation  and,  therefore,  according  to  what  precedes,  inversely
to  the square  root  of  the  dielectric  constant of  the  medium. A
convenient  apparatus  has  recently  been  described  by  P.  Drude,3  and
used  for  numerous  experiments. By  working  with  short  waves  this
method  allows  of  studying  relatively  good  conductors.

Dielectric  action  can  be  simply  explained,  as  was  remarked  on
p.  307,  by  assuming  conducting  particles  surrounded  by  an  insulator
(luminiferous  ether) ;  the  greater  the  volume  of  these  conducting
particles  the  greater  the  dielectric  constant  of  the  medium  in  question.

The  following  table  contains  the  dielectric  constants  of  a  number
of  liquids  at  18° ;  the  numbers  show  that  the  dielectric  constant  varies
extraordinarily  from  one  substance  to  another,  and  so  is  highly  suited
for  characterising  the  substances  : —

DIELECTRIC  CONSTANTS  OF  SOME  LIQUIDS  AT  18°

Benzene  . 2  '29

Ethyl  alcohol . 261

Xylene .

2-35

Propyl  alcohol .

22

Carbon  disulp

hide

2-58

Isobutyl  alcohol

19

Ether .

4-35

Amyl  alcohol

16

Aniline  .

7'28

Ortho-nitro-toluene

28

Chloroform

5-0

Nitro-benzene .

36

Ethyl  chloride

11

Water

80

Ethyl  bromide

. 4-8

Ethyl  acetate

6-3

Methyl  alcohol

. 32

1  Wied.  Ann.,  33.  13  (1888). For  the  description  of  simple  and  suitable  electro-
meters see  F.  Smale,  Wied.  Ann.,  57.  215  (1896).

2  Nernst,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  14.  622  (1893).

Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  23.  267  (1897).

CHAP,  v PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  315

If  in  the  expression  (p.  307)

l 1

~  N2"+  2  '  d'

N2  be  replaced  by  D,

D  +  2'd

means  the  specific  refraction  for  very  long  waves,  since  the  measurements
of  dielectric  constants  are  always  made  with  wave  lengths  considerably
greater  than  those  of  visible  light.  It  may  be  expected,  therefore,
that  the  regularities  observed  in  optically  measured  refraction  would
become  much  more  obvious  if  there  were  used,  instead  of  the  optical
refractive  index  N,  the  corresponding  value  of  the  electric  refractive
index  (  =  v/D)  which  is  free  from  the  influence  of  dispersion  (that  is,
refers  to  very  long  waves).  This  anticipation  does  not  turn  out  to  be
true,  as  was  shown  by  the  extensive  investigations  of  Landolt  and  Jahn.1
The  expression  for  the  electric  refraction  is  not  even  approximately
constant  for  the  same  substance  with  varying  temperature  and  state  of
aggregation,  nor  can  the  specific  refraction  of  mixtures  be  calculated
with  any  certainty  from  the  mixture  formula.2

The  explanation  of  this  behaviour  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  refractive
index  extrapolated  from  Cauchy's  formula  for  very  long  waves  rarely
agrees  with  the  square  root  of  the  dielectric  constant.  To  take  the
crassest  example,  the  refractive  index  of  water  extrapolated  for  long
waves  is  1'3,  the  square  root  of  its  dielectric  constant  is  9  ;  in  other
words,  there  is  a  region  of  very  strong  and,  in  fact,  anomalous  dis-
persion in  the  infra  -red  spectrum.  Dispersion  phenomena  in
the  infra-red  region  of  the  spectrum  have  so  far  been  but  slightly
studied,  we  have,  therefore,  no  means  of  tracing  the  complete  dispersion
curve  ;  for  the  long  heat  waves  investigated  are  still  very  much
shorter  than  the  shortest  electric  waves  which  have  been  produced
and  measured,  so  that  a  large  and  certainly  highly  interesting  region
remains  inaccessible  to  experiment  ;  but  the  recent  investigations  of
Drude  (I.e.,  p.  314)  bring  out  clearly  that  dispersion  is  mainly  associated
with  presence  of  hijdroxyl  groups  in  the  molecule,  and  that  the  observed
phenomena  of  anomalous  dispersion  accompanied  by  the  appearance  of
absorption  bands  in  the  infra-red  part  of  the  spectrum  is  in  accordance
with  Helmholtz's  theory.

The  circumstance  that  mixtures  of  pyridine  or  betaine  with  water
show  much  more  marked  anomalous  dispersion  than  these  substances
in  the  pure  state  is  explained  by  Bredig3  as  due  to  formation  of
hydrates  in  solution  after  the  analogy  of  NH4(OH).

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  10.  289  (1892).

2  See  also,  amongst  others,  the  researches  of  F.  Ratz,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  19.
94  (1896)  ;  Linebarger,  ibid.,  2O.  131  (1896)  ; J.  Philip,  ibid.,  24.  18  (1897),

3  Zeitschr.  /.  ffleMrochem.  ,  7.  767  (1901).

316  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

From  the  point  of  view  of  the  above  theory  of  Clausius  and  Mossotti
these  facts  may  mean  that  the  molecules  consist  of  a  well-conducting
core,  or  several  such,  and  a  less  conducting  sheath  ;  then  the  optical
refraction  would  be  the  measure  of  the  volume  of  the  well-conducting
core,  whilst  the  electric  refraction  measured  for  very  long  waves  would
give  the  volume  of  the  core  plus  the  badly  conducting  sheath.  The
additive  behaviour  of  the  optical  molecular  refraction  would  show  that
the  volume  of  the  core  is  practically  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  volumes
of  its  components,  whilst  the  volume  of  the  surrounding  sheath  would
be  greatly  influenced  by  constitution.  Of  course  this  assumption  is,
at  the  present  time,  very  hypothetical,  still  we  may  draw  certain
conclusions  on  the  molecular  constitution  of  matter  from  the  explana-
tion of  anomalous  dispersion  in  the  region  of  long  waves.

Magnetic  Rotation  of  the  Plane  of  Polarisation.— In  1846
Faraday  discovered  that  transparent  substances,  when  placed  in  a
magnetic  field,  acquire  the  property  of  rotating  the  plane  of  polarisa-
tion in  the  direction  of  the  lines  of  force ;  and  also  that  the  observed
rotation  is  proportional  to  the  thickness  of  the  layer,  and  to  the
intensity  of  the  magnetic  field.  The  sense  of  this  rotation  is  the  same
for  most  substances,  as  for  all  organic  substances  for  instance ;  it  is  in
the  same  direction,  as  seen  by  the  observer,  in  which  the  magnetising
current  circles  ;  but  its  magnitude  is  dependent  upon  the  nature  of  the
particular  substance.

The  problem  of  explaining  the  relation  between  the  degree  of
rotation  and  the  chemical  nature  of  the  substance  has  been  recently
(since  1882)  attacked  in  a  very  thorough  way  by  W.  H.  Perkin.  As
a  measure  of  the  coefficient  of  the  magnetic  rotation  of  substances,
Perkin  took  the  observed  angle  of  rotation  in  a  definite  intensity  of
the  magnetic  field,  divided  by  the  density  of  the  substance  and  by  the
rotation  angle  of  a  layer  of  water  of  the  same  thickness  in  the  same
field  ;  this  value  he  named  the  specific  rotation  ;  and  the  product  of  this
with  the  molecular  weight  of  the  substance  divided  by  the  molecular
weight  of  water,  he  called  the  molecular  rotation.  Here  we  meet  with
relations  which  are  similar  to  the  dependence  of  the  molecular
refraction  upon  the  composition  and  the  constitution  respectively.
The  molecular  rotation  of  organic  compounds  can  usually  be  calculated
very  approximately,  by  summation  of  the  atomic  rotations,  the  values
of  which  must  be  suitably  chosen  •  and  here  also,  in  the  case  of  the
multivalent  elements,  the  atomic  rotation  varies  very  distinctly  with
the  mode  of  union.1

Magnetism. — The  molecular  magnetism,  i.e.  the  specific  magnetism
referred  to  that  of  water  as  unity,  and  multiplied  by  the  molecular
weight,  has  recently  been  investigated  for  a  number  of  organic  com-

1  For  further  information  see  Ostwald,  Lehrluch  der  allg.  Chem.,  2nd  edit.,  I.  p.  499
(1891). [Also  see  Walker's  translation  of  Ostwald's  Outlines,  p.  105.— TR.]

CHAP.  V PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  317

pounds  by  Henrichsen,1  who  used  the  torsion  method  of  G.  Wiedemann.
All  of  the  substances  studied  were  diamagnetic.  As  the  molecular
magnetism  could  be  calculated  by  summation  of  suitably  chosen  atomic
magnetisms,  it  proves  that  this  property  is  also  emphatically  additive.
The  presence  of  double  carbon-unions  in  the  molecule  seems  to  increase
the  diamagnetism.

According  to  recent  investigations  by  G.  Jager  and  St.  Meyer,2  the
atomic  magnetism  of  the  paramagnetic  elements,  nickel,  cobalt,  iron,
manganese  in  equivalent  solutions  of  their  compounds  stands  in  the
simple  ratio  2:4:5:6,  and  chromium  appears  to  lie  between  nickel
and  cobalt.

It  is  remarkable  that  the  magnetic  susceptibility  appears  to  be
independent  not  merely  of  the  anion,  but  of  the  valency  of  the
cation ;  for  solution  of  ferrous  and  ferric  salts  containing  equal
amounts  of  iron  are  equally  susceptible.

The  Heat  of  Combustion. — By  the  heat  of  combustion  of  a
substance  there  is  meant  the  quantity  of  heat  produced  by  the
complete  oxidation  of  1  g.  of  the  substance.  It  makes  a  slight
difference  whether  the  combustion  is  conducted  at  constant  pressure,  or
at  constant  volume,  the  former  value  being  a  trifle  smaller,  viz.  by  the
amount  of  the  heat  value  of  the  external  work  performed  by  the
combustion.  In  the  case  of  the  hydrocarbons,  e.g.,  this  difference  is
usually  less  than  0'5  of  a  per  cent  of  the  total  value.  The  details  of
this,  as  well  as  the  methods  of  the  determination  of  the  heat  of  com-
bustion, will  not  be  given  till  the  chapter  on  "  Thermochemistry."  We
will  give  in  this  place  only  a  statement  of  the  regular  relations  which
were  ascertained  by  a  study  of  organic  compounds.

The  hydrocarbons  in  particular  have  been  carefully  studied ;  accord-
ing to  J.  Thomsen,3  the  following  may  be  theoretically  prefaced
regarding  these  values.  The  process  of  combustion  may  be. regarded
as  occurring  in  two  stages,  viz.  : —

1.  The  decomposition  of  the  molecule  into  the  individual  atoms.

2.  The  combination  of  the  individual  atoms  with  oxygen.

The  quantity  of  heat  produced  in  the  combustion  of  a  hydrocarbon
is  equal  to  the  heat  developed  by  the  union  of  the  isolated  atoms  with
oxygen,  minus  the  heat  absorption  which  would  be  observed  in  the
dissociation  of  the  hydrocarbons  into  separate  carbon  atoms  and
separate  hydrogen  atoms.  It  is  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  the
process  actually  occurs  in  this  way ;  because  according  to  the  law  of
the  conservation  of  energy,  the  quantity  of  heat  developed  must  be
the  same,  whatever  may  be  the  order  in  which  it  occurs.

1  Wied.  Ann.,  34.  180  (1888).

2  Ibid.,  63.  83  (1897).

3  Thermochem. Untersuchungen,  Bd.  IV.,  Liepzig,  1886;  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,
1.  369  (1887).

318  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

Now,  if  we  make  the  assumption  that  the  same  quantity  of  heat
absorption  S  is  always  required  in  the  separation  of  one  hydrogen,
wherever  the  separation  occurs ;  and  that  there  are  required  the  same
amounts  of  heat,  viz.  U,  V,  and  W,  in  the  separation  of  single,  double,
or  triple  carbon  unions  respectively,  wherever  the  separations  occur ;
then  in  the  dissociation  of  a  carbon  compound  CaH2b,  the  amount  of
heat  absorption  Ax,  is,

A1  =  2bS  +  xU  +  y  V  +  zW,

where  x,  y,  and  z  denote  respectively  the  number  of  single,  double,  or
triple  unions.

Now,  since  there  are  in  the  molecule  4a  carbon  valencies,  2b  of
which  are  satisfied  by  hydrogen,  then  4a  -  2b  carbon  valencies  must
be  satisfied  in  pairs;  and  therefore,  and  because  every  single  union
employs  two  valencies,  every  double  union  four  valencies,  and  every
triple  union  six  valencies,  it  follows  that

4a  -  2b  -  2x  +  4y  +  6z.
Therefore

x  =  2a  -  b  -  2y  -  3z,

and  therefore  for  the  heat  absorption  A15  we  find

A!  =  2bS  +  (2a  -  b  -  2y  -  3z)U  +  yV  +  zW.

Now,  if  P  denotes  the  heat  of  combustion  of  an  isolated  carbon
atom,  and  Q  that  of  an  isolated  hydrogen  atom,  then  the  heat
developed  A2  in  the  combustion  of  the  isolated  atoms  amounts  to

A2  =  aP  +  2bQ.
And  thus  for  the  heat  of  combustion  at  constant  volume,  we  have

A2  -  A!  =  aP  +  2bQ  -  2bS  -  (2a  -  b  -  2y  -  3z)U  -  yV  -  zW.

In  order  to  obtain  the  heat  of  combustion  at  constant  pressure,  it
must  be  observed  that  the  combustion  of  the  gaseous  molecule  C  H2b

requires  a  +  -  molecules  of  oxygen,  and  that  there  are  produced  a
molecules  of  gaseous  carbon  dioxide,  and  b  molecules  of  liquid  water ;

there results,  therefore,  a diminution  of the  volume  of  1  —  -  mol,

2

which  corresponds  to

0-580  -0-290b  Cal.

Now,  if  we  add  these  corrections,  which  are  usually very  small,  to

CHAP,  v PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  319

A9  -  Ap  we  obtain  as  the  heat  of  combustion  S5(CaH2b)  of  the  hydrocarbon
(CaH2b),  at  constant  pressure,

$(CaH2b)  -  aA  +  bB  +  yC  +  zD  +  0-580,
where

A  =  P-2U,  C  =  2U-V,

B  =  2Q  +  U  -  2S  -  0-290, D  =  3U  -  W.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  formula  allows  a  very  exact  calculation  of
the  heat  of  combustion  of  the  hydrocarbons  of  the  fat  series,  expressed  in
large  calories,  if  we  assume  the  following  values,  viz.  :  —

A-  106-17,  C=  15-465,

B- 52-53,  D  =  43-922.

Thus,  for  example,  by  the  calculation  of  the  heat  of  combustion  of
di-allyl,  we  find

$(C6H10)  -  6A  +  5B  +  2C  +  0'58  -  931-2  CaL,

while  Thomsen  determined  it  experimentally  as  932-8  Cal.  Of  course
it  is  not  possible  to  ascertain  the  particular  values  of  P,  Q,  S,  U,  V,
and  W  from  the  empirically  determined  values  of  A,  B,  C,  and  D.

The  preceding  formula  is  not  applicable  to  closed  chain  hydro-
carbons, such  as  trimethylene  or  benzene.  Thus  the  heat  of  combus-
tion of  the  latter  substance,  C6H6,  in  the  gaseous  state,  on  the
assumption  of  nine  single  unions,  according  to  the  preceding  formula,
would  give

6A  =  637-02

+  0-580= 0-58

Sum  =  795 -19

while  by  assuming  three  doubled  unions  in  benzene,  we  would  have
795-19  +  3  x  15-465  -  841-585.

Both  of  these  values  differ  too  much  from  that  obtained  by  direct
measurement,  viz.  787*5,  which,  however,  is  quite  near  the  value
calculated  on  the  supposition  of  nine  single  carbon  unions.

It  happened  by  chance  that  Thomsen,  in  using  his  universal
burner,  obtained  heats  of  combustion  which  were  a  little  too  high,  and
so  his  old  values  for  the  heat  of  combustion  of  gaseous  benzene,  when
corrected,  coincide  quite  well  with  the  value  calculated  on  the  assump-
tion of  nine  single  unions.  This  circumstance,  viz.  that  the  values  as
first  determined  by  him  seemed  for  the  time  to  speak  against  the
Kekule  formula,  gave  opportunity  for  much  controversy.

Thus  it  resulted,  particularly  by  the  work  of  Berthelot  in  Paris,
and  Stohmann  in  Leipsic,  both  of  whom  worked  with  the  calorimetric
bomb,  that  more  extended  material  gave  a  broader  basis  for  the

320  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

theoretical  development  of  the  relations  between  the  heat  of  combus-
tion and  the  chemical  constitution.  Then  a  renewed  discussion  of  the
observations  led  Thomsen 1  to  the  conclusion  iliat  ike  benzene  union  has
a  heat  value  different  from  that  of  the  acetylene  union.

In  order  to  obtain  satisfactory  material  to  prove  this  view,  Thomsen
then  calculated  the  heat  of  combustion  of  a  number  of  aromatic  hydro-
carbons, which  were  measured  in  the  solid  state.

The  assumption  that  the  same  formula,  of  course  with  changed
constants,  would  hold  good  here,  was  justified  by  this  circumstance,  viz.
that  the  heat  of  sublimation,  which  obviously  is  the  excess  of  the  heat
of  combustion  in  the  gaseous  state  over  that  in  the  solid  state,  in  all
cases  has  a  regular  connection  with  the  constitution,  and  that,  at  all
events,  this  value  is  only  a  very  small  fraction  of  the  heat  of  combustion.

In  fact,  it  was  shown  that  the  heat  of  combustion  of  benzene,
naphthalene,  anthracene,  phenanthrene,  and  chrysene,  all  being  taken
in  the  crystallised  slate,  can  be  calculated  from  the  formula

$(CaH2b)  =  104'3b  +  49-09m  +  105'47n,

where  m  denotes  the  number  of  single  hydrocarbon  unions,  and  n  the
number  of  double  unions.  The  formula  harmonises  much  better  with
the  results  of  experiment  by  ascribing  to  benzene  three  double  unions,
to  naphthalene  four,  to  anthracene,  phenanthrene,  and  chrysene  each
six.  It  is  also  possible  to  calculate  the  heat  of  combustion  of  the
phenyl  methanes,  by  ascribing  a  heat  value  of  7 23 "7  to  the  radical
C6H5  -  C.  The  preceding  formula  is  also  in  harmony  with  other
determinations  ;  thus  the  heat  of  combustion  of  methane  in  the  solid
state  is  calculated  to  be

25(CH4)  =  2  x  104-3-208-6,

a  result  a  little  smaller  than  that  for  gaseous  methane  (21 1*9),  as  it
should  be.

A  comparison  of  the  numerical  values  obtained  by  the  new
formula,  with  those  given  on  p.  319,  which  were  obtained  for  gaseous
hydrocarbons  of  the  open-chain  variety,  leads  to  this  conclusion  ;  viz.
that  the  heat  of  formation  of  an  ethylene  union  is  considerably  smaller  than
that  of  the  formation  of  a  benzene  union.  And  this  result  is  entirely  in
harmony  with  the  well-known  fact  that  the  formation  of  addition  pro-
ducts is  attended  with  much  greater  difficulty  in  the  case  of  aromatic
nuclei  than  in  the  case  of  the  olefines ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  the
double  benzene  unions  are  much  harder  to  dislocate  than  the  olefine
unions.  This  difference  is  all  the  more  remarkable  because  the  com-
pounds have  the  same  optical  behaviour  (p.  310).

In other organic compounds2 the heats  of combustion show  a

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  7.  55  (1891).
2  Stohrnann,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  6.  334  (1890).

CHAP,  v PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  321

prevailingly  additive  character.  But  the  unmistakable  influence  of
constitutional  differences  (for  instance,  in  isoineric  acids)  may  be
distinguished  with  some  certainty  as  the  difference  in  the  value  of
the  heats  of  combustion,  and  can  be  compared  with  the  much  more
remarkable  variations  of  other  physical  properties,  specially  the
dissociation  constant.1  In  the  sense  of  Berthelot's  principle  (Book  IV.
Chap.  V.)  the  less  stable  isomeric  form  has  usually,  but  not  always,
the  greater  content  of  energy,  and  consequently  the  greater  heat  of
combustion ;  but  as,  according  to  Baeyer's 2  stereochemical  theory,
double  and  treble  bonds  between  carbon  atoms  are  more  unstable  the
more  their  valencies  vary  in  direction  from  the  tetrahedric  arrangement,
i.e.  the  greater  the  tension  inside  the  molecule,  so  usually  the  heat  of
combustion  increases  with  the  magnitude  of  the  tension,  as  was  found
by  Stohmann  3  in  general,  and  especially  for  the  poly-methylenes  (CH2)n.
The  heats  of  combustion  of  the  hydrogenised  benzenes  measured
by  Stohmann  4  are  very  characteristic  of  the  thermal  behaviour  of  the
aromatic  compounds.  He  found  the  heat  of  combustion  under  constant
pressure—

Diff.
Benzene  .  ...  779*8

68-2
Di-hydro-benzene  .....  848 '0

44-0
Tetra-hydro-benzene  .  .  .  ,  892'0

41*2
Hexa-hydro-benzene  .....  933*2

58*0
Hexene  .  .  .  .  .  .  991 '2

Similar  differences  were  found  for  the  terephthalic  acids  and  their
products.5  The  transformation  of  benzene  into  its  first  reduction
product  is  accompanied  by  a  much  greater  absorption  of  heat  than  the
transformation  of  already  hydrogenised  products  to  the  next  higher
product  of  reduction.  The  entire  thermal  behaviour  of  benzene  and
its  derivatives  agrees  well  with  Thiele's  assumption  (p.  289),  according
to  which  the  saturation  in  aromatic  compounds  is  much  more  complete
than  was  formerly  supposed.

Regularities  in  the  Boiling-Points  of  Organic  Compounds.

—The  problem  of  calculating  the  boiling-points  of  organic  compounds
from  their  composition  and  constitution,  and  with  the  same  exactness
that  is  possible  in  the  case  of  the  molecular  refraction,  has  not  been
solved  as  yet ;  and,  indeed,  this  problem,  which  is  interesting  both  in
a,  practical  and  a  theoretical  way,  presents  no  little  difficulty,  for  the
reason  that  the  boiling-point,  doubtless,  depends  to  a  large  degree

1  Stohmann  and  Schmidt,  Zeitschr.  pliysik.  Chem.,  21.  314  ref.  ;  Journ.  pr.  Chem.,
53.  345  (1896).

2  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  18.  2278  (1885).

3  Journ.  pr.  Chem.,  45.  305,  475  ;  46.  530  (1892). .

4  Sitzungsber.  der  iachs.  Akctd.,  1893,  477.

5  Stohmann  and  Kleber,  Journ.  f.  prakt.  Chemie,  43.  1  (1891).

322  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

upon  the  constitution,  and  that  certainly  makes  the  problem  all  the
more  fascinating.

Now,  investigation  has  disclosed  a  number  of  instances  of  regular
behaviour l  which  are  sufficiently  remarkable  to  deserve  a  more
thorough  treatment,  although  it  has  not  been  possible,  as  yet,  to  group
them  from  any  general  standpoint.  These  regularities,  for  the  most
part,  consider  the  change  of  boiling-point  experienced  by  an  organic  com-
pound from  substitution.

The  Substitution  of  CH3. — In  the  homologous  series  of  the  normal
alcohols,  acids,  esters,  normal  nitriles,  and  ketones,  the  boiling-point
increases  about  19°-21?  regularly  from  series  to  series;  in  the  case  of
the  aldehydes  it  is  about  26°- 2 7°.  In  the  gly colic  acid  esters  there  is
a  normal  rise  of  about  20°  when  the  methyl  group  is  in  the  alcohol
residue,  as  contrasted  with  a  rise  of  about  10°  when  it  is  in  the  acid
residue.  Regarding  the  aromatic  compounds,  there  is  a  normal  dif-
ference of  21°  in  pyridine  and  its  derivatives  ;  in  some  of  the  amine
bases,  as  aniline,  toluidine,  and  piperidine,  a  difference  of  10°-11°.

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  case  of  the  entrance  of  the  CH3  group
into  the  normal  hydrocarbons,  or  further  into  the  benzene  nucleus,
or  into  the  side  chains,  there  is  always  a  rise  in  the  boiling-point,  to
be  sure,  but  it  shows  no  decided  regularity.

The  Substitution  of  Cl,  Br,  and  I. — The  introduction  of  the  first
chlorine  atom  into  a  methyl  group  occasions  a  rise  in  the  boiling-
point  of  about  60° ;  the  actions  of  the  second  and  third  Cl  atoms  are
much  weaker,  as  shown  in  the  example  of  the  chlor-acetic  acids ;  thus

Diff.
CH3C02H  boils  at .  .118°

CHoClC02H „  . 185°

19°
CHCl2COoH „  .  . 194°

3°
CC13C02H „  . 195°-200°

The replacement  of Cl  by Br makes the rise about 24° greater
throughout ;  by  I  about  50°  greater.

The  Substitution  of  H  by  OH. — This  in  general  occasions  a  rise  of
about  100° ;  the  phenoles  and  the  corresponding  amines  have  the
same  boiling-points ;  thus  here  the  effect  of  the  substitution  of  NH2
and  of  OH  is  the  same.

A  very  complete  and  valuable  study  on  the  action  of  substituting
negative  radicles  has  been  made  by  L.  Henry,2  who  established  that

1  These  have  been  compiled  by  W. Marckwald, Dissertation, Berlin, 1888  ;  see
also Fehling's Nandivorterbuch, art. "  Siedepunkt " ("boiling-point"), (1893), to
which  also  reference  should  be  made  for  the  bibliography  ;  and  Nernst  and  Hesse,  Sieden
und  Schmelzpunkt,  Braunschweig,  1893.

2  Bulletin  de  I'Academie  belgique  [3],  15.  No<=.  1  and  2  (1888).

CHAP.  V PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  323

the  accumulation  of  negative  radicals,  especially  oxygen,  at  one  point
of  the  molecule  of  an  organic  compound  causes  great  increase  of
volatility,  that  the  influence  is  greatest  when  the  substituting  negative
radicals  are  attached  to  a  single  carbon  atom,  whilst  the  action  is  still
noticeable  if  the  substitution  takes  place  in  two  carbon  atoms  directly
combined.

When  two  compounds  unite  with  each  other  with  elimination  of
water,  the  boiling-point  of  the  resulting  product  can  be  roughly  calcu-
lated by  adding  the  boiling-points  of  the  two  components,  and  then
subtracting  100°-120°.  Thus

Acetic  acid  boils  at  .  .  .  .118°

Ethyl  alcohol ,,  .  .  .  . 78'5°

Sum -196 -5°

Acetic  ether  boils  at  .  .  . 77 '0°

Diff.=119-5°

A  Comparison  of  Isomerie  Compounds  shows  that  in  the  fat
series  the  normal  compound  has  the  highest  boiling-point.1  The
more  the  chain  of  carbon  atoms  assumes  a  "  branching  "  type,  or  the
more  "spherical"  the  molecule  becomes,  so  much  the  more  does  the
volatility  increase.  Pentane,  C5H12,  may  serve  to  illustrate  this —

CH3(CH2)3CH3 ; (CH3)2CHCH2CH3 ; (CH3)4C
B.-P.  38°  30°  9-5°

In  general  a  change  of CH3(CH2)2  into  (CH3)2CH  corresponds  to  a
fall  in  boiling-point  of  about  .7°.

Further,  in  the  case  of  isomers  containing  oxygen,  the  boiling-
point  will  be  the  lower  the  nearer  the  oxygen  atom  approaches  the
centre  of  the  molecule  :  a  change  from  a  primary  to  a  secondary
alcohol  corresponds  to  a  fall  in  the  boiling-point  of  about  19° ;  thus

CH3(CH2)2CH2OH  boils  at .  .  . 116'80\  n-ff  _17.RO

CH3(CH2)CH(OH)CH3 ,, .  .  . W'Q°fuin'-

Moreover,  in  the  case  of  the  isomeric  halogen  substitution  products,
that  one  will  have  the  lower  boiling-point  where  the  chlorine  seems  to
be  more  central  in  the  chain  of  atoms  ;  thus

CH3CH2CH2C1  boils  at ..... 46 -5°
CH3CHC1CH3 „  .  .  .  .  .37°

Of  the  isomers  of  the  benzene  derivatives,  in  general  the  ortho  com-
pounds boil  at  a  higher  temperature  than  the  meta  compounds,  and  these
in  turn  about  the  same  as,  or  higher  than,  the  para  compounds.

Regarding  the  influence  of  the  double  union  in  hydrocarbons,  there
is  no  general  rule ;  but  it  is  found  that  the  hydrocarbons  correspond-
ing to  the  formula  CnH2n+2,  and  those  corresponding  to  CnH2n,
have  the  same  boiling-point,  so  that  in  this  case  the  double  union

1  B.  Tollens,  B.  B.,  2.  83  (1869).

324  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

seems  to  have  the  same  influence  as  two  hydrogen  atoms.  But  in
other  cases  a  corresponding  change  in  molecular  structure,  eg.  carbon
union  instead  of  two  hydrogen  atoms,  is  associated  with  a  decided
change  in  the  boiling-point ;  thus  compounds  of  the  type

c-H>

C.H/

boil  about  40°-41°  lower  than  those  of  the  type

where  R  represents  any  selected  divalent  radical,  as  0,  CH2,  S,  NH,  etc.

When  an  acetylene  compound  is  produced  by  the  more  extended
elimination  of  hydrogen,  the  boiling-point  rises  :  thus  the  propargyl
compounds  boil  about  19 '5°  higher  than  the  corresponding  propyl
compounds.

Increase  of  molecular  weight  due  to  substitution  causes  a  rise  in
the  boiling-point,  as  was  shown  by  Earp l  in  the  replacing  of  oxygen
by  sulphur ;  at  the  same  time  another  action  is  distinguishable,  viz.
that  increase  of  symmetry  in  the  molecule  lowers  the  boiling-point.
The  two  influences  may  help  or  oppose  one  another  ;  the  passage  of
H9S  into  CH3SH  both  increases  the  molecular  weight  and  lowers
the  symmetry  so  that  a  change  from  -  6 1  °  to  +  2 1  °  in  the  boiling-point
is  observed.  In  the  passage  of  CH3SH  into  (CH3)2S  increase  of
molecular  weight  causes  a  rise,  gain  of  symmetry  a  fall,  so  that  only
a  relatively  small  rise  from  21°  to  41°  results.  By  exception  the
substitution  of  methyl  in  the  place  of  the  hydrogen  atom  of  a  hydroxyl
group  lowers  the  boiling-point ;  when  therefore  methyl  alcohol  is
converted  into  methyl  ether,  the  substitution  and  production  of  a
symmetrical  molecule  act  in  the  same  sense,  and  a  great  fall  of  the
boiling-point  is  produced  (from  67°  to  -  23°).

The  attempt  of  Vernon 2  to  apply  regularities  of  boiling-point  to
determine  molecular  condition  of  a  liquid  is  noticeable  as  he  starts
from  the  very  plausible  assumption  that  the  deviations  Avhich  individual
substances  show  from  general  rules  have  their  ground  in  polymerisation
of  the  liquid  molecules.  Thus  usually  doubling  the  molecular  weight
raises  the  boiling-point  about  100°  (ethylene  boils  at  -  105,  butylene
at  -5,  octylene  at  126,  the  hydrocarbon  C10H32  at  274);  now  in
the  series  hydroiodic  acid,  hydrobromic  acid,  hydrochloric  acid,  the
boiling-point  falls  from  -  25,  -  73,  to  -  100.  We  may  therefore  expect
for  hydrofluoric  acid  about  -  120,  whereas  its  boiling-point  is  actually
+  19 '4°,  that  is,  140°  too  high.  Vernon  concludes  therefore  for  a
molecular  formula  of  hydrofluoric  acid  lying  between  H2F2  and  H4F4.
1  PhU.  Mag.  [5],  35.  458  (1393).  '2  Chem.  News,  64.  54  (1891).

CHAP,  v PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  325

Similarly  water,  by  analogy  with  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  should  boil
at  -  100°,  as  the  boiling-point  lies  200°  higher  the  formula  (H20)4  is
probable.  By  similar  considerations  Vernon  found  the  molecular
formulae  S12,  S02,  SOC12,  S03,  (H2S04)4,  (Se02)4.  It  is  especially
noticeable  that  the  hydroxyl  compounds,  according  to  these  observations,
are  in  general  strongly  polymerised ;  for  the  thio-compounds  which
contain  SH  instead  of  OH  boil  30°  or  more  below  the  corresponding
hydroxyl  compounds,  whereas  in  general  replacing  of  oxygen  by
sulphur  causes  a  rise  of  40°  or  50°  in  the  boiling-point;  further,  many
ethers  boil  at  a  lower  temperature  than  the  corresponding  alcohols
(for  instance,  methyl  ether  at  -  23°,  methyl  alcohol  at  +66°),  whereas
otherwise  replacing  of  oxygen  by  an  alkyl  raises  the  boiling-point
(see  pp.  269-272).

The  Boiling-Point  Curves. — It  is  obvious  that  the  comparison
of  the  boiling-points  of  the  different  compounds,  which  has  been
summarised  in  the  preceding  sketch,  can  lay  no  claim  to  any  particular
scientific  value,  because  the  "boiling-point"  so-called  represents  only
one  casual  point  in  the  boiling-point  curve  (p.  65),  and  also  because
any  regularities  observed  between  the  boiling-points  at  atmospheric
pressure  would  vary  more  or  less  when  compared  with  points  selected
at  another  pressure.

If  we  denote  by  T0'  the  absolute  boiling-point  at  atmospheric
pressure  of  a  liquid  which  is  selected  as  "  normal,"  and  by  T0  its
boiling-point  at  any  selected  pressure,  then,  according  to  Ramsay  and
Young  (p.  64),  the  following  formula  expresses  the  boiling  tempera-
ture T  of  another  liquid,  viz.,

T  =  T0A[1+B(T0-T0')].

It  would,  doubtless,  be  more  rational  to  investigate  the  question,  how
the  constants  A  and  B  depend  upon  the  nature  of  the  substances
compared  with  each  other,  instead  of  the  simple  comparison  of  the
boiling-points  of  different  substances  at  normal  pressure ;  then  instead
of  isolated  boiling-points,  one  would  consider  the  whole  boiling  curve.

No  matter  how  well  the  preceding  formula  may  accord  with  ex-
periments at  vapour  pressures  which  are  not  too  high,  it  is,  neverthe-
less, purely  empirical,  and  does  not  include  the  critical  point.  The
theory  of  the  boiling-point  curves  and  of  the  vapour  pressure  curves  of
van  der  Waals  (p.  227)  has  a  decided  advantage  in  this  respect,  viz.
that  it  presents  in  itself  a  well-rounded  development  of  views  which
include  a  consideration  of  the  critical  phenomena ;  and  no  doubt  would
exist  as  to  the  way  to  be  followed,  if  it  were  satisfactorily  vindicated
by  the  results  of  experience,  and  if  the  critical  data  in  particular
should  actually  make  a  more  certain  calculation  of  the  boiling-point
curves  possible.  But,  as  already  shown,  this  is  not  the  case  (p.  234) ;
for  the  aforesaid  theory  is  capable  of  improvement  in  many  respects.

326  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

For  this  reason  it  would  perhaps  be  profitable  if  some  one  should  first
use  the  formula,  given  by  Eamsay  and  Young,  for  all  that  it  is  worth,
and  push  on  still  further  in  the  direction  of  the  relations  between  the
•boiling-point  curve  and  the  chemical  composition.1

The  Critical  Data.  —  On  the  other  hand,  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  the  critical  data  have  great  significance  for  very  well-defined
chemical  substance,  and  that  the  problem  of  tracing  out  their  relation-
ship to  the  constitution  is  a  very  important  one.  Unfortunately  the
experimental  data  thus  far  accumulated  are  neither  very  extensive  nor
very  exact,  as  there  is  considerable  difference  between  the  results  of
different  observers.  For  this  reason,  the  results  up  to  date  are  very
small,  and  we  will  limit  ourselves  to  the  description  of  a  rule  dis-
covered independently  by  Guye  and  Heilborn.

In  keeping  with  experiment  (p.  234),  and  according  to  van  der
Waals,  the  critical  volume,  which  is  determined  experimentally  with
great  difficulty,  may  be  made  proportional  to  the  critical  temperature
divided  by  the  critical  pressure,  i.e.  proportional  to  the  so-called
"  critical  coefficient  "  k,

But  now  since,  according  to  the  reasoning  on  p.  301,  the  critical
molecular  volume  is  an  additive  property,  then  the  critical  coefficient
must  be  so  also  (Heilborn).  On  the  other  hand,  the  critical  coefficient,
like  the  molecular  refraction  (p.  309),  is  a  measure  of  the  space  actu-
ally occupied  by  the  molecules  ;  and  since  the  latter  is  decidedly  an
additive  property,  therefore  the  former  is  also  (Guye).2

Now  as  a  matter  of  fact  it  is  found  that  it  is  possible  to  make

if  the  critical  pressure  is  estimated  in  atmospheres,  and  the  refraction
E  refers  to  infinitely  long  wave-lengths  (p.  307).  This  rule  is  only  a
rough  approximation,  inasmuch  as  the  numerical  factor  in  the  preced-
ing equation  varies  betwe'en  the  limits  of  1*6  and  2  '2;  therefore  in
calculation  one  may  use  the  red  rays,  the  refraction  of  which  is  only
slightly  different,  in  comparison.  And  conversely,  it  is  possible  to
calculate  the  critical  coefficient  from  the  atomic  refraction  given  on
p.  309,  with  about  the  same  degree  of  approximation,  i.e.  about
10-20  per  cent.

Heat  of  Evaporation.  —  According  to  p.  60,  the  molecular  weight
of  evaporation  is

1  An  extensive  collection  of  data  has  been  made  by  G. W.  A.  Kahlbaum,  Studien
ilber  Dampfspannkraftsmessungen,  1893,  Basel,  Benno  Scliwabe.

2  Ann.  chim.phys.  [6],  21.  206  (1890)  ;  Thesis,  Paris,  1892.

CHAP.  V PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE

327

or

:dlnp
dT

A d  In  p
T dlnT

(1)
(2)

According  to  van  der  Waals's  theory  (see  p.  227),  the  differential
coefficient  on  the  right  must  be  the  same  for  all  substances  in  correspond-
ing states  ;  but  as,  according  to  p.  303,  the  boiling-point  is  approximately
a  corresponding  temperature  for  all  substances,  it  follows  that  the
quotient  of  the  molecular  weight  of  evaporation  by  the  absolute  boiling-point
must  be  approximately  constant  (Trouton's  law).  The  following  table1
shows  the  degree  of  exactness  of  the  rule.

Substance.

Heat  of
Evaporation.

T-273

A

T

Benzene ......

94-4

80-2

20-65

Toluene 86  '8

110-8

20-61

m-Xylol . . .•'..'. . 82-8

138-5

21-03

Pyridine i 101  '4

117

20-62

Water . . . . .  | 536  '6

100-0

25-64

Alcohol .....

216-5

78-2

28-09

Acetic  acid . ...

89-8

118-5

13-74

Methyl  formiate

110-1

31-8

21-45

Ethyl  formiate  ....

94-4

54-3

21-13

Methyl  acetate  ....

97-0

571

21-53

Propyl  formiate

90-2

80-9

22-38

Ethyl  acetate ....

88-1

77-15

21-93

Methyl  propiouate . . .

89-0

797

21-99

Propyl  acetate  ....

83-2

101-25

22-45

Ethyl  propionate
Methyl  butyrate

81-8
79-7

99-2
1027

22-22
21-43

Methyl  iso-butyrate  .

75-0

92-3

20-74

The  substances  which  have  normal  molecular  weight  in  the  liquid
state  give  quotients  that  vary  only  a  little  from  the  normal  value  21  ;
substances  which  have  normal  vapour  density  but  are  associated  as
liquids,  such  as  water  and  alcohol,  give .  noticeably  higher  values
(25'64  and  2 8 '09).  Acetic  acid  finally  which  forms  double  molecules
in  the  gaseous  state  has  a  small  value  for  the  quotient  (13 '74);  but
if  the  heat  of  evaporation  for  this  substance  is  reduced  to  that  for
normal  molecules  by  the  addition  of  80  (the  heat  required  for  dis-
sociation of  the  saturated  vapour  in  the  normal  molecules),  we  get  the
quotient  26'28,  indicating  a  considerable  degree  of  association  in  the
liquid  state.2

1  According  to  the  measurements  of  Marshall  and  Ramsay,  Phil.  Mag.  [5],  41.  38
(1896),  and  W.  Longinine,  Arch.  sc.  phys.  nat.,  Geneve,  9.  5  (1900).

2  Batschinski  (Zeitschr.  phys.  Chem.,  43.  369,  1903)  gives  a  deduction  of  Trouton's
rule  from  Clausius's  characteristic  equation.

328  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK II

The  Melting-Point. — In  determining  the  melting-point  experi-
mentally, one  will  best  accomplish  it  by  surrounding  the  thermometer
with  the  finely  pulverised  substance  and  heating  it  to  incipient  fusion.
On  account  of  the  latent  heat  the  thermometer  remains  constant  for
some  time,  when  it  is  carefully  stirred  till  all  is  melted  at  a  fixed
temperature,  which  can  be  exactly  measured,  and  which  is  the  melting-
point.  We  can  in  this  way  obtain  very  exact  measurements,  especially
by  using  large  quantities  of  the  particular  substances,  and  by  fixing
the  zero-point  of  the  thermometer  scale  very  accurately  by  observing
the  melting-point  of  water  according  to  this  method.

Another  method,  which  allows  of  very  accurate  determination,  and
which  also  makes  it  possible  to  use  considerably  smaller  quantities  of
the  substance,  say  10-20  g.,  depends  upon  the  phenomenon  of  under-
cooling or  over-melting.  For  although  a  solid  substance  at  its  melting-
point  assumes  the  liquid  form  under  all  circumstances,  yet  there  is
usually  a  marked  delay  in  the  reverse  process,  and  it  requires  some
external  stimulus  to  induce  the  liquid  to  assume  the  solid  state  which
corresponds  to  its  temperature.  If  one  brings  this  about  by  stirring
with  a  glass  rod,  or  more  certainly  still  by  introducing  a  bit  of  the
substance  in  the  solid  state,  the  freezing  of  the  under-cooled  substance
occurs ;  and  then,  as  a  result  of  the  latent  heat,  the  temperature  rises
to  the  freezing-point.  This  pause  in  the  fall  of  the  temperature  may
be  determined  with  great  precision  and  certainty  by  this  method  (see
also  p.  258).

The  methods  of  melting  and  of  freezing  with  large  quantities  of
the  substance  give  results  which  coincide  to  the  hundredth  part  of  a
degree.  These  methods,  according  to  a  recent  publication  by  Lan-
dolt,1  are  the  only  ones  which  give  certain  results.  Nevertheless,  it  is
the  common  practice  to  renounce  all  chance  of  extreme  accuracy,  and
either  by  working  with  substances  which  are  not  completely  pure,  or
with  quantities  of  the  substance  too  small  to  use  with  the  preceding
method ;  usually  the  determination  is  made  by  introducing  the  sub-
stance into  a  capillary  tube  which  is  fastened  to  a  thermometer  bulb,
and  the  two  together  are  dipped  into  a  bath  of  water,  oil,  paraffin,  or
sulphuric  acid.  The  temperature  shown  by  the  thermometer  at  the
moment  when  the  substance  (which  is  opaque  in  the  solid  state)  begins
to  become  transparent  is  noted  as  the  melting-point.  The  moment  of
the  change  of  colour,  as  a  rule,  can  be  sharply  noted  in  a  clear  bath
and  with  favourable  light ;  but  sometimes,  when  the  substance  exhibits
an  appearance  of  translucency  before  it  really  melts,  the  error  of
observation  may  amount  to  several  degrees.  In  such  a  case  the
moment  when  the  melted  substance  begins  to  flow  down  into  a  deeper
part  of  the  tube  may  be  taken  as  the  sign  of  incipient  fusion.  This

1  Zeitschr.  pliysik.  Chem.,  4.  349  (1888)  ;  see  also  R.  v. Schneider,  ibid.,  22.  225
(1897),

CHAP,  v PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE

329

point  may  be  made  more  visible  to  the  eye  by  a  simple  apparatus
suggested  by  Piccard.1

Mention  was  made  on  p.  189  of  the  regularity  in  the  melting-point
of  the  elements.  A  rule  announced  by  v.  Baeyer 2  for  organic  com-
pounds has  general  interest.  According  to  this,  the  even  members  of
homologous  series  are  clearly  different  from  the  odd  members —

SERIES  OF  THE  FATTY  ACIDS

Normal  C2  H4  0.,

c3  H6  o;

C4  H8  02
C5  H1002
C6  HM02
C7  H140.,

c8  H16o;

C9  H1803

$AA

C16H3202

Does  not  solidify  at
Does  not  solidify  at

SUCCINIC  ACID  SERIES

Normal  Succinic  acid  C4  H6  04

Normal  Pyrotartaric  acid  C5  H8  04

Adipic  C6  H1004

a-Pimelic  C7  H1204

Suberic  C8  H1404

Azelai'c  C9  H16O4

Sebacic  C10H1804

Brassylie  CnH2004

M.-P.

4-16-7°
-21°

-  0°
-16°

-  2°
-10-5°
+  16°
+  12°
+  30°
+  62°

+  59'9°
+  69-2°

180°
115°
148°
103°
140°
106°
127°
108°

In  both  series,  without  exception,  the  member  with  an  uneven
number  of  carbon  atoms  has  a  lower  melting-point  than  the  preced-
ing member  with  one  less  carbon  atom.  In  the  succinic  acid  series,
with  increasing  molecular  weight,  the  melting-point  of  the  acids
having  an  uneven  number  of  carbon  atoms  falls,  and  that  of  acids
having  an  even  number  of  carbon  atoms  rises,  so  that  the  two  sets
of  numbers  together  seem  to  have  a  common  mean  variation.

The  following  may  be  stated  respecting  other  irregularities  :—

Bromine  compounds  appear  to  have  a  higher  melting-point  than
the  corresponding  chlorine  compounds;  and  the  nitro- compounds
higher  than  the  corresponding  bromine  and  chlorine  compounds.3

In  the  pyrotartaric  acid  series  the  melting-point  is  higher  the
more  the  structure  of  the  acid  deviates  from  the  normal  type,  i.e.  the
more  side  chains  are  built  on  to  the  normal.  This  may  be  formulated
in  the  statement  that  in  the  pyrotartaric  acids  the  melting-point  rises
with  the  number  of  methyl  groups.4

1  B.  B.,  8.  687. See  also  art. "  Schmelzpunkt "  ("melting-point")  in  Fehling's
Handworterbuch  (1890).  2  B.  B.,  10.  1286  (1877).

3  Petersen,  B.  B.,  7.  59  (1874).  4  Markownikoff,  Lieb.  Ann.,  182.  340,

330  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

Of  the  isomers  of  the  aromatic  series,  the  para  derivatives  seem  to
have  the  highest  boiling-points,  but  there  is  an  exception  to  this  rule  in
the  case  of  the  amido  derivatives  of  the  substituted  benzene  sulphonic
acids,1  and  also  in  the  case  of  the  isomers  of  the  toluene  sulphonic
amides,  anilides,  and  toluidides.

Among  the  amides  of  the  halogen  derivatives  of  the  benzene  sul-
phonic acids,  in  the  para  series,  the  melting-point  rises  about  20°,  when
a  halogen  is  substituted  by  the  next  heavier  halogen.  Thus  the
chlorine  compound  melts  at  143°-144°,  the  bromine  compound  at
160°-166°,  and  the  iodine  compound  at  183°.  Also  the  melting-points
of  the  halides  of  any  particular  series  appear  to  rise  from  the  fluorine
to  the  iodine  compounds,  but  not  regularly.2  For  a  series  of  further
rules  see  the  monograph  quoted  on  p.  322.  Another  point  which  is  of
much  consequence  for  this  question  must  not  be  overlooked ;  it  gives
to  melting-points  occasionally,  perhaps  more  often  than  is  supposed,  a
certain  arbitrary  character.  Many  solids  have  the  faculty  of  existing
in  several  modifications,  possessing  different  physical  properties,  and  in
particular  often  very  different  melting-points  (p.  96).  This  is  especi-
ally common  among  organic  compounds,  arid  it  is  not  impossible  that
allotropy  (polymorphism)  is  a  general  phenomenon,  i.e.  that  every
solid  substance  can  exist  in  several  modifications  corresponding  with
different  conditions  of  pressure  and  temperature.  If  this  view  is
correct,  then  when  comparing  melting-points  the  question  must  first  be
settled  what  modifications  are  comparable,  and  it  is  quite  possible  that
many  exceptions  to  the  rules  of  melting-point  so  far  discovered  are
only  apparent,  and  would  be  avoided  by  the  discovery  of  new
modifications.

Although  in  the  case  of  the  other  physical  properties,  the  theory
of  their  relation  to  the  constitution  of  organic  compounds  in  particular
has  been  developed  much  further  than  in  the  case  of  the  melting-point,
yet,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  other  physical  constant  so  well
suited  to  identify  a  well-defined  chemical  substance.  The  melting-
point  has  a  pre-eminent  place  among  all  the  physical  properties,  as  is
shown  by  the  fact  of  its  easy  and  accurate  determination,  by  its  great
sensitiveness  to  foreign  adulteration,  and  also  by  the  fortunate  circum-
stance that  these  foreign  adulterations  almost  always  act  in  the  same
way,  viz.  to  lower  it  (p.  142),  and  finally,  it  varies  considerably,  even
with  very  slight  changes  in  the  composition.

Internal  Friction. — According  to  the  gas  theory,  p.  209,  the
internal  friction  in  the  case  of  gases  and  vapours  is  directly  proportional
to  the  path  of  the  molecule,  and  this  latter  is  inversely  proportional  to
the  cross-section  of  the  molecule  ;  therefore  by  measuring  the  internal
friction  of  gases,  one  may  obtain  a  measure  of  the  space  occupied  by

1  Beilstein,  Handbuch,  1.  60  (1886).
2  Lenz,  B.  B.,  12.  582  (1879).

CHAP.  V PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  331

the  molecule.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  L.  Meyer l  found  a  proportionality,
which  was  at  least  approximate,  between  the  volumes  of  molecules
determined  in  this  way  and  Kopp's  values ;  and  we  have  already  seen
that  the  latter  (p.  303)  may  be  regarded  as  a  measure  of  the  space
actually  occupied  by  the  molecules.  It  would  be  very  interesting  to
have  a  comparison  between  the  values  as  obtained  by  internal  friction,
and  those  from  the  molecular  refraction,  since  these  latter  values,
according  to  p.  312,  are  also  a  measure  of  the  volumes  of  molecules.

The  internal  friction  of  liquids  has  been  the  subject  of  much
investigation,  but  without  affording  any  regularities  of  a  general  nature.2
It  is  noticeable  that  the  peculiar  influence  on  other  physical  properties
of  the  mode  of  combination  of  oxygen  appears  also  in  the  viscosity.3

The  Natural  Rotation  of  the  Plane  of  Polarisation.— While

the  property  of  being  optically  active  under  the  influence  of  magnetism
is  a  universal  property  (p.  316),  only  certain  substances  are  able  of
themselves  to  rotate  the  plane  of  polarisation.  The  natural  rotation,
like  the  magnetic,  is  proportional  to  the  thickness  of  the  section  used,
and  varies  with  the  temperature,  and  also  with  the  wave-length  of  the
light  used.

The  rotation  may  be  measured  by  the  polarisation  apparatus  or
by  the  polari-strobometer ;  this  in  its  simplest  form,  as  devised  by
Mitscherlich,  consists  of  two  Nicol's  prisms,  which,  when  placed
respectively  before  and  behind  the  stage,  produce  darkness ;  the  stage
is  for  the  reception  of  the  substance.  The  angle  of  rotation  is  read
directly  from  the  divided  circle  of  the  ocular,  or  else  the  rotation  is
compensated  by  a  quartz  wedge  which  can  be  interposed  to  any  desired
thickness  (Soleil).  Finally,  a  number  of  changes  have  been  proposed
in  order  to  obtain  still  greater  accuracy  ;  these  have  been  applied  in
the  so-called  "half-shadow"  apparatus,  which  has  been  well  received  in
both  scientific  and  practical  work.  The  fundamental  principle  of  this
is  that  the  field  of  view  of  the  polarising  apparatus  is  filled,  not  with
one  bundle  of  light  rays,  but  with  two  ;  their  planes  of  vibration  form
a  certain  angle  with  each  other,  and  by  turning  the  analysing  Nicol,
the  two  halves  of  the  field  of  view  are  brought  to  the  same  degree  of
brightness.4

The  natural  circular  polarisation  was  discovered  in  quartz  by  Arago
in  1811,  and  was  afterwards  observed  in  many  other  crystals.

The  natural  circular  polarisation  of  liquids,  or  of  amorphous  solids,
was  first  observed  by  Biot  in  1815  in  sugar  solutions,  and  although  it

1  Wied.  Ann.,  7.  497  (1879)  ;  13.  1  (1881) ;  16.  394  (1882). See  also  Steudel,
ibid.,  16.  369  (1882).

2  Ostwald,  Allg.  Chem.,  2nd  edit.  1.  550  (1891).

3  Thorpe  and  Rodger,  Philosophical  Transactions,  London,  1894  and  1896  ;  Zeitschr.
physik.  Chem.,  14.  361  ;  20.  621.

4  For  a  more  detailed  description,  see  Landolt, Optisches  Drehungsvermogen  org.
Substanzen,  2nd  edit.,  Braunschweig,  1879.

332  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

has  been  found  since  then  in  very  many  substances,  yet  these  are  all
carbon  compounds.

The  rotation  property  of  crystallised  substances  depends  apparently
upon  their  molecular  arrangement  (crystal  structure) ;  while  that  of
organic  compounds  depends  upon  a  constitution  which  inheres  in  the
molecule.  A  fact  among  others,  in  favour  of  this  latter  view,  is  that
Biot  (1819)  found  that  those  organic  substances,  which  were  active  in
the  liquid  state,  were  also  capable  of  rotating  the  plane  of  polarisation
in  the  gaseous  state  ;  this  was  more  thoroughly  studied  by  Gernez
(1864)  for  the  vapour  of  oil  of  turpentine.  We  will  consider  here  only
the  property  of  rotation  of  the  carbon  compounds.

The  property  of  rotation  of  organic  substances  has  primarily  been
of  great  importance  as  an  aid  in  analysis.  This  can  be  determined  not
only  directly  for  active  substances,  as,  for  instance,  sugar  in  water  solu-
tion, but  also  under  certain  circumstances,  as  shown  by  Landolt,1
indirectly,  in  that  the  influence  of  inactive  substances  on  active
substances  may  be  measured  by  the  polari-strobometer.  An  active
substance  is  characterised  by  its  specific  coefficient  of  rotation  [a]  \  a
denotes  the  rotation  angle  for  a  definite  kind  of  light  (sodium  light
for  example),  measured  at  a  definite  temperature  (20°  for  example),
and  expressed  in  degrees  of  the  divided  circle ;  1  denotes  the  length
of  the  section  used,  expressed  in  decimeters ;  c  denotes  the  number  of
grams  contained  in  1  c.c.  of  the  liquid  used  (whether  of  a  solution  or
a  pure  substance) ;  then  we  have

20° a
%  =  fc"

Moreover,  the  specific  coefficient  of  rotation  of  the  substance  in
solution  in  general  varies  with  the  nature  of  the  solvent,  and  also  with
the  concentration ;  it  therefore  will  be  advisable  to  give  a  statement
of  this  phase  of  the  rotation  property.  The  product  of  the  specific
coefficient  of  the  rotation  and  the  molecular  weight  is  called  the
molecular  coefficient  of  rotation.

The  connection  with  constitution  is  shown  in  no  other  physical
property  so  clearly  as  it  is  in  this  of  optical  rotation.  As  already
stated  on  p.  293,  if  we  omit  the  asymmetrical  nitrogen  compounds,
p.  296,  which  are  as  yet  only  very  little  known,  only  those  compounds
are  active  ivhich  have  one  or  more  unsymmetrical  carbon  atoms,  i.e.  carbon
atoms,  the  four  valencies  of  which,  in  the  sense  of  structural  organic
chemistry,  are  satisfied  by  four  different  atoms  or  radicals.  But,  on
the  other  hand,  the  existence  of  such  carbon  atoms  by  no  means
conversely  necessitates  optical  activity  ;  this  is  explained  by  the  follow-
ing fundamental  laws  regarding  the  polari-strobometric  behaviour  of

1  B.  B.,  21.  191  (1888).

CHAP,  v PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  333

organic  compounds,  which  in  turn  are  an  immediate  consequence  of  the
views  developed  on  p.  293.

1 .  Only  those  compounds  are  active  in  an  amorphous  state,  whether
solid,  liquid, or  gaseous,  which  possess  one or more un symmetrical
carbon  atoms  in  the  molecule.

2.  There  corresponds  to  every  optically  active  substance  a  twin,
which  polarises  light  with  the same degree  of  strength  but  in  the
opposite direction ; if the compound has only one unsymmetrical
carbon atom,  then the two twins have  the  relative  rotations, +  A
and -  A. But  if  several  unsymmetrical  carbon  atoms  exist  in  the
molecule,  two  for  instance,  then,  if  we  denote  by  A  and  B  the  rotations
produced  by  each  of  these  respective  carbon  atoms,  there  will  result  the
folloAving  combinations,  viz.  : —

A  +  B; -A-B;
A  -  B  ; -A  +  B.

The  two  in  the  first  horizontal  row  are  isomeric  twins,  since  they  have
the  same  degree  of  rotation  but  in  contrasted  directions.  If  the
compound  has  n  unsymmetrical  carbon  atoms,  then  the  number  of
optical  isomers  is  2n,  two  of  which  are  always  twins.

3.  But,  conversely,  it  is  not  necessary  that  all  compounds  contain-
ing  asymmetric carbon atoms must be optically  active ; for these
may  be —

(a)  Compounds  having  a  very  small  coefficient  of  rotation,  so  that  it

baffles  measurement.  The  quantitative  relations  between
the  strength  of  the  rotation  and  the  nature  of  the  atoms
or  radicals  satisfying  the  four  valencies  of  the  carbon  atoms
have  not  been  determined  as  yet ;  so  that  nothing  certain
can  be  stated  at  present  regarding  the  absolute  degree  of
the  rotation.

(b)  Compounds  exhibiting  internal  compensation  ;  if  a  molecule  contains

an  even  number  of  unsymmetrical  carbon  atoms,  then  it  may
happen  that  the  particular  action  is  exactly  neutralised,  and
that  the  molecule  as  a  whole  is  inactive,  in  case  the  carbon
atoms  are  alike  in  pairs.  This  is  the  case  with  tartaric  acid,

CHOH— C02H

CHOH— C02H,

which  has  two  similar  unsymmetrical  carbon  atoms;  the
possible  isomers  are,  of  course,  as  follows  : —

+A+A  +A-A  -A-A

Dextro  tart,  acid  ; Inactive  tart,  acid  ; Laevo  tart.  acid.

Of  course  +  A  -  A  and  -  A  +  A  correspond  to  identical  sub-

334  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

stances,  which  are  optically  inactive  in  consequence  of  internal

compensation.
(c)  Compounds  consisting  of  an  equi-molecular  union  of  the  right  and  left

varieties. Thus  this  is  the  case  with  racemic  acid,  which  is  an

equi-molecular  union  of  right  and  left  tartaric  acid,
Such  mixtures  as  the  latter  are  obtained  in  the  synthetic  production
of  compounds  with  unsymmetrical  carbon  atoms  from  inactive  sub-
stances. This  follows  necessarily  from  the  fact,  viz.  that  in  the
synthesis  of  such  a  compound  and  in  the  replacement  of  one  c  in  the
compound  Cabc2  by  d,  on  account  of  the  complete  likeness  in  value
between  the  places  occupied  by  the  two  c  valencies,  two  kinds  of  sub-
stitution can  always  occur.

The  Decomposition  of  a  Mixture  of  Optical  Isomers.1—

It  remains  as  a  problem  for  the  experimenter  to  separate  the  equi-
molecular  mixture  of  the  dextro  and  laevo  compound.  There  is  no
particular  difficulty  in  the  synthetical  preparation  of  such  a  mixture
above  the  other  syntheses  of  organic  chemistry ;  but  certain  special
methods  of  treatment  are  requisite  for  the  separation.  The  customary
methods  applicable  to  the  separation  of  physical  mixtures,  and  which
depend  upon  incidental  differences  in  the  melting-points,  the  vapour
pressures,  or  the  solubilities,  all  fail  here  completely,  because,
according  to  p.  294,  both  components  have  the  same  melting-point,  the
same  vapour  pressures,  and  the  same  solubility.  There  are  three
methods  applicable  in  this  case,  for  all  of  which  we  are  indebted  to
Pasteur.  A  short  sketch  of  these  follows.

1 .  By  allowing  an  active  substance,  +  B,  to  react  on  the  mixture,
the  components  of  which  are  designated  as  +  A  and  -  A,  we  obtain
thereby  a  mixture  of  B  +  A  and  B  -  A.  Now,  these  last  compounds
are  no  longer  twins,  but  will  in  general  exhibit  greater  or  smaller  dif-
ferences in  melting-point,  vapour  pressure,  and  solubility,  therefore
they  can  be  separated  by  the  usual  methods.  By  decomposing  the
separated  compounds,  the  isomers  +  A  and  -  A  are  obtained  in  the
pure  state,  and  the  desired  separation  of  the  original  inactive  mixture
is  accomplished.

In  this  way  Pasteur  used  cinchonicine  to  neutralise  a  solution  of
racemic  acid,  which  is  an  equi-molecular  mixture  of  dextro  and  laevo
tartaric  acids ;  the  respective  salts  were  separated  from  each  other  by
crystallisation,  and  then  by  decomposing  these  cinchonicine  salts  the
dextro  and  Isevo  tartaric  acids  were  obtained  in  the  free  state,  thus
the  velocity  of  reaction  in  the  saponification  of  an  optically  active
alcohol  by  a  racemic  mixture  of  an  active  acid  is  noticeably  different
for  the  two  components  of  the  mixture.2

1  For  details  see  van't  Hoff,  Lagerung  der  Atome  im  Raume,  Braunschweig,  1894,  and
especially  in  the  extensive  work  of  Laudolt  referred  to  on  p.  331.

2  Marckwald  and  McKenzie,  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  32.  2130  (1899).

CHAP.  V PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  335

2.  Certain organisms affect the two isomers differently. Thus
Pasteur  observed  that  the  vegetation  of  peniciUum  in  a  dilute  solution
of  ammonium  racemate  destroyed  the  dextro  acid,  while  the  Isevo  acid
remained.

Since  the  organisms  in  question,  or  the  enzymes  contained  in  them,
possess  themselves  an  asymmetrical  structure,  this  method  is  essentially
the  same  as  the  first,

3.  Sometimes  the  dextro  and  laevo  compounds  can  be  separated
from each other in contrasted hemihedral crystals, which can be
picked  out  from  each  other. Pasteur  observed  this  in  the  crystallisa-
tion of  sodium -ammonium  racemate. But  usually  the  two  isomeric
salts  crystallise  out  as  a  compound. This  is  the  case  with  the  tartaric
acids  which,  in  an  equi-molecular  solution,  unite  in  crystallising  out  as
racemic  acid. Of  course  in  such  a  case  the  method  is  debarred.

To  produce  an  optically  active  compound  from  its  antipodes  the
following  method  can  sometimes  be  used.  On  rise  of  temperature  an
optically  active  compound  is  commonly  converted  into  the  racemic
mixture,  which  then,  by  any  suitable  process  of  decomposition,'  will*give
both  the  dextro  and  Isevo  compound

Quantitative  Relations  of  the  Rotatory  Power]. — The  fact
that  optical  activity  is  conditioned  by  the  presence  of  an  unsy in-
metrical  carbon  atom  suggests  another  question,  viz.  What  are  the  re-
lations between  the  nature  of  the  radicals  which  saturate  the  four
valencies  of  the  unsymmetrical  carbon  atom  on  the  one  hand,  and  the
degree  and  direction  of  the  rotation  on  the  other  hand  1  Although  not
very  much  is  certainly  known  at  present,  yet  a  few  general  remarks
will  be  given  regarding  the  kind  of  relation  which  should  be  looked
for  here.

We  will  denote  by  e  the  numerical  value  of  the  property  of  a
radical  which  is  influential  in  occasioning  the  polarisation ;  then  the
power  of  rotation  [a]  will  be  determined  by  the  combination  of  the
values  e1}  e9,  e3,  and  e4,  which  this  property  assumes  for  each  one  of
the  four  respective  radicals  of  the  unsymmetrical  carbon  atoms  ;  and  the
mathematical  expression  which  may  be  calculated  as  the  power  of
rotation  from  these  values  must  obviously  fulfil  the  following  condi-
tions, viz.  : —

1.  It  must  become  equal  to  zero  when  two  or  more  of  the  four
values  of  e  are  the  same,  for  in  the  latter  case  the  asymmetry,  and,
therefore,  of  course,  the  rotation,  will  disappear.

2.  It  must  remain  unchanged  in  degree,  but  in  the  opposite  direction,
when  two  values  of  e  exchange  places  with  each  other. Such  an  ex-
change means  nothing  more  than  that  a  dextro-isomer  is  changed  into
a  Isevo-isomer,  or  the  reverse.

By  a  few  trials  it  is  found  that  an  expression  of  the  following  form
is  suited  to  the  conditions  outlined  above,  viz.  : —

336  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

(et  -  e2)(e1  -  e3)(ei  -  e4)(e2  -  e3)(e2  -  e4)(e8  -  e4),

or

Of  course  many  such  expressions  as  the  preceding  may  be  found,
but  these  two  are  the  simplest.  They  are,  moreover,  fundamentally
identical,  for  it  is  only  necessary  to  use  log  e  in  the  second  expres-
sion, i.e.  to  regard  this  property  as  a  measure  of  the  power  of  rotation,
in  order  to  obtain  the  first  expression.  It  is  also  probable  that  there
exists  a  property  of  the  atom  or  radical,  which  is  related  to  the  mole-
.cular  rotatory  power  according  to  the  following  law,  viz.  :  —

M[a]  -  (ej  -  62X8!  -  e3)(e1  -  e4)(e2  -  e3)(e2  -  e4)(e3  -  e4).

Of  course  it  cannot  be  determined  on  a  priori  grounds,  whether  or
not  the  value  of  e  may  depend  both  on  the  nature  of  the  particular
radical  and  also  on  the  nature  of  the  other  three  radicals  which  con-
stitute the  unsymmetrical  carbon  atom  group,  i.e.  whether  or  not  there
exists  a  mutual  influence  between  the  radicals.  If  such  were  the  case
the  problem  would  be  much  complicated,  because  then  the  calculation
would  have  to  take  account  of  the  mutual  influence  of  each  of  the
values  of  e,  though  probably  bhis  mutual  influence  would  not  be  very
great.

It  was  suspected  by  Guye  l  that  the  product  of  the  mass  of  the
radical,  by  its  distance  from  the  central  point  [centre  of  gravity],  of
the  unsymmetrical  carbon  atom,  or,  since  the  latter  is  approximately
constant,  that  the  mass  of  the  radical  is  a  measure  of  the  degree
of  the  rotatory  power.  The  molecular  rotation  accordingly  would
be

M[a]  =  (ml  -  m2)(m1  -  m^^j  -  m4)(m2  -  m3)(m2  -  m4)(m3  -  m4),

where  the  values  of  m  are  either  proportional  to  the  weights  of  the
four  radicals,  or  at  least  are  greater  the  greater  the  weights  become.
But  this  has  not  been  confirmed  by  experience.

The  Absorption  of  Light.  —  If  monochromatic  light,  i.e.  light
having  a  definite  wave-length,  falls  at  right  angles  upon  an  absorbent
layer  which  has  the  thickness  d,  then  a  part  of  the  light  will  be  used
in  warming  the  substance  permeated,  and  thus  will  be  lost  by  absorp-
tion. The  fundamental  law  of  absorption  states  that  the  intensity  of
the  emerging  light  J',  is  proportional  to  that  of  the  immerging  light
J,  and  that  there  exists  the  relation

J'  =  J(i-y)d;

here  y  denotes  a  numerical  factor  which  is  characteristic  of  the  absorbing

1  C.  R.,  110.  744  (1890)  ;  thoroughly  in  a  Thesis,  Paris  (1891)  ;  see  also  the  work
.of  Landolt  quoted  on  p.  331.

CHAP.  V PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  337

substance ;  this  absorption  coefficient  y  varies  with  the  wave-length
of  light.  In  order  to  detect  this  variation,  it  is  best  to  illuminate  the
absorbing  substance  with  white  light,  and  then  decompose  the  emerging
rays  by  the  aid  of  a  spectral  apparatus  (see  also  p.  193).

Regarding  the  construction  of  the  spectral  apparatus,  the  student
is  referred  to  the  handbooks  of  physics.1  It  should  be  noted  that
the  apparatus  usually  made  for  laboratory  use  depends  upon  the
dispersive  power  of  transparent  substances,  glass  in  particular,  and
therefore  give  refraction  spectra  ;  it  is  only  quite  recently  that  scientific
investigation  has  commonly  begun  to  use  spectra  produced  by  diffrac-
tion gratings.  Inasmuch  as  this  latter  method  (reflection  gratings)  gives
regular  and  strong  dispersion,  and  is  also  entirely  free  from  the  absorp-
tion phenomena  of  glass,  it  now  commonly  finds  almost  universal  applica-
tion, as  it  thus  has  a  great  advantage,  especially  in  studying  the  infra-red
and  the  ultra-violet  parts  of  the  spectrum.  Photography  is  employed
to  study  the  ultra-violet  rays,  and  it  is  also  possible  to  render  the
ultra-violet  rays  visible  by  fluorescence.  In  the  study  of  the  infra-red
part  of  the  spectrum,  use  is  commonly  made  of  heat  effects  caused  by
these  rays  on  the  thermopile,  bolometer,  radiometer,  etc.

The  following  kinds  of  absorption  are  recognised  : —

1.  Absorption  which  steadily  increases  or  decreases  with  the  wave-
length of  light :  uni-lateral  absorption. As  a  rule  the  absorption  in-
creases with  decreasing  wave-length,  i.e.  the  violet  end  of  the  spectrum
is  absorbed  more  strongly  than  the  red  end.

2.  Absorption  which  exhibits a  minimum  in  the  spectrum,  with
regular  increase  on  both  sides  of  this  minimum  :  bi-lateral  absorption.

3.  Absorption  exhibiting  shaded  maxima;  the  spectrum  appears
to  be  crossed  by  absorption  bands.

4.  Absorption  exhibiting  sharply  defined  maxima ; the  spectrum
appears  to  be  crossed  by  absorption  lines.

This  latter  variety,  which  is  altogether  the  most  characteristic,  is
met  in  incandescent  gases.

Inasmuch  as  the  absorption  capacity  of  substances  varies  with  the
nature  of  the  substance  to  such  an  extraordinary  degree  and  in  such
a  variety  of  ways,  and  beyond  all  other  properties,  therefore  both
light  absorption  and  light  emission  would  appear  to  be  primarily  suited
to  give  us  some  information  regarding  molecular  structure.  But  the
results  thus  far  obtained  in  this  line  do  not  at  all  justify  the  anticipa-
tions. We  know  of  innumerable  examples  where  very  slight  changes
in  molecular  structure  are  associated  with  deep-seated  changes  in  the
capacity  for  absorption.  But  we  cannot  infer  a  single  generalisation
regarding  the  laws  according  to  which  this  happens.  Thus,  for
example,  if  we  break  up  the  unstable  variety  of  nitrogen  peroxide,
N2O4,  by  raising  the  temperature  into  the  simpler  molecule  NO.,,  we

1  See  also  the  monographs  on  spectral  analysis  by  Kayser,  Berlin,  1883,  new  edition
being  prepared,  and  by  H.  W.  Vogel,  Berlin,  1886,  and  the  literature  quoted  on  p.  194.

Z

338  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

obtain  a  very  slight  change  in  the  chemical  behaviour ; l  but  the  gas
changes  from  a  slight  yellow  to  a  dark  reddish- brown ;  this  gas,  when
interposed  in  the  path  of  a  bundle  of  light  rays,  gives  a  spectrum
crossed  by  innumerable  absorption  lines.  Also  the  absorption  may
vary  strongly  with  unchanged  molecular  weights.  Thus  iodine,  when
dissolved  in  carbon  disulphide,  gives  a  violet  colour  ;  in  ether,  a  reddish-
brown  ;  yet  in  both  cases  the  iodine  was  shown,  by  the  boiling-point
method,  to  have  the  molecule  I.,.  Of  course  it  is  not  impossible  that
the  different  colours  are  occasioned  by  reaction  with  the  solvent,  i.e.
by  forming  compounds  consisting  of  I2  +  n  molecule  of  the  solvent.
Moreover,  the  cases  are  not  rare  where,  as  in  this  case,  the  absorption
varies  more  or  less  strongly  with  the  nature  of  the  solvent.  Usually,
but  not  always,  the  absorption  bands  advance  towards  the  red,  according
as  the  refractive  power  of  the  solvent  increases.

Up  to  the  present  the  most  thorough  study  of  absorption  in  solu-
tion has  been  done  in  the  case  of  organic  compounds ;  here  there  were
found  certain  remarkable  regularities  regarding  the  influence  of
substitution  on  the  position  of  the  absorption  bands.2

According  to  this,  the  introduction  of  hydroxyl,  methyl,  hydroxy-
methyl,  carboxyl,  phenyl,  and  the  halogens  occasioned  a  displacement
towards  the  red ;  the  introduction  of  the  nitro  and  amido  groups,  and
also  the  addition  of  hydrogen,  occasioned  a  displacement  towards  the
violet ;  these  rules  hold  good  almost  without  exception.  For  reasons
which  will  be  given  in  the  following  paragraph,  the  former  group  is
designated  as  batho-chromic,  and  the  latter  as  hypso-cliromic.  In  the  case  of
all  chemically  related  groups,  the  displacements  increase  with  increasing
molecular  weight  of  the  radical  introduced :  thus  it  is  greater  in  the
case  of  iodine  than  of  bromine,  and  again  greater  in  the  case  of  phenyl
than  of  methyl.  Of  the  solvents  used,  concentrated  sulphuric  acid
gave  the  sharpest  colour  reactions.

The  Theory  of  Colouring  Substances. — Inasmuch  as  the
colour  of  a  substance  depends,  as  is  well  known,  upon  its  selective
absorption,  therefore,  as  has  been  shown  by  M.  Schiitze,3  the  regularities
observed  regarding  the  absorption  of  light  give  opportunity  for  some
interesting  observations  upon  organic  colouring  matters.  The  mixture
of  all  the  colours  of  the  sun's  spectrum  appears  to  be  white,  because  for
every  colour  there  is  an  equally  strong  complementary  colour ;  and  these
two,  when  combined,  produce  in  the  eye  the  sensation  of  whiteness.
Therefore,  when  any  colour  of  the  spectrum  is  extinguished  by  absorp-

1  This  must  be  taken  cum  grano  salis ;  moreover,  the  polymerisation  of  N02  into
N.204  is  attended  with  considerable  evolution  of  heat. — TR.

2  G.  Kriiss  and  Oeconomides,  B.  B., 16.  2051 (1883)  ;  Kriiss,  B. B., 18. 1426
(1885); Zeitschr.  physik. Chem., 2.  312  (1888);  E. Koch, Wied. Ann., 32. 167
(1887)  ;  E.  Vogel,  ibid.,  43.  449  (1891)  ;  M.  Schiitze,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  9.  109
(1892)  ;  G.  Grebe,  ibid.,  10.  674  (1892) ;  Hartley  and  Dobbie,  Trans.  Ghem.  Soc.,  1899,
P-  640.  3  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  9.  109  (1892).

CHAP,  v PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  339

tion,  the  substance  appears  to  have  the  colour  of  the  complementary
emerging  rays. The  paired  complementary  colours  are  as  follows  : —

Violet — Greenish-yellow.
Indigo — Yellow.
Cyanide  blue — Orange.
Bluish-green — Red.
Green — Purple.

Many  colourless  substances  produce  absorption  bands  in  the  violet.
These  bands  are  displaced  towards  the  less  refrangible  [red]  end  of  the
spectrum  by  the  introduction  of  batho-chrome  groups  ;  by  the  entrance
of  bands  into  the  visible  part  of  the  spectrum,  violet  will  be  first
absorbed,  when  the  substance  will  have  a  greenish  hue.  As  the  bands
retreat  regularly  back  towards  the  red,  the  colour  of  the  substance
will  pass  successively  into  yellow,  orange,  red,  purple,  and  finally
back  up  into  violet,  when  the  absorption  bands  pass  from  green  into
greenish-yellow.  Continued  displacement  in  the  same  direction  will
cause  the  appearance  of  the  colours,  indigo,  cyanide  blue,  bluish-green,
and  when  the  bands  pass  into  the  infra-red  spectrum,  the  body  will
again  be  colourless.

This  series  of  absorption  colours,  which  is  the  simplest  possible,  is
very  rarely  seen,  because  usually,  before  the  one  set  of  bands  has
passed  down  through  the  spectrum,  another  set  appears  in  the  violet
end  of  the  spectrum,  and  of  course  there  occur  complications  between
these  two  sets.

The  introduction  of  "hypso- chromic"  groups  works  in  a  way
contrary  to  that  of  the  batho-chromic  groups  ;  the  former  produce  an
elevation  of  the  "  tone  colour,"  the  latter  a  depression,  whence  their
respective  names.  Inasmuch  as  the  hypso-chrome  groups  are  of  excep-
tional occurrence,  the  following  law  may  be  stated,  viz.  : — the  simplest
colouring  substances  are  in  the  greenish-yellow  and  yellow,  and  with  increasing
molecular  weight  the  colour  passes  into  orange,  red,  violet,  blue,  and  green.
In  fact,  this  law  was  empirically  discovered  in  1879  by  Nietzki ;  it  is
by  no  means  perfect,  because  disturbances  arise  from  various  sources ;
thus  the  very  groups  introduced  to  increase  the  molecular  weight  may
have  a  specific  hypso-chrome  action  in  displacing  the  bands  towards  the
violet ;  or  else  complications  may  arise  from  the  existence  of  several
bands  in  the  region  of  the  visible  spectrum.

One  remark  of  Schiitze  is  very  interesting,  viz.  that  in  the  case  of
analogous  elements  an  increase  of  the  atomic  weight  is  attended  by  a
deepening  of  the  colour;  a  beautiful  illustration  of  this  is  found  in
the  series  including  colourless  fluorine,1  yellowish -green  chlorine,
reddish  bromine,  and  violet  iodine.

Now  experience  shows  that  the  colour  of  many  organic  colouring
substances  is  due  to  the  presence  of  certain  specific  groups  in  the

1  Fluorine  has  been  recently  found  by  Moissan  to  have a light  greenish  -  yellow
colour  similar  to,  but  lighter  than,  that  of  chlorine. — Tn.

340  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  HOOK  II

molecule ;  thus  the  colour  of  the  azo  derivatives  is  due  to  the  presence
of  the  azo  group ;  moreover,  the  supposition  is  an  immediate  one,  that
these  same  groups  are  responsible  for  the  absorption  of  light  in  the
molecule,  and  that  the  change  of  colour  is  due  to  the  effect  of  the
influence  exerted  by  the  group  which  is  introduced  on  the  group
producing  the  colour.

0.  N.  Witt,1  who  first  developed  this  view,  called  those  groups
which  produce  the  colours  cliromophores.  Inasmuch  as  their  influence
becomes  greater  the  nearer  spatially  the  group  introduced  is  placed  to
the  chromophore,  this  theory  suggests  an  interesting  method  for
determining  the  value  of  the  influence  of  relative  distance  of  the
groups  in  the  molecule,  by  means  of  spectroscopic  investigation.  In
fact,  Schiitze,  in  his  work  to  which  repeated  reference  has  been  made,
by  the  spectroscopic  study  of  a  number  of  azo  colouring  substances,
showed  that  the  distances  of  the  atoms  as  given  by  the  structure
formulse,  on  the  whole,  corresponded  to  the  distances  evaluated  in  the
way  mentioned  above.

Interesting  direct  applications  of  the  above  theory  are  to  be  found
in  Wallach,2  who  recognised  the  combinations

C  -  CH .  CO and C  =  CHCOCH  -  C
as  chromophores.

Fluorescence. — According  to  the  investigations  of  C.  Liebermann
and  R.  Meyer,  the  somewhat  singular  property  of  fluorescence  is
associated  with  the  existence  of  certain  atomic  groups  in  the  molecule,
the  fluorophores ;  such  groups  are  chiefly  rings  of  six  members,  mostly
heterocyclic,  such  as  pyrine,  azine,  oxazine,  and  thioazine  rings,  and
further  atomic  rings  contained  in  anthracine  and  acridine.  As  in  the
case  of  colour  the  nature  of  the  surrounding  atomic  groups  influences
the  action  of  the  fluorophores.

Crystal  Form. — The  connection  between  crystal  form  and  molecular
structure  has  not  been  very  thoroughly  studied  as  yet,  and  the  results
thus  far  obtained  are  limited  to  some  rules  given  by  Groth  3  regarding
the  change  in  the  ratio  of  the  axes  occasioned  by  the  substitution  of
certain  radicals.  This  phenomenon  in  mineralogy  is  called  morpliotropy.

It  has  been  already  stated  that  optical  isomerism  is  shown  in  the
solid  state  by  the  contrasted  right  and  left  hemihedral  (or  tetartohedral)
crystal  forms  (pp.  80  and  334).  This  is  doubtless  due,  like  the  optical
rotatory  power,  to  an  asymmetric  structure  of  the  molecule.  But  such
a  development  of  planes  may  also  occur  when  the  structure  of  the
molecule  is  not  unsymmetrical ;  in  such  cases  it  is  highly  probable  that
the  molecules  unite  in  an  unsymmetrical  way  to  build  up  the  crystal.

1  £.  B.,  9.  522  (1876).  2  Gott.  Nachr.,  1896,  Heft  4.

a  Pogg.  Ann.,  141.  31  (1876)  ;  see  also  Hintze,  Zeitschr.  Kryst.,  12.  165  (1887)  ;
and  Retgers,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  6.  193  (1890).

CHAP.  V PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE

341

Hemihedrism  may,  like  the  rotary  power  of  crystallised  substances
(p.  332),  be  produced  in  two  entirely  different  ways,  one  of  which,
the  chemical,  refers  to  the  method  of  the  arrangement  of  the  atoms  in  the
molecule  ;  the  other,  the  physical,  to  the  arrangement  of  the  molecules  in  the
crystal.  Both  conditions  allow  of  spatial  isomerism ;  but  by  passing
into  the  liquid  or  gaseous  state,  the  latter  [physical]  variety  of
isomerism  is  destroyed,  while  the  former  [chemical]  persists.

Retgers  gives  some  interesting  statistics  with  regard  to  a  law
proposed  by  Buys-Ballot  in  1846  that  the  simple  chemical  compounds
take  for  preference  a  regular  or  hexagonal  shape,  that  is,  crystallise  in
the  simpler  forms.1

Of  40  monatomic  substances  (elements)

Of  20  tetratomic  substances  there

are  —

there  are  —

7

°/

regular

. 50

regular ....

5

quadratic  .

5

quadratic ....

5

hexagonal  .

. 35

hexagonal  ....

35

rhombic

5

rhombic ....

50

monoclinic

5

monoclinic

5

triclinic

• . 0

triclinic . .

0

Thus  :  regular  and  hexagonal  85  %,  all

Thus  :  regular  and  hexagonal  40

%  all

other  systems  15

%•

other  systems  60  %.

Of  67  diatomic  substances

there  are  —

Of  50  pentatomic  substances  there  are  —

regular .

68  :5

regular ....

12

quadratic

4-5

quadratic ....

6

hexagonal

19-5

hexagonal  ....

38

rhombic  .

3-0

rhombic ....

36

monoclinic

4'5

monoclinic

6

triclinic  .

O'O triclinic ....

2

Thus  :  regular  and  hexagonal  88  %,  all

Of  63  triatomic  substances  there  are —

Thus :  regular  and  hexagonal  50  %,  all
other  systems  50  %.

Of  673  polyatomic  inorganic  compounds
there  are —

regular  .
quadratic
hexagonal
rhombic  .
monoclinic
triclinic  .

42-0

19-0

11-0

23-5

3-0

O'O

regular  .
quadratic
hexagonal
rhombic  .
monoclinic
triclinic  .

5'8

7-0

14-6

27-3

37'3

8-0

Thus  :  regular  and  hexagonal  53  %,  all
'other  systems  47  %.

Thus  :  regular  and  hexagonal  20 '4  %,  all
other  systems  79'6  %.

Of  585  organic  substances  there  are —

regular  .
quadratic
hexagonal

/o

2-5
5-0
4-0

rhombic .

monoclinic

triclinic

33-0

47-5

7-0

Thus  :  regular  and  hexagonal  6 '5  %,  all  other  systems  93;

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  6.  193  (1890).

342  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

The  Systemisation  of  the  Physical  Properties. — We  will  give
in  the  concluding  paragraph  of  this  chapter  only  a  summary  of  the
rather  heterogeneous  material  found  here  ;  for  unfortunately  space  does
not  allow  more  than  a  short  sketch  of  a  subject  which  is  broad  and
which  deserves  generous  treatment.

A  large  number  of  physical  properties  have  been  shown  to  be
clearly  additive,  i.e.  the  value  of  the  property  in  question  can  be
calculated  as  though  the  compound  were  such  a  mixture  of  its  elements
that  they  experience  no  change  in  their  properties ;  thus  we  can
calculate  the  properties  of  a  compound  from  the  properties  of  its  components
in  exactly  the  same  way  as  was  done  for  many  properties  of  the  physical
mixture  (p.  105).  This,  as  already  mentioned  in  a  preceding  chapter
(p.  178),  is  more  clearly  shown  by  the  specific  heat  of  solid  salts  than
is  the  rule  elsewhere  ;  but  there  are  many  properties  of  organic  com-
pounds which  are  more  or  less  clearly  additive,  as  the  volume,
refraction,  magnetism,  heat  of  combustion,  etc.  Several  of  these  have
this  in  common,  viz.  that  their  numerical  values  are  a  measure  of  the  space
actually  occupied  by  the  molecule.  Thus  we  infer  this  [additional]  law
from  these  various  sources,  viz.  that  these  magnitudes  may  very  often  be
calculated  as  though  they  were  approximately  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  volumes
actually  occupied  by  the  atoms.

In  some  cases,  conversely,  the  numerical  values  deduced  for  the
properties  of  the  elements  from  their  compounds  coincide  with  the  values
actually  shown  by  the  elements  in  the  free  state ;  thus  this  is  the  case
for  the  specific  heat  of  solid  elements  for  the  atomic  volume  and  the
atomic  refraction  of  chlorine,  but  not  for  the  atomic  refraction  of
oxygen.  We  have  seen  previously,  in  the  case  of  isomorphic  mixtures
(p.  123),  that  in  some  cases  the  specific  volume  of  a  salt  in  a  mixed
crystal  was  the  same  as  in  the  free  state,  but  in  other  cases  very
different.

Now  the  properties  of  compounds  are  no  more  strictly  additive  than
those  of  physical  mixtures.  For  with  compounds  the  deviations  from
simple  additive  relations  are,  as  a  rule,  much  more  emphatic.  This  is
not  to  be  wondered  at ;  for  the  mutual  influence  of  the  properties  is
much  smaller  in  a  simple  mixture  of  the  molecules,  whereby  there  results
a  physical  mixture,  than  when  the  atoms  unite  to  form  a  chemical
compound.

The  kind  of  influence  of  the  atom  in  a  compound  is  primarily
dependent  upon  the  mode  of  its  union,  i.e.  upon  the  constitution  and
configuration  of  the  compound.  Those  properties  which  are  clearly
traceable  to  mutual  influence  of  this  sort,  and  which  generally  require
very  exact  measurements,  are  called  "  constitutive"  following  the
example  of  Ostwald,1  who  has  done  such  great  service  in  the  systemisa-
tion  of  the  physical  properties.  An  excellent  example  of  a  strongly
constitutive  property  is  the  absorption  of  light.  Similar  examples  are
1  Ostwald,  All.  Chem.,  2nd  edit.,  1.  1121  (1891).

CHAP.  V PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  AND  MOLECULAR  STRUCTURE  343

found  in  the  optical  activity,  the  melting-point,  etc.  Moreover,  our
knowledge  as  to  how  far  the  influence  of  constitution  is  shown  in
certain  cases  varies  with  the  different  properties,  but  in  general  it  is
developed  to  only  a  slight  degree.

Moreover,  it  does  not  seem  to  the  writer  to  be  certainly  established
that  the  deviations  from  simple  additive  relations  are  to  be  ascribed
to  the  influence  of  constitution  alone.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the
molecule  as  a  whole  may  exert  an  influence  upon  these  deviations,  as  is
evidenced  by  many  experiments  with  physical  mixtures ;  for,  in  addi-
tion to  the  forces  which  are  active  between  the  atoms,  there  are  also
forces  active  between  the  molecules,  but  the  action  of  the  latter  may
be  eliminated  by  studying  substances  in  the  gaseous  state.

A  third  species  of  properties  depends,  neither  upon  the  nature  of
the  atom  in  the  molecule,  nor  upon  the  mode  of  the  union  of  the
atoms,  but  only  upon  the  sum  total  of  the  molecule.  Properties  of
this  kind,  which  are  called  " colligative"  by  Ostwald,  we  have  con-
sidered in  the  chapter  on  the  Determination  of  the  Molecular  Weight.
Upon  these  properties  are  based  the  methods  for  ascertaining  the
relative  weights  of  molecules.1

1  Additive  properties  give  no  foothold  in  determining  the  molecular  weights,  because,
as  shown  in  the  specific  heats  of  solid  salts,  they  are  not  affected  by  a  change  in  the
size  of  the  molecule  ;  but  constitutive  properties  sometimes  do  render  accessory  service
in  determining  the  molecular  weights.

CHAPTEE VI

THE DISSOCIATION OF GASES

Abnormal  Vapour  Densities. — In  a  preceding  chapter  (p.  247)  we
have  considered  the  methods  which  enable  us  to  determine  the  mole-
cular weights  of  gaseous  and  of  dissolved  substances ;  in  this  and  the
two  following  chapters  a  discussion  will  be  given  regarding  some  con-
clusions which  are  necessitated  by  the  experimental  results  obtained
by  the  methods  mentioned  above.  These  conclusions  deal  with  the
molecular  condition  of  gaseous  and  of  dissolved  substances.

In  some  cases,  which,  to  be  sure,  are  not  very  numerous,  one  at
once  finds  values  for  the  molecular  weights  which  are  in  glaring  con-
tradiction to  those  chemical  formulae  which  are  probable  from  all
analogies.  Thus  the  vapour  of  ammonium  chloride  has  a  density
about  one-half  as  large  as  it  should  have  if  calculated  from  the  formula
NH4C1 ;  that  of  ammonium  carbamate  has  a  value  about  one-third  of
what  it  should  be  if  calculated  from  the  formula  NH9C09NH4 ;
acetic  acid,  on  the  other  hand,  at  lower  temperatures,  has  a
density  considerably  greater  than  that  corresponding  to  the  formula
CH3C02H.

The  inference  was  close  at  hand,  in  spite  of  their  unexpected
behaviour,  that  Avogadro's  rule  still  holds  good,  and  that  the  abnormal
vapour  densities  were  to  be  explained  by  abnormal  molecular  conditions.
Thus,  at  almost  the  same  time,  Cannizzaro  (1857),  Kopp  (1858),  and
Kekule  (1858)  expressed  the  opinion  that  the  low  vapour  densities
must  be  ascribed  to  a  more  or  less  complete  decomposition  ;  in  fact,  on
the  basis  of  this,  Kopp  succeeded  in  showing  in  many  cases  that  the
decrease  of  vapour  density  followed  in  accordance  with  the  increase  in
the  number  of  molecules  resulting  from  the  decomposition.  Thus
ammonium  chloride  has  about  only  a  little  more  than  half  its  theo-
retically normal  vapour  density,  because  it  is  almost  entirely  decom-
posed into  NH3  +  HC1 ;  and  similarly  ammonium  carbamate  only  about
a  third  of  its  vapour  density,  because  it  is  decomposed  into
2NH3  +  C02,  etc.  Similarly,  on  the  basis  of  this  view,  it  must  be  con-
cluded that  acetic  acid  [at  first]  is  partially  polymerised,  and  that  in

344

CHAP.  VI  THE  DISSOCIATION  OF  GASES  345

addition to the simple molecules,  more complicated ones occur in
greater  quantity.

The  scientific  world  Avere  perfectly  conscious  of  the  importance  of
this  question.  It  was  attacked  by  the  most  various  means,  and,  in
short,  by  the  collection  of  most  of  the  abundant  experimental
material,  it  was  decided,  most  convincingly  and  undeniably,  that  the
rule  of  Avogadro  holds  good  even  in  the  case  of  gases  exhibiting
abnormal  vapour  densities.  Thus,  in  detail,  it  was  not  only  shown
that  the  gaseous  decomposition  products  of  the  substances  in  question
could  be  recognised  by  their  special  physical  and  chemical  behaviour,
but  also  that  these  ingredients  could  be  at  least  partially  separated
from  each  other  into  the  free  state  by  means  of  diffusion.

Dissociation. — The  more  or  less  complete  dissociation  of  a  mole-
cule into  its  components  or  dissociation  products,  we  will  call  dissociation,
following  the  usage  of  St.  Claire  Deville,1  to  whom  we  are  greatly  in-
debted for  his  investigations  regarding  the  definition  of  those  chemical
processes  which  are  of  fundamental  importance  in  these  phenomena.

The  thorough  treatment  of  dissociation  phenomena  belongs  to  the
department  of  the  so-called  "  reversible "  chemical  reactions,  and  ^the
theoretical  derivation  of  the  laws  of  dissociation  forms  a  special  case,
and  a  very  simple  one,  of  the  universal  laws  of  reaction.  These  will
be  considered  under  the  subjects  of  the  doctrine  of  affinity,  and  also
of  thermochemistry.  Yet,  nevertheless,  in  order  to  understand  what
follows,  it  is  necessary  to  introduce  some  remarks  on  the  dissociation
of

The  Extent  of  Dissociation. — Dissociation  is  a  chemical  re-
action, and  consists  in  separating  a  complex  molecule  into  simpler
ingredients,  thus  leading  to  a  continual  increase  in  the  number  of  mole-
cules. The  pressure  exerted  on  the  walls  of  a  vessel  by  a  definite
quantity  of  a  gas,  other  things  being  equal,  will  be  greater  the  greater
the  number  of  new  molecular  species  produced  from  the  original  mole-
cules, and  the  further  the  decomposition  of  the  latter  proceeds  ;  and
also  the  density  of  the  original  gas  must  diminish  in  the  same  propor-
tion, if  it  is  not  maintained  at  constant  volume,  but  at  constant
pressure.

Let  us  denote  by  8  the  vapour  density  observed  when  no  dissocia-
tion occurs,  and  by  A  that  actually  observed ;  then  A  must  always  be
smaller  than  8.  Let  the  number  of  molecules  into  which  the  original
molecules  become  decomposed  be  n ;  thus  in  the  dissociation  of  iodine
vapour,

I2  =  1  +  I.

1  "  Sur  la  dissociation  ou  la  decomposition  spontanee  des  corps  sous  ['influence  de
la  chaleur."  Com.pt.  rend.,  45.  857  (1857).  The  term  "thermolysis,"  suggested  by  Fr.
Mohr,  has  not  come  into  extensive  use.

346  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

Here  n  =  2  ;  and  in  the  case  of  ammonium  carbamate,  viz.,
NH4CO  .  ONH,  -  2NH8  +  C02,

n  =  3. If  the  decomposition  were  complete,  A  would  be  the  nth  part
of  8. In  general  A  lies  between  8  and  8/n.

Let  the  dissociated  part  of  the  gas  mass,  or  the  extent  of  the  dis-
sociation amount  to  a  ;  then  the  undissociated  part  is  1  -  a  ;  i.e.  of
100  molecules,  lOOa  are  dissociated  and  produce  lOOna  new  mole-
cules, while  100(1  -  a)  molecules  remain  undecomposed.  Thereby
the  number  of  molecules  is  increased  by  dissociation,  from

100  to  lOOna  +  100(1  -  a)  -  100[1  +  (n  -  l)a],
and  the  vapour  density  diminishes  in  the  same  proportion,  viz.,

_ 1  _A

r+"(n-  l)a~  8'

The  extent  of  the  dissociation  a  is  calculated,  therefore,  to  be

8-A

When  A  =  8/n,  then  the  extent  of  the  dissociation  a  =  1,  and  we  have
complete  dissociation  ;  but  when  A  =  8,  then  a  =  0,  and  no  dissociation
has  occurred.

According  to  experiment,  the  extent  of  the  dissociation  varies  with
the  temperature  and  the  pressure.  It  increases  with  increasing  tem-
perature, and  diminishes  with  increasing  pressure.  This  is  expressed
by  the  statement  that  by  lowering  the  temperature  and  increasing  the
pressure,  the  values  of  the  vapour  densities  A  and  8  are  brought  nearer
together.

The  Physical  Conduct  of  Dissociated  Gases—  Effusion.—  If  a

gas  which  exists  in  a  state  of  dissociation  is  allowed  to  escape  (effuse)
through  a  narrow  opening  into  a  vacuum,  or  into  a  space  filled  with
an  indifferent  gas,  then  the  velocity  of  the  effusion  will  decrease  as  the
density  or  the  molecular  weight  of  the  gas  increases.  Moreover,  there
occurs  a  partial  separation  of  the  products  of  dissociation,  as  the  effusate
will  contain  an  excess  of  the  lighter  molecules,  and  the  residue  an
excess  of  the  heavier  molecules.

On  this  phenomenon  is  based  the  method  of  research  of  Pebal  l  in
proving  that  ammonium  chloride  owes  its  diminished  density  to  an
extended  dissociation  into  ammonia  and  hydrochloric  acid.  This
method  may  be  used  in  demonstration  at  the  lecture  desk,  in  the  follow-
ing simplified  form  given  by  Strauss.2  In  a  combustion  tube  of  about

1  Lieb.  Ann.,  123.  199  (1862).
2  Exner's  Repert.  d.  Phys.,  21.  501  (1884).

CHAP.  VI  THE  DISSOCIATION  OF  GASES  347

10-12  mm.  diameter,  near  the  middle  there  is  fastened  an  asbestos
plug  about  5  mm.  thick.  A  piece  of  ammonium  chloride  is  then
placed  at  one  side  of  the  plug  in  the  middle  of  the  tube,  and,  in
addition,  a  piece  of  litmus  paper  in  each  division  of  the  tube.  A  blue
piece  is  placed  on  the  same  side  of  the  asbestos  plug  with  the  ammonium
chloride,  and  a  red  piece  on  the  other  side.  On  heating  the  piece  of
ammonium  chloride  by  a  Bunsen  burner,  there  occurs  a  change  of
.colour  in  the  inner  ends  of  the  litmus  paper  in  both  parts  of  the  tube.
This  proves  that  the  effusate  reacts  alkaline,  while  the  residue  reacts
acid.  The  experiment  should  be  interrupted  in  season,  as  the  reaction
is  reversed  after  a  little.

Colour. — The  physical  properties  of  a  mixture  of  any  two  gases
are  intermediate  between  those  of  the  particular  components,  while  the
properties  of  a  compound  of  two  gases  exhibit  in  many  respects  a  deep-
seated  change,  as  shown  for  example  in  the  absorption  of  light.  Now,
dissociation  must  cause  the  physical  properties  of  gases  to  approach
those  of  their  components,  and  thus  it  is  usually  possible  to  draw  some
inference  from  the  change  in  the  physical  properties  of  gases  relative
to  the  progress  of  the  dissociation.  In  this  way  Deville  observed  that
the  colourless  vapour  of  phosphorus  pentachloride  became  distinctly
green  at  higher  temperatures.  This  is  explained  by  a  dissociation  in
the  sense  of  the  following  equation,  viz.  : —

PC15  -  PC13  +  C12,

which  is  likewise  in  harmony  with  the  vapour  density  determinations.
An  experiment  which  can  be  easily  carried  out  consists  in  heating
a  flask  filled  with  nitrogen  dioxide.  This  will  become  almost  colour-
less by  cooling,  and  then,  on  gentle  heating,  it  will  appear  to  be  filled
with  a  dark-brown  vapour,  which  is  again  decolorised  by  cooling.  In
this  case  Salet1  succeeded  in  showing,  in  a  quantitative  way,  that  the
colour  varied  with  the  change  in  vapour  density,  and  that  it  was
entirely  explained  on  the  supposition  that  nitrogen  dioxide  consists  of
a  mixture  of  a  colourless  compound  N201,  and  a  brownish-red  gas  N02,
and  that  the  latter  molecular  species  increases  with  increasing  tempera-
ture at  the  expense  of  the  former.

Specific  Heat. — The  specific  heat  of  a  gas,  existing  in  a  state  of
dissociation,  is  abnormally  great.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  heat
introduced  is  used  not  only  in  raising  the  temperature,  but  also  in
effecting  dissociation,  which  latter  is  attended  with  considerable
absorption  of  heat.  We  are  indebted  to  Berthelot  and  Ogier  for
measurements  of  this  sort.  These  measurements  were  made  with
nitrogen  dioxide 2  and  acetic  acid  vapour.3  The  molecular  heat  of

1  Compt.  rend.,  67.  488  (1868).

2  Iltid..  94.  916  ;  Bull.  Soc.  chim.,  37.  434  (1882).

3  Bull.  f(nc.  chim.,  38.  60  (1882).

348  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

nitrogen  dioxide,  referred  to  N09  =  46  g.  and  at  constant  pressure  at
0°,  is  about  95'1°;  at  100°  it  is  only  about  39*1°  greater,  while  at
157°  it  falls  to  7'1°.  At  this  latter  temperature,  where  the  dis-
sociation is  almost  complete,  we  find  a  value  of  the  molecular  heat
which  would  naturally  be  expected  from  the  figures  on  p.  46.

Gaseous  acetic  acid  conducts  itself  in  a  similar  way.  In  this  case
the  investigators  mentioned  above  found  the  following  values  for  the
molecular  heat  C  at  the  respective  temperatures  : —

t°  =  129° 160° 200° 240° 280°
Cp=  90-1  76-2 57-0 38'2 28'5  g.-cal.

Inasmuch  as  the  degree  of  dissociation  varies  not  only  with  the
temperature,  but  also  with  the  pressure,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  the
specific  heat  of  those  gases,  which  are  already  in  a  state  of  dissocia-
tion, would  vary  considerably  when  compared  with  those  gases  which
either  are  not  at  all  dissociated,  or  only  partly  so,  according  to  the
pressure.

Thermal  Conductivity. — The  kinetic  theory  allows  of  an  interest-
ing application  of  the  thermal  conductivity  of  gases  in  a  state  of  dis-
sociation. As  we  have  already  seen  (p.  208),  heat  is  carried  through
an  ideal  gas  in  the  direction  of  the  fall  of  temperature  by  equalisation
of  the  mean  kinetic  energy  of  the  molecules;  in  gases  in  a  state  of
dissociation  a  new  factor  enters.  At  the  higher  temperature  the  dis-
sociation is  more  considerable  than  at  the  lower ;  the  result  is  that
when,  in  consequence  of  the  irregular  heat  movements,  undissociated
molecules  pass  into  the  hotter  part  of  the  gas,  they  partly  decompose
there ;  conversely,  when  the  products  of  dissociation  come  into  the
colder  parts  they  partially  recombine  to  form  non-dissociated  gas.
But  since  dissociation  is  accompanied  by  absorption  of  heat  and  refor-
mation of  undissociated  molecules  by  generation  of  heat,  the  above
described  process  furthers  the  equalisation  of  temperature  between
the  two  parts  of  the  gas,  that  is,  it  considerably  increase*  the  thermal
conductivity.

Actually  Magnanini  and  Malagnini  found  that  the  thermal 1  con-
ductivity of  nitrogen  dioxide  in  the  dissociating  state  is  more  than
three  times  as  great  as  when  the  gas  is  completely  dissociated.  This
appears  to  be  a  remarkable  confirmation  of  the  kinetic  conception  of
matter.

The  quantity  of  heat  transported  in  the  form  of  heat  of  dissociation
in  a  partially  dissociated  gas  can  be  calculated  if  the  amount  of

1  Nuovo  dm.,  6.  352  (1897)  ;  later  Magnanini  and  Zunino,  Mem.  Acad.  Modena
(3),  2.  (1899).  R.  Goldsclimidt  has  shown  (Sur  les  rapports  entre  la  dissociation  et  la
conductibilite  thermique  des  gaz ;  These,  Briissel,  1902)  that,  in  determining  the  thermal
conductivity  of  gases,  we  possess  a  means  of  detecting  dissociation  at  very  high  tempera-
tures where  measurement  is  hardly  possible  otherwise.

CHAP.  VI  THE  DISSOCIATION  OF  GASES ^  349

dissociated  and  non-dissociated  molecules  which  pass  through  an  area
in  the  gas  at  right  angles  to  the  temperature  gradient  be  known ;  the
quantity  of  heat  in  question  is  then  proportional  to  the  excess  of  un-
dissociated  molecules  which  travel  in  a  unit  of  time  against  the  tempera-
ture gradient  over  the  quantity  that  travels  in  the  opposite  direction.

The  Condition  of  Dissociation. — The  results  given  in  this
chapter  show  that  the  state  of  an  ideal  gas  is  realised  only  when  there  is
no  dissociation  at  all,  or  else  when  it  is  complete.  In  the  first  case  we
have  a  simple  gas ;  in  the  latter  case  a  gas  mixture,  the  properties  of
which  are  a  make-up  of  the  properties  of  the  components.  The  gas
laws  cease  to  hold  good  only  in  the  case  of  partly  dissociated  gases,  for
here  changes  in  the  temperature  and  the  pressure  are  associated  with
changes  in  the  molecular  condition,  and  the  gases  vary  enormously  in
their  behaviour,  not  only  as  regards  their  compressibility  and  their
expansion  by  heat,  but  also  as  regards  all  their  other  physical  pro-
perties.

This  passage  from  the  normal  behaviour  of  a  simple  gas  to
another  normal  behaviour  of  a  gas  mixture  is  called  passing  to  the
state  of  dissociation.  The  laws  of  the  state  of  dissociation  will  be  con-
sidered in  the  section  devoted  to  the  doctrine  of  affinity.  Here  we  will
only  refer  to  the  results  of  pure  experiment.  These  show  that  those
vapour  densities  which  seemed  to  contradict  Avogadro's  rule  most
decidedly  are  associated  with  very  remarkable  deviations  in  all  their
physical  behaviour,  and  these  deviations  which  at  first  seemed  to  con-
tradict Avogadro's  rule  really  argue  strongly  in  its  favour.

CHAPTER VII

ELECTROLYTIC DISSOCIATION

Dissociation  in  Solutions.  —  As  already  stated  on  p.  268,  the  ab-
normal vapour  densities  are  completely  analogous  to  the  abnormal  values
of  the  osmotic  pressure  of  dilute  solutions  observed  in  many  cases.  It
is  an  immediate  inference  to  explain  these  abnormal  osmotic  pressures,
in  the  sense  of  van't  HofF's  generalised  form  of  Avogadro's  rule,  in  a
similar  way,  viz.  as  being  due  to  abnormal  molecular  conditions.  This
assumption  almost  amounts  to  a  certainty  from  this  fact,  viz.  that
almost  all  the  instances  of  dissociation  which  have  been  met  with  thus
far  in  the  case  of  gases  are  also  observed  if  the  particular  gas  is  inves-
tigated, in  a  suitable  solvent,  at  about  the  same  temperature.  Very
often  the  abnormal  vapour  density  of  a  substance  is  also  f  mind  to  corresj.nm<l
to  an  abnormal  value  of  its  osmotic  pressure,

Let  us  suppose  a  molecule,  existing  in  solution,  to  decompose  into  n
new  and  smaller  molecular  species.  These  may  consist  of  one  or  of  several
atoms,  and  may  be  similar  or  dissimilar.  Let  t0  denote  the  lowering
of  the  freezing-point,  or  a  value  which  is  proportional  to  the  osmotic
pressure,  as,  for  example,  the  lowering  of  the  vapour  pressure,  the
raising  of  the  boiling-point,  etc.  Let  t0  be  such  that  it  can  be  calcu-
lated from  the  molecular  proportions  of  the  substance  in  question,  on
the  assumption  that  the  dissolved  substance  is  not  at  all  dissociated  ;
and  in  accordance  with  this,  let  nt0  be  the  lowering  of  the  freezing-
point  corresponding  to  complete  dissociation.  Then  the  value  of  t,  as
observed,  will  lie  between  these  limiting  values.  An  increase  in  the
number  of  molecules,  in  the  proportion  of  1  :  1  +  (n  -  l)a,  will  corre-
spond to  the  degree  of  dissociation  a.  Therefore  it  follows  that

and  therefore

The numerous experimental investigations, for which we are

350

CHAP. VII

ELECTROLYTIC  DISSOCIATION

351

particularly  indebted  not  only  to  Raoult,  but  also  to  Beckmann  l  and
Eykmann,"2  have  led  to  this  result ;  viz.  that  it  is  usual  to  find  sub-
stances in  solution  not  existing  as  simple  molecules,  but  in  a  state  of
dissociation.  Thus  the  organic  acids  in  benzene  solution,  as  in  the
gaseous  state,  consist  of  double  molecules,  but  these  separate  into
single  ones  on  further  dilution.  Chloral  hydrate  in  acetic  acid,  as  in
the  gaseous  state,  decomposes  partially  into  chloral  and  water,  as  is
shown  from  the  following  table  : —

1

t

a

0-266

0-095

0*52

1-179

0-385

0-38

•2-447

i

0-755

0-31

4-900

1-450

0-25

Here  m  denotes  the  number  of  grams  of  chloral  hydrate  dissolved  in
100  g.  of  acetic  acid.  The  lowering  of  the  freezing-point  t0,  which
would  be  observed  in  the  normal  behaviour  of  chloral  hydrate,  is
calculated  from  the  formula  given  on  p.  151,  viz.—

Here  39  denotes  the  molecular  depression  of  acetic  acid,  and  165'5
the  molecular  weight  of  the  undissociated  chloral  hydrate.  The  degree
of  dissociation,  given  in  the  third  column  of  the  preceding  table,  is
calculated  from  the  formula

t-tA

It  is  obvious  that,  with  increasing  concentration,  this  becomes  smaller ;
and  that,  conversely,  with  decreasing  concentration,  it  converges
towards  a  value  of  one.  At  a  high  degree  of  concentration  the
behaviour  of  the  solution  would  approach  that  of  an  ideal  one,  pro-
vided that  certain  discrepancies  did  not  occur,  independently  of  dissocia-
tion, at  high  degrees  of  concentration.  At  a  high  degree  of  dilution
there  would  be  a  mixture  of  the  two  substances,  water  and  chloral,
which  would  perfectly  obey  the  laws  of  ideal  solutions,  while
the  state  [or  process]  of  dissociation  would  be  intermediate  [between
these  extremes].

1  XeUschr.  physik.  Chem.,  2.  715  (1888)  ;  6,  437  (1890).
2  Ibid.,  4.  497  (1889).

352  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK II

Water  Solutions. — Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the
fact  that  abnormal  values  of  the  osmotic  pressure  are  very  common
in  the  case  of  water  solutions.  All  the  methods  of  measuring  the
osmotic  pressure  lead,  with  quantitative  coincidence,  to  this  result;
viz.  that  it  is  much  greater  for  acids,  bases,  and  salts  in  water
solution  than  it  should  be  if  calculated  from  the  molecular  weights
of  the  respective  substances,  either  in  the  gaseous  state  or  in
other  solvents  than  water.  If  we  assume  that  the  Avogadro-van't
Hoff  law  holds  good  here,  we  are  forced  to  the  unavoidable  con-
clusion that  these  substances,  when  dissolved  in  water,  are  in  a
peculiar  molecular  condition,  and  must  be  dissociated  to  a  greater  or  less
degree.

But  one  of  the  first  difficulties  here  consists  in  answering  this
question,  viz.,  What  are  the  products  of  the  dissociation  1  Such  a
substance  as  hydrochloric  acid,  for  instance,  undoubtedly  has,  as
a  gas,  a  molecular  weight  corresponding  to  the  formula  HC1.  But
inasmuch  as  the  lowering  of  the  freezing-point,  in  water  solution,
is  almost  twice  as  great  as  that  which  should  correspond  to  that
molecular  formula,  the  original  molecule,  when  dissolved,  must  be
separated  into  two  new  ones,  i.e.  HC1  must  be  dissociated  into  H  and
Cl.  Both  of  these  dissociation  products  are  such  that  we  cannot
recognise  them  in  any  other  way.  At  ordinary  temperatures
hydrogen  and  chlorine  are  known  to  us  as  H2  and  C19  respectively  :  if
we  boil  a  water  solution  of  hydrochloric  acid,  we  obtain  HC1  to  be
sure,  but  no  free  hydrogen  or  free  chlorine.  So  an  assumption  like
that  mentioned  above  appears,  at  first  glance,  very  improbable ;  and
there  would  be  some  difficulty  in  understanding  it  if  the  same
assumption  were  not  shown  to  be  necessarily  true  from  an  entirely
different  aspect,  and  if  we  did  not  have,  at  the  same  time,  more
detailed  explanations  regarding  the  nature  of  the  dissociation  products
of  salts,  acids,  and  bases,  in  water  solution.

In  the  case  of  salts  one  would  at  once  think  of  a  separation  into
the  acid  and  the  base,  and  thus  explain  their  great  osmotic  pressure  :
in  fact,  we  will  consider  later  this  so-called  "  liydrolytic  dissociation  "  •
but  it  is  not  possible  to  consider  it  such  a  common  phenomenon  as
the  abnormal  pressures  are,  because  salts  can  be  separated,  by  diffusion,
into  the  respective  acids  and  bases  in  only  a  very  few  cases.  For,
disregarding  for  the  moment  many  other  reasons  which  contradict
such  a  method  of  explanation,  and  to  which  we  will  return  later,  this
assumption  fails  utterly  in  the  case  of  acids  and  bases,  which,  as  well
as  salts,  show  abnormal  osmotic  pressures.  Therefore  we  are  forced
to  seek  another  explanation.

Now  it  happens  that  those  substances,  and  only  those  substances,  which
can  conduct  the  galvanic  current  in  'water  solution,  i.e.  tJie  electrolytes,  are
the  ones  which  exhibit  osmotic  pressures  very  much  greater  than  those  which  are
calculated  for  their  concentration  and  their  molecular  weight  in  the  qaseous

CHAP,  vii  ELECTROLYTIC  DISSOCIATION  353

state;  and,  moreover,  if  the  same  substances,  when  dissolved  in  other
solvents,  are  unable  to  conduct  electricity  in  any  marked  degree,  then  they  also
lose  their  abnormal  behaviour.  Thus  we  are  forced  to  the  view  that,  if
dissociation  actually  takes  place,  it  is  intimately  connected  with  the
conduction  of  electricity  by  electrolytes.

Electrolytic  Conduction. — Let  us  try  to  frame  a  mental  image
of  the  conduction  of  the  electric  current.  It  is  a  well-known  fact
that,  in  contrast  to  the  metallic  conduction  of  electricity,  it  is
associated  [in  electrolytes]  with  a  transportation  of  matter;  and,
moreover,  that  the  passage  of  the  galvanic  stream  from  the  metallic
electrode  into  the  solution  is,  according  to  circumstances,  either
associated  with  the  solution  of  the  metal,  or  else  with  the  separation
of  the  substance  in  the  solution  and  its  deposition  on  the  electrode.

Thus  if  we  introduce  gaseous  hydrochloric  acid  between  the
platinum  electrodes  of  a  galvanic  battery,  no  appreciable  transference
of  electricity  occurs ;  neither  is  there  any  transference  of  electricity
if  we  introduce  very  pure  water  between  the  poles ;  but  the  electricity
passes  readily  if  the  poles  are  introduced  into  water  containing
hydrochloric  acid.  Thus,  it  is  fair  to  suppose  that  the  hydro-
chloric acid,  which  is  dissolved  in  water,  is  in  a  molecular  condition
different  from  that  in  the  gaseous  state ;  because  in  the  one  case  it  can
conduct  electricity,  but  not  in  the  other.  The  following  picture
is  both  clear  and  simple  in  attempting  to  account  for  the  definite
conception  entertained.

When  a  current  passes  through  the  solution,  free  chlorine  is
separated  at  the  anode,  where  the  current  enters  the  solution ;  and
free  hydrogen  at  the  cathode,  where  it  leaves  the  solution  :  one  com-
ponent of  the  electrolyte  "  wanders "  in  one  direction,  the  other  in
the  other  direction.  This  is  explained  most  simply  by  supposing
that  the  electrolytes  consist  of  different  parts  which  are  oppositely
polarised,  i.e.  of  molecules  charged  respectively  as  electro-positive  and
electro-negative.  These  parts,  after  the  usage  introduced  into  science
by  Faraday,  are  called  "  ions."  According  to  this  view,  in  the  solu-
tion, the  galvanic  current  consists  in  the  passage  of  the  positively
charged  ions,  the  " cations"  in  one  direction,  and  in  the  passage  of  the
negatively  charged  ions,  the  "  anions,"  in  the  other  direction.  The
passage  of  positive  electricity  from  the  [one]  electrode  into  the  solution
is  accordingly  associated  with  a  separation  of  anions ;  and  the  passage
of  positive  electricity  out  of  the  solution  into  the  [other]  electrode
is  associated  with  a  separation  of  cations.

The  capacity  of  dissolved  substances  to  conduct  the  electric
current  thus  assumes,  as  a  proviso,  a  polarised  cleavage,  a  decomposi-
tion into  positively  and  negatively  charged  molecules,  which  we  will
call  " electrolytic  dissociation" 1  Of  course  it  is  not  necessary  for  the

1  The expression "ionisation"  sometimes  used  should  rather  be  reserved  for  the
formation  of  ions  in  gases  produced  by  the  action  of  Rontgen  rays  and  the  like  (see

2  A

0*  ©  <•©

*©©*©<

©  *G ©

354  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

decomposition  to  be  complete,  for  in  addition  to  the  electrolytically
dissociated  molecules,  there  may  also  exist  in  the  solution  undecom-
posed  molecules,  which  are  electrically  neutral.

Only  the  former  [i.e.  the  dissociated  molecules]  are  instrumental
in  current  conduction,  and  it  is  apparent,  other  things  being  equal,
that  a  solution  will  conduct  electricity  more  readily  in  proportion  as
its  resistance  is  less,  i.e.  the  larger  the  fraction  of  the  electrolytically
dissociated  molecules  in  the  solution.  Cane  sugar,  when  dissolved  in
water,  does  not  conduct  electricity  noticeably ;  therefore  it  must
consist  entirely,  or  at  least  almost  entirely,  of  uncleaved  molecules
which  are  electrically  neutral.  On  the  other  hand,  hydrochloric  acid
is  a  good  conductor  of  electricity ;  and  therefore  the  gas  which  has
been  absorbed  by  water  must  have  attained  a
high  degree  of  electrolytic  dissociation.

On  the  basis  of  these  preceding  remarks,
we  will  now  attempt  to  draw  a  picture  of  the
mechanism  of  electrolytic  conduction.  In  order
to  conform  to  the  preceding  supposition,  let
there  be  a  water  solution  of  hydrochloric  acid
between  two  platinum  plates  (Fig.  28).  These
two  platinum  electrodes  are  in  connection  with
a  source  of  electricity,  as  for  example,  with  a
Fi  28  "  galvanic  battery.  The  first  result  of  this  is

that the platinum  plate,  which is  connected

with  the  positively  conducting  pole,  becomes  charged  with  positive
electricity,  and  the  other  becomes  charged  with  negative  electricity.

As  a  result  of  these  charges,  the  free  electricities  of  the  electrodes
will  exert  an  electrostatic  attraction  or  repulsion  on  the  free  ions  in
the  solution,  which  are  charged  with  free  electricity ;  the  positive
ions  will  be  attracted  by  the  negative  electricity  of  the  cathode,
and  will  be  repelled  by  the  positive  electricity  of  the  anode ;  thus
a  force  will  be  developed,  acting  in  the  direction  of  the  arrows.
The  reverse  of  this  will  happen  in  the  case  of  the  negative  ions;
and  thus  there  will  be  developed  a  force  in  the  opposite  direction.
No  force  of  this  sort  will  be  exerted  upon  the  electrically  neutral
molecules.

As  a  result  of  this  electrical  attraction  and  repulsion,  there  results
a  displacement  of  the  free  ions  in  the  solution,  whereby  the  positive
ions  wander  from  the  anode  to  the  cathode,  and  the  negative  ions  in

Chap.  IX.  of  this  book).  [Referring  to  Professor  Nernst's  criticism  of  ionisation,  we
would  suggest  that  Faraday  used  ion  before  Arrhenius  made  his  discovery ;  that
in  all  deference  to  both  of  these  great  discoverers,  ionisation  is  more  concise  than
the  synonymous  phrase  "  electrolytic  -  dissociation ";  that  in  English,  ion  naturally
suggests  the  words  ionise,  ionic,  ionisation,  ionised,  ionisable,  etc.,  etc.  ;  and  finally,
that  it  is  neither  for  author  nor  translator  to  dictate,  but  to  wait  for  the  common-
sense  use  of  intelligent  users  to  decide  which  expression  is  preferable.  It  is  possible
that  both  terms  may  be  convenient. — TH.]

CHAP.  VII  ELECTROLYTIC  DISSOCIATION  355

the  opposite  direction. This  wandering  [or  "migration"]  of  the  ions
represents  to  us  that  which  ice  call  an  electric  current  in  an  electrolyte.

-L  t7

The  Free  Ions.  — It  now  remains  to  determine  the  material
nature  of  the  ions  and  of  the  electrically  neutral  molecule.  In  the  elec-
trolysis of  hydrochloric  acid,  free  hydrogen  is  separated  at  the  cathode
and  free  chlorine  at  the  anode  :  therefore  the  former  [the  hydrogen]
must  be  positively  charged,  the  latter  [the  chlorine]  negatively.  Thus
we  arrive  at  the  result  that  hydrochloric  acid,  when  dissolved  in
water,  must  be  dissociated  into  positively  charged  hydrogen  ions  and
negatively  charged  chlorine  ions.  Of  course  we  must  regard  the
undissociated  hydrochloric  acid  molecules  as  being  electrically  neutral.
A  similar  inference  must  of  course  be  drawn  for  all  other  electrolytes.

We  may  learn  something  about  the  molecular  dimensions  of  the
ions,  and  about  the  degree  of  electrolytic  dissociation,  by  the  aid  of
principles  developed  previously.

The  osmotic  pressure  in  a  dilute  solution  of  hydrochloric  acid,  as
shown  by  the  quantitative  coincidence  of  results  obtained  in  different
ways,  is  almost  twice  as  great  as  that  corresponding  to  its  gaseous
molecular  weight ;  therefore  two  new  molecules  must  result  from  the
solution  of  one  in  water.  This  means  nothing  else  than  that  the
electrolytic  dissociation  is  almost  complete:  thus —

HC1  =  H  +  ci.

The  ions  of  hydrochloric  acid  are  thus  monatomic.

Now  since  the  two  kinds  of  electricity  are  produced  in  the
equivalent  quantities  by  this  cleavage,  then  the  positive  charge  of
the  hydrogen  must  be  exactly  as  great  as  the  negative  charge  of  the
chlorine,  i.e.  an  atom  of  hydrogen  and  an  atom  of  chlorine  are  electrically
equivalent.  An  important  conclusion  follows  from  this.  If  a  definite
quantity  of  electricity  passes  through  our  electrolytic  cell,  then  electric-
ally equivalent  quantities  of  the  ions  must  separate  out  on  the  two
electrodes ;  for  otherwise  there  would  occur  an  enormous  accumula-
tion of  free  electricity  in  the  circuit,  which  is  impossible.  Thus
hydrogen  and  chlorine  must  be  set  free,  at  the  electrodes,  in
equivalent  electrical  quantities,  or  what  amounts  to  the  same  thing,
in  equivalent  chemical  quantities.

Now  if  we  put  into  the  same  electric  circuit  a  cell  filled  with
hydrobromic  acid,  then  on  the  cathodes  of  the  two  electrolytic  cells
the  same  quantities  of  hydrogen  will  be  set  free  ;  and  on  the  respective
anodes  there  will  be  set  free  equivalent  quantities  of  chlorine  and
bromine.  And  in  general  it  may  be  said  that  chemically  equivalent
quantities  of  the  most  various  ions  are  set  free  from  the  most  various  solu-
tions by  the  same  quantity  of  electric  current.

As  is  well  known,  this  statement  is  most  completely  substantiated

356  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

by  experience ;  it  is  simply  the  fundamental  law  of  electrolysis,
advanced  by  Faraday  and  demonstrated  most  exactly  by  experiment.

Those  ions  which  are  charged  with  the  same  equivalent  quantities
of  electricity  as  the  hydrogen  ion,  the  chlorine  ion,  etc.,  are  called
univalent  •  those  ions  which  are  charged  respectively  with  a  twofold,  or
a  threefold,  etc.,  quantity  of  electricity  are  called  divalent,  trivalent,  etc.

Thus  sulphuric  acid,  for  instance,  in  dilute  solution,  exhibits  an
osmotic  pressure  which  is  three  times  as  great  as  that  which  should
correspond  to  its  concentration,  and  to  the  molecular  formula  H0S04 :
this  means  simply  that,  under  these  circumstances,  three  new  molecules
have  been  produced  from  one ;  and  that  an  almost  complete  dis-
sociation has  occurred,  in  the  sense  of  the  following  equation,  viz.  : —

H2S04  =  H  +  H  +  S04.

The  negative  ion,  S04,  must  be  as  heavily  charged  as  the  two  positive
ions  together,  i.e.  with  twice  as  great  a  quantity  of  electricity  as  a

hydrogen  ion ;  this  is  indicated  by  a  double  dash  (S04).

Accordingly  we  call  the  S04  a  divalent  ion,  and  sulphuric  acid  a
di-basic  acid ;  and  in  general  we  call  an  acid  which  produces  n  hydrogen
atoms,  by  complete  dissociation,  n-basic.

The  radical  hydroxyl  (hydroxyl  ion)  OH,  which  has  a  negative
charge,  is  a  univalent  ion ;  it  is  produced  by  the  electrolytic  dissocia-
tion of  water,  something  which  happens  to  only  a  very  slight  degree
under  ordinary  circumstances,  thus —

H2O  =  H  +  OH  ;
and  also  in  the  dissociation  of  bases,  as  sodium  hydroxide,  e.g.  thus —

NaOH  =  Na  +  OH.

Those  bases,  the  molecules  of  which,  like  the  preceding,  give  only
one  hydroxyl  ion  on  ionisation  as  above  are  called  monacid ;  those
bases  which,  like  barium  hydroxide,  produce  two  hydroxyl  ions,  are
called  di-acid,  etc.,  thus

Ba(OH)2  -  B£  +  OH  +  OH.

It  is  very  remarkable  that  similar  ions  may  have  very  different
charges,  even  in  the  same  solution ;  thus  the  iron  ion,  produced  by
the  dissociation  of  ferrous  chloride,  is  divalent,  thus—

Fed,  =  Fe  +  Cl  +  01,

CHAP,  vii  ELECTROLYTIC  DISSOCIATION  357

while  the  iron  ion,  produced  by  the  dissociation  of  ferric  chloride,  is
bivalent,  thus  —

FeCl3  =  Fe  +  Cl  +  Cl  +  Cl.

Thus  we  see  that  the  electric  valve  of  an  element  is  by  no  means  a
constant  property,  but  may  vary  by  leaps  in  certain  cases.  It  is  possible
that  a  thorough  investigation  of  this  change  in  the  electrical  value  of
certain  elements  might  prove  the  starting-point  for  a  deeper  insight
into  the  reason  for  the  change  in  valence,  and  into  the  nature  of
valence.1

In  the  manner  just  described,  it  is  usually  possible  to  answer  the
question  regarding  the  nature  and  value  of  the  ions  quite  certainly,
by  combining  the  results  of  the  determination  of  the  molecular  weight
and  of  the  conductivity.

Moreover,  the  chemical  behaviour  of  solutions  usually  yields  im-
portant information  on  this  point  (see  Chap.  IV.  of  the  third  book).

£$  The  Determination  of  the  Degree  of  Electrolytic  Dissocia-
tion. —  It  is  not  only  important  to  answer  the  question  regarding  the
nature  of  the  ions,  but  also  another  question,  viz.  how  far  the  decom-
position of  the  electrically  neutral  molecules  in  the  solution  has  proceeded.
Therefore  a  knowledge  of  the  degree  of  dissociation  of  an  electrolyte
is  of  great  significance,  inasmuch  as  many  other  properties,  besides
the  conductivity  and  the  osmotic  pressure,  depend  upon  the  extent
of  the  electrolytic  dissociation  ;  and  especially  is  this  true  of  the
share  of  the  dissolved  substances  in  chemical  reactions  :  a  thorough  refer-
ence will  be  made  to  this  point  under  the  subject  of  the  doctrine
of  affinity.

The  degree  of  the  dissociation,  or  the  value  of  the  coefficient  of
dissociation,  by  which  is  meant  the  ratio  of  the  dissociated  molecules
to  the  whole  number  of  molecules,  can  be  directly  obtained  in  two
independent  ways  :  viz.  from  the  osmotic  pressure  and  from  the
conductivity.

The  first  method  is  of  course  treated  in  exactly  the  same  way  as
the  determination  of  the  ordinary  (i.e.  the  non-electrolytic)  dissociation
in  solution  (p.  350).  Thus  if  P0  denotes  the  osmotic  pressure,  as
calculated  from  the  gas  laws  without  reference  to  dissociation,  and  if
P  denotes  that  actually  observed,  then  it  will  follow  that

P  P  -  P

1  +  (n  -  l)a  =  p-, and  a  =  7—^,
ro  \" 1/ro

•

where  a  denotes  the  degree  of  electrolytic  dissociation.  Instead  of  the
ratio  of  the  respective  osmotic  pressures,  we  may,  of  course,  use  the
relative  depressions  of  the  freezing-point,  or  of  the  vapour  pressure.

1  In this connection, see the paragraph on "The Changeableness of Chemical
Valence  "  (p.  280).—  TR.

358  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

Another  way  [to  find  the  value  a]  is  given  by  the  determination
of  the  electrical  conductivity  ;  this  can  be  easily  and  exactly  done  by
the  method  proposed  by  F.  Kohlrausch.1  A  full  description  of  this
method,  so  commonly  used  in  the  laboratory,  need  hardly  be  given
here.  It  need  only  be  mentioned  that  this  method  depends  upon  the
use  of  Wheatstone's  bridge  ;  and  that  instead  of  a  constant  current,  an
alternating  current  produced  by  an  induction  coil,  is  used, — whereby
the  disturbing  effect  of  polarisation  is  eliminated — and  that  instead  of
a  galvanometer,  as  a  current  indicator,  use  is  made  of  a  telephone
which  is  sensitive  to  the  alternating  current.

As  unity  of  conductivity  is  now  adopted,  that  of  a  body  of  which
a  column  1  cm.  long  and  1  cm.2  in  cross-section  has  a  resistance  of
1  ohm.  If,  therefore,  a  body  of  this  size  possesses  a  resistance  w,  it
has  a  conductivity  K  : —

1

K  = -.
W

The  conductivity  of  an  electrolyte  divided  by  its  concentration
( =  number  of  g-equivalents  in  cm.3)  is  called  the  molecular  con-
ductivity A —

Formerly  the  conductivity  of  mercury  at  0°  was  adopted  as  the
unit  of  conductivity;  in  the  above  measure  it  is  10,630,  hence  the
conductivity  in  terms  of  mercury

k  =

10,630*
Similarly  the  molecular  conductivity  A  was  formerly  defined  as

x-k

c'

where  c  =  1000^,  that  is,  expresses  the  normality.

Now,  according  to  the  statements  on  p.  354,  the  conductivity  is
proportional  to  the  number  of  free  ions,  i.e.  it  is  proportional  to  the
product  arj,  and  therefore  it  is  directly  proportional  to  the  degree*  of
dissociation,  a  itself.  That  is,  we  may  put

while  K  is  a  proportional  factor. For  very  great  dilution  the  electro-
lytic dissociation  becomes  complete,  that  is,  a  =  1  ; if  the  molecular

1  This  method  is  found  in  F.  Kohlrausch,  Lehrb.  d.  prakt.  Physik.,  9  Aufl.,  S.  409  ;
see  further  Ostwald,  Physiko-chem.  Messungen,  Leipzig,  1893,  p.  265  ;  and  especially
Kohlrausch  and  Holborn,  Leitvermogen  der  Elektrolyte,  Leipzig,  1898.

CHAP.  VII

ELECTROLYTIC  DISSOCIATION

359

conductivity  measured  for  sufficiently  great  dilution  be  written  Aoo  ,  we
simply  get

AQO  =K anda=-r^.

AGO

The  following  table  gives  the  molecular  conductivities  obtained  by
Kohlrausch1  for  various  dilutions  of  potassium  chloride  at  18°  : —

KC1.

c  =  1000»j

A

«

C  =  1000rj

A ot

i-o

98-2

0-748

0-005

124-6

0-950

0-5

102-3

0-780

o-ooi

127-6

0-973

o-i

111-9

0-853

0-0005

128-3

0-978

0-03

118-3 0-902

o-oooi

129-5

0-987

o-oi

122-5

0-934

i

131-2

1-000

oo

A  oo  =131-2.

It  has  been  already  remarked  that  the  change  of  the  conductivity
with  the  concentration  from  O'l  normal  downwards  is  very  nearly  the
same  for  all  salts  made  up  by  combination  of  univalent  radicals,  i.e.
that  in  equivalent  solutions  these  salts  experience  the  same  high  dissociation.
Therefore  the  value  of  a  in  the  preceding  table  can  be  used  to  calculate
the  degree  of  dissociation  of  almost  all  these  salts,  e.g.  NaCl,  LiN03,
CH3C02NH4,  etc.

The  combination  of  these  two  methods  for  the  determination  of  a
gives

This  was  first  clearly  developed  by  Arrhenius 2  in  his  work  on  the
hypothesis  of  electrolytic  dissociation ;  this  law  unites  the  abnormal
values  of  the  osmotic  pressure  of  electrolytes  with  the  changes  of
conductivity  with  varying  concentration.  This  law  has  been  well
established  not  only  by  the  preliminary  calculation  of  the  available
material  by  Arrhenius,  but  also  by  its  subsequent  more  exact  proof.3
The  following  table  will  serve  as  an  illustration  ;  here  are  given  the
values  of  the  factor  1  +  (n  -  l)a,  i.e.  the  ratio  in  which  the  number
of  molecules  is  increased  by  dissociation  ;  under  column  I.  are  given
the  results  according  to  the  plasmolytic  method  (p.  134);  under  II.
the  results  according  to  the  freezing-point  method ;  and  under  III.  the
results  according  to  the  method  of  conductivity.

1 Wied.  Ann.,  26.  161  (1885).  2  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  1.  631  (1887).

3  Arrhenius, Zeitschr. physik. Cheni., 2.  491 (1888)  ; van't Hoff  and Reicher.
ibid.,  3.  198  (1889).

360

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK II

Substance.

c

1+0.-IV

I.

II. III.

I

Cane  sugar .

0

0-3

TOO

1-08 1-00

CHoCCvH . .
KC1 "

2

2

0-33
0-14

rs'i

1-04 I'Ol
1-93 1-86

LiCl

2

0-13

1-92

1-94 1-84

MgS04

2

0-38

1-25

1-20 1-35

CaN^Oc

3

0'18

2-48

2-47 2-46

SrClj •  . .

3

0-18

2-69

2-52 2-51

K4FeCy6

5

0-356

3-09

3-07

Hittorf s  Transportation  Values  and  Kohlrausch's  Law
of  the  Independent  Migration  (Wandering)  of  Ions.  —  On

turning  back  to  consider  the  mechanism  of  electric  conduction,  the
question  at  once  arises  as  to  the  velocity  with  which  the  ions  are
transported  through  the  solution,  at  a  given  difference  of  potential
between  the  electrodes,  and  with  given  dimensions  of  the  electrolytic
cell.  The  magnitude  of  the  force  acting  on  the  ions,  and  depending
upon  the  charges  of  the  electrodes,  other  things  being  equal,  is  of
course  equally  great  for  all  univalent  ions ;  and,  moreover,  the  pull
exerted  upon  the  positive  ions  in  the  direction  of  the  current  is  just
exactly  as  strong  as  the  pull  exerted  upon  the  negative  ions  in  the
opposite  direction  ;  and  of  course  the  force  which  drives  n-valent  ions
is  n-fold  as  great.

But  the  friction  resistance  of  the  different  ions  will  vary  with  their
varying  nature.  It  may  be  predicted,  with  a  large  degree  of  proba-
bility, that  this  friction  resistance  will  be  very  great ;  for,  if  we  notice
how  slowly  a  fine  precipitate  in  water  sinks  to  the  bottom,  and  that  it
requires  more  time  the  finer  the  precipitate  is — then  it  follows  that
such  extraordinarily  fine  particles  as  the  ions  are  would  require  an
enormous  force  to  transport  them  through  the  solution  with  any  notice-
able velocity.  On  this  assumption,  which  will  be  justified  later,  we  may
regard  the  ions  as  massive  points  with  very  great  friction  (p.  13),  and  therefore
set  their  velocity  proportional  to  the  forces  acting  on  them.  But  as  the  intensity
of  current  is  proportional  to  the  velocity  at  which  the  ions  travel  in
the  solvent,  it  is  proportional  to  the  electromotive  force,  that  is,  Ohm's
Law  holds.

It  appears  from  section  7,  p.  14,  that  force  and  velocity  are  not
proportional  at  the  first  moment,  but  on  account  of  the  very  large
friction  this  initial  stage  is  not  accessible  to  experimental  proof
(see  Cohn).1

The  term  resistance  friction  (Reibungs-wider stand)  will  be  understood
as  meaning  that  force — expressed  e.g.  in  kilogram  weights — which  will

1 Wied.  Ann.,  38.  217  (1889).

CHAP.  VII  ELECTROLYTIC  DISSOCIATION  361

be  required  to  drive  1  g.-ion,  i.e.  the  molecular  weight  of  the  ion
expressed  in  grams,  against  the  solvent,  with  a  velocity  of  1  cm.  per
sec. ;  and  the  term  mobility  (Beweglichkeit)  or  velocity  of  transport  will
mean  the  reciprocal  of  this  force,  i.e.  the  velocity  with  which  1  g.-ion
will  be  transported  under  the  influence  of  a  pull  of  1,  e.g.  1  kilogram
weight.

Now,  for  the  sake  of  simplicity,  let  us  consider  a  binary  electro-
lyte, i.e.  one  composed  of  two  univalent  ions,  and  let  us  suppose  that
the  quantity  of  electricity,  E,  is  sent  through  the  electrolytic  cell.
Then  the  transference  of  ions  occurs  so  that  the  positive  ones  are
carried  "in  the  direction  of  the  current"  through  the  solvent,  and  the
negative  ones  in  the  opposite  direction.  If  we  take  a  cross-section
through  the  electrolytic  cell,  at  any  selected  place,  at  right  angles  to
the  current,  then  the  electricity  conveyed  by  the  positive  ions  in  the
direction  of  the  current,  plus  that  conveyed  by  the  negative  atoms  in
the  opposite  direction,  is  equal  to  E.

Now  if  we  denote  the  mobility  of  the  positive  and  negative  ions
by  U  and  V,  then  their  respective  velocities  will  be  in  the  same  ratio
as  theif  mobilities;  since  they  are,  at  every  instant  of  the  passage  of
electricity,  under  the  influence  of  the  same  forces.  Moreover,  the
transport  of  a  quantity  of  electricity,  E,  occurs  in  this  way  :  viz.  in  the
direction  of  the  current,  there  "  wander  "

E  positive  ions,

and  in  the  opposite  direction

y

Er- — - negative  ions.

Now  there  separate  out  on  the  cathode,  E  equivalents  of  +  elec-
tricity, in  the  form  of  positive  ions ;  and  these  disappear  from  the
solution,  and  are  precipitated,  as  gas  or  metal,  on  the  electrode  (of

course  in  an  electrically  neutral  state):  E  ions  have  thus  passed

by  the  "  ionic  migration."  Moreover,  at  the  close  of  the  experiment,
there  will  be  found  a  diminution  of  concentration  in  the  solution  in
the  neighbourhood  of  the  cathode,  corresponding  to  the  removal  of

y
E^ — \r  cations ;  or, according  to  what  has  preceded,  to  the  removal

of  the  same  quantity  of  negative  ions  by  the  wandering  [in  the  opposite

y
direction],  and  therefore  corresponding  to  E^y — ^  equivalents  of  the

electrolyte. In  a  precisely  analogous  way  it  follows  that  the  liquid

362  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  anode  must  be  attenuated  by  the  loss  of
Ejj — —  equivalents  of  electrolyte.

Now  it  is  usually  the  case  that  the  separated  quantities  of  anion
and  cation  respectively  react,  in  a  secondary  way,  either  upon  the
solution  or  upon  the  metal  of  the  electrode.  Thus  by  the  electrolysis
of  potassium  chloride,  the  metallic  potassium,  which  is  deposited  upon
the  cathode  by  the  passage  of  the  quantity  of  electricity  E  through
the  cell,  does  not  remain  there  as  such ;  but,  as  is  well  known,  it  reacts
upon  the  solvent,  forming  potassium  hydroxide  and  hydrogen.  If  we
electrolyse  silver  nitrate  between  silver  electrodes,  there  does  not
result  an  accumulation  of  the  free  radical  N03,  equivalent  to  E,  at  the
anode,  but  this  reacts  with  the  metal  of  the  electrode  forming  the
equivalent  quantity  of  silver  nitrate.  Therefore,  the  variations  in
concentration  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  electrodes  are  changed  in
a  corresponding  way,  to  be  sure,  but  in  such  a  way  that  it  can  be
easily  calculated  in  each  particular  case.

For  the  thorough  study  of  these  changes  in  concentration  produced
by  the  wandering  of  the  ions,  and  also  for  their  theoretical  interpreta-
tion in  the  sense  given  above,  we  are  indebted  to  Hittorf.1  His  work
is  of  fundamental  importance,  both  in  framing  a  conception  of  electro-
lysis, and  also  in  the  theory  of  solutions.  Following  the  usage  of
Hittorf,  we  will  designate  the  following  ratios,  which  can  be  deter-
mined directly  by  experiment,  as  the  transport  values  of  the  cations  and
anions  respectively,  viz.,

U  V

n  = and  . -  n  =

U  +  V  U  +  V  '

In  practice  it  is  often  possible  to  decide  upon  the  nature  of  the
ions  by  means  of  measurements  of  migration,  especially  in  complex
molecules.

The  discovery  of  the  relation  between  the  conductivity  and  the
transport  number  was  made  by  Friedrich  Kohlrausch : 2  we  will  pro-
ceed to  derive  it  by  the  consideration  of  electrolytic  dissociation.

Kohlrausch's  Law  of  the  Independent  Wandering  of  Ions.

— The  conductivity  of  a  solution  of  a  binary  electrolyte  is  greater  in
accordance  as  it  contains  more  free  ions,  and  according  as  these  have
a  greater  mobility ;  and  since  the  particular  quantities  of  electricity
transported  by  the  anion  and  cation  are  directly  proportional  to  their
mobility,  therefore  the  conductivity  must  be  proportional  to  their
sum  ;  that  is,  the  specific  conductivity  K  of  a  solution,  which  contains
c  g.-mol.  of  the  electrolyte  in  a  litre,  must  be

K  -  ar;F(U  +  V),

1  Pogg.  Ann.,  89.  177  ;  98.  1  ;  1O3.  1  ;  106.  337  (1853-59)  ;  see  also  Ostwald's
Classiker,  Nos.  21  and  23.  2 Wied.  Ann.,  6.  1  (1879)  ;  26. 161  (1885).

CHAP,  vii  ELECTROLYTIC  DISSOCIATION  363

where  a  denotes  the  degree  of  dissociation  at  the  respective  con-
centration. F  is  a  proportional  factor,  depending  on  the  system  of
units  chosen.  By  making

u  =  FU and  v  =  FV,

and  by  introducing  the  molecular  conductivity  A  for  K/T/,  we  obtain

K  =  a>/(u  +  v).

At  very  great  dilution  a  =  1  ;  then  by  noticing  that  u  and  v  are  pro-
portional to  the  magnitudes  U  and  V  introduced  above,  we  obtain  the
three  equations,

A  oo  =u  +  v; u  =  nAoo; v  =  (l-n)Ax>.

These  express  Kohlrausch's  law  of  the  independent  wandering  of  the
ions.  They  state  primarily  that  the  molecular  conductivity  of  a  binary
electrolyte  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  conductivities  of  the  two  ions,  i.e.  that  it
is  an  additive  property ;  further,  that  there  exists  between  the  conductivity
and  the  transport  values  an  intimate  relation,  such,  that  if  the  trans-
port value  of  one  electrolyte  is  known,  the  transport  values  of  the
other  electrolytes  can  be  calculated  from  the  respective  conductivities.

These  rules  hold  good  for  those  electrolytes  which  are  completely
dissociated,  but  they  likewise  apply  to  the  comparison  of  electrolytes
existing  in  the  same  state  of  dissociation,  as  one  can  easily  convince
himself.  In  the  way  that  Kohlrausch  developed  his  law,  it  is  im-
possible to  distinguish  between  the  conducting  molecules  (i.e.  the  free
ions),  and  the  inactive  molecules  of  an  electrolyte ;  and  Kohlrausch
found  the  proof  for  his  law,  both  in  the  conductivities  as  measured  by
himself  and  also  in  the  transport  values  obtained  earlier  by  Hittorf.
He  found  good  coincidence,  in  all  cases,  between  calculation  and
experiment,  when  he  compared  electrolytes  in  the  same  degree  of
dissociation,  but  otherwise  he  found  decided  deviations.  As  is  obvious
from  the  deduction  given  above,  Arrhenius  showed  that  the  sufficiency
of  Kohlrausch's  law  must  necessarily  fail  in  comparing  dissociated
electrolytes  which  have  been  reduced  to  different  degrees  of  ionisation
[i.e.  dissociation].

Recently  an  experimental  investigation x  has  been  conducted  which
is  suited  for  showing  this.  This  work  concerns  the  conductivity  and
transport  values  of  dilute  silver  salts  ;  and  it  shows  the  strict  sufficiency
of  Kohlrausch's  relation  between  the  conductivity  and  the  transport
values,  provided  that  these  two  values  refer  to  electrolytes  which  are
completely  dissociated.

The  following  table  gives  the  molecular  conductivity  for  a  number
of  ions  :  the  values  are  referred  to  a  temperature  of  18° :: —

1  M.  Loeb  and  W.  Nernst,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  2.  948  (1888).

NH4

Na

Li

Ag

H

64-2

44-4

35-5

557

318

Br

I

N03

C103

CO,H

C2H302

OH

667

667

60-8

56-5

45

337

174

364  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  n

Cl

The  values  increase  T5  to  2 '7  per  cent  per  degree  of  temperature;
the  temperature  coefficient  is  smaller  the  greater  the  mobility,  so  that
with  increasing  temperature  the  differing  mobilities  of  different  ions
are  more  nearly  equalised.  Thus  from  the  preceding  table  the  mole-
cular conductivity  of  potassium  chloride,  e.g.,  is  131  '2  at  infinite
dilution;  and  its  transport  value  is  calculated  to  be  0'50  ;  while  the
respective  values  obtained  by  experiment  are  131  and  0'51.

The  great  practical  value  of  this  law  consists  in  this,  viz.  that
we  may  calculate  quite  certainly  the  limiting  value  of  the  molecular  con-
ductivity of  those  electrolytes  at  infinite  dilution,  in  the  cases  of  which  we
cannot  reach  the  limit  by  experiment.  Thus  we  can  obtain  the  limiting
value  of  the  potassium  chloride  quite  certainly  by  extrapolation
(p.  359);  but  this  is  not  the  case  with  ammonia,  as  is  shown  by
the  following  figures  : —

Concentration . . . =1-0 O'l O'Ol O'OOl  g.  equivalents  per  litre.
Mol.  conductivity  of  NH3 . =0'89 3 '3 9 '6 28

The  dilution  of  ammonia,  as  shown  by  the  first  measurements,
falls  too  far  short  of  complete  dissociation  to  enable  us  to  reach  its
constant  molecular  conductivity.  But  from  Kohlrausch's  law  we
can  calculate,  with  full  certainty,  the  limiting  value  of  the  molecular
conductivity  of  ammonia  (ammonium  hydroxide  =  NH4  +  OH)  at  in-
finite dilution,  by  means  of  the  mobility  of  the  two  ions,  thus —

Aoo  =64-2  +  174-238-2.

Thus  the  conception  that  those  salts  which  conduct  the  galvanic
current  when  they  are  dissolved  in  water  are  more  or  less  dissociated
into  their  ions,  is  seen  to  be  supported  in  every  respect,  both  by  the
phenomena  and  by  the  laws  of  electrolysis ;  moreover,  the  law  of
Avogadro,  which  has  been  applied  by  van't  Hoff  to  solutions,  can  be
also  shown  to  meet  the  requirements  fully  in  the  case  of  electrolytes.

The  Characteristics  of  Electrolytic  Dissociation.— Electro-
lytic dissociation  differs  from  ordinary  dissociation  chiefly  in  this,  viz.
that  in  the  former  the  dissociation  products  are  electrically  charged,
but  not  in  the  latter.  The  introduction  of  the  idea  of  electrical
dissociation  into  science  marks  a  new  era  in  our  molecular  conceptions,
since  it  has  revealed  to  us  an  entirely  new  species  of  molecule,  viz.
the  electrically  charged  ion.  According  to  circumstances,  the  same
substance  may  decompose  either  into  electrolytic  or  into  non-electro-
lytic molecules.  Thus  by  dissolving  ammonium  chloride  in  a  good

CHAP.  VII  ELECTROLYTIC  DISSOCIATION  365

deal  of  water  it  dissociates  electrolytically,  and  almost  completely  in
the  sense  of  the  equation,

NH4C1  -  NH4  +  01,

while  by  volatilisation,  at  sufficiently  low  pressures,  it  decomposes
quite  completely  in  the  sense  of  the  following  equation,  into  non-
electric molecules,  thus

These  two  processes  are  distinctly  different,  and  no  connection  between
them,  however  probable,  is  known  at  present.

The  products  of  ordinary  dissociation  may  be  mixed  together  in
any  selected  proportion  ;  but  in  electrolytic  dissociation  there  are  in
the  system  the  same  number  of  positive  and  of  negative  ions,  so  that
they  neutralise  each  other  electrically.

In  ordinary  dissociation  no  other  expenditure  of  work  is  requisite
in  order  to  separate  the  products  than  that  usually  required  to  effect
the  separation  of  a  mixture  (p.  101);  but  in  the  case  of  electrolytic
dissociation,  in  addition  to  this  work,  there  is  required  the  expenditure
of  the  much  greater  work  necessary  to  overcome  the  electric  attraction
of  the  oppositely  charged  ions.  Such  a  separation  of  this  kind  is  observed
to  only  a  very  inconsiderable  degree  by  electrostatic  influence  on
electrolytes  ;  x  here  the  free  electricities  collect  on  the  surfaces  in  the
form  of  ions  ;  but  no  one  has  ever  detected  a  weighable  quantity  of
"  free  ions  "  in  this  sense,  which  are  unaccompanied  by  the  opposite
kind.  This  could  not  be  very  easily  produced,  because  the  accumula-
tion of  free  ions  of  the  same  kind  is  opposed  by  the  enormous
electrical  forces  resisting  it.

The  Diffusion  of  Electrolytes.  —  The  preceding  observations
explain  at  once  why  we  cannot  conduct  an  experiment  like  that
described  on  p.  346  [effusion]  for  the  separation  of  the  ions.  If  we
allow  a  dissociated  gas  to  diffuse,  through  a  small  opening  for  instance,
there  will  occur  a  partial  separation  of  the  components,  since  the  more
mobile  components  will  outstrip  the  sluggish  ones;  but  it  is  quite
otherwise  in  the  case  of  electrolytic  dissociation.

Let  us  imagine  two  solutions  of  hydrochloric  acid,  having  a  dif-
ferent concentration,  to  be  brought  into  contact  with  each  other  ;  and
let  these  be  sufficiently  diluted,  in  order  that  we  may  disregard  the
undissociated  molecules  of  HC1.  Then  on  every  molecule  existing  in
the  solution  (145),  on  the  positively  charged  hydrogen  and  on  the
negatively  charged  chlorine  ions,  there  will  be  exerted  the  same  force
due  to  the  gradient  of  the  osmotic  pressure  ;  this  will  tend  to  move
them  from  places  of  a  higher  to  those  of  a  lower  concentration.  But

1  Ostwald  and  Nernst,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  3.  120  (1889).

366  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

we  know  from  the  conductivities,  that  a  hydrogen  ion  has  a  greater
mobility  than  a  chlorine  ion  (p.  364);  then  the  former  will,  to  a
corresponding  extent,  outstrip  the  latter,  and  thus  there  will  occur  a
partial  separation  of  the  two  ions.

But  this  can  only  happen  to  a  limited  degree.  For  as  soon  as  one
dilute  solution  contains  an  excess  of  H-ions,  and  the  other  an  excess
of  Cl-ions,  then  the  one  will  become  positively  charged,  and  the  other
negatively.  As  a  result  of  these  electric  charges,  there  will  arise  an
electrostatic  force ;  this  will  drive  the  H-ions  from  places  of  a  lower
to  those  of  a  higher  concentration,  and  the  Cl-ions  from  those  of  a
higher  to  those  of  a  lower  concentration.  Thus  the  diffusion  of  the
H-ions  will  be  retarded,  and  that  of  the  Cl-ions  will  be  accelerated ;
.and  the  equalised  condition  will  obviously  be  that  where  both  ions
diffuse  with  the  same  velocity.  A  separation  of  the  ions  will  occur
only  during  the  first  instant,  and,  on  account  of  the  great  electrostatic
capacity  of  the  ions,  only  to  an  inappreciable  degree.

Tims  the  decomposition  'products  of  electrolytic  dissociation  cannot  be
separated  from  each  other,  like  the  products  of  ordinary  dissociation,  by
diffusion,  to  any  marked  degree.  On  the  contrary,  this  can  easily  be
done  by  removing  the  electrostatic  charges  which  result  from  diffu-
sion, i.e.  the  solution  can  be  electrolysed.

Thus,  let  a  diffusion  cylinder,  having  the  height  x,  be  filled  with  a
highly  dissociated  solution  of  a  binary  electrolyte,  having  the  concen-
tration 77,  in  the  total  cross-section  q,  and  let  the  osmotic  pressure  of
each  particular  ion  be  p ;  then  at  the  position  x  +  dx  these  values
will  become  respectively  ry  -  d>?  and  p  --  dp ;  the  volume  of  the
section  thus  increased  is  qdx,  and  it  contains  a  quantity  of  electrolyte
(of  hydrochloric  acid,  e.g.)  equal  to  7/qdx  g.-mol.  Let  this  be  acted
upon  by  the  force  qdp ;  this  will  give  per  g.-mol.

Idp
77  dx*

Now  the  resistance  friction,  which  must  be  overcome  by  the  two  ions
in  their  movement,  amounts  respectively  (according  to  p.  360)  for  the
cation  to

l_

U
and  for  the  anion  to

1

V

The  quantity  of  each  ion  which  will  migrate  in  unit  of  time  dz,
through  a  cross-section  of  the  diffusion  cylinder,  if  acted  upon  only  by
the  forces  due  to  the  osmotic  pressure,  can  be  obtained  by  the  product

CHAP.  VII  ELECTROLYTIC  DISSOCIATION  367

of  the  cross-section  x  the  concentration  x  the  force  per  g.-mol  x  the
mobility  x  the  time  ;  it  amounts  respectively  to

-Uq^dz, and -  Vq^dz.
MX  MX

But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  electrostatic  forces  described  above
come  into  play  ;  these  equalise  the  velocity  of  the  two  kinds  of  ions  ;
let  their  electrostatic  potential  amount  to  P.  Then  the  electrostatic
attraction  or  repulsion,  exerted  per  g.-ion,  will  amount  respectively  to

dP  dP

-  -=-, and +  -=-  ;

dx  dx

and  the  quantities  of  each  ion  which  will  migrate  through  the  cross-
section,  from  the  influence  of  this  force  alone,  calculated  by  means  of
the  same  products  as  above,  are  respectively

,q  Tf  A

-T-dz, and +  Vqry-T-dz.

Now,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  two  forces  act  together  ;  and  the
quantity  of  salt  which  will  migrate  through  the  cross-section,  in  the
time  dz,  is

. /dp dP\  /dp dP\

dS  =  -  UqdzM-  +  tft-  }=  -  Vqdz(  -^  -  »-=-)  ;
\dx 'dx/  \dx 'dx'

or,  after  the  elimination  of  -=-  ,

2UV  dp
TT  —  ,Tq^-
U  +  V  MX

Now,  according  to  the  law  of  the  osmotic  pressure  (p.  148),

where  c,  according  to  definition,  is  equal  to  the  reciprocal  of  the
volume  of  the  solution  which  contains  1  g.-mol.  By  introducing  this,
we  obtain

2UV  _  dr,
dS=  -TT ArKTqyMz.
U  +  V MX

A  comparison  of  this  formula  with  that  on  p.  157  shows  that

B  =  JK>  .... „,

and  this  denotes  the  diffusion  coefficient  of  the  electrolyte.

368  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

Regarding  U  and  V,  we  know  already  (p.  363)  that  they  are
proportional  to  the  ion  mobilities  u  and  v ;  thus

u  =  FU and v  =  FV  . . . . (2)

The  value  of  the  proportional  factor,  F,  depends  upon  the  choice  of
the  unit  of  measurement ;  its  absolute  value  can  be  calculated  from
the  equation  derived  by  Kohlrausch  on  p.  363,  where  a  =  1,  in  the
case  of  fully  dissociated  electrolytes,  viz.,

K  =  r?F(U  +  V).

If  we  express  all  these  magnitudes  on  the  same  system  of  measurement,
then  F,  of  course,  will  =  1.  We  may  suitably  choose  the  C.G.S.
system.1

In  order  to  obtain  the  conductivity  k,  on  this  scale,  we  must
multiply  it  by  109  because  an  Ohm=109  C.G.S.  Further,  the
unit  of  ion  concentration,  of  course,  is  that  which  holds  the  quantity  of
electricity  ±  1  bound  to  the  ions  contained  in  1  c.c.  If  the  unit
quantity  of  electricity  is  held  by  v-equivalents  of  a  positive  ion,  then  a
c.c.  contains

71  (*

-, and  1  c.c.  contains

v  1000  v

units  of +  electricity  ;  and  of  course  the  same  quantity  of  -  electricity.
We  thus  find  that

or,  after  introducing  the  molecular  conductivity  (p.  363),

U  +  V  =  Av  .  lO'9  .... (3)

Now  96,540  Coulomb  (Ampere  seconds)  (=9654  C.G.S.  units)
deposit  1  mol  of  a  univalent  ion  (Book  IV.  Chap.  VI.) ;  hence  we
have  for  univalent  ions

_L_

"9654

further

0  +  V  =  -^-.  10-9=1-036A.  lO'13,

or,  according  to  p.  363,

U=  l'036u.  10-13, V-l'036v.  10-13  . . (4)
If  we  think  of  an  electrolytic  cell  (p.  354)  as  connected  with  the

1  See  the  Text-books  of Physics,  e.g. Kohlrausch,  Prakt. Physik., Leipzig,  1892,
Appendix. [In  English,  see,  e.g.  Daniel's  Physics,  2nd  edit.,  p.  13. — TR.]

CHAP. VII

ELECTROLYTIC  DISSOCIATION  369

poles  of  a  Daniel's  element  which  has  an  electromotive  force  of  I'll
volt;  and  if  we  separate  the  electrodes  I'll  cm.,  then  we  have  a
potential  gradient  of  1  volt  per  cm.,  provided  we  disregard  the  internal
resistance  of  the  element  and  the  polarisation  of  the  electrodes  ;  if  the
electrolytic  cell  is  filled  with  dilute  hydrochloric  acid,  then  the  values
of  u  and  v,  calculated  according  to  p.  364,  are  respectively

U'  -  Q'00329, and  V  =  0  00068  —

sec.

It  thus  becomes  apparent  that  the  velocities  controlled  by  the
current  are  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  velocities  of  the  mole-
cules moving  back  and  forth  ;  now  these  latter  were  introduced
(p.  243)  to  explain  the  osmotic  pressure,  and  they  constitute  the
measure  of  the  temperature  in  the  sense  of  the  kinetic  theory.  The
increase  in  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  ions  occasioned  by  the  current  is-
extremely  slight  ;  and  the  work  which  the  current  does  is,  practically,
completely  used  up  in  overcoming  the  friction,  i.e.  in  developing  Joule's-
heat.

The  migration  in  the  case  of  coloured  ions,  such  as  the  anion  of
potassium  permanganate,  can  be  made  visible  by  a  method  suggested  in
1887  by  0.  Lodge.  Using  a  U-shaped  apparatus1  the  migration  may
not  only  be  made  visible,  but  the  absolute  velocities  may  be  measured!
with  fair  accuracy  in  a  lecture.

Now  if  we  introduce  into  equation  (1),  developed  for  the  diffusion
coefficients,  the  values  of  U  and  V,  from  equations  (3)  and  (4),  we
obtain

.  vRT.  10-°  (5)

Now,  it  remains  to  express  the  gas  constant  E,,  in  the  same  system
of  measurement,  i.e.  in  its  evaluation,  to  select  that  unit  of  volume  in
c.c.,  and  that  unit  quantity  of  ions  which  shall  hold  the  unit  quantity
of  electricity  1.  Now  the  pressure  in  a  space  containing  this  quantity
of  ions  per  c.c.,  according  to  p.  41,  at  T  =  273,  is

22,420  v  atm.  -  22,420  x  981,000  x  1-033  v  abs.  units,

and,  therefore,  in  the  C.G.S.  system  (for  univalent  ions  v  =  - -),

"654

RT  =  2'35lJ-x  10°  .  (6)

L  /  o

Now,  by  introducing  this  into  equation  (5),  we  obtain  the  diffusion
coefficients  on  the  absolute  scale,  i.e.  the  quantity  of  salt  which  will
migrate  per  sec.  through  a  cross-section  of  1  sq.  cm.,  where  the
gradient  of  concentration  per  centimetre  is  1.  It  is  a  matter  of

1  See  Zeitschr.f.  Elektr.,  3.  308  (1897).

2B

370

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK II

indifference  what  scale  we  take  to  express  the  quantity  of  salt,  pro-
vided only  that  we  measure  the  concentration  (i.e.  the  quantity  of
salt  x  cm.  ~3)  on  the  same  scale.  It  must  be  noticed,  however,  that
the  numerical  values  usually  given  are  based  on  the  day  as  unit  of
time,  and  thus  the  factor  8 '6 4  x  104,  the  number  of  seconds  in  a  day,
must  be  introduced  in  order  to  express  the  diffusion  coefficient  D  in
the  conventional  system  of  measurement;  then

2uv

D  =  -  -v  .  2-351  . ----  x  106
u  +  v  2/3

10-°.  8-64  x  104

or,  simplified  and  calculated  for  T  =  273  +  IS,

D  =  0-04485

0-0034(1-18)]

(8)

The  temperature  coefficient,  as  calculated  theoretically  for  18°,
from  that  of  the  mobility  of  the  ions,  and  from  that  of  the  osmotic
pressure,  is  in  complete  accord  with  observation,  viz.  0'024  for  bases
and  acids,  and  0'026  for  neutral  salts.  The  following  table  contains
the  observations  of  Scheffer  calculated  for  18°,  and  the  theoretical
values  calculated  from  the  ion  mobilities  u  and  v,  according  to  equa-
tion (8) : —

Substance.

D  obs.

U  theor.

Substance.

D  obs.

D  theor.

HOI

. .  2-30

2-45

XaN03

ro3  i

rio

HN03  .

2-22

2-29

NaC02H .

0-95 i

1-00

KOH .

1-85

2-13

NaCH-iCO., .

0-78 i

0-86

NaOH  .

. 1-40

1-58

NH4C1.

1-33 !

1-46

NaCl .

. i I'll

1-19

KN03  .

1-30

1-41

W.  Oeholm  has  made  a  thorough  experimental  study  of  tht;  accuracy
of  the  diffusion  theory ;  the  numbers  he  obtained l  for  very  dilute
solutions  (about  O'Ol  normal)  at  18°  are  given  in  the  following  table  :—

Substance.

D  obs. D  theor.

Substance. D  obs.

D  theor.

HC1 .
KOH .
NaOH  .

NaCl .

232 2-45
1-90 2-13
1-43 1-58
1-17 i 1-19

KC1 . . . 1-46
KI . . . !  1-46
Lid . . . I'OO
CH3C02H . . (0-930)

!

1-46
1-47
0-994
1-37

Since  acetic  acid  at  this  concentration  is  only  dissociated  to  a  small
extent,  the  observed  value  0'93  is  considerably  less  than  that  calculated
for  complete  dissociation  1*37.  Otherwise  the  agreement  found,

1 "Diffusion  von  Elektrolyten,"  Akademische  Abhandlung,  Helsingfors,  1902.

CHAP,  vii  ELECTROLYTIC  DISSOCIATION  371

especially  in  the  recent  measurements  of  Oeholm,  is  surprising,  when
one  thinks  that  the  calculated  value  involves  diffusion  coefficients  and
laws  of  gases  and  electrical  measurements,  and  that  parts  of  physics
are  thus  brought  in  relation  between  which  a  connection  was  hardly
imagined  previously.  The  fact  that  not  only  in  acetic  acid  but  in  the
other  substances  the  calculated  values  are  usually  a  little  larger  than
the  observations  may  be  attributed  to  incomplete  dissociation,  since
the  undissociated  molecules  diffuse  more  slowly  than  free  ions.

The  theory  of  diffusion  in  mixtures  of  salts  can  also  be  completely
developed ;  observation  again  supports  the  results  of  the  theory,  as
was  shown  by  me  in  1888,  and  subsequently  in  a  series  of  researches
by  Arrhenius.1

If  we  measure  the  molecular  conductivity,  the  mobility  of  ions,
the  diffusion  coefficient,  and  the  gas  constant,  by  one  system  of
measurement,  consistently  applied,  it  will  be  found  that

A  =  U  +  V,

and  according  to  equation  (5)

1) \U V/  RT'

That  is,  that  while  the  molecular  conductivity  is  simply  equal  to  the  sum
of  the  ion  mobilities,  the  reciprocal  of  the  diffusion  coefficient  is  proportional
to  the  sum  of  the  reciprocals  of  the  mobilities,  these  being  also  included  under
the  additive  properties.

The  Friction  of  the  Ions. — The  friction  of  the  ions  can  be  cal-
culated on  the  absolute  scale  from  the  mobilities  found  on  p.  369.
Now,  since  the  velocities  assumed  by  the  ions,  when  unit  force  acts  on
i'-equivalents,  according  to  equation  (4),  are  respectively,

U=  l-036ux  10-13, and  V=l-036vx  lO'13;
then,  per  v-equivalents,  there  will  be  respectively  the  forces

l-036uxlO~3' and  1  -036 v  TTO - «  abs'  UnitS ;
or,  per  g.-ion  respectively,  the  forces

1  0*950  ,  0-950

K= -, and  _ -  x  10+11  kg. (9)

l-036ux  10-13.981000v u  v

required  to  cause  the  ions  to  move  with  velocity  1  cm. /sec.  (Kohlrausch).
We  may  apply  the  same  formula  to  a  non-electrolyte  or  to  a  salt,

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  1O.  51  (1892)  ;  see  also  the  interesting  studies  of  U.
Behn,  Wied.  Ann.,  61.  (54  1897)  ;  and  Abegg  and  Bose,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  30.
545  (1899).

372

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

by  making  u  =  v,  and  then  calculating  its  mobility  according  to  equa-
tion (8) ;  then  we  obtain

D

(10)

0'02242[1  +  0-0034(t-  18)]'
and  by  considering  equation  (9),  we  obtain

K  =  ?[l  +  0'0034(t-18)]  x  109kg.

a  formula  which  was  already  referred  to.

Now  we  will  use  equations  (9)  and  (10)  in  order  to  calculate  the
resistance  friction  for  an  ion  and  for  an  electrically  neutral  molecule
of  any  related  molecular  structure.  Thus  the  conductivity  v  of  the

//O

ion  of  caproic  acid,  viz.  H3C—  CH2—  CH2—  CH2—  CH2—  C^ 5  at  i  o°,

'

amounts  to  18  ;  and,  therefore,  according  to  equation  (9),  the  force  in

cm
kilograms  required  to  give  it  a  velocity  of  1  -—  ,  is

K  =  5'3  x  109.

Moreover,  from  the  diffusion  constant  0'38  of  mannite,  C0HU06,
measured  at  the  same  temperature,  according  to  equation  (10),  we
calculate  this  force  to  be  ^  _  r.~  ..  ^9

The  fact  that  these  resistance  frictions  are  so  nearly  coincident,  in
spite  of  the  very  different  ways  in  which  they  are  derived,  is  a  new
proof  that  the  views  developed  in  the  preceding  pages  are  based  on  a
sure  foundation.

Further  comparisons  are  given  in  the  following  table  :  —  l

Anion  or  Ration  of

1§

v
or  u

K  lO-9

Dissolving
substance

p_i

If

D

K  10-9

3>

o  £

B

*

1

Acetic  acid

59

45

2-1

Acetic  acid .

60

•90

2'4

18

Tartaric  acid .

149

30

3-2^

Racemic  acid .

149

30

3'2  |

/  Tartaric  acid

150

•50

4"2

18

Isobutyl-Sul-
phuric  acid .

153

29

3-3  J

\  Racemic  acid

150

•52

4-1

18

Ammonium  Ion

18

64

1-5

Ammonia

17

1-64

1-3

19

Other  Solvents. — The  faculty  of  breaking  up  dissolved  substances
into  ions  and  so  yielding  good  conducting  electrolytes,  which  is  most
marked  in  the  case  of  water,  is  found  also  in  other  solvents,  but  mostly
only  to  a  small  extent  and  hardly  ever  to  an  extent  comparable  with
water.

It  should  be  noticed  that  conductivity  depends  not  only  on  the
1  Euler,  Wied.  Ann.  Jabelband,  p.  273  (1897).

CHAP,  vii  ELECTROLYTIC  DISSOCIATION  373

number  of  ions,  that  is  on  the  degree  of  dissociation,  but  also  upon
their  mobility.  According  to  the  preceding  pages,  the  velocity  of
diffusion  is  a  measure  of  this.  This  is  remarkable  because  in  weakly
dissociated  solvents  we  can  neither  determine  Aoo  directly  nor  obtain  a
from  freezing-point  determinations  on  account  of  its  smallness ;  hence
to  find  a  and  Aoo  =  u  +  v  separately  in  the  equation

K  -  a>;  (u  +  v)

one  is  thrown  back  upon  measurements  of  diffusion.  The  measure-
ments made  so  far  show  that  ionic  velocities  vary  from  one  solvent  to
another.  Thus  Kawalki  found  the  mobilities  of  a  large  number  of
ions  in  alcohol  to  be  O34  times  as  great  as  in  water.1  Yet  they  remain
at  least  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude,  so  that  the  conductivity  of
dissolved  substances  yields  at  least  a  rough  indication  of  the  dissociating
power  of  the  solvent.

We  may  form  the  following  conclusions  on  the  power  of  solvents
to  break  up  dissolved  substances  into  ions.  Clearly  the  electrostatic
attraction  of  oppositely  charged  ions  plays  an  important  rdle  in
electrolytic  dissociation ;  that  force  naturally  tends  to  recombine  the
ions  into  electrically  neutral  molecules.2  We  must  therefore  assume
that  other  actions  whose  nature  is  unknown  to  us,  perhaps  the  kinetic
energy  of  the  components  of  the  molecule,  cause  separation,  and  that
dissociative  equilibrium  has  its  origin  in  the  concurrence  of  these  two
opposed  tendencies.  If  the  electrostatic  force  is  weakened  the
electrolytic  dissociation  should  increase ;  now  electrostatics  shows  that
two  oppositely  charged  bodies  attract  each  other  more  weakly  the
higher  the  dissociation  constant  of  the  medium  in  which  they  are
placed.  It  follows,  therefore,  ceteris  paribus,  that  electrolytic  dissocia-
tion will  be  greater  the  higher  the  dielectric  constant  of  the  medium.
This  view  is  supported  by  the  following  table  : —

Medium.

Dielectric
constants.

Electrolytic  Dissociation.

Gaseous  space .

i-o

Indistinguishable  at  normal  temperatures.

Benzene . . 2  '3

Extremely  small but  measurable  conductivity

indicates  a  trace  of  dissociation.

Ether

4-1

Noticeable  conductivity  of  the  dissolved  electro-

lyte.

Alcohol .

25

Moderately  strong  dissociation.

Formic  acil . 62

Strong  dissociation  of  dissolved  salts.

Water . . 80

Very  strong  dissociation.

The parallelism between electrostatic dissociation of dissolved
substances  and  the  dielectric  constant  of  the  solvent  is  put  beyond

1 Wied.  Ann.,  52.  300  (1894).
2  Nernst,  Gott.  Nachr.,  Nov.  12,  1893  ;  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  13.  531  (1894).

374  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  n

doubt  by  this  and  a  number  of  other  examples  ;  but  absolute  propor-
tionality is  not  to  be  expected,  for  other  influences  have  to  be  taken
into  account,  especially  as  we  are  unable  to  say  how  far  the  forces
tending  to  separation  of  the  ions  vary  with  the  nature  of  the  medium.

The  behaviour  of  formic  acid  as  a  solvent  studied  by  Zanninovitch-
Tessarin1  is  especially  noticeable.  Salts,  such  as  NaCl,  KBr,  etc.,  are
hardly  less  dissociated  in  this  solvent  than  in  water,  as  measurements
of  conductivity  and  freezing-point  both  show ;  hydrochloric  acid,  on
the  other  hand,  hardly  conducts  at  all,  and  consists  for  the  most  part
of  double  molecules ;  tri-chlor-acetic  acid  also,  which  is  extensively
dissociated  in  water,  has  almost  its  normal  molecular  weight  in  formic
acid.  This  shows,  as  was  to  be  expected,  that  besides  the  undoubted
influence  of  the  dielectric  constant  other  specific  influences  make
themselves  felt.  Apparently  association  of  the  ions  with  molecules  of
the  solvent  is  important  in  this  respect.  Methyl  alcohol  as  a  solvent
has  been  thoroughly  investigated  by  Carrara 2  and  by  Zelinsky  and
Krapiwin,3  acetone  by  St.  v.  Laszczynski 4  and  Carrara ; 5  for  other
literature  in  this  interesting  field  see  the  Jahrbuch  der  Elektrochemie
from  1895  (Halle,  \V.  Knapp).

It  is  worth  mentioning  that  solvents  witli  considerable  dissociating
power  are  also  those  which  have  a  tendency  to  polymerisation  in  the
liquid  state.6  This  favours  the  assumption  that  electrolytic  dissocia-
tion is  helped  by  association  of  the  free  ions  with  the  molecules  of  the
solvent,  an  assumption  which  is  all  the  more  plausible,  as  the  ions  have
a  strong  tendency  to  form  molecular  compounds,  as  will  appear  in  the
following  section.

The  fact  noted  by  F.  Kohlrausch 7  that  we  know  of  no  good
electrolytically  conducting  liquids  at  usual  temperatures,  that  con-
sequently electrolytic  conduction  is  first  seen  in  mixtures,  supports
this  view.

Werner's Theory of Molecular Compounds.— Whilst in

dealing  with  the  carbon  compounds  the  unitary  conception  is  the  most
helpful ;  in  dealing  with  the  majority  of  the  inorganic  compounds,
especially  the  salts,  acids,  and  bases,  Berzelius's  dualistic  hypothesis  is
more  suitable,  the  hypothesis  which,  as  we  have  seen  in  this  chapter,
can  be  referred  to  decomposition  into  negative  and  positive  ions.
Werner  has  shown  that  the  investigation  of  ionic  dissociation  gives
valuable  insight  into  the  constitution  of  so-called  molecular  compounds,
especially  the  metal  ammonia  derivatives.

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  21.  35  (1896).

2  Ibid.,  19.  (599  (1896).

3  Ibid.,  21.  35  (1896).

4  Zeitschr.  f  Elektrochemie,  2.  55,  214  (1895).

5  Gaz.  chim,,  27.  [1],  207  (1897).

6  Nernst,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  14.  624  (1894)  ;  Dutoit  and  Astou,  Compt.  rend.,
125.  240  (1897).

7  Pogrj.  Ann.,  159.  270  (1875).

CHAP.  VII  ELECTROLYTIC  DISSOCIATION  375

The  following  observations  serve  as  starting-point.  Amongst  the
metallic-  ammonia  compounds  of  the  trivalent  metals,  cobalt,  chromium,
and  rhodium,  four  series  are  known  with  3,  4,  5,  and  6  molecules  of
ammonia.  Thus  considering  the  chlorides,  we  have  as  the  member
richest  in  ammonia  the  luteo  salts  Me(NH3)6Cl3,  where  Me  is  one  of
the  metals  mentioned.  In  these  salts,  as  in  other  metallic  chlorides,
the  chlorine  atoms  can  be  separated  as  ions  ;  this  is  shown  by  the
conductivity  and  by  chemical  behaviour,  for  instance,  immediate
reaction  with  silver  nitrate,  decomposition  by  sulphuric  acid  with
formation  of  hydrochloric  acid,  etc.  When  these  compounds  lose  a
molecule  of  ammonia  and  turn  into  the  purpureo  salts  Me(NH3)5Cl3,
the  remarkable  phenomenon  appears  that  one  of  the  chlorine  atoms  can  no
longer  be  separated  as  ion.  This  can  be  rendered  symbolically  by  the
formula

which  is  to  express  that  the  complex  within  the  bracket  does  not
dissociate  on  solution.  Coming  to  the  next  member  of  the  series  we
find  that  as  each  molecule  of  ammonia  disappears  the  chlorine  atom.
becomes  incapable  of  acting  as  ion.  Thus  we  have  the  series

/Me(NH3)ACl3 /Me(NH3)5\Cl2 fMe(NH3)ACl Me/(NH,)f
V  ) ( C\ ) ( C\.2 )  ( Cl,

Luteo  salts.  Purpureo  salts.  Praseo  salts.  Hexamine  salts,

The  last  member  of  the  series  is  not  dissociated.
The  series  of  the  cations  of  these  salts  is

M<We Me(NH3), Me(NH3)4 Me(NH3)3

2  3

Thus  we  here  find  the  neutral  ammonia  molecule  replaced  by
univalent  anions,  so  that,  naturally,  the  negative  charge  of  the  anions
is  neutralised  by  the  positive  charge  of  the  complex.  Hence  for  each
atom  of  chlorine  that  enters  it  the  complex  loses  one  charge  and!
finally  becomes  electrically  neutral.  If  an  anion  be  introduced  in  the
place  of  an  ammonia  molecule  in  the  neutral  hexamine  salt;  we  obtain
the  anion

which  is  capable  of  forming  salt  with  potassium.

These  relations  are  excellently  shown  by  the  platin-ammonia  com-
pounds investigated  by  Werner  ;  1  the  following  series  of  radicals  has
been  found  :  —

1  Zeitschr.  anorg. Cherrne,  3.  267 (1893)  ; 8.  153  (1895)  ; Werner  and  Miolati  ;
Zeitschr.  /.  phys.  Chem.,  12.  35  (1893)

376

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

Pt(NH3)6, Pt(NH8)5Cl, Pt(NH3)4Cl2, Pt(NH3)3Cl3, Pt(NH3)2Cl4,
Pt(NH3)Cl5, PtCl~6.

The  original  platin-ammonia  ion  with  a  quadruple  charge  loses  its
charge  by  substitution  of  chlorions,  becomes  electrically  neutral,  and
finally  even  negative.  The  following  curve  gives  the  observed
molecular  conductivity  of  the  chlorides  and  potassium  salts  of  the
above  radicals  : —

228

96-75

4

[Pt(NH8)6]014

Chloride

of  the  von

Drechsel  base.

108-5

Unknown.

Platini-  Platini-

tetramine-  monocliamine-

chloride.  chloride.

Fig.  29.

Plat-ini-
diamine-
chloride.

(PtCl,)

Von  Cossa Potassi

salt.  !>i;itin

chloric

Similarly  a  series  can  be  obtained  by  the  substitution  of  chlorions
in  compounds  of  divalent  platinum  : —

(pt(NH3)4)d2

PtCl4

The position of ammonia in the examples  here given can be
taken  by  other  atomic  groups,  such  as  water. Thus  we  know  the

C13  and  the  tetramine-roseo  compounds

In  these  the  radical  remains  trivalent  because  the

roseo  compounds

(  Me\TT  ,$!*  )  C13.
\ (JrL2U)2/

substituent  is  neutral.  By  introducing  this  watej1  molecule  we  obtain
hexahydrates,  and  this  is  actually  the  form  in  which  the  heavy  metals
most  commonly  appear.  When  a  hydrate  contains  more  than  6
molecules  of  water,  for  example  the  vitriols,  this  is  attributed  by
Werner  to  a  combination  of  water  with  the  anion.

CHAP.  VII  ELECTROLYTIC  DISSOCIATION  377

Werner  and  Gubser  l  have  given  an  interesting  case  of  "  hydrate
isomerism  "  in  the  chromium  chlorides.  It  has  long  been  known  that,
like  other  chromium  salts,  these  exist  in  two  modifications,  a  green  and
a  violet.  The  solid  salts  both  have  the  composition  CrCl3  .  6H2O.
In  solution  the  green  form  changes  into  the  violet,  whilst  the
conductivity  rises  about  threefold.  In  the  violet  solution  the  three
chlorine  atoms  are  present  as  ions,  it  has  therefore  the  constitution
(O(H20),.)C13  ;  in  the  green  solution  only  one  chlorine  atom  is  present

as  ion,  the  constitution  is  therefore  f.CrW Mci  +  2H20. That  we

2

2 /

have  here  actually  two  molecules  of  water  combined  in  a  different  way
to  the  others,  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  green  salt  can  be  trans-
formed into  the  tetra-hydrate  without  losing  any  of  its  characteristic
properties.  It  may  be  seen  from  these  examples  that  the  negative
atom  can  be  combined  in  two  different  ways  :  one  so  that  it  is  easily
separated  as  an  ion,  the  other  so  that  it  combines  with  the  metallic
atom  to  form  a  radical  ;  the  latter  is  the  case  when  it  takes  the  place
of  ammonia  or  water.  Werner  believes  that  in  the  latter  case  the
radical  is  directly  attached  to  the  metallic  atom  and  exists  in  the  inner
sphere  of  the  latter.  Ions  which  contain  other  kinds  of  molecules
added  in  this  way  are  called  complex  ions.  The  number  of  radicals
directly  combined  is  a  characteristic  constant  of  each  metal  known  as
the  co-ordination  number  ;  it  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the  valency.

A  very  remarkable  research  of  Abegg  and  Bodlander  2  shows  how
the  affinity  of  the  elements  for  the  electron  regulates  the  formation  of
complex  compounds  ;  the  less  firmly  the  ion  holds  its  electric  charge
the  more  readily  it  forms  "  molecular  compounds  "  in  general.  This
hypothesis  cannot,  however,  be  followed  out  with  exactness,  since  we  do
not  know  how  to  give  precise  determination  to  the  electro-affinity.

Ions  with  Positive  and  Negative  Charge.  —  A  peculiar  kind  of
ion  must  be  formed,  as  K  lister3  showed  first,  when  an  electrically
neutral  molecule  gives  off  simultaneously  a  positive  and  a  negative  ion
(either  uni-  or  multi-valent)  ;  in  that  case  an  electrically  neutral  mole-
cule remains,  but  one  which  is  capable  of  acting  as  an  ion,  since  it
carries  free  electric  charges  ;  Kiister  gave  such  the  name  zwitter-ion.
An  example  is  to  be  found  in  methyl  orange  and  substances  which
possess  the  formula

N(CH3)2  -  E  -  S03H.

There  are  in  solution  both  a  base  (substituted  ammonia)  and  an  acid
(sulphoriic  acid),  therefore  must  form  the  ion

NH(CH3)2  -  R  -  S03.

1  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Qes.,  34.  1579  (1901).

2  Zeitschr.  anorg.  Chem.,  20.  453  (1899).

3  Ibid.,  13.  136  ;  see  also  Winkelbleoh,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  36.  546  (1901).

378  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

Evidently  this  conception  of  a  zwitter-ion  is  partly  identical  with
that  of  an  "internal  salt";  the  new  theory  therefore  admits  the
possibility  of  two  isomers,  according  as  the  charges  remain  free  or
neutralise  each  other.  Nothing  is  known  experimentally  as  to  the
existence  of  these  two  isomers  ;  they  would  correspond  to  the  difference,
for  example,  between  dissociated  and  non-dissociated  acetic  acid.

It  would  evidently  be  of  much  importance  to  find  a  means  of
testing  for  zwifter-ion  ;  since  the  entire  ion  suffers  no  force  in  an
electric  field,  such  ions  do  not,  like  the  ordinary  kind,  contribute  to
the  conductivity.  But  the  electric  field  must  exert  a  moment  of
rotation  on  their  free  charges,  and  hence  must  have  a  directive  action
on  them,  but  on  this  subject  nothing  is  known  at  present.  It  is
possible  that  zwitter-ions  are  much  commoner  than  has  hitherto  been
assumed,  for  example,  the  carbon  in  carbonic  oxide  would  be  tetra-
valent  if  the  latter  substance  had  the  constitution

but  this  view  can  neither  be  confirmed  nor  disputed  at  the  present
time.

Incandescent  Gases.  —  Arrhenius,1  on  the  basis  of  his  own  investi-
gations, has  recently  developed  the  view  that  the  conductivity  of  incan-
descent gases,  which  had  been  repeatedly  studied,  is  an  electrolytic
phenomenon,  and,  therefore,  that  it  argues  the  existence  of  ions.  The
flame  of  a  Bunsen  burner  was  fed  by  means  of  an  atomiser  (Zerstauber)
with  a  mixture  of  air  and  little  drops  of  different  salt  solutions,  and
thus  was  brought  to  a  degree  of  saturation  which  was  fairly  constant
and  capable  of  approximate  determination.  Of  course,  this  was  pro-
portional to  the  concentration  of  the  solutions  used,  and  was  deter-
mined on  an  absolute  scale  by  photometric  measurement.  Inasmuch
as  it  was  possible  to  measure  the  intensity  of  a  galvanic  current  which
was  sent  through,  by  means  of  two  platinum  electrodes  adjusted  in  the
flame,  it  was  thus  possible  to  measure  the  conductivity  of  the  incan-
descent salt  vapours.  The  flames  which  were  free  from  salt  vapours
did  not  conduct  in  a  marked  degree.

In  the  case  of  the  akali  salts  the  conductivity  was  nearly  propor-
tional to  the  square  root  of  the  quantity  present.  It  was  independent
of  the  nature  of  the  negative  ingredient  of  the  salt.  Thus,  for  example,
all  potassium  salts  having  the  same  degree  of  concentration  conducted
equally  well.  The  conductivity  of  the  salts  of  the  alkali  metals
increased  with  the  atomic  weights.  Mixtures  of  the  vapours  of  potas-
sium and  sodium  salts  showed  a  conductivity  similar  to  that  which
can  be  calculated  for  the  mixture  of  two  electrolytes  in  water  solution.

Acids  and  ammonium  salts  did  not  conduct  in  a  marked  way.

1 \Veid.  Ann.,  42.  18  (1891).

CHAP. VII

ELECTROLYTIC  DISSOCIATION  379

The  salts  of  the  heavy  metals  showed  only  traces  of  conductivity.

The  behaviour  of  the  akaline  earths  was  much  more  complicated.

According  to  Arrhenius,  the  reaction  which  leads  to  the  formation
of  free  ions,  and  which  consists  of  the  action  of  the  water  vapour  of
the  flame  on  the  akali  salt,  is  probably  as  shown  in  the  following
scheme,  viz.  : —

KC1  +  H20  =  HC1  +  KOH.

The  potassium  hydroxide  formed  then  breaks  up  slightly  into  ions,  as
follows,  viz.  : —

KOH  =  K  +  OH.

Since  direct  observation  shows  that  the  resulting  acid  does  not
conduct  in  the  flame,  there  follows  immediately  from  this  view  a  re-
sult obtain^!  experimentally,  but  which  is,  at  first  sight,  very  sur-
prising, viz.  that  salts  having  the  same  positive  ion,  when  in  the  same  degree
of  concentration,  conduct  equally  well  Moreover,  a  number  of  other
phenomena  are  explained  by  the  view  given,  above,  as,  particularly,  the
fact  that  the  conductivity  increases  in  proportion  to  the  square  root  of
the  concentration.

Historical  Observations. — The  idea  of  electrolytic  dissociation,
which  has  exerted  such  a  fruitful  and  regenerating  effect  upon  various
departments  of  physics  and  chemistry,  like  other  discoveries  of  this
sort,  had  its  historical  anticipation.  As  early  as  the  year  1857,
Clausius,1  from  the  laws  of  electrolytic  conductivity,  developed  the
view,  that  in  conductors  of  that  sort  there  must  be  traces  of  free  ions
leading,  at  least,  an  ephemeral  existence.

H.  v.  Helmholtz,2  in  1880,  from  a  similar  starting-point,  arrived
at  similar  conclusions.

"  Since  the  complete  equilibrium  of  electricity  is  produced  in  the  interior
of  electrolytic  liquids,  as  well  as  in  metallic  conductors,  by  the  -weakest  dis-
tribution of  the  electric  forces  of  attraction,  therefore  it  must  be  assumed  that  no
other  (chemical)  force  is  opposed  to  the  free  movement  of  the  positively  and
negatively  charged  ions,  save  the  forces  of  their  electrical  attraction  and
repulsion.'1'

In  this  law  Helmholtz  has  clearly  formulated  the  fundamental  idea
of  the  theory  of  electrolytic  dissociation.  But  the  idea  remained  latent
till  very  recently,  because  no  significant  inferences  were  drawn  from  it.
And,  therefore,  Arrhenius  must  be  regarded  as  the  particular  father  of
this  theory  (1887);  for  on  the  one  hand  he  showed  how  to  determine
the  nature  and  the  number  of  the  ions ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  by
a  series  of  applications,  he  clearly  showed  the  fruitfulness  of  the
theory.3

1  Pogg.  Ann,,  101.  338  (1857).

2  Wied.  Ann.,  11.  737  (1880).

3  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  from  1887  on  ;  also  9.  330  (1892).

CHAPTER VIII

THE PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF SALT SOLUTIONS

The  Necessity  of  the  Additive  Relation. — A  solution  which  is
sufficiently  dilute  contains  the  electrolytes  in  a  state  of  complete  dis-
sociation. The  dissolved  substance  has  now  become  a  mixture  of
different  molecules,  i.e.  of  its  ions.  Now  it  is  a  common  experience
that,  in  a  dilute  solution,  or  in  a  gas  mixture  (p.  100),  the  properties
of  each  particular  component  remain  unchanged,  and,  moreover,  if  the
components  are  known,  the  properties  of  the  mixture  can  be  predicted.
From  this  there  follows  the  fundamental  law  that —

The  properties  of  a  salt  solution  are  composed,  additively,  of  the  pi*o-
perties  of  the  free  ions.

Inasmuch  as  this  simple  law  has  been  at  times  subject  to  much
misconception,  particular  warning  should  be  given  against  certain
illegitimate  applications.

The  law  presupposes  complete  dissociation  of  the  electrolytes.
Nothing  can  be  said  a  priori  regarding  the  behaviour  in  cases  where
the  dissociation  is  incomplete.

The  law  may  hold  good  in  cases  where  the  dissociation  is  not
complete ;  and  this  would  obviously  be  the  case  where  the  properties
in  question  are  not  changed  by  the  union  of  the  ions  to  form
electrically  neutral  molecules.  To  what  extent  this  may  happen  in
any  given  case  depends  expressly  upon  this,  viz.  whether  the  property
in  question  is  decidedly  additive  or  not.

It  is  unreasonable  to  reject  this  law  because  it  occasionally  holds
(e.g.  with  regard  to  absorption  of  light)  even  in  cases  in  which  it  is  not
obviously  necessary  that  it  should.

The  Density  of  Salt  Solutions. — If  we  add  to  water  a  salt
which  is  completely  dissociated  electrolytically  when  in  solution,  then
the  change  in  volume  so  occasioned  will  be  brought  additively  by
intermixture  of  the  particular  ions,  and  therefore  this  will  be  an
additive  property  of  the  ions.  A  similar  thing  may  occur  in  the  case
of  salts  which  are  only  slightly  dissociated,  as,  for  instance,  when  the
electrolytic  dissociation  is  associated  with  no  change  of  volume.  But

380

CHAP.  VIII THE  PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  OF  SALT  SOLUTIONS

381

here  this  is  not  a  necessary  consequence.  It  has  not  been  possible  as
yet  to  state  what  part  of  the  change  of  volume  is  due  to  each  particular  ion.
Let  us  denote  by  s  the  density  of  a  solution  containing  in  m  grams
of  water  1  g.-mol  of  a  salt  having  a  mol  wt.  of  M ;  and  by  s0,  the
density  of  pure  water  at  the  same  temperature;  then  the  change  of
volume  occasioned  by  the  solution  of  that  quantity  of  salt  will  be

M  +  m m
Av  =  —

s  s0

The  following  table  contains  some  values  of  the  change  of  volume,1
as  calculated  from  dilute  solutions  : —

I.

Diff.

II.

Diff.

Diff.  I.-II.

KC1  =  267

NaCl  =  l7'7

9-0

8'4

i 9-0

KBr  =  35'l

NaBr=267

8-4

10-3

9-4

KI =45-4

Nal =36-1

9-3

These  values  are  uncertain  within  the  limit  of  one  unit.  But
within  this  limit  of  error,  the  preceding  law  holds  good,  as  shown
by  the  constancy  of  the  differences  between  Cl  and  Br,  Br  and  I,  and
Na  and  K.

The  change  in  volume,  Av,  is,  as  a  rule,  no  longer  additive,  when
weakly  dissociated  salts  are  concerned  ;  thus

=  50-G
KC1  =26-7

NaAc  =  40-0
NaCl  -17-7

HAc  =  5M
HC1  =17-4

Diff.  =  23-9

=  22-3

=  33-7

The  differences  refer  to  differences  in  the  increase  of  volume  occa-
sioned by  Ac  (the  acetic  acid  radical)  and  Cl.  They  are  equal  when
salts  are  compared  which  exhibit  the  same  degree  of  dissociation  ;  but
they  have  an  entirely  different  value  when  the  highly  dissociated
hydrochloric  acid  is  compared  with  the  slightly  dissociated  acetic  acid.
Acetic  acid  also  is  highly  dissociated  at  great  dilution ;  then  Av  would
diminish  to  about  40 '5.

It  is  very  noticeable  that  the  values  of  Av  for  electrolytically  dis-
sociating substances  are  quite  exceptionally  small,  in  fact,  they  are
smaller  than  the  molecular  volume  in  the  solid  state,  and  in  some  in-
stances (for  example,  sodium  carbonate,  magnesium  sulphate,  zinc
sulphate)  are  even  negative.  It  seems,  therefore,  that  with  increasing
separation  of  ions  Av  has  in  general  a  marked  tendency  to  fall  off;  this
may  be  seen  from  the  exact  measurements  by  Kohlrausch  and  Hallwachs
on  p.  301.  The  effects  hitherto  observed  may  be  most  easily  explained
1  J.  Traube,  Zeitschr.  anorg.  Chem.,  3.  1  (1892).  .

382

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

by  supposing  the  solvent,  water,  suffers  a  strong  contraction  on  account  of  the
presence  of  free  ions.

It  is  of  interest  to  know  that  such  a  contraction  might  be  expected
from  the  electric  charges  of  the  ions ;  every  electric  liquid  must  suffer
a  contraction  if,  as  usually  happens,  the  dielectric  constant  increases
with  pressure.  It  is  therefore  natural  to  explain  the  observed  con-
traction of  water  as  due  to  the  electrostatic  field  of  the  ions  in  a  dis-
solved electrolyte.1  Carrara 2  has  shown  the  existence  of  such  "  electro-
stridion"  in  non-aqueous  solutions.

If  the  change  of  volume,  as  defined  above,  is  an  additive  property,
the  same  thing  of  course  will  not  be  strictly  true  regarding  changes
in  the  specific  gravity,  and  for  algebraic  reasons.  But  this  is  approxi-
mately true,  because  the  changes  of  density  amount  to  only  a  small
part  of  the  total  density.  In  fact,  it  is  found  that  the  densities  of
normal  solutions  of  Na  and  K  compounds,  e.g.  show  a  constant  differ-
ence when  combined  with  the  same  negative  component.  And  further-
more, as  the  changes  in  density  are  nearly  proportional  to  the  amount
of  the  content,  then  the  difference  must  be  proportional  to  [the
difference  in]  the  content.

These  regularities  can  be  used  to  calculate,  from  a  few  data  which
are  empirically  determined,  the  density  of  any  selected  solution  of  a
salt  having  the  ions  A  and  B.3

Let  us  denote  by  D^  the  density  of  an  /x-fold  normal  solution  of
ammonium  chloride,  which  is  chosen  as  the  starting-point,  and  let  a
and  b  represent  the  differences  between  the  densities  of  a  normal  AC1
solution  and  of  a  normal  NH4B  solution  respectively  ;  then  the  density
of  an  /x-fold  normal  AB  solution  is  calculated  from  the  formula

d  -  DM  +  /x(a  +  b).

The  constants  a  and  b,  which  are  to  be  empirically  determined,  are
called  the  moduli  of  the  respective  ions.  In  the  following  table  there
are  given  the  densities  of  solutions  of  ammonium  chloride,  and  also  the
moduli  of  a  number  of  ions.4  All  the  values  refer  to  a  temperature
of  15°.

M

Densities  of  NH4C1  Solutions.

1

1-0157

2

1-0308

3

1-0451

4

1-0587

5

1-0728

1  Drude  and  Nernst,  Zeitschr.  pliysik.  Chem.,  15.  79  (1894).

2  Carrara  and  Levi,  Qaz.  chim.  ital.,  30.  II.  197  (1900).
*  Valson,  C.  R.,  73.  441  ;  77.  806.

4  Bender,  Wied.  Ann.,  20.  560  (1883).

rHAP.  VIII THE  PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  OF  SALT  SOLUTIONS  383

MODULI  IN  T-otrocr  UNITS

sNH4  =  0  ;  K  =  289  ;  Na  =  238  ;  Li  -  78  ;  JBa  =  735  ;  |Sr  =  500  ;
JCa  =  280  ;  JMg  =  210  ;  ^Mn  =  356  :  JZn  =  410  ;  ACd  =  606  ;
|Pb  =  1087j  |Cu  =  434;  |Ag=1061.

Cl  =  0; Br=373; 1  =  733; NO3=163; 1S04=206; C.2H302

-  15.

Thus  the  density  of  a  threefold  normal  solution  of  Sr(N03)9,
which  contains  1*5  g.-mol  per  litre,  is  calculated  to  be

d  =  1-0451  +  0-0003(500  +  163)  =  1-2440  ;

while  a  direct  determination  gave  the  result 1*2422. Sometimes  the
differences  are  considerably  greater.

The  Refractive  Power  of  Salt  Solutions. — For  the  reason
that  the  change  of  volume,  on  adding  a  salt  to  a  solvent,  must  be
necessarily  an  additive  property  of  the  ions  the  same  would  be
expected  of  the  change  in  the  specific  refractive  power.  In  fact,  it  is
found  to  be  true  that  the  molecular  refractive  power  of  a  salt,  in  water
solution,  is  an  additive  property,  provided  that  this  is  completely,  or  at
least  nearly,  decomposed  into  the  free  ions ;  but  this  may  (not
necessarily  must)  cease  to  hold  good  when  the  electrolytic  dissociation
is  slight.  Gladstone l  has  stated  that  the  specific  molecular
refractive  powers  of  similar  K  and  Na  compounds  show  quite
constant  differences.  Le  Blanc 2  has  shown  most  conclusively  that  the
same  is  true  of  the  differences  between  the  specific  refractive  powers  of
acids  and  of  their  Na  salts,  in  so  far  as  the  former  are  highly
dissociated ;  but  not  so  when  the  dissociation  is  slight,  i.e.  there
is  a  marked  difference  between  the  atomic  refraction  of  combined  hydrogen,  and
that  of  hydrogen  which  is  electrolytically  separated.

No  way  has  yet  been  found  to  determine  the  specific  refraction  of
particular  ions ;  nor  any  method  to  determine  the  amount  by  which
each  ion  changes  the  specific  volume  of  water  (compare  p.  381).

It  would  be  simpler,  but  less  rational,  to  calculate  from  the  refrac-
tive index  instead  of  from  the  specific  refractive  power.  The  change
•experienced  by  the  refractive  index  of  pure  water,  on  the  addition  of
a  salt,  is,  at  least  approximately,  made  up  additively  of  the  changes
occasioned  by  the  particular  atoms ;  and,  therefore,  by  the  use  of
suitably  chosen  numerical  values  or  moduli  of  the  ions,  it  is  possible
to  calculate  the  refractive  coefficients  of  salt  solutions  in  exactly  the
same  way  that  was  shown  to  be  possible  for  the  specific  gravities

1  Gladstone,  Phil.  Trans.,  1868  ;  Kanonikoff,  J.  pr.  Chem.  [2],  31.  339  (1885).
2  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  4.  553  (1889)!

384

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

(p.  383).  Thus  let  us  denote  by  N^  the  refractive  index  of  a  solution
of  KC1  containing  /z  equivalents  per  litre  ;  then  the  refractive  index
n  of  a  solution  of  a  salt  of  this  content,  and  when  the  moduli  of  the
ions  are  a  and  b,  may  be  calculated  from  the  formula

n  -

(a  +  b).

Bender,1  using  the  following  refractive  coefficients  for  KC1  solutions
at  t°  =  18°,  as  a  starting-point,  found  the  following  moduli  :—

M

Ha D

1

H£

Hy

1

1-3409 T3428

1-3472

1-3505

2

1-3498 1-3518

1-3565

1-3600

3

1-3583 1-3603

1-3651

1-3689

MODULI  IN

UNITS

Ha

D

H/3

Hy

K

0

0

0

0

Na

2

2

2

2

iCd

38

40

41

Cl

o

0

0

0

Br

37

38

41

43

I

111

114

123

131

Thus  the  refractive  coefficient  for  a  twofold  normal  NaBr  solution,
and  the  line  Ha,  is  calculated  to  be

ri  =  1-3498  +  0-0002(2  +  37)  -  1-3576  ;

while  experiment  gave  1*3578. The  coincidence  usually  is  not  so  good
as  this.

Light  Absorption  and  Colour.  —  The  theory  of  electrolytic
dissociation  requires  that  the  absorption  of  an  electrolyte,  which  is  completely
dissociated,  should  be  made  up  additively  from  the  absorption  of  the  positive  and
negative  ingredients  ;  and  therefore  that  the  colour  of  a  dilute  salt  solu-
tion depends  upon  the  colour  of  the  free  ions.  Some  arguments  in
favour  of  this  view  are  the  well-known  facts  that,  when  in  very  slight
concentration,  all  chromates  are  yellow,  all  copper  salts  are  blue,  and

1 Wied.  Ann.,  39.  89  (1890)  ;  see  also  Valson,  Jahresber.f.  Chem.,  1873,  p.  135.

CHAP.  VIII THE  PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  OF  SALT  SOLUTIONS

385

all  salts  made  up  of  nothing  but  colourless  ions — as  01,  Br,  I,  N03,
S04,  etc.,  and  as  K,  Na,  Ba,  Ca,  NH4,  etc. — in  water  solution  are
colourless.  Moreover,  this  has  been  recently  subjected  to  a  quantitative
proof.  Ostwald,1  in  particular,  has  investigated  the  absorption  spectra
of  a  number  of  salts  of  permanganic  acid,  of  fluorescein,  of  eosin,  of
rosolic  acid,  of  aniline  violet,  etc.,  and  fixed  them  photographically,

Fig.  30.

thus  obtaining  actual  proof,  undistorted  by  any  subjective  influence.
The  paper  on  the  subject  included  some  accompanying  illustrations,
made  up  of  the  photographed  spectra,  which  were  compared  with  each
other  as  exactly  as  possible.  These  represented  a  number  of  dilute
solutions  of  salts  containing  one  coloured  ion,  and  contributed,  in  a
striking  way,  to  demonstrate  the  question  at  issue  regarding  the

1  Abh.  d.  Icgl. sacks.  Akad., 18. 281  ; Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  9.  579  (1892)  ;
also  Ewan,  Phil.  Mag.  [5],  33.  317  (1892).

2  0

386  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

dissociation  theory  ;  it  ivas  found  that  the  spectra  of  dilute  solutions  of  salts
containing  the  same  coloured  ion  are  identical.

The  accompanying  cut  (Fig.  30)  shows  the  absorption  spectra  of  a
number  of  salts  of  permanganic  acid,  which  were  studied  in  equivalent
solutions,  i.e.  in  solutions  containing  the  same  number  of  coloured  ions;
they  all  show  absolutely  identical  bands  in  the  yellow  and  green.  If
we  remember  that  the  absorption  of  light  is  usually  (p.  336)  changed
considerably  by  very  slight  changes  in  the  structure  of  the  molecule,
it  would  appear  very  strange  not  to  seek  its  simple  explanation  in  the
dissociation  theory.

General  rules  for  the  behaviour  of  the  spectrum,  when  the  ions
unite  to  form  molecules  which  are  electrically  neutral,  have  not  been
found  as  yet;  thus  the  change  is  quite  small  when  a  solution  of  copper
sulphate,  e.g.  is  diluted,  but  this  change  in  the  colour  is  clearly
recognisable  when  one  adds  water  to  a  solution  of  copper  chloride ;  in
the  latter  case,  the  originally  green  solution  gradually  assumes  the
blue  colour  of  the  copper  ions,  a  clear  and  simple  experiment.

Of  course  the  same  ion  may  change  its  colour  by  changing  the
value  of  its  electrical  equivalent  [i.e.  its  valence] ;  thus  the  divalent
iron  ion  is  coloured  green,  as  in  FeS04 ;  but  the  trivalent  iron  ion  is
coloured  yellow,  as  in  FeCl3.  The  spectrum  also  changes  when  a
coloured  ion  unites  with  another  substance  to  form  a  new  ion ;  thus
the  negative  ions  of  the  hydroferro-  and  of  the  hydroferri-cyanic  acids
[H4FeCu6  and  H3FeCu6]  have  colours  different  from  that  of  the  free
iron  ions.

The  Natural  Power  of  Rotation. — Those  salts  which  contain  one
optically  active  ion  must,  when  in  equivalent  solutions,  and  when  in  a  state
of  complete  dissociation,  have  the  same  power  of  rotation.  This  law  was
first  established  from  certain  measurements  of  Landolt,1  but  the  results
of  Oudemans,2  are  still  more  striking ;  he  developed  the  law  in  a
purely  empirical  way,  and  formulated  it  as  follows.  Alkaloids,  in
their  salts,  are  independent  of  the  acid  with  which  they  are  combined ;
and  optically  active  acids  are  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  metal
with  which  they  are  combined  :  these  show  the  same  rotation,  at  the
same  degree  of  concentration ;  thus  the  molecular  rotation  of  the
following  salts  of  quinic  acid,  as  measured  in  about  4-th  normal  solution,
were  nearly  identical,  viz.  : —

K  =  4S-8;  Na  =  48'9;  NH4  =  47'9;  Ba  =  46'6;  Sr  =  48'7;  Mg  =  47'8.

The  power  of  magnetic  rotation  is  also  an  additive  property,  as  is
inferred  from  the  investigations  of  Jahn.3  It  should  also  be  mentioned

1  B.  B.,  6.  1073  (1873)  ;  W.  Hartmann,  ibid.,  21.  221  (1882).

2  Beibl.,  9.  635  (1885).
3 Wied.  Ann.,  43.  280  (1891).

CHAP,  viil THE  PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  OF  SALT  SOLUTIONS  387

here,  in  brief,  that,  according  to  the  investigations  of  G.  Wiedemann,1
the  atomic  magnetism  of  dissolved  salts  of  magnetic  metals  is
independent  of  the  nature  of  the  acid,  see  p.  316,  and  the  phenomenon
of  fluorescence  can  be  shown  by  ions  as  well  as  by  electrically  neutral
molecules.2

Ionic  Mobility. — Ostwald,  Walden,  and  especially  Bredig,3  investi-
gated the  relation  between  the  chemical  nature  of  a  number  of  anions
and  cations  and  their  mobilities  (see  Chap.  VII.)  as  deduced  from  the
limiting  values  of  the  molecular  conductivities.  The  relations  so  far
known  are  chiefly  the  following  : —

The  mobility  of  elementary  ions  is  a  marked  periodic  function  of
their  atomic  weight,  and  rises  in  each  series  of  similar  elements
when  the  atomic  weight  increases  until  the  latter  reaches  the
value  35.

Compound  ions  travel  equally  fast  when  they  are  isomeric  and  of
equal  degree  of  substitution  with  respect  to  the  dissociating  group  ;  thus
we  find  equal  mobility  for

the  anions  of  ortho-toluic  acid  CH3 .  C6H4 .  COOH  (2 9 '9)  and  toluic
acid  C6H5 .  CH2 .  COOH  (2  9 -8),  butyric  acid  CH3CH2CH9COOH
(30-7)  and  isobutyric  acid  (CH3)2CHCOOH  (30'9) ;
• the cations of propyl amine CH3CH2CH2NH3OH (4(H)  and

isopropylamine  (CH3)2CHNH3OH  (40'0) ;

on  the  contrary,  when  the  degree  of  substitution  is  not  the  same  the
mobilities  are  unequal  as  with  the

cations  of  propyl  amine  C3H7NH3OH  (40'1)  and  trimethyl  amine

(CH8)8NHOH  (47-0).

The  higher  the  degree  of  substitution  of  isomeric  ions  the  faster
they  travel.

The  substitution  of  the  same  group  in  different  ions  alters  the
mobility  in  the  same  sense ;  mobility  in  general  falls  off  with  increase
in  the  number  of  atoms,  but  less  so  when  the  number  of  atoms  is
already  large,  so  that  the  mobility  tends  with  increasing  complexity
of  the  ion  asymptotically  to  the  minimum  value  of  20  (the  fastest  ions

i

are  11  =  325  and  OH  =167).  Numerical  relations  have  not  been
established  on  account  of  numerous  imperfectly  known  constitutive
influences.

Systematic  Resume  of  the  Properties  of  Ions. — In  the  study
of  any  casual  physical  property  of  a  salt  solution,  the  first  attempt
made  is  to  give  it  an  additive  form.  This  is  usually  done  simply

1  See  art.  "  Magnetismus,"  in  Ladenburg's  Handworterbuch,  7.  (1889).

2  Compare  the  interesting  study  of  Buckingham,  Zeitschr.  physik. Chem.,  14.  129
(1894).

3  Zeitschr.  physik.  G/iem.,  13.  242  (1894).

388  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

by  means  of  the  so-called  "  uni-lateral "  [or  "  one-sided "]  properties
(p.  109),  i.e.  those  where  the  dissolved  substances  alone  are  efficient,
but  not  the  solvent.  Thus  the  conductivity,  the  colour  of  a  substance
when  dissolved  in  a  colourless  solvent,  etc.,  are  "  uni-lateral "  pro-
perties ;  but  not  the  density,  the  refractive  power,  the  internal
friction,  and  the  like,  because  here  the  solvent  contributes  to
the  values  measured.  In  the  latter  case  this  problem  must  first
be  solved,  viz.  the  determination  of  the  very  interesting  action
exerted  by  the  dissolved  substance.  We  have,  in  the  preceding
sections,  several  illustrations  of  the  way  that  this  is  done  in  special
cases.

When  this  shall  have  been  finally  accomplished,  viz.  the  bringing
of  the  property  in  question  into  an  additive  form,  as  by  combining  it
with  another  property,  according  to  circumstances  (as,  e.g.  by  combin-
ing the  refraction  of  light  with  the  density),  then  there  remains  the
further  question,  viz.  How  far  does  each  particular  ion  contribute  to  the
observed  value  of  the  property  ?

In  certain  instances,  only  one  ion.  is  active,  as  in  the  case  of  salts,
where  a  coloured  or  an  optically  active  radical  is  combined  with  a
colourless  or  optically  inactive  radical ;  then  in  such  a  case  the  preced-
ing question  answers  itself.  In  other  cases,  the  attempt  to  answer
the  question  has  not  met  with  good  success,  as  shown,  e.g.  in
the  increase  of  the  volume  of  water  on  dissolving  a  salt ;  on  the
other  hand,  the  attempted  explanation  was  successful  in  the  con-
ductivity, and  in  the  capacity  of  diffusion,  and  also  in  the  case  of
those  properties  regarding  the  nature  of  which  we  have  some  clear
conceptions.

Not  until  these  preliminary  questions  are  solved,  can  we  undertake
with  safety  the  investigation  of  the  problem  as  to  how  far  the  properties
considered  are  dependent  upon  the  nature  of  the  ion.  But,  in  general,  it
may  be  predicted  that  the  property  will  have  a  more  or  less  decidedly
constitutive  nature ;  therefore  the  point  of  view  attained  in  the  para-
graph on  the  resume'  of  the  properties  of  electrically  neutral  molecules
(p.  342)  finds  here  its  full  value.

Moreover,  in  addition  to  the  composition  and  constitution  of  the
ion,  it  appears  that  sometimes  another  factor  in  the  case  of  ions  is  of
considerable  importance,  viz.  the  magnitude  of  the  electric  charge,  i.e.
the  same  ion  may  conduct  itself  with  varying  electrical  valencies.  This
question  regarding  the  influence  of  a  change  in  the  electric  charge  on
the  physical  properties,  although  interesting  in  many  respects,  has  not
yet  been  subjected  to  a  systematic  examination.

Finally,  regarding  the  electrolytes  which  are  not  completely  dissociated,
this  question  arises,  viz.  what  part  of  the  observed  value  of  the
respective  properties  of  the  dissolved  substances  is  due  to  the  electri-
cally neutral  components,  and  what  part  is  due  to  those  which  are
dissociated.  This  question  decides  itself  in  the  conductivity,  since  the

CHAP.  VIII THE  PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  OF  SALT  SOLUTIONS  389

dissociated  part  alone  is  active.  For  those  cases  where  the  problem
is  settled,  we  have  a  method  for  determining  the  degree  of  electrolytic  dis-
sociation. The  most  important  result  of  the  two  preceding  chapters
can  be  stated  in  the  theorem :  that  the  ions  show  all  the  properties
of  ordinary  molecules  as  well  as  certain  new  ones  due  to  the  electrical

CHAPTER IX

THE ATOMISTIC THEORY OF ELECTRICITY

General. — In  the  two  foregoing  chapters  we  have  been  concerned
with  the  properties  of  free  ions,  that  is  with  positively  or  negatively
charged  molecules ;  in  the  third  book  we  shall  see  that  the  theory  of
free  ions  is  of  the  greatest  importance  in  understanding  numerous
chemical  processes.

We  are  thus  naturally  led  to  the  question  of  the  nature  of
electricity  itself,  a  problem  which  certainly  belongs  more  to  the  region
of  pure  physics,  but  is  of  such  extreme  importance  for  the  theoretical
chemist  that  some  mention  of  it  appears  to  be  in  place  here,  the  more
so  as  a  chemical  conception  of  electricity  has  come  forward  in
recent  times.

It  is  not  superfluous  to  warn  the  reader  against  a  misunderstanding
of  the  recent  development  of  electricity  which  was  associated  with  the
names  of  Maxwell  and  Hertz  :  a  misunderstanding  that  is  somewhat
widespread,  and  which  makes  the  following  theory  difficult  or  impos-
sible to  understand.  It  is  generally  known  that  recent  physics  has
been  occupied  with  electrical  vibrations ;  it  is  clearly  under  this
influence  that  a  notion  has  arisen  that  the  so-called  fluid  theory -of
electricity  regarding  the  latter  as  a  corporal  agent  is  superseded,  and
now  one  often  finds  the  entirely  needless  supposition  that  electricity  is
a  state  of  vibration.  The  electromagnetic  theory  of  light  has  given  a
conclusive  proof  that  the  phenomenon  of  light  which  has  long  been
known  to  consist  of  wave  motion  is  essential  by  an  electrical  pheno-
menon, or  in  other  words,  that  there  is  no  essential  difference  between
optical  vibrations  and  electrical.  Hence  optics  has  become  a  special
chapter  in  the  theory  of  electricity,  just  as  has  long  been  the  case
with  magnetism.  But  the  question  as  to  the  nature  of  electricity
remains  the  same  as  before.

This  may  be  made  clear  by  an  example.  Physics  has  shown  that
the  sensations  of  tone  are  to  be  attributed  to  vibrations  of  the  air,
hence  acoustics  becomes  a  special  branch  of  hydrodynamics,  viz.  the
theory  of  vibrations  of  gaseous  substances.  If  any  one  were  to  say  on

390

CHAP.  IX  THE  ATOMISTIC  THEORY  OF  ELECTRICITY  391

the  strength  of  acoustics  that  air  was  a  state  of  vibration,  the  absurdity
of  this  expression  would  be  obvious;  yet  the  same  false  conclusion
has  been  drawn  recently  with  regard  to  electricity.  Purely  chemical
investigations  have  shown  us  the  nature  of  air,  and  the  development
of  acoustics  has  hardly  even  contributed  a  detail  towards  it.  Similarly
we  may  look  for  knowledge  of  electricity,  and  perhaps  also  of  the
luminiferous  ether,  to  investigations  that  have  a  great  similarity  to
the  methods  used  in  chemistry.

Ion  and  Electron. — The  consideration  of  electrolytic  phenomena
has  shown  that  the  quantity  of  free  electricity  which  the  ions  are
capable  of  taking  up. is  as  invariable  a  quantity  as  that  of  the  atoms
of  the  chemical  elements ;  the  simplest  explanation  of  this  behaviour
is  that  put  forward  by  Helmholtz  that  electricity  itself  has  an  atomistic
structure,  that  therefore  we  must  assume  the  existence  of  positive  and
negative  elementary  particles.

Just  as  the  law  of  constant  and  multiple  proportions  was  unintel-
ligible without  an  atomistic  conception  of  matter,  so  the  existence  of
ions — that  is,  of  atoms  or  radicals  which  are  always  capable  of  taking
up  a  defined  quantity  of  free  electricity,  or  twice  or  three  times  that
quantity — would  be  quite  unintelligible  if  electricity  were  a  continuum.
But  if  we  attribute  an  atomic  structure  to  electricity  which  we  know
is  as  indestructible  as  matter,  and  can  be  regarded  as  an  elementary
substance  like  the  chemical  elements,  it  is  clear  that  each  ion  can  only
combine  with  a  whole  number  of  electrical  elementary  particles.

Thus  we  have  to  assume  two  new  univalent  elements  whose  atoms
exert  no,  or  very  little,  Newtonian  attraction  on  the  other  elements  but
act  on  each  other,  similar  atoms  repelling  each  other,  and  dissimilar
attracting  (Coulomb's  law).  We  shall  use  the  signs  0  and  0  as
symbols  for  these  elements.  The  chemical  compounds  of  these  two
univalent  elements  with  the  others  are  to  be  considered  ions  ;  Faraday's
law  is  then  nothing  else  than  the  law  of  constant  and  multiple  propor-
tions, applied  to  the  compound  atoms  of  ordinary  elements  with  the
positive  and  negative  electrons.

The  compound  H0(  =  H)  arises  by  substitution  of  a  positive
electron  in  a  molecule  of  hydrochloric  acid  (HC1)  in  the  place  of  the
chlorine;  similarly,  if  a  negative  electron  be  substituted  for  the
hydrogen,  we  obtain  the  compound  Cl©(  =  Cl)  ;  double  substitution
of  negative  electrons  in  the  molecule  of  sulphuric  acid  H.2SO4  in  the

place  of  hydrogen  gives  the  compound  S04<  2(  =  S04),  and so  on.

This  formation  of  free  ions  comes  into  the  scheme  of  valence  (p.  277).
The  dualism  which  is  found  in  the  valence  theory,  and  which  leads  to
a  distinction  into  positive  and  negative  elements,  is  to  be  explained  by
the  faculty  of  some  elements  (such,  for  instance,  as  strongly  positive

392  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  11

hydrogen)  to  combine  with  positive  electrons,  with  others  (such,  for
example,  as  strongly  negative  chlorine)  to  combine  with  negative
electrons.

The  ions  behave  as  saturated  chemical  compounds  in  the  sense  of
the  valence  theory,  as  may  be  seen  from  their  behaviour  towards
molecular  compounds  ;  as  we  saw  on  p.  375  that  ions  are  capable  of
replacing  ammonia  molecules  in  the  platin-ammonia  compounds.

The  relation  between  positive  and  negative  electrons  recalls  that
between  optical  isomeric  twins  (p.  293).  It  is  a  question  of  much
importance  whether  a  compound  of  the  positive  and  negative  electrons
(00  =  neutron,  an  electrically  neutral  massless  molecule)  really
exists  ;  we  shall  assume  that  neutrons  are  everywhere  present  like  the
luminiferous  ether,  and  may  regard  the  space  filled  by  these  molecules
as  weightless,  non-conducting,  but  electrically  polarisable,  that  is,  as
possessing  the  properties  which  optics  assumes  for  the  luminiferous  ether.

Free  Electrons.  —  The  chemical  theory  of  electricity  put  forward
above  raises  the  question  whether  the  elementary  atoms  of  electricity
can  be  isolated,  or  whether  they  are  only  found  in  chemical  combina-
tion with  ordinary  atoms  or  radicals.

The  following  consideration  l  makes  it  probable  that  free  electrons
can  exist  at  least  momentarily.  If  we  consider  the  chemical  equilibrium
(see  Book  III.  Chap.  I.)

which  exists  kinetically  in  aqueous  solution,  we  must  suppose  that  an
exchange  of  negative  electrons  occurs  between  the  bromine  and
chlorine  atoms,  and  hence  we  are  driven  to  assume  that  the  electrical
atoms  must  be  capable  of  independent  existence  apart  from  matter  at
least  momentarily.  The  question  as  to  the  amount  of  free  electrons
in  that  or  similar  cases  has  not  been  answered  so  far.

It  has  been  found  possible  by  two  quite  different  means  to  isolate
at  least  negative  electrons,  that  is,  to  get  them  free  from  original
matter.  Closer  investigation  of  the  cathode  rays  discovered  by
Hittorf  has  led  to  the  knowledge  (Wiechert,  1897)  that  they  consist  of
negative  electrons  projected  with  great  velocity.  By  studying  the
action  which  electrostatic  and  electromagnetic  fields  of  force  exert  on
the  cathode  rays,  it  has  been  found  possible  to  measure  the  velocity  of
these  electrical  particles  with  certainty  ;  according  to  W.  Kaufmann's
measurements2  for  discharge  potentials  of  3000  to  14,000  volts,  it
amounts  from  0'31  to  0'68.  1010  cm.  per  second,  that  is,  from  -^  to
only  J  of  the  velocity  of  light.

Phenomena  very  similar  to  this  are  shown  as  cathode  rays  in

1  Nernst,  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  30.  1563  (1897).
2  See  also  Riecke,  Lehrbuch  der  Physik,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  348  ff.

CHAP.  IX  THE  ATOMISTIC  THEORY  OF  ELECTRICITY  393

strongly  evacuated  Geissler  tubes,  and  we  meet  them  in  an  entirely
unexpected  manner  in  the  remarkable  rays  discovered  a  few  years  ago
by  Becquerel.  Becquerel  found,  first,  that  metallic  uranium  and  its
compounds  can  give  off  continuously  rays  which  pierce  comparatively
thick  masses  of  wood,  glass,  and  even  metals,  which  are  photographi-
cally active,  and  make  air  slightly  conducting.  The  active  substance
is  not  uranium  itself,  but  is  formed  of  small  quantities  of  other
elements  of  which  radium  has  so  far  been  isolated  with  certainty,
and  is  considered  a  homologue  of  barium,  with  an  atomic  weight
between  230-250.

The  compounds  of  radium  possess  the  faculty  of  giving  off  Becquerel
rays  with  surprising  strength,  so  that  these  preparations,  which  are  due
in  the  first  instance  to  M.  et  Mme.  Curie,  have  been  more  precisely
investigated.  The  noteworthy  result  has  been  obtained  in  this  case
also  that  the  emission  consisted  usually  of  cathode  rays,  that  is,  of
free  negative  electrons.  Their  velocity  appears  to  lie  between  2 '4  to
2-8 .  1010,  that  is,  only  a  trifle  less  than  the  velocity  of  light  (3 .  1010).

Their  high  velocity  compared  with  that  of  the  cathode  rays  ex-
plains the  difference  between  their  properties  and  those  of  cathode
rays,  especially  their  much  greater  penetrative  power.

It  has  not  so  far  been  found  possible  to  prove  the  existence  of  free
positive  electrons  in  any  similar  way.  Probably  the  positive  electron
has  much  greater  affinity  for  ordinary  atoms  and  radicals  than  the
negative,  so  that  its  isolation  is  much  more  difficult.1  There  appears
to  me  at  the  present  time  to  be  no  reason  to  doubt  that  positive
electrons  might  be  isolated.

For  numerous  details,  especially  on  the  experimental  side  of  this
remarkable  region  of  investigation,  see  the  exposition  by  E.  Eiecke,
Lehrbuch  tier  Physik,  2nd  ed.  vol.  ii.  p.  339.

The  fact  that  negative  electrons  can  be  projected  by  electrostatic
forces  in  the  cathode  rays,  and  by  chemical  forces  in  the  Becquerel
rays,  and  that  they  travel  with  constant  velocity  (in  a  vacuum)  shows
that,  like  ordinary  matter,  they  possess  a  certain  inertia  or  mass.  This
mass  can  be  calculated  from  the  magnetic  or  electrostatic  deviation
of  the  rays,  and  has  been  found  in  the  cathode  rays  to  be  -g-^nnr  °^  ^he
mass  of  a  hydrogen  atom.  But  this  mass  is  considerably  greater  at
higher  velocities.  Apparently  it  is  not  a  mass  in  the  ordinary  sense,
but  an  inertia  of  electromagnetic  character,  due  to  the  action  of  the
moving  electrons  on  the  luminiferous  ether.2

It  should  be  mentioned  that  the  theory  given  by  Lorentz  of  the
Zeemann  phenomenon  (see  Riecke,  I.e.  p.  447)  is  based  on  the
vibrations  of  free  negative  electrons  round  positively  charged  metallic

1  See  Nernst,  Bedeutung  elektrischer  Methoden  und  Theorien  fur  die  Chemie,  Got-
tingen,  0.  Vandenhoek  u.  Ruprecht,  1901,  p.  25.

2  See  H.  A.  Lorentz,  Physikal.  Zeitschr.,  2.  78  (1900)  ;  Abraham,  Oott.  Nadir.,  Heft
1,  1902,  and  W.  Kaiifmann,  ibid.,  Heft  3,  1903.

394  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

atoms,  and  that,  in  this  case  also,  the  mass  of  the  negative  electrons  is
about  the  same  as  in  the  cathode  rays.

Action  of  Electrons  on  Gases. — In  the  previous  section  we  saw
that  rays  of  electrons  are  characterised  by  their  penetrative  power,  by
their  electrostatic  and  electromagnetic  "deviation,  by  their  action  on
photographic  plates,  and  by  the  phosphorescence  they  produce.  All
these  actions  therefore  are  due  to  the  enormous  velocity  of  the  electrons  ;
it  is  therefore  of  great  importance  that  we  possess  indications  of  slowly
moving  or  motionless  electrons  in  the  action  of  electrons  on  gases.

It  has  been  observed  in  fact  that  electrons  immediately  form  ions,
that  is,  electrically  charged  molecules  in  a  gas ;  it  is  true  that  the  ions
are  of  quite  a  different  kind  to  those  known  in  the  theory  of  electro-
lytic dissociation.  To  distinguish  these  from  the  electrolytic  ions,
since  they  are  produced  only  in  gas,  we  shall  describe  them  as  gas
ions.

The  numerous  observed  facts  on  this  subject  may  be  simply  shown
and  described  by  means  of  the  following  conceptions.1  With  free
electrons  in  a  mass  of  gas,  for  example  air,  each  electron  attaches  to
itself  a  certain  number  of  molecules  of  the  gas  and  so  forms  a  gas  ion  ;
if  the  velocity  of  the  electron  is  very  great,  it  may  produce  a  relatively
large  number  of  positive  and  negative  gas  ions.

The  formation  of  gas  ions  may  be  most  simply  conceived  as  due  to
the  dielectric  attraction  of  the  free  electrons  of  the  gas  molecules,
just  as  on  p.  382  we  were  obliged  to  assume  that  an  electrolytic  ion
surrounded  by  a  sheath  of  water  molecules  can  cause  a  contraction  of
the  solvent.  The  complex  thus  produced  must  go  into  thermal
equilibrium  with  the  other  molecules,  that  is,  it  must  assume  an  amount
of  kinetic  energy  corresponding  to  the  temperature  of  the  gas.

If  the  free  electron  possesses  a  very  high  velocity,  it  may  break
up  a  large  number  of  neutrons  in  the  course  of  gradually  losing  its
excess  of  kinetic  energy,  that  is,  it  may  form  new  positive  and  negative
electrons,  each  of  which,  according  to  its  kinetic  energy,  will  either
form  a  gas  ion  at  once,  or  will  break  up  fresh  neutrons.

As  with  electrolytic  ions  in  a  solvent  the  gas  ions  impart  a  certain
conductivity  of  the  gas.  Cathode  rays  which  penetrate  into  a  gas
through  a  thin  metallic  window  from  a  Geissler  tube,  or  Becquerel
rays,  projected  by  a  radio-active  preparation  brought  into  the  mass  of
gas,  give  to  the  gas  a  noticeable  conductivity,  since  the  negative
electrons  thus  entering  with  high  velocity  produce  a  considerable
number  of  positive  and  negative  gas  ions.

This  conductivity,  unlike  that  of  ordinary  molecules,  is  not  stable

1  See  the  lengthy  exposition  of  J.  Stark,  Elektrizitat  in  Gasen,  Leipzig,  1902,  by
Ambrosius  Earth  ;  a  short  but  extraordinarily  clear  and  precise  summary  by  Langevin,
Recherches  sur  I es  gaz  ionises,  These,  Paris,  1902  ;  Ann.  chim.  phys.  [7],  28.  289  and  433
(1903).

CHAP.  IX  THE  ATOMISTIC  THEORY  OF  ELECTRICITY  395

or  lasting,  re  -combination  of  the  gas  ions,  or,  more  correctly,  the
combination  of  the  electrons  contained  in  a  positive  gas  ion  with  the
electron  contained  in  a  negative  gas  ion  causes  it  to  disappear  in  a
short  but  measurable  time.  Here,  also,  then  is  an  important  difference
between  the  electrolytic  and  the  gas  ions  ;  in  the  former  equilibrium  is
produced  in  an  unmeasurably  short  time,  in  the  second  case  quickly,
but  not  so  fast  as  to  prevent  any  measurement.

Many  measurements  have  shown  that  the  law  of  Guldberg  and
Waage  (Book  III.  Chap.  I.)  is  applicable  to  the  recombination  of  the
gas  ions  ;  if  7]  is  the  concentration  of  positive,  and  rf  of  positive  ions,
we  have

usually  but  not  always  t]  can  be  put  =rjf.  Apparently  the  gas
molecules  with  which  the  free  electrons  are  loaded  cause  the  re-
combination of  the  two  kinds  of  gas  ions  to  be  measurably  slow,
though  probably  the  reaction

e+0=©e

which  takes  place  in  a  vacuum,  that  is,  in  the  luminiferous  ether,  occurs
with  a  prodigious  velocity,  so  that  ether  cannot  be  made  conducting.

It  is  of  very  great  importance  that  the  chemical  nature  of  the  gas
is  of  secondary  consequence  to  the  degree  of  ionisation  ;  l  according  to
the  views  put  forward  here,  it  is  primarily  the  dissociation  of  neutrons
which  happens,  gas  molecules  play  only  a  small  part  in  forming  a
sheath  round  the  free  electrons  in  consequence  of  dielectric  forces.
According  to  the  customary  view  that  the  ionisation  consists  primarily
in  breaking  up  the  gas  molecule  into  a  positive  ion  and  a  free  negative
electron  it  might  be  expected,  contrary  to  the  observations,  that  the
chemical  nature  of  the  gas  would  be  of  as  much  importance  as  in
electrolytic  dissociation.

Other  Methods  of  Formation  of  Gas  Ions.2  —  Gases  can  be  made
conducting  by  various  ways  other  than  by  rays  of  negative  electrons.
Apparently  the  reaction

ee-e+e

is  always  produced  by  a  sufficiently  high  potential  gradient,  such,  for
example,  as  that  at  a  charged  point,  when  gas  molecules  are  present
which  can  attach  themselves  to  the  free  electrons  and  so  delay  their

1  See  Stark,  I.e..  p.  74. For  distinction  from  the  stable  electrolytic  dissociation  of
solutions,  salts,  and  also  gases  (p.  378),  the  transitory  conductivity  of  gases  by  means  of
gas  ions  may  be  described  as  ionisation.

2  Our  knowledge  of  gas  ions  is  mainly  due  to  the  valuable  investigations  of  J.  J.
Thomson and his  students  (Rutherford,  Zeleny,  McClelland, Wilson,  Townsend,  and
others)  in  Cambridge,  189-71900.

396

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

re-combination.  At  any  rate  gases  can  be  made  decidedly  conducting
by  means  of  the  so-called  point  discharge.

Rontgen  rays  have  a  very  strong  ionising  influence  on  gases  ;  it  is
not  unlikely  that  the  violently  impulsive  ether  waves,  such  as  Rontgen
rays  are  supposed  to  be,  produce  potential  differences  capable  of  de-
composing neutrons.

Whether  the  ionic  content  of  flame  gases  is  due  to  spontaneous
formation  of  gas  ions  by  high  temperature  is  doubtful  ;  it  must  be
observed  in  passing  that  at  high  temperatures  gases  possess  a  certain
amount  of  stable  conductivity  depending  upon  the  chemical  nature  of
the  substance,  and  due  to  ordinary  electrolytic  dissociation  (p.  378).

Mobility  of  the  Gas  Ions.  —  The  number  of  gas  ions  present  in
the  gas  at  the  highest  degree  of  ionisation  hitherto  produced  is  very
small  compared  with  the  whole  number  of  molecules  in  the  gas,  less  than
one  gas  ion  in  a  billion  gas  molecules.1  Hence  the  gas  ions,  like  an
extremely  dilute  electrolytic  solution,  must  have  a  mobility  independent
of  their  concentration.

The  conductivity  K  of  an  ionised  gas  is  therefore

K  =  k?  +  k'

?,

where  ?;  and  ?/'  are  the  concentrations,  k  and  k'  the  mobilities  of  the
positive  and  negative  gas  ions.

The  values  of  k  and  k'  have  been  obtained  by  widely  differing
methods  ;  without  going  into  experimental  details  we  will  give  here
the  most  reliable  values  given  by  Zeleny.2

k

k'

k'
k

Temp.

Dry  air .

1-36

1-87

1-37

13-5

Damp  air .

1-37

1-51

1-10

14

Dry  oxygen  . . .

1-36

1-80

1-82

17

Damp  oxygen

1-29

1-52

1-18

16

Dry  carbon  dioxide

076

0-81

1-07

17-5

Damp  carbon  dioxide

0-82

0-75

0-92

17

Dry  hydrogen

670

7'95

1-19

20

Damp  hydrogen .

5-30

5-60

1-05

20

The  numbers  are  the  velocities  in  cm.  per  second  which  the  gas
ions  assume  with  a  potential  gradient  of  1  volt  per  cm.

On  comparison  with  the. mobility  of  the  hydrogen  ion  (p.  369)  we
see  that  the  positive  ions  in  dry  air  move  some  400  times  faster  under
the  same  potential  gradient ;  evidently  the  friction  of  the  ions  in  air

Langevin,  I.e.  p.  322.

2  Phil.  Trans.,  195.  193  (1901).

CHAP.  IX  THE  ATOMISTIC  THEORY  OF  ELECTRICITY  397

must  be  very  much  smaller  than  in  water ;  the  positive  gas  ions  in
hydrogen  travel  2000  times  faster  than  the  hydrogen  ions  in  water.

In  spite  of  these  relatively  great  mobilities  the  conductivity  due  to
ionisation  in  gas  is  very  small  because  the  content  in  gas  ions,  as
remarked  above,  is  less  than  10~12  of  the  gas,  or  since  the  latter  at
atmospheric  pressure  contains  only  ^  of  a  mol  per  litre  the  normality
only  reaches  about  0'45  .  10~13.  Even  in  hydrogen,  in  which  we  have
seen  the  mobility  is  2000  times  that  of  the  hydrogen  ion,  the  con-
ductivity is  only  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  that  of  an  acid
solution  of  10  "10  normal.  Consequently  the  conductivities  of  the
ionised  gases  must  usually  be  determined  by  electrostatic  measure-
ment, but  even  the  small  amount  of  electricity  required  to  charge
an  electrometer  usually  causes  noticeable  changes  of  concentration  in
the  gas  ions.  Consequently  the  methods  of  investigation  of  the
conductivity  of  ionised  gases  differ  considerably  from  these  for  the
investigation  of  electrolytic  conductivity.  They  cannot  be  discussed
here  however.

The  numbers  given  above  for  the  mobility  refer  to  gases  at
atmospheric  pressure  ;  according  to  the  kinetic  theory  (p.  308),  the
mobility  of  a  gas  ion  must  be  inversely  proportional  to  the  number  of
collisions  it  makes  with  the  gas  molecules ;  in  other  words,  it  must
increase  in  inverse  proportion  to  the  pressure  of  the  gas.

This  conclusion  is  confirmed  by  measurements  made  at  pressures
of  O'l  to  0'2  atmospheres;  for  lower  pressures  than  this  the  mobility
increases  much  faster  than  inversely  proportionally  to  the  pressure  ;
this  is  the  case  especially  with  the  negative  gas  ions.1

This  result  clearly  means  that  at  low  pressures  the  number  of  gas
molecules  which  surround  the  electron  diminishes,  and  that  hence  the
gas  ion  is  more  mobile.  The  circumstance  that  this  diminution  is
more  noticeable  in  the  negative  than  in  the  positive  gas  ions  confirms
the  conclusion  drawn  on  other  grounds  that  the  positive  electrons  hold
ordinary  matter  more  firmly  than  negative,  so  too  the  invariably  greater
mobility  of  the  negative  ion  as  compared  with  the  positive  (see  the

Y
ratio .—  in  the  table,  p.  396)  shows  that  the  number  of  gas  molecules

l£

attached  to  a  positive  electron  is  greater  than  to  a  negative.

The  great  influence  that  water  vapour  exercises  on  the  mobility,
and  also,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  table  in  the  following  section,  on  the
diffusivity,  is  clearly  to  be  attributed  to  the  greater  number  of  water
molecules  which  attach  themselves  to  electrons,  perhaps  on  account  of
their  greater  dielectric  constant  (see  also  the  next  section).

Diffusion  of  Gas  Ions. — The  theory  of  the  diffusion  of  electrolytes
in  dilute  solution  given  by  the  author  is  applicable  without  change  to

1  See  Langevin,  I.e.  p.  514.

398

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

the diffusion of gas ions. The diffusion coefficient is therefore,
according  to  p.  370  (7),

Here,  if  instead  of  volts  we  introduce  absolute  units,

U  =  klCr8, V  =  k'.10-8.
We  have  found  for  the  gas  constant  of  univalent  ions,  p.  369  (6),

RT  =  2-351.  10",

and  since  an  equivalent  of  an  n-valent  ion  possesses  one  nth  of  the
osmotic  pressure  we  have  for  n-valent  ions

and  thus  finally

D  =  — —  _

k  +  k'  " n 273

(2)

Townsend l  has  given  the  following  values  of  the  diffusion  constant
at  15°  (cm.2  sec.1) : —

Obs.

Cal.

Air  dry .

D  =  0'0347

0-0391

Air  damp

D  =  0'0335

0-0356

Oxygen  dry

D  =  0-0323

0-0384

Oxygen  damp  .
Carbon  dioxide  dry

D  =  0-0323

D  =  0-0245

0-0386
0-0194

Carbon  dioxide  damp

D  =  0-025

0-0194

Hydrogen  dry  .

D  =  0156

01805

Hydrogen  damp

D  =  0-135

0-1345

According  to  p.  210,  the  diffusion  coefficient,  for  example,  of  C09
into  N02  is  0'089,  and  since  these  two  gases  have  almost  the  same
free  path  and  molecular  weight,  the  diffusion  of  carbon  dioxide
molecules  in  carbon  dioxide  (Maxwell's  "Diffusion  into  itself")  must
be  equally  great.  Now  we  saw,  p.  372,  that  an  electrolytic  ion  has
about  the  same  mobility  as  an  ordinary  molecule,  we  may  therefore
reasonably  expect  that  the  mobility,  and  hence  the  diffusivity  of  a  gas
ion  would  be  the  same  as  that  of  an  ordinary  molecule  if  the  two  are
of  the  same  magnitude.  We  find,  however,  that  in  carbon  dioxide —

Zeitschri/t,  1.  313  (1900)  ;  more  fully,  Phil.  Trans.,  193.  129  (1899).

CHAP.  IX  THE  ATOMISTIC  THEORY  OF  ELECTRICITY  399

and  other  gases  behave  similarly  —  the  gas  ioii  travels  only  about  one-
third  as  fast  as  the  carbon  dioxide  molecules  (0*0245  as  compared
with  0'089);  hence  the  assumption  is  made  very  plausible  that  a
greater  number  of  molecules  is  grouped  round  the  electron  in  a  gas
ion  (Langevin,  I.e.  p.  332,  assumes  that  there  are  7).

Carrying  out  for  gas  ions  calculations  analogous  to  that  on  p.  370,
we  find  agreement  between  the  observed  and  calculated  diffusion
coefficients  when

this  indicates  that  a  gas  ion  is  electrically  univalent,  that  is,  it  is  only  a
single  positive  or  negative  electron.

We  saw  on  p.  365  'that  the  diffusion  of  an  electrolyte  produces
potential  differences  when  the  mobility  of  the  positive  and  negative
ions  is  different.  The  corresponding  phenomenon  for  gas  ions  has
been  demonstrated  by  Zeleny,1  who  stated  that  a  metallic  conductor
dipping  into  an  ionised  gas  is  negatively  charged  because  the  more
mobile  negative  gas  ions  diffused  to  it  faster  than  the  positive.

Condensation  by  Gas  Ions.  —  When  air  saturated  with  water
vapour  is  expanded  it  cools,  and  therefore  becomes  supersaturated
with  water,  which,  when  there  is  dust  in  the  air,  condenses  to  form  a
cloud  ;  when  the  air  is  free  from  dust  it  remains  supersaturated  ;  but
when  the  supersaturation  is  sufficiently  great,  gas  ions  are  capable  of
acting  as  centres  of  condensation,  so  that  we  have  an  important  new
means  of  detecting  them.

J.  J.  Thomson,2  who,  with  his  students,  cleared  up  this  phenomenon
by  his  brilliant  researches,  showed  that  when  the  ratio  of  expansion
is  greater  than  1*33,  both  the  positive  and  negative  gas  ions  act  as
nuclei  for  the  condensation  of  cloud  drops  ;  if  it  lies  between  1'29  and
T33  all  the  negative  but  only  some  of  the  positive  ions  act  as  nuclei.
When  the  ratio  of  expansion  is  between  T27  and  1*29  only  the  negative
ions  act  as  nuclei  ;  and  below  1*27  these  cease  to  be  effective.

The  action  of  the  gas  ions  just  described  is  probably,  like  the
attachment  of  gas  molecules  to  the  electrons,  referred  to  dielectric
forces  ;  in  the  last  chapter  of  this  book  we  shall  return  to  this
phenomenon,  which  is  of  the  greatest  importance  for  atomistics.  It  is
especially  remarkable  that  the  negative  ions  produce  condensation
more  strongly  than  the  positive.

Positive  and  Negative  Elements.  —  The  electron  theory  allows
us  to  form  a  clear  picture  of  the  relation  between  the  dualistic
and  unitary  conceptions.  The  different  elements  and  radicals  have
different  chemical  affinities  towards  the  positive  and  negative  electrons  ;

1  Phil.  Mag.,  46.  134  (1898).
2  Ibid.  [5],  46.  528  (1898)  ;  [6],  5.  346  (1903).

400  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

those  which  have  a  strong  tendency  to  combine  with  the  positive
electrons  form  positive  groups  of  elements  ;  similarly  negative  elements
are  characterised  by  their  affinity  for  negative  electrons.  Besides  this
the  different  elements  exercise  a  chemical  attraction  on  each  other
which  is  not  of  a  polar  character.  Accordingly,  two  atoms  of  an
element  may  form  a  stable  chemical  compound  without  any  action  on
the  part  of  the  electrons;  the  stability  with  which  the  two  hydrogen
or  two  nitrogen  atoms  unite  with  one  another  in  the  molecule  is  an
example  of  this.  The  same  is  true  of  many  of  the  compounds  of  the
metalloids  with  each  other,  such  as  iodine  chloride,  phosphorus  sulphide,
and  so  on.  So  too  the  metals  make  numerous  compounds  with  each
other,  in  which  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  electrons  take
part.  Carbon  especially,  which  forms  a  transition  between  the  well-
marked  positive  arid  negative  elements,  reacts  with  both  groups  of
elements,  and  since  electrons  seem  here  to  be  out  of  the  question,  the
possibility  of  a  purely  unitary  conception  of  the  carbon  compounds  is
noticeable.

But  so  soon  as  a  positive  and  a  negative  element  react  with  one
another  we  have  separation  of  ions,  that  is,  the  additional  separation  of
a  massless  electrically  neutral  molecule  is  associated  with  this  chemical
process ;  it  is  remarkable  that  this  process  involves  a  far  deeper
change  in  the  ordinary  behaviour  than  one  in  which  the  electrons  do
not  take  part  ;  whilst  the  compounds  of  the  metals  with  each  other
retain  their  metallic  character,  and  similarly,  compounds  of  metalloids
recall  the  properties  of  their  components,  when  a  metal  reacts  with  a
metalloid  something  entirely  new  and  peculiar  is  produced.  Sub-
stances like  sodium  chloride  show  the  greatest  possible  difference  of
character  from  that  of  their  components,  and  in  the  formation  of  such
compounds  clearly  the  chemical  forces  acting  are  the  most  intense.

It  is  of  course  possible  that  in  the  non-polar  reactions  electrical
forces  are  in  the  background,  just  as  it  has  often  been  hoped  to  refer
the  Newtonian  attraction  to  electrical  phenomena,  and  as  has  been
accomplished  with  optics.  That,  however,  is  a  matter  of  the  future  ;
at  present  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  the  forces  of  polar  character
from  unitary  actions.

The  views  put  forward  here  admit  of  supposing  that  an  element  or
radical  can  react  with  a  positive  or  negative  electron,  without  a
simultaneous  reaction  between  another  element  of  the  opposite  character
combining  with  the  electron  which  is  set  free.  If  this  happens  the
free  electrons  should  possess  a  certain  dissociation  pressure  in  analogy
with  that  of  ordinary  chemical  processes ;  this  would  cause  differences
in  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  electrons  given  out ;  possibly  the
Becquerel  rays  are  due  to  some  such  chemical  process.

In  any  case  the  recent  investigations  in  the  region  of  the  electron
theory  have  an  importance  for  purely  chemical  questions  that  can
hardly  be  overrated.

CHAPTER X

THE METALLIC STATE

General. — Matter  is  found  in  a  singular  condition  as  metal,  and
although  transition  stages  are  known,  there  is  on  the  whole  a  sharp
distinction  between  this  and  the  non-metallic  state.

The  noticeably  distinct  position  of  the  metallic  substances  may
be  seen  in  the  first  place  in  their  facility  for  combining  to  form
homogeneous  mixtures  with  one  another,  but  not  with  non-metallic
substances ;  no  single  non-metallic  solvent  is  known  for  any  metal
apart  from  obvious  cases  of  chemical  combination,  nor  are  any  cases
of  isomorphous  mixtures  of  a  metallic  and  a  non-metallic  substance
known.1

An  equally  important  criterion  for  the  metallic  state  is  the  power
of  conducting  electric  currents  "  metallically"  that  is,  unlike  electrolytic
conduction,  without  any  transport  of  matter ;  metallic  and  electrolytic
conductors  behave  so  differently  that  they  are  distinguished  as  con-
ductors of  the  first  and  second  class.

The  opacity  of  metals  is  closely  related  to  their  electric  con-
ductivity ;  there  are  no  known  non-metallic  substances  which  are  so
opaque  in  thin  films  as  the  metals.  According  to  the  electromagnetic
theory  of  light,  the  opacity  of  the  metallic  state  is  due  to  the  absence
of  material  transport  associated  with  electricity,  the  conduction  in  the
metal  is  therefore  practically  free  from  inertia  in  contradistinction  to
electrolytic  conduction ;  the  metals  behave  as  good  conductors  even
towards  electric  oscillations  as  rapid  as  the  waves  of  light.

It  is  noteworthy  that  metallic  conductivity  is  usually  at  ordinary
temperatures  of  a  much  higher  order  of  magnitude  than  the  highest
known  conductivity  of  electrolytes,  and  it  seems  from  numerous
observations  that  metallic  conduction  would  assume  extraordinary
values  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  absolute  zero  of  temperature  at
which  electrolytic  conduction  would  almost  vanish ;  and  on  the  other

r  The  fact  that  hydrogen  and  the  other  gases,  for  which  many  non-metallic  solvents
are  known,  are  also  occluded  by  many  metals,  may  perhaps  be  regarded  as  an  exception,
but  occlusion  by  metals  is  probably  merely  a  phenomenon  of  adsorption,  p.  129.

401  2  D

402  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

hand,  at  very  high  temperatures,  whilst  electrolytes  gain  considerably
in  conductivity,  metallic  conduction  tends  to  cease.

Certain  partly  conducting  materials,  such  as  carbon,  -silicon,
tellurium,  and  similar  elements  lie  on  the  boundary  between  the
metallic  and  non-metallic  states.1  Metallic  conduction  in  chemical
compounds  is  rare  and  not  well  marked.2

The  characteristics  of  the  metallic  state  vanish  in  gases  ;  vapours
of  metals  mix  with  all  other  gases  and  show  no  trace  of  metallic
conductivity.

Metallic  Solutions.3 — The  general  behaviour  of  liquid  metallic
mixtures  is  quite  analogous  with  that  of  mixtures  of  non-metallic
substances.  Metals  are  known,  for  example  lead  and  tin,  which  mix
in  all  proportions  in  the  liquid  state  and  behave  in  this  respect
therefore  like  water  and  alcohol ;  others,  such  as  zinc  and  lead,  form
two  separate  layers  which  only  dissolve  each  other  to  a  small  extent,
and  recall  the  behaviour  of  water  and  ether.  Moreover,  this  limited
solubility  is  much  the  more  frequent  case.

When  a  liquid  mixture  freezes,  usually  one  of  the  components
separates  out  in  the  pure  state  first,  and  in  the  same  way  the
components  of  a  metallic  mixture  can  usually  be  separated  by
fractional  distillation.  Consequently  the  thermodynamic  theory  of
metallic  mixtures  follows  the  same  lines  as  that  for  non-metallic
substances,  and  in  particular,  molecular  weight  determinations  in
dilute  solution  can  be  made  on  metals  as  on  other  substances.  The
most  important  result  that  has  been  obtained  in  this  respect  is  that
the  metals  in  dilute  solution  are  for  the  most  part  monatomic ;  this
has  also  been  shown  by  vapour  pressure  determinations  for  mercury
and  cadmium  vapour ;  it  is  of  course  possible  that  the  dissolved  metal
forms  a  compound  with  the  solvent,  but  this  can  only  contain  a  single
atom  of  the  dissolved  metal.

Molecular  weight  determinations  in  metallic  solutions  have  been
made  according  to  the  Raoiilt  van't  Hoff  method  of  Ramsay 4  and
Tammann,5  and  recently  in  a  very  complete  manner  by  Heycock  and
Neville ; 6  the  most  important  results  of  their  investigations  have
been  collected  by  Bodlander  in  the  publication  referred  to.3  They
found 7  that  tin  is  deposited  in  the  pure  state  from  alloys  with  sodium,
aluminium,  indium,  copper,  zinc,  silver,  cadmium,  gold,  mercury,
thallium,  lead,  and  bismuth  ;  that  the  molecular  weight  of  these  metals

1  See  also  the  arrangement  of  the  elements,  p.  189.

2  See  also  F.  Streintz,  LeitvermSgen  gepresster  Pulver,  Stuttgart,  1903,  F.  Enke.

3  See  also  the  article "  Chemische Natur der  Metall-legierungen,"  by  F.  Forster,
Naturw.-  Rundschau,  9.  Nos.  36-41  (1892) ;  and  ''  Konstitution  einiger  Legierungen,"  by
G.  Bodlander,  Berg  und  Hutlenmannische  Zeitung,  1897,  Nos.  34  and  39.

4  Zeitschr  physik.  Chem.,  3.  359  (1889).

5  Ibid.,  3.  441  (1889).

6  Journ.  of  Chem.  Soc.,  since  1888.

7  Chem.  Zentralblatt,  1889,  Bd.  I.  p.  666.

CHAP,  x  THE  METALLIC  STATE  403

in  the  liquid  mass  is  the  same  as  their  atomic  Aveight ;  that,  therefore,
the  molecules  consist  of  single  atoms  like  those  of  vapour  of  mercury.
Aluminium  and  indium  form  double  atoms  in  tin.  Antimony  alone
raises  the  melting-point  of  tin.  Sodium1  deposits  in  the  pure  state
from  alloys  containing  gold,  thallium,  mercury,  and  lead,  and  these
metals  occur  in  sodium  in  the  form  of  single  atoms.  Cadmium,
potassium,  lithium,  and  zinc  lower  the  melting-point  of  sodium  less
than  the  same  number  of  atoms  of  the  former  metals,  they  therefore
probably  form  double  atoms  as  well  as  single.  Bismuth**  also
separates  in  the  pure  state  from  alloys  with  most  metals,  and  the
following  metals  form  monatomic  molecules  in  fused  bismuth  :  lead,
thallium,  mercury,  tin,  palladium,  platinum,  gold,  cadmium,  sodium,
and  silver.  Zinc,  copper,  and  arsenic  form  larger  molecules,  di-  or  tri-
atomic ;  antimony  raises  the  melting-point  of  bismuth  and  must
therefore  be  deposited  in  the  form  of  a  mixture  or  compound.  Cadmium
forms  compounds  with  silver,  since  the  latter  metal  raises  its  melting-
point  ;  otherwise  cadmium  separates  in  the  pure  state.  Antimony,
platinum,  bismuth,  tin,  sodium,  lead,  and  thallium  exist  in  these  alloys
in  the  state  of  monatomic  molecules.  Copper,  zinc,  mercury,
palladium,  potassium,  gold,  and  arsenic  form  polyatomic  molecules  in
fused  cadmium.  Lead  seems  always  to  separate  in  the  pure  state  from
its  fused  alloys.  Whilst  gold,  palladium,  silver,  platinum,  and  copper
form  mainly  monatomic  molecules  in  fused  lead,  the  molecules  of  the
other  metals  in  this  solvent  are  larger.  Antimony,  cadmium,  mercury,
and  bismuth  in  particular  occur  as  double  atoms  in  fused  lead.  If
gold  and  cadmium  are  simultaneously  dissolved  in  tin,  the  compound
AuCd  is  formed  in  solution,3  and  crystallises  out  as  such  if  the
concentration  is  sufficiently  great.  The  same  alloy  has  been  found
in  later  investigations,4  when  gold  and  cadmium  are  dissolved
in  tin,  thallium,  bismuth,  or  lead.  Silver  forms  with  cadmium  in
solution  in  tin,  lead,  or  thallium,  the  compound  Ag2Cd,  but  in
fused  bismuth  Ag4Cd.  Gold  combines  with  aluminium  when  both
are  dissolved  in  tin  to  form  the  crystalline  compound  Al2Au,  which
is  insoluble  in  tin.  By  adding  aluminium  to  tin  containing  gold  the
whole  of  the  gold  is  precipitated  in  this  form,  so  that  pure  tin  is
left  behind.  Pure  thallium  separates  from  a  solution  of  gold,
silver,  or  platinum  in  thallium;5  the  dissolved  metals,  namely,
gold,  silver,  and  platinum,  form  monatomic  molecules  in  thallium.
Tin,  bismuth,  thallium,  lead,  antimony,  and  magnesium  are  mon-
atomic in  zinc,  and  all  these  solutions  on  freezing  deposit  zinc  in
the  pure  state.6

The  dissolved  metals,  like  ordinary  dissolved  materials,  show  the
phenomenon  of  diffusion  as  might  be  expected,  since  they  obey  the  laws

1  Ohem.  Zentralblatt,  1889,  Bel.  II.  p.  1043. 4  Ibid.,  1894,  Bd.  I.  p.  410.

2  Ibid.,  1891,  Bd.  I.  p.  129.  5  Ibid.,  1894,  Bd.  I.  p.  266.

3  Ibid.,  1892,  Bd.  I.  p.  153.  6  Journ.  Chem.  Soc.,  71.  383  (1897).

404  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

of  osmotic  pressure.  G.  Meyer l  has  shown  that  the  diffusion  constants
of  metals  dissolved  in  mercury  are  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as
those  of  the  salts  in  water,  and  that  this  is  also  true  of  the  frictional
resistance.  Metallic  powder  can  be  welded  at  high  pressure,  as  has
been  shown  by  Spring 2  in  a  series  of  interesting  researches,  so
that  even  solid  metals  are  capable  of  fusing  into  each  other  (see
also  p.  170).

Metallic  Alloys. — Investigation  of  liquid  metallic  mixtures  meets
with  considerable  difficulty  on  account  of  their  opacity,  so  that  the
experimenter  usually  finds  a  difficulty  in  distinguishing  between  a
homogeneous  liquid,  an  emulsion,  or  a  solution  filled  with  minute
crystals.  The  investigation  of  these  mixtures  in  the  solid  state  is  still
more  difficult,  for  here  it  is  almost  impossible  to  say  whether  the
substance  is  amorphous  or  crystallised.  The  behaviour  of  the  zinc-
cadmium  mixtures 3  is  simple ;  the  melting-point  of  the  alloy  falls
with  increasing  content  of  cadmium  from  41 8 '5°,  that  of  pure  zinc,
to  264*5°,  the  melting-point  of  an  alloy  with  75  atoms  per  cent  of
zinc.  On  the  other  hand,  the  addition  of  zinc  lowers  the  melting-point
of  cadmium  from  320'5°  to  264'5°  when  an  alloy  of  composition  75
atoms  per  cent  of  zinc  is  reached.  This  alloy,  which  apparently
freezes  in  a  homogeneous  state  at  the  last-named  temperature,  is  com-
pletely analogous  to  the  so  called  cryohydrates  (p.  126),  and  the  alloy  of
the  composition  stated  formed  on  freezing  is  a  chemical  mixture  of  zinc
and  cadmium  crystals.  More  frequently,  however,  compounds  are
deposited  from  such  mixtures,  and  often  of  more  than  one  composition,
so  that  metals  show  a  strong  tendency  to.  form  in  the  solid  state
compounds  analogous  to  salts  with  water  of  crystallisation,  double  salts,
and  the  like.  Many  metallic  alloys  are  undoubtedly  deposited  as  an
intimate  mechanical  mixture  of  such  compounds  of  the  pure  metals.
This  may  even  be  made  visible  by  the  study  of  etched  figures  produced
by  acting  on  a  polished  surface  with  nitric  or  similar  acid.

The  view  put  forward,  especially  by  Bodlander,  that  most  alloys  have
a  structure  like  that  of  granite,  more  or  less  fine,  would  be  more  easily
demonstrated  if  it  were  possible  to  prepare  thin  transparent  sections
of  alloys  as  of  granite,  in  which  the  crystals  of  the  different  substances
might  be  seen  by  the  microscope  lying  side  by  side.  This  would  not
seem  possible  on  account  of  the  opacity  of  an  alloy  even  in  the
thinnest  layers.  However,  Heycock  and  Neville  4  succeeded  in  accom-
plishing this  problem  with  the  aid  of  the  invisible  rays  discovered  by
Eontgen.  They  took  Eontgen  photographs  of  thin  plates  of  an  alloy
of  sodium  and  gold.  A  fern-like  growth  of  easily  penetrable  crystals

1  Wied.  Ann.,  61.  225  (1897).

2  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  15.  65(1894).

3  Heycock  and  Neville,  Journ.  Chem.  Soc.,  71.  383  (1897).

4  Proceed.  Chem.  Soc.,  1896-97,  105.

CHAP.  X  THE  METALLIC  STATE  405

of  the  shape  of  salammoniac  crystals  was  found  embedded  in  a  less
penetrable  mass.  The  penetrable  crystals  consisted  of  pure  sodium
which  crystallises  in  the  regular  system.  The  ground  mass  was  formed
of  a  eutectic  mixture  of  small  gold  and  sodium  crystals,  and  on  account
of  the  gold,  it  is  almost  opaque  to  the  Rontgen  rays.  Plates  contain-
ing a  very  large  proportion  of  gold  show  the  reverse  phenomenon  of
opaque  crystals  of  pure  gold  in  a  more  transparent  mass  containing
sodium.  Plates  of  pure  sodium  show  no  crystallisation,  because  the
whole  mass  crystallises  together,  so  that  the  individual  crystals  are
unable  to  grow.  In  the  alloy,  on  the  other  hand,  at  the  beginning  of
the  crystallisation  single  crystals  are  separated  from  each  other  by  the
less  easily  frozen  eutectic  mixture,  and  therefore  have  the  power  of
developing.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  this  method  will  be  applied  to  the
structure  of  alloys  whose  components  show  smaller  differences  in  pene-
trability. E.  Maey l  has  shown  that  the  specific  volume  is  an  important
means  of  investigating  the  chemical  compounds  that  exist  in  alloys.

It  seerns  to  be  definitely  shown  in  many  cases  by  recent  experiments
that  the  faculty  of  forming  isomorphous  mixtures  is  very  rare  in  metals  ;
this  is  the  more  plausible,  since  the  formation  of  isomorphous  mixtures
between  wide  limits  or  in  all  proportions  is  almost  exclusively  met  with
in  chemically  analogous  materials.  The  chemical  distinction  between
two  elements  is  almost  always  too  great  to  allow  the  formation  of
isomorphous  mixtures.  Even  in  the  liquid  state,  as  we  have  seen,
metals  do  not  often  mix  in  all  proportions.

Electric  Conductivity  of  Alloys. — Most  physical  properties  of
metallic  mixtures  have  been  but  little  investigated  on  account  of  the
great  experimental  difficulties ;  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  specific
volume  of  copper  gold,  antimony  bismuth,  and  other  alloys  is  an
additive  property ;  copper  tin,  silver  gold,  tin  gold  show  a  contraction,
antimony  tin,  zinc  cadmium,  cadmium  lead  a  marked  dilatation.  The
specific  heat  of  solid  alloys,  according  to  Regnault,2  is  decidedly  additive;
but  it  must  be  remembered  that  even  chemical  compounds  in  the  solid
state  show  the  same  capacity  for  heat  as  the  solids  from  which  they  are
produced ;  in  other  cases  it  is  easily  seen  that  the  properties  are
considerably  modified  by  mixture  ;  this  of  course  suggested  the  view
that  mixtures  of  metals  form  chemical  compounds ;  this  view  is
supported  by  the  fact  that  the  heat  of  mixture,  for  example,  in  mixing
fused  copper  and  zinc  to  form  brass,  and  in  the  preparation  of  sodium
amalgam,  reaches  an  unusual  magnitude,  and  even  gives  rise  to
phenomena  of  incandescence.

The  study  of  the  electric  conductivity  of  alloys  yields  important
conclusions  on  this  point,  and  C.  Liebenow  3  has  put  forward  valuable

1  ZeUschr.  physik.  Chem.,  38.  292  (1901). 2  Ann.  chim.  phys.  (2),  73.  (1840).
3  ZeUschr.  fur  Elektrochemie,  1897,  Ed.  IV.  p.  201. It  appears  separately  as  : "Z)er
elektrische  Widerstand  der  Metalle,"  Knapp,  Halle,  1898.

406  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

theoretical  considerations  on  it.  For  want  of  space  we  can  here  only
indicate  the  outlines  of  his  theory.  The  conductivity  of  an  alloy  must
in  general  be  smaller  than  that  reckoned  for  the  conductivity  of  the
pure  metal  according  to  the  rule  of  mixtures,  because  thermoelectric  forces
arise  which  oppose  the  electric  current.

Let  us  suppose  a  conductor,  for  simplicity,  to  consist  of  thin
alternate  layers  of  the  two  metals  which  form  the  alloy,  then  at  the
surface  of  contact  Peltier  effects  will  be  produced  (alternate  heating
and  cooling),  that  is,  the  points  of  contact  will  be  alternately  heated
and  cooled,  so  that  the  conductor  becomes  a  thermopile  whose
electromotive  force  must  oppose  the  current.  Since,  as  is  easily  seen,
this  opposing  force  must  be  proportional  to  the  strength  of  current,  its
effect  appears  simply  as  an  increase  in  the  resistance  of  the  alloy.
The  same  effect  must  be  found  when  the  two  metals  are  not  arranged
in  plates,  as  was  assumed  above,  but  in  the  form  of  very  small  particles,
as  actually  occurs.

We  get  for  the  specific  resistance  of  an  alloy  the  formula

here  A0  is  the  true  resistance  at  0°,  B0  is  the  apparent  resistance  due  to
the  thermoelectric  effect,  or  what  is  physically  the  same,  the  opposing
electromotive  force  per  unit  strength  of  the  current  •  C0  is  the  observed
resistance,  a,  /3,  y  are  the  temperature  coefficients.

It  is  found  that  the  temperature  coefficient  of  most  pure  metals  is
0'004  (about  the  same  as  the  expansion  coefficient  of  gases),  or,  in  other
words,  the  resistance  of  most  pure  metals  increases  approximately  in
proportion  to  the  absolute  temperature,  as  was  pointed  out  by  Clausius
(1858).  As  to  the  thermoelectric  effect,  it  may  be  assumed  in  the
first  place  that  it  is  little  affected  by  temperature  ;  since  the  experi-
mental results  support  this  assumption  we  may  put

as  the  first  approximation.

Then  from  these  assumptions  a  series  of  interesting  conclusions
may  be  drawn  :  —

1.  In  general  (when  B0  possesses  a  considerable  value)  the  specific
resistance  of  an  alloy  will  be  much  greater  than  that  of  its
components,  but  the  temperature  coefficient  much  smaller  than
that  of  the  pure  metals.

2.  For  metals  which  are  thermoelectrically  indifferent  B0  is  small,

therefore  the  specific  resistance  can  be  calculated  from  that  of
the  components;  the  temperature  coefficient  for  such  alloys
should  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  pure  metals.

3.  If the  two  metals in mixing  form a compound, and  if the

proportions  are  taken  so  as  to  produce  it,  B0  must  vanish  and
the  temperature  coefficient  must  be  the  same  as  that  of  the

CHAP.  X  THE  METALLIC  STATE  407

pure  metals;  but  if  either  of  the  components  is  present  in
excess,  B0  must  reach  a  noticeable  value,  and  therefore  the
temperature  coefficient  must  fall.

These  conclusions  were  thoroughly  tested  by  Liebenow  so  far  as
the  experimental  material  would  allow,  and  were  found  correct  to  a
surprising  degree  ;  there  is  no  doubt  that  this  indicates  a  means  of
investigation  of  the  constitution  of  alloys  which  will  lead  to  the  most
important  results.  (See  here  the  original  treatment  by  the  same
author  of  the  constitution  of  mercury.)  l

The  Theory  of  Metallic  Conduction.  —  It  is  hardly  doubtful
from  what  precedes  that  the  theory  of  metallic  conduction  should  lead
to  a  deeper  knowledge  of  the  metallic  state,  just  as  the  theory  of
electrolytic  conduction  has  led  to  a  knowledge  of  the  peculiar  con-
stitution of  the  electrolytes.

Only  the  beginnings  of  this  line  of  progress  exist  at  the  present
time.  The  first  assumption  is  obviously  that  electric  particles  are
present  in  the  metals  and  travel  in  the  direction  of  the  current,  but
these,  unlike  the  ions,  appear  to  be  massless.  The  remarkable  con-
ductivity of  many  metals  leads  to  the  supposition  that  the  number  of
such  particles  is  very  great  ;  this  view  is  supported  by  the  fact  that
matter  in  the  metallic  state  has  a  very  great  density,  i.e.  that  the
numerous  electric  particles  cause  very  great  electrostriction  (p.  382).
The  existence  of  massless  electric  atoms  is  rendered  probable  by  the
considerations  on  p.  391  ;  according  to  these,  we  must  regard  the  metals
as  solvents  in  which  the  dissociation

reaches  considerable  magnitude.

If  it  is  assumed  that  the  free  electrons  and  metals  follow  the
principles  of  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases,  and  especially  that  their
kinetic  energy  can  be  considered  as  in  equilibrium  with  that  of  ordinary
molecules,  the  ratio  of  thermal  and  electric  conduction  in  the  metals  can
be  calculated  in  good  agreement  with  experience  (see  Drude).2

1  Zeitschr.  fur  EleUrochemie,  4.  515  (1898).
2  Ann.  d.  Phys.,  1.  566  (1900)  ;  Reinganum,  ibid.,  2.  398  (1900).

CHAPTER XI

COLLOIDAL SOLUTIONS

Colloids  and  Crystalloids. — From  his  examination  of  hydro-diffu-
sion, Graham,1  came  to  this  conclusion,  viz.  that  substances  existing
in  solution  fall  into  two  groups,  the  physical  and  chemical  behaviour
of  which  are  characteristically  different.  These  differences  appeared
to  Graham  so  pronounced  that  he  designated  them  as  "two  different
worlds  of  matter,"  the  "  crystalloidal  condition  "  of  matter  being  in  the
sharpest  contrast  to  the  "colloidal  condition."

The  difference  between  them  is  shown  most  clearly  in  their
solutions.  Up  to  this  point  we  have  considered  only  solutions
of  crystalloids ;  let  us  now  turn  to  the  examination  of  solutions  of
colloids.

The  most  important  examples  of  the  latter  are  silicic  acid,  alu-
minium hydroxide,  ferric  hydroxide,  and  many  other  metallic  hydrox-
ides ;  also  starch-flour,  dextrin,  gum,  caramel,  tannin,  white  of  egg,
glue,  etc.  etc. ;  also  colloidal  solutions  of  certain  elements,  as  silver,
selenium,  etc.,  have  been  recently  prepared.

The  distinctions  consist  in  this,  viz.  that  crystalloidal  substances
are  characterised  by  the  facility  with  which  they  assume  the  crystal-
lised condition ;  while  the  colloids,  which  were  named  by  Graham
from  their  representative  glue  [/coAAa],  are  incapable  of  crystallising,  or
at  least  do  so  very  slowly.  Still  more  important  are  the  differences
between  the  conduct  of  these  two  classes  when  in  a  state  of  solution.
It  will  be  shown  shortly  how  pronounced  is  the  difference  between  crystalloid
and  colloid  solutions  regarding  their  osmotic  pressures.

As  has  been  mentioned  already,  Graham  was  led  to  his  discovery
of  the  peculiar  nature  of  colloidal  solutions  by  the  study  of  their
diffusion  velocity ;  the  diffusion  of  colloids,  in  general,  resembles  that
of  crystalloids,  but  is  relatively  a  much  slower  operation.  This  is
shown  by  the  following  time  periods  found  by  Graham  to  be  required
to  effect  the  same  degree  of  diffusion  at  10°.

1  Lieb.  Ann.,  121.  1  (1862).
408

CHAP.  XI

COLLOIDAL  SOLUTIONS

409

Crystalloids.

Colloids.

Hydrochloric  acid .

. 1

White  of  egg . .

. 49

Sodium  chloride

. 2-33

Caramel .

. 98

Sugar

. 7

Magnesium  sulphate

. 7

Osmotic  Pressure. — The  question  was  formerly  raised  whether  a
colloidal  solution  was  to  be  regarded  as  a  simple  emulsion,  or  as  a  true
solution.  But,  at  present,  when  we  can  detect  a  "  head  "  of  pressure
directly  from  the  phenomena  of  diffusion,  we  must  in  all  probability
suppose  that  there  is  no  essential  difference  between  solutions  of
colloids  and  of  crystalloids.1  But  the  extreme  slowness  of  the  diffusion
of  colloids  speaks  decidedly  regarding  two  things,  viz.  on  the  one  hand,
the  driving  force  must  be  very  small,  i.e.  the  osmotic  pressure  is
very  small ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  resistant  friction  experienced
by  the  molecules  in  their  passage  through  the  water  must  be  enormous  ;
both  these  conditions  are  explained  by  the  assumption  that  the  colloids
possess  exceedingly  high  molecular  weights.

Now,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  experiments  conducted  with  colloid
solutions  show  very  small  values  for  the  osmotic  pressure.  Thus
Pfeffer,2  by  the  use  of  a  membrane  of  cupric  ferrocyanide,  obtained
the  following  values  for  gum-arabic  at  the  respective  concentrations,
and  at  a  temperature  of  15° ;  the  corresponding  values  for  cane  sugar
are  appended  for  comparison  : —

Con.

Gum-Arabic.

Cane  Sugar.

Mol.  Wt.  of
Gum-Arabic.

11

14%
18%

6P9  cm.  Hg
25-9 „ „
70-0 „ ,,
119-2 „ „

51-8  cm.  Hg
310-8 „ „
725-2 ,, ,,
932-4 „ „

2570
4110
3540
2680

The  molecular  weights  of  the  gum-arabic  given  in  the  last  column
are  obtained  by  the  well-known  rules  (p.  256),  from  the  mol.  wt.  (342)
of  cane  sugar,  multiplied  by  the  ratio  of  the  corresponding  osmotic
pressure.

In  the  following  table  are  given  some  molecular  weights,  calculated
in  a  similar  way,  from  the  osmotic  pressures  observed  by  Pfeffer  : —

1  Suspensions  are  to  be  distinguished  from  solutions  in  the  fact  that  they  exercise  no
measurable  osmotic  pressure,  and  also  that  they  do  not  diffuse  ;  this  criterion  has  been
overlooked  in  many  recent  researches.

2  Osmotische  Untersuchungen,  Leipzig,  1877.

410

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

Substance.

Membrane.

Con.

Temp.

Pressure. Mol.  Wt.

Dextrin .
Conglutin  .

Cupric  ferrocyanide
Calcium  phosphate

1%
2%

16°
16°

16-6  cm.  Hg 1080
3-8 ,, ,, 9500

Glue . .

Cupric  ferrocyanide

6%

23-3°

237 „ ,, 4900

Glue . .

Parchment

6%

23-3° 21-3 ,, „ 5200

Recently  Linebarger1  has  determined  the  osmotic  pressure  of
colloidal  tungstic  acid,  using  parchment  paper  as  the  semi-permeable
membrane,  as  it  is  impermeable  for  the  dissolved  colloid.  A  solution,
containing  2 4 '6 7  g.  of  H2W04  per  litre  at  17°,  showed  a  pressure  of
25'2  cm.  of  Hg,  which  gives  a  mol.  wt.  of  1700 ;  while  that  from  the
formula  (H2W04)7  requires  1750,  a  fairly  good  coincidence;  another
solution  containing  10  g.  per  litre  gave  a  mol.  wt.  of  1720.

The  Freezing-Point  and  the  Vapour  Pressure. — In  harmony
with  the  small  osmotic  pressure  [of  colloidal  solutions]  stands  the
observation,  that  the  freezing-  and  boiling-points  of  colloidal  solutions  are
only  slightly  different  from  the  respective  values  of  pure  water.  Tam-
mann 2  showed  that  the  vapour  pressure  of  water  is  only  slightly
depressed  by  the  addition  of  considerable  quantities  of  gelatin  and
gum.  The  following  table  of  figures,  given  by  Sabanejeff  and
Alexandrow,3  gives  an  illustration  of  the  slight  depression  of  the
freezing-point  of  colloidal  solutions  : —

Quantity  of  White
of  Egg  in  100  g.  of
water.

Depression  of  the
Freezing-Point.

Mol.  Wt.

14-5

0-020°

14,000

26-1

0-037°

13,000

44-5

0-060°

14,000

Of  course  such  results  as  these  are  open  to  the  objection  that  the
observed  depression  of  the  freezing,  small  as  it  is,  may  be  accounted
for  on  the  supposition  that  the  colloid  is  impure,  and  therefore  that
the  mol.  wts.  given  in  the  third  column  are  to  be  regarded  only  as  the
lower  limit  But  at  all  events  it  is  an  evidence  that  the  remarkable
magnitude  of  the  mol.  wt.  of  substances  occurring  in  colloidal  solution
is  one  of  their  chief  characteristics,  and  therefore  the  question

1  Silliman's  Journal  [Am.  Jour.  Sri.]  [3],  43.  218  (1892).

2  Mem.  d.  Petersb.  Akad.,  35.  No.  9  (1887).
3  Journ.  russ.  Ges.,  2.  7-19  (1891)  ;  ref.  in  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  9.  88  (1892).

CHAP.  XI

COLLOIDAL  SOLUTIONS

411

proposed  by  Graham1  ought  to  be  discussed,  viz.  "whether  the  com-
plex nature  of  the  molecule  is  not  the  basis  of  the  colloidal  condition."
Although  colloidal  solutions  may  represent  the  transition  state  inter-
mediate between  emulsions  and  true  solutions,  yet  they  doubtless
resemble  the  latter  much  more  than  they  resemble  a  coarse  mechanical
suspension.

The  Molecular  Weight  of  Colloids. — The  osmotic  method
described  above  is  particularly  suitable  for  the  further  investigation
of  colloidal  solutions,  and  especially  for  the  more  exact  determination
of  their  molecular  weights.  For  while  exact  measurements  of  the
lowering  of  the  vapour  pressure  and  of  the  freezing-point  are  open
to  question,  because  of  the  extreme  difficulty  in  purifying  the  colloids
from  foreign  salts,  yet  these  impurities  may  be  disregarded  in  the
measurement  of  the  osmotic  pressure,  because  these  salts  can  easily
penetrate  the  parchment  paper,  and  thus  do  not  affect  the  observed
pressure  action.  Moreover,  the  differences  of  the  freezing-  or  boiling-
points  here,  although  very  small,  some  hundredths  of  a  degree,
correspond  to  pressures  which  can  be  easily  measured  by  the  man-
ometer.

The  same  method  of  investigation,  when  applied  to  a  mixture  of
several  colloids,  would  lead  to  some  conclusions  respecting  the  mutual
action  of  colloid  molecules.  Of  course  the  very  dark  question  regarding
the  relative  capacity  of  the  colloid  molecules  for  reaction  claims
especial  interest.

In  the  following  table  are  given  some  figures  collated  from  the
results  by  the  freezing-point  method  : —

Substance.

Mol.  Wt.

Observer.

Inulin ....

2200

]

Maltodextrin

965

h  Brown  arid  Morris.'2

Starch ....

ca.  25000

J

Gum  ....

,, 1800

}

Caramel .

„ 1700

}-  Gladstone  and  Hibbert.3

Ferric  hydroxide

,, 6000

1

Tungstic  acid .

„ 800

]

Glycogen .
Silicic  acid

1625
at  least  49000

•Sabanejeff.4

Tannin ....

1100

J

Although  the  results  may  be  uncertain  on  account  of  the  smallness
of  the  depressions  observed,  yet  at  the  same  time  they  undoubtedly
show  that  colloids  do  have  a  very  large  mol.  wt.

1  I.e.  p.  71.
3  Ibid.,  189  ;  Phil.

2  Chem.  Zentralbl,,  2.  122  (1889).
.,  28.  38  (1889).  4  Ibid.,  1.  10  (1891).

412  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  II

Moreover,  it  appears  that  other  solvents  besides  water  may  be
utilised  to  prepare  colloidal  solutions ;  thus  caoutchouc  dissolved  4h
benzene  shows  a  mol.  wt.  of  6500  (Gladstone  and  Hibbert) ;  and  tannin
in  acetic  acid  a  mol.  wt.  of  1100  (Sabanejeff).  Further,  it  should
be  mentioned  that  Graham  explained  the  peculiar  inactivity  of
colloid  substances  as  a  result  of  their  high  mol.  wt.  ;  also,  from  the
fact  that  arabic  acid,  e.g.  (Gummi-saure),  could  be  neutralised  by  very
small  quantities  of  calcium  hydroxide  or  potassium  hydroxide,  he  con-
cluded that  its  mol.  wt.  must  be  much  greater  than  C12H11011,  the
formula  commonly  given.

Sabanejeff1  attempted  to  found  a  classification  of  the  soluble  colloids
from  the  magnitude  of  the  molecular  weights.  He  called  those  having
a  mol.  wt.  greater  than  30,000  the  higher  or  typical  colloids.  To  this
group  belong  starch,  silicic  acid,  and  ferric  hydroxide,  and  probably
also  antimonic  sulphide,  cupric  sulphide,  and  potassium,  ferric,  and
silver  tartrates.  The  group  of  the  lower  colloids,  or  those  having  a
mol.  wt.  of  less  than  30,000,  includes  tungstic  acid,  molybdic  acid,
arabic  acid,  tannin,  glycogen,  inulin,  dextrin,  albumin,  etc.

By  allowing  a  solution  of  the  lower  colloids  to  solidify  completely
by  refrigeration,  then,  on  remelting  this,  a  colourless  solution  is
obtained,  while  by  this  same  process  the  colloids  of  the  first  species
[the  higher  or  typical]  become  completely  insoluble,  or  nearly  so ; 2  in
other  words,  solutions  of  the  "  typical  colloids  "  are  supersaturated.

Gelatination. — Many  colloidal  solutions  are  able  to  coagulate  or
gelatinise,  either  on  the  addition  of  foreign  substances  or  sometimes
spontaneously.  What  the  nature  of  this  process  is,  and  whether  it  is
comparable  to  the  process  of  crystallisation,  cannot  be  stated  at
present.  As  a  result  of  his  investigations,  Graham  concluded  that  the
addition  of  a  foreign  substance  only  tends  to  accelerate  a  process
which  is  spontaneous ;  and,  in  fact,  it  appears  probable  that  those
colloidal  solutions  which  are  made  to  coagulate  or  gelatinise  by  the
addition  of  foreign  substances,  must  be  regarded  as  supersaturated,
and,  therefore,  in  a  state  of  labile  (unstable)  equilibrium.  Other  col-
loidal solutions,  as  those  of  gelatin,  agar-agar,  etc.,  e.g.  will  solidify
only  below  certain  definite  temperatures,  and  will  become  liquid  again
only  when  raised  to  the  same  temperature.  Here  of  course  we  have
to  do  with  a  condition  of  equilibrium  between  the  gelatinous  and  the
liquid  states,  and  this  is  a  parallel  to  that  between  the  salt  and  the
saturated  solution.

The  simplest  conception  of  the  nature  of  •  gelatinised  solutions  is
that  a  solid  substance  is  separated  which  has  a  "  network  "  structure,
the  interstices  of  which  are  filled  with  water,  which  is  held  fast  by
capillary  forces.  The  greater  part  of  this  water  which  is  held  by

1  Jour.  TUSS.  Ges.,  1.  80  (1891)  ;  ref.  in  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  9.  89  (1892).
2  See  Ljubavin,  Chem.  ZentralU.,  1.  515  (1890).

CHAP.  XI  COLLOIDAL  SOLUTIONS  413

"  capillary  affinity,"  l  is  removed  by  evaporation,  but  where  the  inter-
sfices  of  the  network  are  very  fine,  the  water  is  given  off  only  by
drying  thoroughly.

If  a  dried  jelly  is  brought  into  contact  with  water,  it  begins  to
swell.  This  process  apparently  indicates  an  inward  suction  of  the
water  into  the  capillaries,  resulting  in  a  large  increase  of  the  volume.
That  the  force  which  drives  the  water  into  the  colloid  substances  is
very  great  is  obvious  from  the  fact  that  blocks  of  granite  are  split  by
the  swelling  of  wood.  The  work  performed  by  the  capillary  and
adhesion  forces  occasions  the  development  of  heat,  although  this  is  not
very  considerable.  This  was  observed  by  E.  Wiedemann  and  Liide
king,2  but  was  regarded  by  them  as  "  heat  of  hydration."

By  the  addition  of  plenty  of  water,  some  colloids,  as  gelatine,  glue,
etc.,  can  be  brought  back  to  solution ;  but  others,  as  silicic  acid,  can-
not be.  As  stated  by  both  the  observers  mentioned  above,  the  solu-
tion is  attended  by  an  absorption  of  heat.  This  is  in  harmony  with  the
fact  that  the  heat  of  solution  of  solids  is  as  a  rule  negative.  The
coagulation  of  colloidal  silicic  acid  is  accordingly  attended  by  the
development  of  a  corresponding  degree  of  heat.

A  gelatinised  solution  presents  several  peculiarities, — an  inter-
mediate thing  between  a  solid  and  a  liquid,  its  enormous  internal
friction  relates  it  to  solids.  It  also  has  clearly  denned  elasticities  of
deformation  which  clearly  distinguish  it  from  true  pulpy  substances.
Yet  it  preserves  many  properties  of  liquid  solutions ;  thus  it  can  dis-
solve crystalloids  and  allows  them  to  diffuse  freely.  Thus,  according
to  the  older  researches  of  Graham,  who  worked  with  solutions  of
gelatine,  and  especially  according  to  the  more  recent  work  of  Voigt-
lander,3  who  worked  with  agar-agar  solutions,  it  appears  that  crystal-
loids diffuse  through  gelatinised  solutions  with  velocities  which  are  remark-
ably near  to  those  with  which  they  diffuse  through  pure  water.

In  harmony  with  this,  the  electric  conductivity  of  salts,  which,  as
shown  by  the  principles  already  established,  is  closely  connected  with
the  capacity  of  diffusion,  is  only  slightly  changed  by  the  gelatinisation
of  the  solution.  A  similar  thing  seems  to  hold  good  for  the  reaction
capacity,  as  is  inferred  from  an  observation  made  by  Reformatzky.4
According  to  this,  the  velocity  with  which  methyl  acetate  is  decom-
posed by  acids  in  a  solution  gelatinised  by  agar-agar,  is  within  1  per
cent  of  the  velocity  in  pure  water.

By  means  of  these  properties  we  can  explain  some  of  the  applica-
tions which  have  been  made  of  gelatinised  solutions,  and  which  possess
great  interest.

1  Graham,  I.e.  p.  72,  and  interesting  researches  by  Linebarger  on  velocity  of  coagula-
tion, J.  Amer.  Cliem.  Soc.,  20.  375  (1898).

2  Wied.  Ann.,  25.  145  (1885).

3  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  3.  316  (1889).

4  Ibid.,  7.  34  (1891).

414  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

Thus  the  sensitive  layer  of  photographic  plates  which  were  wet  by
the  old  methods,  by  the  new  methods  are  made  of  a  dried  gelatinised
solution  or  emulsion  of  the  sensitive  substance,  so  that  their  practical
use  is  rendered  much  easier  than  was  formerly  supposed  to  be  possible.

When  galvanic  elements  are  to  be  transported,  the  electrolytic
liquid  with  which  they  are  provided  is  gelatinised.  This  led  to  the
construction  of  the  so-called  "dry  cell."

The  introduction  of  "  culture  gelatine  "  into  bacteriology  by  Robert
Koch  marked  a  new  epoch  in  this  science.

Finally,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  technology  of  explosives  has
experienced  an  extended  regeneration  by  the  use  of  gelatinised  solu-
tions of  pyroxylin  (smokeless  powder),  and  especially  so  since  Alfred
Nobel  gelatinised  the  pyroxylin  with  "  nitroglycerin,"  and  thus  used
the  solvent  itself  as  an  explosive.

It  is  remarkable  that  a  gelatinised  solution  is  unable  to  absorb  another
colloid,  because  it  retards  its  diffusion  almost  completely;  for  this
reason  it  makes  a  semi-permeable  membrane,  which  gives  free  passage
to  water  and  its  dissolved  crystalloids,  but  not  to  colloids  dissolved  in
water.

This  fact,  which  was  known  by  Graham,  and  which  he  rightly  re-
garded as  very  important,  explains  why  a  clearly  defined  osmose  is  to
be  observed  only  when  an  animal  membrane,  parchment,  or  unsized
(planirtes)  paper  is  used  with  colloid  solutions.  Membranes  of  this
sort  have  the  property  of  colloid  solutions,  viz.,  of  offering  not  a  very
much  greater  resistance  to  crystalloids  than  to  pure  water,  but  they
hinder  colloids  almost  completely.  Before  the  membranes,  which  are
semi-permeable  for  many  crystalloids,  and  which  are  described  on
p.  132,  were  known,  the  tendency  was  to  ascribe  a  very  strong  osmotic
activity  to  colloidal  solutions,  and  it  was  not  until  Pfeffer's  experi-
ments that  the  contrary  was  known  to  be  the  case.

It  cannot  be  certainly  stated  at  present  why  a  gelatinised  solution
is  impermeable  to  a  dissolved  colloid.  Perhaps  it  may  be  reasonable
to  suppose  that  the  meshes  of  the  network  are  too  fine  to  allow  the
colloid  molecules  to  diffuse,  but  are  wide  enough  to  allow  the  smaller
crystalloid  molecules  to  diffuse.

Dialysis. — The  property  of  gelatinised  solutions  just  described  is
very  important  for  the  preparation  of  pure  colloid  solutions,  because
it  makes  the  separation  of  colloids  and  crystalloids  possible.  Thus  let
a  piece  of  parchment  paper  or  of  animal  membrane  be  fastened  to  the
lower  part  of  a  frame,  and  let  this  be  filled  with  the  solution  to  be
purified,  and  let  it  be  dipped  into  pure  water  ;  then,  after  a  sufficient
lapse  of  time,  the  crystalloids  in  the  solution  diffuse  through  into  the
water,  especially  if  the  water  bathing  the  frame  be  replaced  from  time
to  time  with  fresh  water ;  the  colloid  substances  remain  behind  in  the
frame  [the  dialyser].  Thus  to  prepare  colloidal  silicic  acid,  e.g.  we

CHAP.  XI  COLLOIDAL  SOLUTIONS  415

decompose  a  solution  of  sodium  silicate  by  hydrochloric  acid,  and  then
pour  it  into  the  "  dialyser,"  for  so  the  discoverer,  Graham,  called  the
simple  apparatus,  the  method  being  called  "dialysis."  After  several
days  the  sodium  chloride  formed,  and  the  excess  of  hydrochloric  acid,
diffuse  away,  and  there  remains  a  solution  of  silicic  acid  which  is
almost  absolutely  pure.  As  a  result  of  the  osmotic  action  of  the  dis-
solved colloid  during  the  process,  the  solution  [of  the  colloid]  becomes
diluted  with  water.

For  recent  literature  on  the  subject  of  the  colloids  see  Lottermoser,
Anorg.  Kolloide,  Sammlung  chem.  techn.  Vortriige,  Heft  6  ;  and  Theory  of
Colloids,  Leipzig,  1903  (Deuticke) ;  and  especially  the  work  by  Bredig,
Inorganic  Ferments,  Leipzig,  1901.

CHAPTER  XII

THE  ABSOLUTE  SIZE  OF  MOLECULES

The  Superior  Limit. — We  have  treated  thus  far  of  the  properties  of
molecules,  of  their  kinetic  conditions,  of  the  various  forces  exerted  by
them,  etc.  In  this  concluding  chapter  we  will  discuss  briefly  the
problem  of  their  absolute  dimensions,  a  problem  which,  to  be  sure,  is
usually  treated  more  for  its  fascination  than  for  any  decided  results
afforded.

The  assumption  that  matter  is  not  infinitely  divisible  requires
that  these  dimensions  [of  the  molecule],  no  matter  how  small,  must
yet  be  finite.

Many  experiences  of  daily  life  speak  in  favour  of  the  view  that
the  divisibility  of  matter  extends  to  a  high  degree.  Infinitesimal
quantities  of  strong  perfumes  can  impart  their  odour  to  whole  rooms ;
they  have  entirely  filled  them  with  their  molecules.  Infinitesimal
quantities  of  strong  colouring  substances  can  distinctly  colour  large
quantities  of  water.  One  part  of  fluorescein,  when  dissolved  in  more
than  a  hundred  million  parts  of  water,  suffices  to  impart  to  it  a  distinct
fluorescence.  Faraday  prepared  gold-foil,  the  thickness  of  which,  at
the  most,  was  0'5  millionths  of  a  mm.  Rontgen1  succeeded  in  pre-
paring layers  of  oil  on  water,  having  about  the  same  thickness.

The  attempt  has  been  made  repeatedly  from  determinations  of
this  sort  to  find  the  lower  limit  of  the  size  of  the  molecule,  or  at  least
the  limit  of  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the  molecular  forces,  i.e.  the  distances
within  which  the  mutual  attraction  of  the  molecules  begins  to  have
a  "  noticeable  value."  As  is  obvious,  there  is  no  precise  definition  of
this  sphere  of  activity,  for  it  leaves  the  question  open  regarding  the
boundary  between  the  "  noticeable  "  (merklich)  and  the  "  unnoticeable  "
action ;  nor  will  this  be  possible  until  we  know  something  certain
regarding  the  law  of  the  variation  of  the  molecular  forces,  with  their
distances  apart.2  Nevertheless,  by  means  of  the  capillary  forces,  an

1  Wied.  Ann.,  41.  321  (1890).

2  See,  e.g.  Bohl.  Wied.  Ann.,  36.  334  (1889)  ;  Galitzine,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,
4.  417  (1889).

416

H AP.  XII  THE  ABSOLUTE  SIZE  OF  MOLECULES  417

estimation  of  these  magnitudes  can  be  attempted ;  in  this  way  van
der  Waals  found  the  order  of  the  magnitude  to  be  about  0*2  million ths
of  a  mm.

If  it  were  possible  to  make  lamellae  of  a  homogeneous  liquid
sufficiently  thin,  then  the  otherwise  constant  surface-tension  (p.  57)
would  begin  to  diminish  as  soon  as  the  thickness  of  the  lamellae
should  become  smaller  than  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the  molecular
forces ;  because,  from  this  point,  the  resultant  of  the  forces,  which
are  directed  towards  the  interior  of  the  liquid,  would  begin  to
diminish.  The  phenomenon  of  the  dark  spots 1  in  soap-bubble  films
has  been  employed  for  this  purpose ;  but  even  disregarding  the  fact
that  such  a  heterogeneous  and  ill-defined  substance,  chemically,  as
"  soap  solution,"  must  at  the  outset  be  discarded  for  investigations
like  these,  it  is  stated  by  Drude  2  that  the  surface-tension  of  these  dark
parts  is  not  noticeably  different  from  that  of  the  other  parts ;  this
observer  determined  their  thickness  to  be  17  x  10~6mm.;  while  Reinold
and  Riicker  3  found  it  to  be  1 2  x  1 0  " 6  mm.  A.  Overbeck  4  conducted
an  interesting  research,  in  which  he  determined  the  slightest  thickness
with  which  a  platinum  plate  must  be  covered  by  another  metal,  in
order  that  this  layer  may  receive  an  electric  charge  •  but  this  method
cannot  give  a  safe  determination  of  the  sphere  of  activity  of  the
molecular  forces,  because  the  observations  argue  for  the  formation  of
an  alloy  (a  solid  solution,  p.  169),  on  the  surface  of  the  platinum,  to
explain  them.

A  very  interesting  and  promising  method  of  detecting  small
particles  whose  refractive  index  differs  sufficiently  from  that  of  the
medium  has  been  discovered  by  Siedentopf  and  Zsigmondy ; 5  by
strong  side  illumination  they  succeeded  in  producing  a  diffraction
image  of  the  particles  which  are  made  self-luminous  by  the  illumination  ;
this  can  be  done  even  when  their  dimensions  are  small  compared  with
the  wave-length  of  light.  The  method  was  found  to  be  applicable  to
particles  of  about  6'10~6  mm.,  so  that  direct  observation  has  already
approached  molecular  dimensions.  The  authors  applied  their  method
to  ruby  gold  glasses  ;  they  succeeded  in  showing  that  the  gold  is
distributed  in  small  particles  in  these  glasses.  Although  no  doubt  the
gold  particles  (colloidal  molecules  ?)  thus  made  visible  consist  of  many
single  gold  atoms,  it  is  none  the  less  of  the  highest  interest  that  by
refining  the  observation  the  apparent  continuum  can  be  resolved  into
discrete  points.

In  the  following  paragraphs  I  have  collated  the  methods,  by  means
of  which,  and  guided  chiefly  by  the  sound  doctrine  of  the  molecular

1  See  J.  P.  Cooke's  New  Chemistry,  p.  29  et  seq. — TE.

2  Wied.  Ann.,  43.  158  (1891).

3  Phil.  Trans.  (1881),  447  ;  (1883),  645.

4  Wied.  Ann.,  31.  337  (1887).

5  Ann.  d.  Phys.  [4],  10.  1  (1903).

2E

418  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

kinetic  theory,  an  estimation  of  these  molecular  dimensions  has  been
obtained.  Caution  in  selecting  the  material  to  be  described  here  is
doubly  necessary  ;  for  perhaps  nowhere  else  in  the  natural  sciences
does  fantasy  so  overshadow  the  critical  faculty.  We  are  not  yet  in
the  possession  of  a  method  l  for  measuring  the  molecular  dimensions
with  the  same  degree  of  accuracy  which  is  possible  in  the  measurement
of  the  wave-length  of  light,  but  fair  approximations  have  already  been
reached.

The  Space  occupied  by  the  Molecules.  —  According  to  the
present  view,  the  molecules  do  not  completely  fill  the  space  which  is
occupied  by  the  body  as  a  whole,  but  are  separated  from  each  other
by  intervening  spaces.  We  have  already  repeatedly  studied  properties
which  are  to  be  regarded  as  measures  of  the  volume  actually  occupied
by  the  molecules  (p.  307),  or  which  at  least  are  related  more  or
less  closely  in  this  way.  We  will  now  proceed  to  see  how  far  the
absolute  value  of  this  magnitude  is  determined.

The  first  method  to  determine  this  is  derived  from  van  der  Waals'
theory,  according  to  which  the  constant  "  b  "  of  the  equation  of
condition  is  equal  to  fourfold  the  volume  of  the  molecule  ;  now  its
value  can  be  calculated,  either  by  means  of  the  deviation  of  gases  from
the  law  of  the  ideal  gas  condition,  or  from  the  relation  that  it  is  three-
fold as  large  as  the  critical  volume  ;  or  finally,  from  the  equation
(p.  223),  viz.

b  =  -LJo_.

82737r0

if  we  calculate  the  critical  pressure  TTO  in  atmospheres,  then  our  unit
of  volume  will  denote  the  space  occupied  by  the  gas  under  normal
conditions  of  temperature  and  pressure,  and  the  equation

4 32  2737r0

denotes  the  fraction  of  the  volume  actually  occupied  by  the  molecules.
The  three  methods  given  above  to  determine  the  value  of  b  give
only  approximately  coincident  results,  on  account  of  the  inexactness
of  the  theory,  to  which  reference  has  often  been  made  ;  but  these
deviations  are  of  no  importance  in  view  of  the  object  here  considered.
We  find  abundant  data  for  calculations  of  this  sort.2  Equation  I.  is
naturally  not  applicable  to  substances  that  are  strongly  dissociated
(p.  271).

1  For a summary of  the different  attempts in  this  line, see  v. Hemmelmayer,
Bericht  der  Leseliatte  der  deutschen  Studenten  in  Frag.,  1892. See  also  W.  Thomson,
.Exner's  Rep.,  21.  182,  1885. [See  also  W.  Thomson's  (Lord  Kelvin's)  published  works
in  English.  —  TR.]

2  Kontinuitat,  etc.,  p.  136.

CHAP.  XII

THE  ABSOLUTE  SIZE  OF  MOLECULES

419

The  Clausius-Mossotti  theory  of  dielectra  (p.  316)  gives  another
method ;  according  to  this,  when  D  denotes  the  dielectric  constant,
the  value  of  the  space  filled  is

x  =  -

D-l

D  +  2

II.

The  following  table,  taken  from  a  work  of  Lebedew,1  contains
some  results  calculated  by  these  two  independent  methods.  The
dielectric  constant  D  is  obtained  from  the  equation

D-l 1

which  is  well  established,  both  by  theory  and  by  experiment  ;  here  d
denotes  the  density  reduced  to  the  gas  condition  at  0°,  and  to  a
pressure  of  1  atm.  The  table  is  based  on  the  measurements  of  Boltz-
mann  (1875),  Klemencic  (1885),  and  Lebedew  (1891).

X

Substance

M

2-2420  x

Ace.  to  I.

Ace.  to  II.

Nitrous  oxide

0-00048

0-00038

3-7

Carbon  dioxide

0-00050

0-00033

4-0

Ethylene

0-00056

0-00054

2-4'

Carbon  disulpliide  .
Benzene

0-00082
0-00128

0-00097
0-00123

4-3
2-7

Although  the  deviations  between  the  twTo  columns  of  figures
are  far  greater  than  any  error  due  to  observation,  yet  it  is  very
remarkable  that  the  orders  of  magnitude  coincide  so  well.  Therefore
it  need  not  appear  questionable  if  these  values  should  be  used  to
develop  further  conclusions.

The  Density  of  the  Molecules. — The  specific  gravity  w  of  the
molecules  may  be  calculated  directly  from  the  value  of  x.  22,420  c.c.
of  a  gas  at  0°,  and  a  pressure  of  1  atm.,  contain  1  g.-mol.  M ;  there-
fore the  density  of  the  molecule,  referred  to  water  at  4°,  amounts  to

w  =

M

22,420x

In  the  third  column  of  the  preceding  table  are  given  the  respective
values  of  this  quantity,  on  the  basis  of  the  value  of  x,  according  to
van  der  Waals'  figures.

1 Wied.  Ann.,  44.  288  (1891).

420  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  II

Values  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude  are  obtained  by  calculating
w  from  the  dielectric  constant  ;  thus

,D  +  2

The  specific  refraction  (p.  307)  also  gives  a  measure  of  the  specific
volume  -  of  the  molecule,  which  is  at  least  approximate.

The  Size  of  Molecules.  —  By  combining  these  units,  obtained
as  just  described,  with  the  formula  of  Clausius  and  Maxwell  (p.  208),
viz.

we  are  led  a  step  further.  The  mean  wave-length  L  has  been  deter-
mined, with  at  least  an  approximate  coincidence,  by  three  different
methods,  so  that  we  are  certain  of  the  approximate  value.  Then  A3,
a  cube,  the  cross-section  of  which  contains  a  molecule  of  the  gas,  may
be  denoted  by  the  reciprocal  value  of  the  number  of  molecules  N  in
unit  volume,  so  that  for  the  sum  Q,  of  the  cross-section  of  the  mole-
cules, we  may  write

N7TS2  1

Now  if  we  assume  that  the  molecules  are  spherical,  it  obviously
results  that  the  following  equation,  viz.

represents  the  volume  of  the  molecules  ;  and  therefore  the  molecular
diameter  would  be  expressed  by  the  following  formula,  containing
only  magnitudes  which  can  be  determined,  viz.

Thus  for  carbon  dioxide  (p.  209)  we  find

s  =  8-5  x  0-000068  x  0*00050  =  0'29  millionths  mm.,
and  similar  values  for  other  substances.

The  Number  and  the  Weight  of  Molecules.  —  The  number
of  molecules  contained  in  1  cubic  mm.  of  a  gas  at  0°  and  at  atmo-
spheric pressure  is  obtained  directly  from  the  formula

N= -L  J_  J_

V2W 72x/2LsxV 3201A5

CHAP.  XII

THE  ABSOLUTE  SIZE  OF  MOLECULES

421

According  to  Avogadro's  law  this  must  be  the  same  for  all  gases,
i.e.  L3x2  must  be  a  constant.

Again,  if  we  use  the  mean  free  paths  derived  from  the  internal
friction  (p.  209),  we  obtain —

LX106

XX  105

L3X'2X1020

Nitrous  oxide
Carbon  dioxide .
Ethyl  ene .

68
68
58

48
50
56

7'2
7-8
6-1

Mean

7'OxlO'20

Therefore  it  follows  that  the  number  of  molecules  N  contained  in
1  cubic  mm.  of  a  gas  at  0°  and  at  atmospheric  pressure  is

N  =  -

320  x  7-0

1016.

Now  1  cubic  mm.  of  hydrogen  weighs  0  '000090  mg.  ;  therefore  an
atom  weighs

0-000090
~ —

x  10

and  a  molecule  of  any  gas  of  mol.  weight  M  has  the  weight  expressed
by  the  formula

=  M  x  10

mg.

These  calculations  were  first  given  by  van  der  Waals,  though
Loschmidt  still  earlier  (1865)  had  tried  to  obtain  an  estimate  of  these
values.

The  colloidal  molecule,  for  which  M  may  be  over  10,000,  may
weigh  about  10~17  mg.  If  we  dissolve  1  mg.  of  white  of  egg  in  a
litre  of  water,  there  will  be  about  1011  molecules  in  each  cubic  mm.

The  Electric  Charge  Of  an  Ion.  —  One  mg.  of  hydrogen,  when
in  the  ion  condition,  carries  about  9  '65  absolute  units  of  electricity
and  therefore  an  atom  has  9  '6  5  x  10  ~21.  This  number  in  general
represents  the  magnitude  of  the  electric  charge  of  univalent  ions.
The  n-valent  ions  of  course  have  an  n-fold  charge.

f*TY)

If  a  particular  ion  moves  with  a  velocity  of  1  —  1,  then  this  repre-

S6C.

sents  a  galvanic  current  of  an  intensity  of  9  '6  x  10  ~20  of  an  ampere.
Now,  by  the  aid  of  a  very  sensitive  galvanometer,  one  can  detect  a
current  of  about  10'11  of  an  ampere,  i.e.  what  would  correspond  to  the

422  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK II

movement  of  about  100  millions  of  ions,  with  the  velocity  mentioned
above.

Determination  of  the  Absolute  Charge  of  an  Ion  by  J.  J.
Thomson. — In  the  earlier  editions  of  this  book  it  was  suggested  that
the  magnitude  of  the  charge  of  single  ions  might  perhaps  be  determined,
and  hence  the  absolute  magnitude  of  the  molecule-

This  hope  has  meanwhile  been  most  completely  realised  by  the
work  of  J.  J.  Thomson  on  gas  ions,  referred  to  in  Chapter  IX.  of  this
book.

We  saw  on  p.  399  that  a  gas  ion  can  serve  as  the  nucleus  for  cloud
formation,  and  that  with  sufficient  under-cooling  all  the  gas  ions  act  in
this  way.

Now  the  mass  of  condensed  water  can  be  reckoned  from  the
degree  of  under-cooling ;  the  size  of  the  single  drops  may  be  determined
from  the  rate  at  which  they  sink,  so  that  the  number  of  drops  formed
is  known.  But  as  the  degree  of  ionisation  produced,  for  example  by
means  of  Rontgen  rays,  is  also  known,  we  have  a  means  of  determining
the  amount  of  electricity  contained  in  each  drop,  and  this  is  identical
with  the  charge  of  a  single  ion.

In  this  way  Thomson  found  (loc.  cit,  p.  399)  11*3  x  10~21  absolute
(magnetic)  units  as  the  charge  of  a  single  ion,  whilst  we  calculated
above  by  an  entirely  different  method  9*65  x  10 ~21,  a  most  striking
agreement.  The  number  of  gas  molecules  in  a  cubic  millimetre  of  a
gas  at  0°  atmospheric  pressure  is  N  =  3'6xl016,  whilst  we  found
above  4-5  x  10™.

Planck  in  his  electromagnetic  theory  of  radiation  arrives  by  a
method  that  is  perhaps  somewhat  hypothetical  at  the  present  time  at
N  =  5'0.1016,  which  is  equally  in  good  agreement  with  the  above
numbers.1

In  any  case  we  may  regard  the  molecular  dimensions  as  established
with  a  remarkable  degree  of  certainty,  so  that  the  atomistic  conception
begins  to  lose  its  hypothetical  character.

1  Ann.  d.  Phys.,  4.  553  (1901).

BOOK  III

THE TRANSFORMATION OF MATTER
(THE DOCTRINE OF AFFINITY,  I.)

CHAPTER I

THE LAW OF CHEMICAL MASS- ACTION

The  Aim  of  the  Doctrine  of  Affinity. — As  the  final  goal  of  the
doctrine  of  affinity,  this  problem  is  proposed,  viz.,  to  ascribe  those
forces  which  are  efficient  in  the  transformation  of  matter  to  well-
investigated  physical  transformations.  The  question  of  the  nature  of
the  forces  which  come  into  play  in  the  chemical  union  or  decomposition
of  substances  was  agitated  long  before  a  scientific  chemistry  existed.
As  long  ago  as  the  time  of  the  Grecian  philosophers,  the  "  love  and  hate"
of  the  atoms  were  spoken  of  as  the  causes  of  the  changes  of  matter ;
and  regarding  our  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  chemical  forces,  not
much  further  advance  has  been  made  even  at  the  present  time.  We
retain  anthropomorphic  views  like  the  ancients,  changing  the  names
only  when  we  seek  the  cause  of  chemical  changes  in  the  changing
affinity  of  the  atoms.

To  be  sure,  attempts  to  form  definite  conceptions  [regarding  these
affinities]  have  never  been  wanting.  All  gradations  of  opinion  are
found,  from  the  crude  notion  of  a  Borelli  or  a  Lemery,  who  regarded
the  tendency  of  the  atoms  to  unite  firmly  with  each  other  as  being
due  to  their  hook-shaped  structure  (and  we  employ  the  same  view  at
present  when  we  speak  of  "  the  linking  of  the  atoms  in  the  molecule  "),
to  the  well -conceived  achievements  of  a  Newton,  a  Bergman,  or  a
Berthollet,  who  saw  in  the  chemical  process  a  phenomenon  of  attraction
which  was  comparable  with  the  fall  of  a  stone  to  the  earth.

Incidentally  it  appears  that  a  deeper  insight  into  the  nature  of
the  chemical  forces  may  be  gained  by  identifying  them  with  the
attractions  of  the  different  electricities ;  for  chemistry  has  com-

423

424  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  in

pletely  emancipated  herself  from  the  authority  of  a  Berzelius,  whose
theory,  instead  of  leading  to  further  discoveries,  was  only  suited
to  obscure  the  impartial  estimation  of  the  facts.  It  cannot  be  too
strongly  asserted  that  there  is  no  discovery  of  any  physical  interchange
of  bodies  with  each  other  which  cannot  be  used  by  the  speculative
brain  in  the  explanation  of  the  chemical  forces  also ;  but  up  to  the
present  the  results  are  not  at  all  commensurate  with  the  ingenuity
displayed.  It  cannot  be  emphasised  enough  that  we  are  as  yet  very
far  from  reaching  the  goal,  viz.  the  explanation  of  chemical  decom-
positions by  the  play  of  well-defined  and  well -investigated  physical
forces.

In  view  of  this  undeniable  fact,  we  must  ask  ourselves  the  question,
whether  this  problem  has  been  well  chosen,  and  also  whether  it  should
not  be  seasonably  discarded.  And,  in  fact,  it  appears  that  the  strenu-
ous endeavours  made  to  reach  the  goal  at  present  do  not  promise  very
much ;  and  it  seems  as  though  the  stepping-stones,  from  which  some
one  will  pluck  the  ripe  fruit,  are  not  at  present  built  firmly  enough  nor
high  enough.

Nowhere  does  a  master  mind  show  itself  more  clearly  than  in  the
wise  restraint  which  imposes  upon  the  investigator  the  choice  of  the
mark  to  be  aimed  at ;  and  nowhere  is  danger  more  imminent  than
when  valuable  ability  for  work  is  squandered  in  attacking  useless
problems — problems  which  offer  difficulties  which  are  almost  insuperable
at  present,  but  which  may  perhaps  be  easily  overcome  in  a  short  time
by  the  use  of  results  gained  from  sources  which  [previously]  seemed
entirely  foreign  to  the  subject.

The  history  of  chemistry  offers  a  striking  example  of  this.  As  long
as  the  alchemists  attempted  to  convert  the  worthless  metals  into  gold,
their  endeavours  remained  fruitless;  scientific  chemistry  did  not
develop  until  it  began  to  consider  questions  which  had  been  previously
regarded  as  insignificant.

The  most  immediate  aim  requires  that  we  must  deliberately  ignore
the  question  regarding  the  nature  of  the  force  which  is  instrumental  in
chemical  decompositions,  and  must  fix  the  eye  upon  its  mode  of  action,
and  especially  as  regards  its  dependence  upon  the  external  conditions,
such  as  the  mass-ratio,  the  temperature,  and  the  pressure.  And  here
brilliant  results  will  undoubtedly  be  obtained.  Similarly  the  laws
which  control  the  pressure  exerted  by  gases  were  discovered  before
they  were  explained,  by  ascribing  them  to  the  collisions  of  the  gas
molecules.  For,  supposing  that  it  had  happened  that  some  genius
had  gained  an  insight  into  the  kinetic  gas  theory  a  little  before  the
gas  laws  themselves  were  discovered,  even  then,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
the  way  leading  to  the  kinetic  conception  of  the  gaseous  state  had  to
be  levelled  down  by  much  painstaking  endeavour.

We  are  as  yet  very  far  distant  from  having  a  clear  conception  of
the  course  of  a  chemical  combination,  but  we  possess  some  fundamental

CHAP.  z  THE  LAW  OF  CHEMICAL  MASS-ACTION  425

laws  which  control  it.  The  investigation  of  such  laws  should  not
be  regarded  as  less  worthy  than  the  aim  designated  above ;  for,  ulti-
mately, that  standpoint  will  receive  vindicated  recognition  which
recognises  the  experimental  discovery  of  the  laws  of  gases  as  being  on
an  equality  with  their  theoretical  establishment.

We  may  compare  the  present  condition  of  the  doctrine  of  affinity
in  many  respects  with  that  of  theoretical  astronomy.  The  latter,  on
the  basis  of  Newton's  law,  attained  a  development  which  at  that
time  was  not  reached  by  the  other  sciences.  This  law,  according  to
which  two  mass -points  attract  each  other  directly  as  the  product  of
their  masses,  and  inversely  as  the  square  of  their  distance,  merely
describes  the  mode  of  action  of  attraction ;  it  does  not  explain  its
nature,  which  is  unexplained,  even  at  present.  The  question  which
anticipated  the  important  discovery  of  this  law  was  not  why  does  a
stone  fall  to  the  earth,  but  how  does  it  fall.

Similarly,  a  great  result  in  chemical  mechanics  was  obtained  when
the  question  wras  asked,  not  why,  but  how,  do  acids  invert  water  solu-
tions of  cane-sugar.  And  although  such  a  simple  and  universally
efficient  law  as  Newton's  law  has  not  been  formulated  as  yet  for  the
complexities  of  chemical  phenomena, — where,  in  strong  contrast  to
astronomy,  the  specialised  nature  of  matter  is  expressed  most  clearly,
— yet,  nevertheless,  theoretical  chemistry  does  possess  a  number  of
universal  nature  laws,  which  make  a  formal  description  of  the  course
of  a  chemical  reaction  possible,  just  as  theoretical  astronomy  predicts
the  paths  of  the  heavenly  bodies.

The  demonstration  and  application  of  these  laws  will  form  the
second  part  of  this  description  of  theoretical  chemistry.

The  Condition  of  Chemical  Equilibrium. — When  we  bring
together  a  number  of  substances  which  are  capable  of  chemical  re-
action,— and  thus  constitute  a  chemical  system,  as  we  will  call  it, — a
reaction  occurs  which  will  terminate  after  the  lapse  of  a  sufficient
interval  of  time ;  then  we  say  that  the  system  reaches  a  state  of
chemical  equilibrium.

In  general,  the  state  of  equilibrium  is  associated  with  definite
conditions  of  temperature  and  pressure ;  and  a  change  in  these  latter
values  implies  a  change  in  the  state  of  equilibrium.  Moreover,  it
requires  great  precaution  before  one  can  regard  a  system  as  actually
having  arrived  at  a  state  of  equilibrium.  For  the  observation  that  no
material  change  can  be  observed,  even  after  the  lapse  of  quite  a  long
time,  is  by  no  means  always  sufficient.

Thus,  as  many  observations  have  shown,  a  mixture  of  hydrogen
and  oxygen  may  be  preserved  for  years  in  sealed  glass  bulbs,  without
the  formation  of  a  noticeable  amount  of  water.  Yet,  in  spite  of  this,
the  two  gases  are  by  no  means  in  equilibrium;  but,  on  the  other
hand,  we  have  many  reasons  for  asserting  that,  at  ordinary  tern-

426  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  in

perature,  the  reaction  goes  on  spontaneously,  but  far  too  slowly  to  be
recognised  in  such  a  lapse  of  time  as  is  practically  feasible ;  and  also
that  the  actual  equilibrium  would  not  be  reached  until  all  of  the  gases
should  have  united  almost  but  not  quite  completely  to  form  water ;
and  therefore  that  the  completion  of  this,  at  ordinary  temperatures,
requires  an  enormously  long  lapse  of  time.

Reversible  Reactions. — As  an  expression  of  the  equalisation  of
a  reaction  we  will,  in  what  follows,  use  this  as  a  universal  symbol,  viz.

njAx  +  n9A9  + . . . =  n/Aj'  +  n9'A9'  + . . .

This  states  that  ^  molecules  of  the  chemically  simple  substance
Ar  and  n.2  molecules  of  the  substance  A2,  etc.,  unite  to  form  nx'  mole-
cules of  the  substance  A/,  and  n2'  molecules  of  the  substance  A2',  etc.
The  substances  AI}  A2  .  .  .,  Ax'  A2',  .  .  .,  may  be  present  in  any  casual
number  and  quantity,  and  may  exist  in  any  of  the  states  of  aggrega-
tion. We  say  that  the  substances  present,  in  certain  proportions,  in
reference  to  the  preceding  reaction  are  in  chemical  equilibrium  when
they  can  remain  together  for  an  indefinitely  long  time  in  these  same
proportions,  without  the  occurrence  of  a  decomposition,  in  the  sense  of
the  preceding  reaction,  either  in  one  direction  or  the  other.

We  call  a  reaction  which  progresses  in  the  sense  of  the  preceding
scheme,  reversible  wh'en,  in  the  sense  of  the  reaction  equation,  it  goes
on  from  left  to  right,  with  any  arbitrary  excess  of  some  (not  all)  of  the
reaction  products  Aj',  A9',  etc.,  if  we  start  out  with  any  arbitrary
quantity  of  the  substances  A15  A2,  etc. ;  and  also  if  the  reaction
occurs  spontaneously,  in  the  opposite  sense,  with  some  arbitrary
excess  of  the  reaction  products  Ap  A2,  etc.,  if  we  start  out  with
arbitrary  quantities  of  A1/,  A./,  etc.  ;  so  the  final  state  of  equilibrium
reached  will  be  the  same  in  both  cases  if  we  start  out  with  equivalent
quantities.

An  excellent  illustration  of  a  reversible  reaction  is  the  production
of  an  ester,  which  occurs  spontaneously  according  to  the  equation

C2H5OH  +  CH3C02H^i>C2H5-CH3C02  +  H2O

Alcohol  Acetic  acid  Ethyl  acetate  Water

One  molecule  of  alcohol  and  one  molecule  of  acetic  acid  unite  to
form  one  molecule  of  the  ester  (ethyl  acetate  in  this  case)  and  one
molecule  of  water,  or  the  reverse.  If  we  bring  together  alcohol  and
acetic  acid,  a  reaction  occurs,  in  the  sense  of  the  equation,  from  left  to
right.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  mix  a  molecule  of  the  ester  with  a
molecule  of  water,  a  reaction  occurs,  in  the  sense  of  the  equation,  from
right  to  left.  In  neither  case  is  the  course  of  the  reaction  complete,
i.e.  until  all  of  the  reacting  components  are  used  up ;  but  it  comes  to
a  pause  when  such  a  condition  of  equilibrium  is  established  as  shall

CHAP.  I  THE  LAW  OF  CHEMICAL  MASS-ACTION  427

allow  some  of  all  four  of  the  reacting  components  to  exist  beside  each
other.

If  we  start  out  with  equivalent  quantities,  i.e.  with  those  pro-
portions which  are  convertible  into  each  other,  in  the  sense  of  the
reaction  equation,  then  in  both  cases  we  arrive  at  the  same  [final]
condition  of  equilibrium.  Thus,  to  select  the  simplest  case,  if  we  mix
1  g.-mol.  of  alcohol  (46  g.)  with  1  g.-mol.  of  acetic  acid  (60  g.);  or  if
we  mix  1  g.-mol.  of  ethyl  acetate  (88  g.)  with  1  g.-mol.  of  water  (18  g.) ;
then  in  both  cases,  as  shown  by  experience,  the  final  composition  of
the  reaction  mixture  is

J  mol.  alcohol  +  J  mol.  acetic  acid  +  f  mol.  ester  +  f  mol.  water.

We  call  a  chemical  system  homogeneous  when  it  has  the  same
physical  and  chemical  nature  at  every  point ;  and  when  this  is  not  the
case,  we  call  it  heterogeneous.  Thus  a  system  consisting  of  a  gas  mixture
or  of  a  solution,  e.g.  we  call  homogeneous  ;  but  if  solid  substances  are
also  present,  or  if  the  liquid  is  separated  into  different  layers,  then  the
system  is  heterogeneous.

The  opinion  was  formerly  entertained  that  "  reversible  reactions  "
were  an  exceptional  class ;  or,  at  least,  that  reactions  should  be  divided
into  two  classes,  viz.  the  reversible  and  the  non-reversible.  But  such  a
sharp  distinction  as  this  does  not  exist ;  and,  moreover,  there  can  be
no  doubt  that  by  suitable  adjustment  of  the  conditions  of  the  experi-
ment, it  would  be  possible  to  make  a  reaction  take  place,  now  in  one
direction,  now  in  the  opposite — that  is,  in  principle  every  reaction  is

If  in  following  out  these  considerations  we  limit  ourselves  expressly
to  reversible  reactions,  then  we  place  a  restriction  upon  ourselves  only
to  this  extent,  viz.  in  so  far  as  we  make  the  proviso  that  the  con-
ditions for  the  reversibility  of  the  reaction  in  question  have  been  already
found.  Thus,  if  the  course  of  a  reaction  is  complete,  from  a  practical
standpoint,  as,  e.g.,  the  union  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen  to  form  water,
we  are  not  justified,  on  this  basis,  in  laying  down  an  essential  dis-
tinction between  this  and  the  formation  of  an  ester,  where  the
equivalent  proportions  of  the  acid  and  alcohol  react  only  to  f  of  the
[theoretically]  possible  extent.  The  distinction  is  only  a  quantitative
one ;  for  hydrogen  and  oxygen,  even  in  equivalent  proportions,  are
surely  unable  to  unite  with  each  other  in  absolute  completeness ;  but
here  also  the  reaction  doubtless  comes  to  a  pause  before  the  possible
[theoretical]  limit  of  the  change  is  reached,  although  the  quantity
of  the  two  gases  which  remain  uncombined  in  equilibrium  with  each
other  at  ordinary  temperatures,  may  escape  detection,  on  account  of
its  insignificance.

We  will  first  develop  the  law  of  mass-action  for  reversible  reactions
which  take  place  in  a  homogeneous  system ;  then  there  will  be  no  diffi-
culty in  developing  it  later  for  heterogeneous  systems.

428  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK III

According  to  the  usage  of  van't  Hoff,  we  will  introduce  into  the
reaction  equation,  in  place  of  the  sign  of  equality,  two  parallel  arrows
pointing  in  opposite  directions,  thus  (^TT),  to  denote  that  we  are
dealing  with  a  reversible  reaction.

The  law  of  mass-action  will  instruct  us,  not  only  concerning  the
variation  of  the  condition  of  equilibrium  in  a  chemical  system,  with  the
relative  proportions  of  the  reacting  components,  but  also  concerning  the
velocity  with  which  this  equilibrium  is  attained.  It  is  the  fundamental
law  of  chemical  statics  as  well  as  of  chemical  kinetics.

On  the  other  hand,  the  law  of  mass-action  has  nothing  to  say
regarding  the  influence  of  temperature ;  the  law  which  deals  with  this
will  be  discussed  in  Book  IV.  (Transformation  of  Energy).

The  Kinetic  Development  of  the  Law  of  Mass-Action.—

We  will  assume  that  the  following  molecular  species,  viz.  A1,  A9  .  .  .
A/,  A/  ...  have  been  brought  together  in  a  homogeneous  system,  where
these  react  on  each  other,  according  to  the  scheme

AJ  +  A2  + ...  ^I^A/  +  A2'  +  .  .  .

If  we  compare  this  with  the  universal  reaction  equation  on  p.  426,  we
will  notice  that  here  we  have  a  simpler  case,  because  here  the  np  n,
.  .  .  n1/,  n2'  .  .  .  are  all  equal  to  1,  i.e.  there  is  only  one  molecule  of  each
substance  concerned  in  the  reaction.

The  reacting  substances  may  be  either  gaseous,  or  may  form  a  liquid
mixture,  or  finally  may  be  dissolved  in  any  selected  solvent.  In  each
case  we  may  state  the  following  considerations  regarding  the  course  of
the  reaction.

In  order  that  a  decomposition  may  occur  in  the  direction  from  left
to  right,  in  the  sense  of  the  reaction  equation,  it  is  of  course  necessary
that  the  molecules  AI}  A2  .  .  .  shall  collectively  collide  at  one  point ;  for
otherwise  a  reaction  would  be  impossible,  because  side  reactions  must
be  first  excluded.  Such  a  collision  as  this  of  course  need  not  necessarily
lead  to  a  rearrangement  of  the  atoms  in  those  molecules  which  nnally
result  from  the  preceding  reaction.  Rather  must  this  collision  be  such
as  will  be  favourable  to  that  prerequisite  loose  union  of  the  atoms,  in
those  particular  molecules  which  must  precede  the  rearrangement.  As
a  result  of  a  large  number  of  collisions  of  this  sort,  there  will  be  only
a  definite  percentage,  the  external  conditions  being  equal,  which  will
cause  a  rearrangement  from  left  to  right  in  the  sense  of  the  equation.
But  this  rearrangement  will  be  greater  the  more  frequent  the  collisions  ;
and  therefore  a  direct  ratio  must  exist  between  these  two  magnitudes.  Now
we  observe  that  these  collisions  must  obviously  be  proportional  to  the
concentrations  of  the  bodies  A1?  A2  .  .  .,  i.e.  collectively  they  must  be
proportional  to  the  product  of  these  concentrations.  Therefore  the  velocity

CHAP.  I  THE  LAW  OF  CHEMICAL  MASS-  ACTION  429

v  of  the  change  from  left  to  right,  in  the  sense  of  the  reaction  equation,

s

where  cp  c2  .  .  .  denote  respectively  the  spatial  concentration,  i.e.  the
number  of  g.-mol  of  the  substances  AI}  A2  .  .  .  contained  in  a  litre,  and
where  k  is  a  constant  for  the  given  temperature,  and  which  may  be
called  the  velocity  coefficient.

We  employ  the  same  consideration  for  the  molecules  A1/,  A2'  .  .  .  ;
here  also  the  change  from  right  to  left,  in  the  sense  of  the  reaction
equation,  will  increase  with  the  number  of  collisions  of  all  these  mole-
cules at  one  point  ;  and  the  latter,  again,  will  be  proportional  to  the
product  of  their  spatial  concentrations.  If  we  denote  the  corresponding
proportional  factor  [velocity  coefficient]  by  k',  then  the  velocity  v',  with
which  the  change  occurs  from  right  to  left,  in  the  sense  of  the  reaction
equation,  will  be

where  again  c/,  c2'  .  .  .  denote  the  number  of  g.-mol  of  each  of  the
substances  A1/,  A2'  respectively,  contained  in  1  litre.

These  spatial  concentrations  are  commonly  called  the  active  masses
of  the  reacting  components.  The  reaction  velocity  in  the  sense  of  the
reaction  equation,  from  left  to  right,  or  the  reverse,  is  thus  proportional
to  the  product  of  the  active  masses  of  the  components  of  the  left  side,
or  of  the  right  side,  respectively.

We  cannot  observe  either  v  or  V  alone.  The  tracing  out  of  the
course  of  a  reaction  by  measurement  can  merely  give  us  the  difference
between  these  values.  For  the  total  reaction  velocity,  which  is  actually
observed,-  is  made  up  of  the  difference  between  the  two  partial  reaction
velocities  noted  above  ;  because  the  change  actually  observed,  at  every
moment  of  time,  is  equal  to  the  change  in  one  direction,  minus  the
change  in  the  opposite  direction,  during  this  moment  of  time.

Therefore,  when  the  condition  of  equilibrium  has  been  reached,  we
are  not  to  conclude  that  no  further  change  takes  place  ;  but  we  should
rather  assume  merely  that  the  change,  in  the  sense  of  the  reaction
equation,  from  left  to  right,  is  compensated  by  the  change,  in  the  sense
of  the  reaction  equation,  from  right  to  left  ;  and,  therefore,  that  the
total  change  to  be  observed  is  equal  to  zero,  i.e.  the  system  stands  in
equilibrium.  Therefore,  here  we  have  the  relation

v  -  v'  =  0,
and,  therefore,

which  is  the  fundamental  law  of  chemical  statics.

This  view  must  be  entertained,  viz.  not  that  there  is  no  absolute
indifference  between  the  reacting  substances  in  the  condition  of  equi-

430  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  Til

librium,  but  rather  that  the  reacting  ingredients,  with  their  properties
unchanged,  persist  in  their  mutual  action,  and  that  here  the  mutual
[apparent]  change  alone  has  disappeared ;  this  view,  moreover,  is  of
fundamental  importance  for  our  conception  of  changes  of  matter.  It
is  ordinarily  expressed  by  the  statement  that  in  this  and  in  all  analo-
gous cases  the  equilibrium  is  not  a  static  but  a  dynamic  one.

This  view  was  derived  as  an  immediate  conclusion  from  the  kinetic-
molecular  mode  of  explanation,  and  it  has  been  employed  with  especial
success  in  the  development  of  the  kinetic  gas  theory.

Thus  the  equilibrium  between  water  and  water  vapour,  according
to  Clausius,  is  not  to  be  conceived  of  as  though  there  occurred  neither
the  evaporation  of  liquid  water  nor  the  condensation  of  gaseous  water
vapour ;  but  rather,  when  saturated  water  vapour  is  in  contact  with
water,  both  of  these  processes  continue  uninterruptedly  in  equilibrium,
i.e.  through  a  definite  area  of  the  surface  of  the  liquid  water,  in  any
interval  of  time,  there  are  the  same  number  of  molecules  going  in  the
one  direction  as  in  the  other  (see  also  p.  216).

This  view,  as  applied  to  chemical  changes,  was  first  advanced  by
Williamson  (1851),  and  later  it  was  more  fully  developed  by  Guldberg
and  Waage,  by  Pfaundler,  and  others.

Regarding  the  progress  of  the  reaction,  i.e.  the  velocity  with  which
the  chemical  change  strives  to  reach  the  condition  of  equilibrium  at
any  moment,  this  is  expressed  by  the  following  equation,  viz.

V  =  v  -  v'  =  kCjC2  ...  -  k'c/c./  .  .  .

This  is  the  fundamental  law  of  chemical  kinetics.

Of  course,  the  formula  for  the  equilibrium  represents  only  a  special
case  of  those  so  developed ;  and  it  is  obtained  by  making  the  total
velocity  equal  to  zero  ;  in  the  same  way,  in  analytical  mechanics,  from  a
specialisation  of  the  general  equations  of  motion,  one  obtains  at  once
the  conditions  of  equilibrium.

There  is  no  difficulty  in  generalising  the  preceding  equations,  for
the  reaction  which  shall  occur,  according  to  the  scheme,

DjAj  +  n2A2  + . . . =  n/A/  +  n2'A2'  + . . .,

where  n^  n2  .  .  .  n^,  n2'  denote  the  number  of  molecules  with  which
each  particular  substance  takes  part  in  the  reaction ;  these  numbers
(np  n9  .  .  .  n^,  n2')  are  necessarily  whole  numbers,  and,  as  a  rule,  they
are  not  large  numbers,  that  is,  e.g.,  rarely  larger  than  three.

Here  also  we  must  put  v  and  v'  proportional  to  the  number  of
collisions  of  all  the  kinds  of  molecules  necessary  to  the  reaction ;  we
must  remember  however  that  nx  molecules  A1?  n9  molecules  A9,  and  so
on,  must  collide  simultaneously  in  order  that  the  reaction  may  take  place
from  left  to  right,  and  similarly  i^'  molecules  A-/,  n2'  molecules  A2',
and  so  on,  in  order  that  the  reverse  reaction  may  be  possible.

CHAP,  r  THE  LAW  OF  CHEMICAL  MASS-ACTION  431

If  we  consider  the  path  of  a  single  molecule  arbitrarily  chosen  for
a  fixed  time,  the  number  of  its  collisions  with  other  similar  molecules
will  be  proportional  to  c,  the  concentration  of  the  kind  of  molecule  in
question  ;  the  number  of  collisions  between  two  similar  molecules  of  a
given  kind  during  the  same  time  is  therefore  c-times  as  many,  that  is,
the  number  of  collisions  between  two  similar  molecules  is  proportional
to  the  square  of  the  concentration  c,  and  in  general  it  follows  that  the
number  of  collisions  between  n  similar  molecules  of  one  kind  must  be
considered  proportional  to  cn.

The  number  of  collisions  of  n:  molecules  Av  n.2  molecules  A2,  is
therefore  proportional  to  c1nic2n2  .  .  .,  and  for  the  velocity  of  reaction
which  is  proportional  to  that  number  we  have

and  similarly  the  velocity  of  the  reverse  reaction  is

the  total  velocity  of  reaction  being  again  the  difference  between  the
partial  velocities

a  formula  which  represents  the  most  general  application  of  the  law  of
mass-action  of  homogeneous  systems. If  V  is  equal  to  0,  the  formula

-J= — '—% —  =  ,-;  =  const.

for  the  state  of  equilibrium  is  arrived  at.

An  error  which  is  frequently  found  in  the  literature  of  the  subject
is  this,  viz.  that  the  active  mass  of  a  substance  which  reacts  with  n
molecules  is  written  c  instead  of  cn.  This  oversight,  perhaps,  does
not  need  to  be  corrected,  inasmuch  as  the  correct  notation  in  this
respect  has  been  already  used  in  the  writings  of  Guldberg  and  Waage.
But  because,  in  spite  of  this,  there  is  still  much  uncertainty  at  present,
it  appears  suitable  to  refer  to  this  in  order  that  there  may  be  no  room
for  doubt ;  since,  moreover,  we  have  proof,  both  from  innumerable
experimental  facts,  and  also  from  the  clear  kinetic  and  thermodynamic
demonstration,  which  will  be  given  in  the  last  book.

It  should  also  be  emphasised  that  the  kinetic  proof,1  given
above,  of  the  law  of  chemical  mass-action,  can  lay  no  claim  to  be  in
the  rank  of  the  laws  which  are  proven  with  universal  completeness ;
but  it  can  only  be  considered  as  a  means  of  making  this  law  appear
probable.  The  thermodynamics  of  the  last  book  will  furnish  a  stricter
theoretical  proof ;  this  will  find  its  demonstration  in  an  abundance  of
facts,  part  of  which  are  unintelligible  without  it,  and  part  of  which
1  A  more  stringent  proof  will  be  found  in  Boltzmann,  Wied.  Ann.  22.  68  (1884).

432  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

were  furnished  by  means  of  the  universal  laws  [of  thermodynamics].
The  more  recent  development  of  theoretical  chemistry  leads,  more  and
more  convincingly,  to  recognising  that  we  must  regard  the  formulation
of  [the  law  of]  chemical  mass-action  as  an  expression  of  a  very  significant
law  of  nature,  which  serves  as  the  foundation  of  a  more  extended
development  of  the  doctrine  of  affinity.

The  History  of  the  Law  of  Mass-Action. — The  first  theory
of  the  action  of  chemical  forces  is  that  which  was  developed  by  the
Swedish  chemist,  Bergman,  in  the  year  1775.  The  essential  principle
of  this  may  be  stated  in  the  following  law,  viz.  : —

The  magnitude  of  chemical  affinity  may  be  expressed  by  a  definite
number ;  if  the  affinity  of  the  substance  A  is  greater  for  the  substance
B  than  for  the  substance  C,  then  the  latter  (C)  will  be  completely  expelled
by  B  from  its  compound  with  A,  in  the  sense  of  the  equation

AC  +  B  =  AB  +  C.

This  theory  fails  entirely  to  take  account  of  the  influence  of  the
relative  masses  of  the  reacting  substances  ;  and,  therefore,  as  soon  as  this
point  was  noticed,  this  statement  of  the  law  of  course  had  to  be
repudiated.

An  attempt  to  consider  this  factor  was  made  by  Berthollet  (1801),
who  introduced  into  the  science  the  conception  of  chemical  equilibrium.
The  views  of  this  French  chemist  may  be  summed  up  in  the  following
law : —

Different  substances  have  different  affinities  for  each  other  ;  these  exhibit
their  value  only  when  they  are  in  immediate  contact  with  each  other.  The
condition  of  equilibrium  depends  not  only  upon  the  chemical  affinity,  but  also
essentially  upon  the  relative  masses  of  the  reacting  substances.

The  genuine  kernel  of  Berthollet's  idea  is  to-day  the  guiding
principle  of  the  doctrine  of  affinity.  This  holds  good,  especially  for  the
conception  regarding  many  reactions  which,  in  the  sense  of  Bergman's
notion,  proceed  to  a  completion,  i.e.  until  the  reacting  substances  are
all  used  up ;  but  only  for  this  reason,  viz.,  that  one  or  more  of  the
products  of  the  reaction  either  crystallise  out  or  evaporate  off  from
the  reaction  mixture,  and  hence  the  inverse  reaction  becomes  im-
possible.

Two  Norwegian  investigators,  Guldberg  and  Waage,  clinging  to
Berthollet's  idea,  succeeded  in  formulating  the  influence  of  the  reacting
masses  in  a  simple  law,  viz.  the  law  of  chemical  mass-action  given
above.  The  results  of  their  theoretical  and  experimental  studies  were
given  in  a  book1  which  appeared  at  Christiania  in  1867,  and  which
was  entitled  Etudes  sur  les  affinites  chimiques.  A  new  epoch  of  theo-
retical chemistry  dates  from  the  appearance  of  this  book.

1  Given  in  abstract,  Jour,  prakt.  Chem.  [2],  19.  69  (1879). Translated  into  German
with  notes  by  Abegg,  Ostwald's  Klassiker,  No.  104.

CHAP.  I  THE  LAW  OF  CHEMICAL  MASS-ACTION  433

Already,  before  this,  formulae  to  describe  the  progress  of  certain
chemical  reactions,  and  which  must  be  regarded  as  applications  of  the
law  of  mass-action,  had  been  described  by  Wilhelmy  (1850)  and  by
Harcourt  and  Esson  (1856).  The  service  of  Guldberg  and  Waage  is
still  undiminished,  since  they  grasped  the  law  in  its  full  significance
and  applied  it  logically  in  all  directions.

The  treatise  of  the  two  Scandinavian  investigators  remained  quite
unknown;  and  so  it  happened  that  Jellet  (1873),  and  van't  Hoff
(1877),  and  others  independently  developed  the  same  law.

The  thermodynamic  basis  of  the  law  of  mass-action  is  due  to
Horstmann,  Gibbs,  and  van't  Hoff;  it  will  be  dealt  with  more  closely
in  Book  IV.

2F

CHAPTEK  II

CHEMICAL  STATICS — HOMOGENEOUS  SYSTEMS

Equilibrium  between  Gases. — Corresponding  to  the  different  states
of  aggregation,  the  particular  system  considered  as  being  in  equilibrium,
and  which  must  be  both  physically  and  chemically  homogeneous  in  all
its  parts,  may  be  either  gaseous,  liquid,  or  solid.  In  accordance  with
the  old  fundamental  law,  viz.  corpora  non  agunt  nisi  fluida  [substances
do  not  react  on  each  other  unless  they  are  fluid],  the  last  species  of
homogeneous  systems  [i.e.  the  solids],  in  particular  would  be  excluded
from  the  foregoing  consideration.  But  some  facts,  though  they  are
but  few,  lead  us  not  exactly  to  a  repudiation  of  this  law,  but  rather  to
limit  its  universal  availability.  Thus,  for  the  sake  of  completeness,
a  short  notice,  at  all  events,  must  be  given  to  the  equilibrium,  which  is
exhibited  by  homogeneous  mixtures  existing  in  the  solid  state.

In  the  consideration  of  gaseous  systems,  the  conception  of  "active
mass"  has  a  very  simple  and  obvious  meaning.  By  the  "active
mass  "  of  a  substance  (a  molecular  species),  we  mean  the  number  of
g.-mols.  which  are  present  in  1  litre.  But  now  the  partial  pressure
under  which  a  gas  stands  in  a  gas  mixture  corresponds  simply  to  this
value  ;  because,  according  to  Avogadro's  law,  the  pressure  of  a  gas
depends  only  upon  the  number  of  molecules  which  it  contains  in  unit
volume.  Thus  in  the  equations  on  p.  431,  instead  of  the  concentrations,
we  may  introduce  the  respective  partial  pressures  of  the  different
molecular  species,  as  they  participate  in  the  reaction.

Thus,  if  a  reaction  occurs  in  a  gaseous  system,  in  the  sense  of  the
equation,

n1A1  +  n2A2  + . . .  ~ ^n1/A1/  +  n2'A2'  +  . . .,

and  if  the  partial  pressures  of  the  molecular  species  A.r  A.,,  etc.,  are
respectively  p1?  p2,  etc.,  and  for  the  molecular  species  Ax',  A2',  etc.,
Pi'»  P-2 '  e^c-'  tnen  the  following  relation  holds  good  for  the  condition
of  equilibrium  :  viz.

r>  /nl'r»  'n°'  V

PI  _IV__i_Lj  =  K  =  K
'i"* ... k'

CHAP.  II  CHEMICAL  STATICS HOMOGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  435

In  this  formula  we  express  only  the  ratio  of  the  two  velocity
coefficients ;  we  will  designate  this  value  as  the  reaction  constant,  and
will  denote  it  by  K.

The  Formation  of  Hydrogen  Iodide. — The  preceding  formula
will  be  first  applied  to  the  formation  of  hydrogen  iodide  from  hydrogen
and  iodine  vapour ;  it  occurs  in  the  sense  of  the  equation

H2  +  I2  =  2HI.

This  equation  was  first  investigated  by  Hautefeuille,1  but  after-
wards, and  very  thoroughly,  by  Lemoine.2  The  latter  allowed  a
weighed  quantity  of  iodine  to  act  upon  a  measured  volume  of  hydrogen
in  a  sealed  bulb.  After  the  condition  of  equilibrium  had  been  reached,
the  contents  of  the  bulb  were  introduced  into  a  eudiometer,  and  the
residual  hydrogen  was  measured,  while  the  hydrogen  iodide  which
had  been  produced  was  absorbed  by  the  water.  At  ordinary  tempera-
tures, the  reaction  progressed  so  very  slowly  that  the  two  substances
seemed  absolutely  indifferent  towards  each  other ;  and  they  could,
accordingly,  be  separated  from  each  other  (as  by  absorption,  e.g.  in
Lemoine's  work)  without  any  marked  displacement  of  the  condition
of  equilibrium  taking  place  during  the  separation.

But  as  the  temperature  was  raised — and  this  is  quite  a  universal
phenomenon — the  velocity  of  the  reaction  increased  enormously.  At
265°  (oil-bath)  the  time  required  to  bring  about  the  state  of  equili-
brium was  counted  in  months;  at  350°  (boiling  mercury)  in  days ;  at
440°  (boiling  sulphur)  in  hours.

Moreover,  with  increasing  pressure  the  velocity  of  the  reaction
increased,  a  fact,  by  the  way,  which  is  in  harmony  with  the  considera-
tions advanced  on  p.  428.

Special  researches  proved  that  the  final  condition  of  equilibrium
reached  was  the  same,  whether  one  started  with  a  mixture  of  hydrogen
and  iodine  vapour,  or  with  the  corresponding  quantities  of  hydrogen
iodide  with  an  excess  of  one  of  the  reaction  products  :  thus  the  final
condition  could  be  reached  either  by  a  change  from  left  to  right,  in
the  sense  of  the  reaction  equation,  or  in  the  inverse  direction.

If  we  denote  the  partial  pressure  of  the  hydrogen  iodide  by  p,  and
that  of  the  hydrogen  and  of  the  iodine  respectively  by  px  and  by  p2,
then  in  the  condition  of  equilibrium  we  will  have

PlP2  _  K

9 — *»
P2

The  total  pressure  of  the  gas  mixture,  according  to  Dalton's  law,
of  course  will  be

p  =  P  +  Pi  +  P2-
1  a  /?.,  64.  608  (1867).  2  Ann.  chim,  phys.  [5].  12.  145  (1877).

436

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

We  will  first  investigate  the  way  in  which  the  condition  of
equilibrium  changes  with  the  external  pressure.  If  we  compress  the
reaction  mixture  to  the  nth  part,  then  the  particular  partial  pressures
will  rise  to  n-fold  their  [original]  value.  But  now  we  have

inpa  _  PiP2  _  rr
"

i.e.  the  new  pressure  values  meet  the  requirements  of  the  equilibrium
formula,  and  therefore  there  is  no  change  in  the  relative  quantities
resulting  from  changes  in  the  pressure.

Thus  the  condition  of  equilibrium  is  independent  of  the  external  pressure.
This  result  is  general  if  there  is  no  change  in  the  number  of  molecules
caused  by  the  reaction.

Lemoine  found  for  the  values  of  the  total  pressure  P,  as  given
below,  the  following  corresponding  values  of  the  decomposition  co-
efficient x  (i.e.  the  quantity  of  the  free  hydrogen  divided  by  the
quantity  of  the  total  hydrogen).  In  all  of  these  researches  the
glass  bulb  was  filled  at  first  with  hydrogen  iodide.

p

X

4-5  Atm.

0"24

2-3 „

0-255

1-0 ,,

0-27

t  =  440°

0-5 „

0-25

0-2 ,,

0'29

The  above  numbers  hardly  bring  out  the  influence  of  pressure  on
the  degree  of  decomposition  of  hydroiodic  acid,  as  the  numbers  show
irregular  variations.  Similarly,  the  reduction  of  the  other  researches
of  Lemoine  (see  p.  350  of  the  first  edition  of  this  book)  leaves  no
doubt  that  the  results  are  affected  by  some  source  of  error.

In  fact,  M.  Bodenstein,1  who  has  recently  repeated  the  investiga-
tions of  Lemoine,  has  found  that  the  glass  walls  absorb  considerable
quantities  of  hydroiodic  acid,  and  that  consequently  less  of  this  gas
takes  part  in  the  equilibrium  than  was  calculated  in  Lemoine's  experi-
mental arrangement  from  the  amount  of  free  hydrogen ;  Bodenstein,
however,  in  arriving  at  the  equilibrium,  determined  besides  the  volume
of  free  hydrogen,  the  quantities  of  free  iodine  and  free  hydroiodic
acid  separately  by  titration  ;  he  was  thus  able  to  prove  exactly  that
the  decomposition  of  hydroiodic  acid  is  independent  of  the  pressure,
and  to  arrive  at  a  precise  application  of  the  law  of  mass  action  of
this  case.

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  22.  1  (1897).

CHAP. II

CHEMICAL  STATICS HOMOGENEOUS  SYSTEMS

437

If  we  express,  as  above,  the  degree  of  decomposition  of  the  pure
hydroiodic  acid  by  x,  we  have

p

p  =

and  therefore

4(1  -

=  K

If  in  a  given  volume  a  mols  of  iodine  and  b  mols  of  hydrogen
react,  and  2y  is  the  number  of  mols  of  hydroiodic  acid  formed,  there
remains  a  -  y  mols  of  free  iodine,  and  b  -  y  mols  of  free  hydrogen,  so
that

-,

a  +  b

-

+  b

a  +  b

and  consequently,

4V2

=  K,

and  this  solved  for  y  gives

a  +  b  /

~ ~~ ~

(a  +  b)

ab

2(1  -  4K) V 4(1  -  4K)2 1  -  4K

The  following  table  shows  the  good  agreement  between  calculation
and  observation ;  a  and  b  here  stand  for  the  number  of  cubic  centi-
metres of  gaseous  iodine  and  hydrogen,  reduced  to  0°  and  760  mm.
pressure  that  were  contained  in  the  glass  bulb  of  about  13  cubic
centimetres  volume ;  y  is  the  amount  of  hydroiodic  acid  formed
expressed  in  the  same  manner.  The  quantities  directly  determined  as
mentioned  above  were  a  -  y,  b  -  y,  and  y.

HEATED  IN  SULPHUR  VAPOUR  :  x  -  0-2198,  K  =  0-01984

a

b

Difference.

Obs.

Cal.

2-94

8-10

5-64

5-66

+  0-02

5-30

7-94

9-49

9-52

+  0-03

9-2?

8-07

13-47

13-34

-0-13

14-44

812

14-93

14-82

-0-09

27-53

8-02

15-54

15-40

-0-14

33-10

7-89

15-40

15-12

-0-28

1  In  solving  quadratic  equations  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  whether  to  give
the  positive  or  negative  sign  to  the  root ;  only  one  solution  gives  a  physically  possible
result.  In  the  above  case,  for  example,  the  positive  sign  would  yield  for  7  values  higher
than  a  and  b,  which  of  course  is  nonsense.

438  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

HEATED  IN  MERCURY  VAPOUR :  x  =  0-1946,  K  =  0 -01494

*V

Obs.

Cal.

2-59

6-63

4-98

5-02

+  0-04

5-71

6-22

9-55

9-60

+  0-05

10-40

6-41

11-88

11-68

-0-20

26-22

6-41

12-54

12-34

-0-20

23-81

6-21

12-17

11-98

-0-19

22-29

6-51

12-71

12-68 -0-03

The  above  tables  certainly  give  the  most  exact  confirmation  of  the
law  of  mass-action  for  homogeneous  gaseous  systems  that  has  so  far
been  arrived  at.

The  Dissociation  Phenomena  of  Gases. — A  class  of  reactions
which  deserves  especial  consideration,  because  of  the  simplicity  and  the
frequency  of  their  occurrence,  is  found  in  the  so-called  phenomena  of
dissociation.  These  are  distinguished  by  this  fact,  viz.  that,  in  the
general  equation  of  reaction,  the  substances  standing  on  one  side  are
reduced  to  a  single  molecule,  and  the  change  proceeds  according  to  the
scheme

A  =  n1/A1/  +  n9'A9'  + . . .  ;

here  A  is  the  [original]  molecular  species  advancing  to  the  state  of  dis-
sociation, and  Aj',  A2'  .  .  .  are  the  [corresponding]  dissociation  products.
If  p  denotes  the  partial  pressure  of  the  former  [i.e.  the  original
molecular  species],  and  PJ',  p2'  .  .  .  those  of  the  latter  [i.e.  the  resulting
molecular  species]  respectively,  then,  according  to  what  has  preceded,  the
relation  for  the  condition  of  equilibrium  is

where  K  is  designated  as  the  dissociation  constant.

The  number  of  molecules  in  the  system  grows  with  increasing
dissociation.  Inasmuch  as  we  have  an  easy  and  exact  method  of
learning  this  [i.e.  the  relative  number  of  molecules],  by  means  of  the
vapour  density  determination,  there  is,  therefore,  no  difficulty  here  in
investigating  the  condition  of  equilibrium.

For  a  simple  case,  we  will  consider  a  gas  which  dissociates  into  two
new  molecules/- which  latter  maybe  identical  with  each  other,  as  in
the  dissociation  of  nitrogen  dioxide,  thus

N20  ~->N02  +  N02 ;

CHAP.  II  CHEMICAL  STATICS  -  HOMOGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  439

or  where  they  may  be  different,  as  in  the  case  of  the  dissociation  of
phosphorus  pentachloride  into  chlorine  arid  phosphorus  trichloride,
thus

Let  8  be  the  density  of  the  undecomposed  gas,  as  calculated  from
its  [theoretical]  molecular  weight  ;  at  complete  dissocation  the
number  of  molecules  will  be  doubled,  and  the  vapour  density  therefore
will  amount  to  8/2.  Now,  according  to  p.  346,

8  S-A

The  total  pressure  P,  at  which  A  is  measured,  is  made  up  of
the  pressures  of  the  undecomposed  molecules,  and  of  the  products
of  dissociation  ;  if  we  denote  the  former  by  p,  and  the  latter  by  p',
then,  according  to  Dalton's  law,  we  will  have

Now,  since  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  the  undecomposed  molecules
to  the  number  of  the  dissociated  ones,  is  as  1  -  a  to  2a;  therefore  we
obtain

Now  the  law  of  mass-action  gives  us  the  relation

P/2  =  KP,

where  K  denotes  the  constant  of  dissociation  ;  then  by  the  substitution
of  the  expressions  obtained  for  the  partial  pressures,  we  obtain  as  the
equation  of  the  isotherm  of  dissociation

4[S-APP
!2A^8]8~-
from  which  we  obtain

by  making

that  is,  the  vapour  density  of  a  gas  existing  in  a  state  of  dissociation
(at  constant  temperature),  changes  with  the  pressure ;  at  very  small
pressures,  it  converges  towards  the.  lower  limit  of  the  vapour  density  ;

440

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  in

at  very  high  pressures,  it  converges  towards  the  upper  limit  of  the
vapour  density.

The  Dissociation  of  Nitrogen  Dioxide.  —  The  vapour  density
of  nitrogen  dioxide  has  been  measured  by  E.  and  L.  Natanson,1  and  has
also  been  calculated  according  to  the  preceding  formula.  Although
there  are  small  deviations  between  the  vapour  densities  required  by
the  theory  and  those  found  experimentally,  yet  on  the  whole  -the
results  are  to  be  regarded  as  a  satisfactory  verification  of  the  theory.
This  is  shown  in  the  following  table  :  —

K'

A  Obs.

A  Calc.

0 mm.

1-590

1-000

26-80  ,

106

1-663

1  -670

0-930

93-75  ,

112

1-788

.  1-783

0-789

182-69  ,

124

1-894

1-906

0-690

261-37  ,

130

1-963

1-984

0-630

497-75  .

121

2-144

2-148

0-493

At  a  temperature  of  49  '7°  and  a  pressure  49  7  '7  5  mm.,  of  1000
molecules  of  N2O4,  493,  i.e.  about  one-half,  are  dissociated.  At  the
same  pressure,  but  with  increasing  temperature,  the  dissociated  frac-
tion becomes  greater,  a  phenomenon  observed  almost  invariably  in
gaseous  dissociation.  The  dissociation  constant  K  increases  with  the
temperature.

The  quantity  K'  in  the  second  column  of  the  above  table  is  derived
from  the  former  equation  (1)

KS (S

T= 2A-8 '

and  should  be  constant  according  to  theory  ;  it  shows  large  but
irregular  variations  due  to  small  errors  of  observations,  especially  when

CJ

A  is  not  very  different  from  8  or  -. If  we  take  the  mean

K'=119

and  recalculate  A  from  equation  (2)  of  the  previous  section,  we  arrive
at  the  last  column,  which  is  in  agreement  with  the  observed  values  of
the  vapour  density.  These  errors  of  experiment  show  that  the
conclusions  of  the  theory  are  thoroughly  satisfied.

1 Wied.  Ann.,  24.  454  (1885)  ;  27-  606  (1886).

CHAP. II

CHEMICAL  STATICS HOMOGENEOUS  SYSTEMS

441

As  already  referred  to  on  p.  347,  nitrogen  dioxide  assumes  more
colour  with  increasing  dissociation,  because  the  molecules  of  N02  are
reddish-brown,  while  those  of  N204  are  colourless.

At  about  500°  the  gas  begins  to  decolourise,  in  consequence  of  a
decomposition  into  oxygen  and  nitric  oxide,  thus

2N02  =  2NO  +  02.

The  following  vapour  densities  were  measured  by  Eichardson,1  by  the
methods  of  Dumas  and  of  others  : —

Temp.

Pressure.

A

y

130°

718-5

1-600

184°

754-6

1-551

0-050

279°

737-2

1-493

0-130

494°

742-5

1-240

0-565

620°

760-0

1  -060

1-000

At  620  ,  under  ordinary  conditions,  the  decomposition  is  com-
plete. The  fraction  a  of  the  decomposed  molecules  may  here  be  cal-
culated from  the  equation

.1-590- A

The  Dissociation  of  the  Compound  of  Hydrochloric  Acid
and  Methyl  Ether. — The  decomposition  of  methyl-ether-hydrochlo-
ride  (a  so-called  "  molecular  compound  ")  has  been  investigated  by
Friedel.2  By  mixing  hydrochloric  acid  gas  with  the  vapour  of  methyl
ether,  a  contraction  takes  place,  which,  as  Friedel  has  shown,  is  to  be
ascribed  to  the  formation  of  the  compound  mentioned  above,  and
according  to  the  reaction

HC1  +  (CH3)20  =  (CH3)20 .  HC1.

For  every  100  volumes  of  the  two  gases  mixed  at  the  pressure  P,
there  occurred  the  corresponding  contraction  of  volume  x.

p

p

X

X

552

4-6

120

628

4-9

128

t  =  20°

756

6-1

124

The  partial  pressure  of  the  undissociated  molecules  is  calculated
1  Jour.  Chem.  Soc.,  51.  397  (1887). 2  Bull  Soc.  Chim.,  24.  241  (1875).

442  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

x  100  —  x

to  be  P— -  and  that  of  the dissociated  ones  as  P—  -  : and
200  -  x  200  -  x

therefore  we  have  the  relation

(100-^P
(200  -  x)x

Or,  since  x  may  be  almost  neglected  on  account  of  its  smallness,  as
compared  with  100  and  200,  it  follows  that  P  and  x  must  be  almost
proportional  to  each  other,  and  this  is  shown  by  the  preceding  table.

In  the  case  of  a  gas  which  is  almost  completely  dissociated,  the  vn-
dissociated  part  is  proportional  to  the  external  pressure.

The  Influence  of  Indifferent  Gases.  —  Experience  has  shown  in
a  large  number  of  cases  that  the  condition  of  dissociation  of  a  gas  is  not
changed  ivhen  another  indifferent  kind  of  gas  (i.e.  a  gas  which  does  not
react  chemically)  is  introduced  at  constant  volume.  This  is  seen  to  be  in
perfect  harmony  with  the  equation  of  the  isotherm  of  dissociation,  if
one  considers  that,  according  to  Dalton's  law,  the  presence  of  a  foreign
kind  of  gas  does  not  influence  the  partial  pressures  of  the  reacting
ingredients.

This  law  is,  moreover,  one  of  extraordinary  importance,  and  one
which  throws  much  light  on  the  general  view.  Later  it  will  be
thoroughly  proved  from  thermodynamic  principles.

Of  course  it  is  entirely  a  different  case  when  the  mixing  with  the
indifferent  gas  is  attended  with  an  increase  of  volume,  the  latter  acting
then  as  a  diluting  agent.  Then  the  dissociation  increases  with  the
increase  of  volume,  independently  of  the  nature  of  the  kind  of  gas
which  is  added.  If  one  studies  a  gas  which  exists  in  a  state  of  dis-
sociation by  the  method  of  the  displacement  of  air  (p.  250),  the
dissociation  is  found  to  increase  the  more  the  evaporating  substance  is
diluted  with  the  indifferent  gas  ;  arid,  therefore,  results  are  obtained
which  depend  upon  the  mutual  diffusion,  i.e.  the  values  of  the  vapour
densities  are  very  irregular.  It  is  erroneous  and  misleading  to  speak
of  the  "  dissociating  influence  "  of  other  gases.

The  Influence  of  an  Excess  of  the  Dissociation  Products.—

The  theory  allows  us  to  anticipate  the  influence  of  the  addition  of  one
of  the  dissociation  products.  Thus,  for  example,  let  a  gas,  which
gives  rise  to  two  different  kinds  of  molecules  on  decomposition,  be
brought  into  equilibrium  with  its  dissociation  products  ;  and  between
the  partial  pressure  p  of  the  undissociated  molecules,  and  that  of  the
dissociation  products,  which  may  be  p'  for  both,  let  there  exist  the
relation

Now,  let  one  of  the  dissociation  products  be  added  in  excess  till  its

CHAP.  II  CHEMICAL  STATICS HOMOGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  443

pressure  is  p0,  and  let  the  increase  which  p  experiences  be  TT.  Then
the  partial  pressure  of  the  other  decomposition  product  will  sink  to
(p'  -  ?r),  and  the  pressure  of  the  first  decomposition  product  will
amount  to  p0  +  p'  -  TT.  The  calculation  of  IT  is  obtained  by  the  law
of  mass-action,  from  the  equation

(P'  -  *-)(Po  +  P  -  T)  =  K(P  +  *•)•

By  comparing  this  equation  with  the  preceding  formula,  it  will  be.
found  that  TT  must  always  have  a  positive  value.  That  is,  admixture
of  one  of  the  decomposition  products,  at  constant  volume,  tends  to  diminish
the  degree  of  dissociation.  This  is  a  very  important  phenomenon.  We
shall  make  repeated  application  of  this  rule.

Moreover,  research  verifies  this  conclusion.  When  Friedel  added
in  excess  one  of  the  decomposition  products  of  methyl-ether-hydro-
chloride,  the  quantity  of  the  latter  substance  increased.  The  dis-
sociation of  phosphorus  pentachloride  diminishes  when  phosphorus
trichloride  is  added  in  excess.1  The  determination  of  the  vapour
density  of  ammonia  by  the  method  of  the  displacement  of  air,  gives
higher  values  when  ammonia  or  hydrochloric  is  used  as  the  packing
gas  2  [instead  of  air  or  some  indifferent  gas].  We  will  consider  later
several  ways  in  which  this  law  is  indirectly  verified.

If  the  admixture  of  the  dissociation  product  occurs  with  increase
of  volume,  then  it  also  acts  as  a  diluting  agent,  and  hence  it  occasions
an  increase  of  dissociation.  Therefore,  according  to  the  special  condi-
tions, on  the  whole,  there  may  result  an  increase  or  a  decrease  of  the
dissociation.  Thus,  e.g.  if  any  selected  volume  of  gaseous  phosphorus
pentachloride  is  mixed  with  another  selected  volume  of  chlorine,  or  of
phosphorus  trichloride,  so  that  the  resulting  mixture  occupies  a  volume
which  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  two  volumes,  then,  as  can  be  easily
shown,  the  condition  of  dissociation  remains  unchanged,  if  the  pressure  of
the  added  chlorine  is-  exactly  as  great  as  its  partial  pressure  in  the  penta-
chloride.

The  Frequency  of  Dissociation  Phenomena. — Dissociation
phenomena  are  much  more  common  than  was  formerly  supposed  to  be
the  case ;  and  no  doubt  can  be  entertained  that,  under  suitable  con-
ditions of  temperature  and  pressure,  not  only  all  chemical  compounds,
but  also  all  poly-atomic  molecules  would  be  reduced  to  a  state  of
decomposition  more  or  less  considerable.  Thus,  the  di-atomic  molecule
of  iodine,  at  high  temperature  and  low  pressure,  decomposes  into  its
two  atoms,  and  a  similar  thing  would  doubtless  happen  in  the  case  of
other  di-atomic  gases,  like  oxygen,  nitrogen,  etc.,  although  no  such
decomposition  could  be  established  at  1700°,  and  at  atmospheric
pressure.3

1  Wiirtz,  C.  R.,76.  60(1873).

2  Neuberg,  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  24.  2543  (1891).
3  C.  Langer  and  v.  Meyer,  Pyrochem.  Unters.,  Brunswick  (Braunschweig),  1885.

444  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  ill

Sulphur,  the  vapour  density  of  which  has  been  investigated  recently
by  H.  Biltz,1  and  Biltz  and  Preuner,2  at  temperatures  varying  from
468-606°,  behaves  exceptionally  ;  the  vapour  density  falls  with  decrease
in  the  temperature  and  only  gives  values  agreeing  with  the  formula  S2
at  high  temperatures.  This  may  apparently  be  explained  by  the
assumption  of  molecules  S8  formed  by  vaporisation  of  sulphur  which
partially  decompose  according  to  the  equation

and  that  the  S4  molecules  simultaneously  decompose  according  to  the
equation

therefore  the  sulphur  vapour  consists  of  three  kinds  of  molecules  S8,
S4,  S9,  the  last  of  which  gains  at  the  expense  of  the  former  on  decrease
of  pressure  or  increase  of  temperature.  The  equation  of  the  dis-
sociation isotherm  of  sulphur  vapour  is  consequently  given  by  the
formula

KiPi  =  P22> and  K2?2  =  Ps2>

where  p1?  p9,  p3  show  the  partial  pressures  of  the  three  kinds  of
molecules,  Kj  and  K9  the  dissociation  constant  of  the  two  reactions.
Sulphur  is  accordingly  an  example  of  "  dissociation  in  two  stages."  The
present  author  has  found  by  means  of  the  apparatus  described  on  p.
254  that  at  1900-2000°  the  S9  molecules  are  broken  up  into  atoms  to
the  extent  of  about  45%.

The  Decomposition  of  Carbon  Dioxide.  —  As  a  further
illustration  of  a  reaction  progressing  in  the  gaseous  condition,  we  will
consider  the  decomposition  of  carbon  dioxide,  which  is  of  great
practical  interest,  and  which  occurs  in  the  sense  of  the  equation

2CO9^±09  +  2CO.

In  a  limited  sense  this  is  no  [true]  dissociation,  because,  in  order  to
make  the  decomposition  possible,  here  two  molecules  of  the  compound
which  is  to  be  decomposed  must  act  together.  If  we  denote  the
partial  pressures  of  the  three  preceding  molecular  species  respectively
by  p15  p9,  p3,  then,  as  a  direct  result  of  the  law  of  mass-action,  we  have
the  relation

KPi2  =

If  one  has  determined  the  degree  of  decomposition  at  a  definite
temperature  for  any  one  pressure  by  means  of  a  vapour  density
method,  then  it  is  possible  to  calculate  the  degree  of  decomposition
for  all  pressures  by  means  of  this  formula.  Thus  it  is  shown  by
Deville  that  at  3000°,  and  at  atmospheric  pressure,  about  40  per  cent  of
1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  2.  920  (1888).  2  Ibid.,  39.  323  (1902).

CHAP. II

CHEMICAL  STATICS HOMOGENEOUS  SYSTEMS

445

the  carbon  dioxide  is  decomposed ;  hence  by  the  aid  of  these  data,  by
the  preceding  equation,  it  is  calculated  that  at  this  temperature  and
at  O'OOl  of  an  atmosphere,  94  per  cent,  and  at  100  atmospheres  10
per  cent  [of  the  COJ  would  decompose.

As  will  be  seen  in  the  last  book,  in  the  application  of  the  mechani-
cal theory  of  heat  to  the  condition  of  chemical  equilibrium,  the
variation  of  the  equilibrium  constant  K  is  so  intimately  connected
with  the  heat  developed  in  the  reaction,  that  one  magnitude  can  be
calculated  from  the  other.  Now  the  heat  developed  by  the  combus-
tion of  carbon  monoxide  can  be  measured  at  the  temperature  of  a
room  ;  and  from  the  difference  of  the  specific  heats  of  the  reacting
gases,  one  can  calculate  this  quantity  for  all  other  temperatures.  Thus
there  is  no  difficulty  in  ascertaining  the  degree  of  the  decomposition
of  carbon  dioxide  under  all  possible  conditions  of  temperature  and
pressure.

The  number  of  molecules  of  carbon' dioxide  out  of  100  molecules
which  would  so  decompose  is  given  in  the  following  table : —

Temp. Pressure  =  0-001

o-oi

O-l

1 10

100  Atm.

1000 07

0-3

0-13

0-06

0-03

0-015

1500 7

3-5

1-7

0-8

0'4

0-2

2000 40

12-5

8

4

3

2-5

2500 81

60

40

19

9

4-0

3000 94

80

60

40

21

10

3500 96

85

70

53

32

15

4000 97

90

80

63

45

25

This  table  was  calculated  by  Le  Chatelier.1  Some  remarkable
deductions,  which  are  interesting  from  a  practical  standpoint,  can  be
drawn  from  these  figures,  viz  : —

1 .  The Smelting Furnace.  —  The temperature only reaches
about  2000°,  and  the  partial  pressure  of  carbon  dioxide  only  amounts
to  about 0'2 of an atmosphere; now  the carbon  dioxide  is  decom-
posed only  to  about  5  per  cent,  whereby  the  capacity  of  the  furnace
for  work  is  somewhat  diminished,  though  not  very  much.

2.  Illuminating Flames. — The  incandescent  zone  in  which the
combustion of  the  separated  carbon  takes  place appears to  have  a
temperature of about 2000° in ordinary flames, and a somewhat
higher  temperature  in  the  regenerative  burners. On  the  other  hand,
on  account  of  the  large  quantity  of  hydrogen  in  the ordinary  illu-
minating material,  the  partial  pressure  [of  the  carbon  dioxide]  sinks
below  O'l  of  an  atmosphere. The  extent  of  the  decomposition  may
be  more  than  10  per  cent,  and  the  temperature  of  the  flame  may  fall  the

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  2.  782  (1888).

446  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

same  amount.  But  the  illuminating  power,  which  rises  more  quickly
than  the  temperature  in  proportion  to  it.  is  also  much  more  strongly
diminished  than  the  temperature.

3.  Explosives.  —  The  temperature  of  combustion  rarely  rises  above
2500°,  and  never  reaches  3000°.  Inasmuch  as  the  pressure  of  the
carbon  dioxide  is  here  estimated  in  thousands  of  atmospheres,  dis-
sociation has  no  influence.

Decomposition  of  Water  Vapour.  —  The  decomposition  of  water
in  the  sense  of  the  equation

is  of  equal  importance  with  that  of  carbon  dioxide,  and  can  be  followed
by  exactly  the  same  formula.

The  dissociation  of  water  vapour,  as  Helmholtz  showed,  can  be
calculated  from  the  electromotive  force  necessary  for  the  reversible
decomposition  of  water,  but  more  precisely  by  the  following  method
given  by  the  author.1

Boudouard,2  and  especially  Hahn,3  have  studied  the  reaction

CO  +  H20  =  C02  +  H2  ;

it  appeared,  for  example,  that  at  1000°  the  constant  of  the  law  of  mass-
action  4

[CO|H20]

~

is  1  '6.  If  we  represent  the  dissociation  constant  of  water  vapour  and
carbon  dioxide  at  the  same  temperature  by  Kx  and  K.,,  their  degree
of  dissociation  with  x  and  y,  we  have

K  _  [H2]2[02]  _ x3

Vl [H2°P ~2v(lx)2~

where  v  is  the  volume  in  which  a  mol  of  water  is  contained,  and
consequently

[0  ]  =  x  , [H  1  =  x, [H9O1  =  *  ~x  .
2  v'  v'  v

Similarly,  for  carbon  dioxide  we  have

K  _[CO]tOs]_ f

J-i-o  —

[C02]2 3v(l-y)» '

(3)

1  See  here  G.  Premier,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  42.  50  (1903).

2  Theses,  Paris,  1901.

3  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  44.  513  (1903).

4  Here  and  in  the  following  the  concentration of  each  kind  of  molecule  will be
expressed  by  its  chemical  formula  enclosed  in  square  brackets.

CHAP.  II  CHEMICAL  STATICS HOMOGENEOUS SYSTEMS  447

In  the  equilibrium  expressed  by  equation  (1),  a  certain  amount  of
free  oxygen  is  always  present,  and  this  must  be  in  equilibrium  with
water  vapour  in  agreement  with  equation  (2),  and  with  carbon  dioxide
in  agreement  with  equation  (3).  Hence,  if  we  divide  equation  (2)  by
(3)  as  applied  to  the  same  system  (1),  the  concentration  of  oxygen
disappears  and  we  obtain

E2_K9_y3(l-x)2
K2 x3(l-yf

Using  the  value  of  K  given  above,  this  equation  shows  that  at
1000°  the  dissociation  of  water  vapour  is  0'73  times  that  of  carbon
dioxide.

Until  more  exact  measurements  are  obtainable,  the  dissociation  of
water  vapour  at  higher  temperatures  may  be  approximately  calculated
by  multiplying  the  numbers  in  the  table,  p.  445,  by  0*73.  Hence  the
practical  conclusions  drawn  with  regard  to  carbon  dioxide  hold  also
for  water  vapour.

Equilibrium  in  Homogeneous  Liquid  Systems — Esterifica
tion. — The  dependence  of  the  equilibrium  upon  the  relative  quanti-
ties of  the  reacting  substances  is  the  same  with  liquid  systems  as  with
gaseous  ones ;  only  here  we  do  not  have  to  take  account  of  the  partial
pressure,  but  rather  of  the  concentration  of  the  reacting  substances ;
and  by  this  is  meant  the  number  of  g.-mol  contained  in  1  litre.

The  number  of  special  cases  which  have  been  investigated  here  is
very  large.  This  is  to  be  explained  by  the  following  reasons :
firstly,  the  study  of  the  chemical  equilibrium  of  a  liquid  system  is
much  easier  for  the  experimenter  in  many  ways  than  the  study  of  a
gaseous  system ;  and  secondly,  the  decompositions  which  occur  in
liquid  systems  are  very  important,  both  in  the  usage  of  the  laboratory,
and  also  in  the  economy  of  nature.

We  begin  with  esterification,  a  reaction  to  which  reference  has
recently  been  marie  (p.  426) ;  the  thorough  study  of  this  by  Berthelot
and  Pean  de  St.  Gilles l  has  had  great  influence  in  defining  the  con-
ception of  chemical  equilibrium.

If  one  mixes  any  organic  acid,  as  acetic  acid,  with  an  alcohol,  as
ethyl  alcohol,  there  is  formed  water,  and  also  the  corresponding  ester ;
the  latter  results  from  the  combination  of  the  positive  component
of  the  alcohol  with  the  negative  component  of  the  acid ;  thus —

CHgCOOH  +  C2H5OH  =  CH3COO-C2H5  +  H20

Acetic  acid  Alcohol  Ethyl  acetate Water.

This  reaction,  which  is  comparable  with  the  neutralisation  of  an
1  Ann.  chim.phys.,  65.  and  66.  (1862),  and  68.  (1863).

448  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

acid  by  a  base  at  ordinary  temperatures,  progresses  very  slowly  ;
several  days  elapse  before  the  state  of  equilibrium  is  approximately
established,  and  the  reaction  comes  to  a  standstill.  If  this  liquid
system  is  heated  in  a  sealed  glass  tube  at  100°,  the  state  of
equilibrium  is  reached  after  a  few  hours.  The  reaction  never  advances
to  a  completion,  i.e.  until  all  of  the  [original]  reacting  substances  are
consumed,  but  only  to  such  a  point  that  all  of  the  four  reacting
substances  stand  in  equilibrium  with  each  other.

It  can  be  easily  ascertained  how  far  the  reaction  has  proceeded
at  any  moment,  by  titrating  the  acetic  acid  which  is  present,  or
which  has  been  produced ;  on  account  of  the  slowness  of  the  reaction
no  marked  displacement  of  the  momentary  condition  need  be  feared
during  the  operation  (of  titration).

If  equivalent  quantities  are  allowed  to  react  on  each  other,
whether  we  start  with  1  g.-mol.  of  acetic  acid  (60  g.)  and  1  g.-mol.
of  alcohol  (46  g.),  or  with  1  g.-mol.  of  methyl  acetate  (88  g.)  and
1  g.-mol.  of  water  (18  g.) ;  in  both  cases,  after  the  lapse  of  a  suffi-
ciently long  time,  there  results  a  homogeneous  system,  which  has  the
following  composition,  viz.  : —

J-  mol.  acetic  acid  +  J  mol.  alcohol  +  f  mol.  water  +  §  mol.  ester.

This  ratio  of  the  relative  quantities  will  remain  constant,  even  if
one  should  wait  seventeen  years.  Moreover,  this  ratio  changes
very  slightly  with  the  temperature  ;  the  reason  for  this  will  be  given
later,  Book  IV.  Chap.  III.

Let  v  be  the  volume  of  the  preceding  reaction  mixture,  and  let
it  be  made  up  of  1  g.-mol.  of  acetic  acid,  with  m  g.-mol  of  alcohol,
and  n  g.-mol.  of  water  (or  of  the  ester;  it  is  indifferen  rhich,  for
the  form  of  the  equation).  Then  in  the  condition  of  equilibrium,  if
x  denotes  the  number  of  g.-mol.  of  alcohol  decomposed  (and  of
acetic  acid  also,  of  course),  there  exists  the  relation —

1  -  x)(m  -  x)  _  ,  ,(n  +  x)x

^2~  V2 _

here  k  denotes  the  velocity  with  which  the  alcohol  and  the  acid  unite,
and  k'  the  velocity  with  which  the  ester  and  the  water  unite  with
each  other.  The  denominator  common  to  both  sides  of  the  equation
can  be  neglected.

As  in  the  preceding  special  case,  let  m  =  1  ;  n  =  0  ;  and  x  =  f  ;
then  we  will  have

9  =  T~'
i.e.  the  constant  of  equilibrium  becomes

CHAP. II

CHEMICAL  STATICS HOMOGENEOUS  SYSTEMS

449

By  introducing this  value  into  the  general equation, and then
solving  it  for  x,  we  obtain  as  the  quantity  of  ester  formed  —

_
-

+  1)  +  n  -

m+l

5(m2-m+  l)  +  8n(m  +  l)  +  n2J-

And  this  simplified  for  n  =  0,  becomes

2/  ,—

x  =  s(m  ^-

The  equation  is  very  satisfactorily  verified  by  experiment,  as  was
first  shown  by  Guldberg  and  Waage,  and  later  and  very  thoroughly
by  van't  Hoff.1  Thus  Berthelot  and  Pean  de  St.  Gilles,  allowing  1
mol  of  acid  to  act  upon  m  mol  of  alcohol,  found  that  the  following
quantities  of  ester  were  formed,  the  latter  being  denoted  by  x  : —

m

x  Obs.

x  Calc.

0-05

0-05

0-049

0-18

0-171

0-171

0-33

0-293

0-311

0-50

0-414

0-423

[1-00

0-667

0-667]

2-00

0-858

0-845

8-00

0-966

0-945

Results  which  were  fully  as  satisfactory  were  obtained  by  calcula-
tion for  any  casual  quantities  of  water  or  ester.  It  is  a  very  important
and  significant  result  of  the  law  of  mass-action,  that  such  apparently
complicated  ratios  as  were  found  by  Berthelot  and  Pean  de  St.  Gilles
in  their  experimental  researches,  could  be  expressed  in  such  simple
formulae.

One  learns,  moreover,  that  by  the  action  of  a  large  quantity  of
acetic  acid  upon  a  little  alcohol,  or  by  the  action  of  a  large  quantity  of
alcohol  upon  a  little  acid,  the  esterification  is  almost  complete  ;  and
conversely,  by  the  action  of  a  large  quantity  of  water  upon  a  little
ester,  the  latter  is  almost  entirely  decomposed.

Just  as  in  the  formation  of  esters  from  alcohol  and  an  organic  acid,
the  law  of  mass -action  is  applicable  in  the  reaction  of  hydrochloric
acid  on  alcohol  with  formation  of  ethyl  chloride  and  water ; 2  and  con-
sideration of  the  equilibrium  produced  by  action  of  sulphuric  acid  on
water  has  recently  led  to  remarkable  results.3

The  Influence  of  the  Nature  of  the  Reacting  Com-
ponents.— After  it  had  been  ascertained,  as  already  shown,  that  the

1  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  1O.  669  (1877).

2  Cain,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  12.  751(1893).

3  Zaitschek,  ibid.,  24.  1  (1897).

450  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

action  of  acids  on  alcohols  could  be  expressed  in  mass  and  number,
this  question  at  once  arose — viz.  how  does  the  reaction-capacity  depend
upon  the  nature  of  the  particular  acid,  and  the  particular  alcohol  used  ?
We  are  indebted  to  Menschutkin l  for  attacking  this  problem  in  a
very  extended  research.  He  determined  the  limit  of  esterification,  on
bringing  together  equi-molecular  quantities  of  the  most  various  acids
and  alcohols ;  and  at  the  same  time  he  directed  the  research  so  as  to
determine,  at  least  approximately,  the  velocity  with  which  the  limit-
ing state  was  reached.  Of  the  numerous  details  of  his  research,  we
will  merely  state  that  in  general —

In homologous series,  the relative quantities of  ester  produced

increased  with  the  molecular  weight.
In  using  the  same  acids,  secondary  alcohols  afforded  less  ester  than

primary  alcohols,  and  tertiary  alcohols  less  ester  than  secondary

alcohols.
There  was  no  simple  connection  observable  between  the  limit  of

esterification  and  the  velocity  with  which  this  was  reached.

The  Dissociation  of  Esters. — As  Menschutkin  observed  in  his
researches,  in  using  tertiary  alcohols,  the  ester  produced  would  de-
compose [when  dissociated]  into  an  acid  and  a  hydrocarbon.  This
reaction  was  investigated  later  by  Konowalow,2  who  allowed  acids  to
react  upon  amylene  [pentene] ;  in  this  way  it  appeared  that  the  reaction
concerned  a  dissociation  phenomenon,  which  proceeded  according  to
the  scheme

CH3COO(C5Hn)  =  CHgCOOH  +  C5H10.

The  reaction  advances  with  marked  velocity  only  in  the  presence
of  a  sufficient  quantity  of  free  acid  ;  the  pure  ester  is  stable,  even  at
quite  high  temperatures ;  and  the  addition  of  acid  at  once  occasions
dissociation  which  then  advances  to  a  definite  limit.  The  same  limit
is  reached  when  one  starts  with  free  amylene  and  free  acid.

Here  we  meet  catalytic  reactions  for  the  first  time,  i.e.  cases  where
the  presence  of  a  certain  substance  will  strongly  accelerate  the  progress
of  a  reaction,  which  can  take  place  without  it.  As  the  law  of  mass-
action  was  applicable  to  this,  therefore  the  writer,  together  with
Hohmann,3  attempted  to  prove  in  a  more  extended  way  just  how  the
simple  relations  which  were  anticipated  were  obtained.

If  1  mol  of  acid  is  added  to  1  mol  of  amylene,  then,  according
to  the  law  of  mass-action,  we  should  obtain

(a  -  x)(l  -  x)  _  y

~^T

where  x  denotes  the  ester  produced,  Y  the  volume  of  the  reaction

1  Ann.  chim.phys.  [5],  2O.  229  (1880)  ;  23.  14  (1881)  ;  30.  81  (1883).
a  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  1.  63  (1887)  ;  2.  6  and  380  (1888).
3  Ibid.,  11.  352  (1893).

CHEMICAL  STATICS HOMOGENEOUS  SYSTEMS

451

mixture,  and  K  the  coefficient  of  equilibrium.  The  figures  in  the
following  table  were  obtained  in  this  way,  viz.  the  amylene  and
trichlor-acetic  acid  were  held  in  a  sealed  glass  tube  at  100°  for  a
sufficiently  long  time  (some  hours,  up  to  a  day)  ;  the  quantity  of  ester
produced  was  found  by  the  decrease  in  the  acidity  titration : —

a

V

x  Found

K

x  Calc.

2-15

361

0762

0-00120

0-762

4-12

595

0-814

0-00127

0-821

4-48

638

0-820

0-00126

0-826

6'63

894

0-838

0-00125

0-844

6-80

915

0-839

0-00126

0-845

7-13

954

0-855

0-00112

0-846

7-67

1018

0-855

0*00113

0-848

9-12

1190

0-857

0-00111

0-852

9-51

1237

0-863

0-00111

0-853

14-15

1787

0-873

0-00107

0-861

By  making  K  =  0'001205,  and  then  solving  the  preceding  equation
for  x,  by  the  help  of  this  mean  value,  we  obtain

a  +  KV-

KV)2-4a ;

and  by  this  means  we  obtain  the  figures  given  in  the  last  column,
which  coincide  remarkably  well  with  the  results  of  observation.

As  is  seen,  the  quantity  of  ester  produced  varies  only  inconsider-
ably, whether  4  or  14  mol  of  amylene  are  added  to  1  mol  of  acid.
One  might  infer  at  first  glance  that  the  esterification  could  be  carried
as  far  as  desired  by  a  sufficient  excess  of  amylene,  just  as  an  acid  can
be  completely  esterified  by  an  excess  of  alcohol  (p.  449).

But  this  is  not  the  case ;  the  esterification  of  amylene  and  an  acid
is  different  from  that  of  an  alcohol  and  an  acid  ;  for  in  the  former  case
only  one  molecular  species  is  found,  viz.  the  ester ;  but  in  the  latter
case  there  are  two,  viz.  the  ester  and  the  water.

In  the  formula  of  equilibrium  for  the  first  reaction,  the  volume  of
the  reaction  mixture  does  not  disappear  as  it  does  in  the  second  case,
which  thus  shows  a  different  behaviour.

Theoretically  one  could  add  an  infinite  quantity  of  amylene  to  a
limited  quantity  of  acid,  without  occasioning  the  esterification  of  more
than  88  per  cent  of  the  acid ;  but  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  acid  is  soon
used  up  on  account  of  the  difficulty  in  purifying  the  amylene.

Equilibrium  in  Solutions. — When  one  of  the  pure  substances
in  a  homogeneous  liquid  mixture  is  present  in  great  excess,  we  have
a  solution.  The  great  importance  which  attaches  to  those  reactions
which  occur  in  water  solutions,  both  in  nature — as  in  plant  and

452  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

animal  organisms — and  also  in  the  role  played  in  the  analytical  opera-
tions of  the  chemist, — demands  a  particularly  thorough  description  of
the  state  of  equilibrium  which  is  established  between  substances  which
are  capable  of  mutual  reaction  when  existing  in  solution.

We  will  first  consider  those  cases  where  the  solvent  is  indifferent,
i.e.  where  none  of  the  molecular  species  which  take  part  in  the  reaction
are  from  that  ingredient  which  is  present  in  great  excess,  viz.  the
solvent.  It  will  be  shown  later  that  the  ultimate  participation  of  the
solvent  in  the  reaction  is  not  essential  for  the  form  of  the  conditions
of  equilibrium.

At  first,  great  difficulty  was  found  in  getting  an  insight  into  the
condition  of  equilibrium  which  prevails  -in  a  solution.  The  methods
which  were  applicable  in  studying  the  action  of  iodine  on  hydrogen,
or  of  acetic  acid  on  alcohol,  and  which  depended  upon  the  direct
analytical  determination  of  one  of  the  molecular  species  taking  part
in  the  reaction,  are  usually  out  of  the  question  here,  because  the  point
of  equilibrium  is  quickly  displaced  by  the  removal  of  one  of  the  re-
acting molecular  species.

Thus,  for  example,  if  one  wished  to  ascertain  the  state  of
equilibrium  of  such  a  reaction  as  the  following,  taking  place  in  water,
between  the  following  reacting  substances,  viz.  : —

,  K2C03  +  2CH3COOH  =  2CH3COOK  +  C02  +  H20 ;

and  if  he  wished  to  ascertain  it  in  this  way,  viz.  by  removing  the
free  C02  by  a  stream  of  air,  and  thus  determining  it  analytically,  he
would  obtain  false  results ;  because  during  this  operation  [i.e.  of
removing  the  C02  by  a  stream  of  air]  the  condition  of  equilibrium
would  be  displaced,  in  the  sense  of  the  equation,  from  left  to  right.

Thus  students  were  limited  almost  exclusively  to  physical  methods
of  determination  which,  like  the  vapour -density  determination  in  a
gaseous  system,  can  be  performed  without  changing  the  composition
of  the  reaction  mixture ;  and  thus  it  is  only  recently  that  the  investi-
gators came  into  the  possession  of  a  method  which  is  almost  as
universally  applicable  for  solutions  as  the  vapour  density  determina-
tion is  for  gas  mixtures.  It  is  necessary  that  one  should  employ,
according  to  the  given  case,  certain  physical  properties  of  the  solution,
such  as  the  power  of  optical  rotation,  the  heat  developed  in  pre-
paring the  solution,  the  refraction  of  light,  the  absorption  of  light,  the
colour,  etc.,  in  order  to  infer  the  composition  of -the  solution  ;  and  this
should  be  preceded  by  familiarising  one's  self  with  the  dependence  of
the  property  in  question  upon  the  composition  of  the  system  as  well
as  possible.

The  Distribution  of  Hydrochloric  Acid  between  Alkaloids.

— As  an  example  of  an  investigation  of  the  sort  just  referred  to,
and  one  which  was  conducted  with  great  skill  and  also  with  very

CHAP.  II

CHEMICAL  STATICS HOMOGENEOUS  SYSTEMS

453

significant  theoretical  developments,  let  us  cite  the  results  of  a
paper  communicated  by  J.  H.  Jellet1  on  the  distribution  of  hydro-
chloric acid  between  alkaloids  in  alcoholic  solution.  It  appears  that
Jellet  made  use  of  this  investigation  in  the  correct  formulation  and
application  of  the  law  of  mass-action  ;  and  although  this  was  subsequent
to  the  work  of  Guldberg  and  Waage,  yet  it  was  done  independently.

The  question  which  Jellet  proposed  to  solve  was  this,  viz. — Such
alkaloids,  as  quinine  and  codeine  in  alcoholic  solution,  combine  with
1  mol  of  hydrochloric  acid ;  but  what  will  be  the  distribution  when
two  alkaloids  are  present  in  the  solution,  but  when  the  acid  present  is
not  sufficient  to  saturate  the  total  quantity  of  alkaloids  1

The  physical  property  which  was  employed  in  ascertaining  the
molecular  condition  of  the  reacting  substances  when  in  equilibrium,
was  their  optical  rotatory  power  when  in  solution.  This,  for  quinine
dissolved  in  alcohol,  was  2*97,  for  codeine,  2 '63.  By  the  addition  of
equi-molecular  quantities  of  hydrochloric  acid  these  values  increased
1-344  fold  and  1'909  fold  respectively.

Moreover,  since  these  substances  do  not  mutually  influence  each
other's  rotatory  power,  when  in  the  same  solution,  except  when  they
react  chemically  on  each  other  at  the  same  time,  therefore  it  is  possible
to  draw  some  conclusion  regarding  the  mutual  action  of  the  dissolved
substances  from  the  rotatory  power  of  the  solution.

Thus  in  a  definite  volume  v  of  the  solution,  let  n  mol.  of  HC1  be
added  to  ax  mol.  of  quinine  (Ch),  and  a2  mol.  of  codeine  (Cod).  Then
when  there  are  produced  x  mol.  of  quinine  "  hydrochloride  "  (ChHCl),
and  accordingly  n  -  x  mol.  of  codeine  "  hydrochloride,"  the  observed
rotation  a  of  the  plane  of  polarisation  of  light  will  be —

a  =  (al-  x)DCh  +  (a2  -  [n  -  x])Dcod  +  xDChHCi  +  (n  -  x)DCo(mci.

The  values  of  D  here  denote  respectively  the  molecular  rotatory  power
for  the  compound  annexed  as  the  sub -index.  By  means  of  this
equation,  the  values  of  x  may  be  expressed  in  only  those  terms  which
can  be  directly  measured.

The  observations  gave  the  following  results  : —

(a2-[n-x])x

a,

ag

(ai-xXn-x)

100  .

104

70-7

42-7

1-91

100

104

91-9

55

2-08

100

104

112-4

66

2-10

100

104

130-3

73

2-02

Mean 2'03

1  Trans.  Irish  Acad.,  25.  371  (1875).

454  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  in

The  reaction  equation,

Ch  +  CodHCq±ChHCl  +  Cod,
corresponds  to  the  formula  of  equilibrium —

_  (a2  -  [n-Lx])x

J-\.  —  7  \  /  \ )

(Sj  -  x)(n  -  x)

since  the  active  masses  of  the  four  molecular  species  participating  in
the  reaction  are  respectively —

n  -  x  x  a9  -  (n  -  x)

- ,  -,  and  -'.

v  v  v

CodHCl ChHCl  Cod

The  volume  v  of  the  solution  can  be  discarded,  i.e.  the  condition
of  equilibrium  does  not  change  when  the  volume  of  the  solution  is
largely  increased  by  the  addition  of  the  solvent,  alcohol.  And,  in
fact,  in  all  the  mixtures  observed  above,  the  rotation  angle  was  pro-
portional to  the  concentration,  and  this  could  not  have  happened
unless  the  condition  of  equilibrium  remained  unchanged  with  the
dilution.

The  coefficient  of  equilibrium  K  was  calculated  as  in  the  last
column,  and  showed  itself  to  be  a  constant  as  far  as  was  possible  with
the  errors  of  observation,  whicli  were  not  inconsiderable.

In  the  same  way,  Jellet  studied  the  distribution  of  hydrochloric
acid  between  codeine  and  brucine ;  the  rotatory  power  of  the  latter  is
1'66,  and  it  increases  1*291  fold  by  neutralisation  with  HC1.  He  also
studied  the  distribution  of  HC1  between  brucine  [Bru]  and  quinine.
The  following  constants  of  equilibrium  were  found  for  these  various
reactions : —

K

Ch  +CodHCl  =  ChHCl  +Cod  .  .  .  2'03
Cod  +  BruHCl  =  CodHCl  +  Bru  .  .  .  1-58
Bru  +  ChHCl  =BruHCl  +  Ch  .  .  .  0'32

From  the  theory  we  can  develop  a  characteristic  relation  which
must  exist  between  the  three  constants  of  equilibrium,  and  which
leads  at  the  same  time  to  a  deeper  insight  into  the  mechanism
of  the  preceding  reaction  and  also  of  related  reactions.  The  hydro-
chloric acid  is  almost,  but  not  quite  entirely,  combined  with  the
alkaloids,  a  very  slight  quantity  remaining  free.  This  amounts  to  the
statement  that  the  alkaloidal  hydrochlorides  [as  substituted  ammonium
chlorides]  are  dissociated,  at  least  in  traces,  into  free  alkaloid  and
hydrochloric  acid.

If  KJ  denotes  the  dissociation  constant  of  quinine  hydrochloride,
and  K2  that  of  codeine  hydrochloride,  and  if  e  denotes  the  (ver}r
small)  quantity  of  hydrochloric  acid  remaining  free,  then  according

CHAP.  II  CHEMICAL  STATICS  -  HOMOGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  455

to  the  law  of  dissociation,  as  already  stated  for  gases,  and  which,
according  to  the  law  of  mass-action,  holds  good  of  course  also  for  sub-
stances existing  in  solution,  we  will  have  —

and

(n  -  x)VK2  =  e(a2  -  [n  -  x]).

Then  by  division  we  obtain  —

04  ~Jn  ~  ^  =  K  =  —  2.
(ax  -  x)(n  -  x)  K/

That  is,  the  constant  of  equilibrium  is  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the  dissocia-
tion constants  of  the  two  compounds  between  which  the  hydrochloric  acid  is
divided  (see  also  p.  446).

Other  things  being  equal,  the  quinine  hydrochloride  is  dissociated
2  !03  times  as  much  as  the  codeine  hydrochloride.  Now  this  rela-
tion also  holds  good  for  other  reactions.  If  we  denote  the  dissocia-
tion constant  of  brucine  hydrochloride  by  K3,  then  the  product  of  the
three  constants  of  equilibrium  should  be  —

^2 K? KI  =  ,
K1'K2'K3

As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  find  that  —

2-03  x  1-58  x  0-32  =  1-026.

Jellet  previously  obtained  this  result  in  a  somewhat  different  way.

Obviously,  in  all  cases  in  which  the  salts  of  an  optically  active  base
have  different  rotatory  power  to  the  base,  it  may  be  studied  in  a
similar  way,  so  that  the  chemical  equilibrium  may  be  found  even
when  the  second  base  added  is  optically  inactive.  This  is  a  good
method  of  comparing  any  bases,  as  was  shown  by  Skraup.1

Dissociation  in  Solutions.  —  In  order  to  investigate  the  con-
dition of  equilibrium,  when  it  concerns  a  reaction  which  involves
a  change  in  the  number  of  molecules,  as  e.g.  a  dissociation,  very
commonly  one  may  make  use  of  a  method  which  amounts  to  the  same
as  the  determination  of  the  vapour  density  of  a  gaseous  system.  The
depresssion  of  the  freezing-point,  of  the  vapour  pressure,  and  of  the
solubility,  experienced  by  a  solvent  on  the  addition  of  soluble  sub-
stances, are  each  directly  proportional  to  the  number  of  molecules  of
the  dissolved  substance.  This  has  been  shown  by  the  new  theory
of  solutions  (see  p.  486)  ;  and  therefore  very  generally,  by  the
determination  of  these  magnitudes,  one  may  learn  the  state  of  equi-
librium of  those  reactions,  the  progress  of  which  is  identified  with  a

1  Monatshefte  fur  Chemie,  15.  775  (1895).

456  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  ill

change  in  the  number  of  molecules.  This  method  has,  in  fact,  already
given  extended  information  concerning  the  dissociation  phenomena  in
solutions  ;  but  unfortunately  it  is  not  sufficiently  accurate  in  all  cases,
because  measurements  of  this  sort  are  uncertain  at  small  concentra-
tions, and  at  higher  concentration  they  are  disturbed  by  the  irregu-
larities already  referred  to.

The  writer1  succeeded  in  showing,  in  an  indirect  way,  viz.  by
the  study  of  the  distribution  of  acids  between  water,  and  benzene
or  chloroform,  that  the  equation  of  the  isotherm  of  dissociation  holds
good,  in  the  broadest  sense,  for  the  decomposition  of  double  mole-
cules into  single  ones.  Thus  if  c  denotes  the  concentration  of  the
double  molecule  of  the  acid,  and  c:  that  of  the  normal  [single]  mole-
cule, then  it  was  shown  that  —

Kc  =  c/, or  KV(1  -  a)  -  4a2,

where  a  denotes  the  degree  of  dissociation,  and  V  the  volume  of  the
solution  containing  2  g.-mol.  of  the  acid.

The  preceding  formula,  of  which  much  use  will  subsequently  be
made,  can  be  considerably  simplified  when  the  [dissolved]  substance  in
question  is  either  very  highly  dissociated,  or  when  it  is  only  very  slightly
dissociated.  In  the  former  case  a  is  almost  constant,  and  nearly  equal
to  1,  and  we  will  have

V(l  -  a)  =  constant  ;
i.e.  the  concentration  of  the  undissociated  molecules  (  =  ~y—  \  at  extreme

dissociation,  is  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  total  concentration  I  =  —  }.

In  the  second  case,  a  is  small  as  compared  with  1,  and  therefore
^r--  constant;  i.e.  the  concentration  of  the  dissociated  molecules  (^),  at

very  slight  dissociation,  is  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  total
concentration  (  —  —  ^=.\

Such  simple  laws  as  these  assist  greatly  in  the  general  treatment
of  the  subject.

Esterification  in  Benzene.  —  The  reaction  described  on  p.  450,
viz.  the  esterification  of  amylene  and  acids,  was  regularly  traced  out  as
the  reacting  substances  were  dissolved  in  benzene.  When  the  concentra-
tion is  not  too  low,  under  these  conditions  the  acid  is  bi-molecular,
i.e.  the  reaction  here  progresses  according  to  the  scheme

S.2  +  2A  =  2E,

1  Zeitfchr.  physik.  Chem.,  80  HO  (1891).

CHEMICAL  STATICS HOMOGENEOUS  SYSTEMS

457

where  S2  denotes  the  double  molecule  of  the  acid,  and  A  and  E  re-
spectively denote  the  amylene  and  the  ester.

Therefore  as  before,  from  the  law  of  mass-action,  we  obtain

(1  -  x)(a  -  x)
xV

_
'

from  which  the  expression

(l-x)(a-x)s

x2V

or  else  the  expression

a  -  x

AH*

V  ~T~

must  be  constant.

The  following  table  contains  some  results  of  an  investigation  con-
ducted with  trichlor-acetic  acid  at  100°.  Here  V  denotes  the  volume
of  that  reaction  mixture  in  litres,  which  contains  the  double  equivalent
of  acid.

a

V

X

K

K'

0-481

3-00

0-181

0-453

0-87

0-963

4-00

0-298

0-392

0-94

0-481

7-77

0-135

0-282

0-85

0-963

13-54

0-197

0-230

0-94

As  a  matter  of  fact,  in  the  sense  of  the  theory,  and  within  the
limits  of  the  errors  of  experiment,  K'  alone  is  constant.  It  should  be
noticed  that  if  one  applies  the  law  of  mass-action  to  the  reaction

S  +  A  =  E,
then  the  active  mass  of  the  acid  obviously  will  be

1  -x
a—  '

when  we denote the  degree  of  the  dissociation  of the acid  by a.
Therefore  the  following  expression,

xV

must  be  constant. But  now,  according  to  the  equation  of  dissociation
(p.  454),  the  following  expression  must  be  constant,  viz.

1  -x

1  -a

458  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  HI

or  because  a  is  very  small  compared  with 1 at  slight  concentration,

'l  -x .

then  a  must  be  inversely  proportional  to  the  expression  ^,

the  square  root  of  the  concentration  of  the  acid  ;  and  thus  we  find
in  this  way  that  the  expression,  designated  above  as  K',  must  be
constant.

Thus  the  requirements  of  the  law  of  mass-action  are  found  to  be  un-
equivocal throughout,  as  appears  from  the  course  of  the  reaction.

Evidence  of  Chemical  Action  from  the  Osmotic  Pressure  of
Solutions. — Just  as  the  question  whether  a  substance  is  dissociated  in
solution  or  not  can  be  decided  by  measurement  of  the  osmotic  pressure
(or  the  proportional  quantities,  such  as  lowering  of  the  freezing-point),
so  we  can  investigate  whether,  in  dissolving  two  or  more  different
substances,  a  chemical  reaction  occurs  which  causes  a  change  in  the
number  of  dissolved  molecules.  If  the  freezing-point  is  lowered  by
each  of  the  substances  in  the  mixture  as  if  the  others  were  not  present,
no  such  reaction  can  have  occurred,  in  the  contrary  case  a  reaction  is
indicated.

As  an  example  of  this  method,  we  may  quote  the  measurements  of
H.  C.  Jones  l  on  solutions  of  water  and  alcohol  in  acetic  acid ;  they
produce  the  same  lowering  of  temperature  as  if  each  was  present
separately,  hence  there  is  no  formation  of  alcohol  hydrates  under  these
circumstances.  But  water  and  sulphuric  acid  influence  each  other's
depression  of  the  freezing-point,  the  effect  in  the  mixture  being
smaller  than  when  the  two  substances  are  present  alone.  The  results
thus  obtained  indicate  that  when  a  considerable  excess  of  water  is
present  the  hydrate  H2SO4  .  2H90  is  formed,  in  other  cases  H2S04 .  H90,
but  in  dilute  solutions  the  latter  hydrate  is  partly  dissociated  into
water  and  sulphuric  acid  by  the  dissociating  power  of  the  solvent,
acetic  acid.

The  Influence  Of  the  Solvent. — Many  investigations  have  led  to
the  very  remarkable  result  that  the  nature  of  the  solvent  has  a  very  great
influence  on  the  molecular  condition  of  the  dissolved  substance  (p.  267).  Thus
the  organic  acids  in  benzene  solution,  and  at  not  too  low  concentration,
have  doubled  molecules;  in  ether,  ethyl  acetate,  acetic  acid,  and  similar
solvents,  they  have  their  normal  molecular  weight.  In  water  solution
they  suffer  electrolytic  dissociation,  more  or  less  strongly.  Similar  results
are  found  in  other  cases.

Now,  as  far  as  this  question  can  be  decided  from  the  material  thus
far  observed,  and  which  is  by  no  means  satisfactory  in  amount,  on  the
whole  it  appears  that  the  different  solutions  can  be  arranged  in  a
series  as  regards  their  "power  of  dissociation"  (dissoziierenden  Kraft,
Beckmann).

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem,,  13,  419  (1894)

CHAP.  II  CHEMICAL  STATICS HOMOGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  459

At  the  head  stands  water,  which  has  the  property  of  splitting  many
dissolved  substances  into  their  respective  ions,  and  of  decomposing
others  at  least  to  their  normal  molecular  size.

The  former  property  [i.e.  ionisation]  is  possessed  by  such  solvents
as  the  alcohols,  the  phenols,  the  esters,  and  the  ethers,  and  also  by  acetone,
only  in  the  very  slightest  degree.  On  the  other  hand,  substances
dissolved  in  these  solvents  just  enumerated,  at  not  too  high  concentra-
tion, usually  have  their  respective  normal  molecular  weights.

Many  substances,  such  as  the  organic  acids,  the  oximes,  the  phenols,
etc.,  when  dissolved  in  the  following  substances,  show  a  tendency,  which
is  more  or  less  strongly  expressed,  towards  the  formation  of  large  mole-
cular complexes,  and  especially  of  double  molecules.  The  solvents  just
referred  to  which  occasion  this  polymerisation  are  anethol,  azo-benzene,
para-toluidine,  etc.,  which  represent  the  transition  from  the  preceding
group  [i.e.  the  slightly  ionising  group  of  solvents]  to  the  following  group
[i.e.  the  group  which  produces  polymerisation],  and  which  includes  the
hydrocarbons  (such  as  benzene,  naphthalene,  di-phenyl-methane,  di-phenyl,
etc.),  carbon  di-sulphide,  chloroform,  ethylene  bromide,  and  the  like.

Accordingly,  we  find  that  acids  with  amylene,  when  dissolved  in
benzene,  form  more  ester,  other  things  being  equal,  than  when  dis-
solved in  ether,  in  which  latter  solvent  the  substances  do  not  react  to
any  marked  extent.  Beckmann  called  attention  to  the  fact  that,
excepting  acetone,  these  solvents,  which  are  characterised  by  great
dissociating  power,1  are  built  on  the  water  type.

We  may  clearly  assume  from  the  observations  made  hitherto  that
the  high  dielectric  constant  of  the  solvent  is  favourable  not  only  to
dissociation  into  ions,  but  also  for  the  dissociation  of  complex
molecules  into  simpler.  This  corresponds  to  the  fact  that  substances
in  solution  are  more  strongly  dissociated  than  when  they  exist  in  a
vacuum  or  in  an  indifferent  gas  under  the  same  conditions  of  tempera-
ture and  concentration.  Thus  acetic  acid  occurs  with  normal  molecular
weight  in  water  under  circumstances  such  that,  as  a  gas,  it  would
consist  almost  entirely  of  double  molecules.  Many  solutions,  more-
over, have  a  greater  dissociating  force  than  a  vacuum,  and  hence  there
follows  this  practical  result,  viz.  that  the  measurements  conducted
according  to  Raoult's  method  usually  give  more  certain  information  regarding
the  noi'mal  molecular  weight  than  the  determinations  of  the  gas  density  afford,
provided  that  by  the  molecular  weight  we  mean  the  smallest  form
which  the  substance  in  question  can  assume  without  a  complete  dis-
solution of  the  molecular  union.

The  Participation  of  the  Solvent  in  the  Reaction. — Thus  far
we  have  always  considered  the  solvent  as  excluded  from  taking  any
part  in  the  reaction,  and  we  will  now  seek  to  find  out  how  such  a
reaction  [i.e.  where  the  solvent  takes  part]  is  to  be  conceived  of.
1  Beckmann,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  Q.  437  (1890).

460  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  ill

The  facility  possessed  by  many  substances,  especially  those  con-
taining hydroxyl,  of  forming  double  molecules  in  solutions  of  small
dissociating  power,  such  as  benzene  or  naphthalene,  has  been  thoroughly
investigated  by  Auwers  and  his  students ; l  the  regular  influence  of
constitution  is  shown  especially  in  the  phenols  and  the  acetanilides.
In  both  groups  of  bodies  the  tendency  to  the  formation  of  double
molecules  is  reduced  or  increased  by  ortho  substitution  ;  the  aldehyde
group  CHO  acts  especially  strongly  in  this  direction,  then  the  group
C02R  (carboxalkyl)  and  ON,  more  feebly  N02  and  the  halogens,  and
least  of  all  the  alkyls.  Substitution  in  the  meta  or  para  position  is  of
much  less  influence ;  in  the  phenols  such  substitution  occasionally
causes  the  anomaly  of  a  rise  in  the  freezing-point.

The  simplest  case  is  that  where  only  one  molecular  species,  A,
occurs  in  solution,  and  which  reacts  on  the  molecules  of  the  solvent,
water,  e.g.  when  hydration  of  the  dissolved  substance  would  occur.
Then  there  would  take  place  the  following  reaction,  viz.

A(H20)n  -  A  +  nH20,

which  also  has  the  form  of  an  equation  of  dissociation.  Let  c
denote  the  concentration  of  the  hydrated  molecules  of  the  substance
A ;  and  cx  the  concentration  of  the  non-hydrated  molecules  ;  and  c.2
the  concentration  of  the  water.  Then  we  obtain  the  equation

Kc  -  c^11.

Now  it  must  be  noticed  that  c2  is  very  large  in  comparison  with
c  and  Cj ;  and  therefore,  especially  when  the  solution  is  sufficiently
diluted,  the  active  mass  of  the  solvent  will  only  change  inconsiderably
if  the  point  of  equilibrium  is  displaced  in  one  direction  or  the  other,
i.e.  the  active  mass  of  the  solvent  is  almost  constant.  But  then  there  is  a
proportionality  between  c  and  cv  and  therefore  in  a  dilute  solution
the  hydrated  fraction  is  independent  of  the  concentration.  This  deduction
from  the  law  of  the  mass-action  has  not  been  properly  noticed  hitherto.2

But  now,  since  we  have  no  means  at  present  of  answering  the
question,  whether  or  not  a  molecule  of  water  combines  with  a  mole-
cular species  existing  in  solution,  and  also  since  the  Raoult-van't  Hoflf
methods  of  the  molecular  weight  determination  are  unable  to  furnish
any  disclosure  concerning  this,  therefore  hitherto  the  experimental
tracing  out  of  the  state  of  equilibrium  of  such  reactions  as  the  pre-
ceding or  of  analogous  ones,  has  eluded  us.  Yet  the  experiment
described  on  p.  450,  viz.  that  in  an  excess  of  amylene  the  esterified
portion  of  the  acid  is  almost  independent  of  the  quantity  of  amylene,
this  speaks  in  favour  of  the  preceding  law.

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  C'hem., 12.  689  ;  15.  33  ;  18.  595  ;  21.  337  ;  32.  39  ;  42.
513.

a  Thus  the  view  is  very  commonly  found  expressed  in  the  literature  that  hydrates
decompose  with  increasing  dilution.

or  THE 1
UNIVERSITY

CHAP.  II  CHEMICAL  STATICS HOMOGENEOUS  SYSTEMs

Moreover,  a  more  stringent  calculation,  on  the  basis  of  thermo-
dynamic  principles  (see  Book  II.  Chap.  III.),  shows  that  the  active
mass  of  a  solvent  at  constant  temperature  is  proportional  to  its  vapour
pressure.  Now,  in  keeping  with  the  preceding  considerations,  this  must
be  regarded  as  constant  in  the  case  of  solutions  fairly  dilute,  because
it  is  only  very  slightly  different  from  that  of  the  pure  solvent.

Equilibrium  in  Solid  Systems. — From  the  van't  Hoff  method
of  treatment  of  "solid  solutions"  (p.  169),  and  especially  from  the
apparent  capacity  of  solid  substances  to  diffuse  into  each  other,—
which  though  very  slight,  yet  is  undoubtedly  true, — from  all  this
there  follows  immediately  the  suggestion  that  mutual  chemical  re-
action may  take  place  even  in  homogeneous  solid  systems,  and  that
ultimately  a  condition  of  equilibrium  will  be  established.  But  it
is  easily  conceivable  that  chemical  processes  in  the  solid  state  of
aggregation  would  usually  take  place  too  slowly  for  one  to  trace
out  their  progress ;  and  thus,  of  course,  their  experimental  study
would  be  impossible.

Now,  in  fact,  illustrations  of  the  gradual  progress  of  molecular
changes  of  solids  are  not  wanting.  Here  would  be  included  the
so-called  elastic  and  thermal  "  effects "  (Nachwirkungen),  which  are
doubtless  to  be  explained  in  a  more  or  less  extended  change  of  the
molecular  structure.  Also  the  brittleness  of  some  metals  occasioned
after  a  time ;  as,  e.g.,  that  of  tin  by  the  cold,  or  by  lively  agitation.
Also  the  gradual  change  of  the  crystal  form,  and  the  change  from
the  so-called  amorphous  to  the  crystallised  condition,  which  is  illus-
trated in  devitrification.

Moreover,  Spring1  succeeded  in  one  case  in  demonstrating  the
establishment  of  the  condition  of  equilibrium,  viz.  in  the  reaction
between  solid  barium  carbonate  and  solid  sodium  sulphate ;  here  the
metathesis  into  barium  sulphate  and  sodium  carbonate,  respectively,
ceased  when  about  80  per  cent  had  been  so  transformed;  and  con-
versely, the  mutual  reaction  between  barium  sulphate  and  sodium  car-
bonate ceased  when  about  20  per  cent  of  the  equi-molecular  mixture  had
been  changed.  These  reactions  are  induced  by  energetic  shaking  of
the  finely-powdered  substances,  and  are  also  accelerated  by  the  appli-
cation of  strong  pressures  (up  to  6000  atmospheres).  Their  progress
was  ascertained  by  extraction  with  water,  and  then  weighing  the
insoluble  ingredients.

1  Bull.  soc.  chim.,  46.  299  (1886).

CHAPTER III

CHEMICAL STATICS — HETEROGENEOUS SYSTEMS

The  Kind  of  Heterogeneity. — The  heterogeneity  of  a  chemical
system  existing  in  equilibrium  obviously  cannot  consist  in  any  varia-
tion of  the  composition  of  the  liquid,  or  of  the  gas  mixture,  from
point  to  point ;  because,  if  this  were  the  case,  there  would  occur  a
migration  of  matter,  as  a  result  of  diffusion,  i.e.  the  system  would  not
as  yet  have  reached  its  state  of  equilibrium.  The  heterogeneity
must  essentially  consist  only  in  the  intimate  association  of  different  com-
plexes, each  of  which  is  homogeneous  in  itself,  such  as  solid  salts  and
saturated  solutions,  mixtures  of  liquids  and  of  gases,  solids  and
their  gaseous  dissociation  products,  etc. ;  the  degree  of  heterogeneity
will  be  conditioned  and  estimated  by  the  number  of  these  complexes.
The  particular  system  may,  of  course,  be  either  gaseous,  liquid,  or
solid.  There  is  no  limit  to  the  number  of  solid  substances,  and  of
liquids  which  do  not  dissolve  each  other,  which  participate  in  material
decompositions  by  a  displacement  of  the  point  of  equilibrium  resulting
from  reactions.  Indeed,  we  know  beforehand  that,  on  account  of  the
complete  miscibility  of  gases,  there  can  be  present  [in  any  case],  only
one  gaseous  complex.

The  different  complexes  which  are  both  physically  and  chemically
homogeneous  in  themselves,  which  may  be  either  a  physical  mixture
or  a  chemical  compound,  and  which  make  up  the  heterogeneous  system,
— these  complexes  are  called  the  phases  of  the  system,  after  the  usage  of
W.  Gibbs.  Thus,  e.g.  in  considering  the  state  of  equilibrium  between
calcium  carbonate  and  its  decomposition  products,  carbon  di-oxide
and  calcium  oxide,  we  must  distinguish  in  this  system  three  phases,
two  of  which,  viz.  CaC03  and  CaO,  are  solid,  and  one,  C02,  is
gaseous.

General  Law  regarding  the  Influence  of  the  Relative
Proportions. — An  unusually  large  number  of  experiments  have  led
to  the  following  law,  which  is  universal,  viz.  :—

The  condition  of  equilibrium  of  a  heterogeneous  system  is  independent

462

CHAP,  ill CHEMICAL  STATICS  -  HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  463

of  the  relative  quantity  by  weight  in  which  each  phase  is  present  in  the
system.

Thus,  e.g.  after  the  state  of  equilibrium  has  been  established  in  the
aforesaid  system,  viz.—

C0

if  there  should  occur  an  increase  or  a  diminution  in  the  quantity  by
Aveight,  in  which  each  of  the  enumerated  substances  is  present,  arid
if  care  is  taken  to  preserve  the  external  conditions,  temperature  and
pressure,  unchanged,  then  the  state  of  equilibrium  remains  unchanged,
i.e.  in  the  sense  of  the  reaction  equation,  there  is  no  associated  change
in  either  direction,  and  the  composition  of  each  particular  phase
remains  undisturbed.

Among  other  deductions  from  the  preceding  law  are  these  well-
known  facts,  viz.  that  the  vapour  tension  of  a  liquid  is  independent
of  its  quantity  ;  and  that  the  concentration  of  a  saturated  solution  is
the  same,  whether  much  or  little  of  the  solid  salt  be  present,  and  the
like.

The  law  may  be  demonstrated,  on  the  basis  of  the  molecular  theory,
in  the  following  way.  The  establishment  of  chemical  equilibrium
does  not  mean  that  all  chemical  change  has  absolutely  ceased  ;  but
rather  that,  in  the  sense  of  the  reaction  equation,  the  change,  at  any
moment  and  at  any  point  in  the  one  direction,  is  exactly  as  great  as
the  change  in  the  opposite  direction  (p.  431).

Thus  if  we  consider  any  selected  part  of  a  surface  which  separates
two  different  phases  of  a  system  from  each  other,  there  will  be  a
continual  exchange  of  molecules  in  this  portion  of  the  surface,  and
molecules  will  be  continually  going  out  and  in  at  the  same  time.  In
order  that  equilibrium  may  become  established  and  remain  so,  this
condition  must  be  fulfilled,  viz.  that  the  same  number  of  molecules
of  each  species  must  pass  through  the  portion  of  the  surface  in  the
one  direction  as  in  the  other.  Thus  we  are  considering  the  necessary
extension  of  the  same  considerations  which  earlier  (p.  216)  led  us
to  conceive  of  the  equilibrium  between  a  liquid  and  its  saturated
vapour,  as  a  dynamic  condition  ;  and  there  also  the  state  of  equilibrium
was  associated  with  the  condition,  that  at  each  portion  of  the  surface
separating  the  liquid  and  the  saturated  vapour,  at  every  moment,  as
many  gaseous  molecules  must  condense  as  shall  evaporate  from  the
liquid.  .

The  forces,  under  the  influence  of  which  there  occurs  the  continuous
exchange  of  molecules  between  twa  different  phases,  like  all  molecular
forces,  have  only  very  small  spheres  of  action  ;  these  forces,  at  distances
which  are  large  enough  to  be  measured,  sink  to  zero.  This  exchange  only
takes  place  as  a  result  of  the  forces  which  are  active  in  the  immediate
vicinity  of  the  limiting  surface  between  molecules  which  exist  in  two
different  phases  ;  and  it  is  indifferent  whether  the  extension  of  the  two

464  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  Hi

phases  on  both  sides  of  the  separating  surface  is  large  or  not.  For
the  same  reason  it  [i.e.  the  exchange  of  molecules]  is  not  influenced
either  by  the  form 1  or  by  the  extension  of  the  separating  surface.
This  can  only  mean  that  the  condition  of  equilibrium  is  independent  of  the
relative  mass  of  each  of  the  phases.

Complete  and  Heterogeneous  Equilibrium. — Among  the
simplest  cases  of  equilibrium  are  the  so-called  "physical,"  i.e.  the
equilibrium  between  two  different  states  of  aggregation  of  the  same
substance ;  as,  e.g.,  the  equilibrium  between  ice  and  liquid  water ;  the
equilibrium  between  liquid  water  and  water  vapour ;  and  the  equilibrium
between  ice  and  water  vapour,  i.e.  where  the  reaction — in  regard
to  which  an  equilibrium  has  been  established — consists  in  the  melting
of  a  solid  body,  in  the  evaporation  of  a  liquid,  or  in  the  evaporation  of
a  solid  (sublimation).

The  relations  here  are  very  simple.  For  a  definite  external
pressure  there  corresponds  a  definite  temperature  at  which  the  two
systems  can  exist  beside  each  other ;  thus  ice  and  water  are  co-
existent at  atmospheric  pressure  at  0° ;  and  liquid  water  and
water  vapour  at  atmospheric  pressure  and  at  100°.  If  we  change
the  external  pressure,  at  a  temperature  which  is  kept  constant,  or
if  we  change  the  temperature,  at  an  external  pressure  which  is  kept
constant — then  the  reaction  advances  to  a  completion  in  one  sense
or  in  the  other.

One  may  become  completely  familiarised  (orientiert)  with  these
conditions  of  equilibrium  if  he  ascertains  the  dependence  of  the
pressure  at  which  the  two  respective  states  of  aggregation  are  capable
of  existing  beside  each  other — upon  the  temperature,  i.e.  the  depend-
ence of  the  melting-point  upon  the  external  pressure,  and  the  vapour-
pressure  curve  of  the  liquid  or  solid  substance.

Now,  in  complete  analogy  with  these  foregoing  reactions,  which  are,
on  the  whole,  physical,  there  are  a  number  of  reactions  which  are  of  a
purely  chemical  nature.  These  latter  have  this  peculiarity  in  common,
viz. —

In  reactions  which  occur  isothermally,  each  one  of  the  phases  may  change
its  mass  but  not  its  composition.

In  all  reactions  of  this  sort  the  same  thing  holds  true  which  was
true  in  the  case  of  the  physical  reactions,  i.e.  with  a  certain  external
pressure,  the  phases  of  the  system  are,  collectively,  coexistent  only  at
a  certain  definite  temperature ;  and  under  all  other  conditions,  the
reaction  advances  in  one  sense  or  the  other  to  a  completion,  i.e.  till
one  of  the  phases  is  exhausted.

After  the  example  of  Roozeboom,2  whose  many-sided  experimental

1  Excepting  very  great  curvatures,  where  possibly  the  capillary  forces  may  come
noticeably  into  play  (Book  IV.  Chap.  III.).

2  Rec.  trav.  chim.  des  Pays-Bas  ;  since  1884  ;  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.  ;  since  1888.

CHAP.  Ill CHEMICAL  STATICS HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  465

investigations have very largely  contributed to clearing  up these
questions,  we  will  call  the  equilibrium  " completely  heterogeneous"

A  complete  [heterogeneous]  equilibrium,  e.g.,  is  that  between  calcium
carbonate  and  its  decomposition  products.  For  a  definite  temperature
there  corresponds  one,  and  only  one,  pressure  at  which  the  three
substances  reacting  on  each  other  can  exist  beside  each  other,  in  the
sense  of  the  reaction  equation  following,  viz.

CaCO.^±CaO  +  CO2.

Let  us  think  of  the  CaC03  as  being  at  the  bottom  of  a  cylinder
which  is  closed  with  a  movable  air-tight  piston.  Then,  if  we  increase
the  volume  by  raising  the  piston,  the  reaction  progresses,  in  the  sense
of  the  preceding  equation,  from  left  to  right ;  and  if  we  diminish  the
volume  by  depressing  the  piston,  the  reaction  progresses,  in  the  sense
of  the  preceding  equation,  from  right  to  left.  Equilibrium  can  exist
only  at  a  definite  pressure  exerted  from  without  upon  the  piston,  viz.
the  so-called  "  dissociation  pressure"  If  we  make  the  external  pressure
only  a  trifle  smaller,  always  at  a  temperature  which  is  kept  constant,
then  the  reaction  advances  from  left  to  right  until  the  calcium  carbonate
is  exhausted,  i.e.  until  it  is  complete.  If  we  make  the  external  pressure
only  a  trifle  greater  [than  the  dissociation  pressure],  there  results,  con-
versely, the  complete  reunion  of  the  carbon  dioxide  with  the  calcium
oxide,  in  the  sense  of  the  equation,  from  right  to  left.  When  the
reaction  occurs,  with  the  equilibrium  pressure  and  temperature  remain-
ing constant,  none  of  the  phases  changes  its  composition :  this  is  the
necessary  pre-existing  condition  for  the  occurrence  of  the  reaction  under
constant  equilibrium  pressure.

The  peculiarity  of  such  reactions  is,  that  they  may  occur  at
constant  temperature  without  change  in  the  composition,  or  in  any
other  property  of  each  of  the  phases,  and  with  no  change  except  in
their  total  mass  ;  it  follows  from  this,  as  a  very  complete  generalisation,
that  for  a  given  composition,  there  can  be  but  one  corresponding
external  pressure,  and  to  every  definite  temperature  there  corresponds  one,
and  only  one,  equilibrium  pressure.

In  this  manner  the  way  is  clearly  pointed  out  which  must  be
followed  for  the  experimental  investigation  of  special  cases  of  complete
equilibrium.  We  may  become  completely  familiar  with  such  a  case
if  we  ascertain  for  each  temperature  the  corresponding  pressure  at
which  the  different  phases  are  coexistent,  and  if  we  also  ascertain  the
composition  of  each  of  the  phases.  Sometimes,  as  was  the  case  with
the  system,

CaC03  +  CaO  +  C02,

the  composition  may  remain  unchanged,  even  with  a  change  in  the
temperature  ;  but,  as  a  rule,  this  is  not  the  case.

2H

466  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  ill

Let  us  consider,  as  an  example  somewhat  similar  to  the  last  case,
the  equilibrium  between  a  solid  salt,  its  saturated  water  solution,  and
the  water  vapour :  here,  as  a  sign  of  complete  equilibrium  for  a
definite  temperature,  the  three  phases  are  coexistent  only  at  one
pressure,  namely,  the  vapour  pressure  of  the  saturated  solution ;  and,
moreover,  the  reaction  which  occurs  isothermally  (the  evaporation  of
the  water  and  the  precipitation  of  the  salt)  does  not  result  in  a  change
of  composition  of  any  of  the  phases.  But  the  composition  of  the  liquid
phase  (the  solution)  varies  with  the  temperature  as  a  result  of  the
varying  solubility  of  the  salt.

Now,  as  it  is  the  influence  of  the  temperature  which  especially  concerns
us  in  complete  equilibrium,  the  further  description  of  that  belongs  to
the  sections  on  thermo-chemistry.

Phases  of  Variable  Composition. — The  relations  are  very
different  when  one  or  more  of  the  phases  changes  its  composition
while  the  reaction  proceeds  isothermally.  Here,  in  general,  a  change
of  the  external  pressure  establishes  a  new  condition  of  equilibrium,
so  that  one  or  more  of  the  phases  of  the  system  changes  its
composition.

An  illustration  will  serve  to  make  the  ease  intelligible.

If  we  allow  pure  water  to  evaporate  at  the  exact  pressure  of  its
saturated  vapour,  then,  while  the  reaction  (evaporation)  is  going  on,
neither  the  liquid  nor  the  gaseous  phase  changes  its  composition.  If
we  make  the  external  pressure  a  little  smaller,  then  all  the  water
evaporates ;  if  we  increase  it,  then  all  the  vapour  condenses.

Now  this  is  at  once  changed  as  soon  as  a  salt  is  dissolved  in  the
water;  then,  as  is  well  known,  the  vapour  pressure  is  lowered  in
proportion  to  the  concentration  [of  the  solution].

Let  a  definite  volume  of  water  vapour  be  in  equilibrium  with  the
solution.  If  we  now  diminish  the  external  pressure  a  little,  not  all
the  water  evaporates  but  only  a  definite  fraction.  For,  as  a  result  of  the
evaporation,  the  concentration  of  the  solution  increases,  whereby  the
maximal  pressure  is  still  further  reduced  until  it  has  sunk  to  the  new
and  lower  value  of  the  external  pressure,  and  thus  a  new  state  of  equili-
brium has  become  established.  But  now,  if  the  concentration  proceeds
so  far  that  the  solid  salt  is  precipitated,  then  the  concentration  remains
constant,  and  equilibrium  pressure  also  remains  constant,  and  the
latter  does  not  increase  any  more  with  further  evaporation.

Thus  in  those  systems  in  which  there  occur  phases  having  a  vari-
able composition,  the  equilibrium  depends  upon  the  relative  masses  of
the  reacting  components  in  these  phases,  and  thus  the  problem  arises
of  formulating  this  influence.

In  what  follows,  as  we  advance  from  the  simplest  conditions  of
equilibrium  to  the  experimental  examination  of  more  complicated
examples  which  occur,  this  simple  result  will  be  found,  viz.  tJiat  without

CHAP.  Ill

CHEMICAL  STATICS HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS

467

the  introduction  of  any  new  assumptions,  the  law  of  mass-action  may  be  also
applied  to  heterogeneous  systems.

We  will  first  consider  the  case  where  there  occurs  only  one  phase
having  a  variable  composition  in  the  system,  and  will  then  proceed  to  the
more  complicated  ones  where  their  number  is  greater  than  one.  This
one  phase  may  be  either  gaseous  or  liquid.  But  solid  substances,  in
contrast  to  gaseous  and  liquid  phases,  do  not  change  their  composition  by  a
displacement  of  the  point  of  equilibrium  ;  and  to  this  extent  they  occupy  an
exceptional  position,  because  for  this  reason  they  form  only  phases  of  con-
stant composition.

Equilibrium  between  a  Gaseous  Phase  and  a  Solid  Sub-
stance —  Sublimation.  —  According  to  Dalton's  law,  the  sublimation
pressure,  i.e.  the  maximal  partial  pressure  under  .which  the  solid
vaporises  into  a  gas,  with  which  it  forms  no  new  compound,  is  as  great
as  though  the  sublimation  took  place  in  a  vacuum.  The  composition
of  the  gaseous  phase  is  completely  determined  by  the  vapour  pressure
of  the  corresponding  solid  substance,  and  by  the  quantity  of  the  foreign
gases  which  are  present,

The  Dissociation  of  a  Solid  Substance  which  produces  only
one  Gas.  —  This  case  conducts  itself  in  the  same  way  as  the  last.
Here  also,  for  each  temperature,  there  is  a  corresponding  maximal
pressure  (the  dissociation  pressure),  of  the  gas  resulting  from  the  dissocia-
tion, and  which  is  not  changed  by  the  presence  of  indifferent  gases.
The  pressure  of  dissociation  is  also  independent  of  the  relative  quan-
tities of  the  solid  bodies  which  take  part  in  the  reaction.

The  classical  example  of  this  case  is  the  dissociation  of  calcium
carbonate,  the  regularity  of  which  was  observed  by  Debray  (1867);
the  reaction  equation  is

C0

Solid

Solid Gaseous.

The  dissociation  pressures  of  this  system  have  been  recently  measured
very  exactly  by  Le  Chatelier  ;  x  in  measuring  the  temperatures  he
used  a  thermopile  made  of  platinum  and  an  alloy  of  platinum  and
rhodium.

THE  DISSOCIATION  TENSIONS  OF  CALCIUM  CARBONATE

t

P

t

P

547°
610°

27  mm.  Hg.

46  „ ,,

745°
810°

289  mrn.  Hg.

678  „ „

625°

56  „ ,,

812°

753  „ „

740°

255  „ ,,

865°

1333  „ „

1  C.  R.,  102.  1243  (1886)

468  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

The  observation  that  both  the  dissociation  pressure  and  the  maximal
pressure  of  the  saturated  vapour  increase  rapidly  with  the  temperature
appears  to  be  quite  general ;  moreover,  there  is  a  very  close  analogy
between  these  phenomena.

The  dissociation  pressure  is  independent  of  the  ratio  between  the
relative  quantities  of  solid  carbonate  and  calcium  oxide,  as  also
follows  if  we  apply  the  general  law  stated  on  p.  462  to  the  particular
system  considered.  This  is  usually  expressed  as  follows  :  viz.  the  active
masses  of  solid  bodies  as  they  participate  in  the  chemical  equilibrium  are
constant  (Guldberg  and  Waage,  Horstmann).

The  explanation  of  this  behaviour,  from  the  standpoint  of  the
kinetic  molecular  theory,  has  thus  far  presented  some  difficulty.  Thus
one  might  incline  to  the  view  that  the  more  C02  molecules  which  were
seized  and  held  fast  by  the  mixture  of  solid  carbonate  and  oxide,  the
more  would  the  relative  quantity  of  oxide  decrease ;  and  the  fewer  the
molecules  of  C02  which  were  emitted  [by  the  carbonate],  the  more  would
the  quantity  of  the  carbonate  diminish.  But  in  this  way  the  influence
of  the  relative  quantities  on  the  dissociation  pressure  would  manifest
itself,  and  this  is  contrary  both  to  the  general  law  just  mentioned  and
also  to  experiment.

We  have  already  given  on  p.  463  a  general  discussion  according
to  the  molecular  theory  showing  that  the  quantity  of  the  various
phases  must  be  without  influence  on  equilibrium  ;  it  is  worth  while
however  to  go  through  some  considerations  which  show  simply  and
easily  the  constancy  of  the  dissociation  pressure.

Both  the  calcium  oxide  and  also  the  carbonate  must  each  certainly
possess  a  certain  vapour  pressure,  or,  more  correctly,  a  pressure  of  sub-
limation ;  by  this  is  meant  the  respective  partial  pressures  of  the
molecular  species  CaO  and  CaC03,  standing  in  a  gas  space  which  is  in
contact  with  the  oxide  and  the  carbonate.  Now,  these  sublimation
pressures  are  independent  of  the  presence  of  foreign  gases  ;  they  remain
unchanged  when  the  oxide  and  the  carbonate  are  present  at  the  same
time.  We  cannot  ascertain  the  magnitudes  of  these  pressures,  because
they  evade  direct  measurement  by  reason  of  their  smallness.

In  the  vapour  space,  which  is  in  contact  with  the  two  solid  sub-
stances, there  occur  the  three  molecular  species,  viz.  CaC03,  CaO,  and
C02  ;  and  respecting  the  reaction,

CaC03^±CaO  +  C02,

a  condition  of  equilibrium  will  be  established,  and  to  this  we  may
directly  apply  the  law  of  chemical  mass-action.

Let  us  denote  by  ir^  and  ?r2,  the  sublimation  pressures  of  the  oxide
and  of  the  carbonate  respectively  ;  and  by  p,  the  vapour  pressure  of  the
carbon-dioxide ;  this  latter,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  the  values
of  TTj  and  7r2,  will  not  be  very  different  from  the  vapour  pressure  (Le

CHAP.  Ill CHEMICAL  STATICS  -  HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  469

the  dissociation  pressure)  of  the  whole  system. Thus,  according  to  the
law  of  mass-action,  it  follows  that

where  K  denotes  the  dissociation  constant  of  the  gaseous  CaC03  mole-
cules. Now,  since  TTI  and  ?r2  are  independent  of  the  quantity  of  the
solid  substances  [CaO  and  CaC03  respectively],  then  p,  i.e.  the  dissocia-
tion pressure  at  any  given  temperature,  must  also  be  constant.  But  it
will  vary  greatly  with  the  temperature,  because  the  same  also  holds
good  both  for  K  and  for  TTI  and  7r2.

Considered  on  the  basis  of  the  molecular  theory,  this  same  proof
is  the  reason  for  the  view  that  the  reaction  occurs  exclusively  in  the
gaseous  phase,  and  that  the  solid  substances  participate  in  the  reaction
to  the  extent  of  their  previous  sublimation.  This  view  leads,  as  an
immediate  consequence,  to  the  constancy  of  the  dissociation  pressure,
though,  on  the  other  hand,  it  [i.e.  the  constancy  of  the  dissociation
pressure]  is  not  a  necessary  condition  for  its  derivation.1

To  the  dissociation  phenomena  of  solid  bodies  there  also  belong
the  dehydration  of  salts  containing  water  of  crystallisation,  resulting  from
raising  the  temperature.  This  has  been  thoroughly  studied  by
Mitscherlich,  Debray,  G.  Wiedemann,  Pareau,  Miiller-Erzbach,  and
others.  Here  also  the  pressure  of  decomposition  is  constant  for  any
given  temperature,  but  increases  strongly  with  increasing  temperature.
But  here  dissociation  by  stages  is  usually  found,  i.e.  the  salts  do  not
lose  all  their  water  at  a  constant  pressure,  but  several  stages  can  be
recognised,  at  which  points  the  different  molecules  of  water  suddenly
evaporate  as  the  pressure  changes.

Thus,  for  example,  copper  sulphate  (CuSO4  +  5H20)  gives  off  the
first  two  molecules  of  water  with  constant  pressure,  the  following  two
also  with  constant  but  much  lower  pressure,  and  finally,  the  last
molecule  of  water  with  the  least  pressure,  so  that  the  dissociation
occurs  in  three  stages

I.  CuS04  .  5H20  =  CuS04  .  3H20  +  2H90
II.  CuS04  .  3H20  =  CuS04  .  H20  +  2H90
III.  CuS04  .  H20 =  CuS04  +  H20

each  of  which  possesses  its  own  maximal  pressure.  A  simple  and  certain
method  of  determining  the  various  stages  of  hydration  is  due  to
Miiller-Erzbach.2  The  researches  of  Andreae  3  show  that  the  change
in  question  is  discontinuous.  The  ammonia  compounds  of  the  metal  chlorides
behave  like  salts  with  water  of  crystallisation  (Isambert  [1868],
Horstmann  [1876]).

1  The  considerations  advanced  by  Horstmann,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  6.  1  (1890),
and  which  derived  the  same  result from  the  same  standpoint  of "solid  solutions,"
do  not  at  all  contradict  the  preceding  statements.

2  See  especially  Zeitschr.  physik.  C/iem.,  19.  135  (1896).

3  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  7-  241  (1891).

470  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  ill

R.  Hollmann1  has  shown  that  crystalline  mixtures  containing
water  possess  a  vapour  pressure  which  is  independent  of  the  content
of  water  within  certain  limits.  He  showed  also  that  small  quantities
of  an  isomorphous  mixture  in  all  cases  lowered  the  vapour  pressure  of
the  crystal.  The  discovery  that  double  salts  also  behave  like  simple
crystals  is  of  great  interest ;  if  the  vapour  pressure  of  a  series  of
mixtures  of  two  salt  hydrates  which  are  isomorphous  in  all  proportions
be  investigated,  it  is  found  that  the  vapour  pressure  curve  shows  a
break  where  the  composition  corresponds  with  that  of  a  pure  double
salt.  This  is  the  only  method  at  present  known  for  deciding  whether  a
double  salt  is  found  in  a  complete  isomorphous  mixture  series  (p.  120).

Here,  of  course,  each  dissociation  has  its  own  particular  maximal
pressure.

The  Production  of  one  Gas  from  several  Solid  Substances.

— It  can  be  shown  here,  by  the  same  considerations  which  were
advanced  above,  that  for  every  temperature  there  is  a  corresponding
development  pressure  (Entwicklungs-druck)  which  is  independent  of  the
relative  quantities  of  the  solid  substances.  In  fact,  Isambert 2  demon-
strated that  the  development  of  ammonia  from  lead  oxide  and
ammonium  chloride,  in  the  sense  of  the  equation

PbO  +  NH4C1  =  NH3  +  Pb(OH)Cl,

took  place  at  the  following  maximal  pressures  for  the  corresponding
temperatures  : —

t  Pressure.

17*5°  296  mm.  Mercury

27-0°  420 ,

t  Pressure.

36 '3°  599  mm.  Mercury

48-9°  926 ,

At  about  42°  the  maximal  pressure  is  equal  to  the  atmospheric  pressure,
and  thus  this  point  is  the  "boiling-point"  of  the  system.

Another  interesting  example  of  the  preceding  case  has  been  found
by  Rothmund 3  when  calcium  carbide  is  formed  according  to  the
equation

CaO  +  3C  -  CaC2  +  CO,

a  single  gas  is  generated  from  this  solid  substance,  and  can  therefore
be  in  equilibrium  with  the  system  only  at  one  given  pressure  for  a
given  temperature.  In  point  of  fact  it  is  found  that  above  1620°
carbon  monoxide  is  violently  evolved  with  formation  of  carbide,  and
that  conversely  below  that  temperature  carbon  monoxide  completely
decomposes  calcium  carbide  into  lime  and  carbon.

The  Dissociation  of  one  Solid  Substance  which  produces
several  Gases. — When  the  volatilisation  of  a  solid  substance  is

1  Zeitsc/ir.  physik.  C/iem.,  37.  193  (1901).  2  C.  R.,  102.  1313  (1886).

3  Gott.  Nachr.,  1901,  Heft  3.

CHAP. Ill

CHEMICAL  STATICS HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS

471

attended,  at  the  same  time,  with  a  more  or  less  complete  dissociation,
then  for  a  definite  temperature  there  corresponds  a  definite  dissociation
pressure;  this  latter  amounts  to  the  same,  in  the  presence  of  an  in-
different gas,  as  in  a  vacuum.  But  where  one  of  the  resulting  gaseous
products  of  decomposition  is  present  in  excess,  it  constitutes  a  case
requiring  special  treatment.

Thus  ammonium  hydrosulphide  [NH4SH]  for  each  temperature
has  a  definitely  corresponding  vapour  pressure  ;  but,  as  must  be  inferred
from  its  vapour  density,  the  gas  mixture  resting  above  it  must  be
almost  completely  dissociated  into  ammonia  and  hydrogen  sulphide,
i.e.  in  the  sublimation  the  following  reaction  occurs,  viz.,

NH4Siq±NH

H,S.

At  25'1°  the  dissociation  pressure  of  the  gas  amounted  to  501  mm.,
without  excess  of  the  decomposition  products,  i.e.  the  partial  pressures
of  the  two  gases,  NH3  and  H9S,  were  equal  to  each  other,  each  being
250-5°  mm.

According  as  one  or  the  other  of  the  two  gases  was  present  in  excess,
the  partial  pressures  [px  and  p9]  for  the  state  of  equilibrium  had
the  following  values  :  l  —

NH3
11

H2S
Pa

PiPa

208

294

60700

138

458

63200

417

146

60800

453

143

64800

Mean

62400

As  is  obvious,  the  partial  pressure  of  that  gas  which  is  not  present
in  excess  is  diminished  by  the  presence  of  the  other,  i.e.  the  dissocia-
tion pressure  has  fallen.  This  result  may  be  theoretically  developed
in  the  following  way.

In  the  vapour  of  the  ammonium  hydro-sulphide,  aside  from  the
decomposed  molecules,  there  are  also  some  undecomposed  molecules,
though  the  number  of  the  latter  may  be  but  small :  let  their  partial
pressure  [i.e.  of  the  undecomposed  molecules]  amount  to  TT.  Then  by
applying  the  equation  of  the  isotherm  of  dissociation  to  the  gaseous
phase,  we  obtain

KTT  -  pjpjj.

But  now,  according  to  Dalton's  law,  at  constant  temperature,  the
vapour  pressure  TT  of  the  undecomposed  molecules  of  ammonium  hydro-

1  Isambert,  C.  ft.,  02.  919  ;  93.  731  (1881)  ;  94.  958  (1882).

472  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

sulphide  must  be  constant  ;  and,  according  to  the  preceding  formula,
the  same  thing  holds  true  for  the  product  Pjp2.  Now,  denoting  the
dissociation  pressure  by  P,  for  the  case  where  pl  =  p2  (i.e.,  where  there
is  no  excess  of  either  of  the  decomposition  products),  we  obtain

P2
K7r  =  Plp2  =  -.

Now,  in  fact,  this  equation  is  found  to  be  established  by  the  pre-
ceding table.  The  value  of  pxp2  varies  irregularly,  and  the  mean
value  62,400  approximately  coincides  with  the  [theoretical]  value,

The  relations  are  very  similar  in  the  case  of  ammonium  carbamate,
a  substance  studied  by  Horstmann,1  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  the
first  application  of  the  law  of  mass-action  to  the  dissociation  of  solid
compounds,  which  was  at  the  same  time  one  of  the  most  remark-
able demonstrations  of  this.  The  substance,  in  sublimation,  decomposes
almost  entirely  in  the  sense  of  the  equation

NH4-0-CONH2^±2NH3  +  C02.

If  we  denote  the  partial  pressure  of  the  ammonia  by  p15  and  that
of  the  carbon  dioxide  by  p2,  then  the  application  of  the  equation  of
the  isotherm  of  dissociation  gives

K?r  =  Pi2P2  >

here  K  denotes*  the  dissociation  constant  of  the  gaseous  ammonium
carbamate  molecules,  and  TT  their  partial  pressure.  Now,  since  the
latter  is  constant,  in  the  presence  of  the  solid  salt,  for  any  given
temperature,  therefore  the  right  side  of  the  preceding  equation  must
also  be  constant  ;  and  since  TT,  in  contrast  to  the  total  pressure,  has  an
infinitesimal  value,  on  account  of  the  almost  complete  dissociation  of
the  ammonium  carbamate,  therefore  we  obtain

4P3

where  P  denotes  the  dissociation  pressure  at  the  respective  temperature,
without  excess  of  either  of  the  dissociation  products  :  and,  therefore,
two-thirds  P  denotes  the  partial  pressure  of  the  ammonia  ;  and  one-third
P,  that  of  the  carbon  dioxide.  The  addition  of  NH3,  then,  will  depress
the  dissociation  pressure  a  good  deal  more  than  the  addition  of  C02.
Horstmann,  and  Isambert2  later,  found  the  preceding  formula  to  be
well  established.

1  Lieb.  Ann,,  187.  48  (1877).  2  C.  R.,  93.  731  (1881)  ;  97.  1212  (1883).

CHAP.  Ill CHEMICAL  STATICS  -  HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  473

Reaction  between  any  Arbitrary  Number  of  Gases  and
Solid  Substances.  —  This  general  case  can  be  dealt  with,  according
to  what  has  preceded,  without  the  introduction  of  any  new  assumptions.

Thus,  let  v1  molecules  of  the  solid  substance  a1}  and  v2  molecules
of  the  solid  substance  a2,  etc.,  come  together  with  nx  molecules  of  the
gas  A1?  and  n2  molecules  of  the  gas  A2,  etc.  ;  and  let  them  form  i//
molecules  of  the  solid  substance  a/,  and  v/  molecules  of  the  solid
substance  a2',  etc.,  and  also  nx'  molecules  of  the  gas  A1',  and  n2'  mole-
cules of  the  gas  A2',  etc.  Thus  the  reaction  will  occur,  according  to
the  general  scheme,

i/1a1  +  v2a2  +  .  .  +  nxAt  +  n2A2  +  .  .^v/a/  +  v2'a2'  +  .  .  +  n1/A1/  +  n2'A2'  +  .  .

As  above,  let  the  partial  pressures  of  the  reacting  gases  be  respec-
tively p:,  p2  .  .  .,  p/,  p2'.  .  .  Now  some  of  the  molecules  of  the  solid
substances  ap  a9  .  .  .,  a^,  a/.  .  .,will  certainly  occur  in  the  gaseous
system,  though,  under  the  circumstances,  in  very  small  quantities,  since
each  of  these  solid  substances  will  have  a  certain  vapour  pressure;
let  this  latter  amount  respectively  to  irv  7r2  .  .  .,  ir^  7r2'  .  .  .,  etc.
Thus  the  application  of  the  law  of  mass-action  to  the  gaseous  system
will  give  the  following  condition  :  —

kTr/iTr/2 . . . p^p^ . . .. =  kV/^V^' . . . Pimps'"2' . . •

Here  k  and  k'  denote  the  velocity  coefficients  of  the  two  mutually
opposed  reactions.

Now  if  we  observe  that,  according  to  Dalton's  law,  the  vapour
pressures  of  solid  bodies  are  independent  of  the  presence  of  other  gases,
and  that  they  remain  constant  at  constant  temperatures,  then  we  can
bring  the  preceding  equation  to  the  form

where  K  denotes  a  constant,  which  again  we  will  call  the  constant  of
equilibrium.  We  thus  obtain  the  same  result,  which  we  previously
obtained  in  a  simple  way  in  establishing  the  conditions  of  equilibrium
between  gases  which  react  on  each  other  in  the  presence  of  solid
substances,  and  we  need  to  neglect  only  those  molecular  species  which
are  present  at  the  same  time  in  the  solid  form.

As  has  been  already  noted,  Guldberg  and  Waage  expressed  this
result  in  the  statement,  that  the  active  mass  of  a  solid  substance  is  constant.

As  an  example  of  this,  let  us  consider  a  reaction  which  was  studied
by  Deville,1  viz.

By  the  reaction  of  steam  at  the  pressure  p  upon  iron  at  quite  high
temperatures,  the  reaction  reached  its  completion  when  the  partial
pressure  p'  of  the  hydrogen  produced  reached  a  definite  value.  The

1  Lieb.  Ann.,  157.  76  (1870).

474  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

application  of  the  general  equation  preceding  led  to  the  relation  that  p4
and  p/4  must  be  proportional,  and  therefore  p  and  p'  must  be  so  also.

In  fact,  Deville  found  that,  when  the  pressure  of  the  steam  was  4 '6
and  10*1  mm.,  the  corresponding  pressures  of  the  hydrogen  developed
amounted  respectively  to  25-8  and  57*9  mm.  The  ratios  in  these  two
cases  are  0'178  and  0*174  ;  the  coincidence  is  more  than  sufficient,  in
consideration  of  the  extraordinary  difficulties  met  in  prosecuting  this
research.  The  figures  refer  to  a  temperature  of  440°.  The  pressure
of  the  water  vapour  was  held  constant  during  the  research,  simply  in
this  way  :  a  tube  containing  finely  divided  iron  was  in  communication
with  a  retort  containing  water,  which  was  kept  at  0°  the  first  time,
and  the  second  time  at  11*5° ;  thus  the  pressure  of  the  water  vapour
in  the  apparatus  would  be  equal  to  the  saturation  pressure  of  water  at
these  temperatures,  namely,  4 '6  and  lO'l  mm.  The  partial  pressure
of  the  hydrogen  developed  was  measured  by  the  manometer.  Other
series  of  experiments  therefore  show  variations  not  yet  explained.

Explanation  of  the  preceding  General  Case  by  Means  of
Sublimation  and  Dissociation. — When  a  number  of  bodies  react
with  a  single  gas  phase  we  may  consider  the  reaction  in  general,  as
has  already  been  shown  on  p.  470  for  the  special  case  of  the  dissociation
of  calcium  carbide,  as  occurring  in  the  form  of  a  sublimation  of  the  solid
bodies  which  then  react  as  gases.  We  may  therefore  consider  the
reaction  in  the  gaseous  phase  as  consisting  first  in  a  dissociation  of  the
reacting  molecules.

The  chemical  process  is  thus  reduced  to  sublimation  and  dissociation,
and,  however  complicated  the  case,  it  may  be  calculated  when  we
know  the  sublimation  pressure  and  dissociation  constants  of  all  the
reacting  molecules.  It  would  be  an  important  problem  for  future
chemical  investigation  to  determine  these  quantities  for  as  many  gases
as  possible  and  to  find  general  rules  for  their  calculations.

This  may  be  elucidated  by  one  or  two  applications.  Ammonium
chloride  at  ordinary  temperatures  has  an  exceedingly  small  sublimation
pressure,  probably  to  be  reckoned  in  thousandths  of  a  millimetre  of
mercury ;  ammonia  and  hydrochloric  acid  in  the  gaseous  phase  can
remain  in  equilibrium  with  solid  sal-ammoniac,  and  the  product  of  the
partial  pressure  of  these  gases  is  constant  at  a  constant  temperature.
If,  then,  by  any  means  we  reduce  the  partial  pressure  of  hydrochloric
acid,  that  of  ammonia  must  increase,  if  the  partial  pressure  of  hydro-
chloric acid  is  made  excessively  small  that  of  ammonia  will  become
very  considerable.  If  solid  lime  be  added  to  sal-ammoniac,  the  hydro-
chloric acid  is  almost  completely  absorbed  so  that  the  partial  pressure
of  ammonia  must  increase,  since  the  product  of  the  partial  pressure  of
hydrochloric  acid  and  ammonia  must  remain  constant  so  long  as  solid
sal-ammoniac  is  present.  Actually  even  at  atmospheric  temperature
ammonia  is  evolved  from  a  mixture  of  sal-ammoniac  and  lime  with

CHAP. Ill CHEMICAL  STATICS HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  475

considerable  partial  pressure,  and  it  is  certainly  very  noteworthy  that
small  sublimation  pressures  of  bodies  that  dissociate  on  volatilisation
can  be  raised  to  considerable  amounts  by  sufficiently  thorough  absorption
of  one  of  the  components.  Thus  if  sal-ammoniac  is  mixed  with  phosphorus
anhydride,  the  pressure  of  ammonia  is  made  exceedingly  small  and
hydrochloric  acid  is  violently  evolved.  The  formation  of  carbon
dioxide  from  calcium  carbide  by  acids  may  be  regarded  in  the  same
manner.  The  partial  pressure  of  the  calcium  oxide  in  the  gaseous
phase  is  extremely  reduced,  that  of  the  carbon  dioxide  is  consequently
considerably  raised,  since  so  long  as  solid  calcium  carbonate  is  present
the  product  of  the  partial  pressure  of  C02  and  CaO  must  be  constant.
Mercury  salts  are  little  volatile  at  low  temperatures,  but  for  the  same
reason  if  copper  filings  are  brought  in  contact  with  them  the  negative
radical  of  the  mercury  salt  is  combined,  and  the  partial  pressure  of  the
mercury  vapour  reaches  such  an  amount  that,  on  moderate  warming,
enough  mercury  is  given  off  to  serve  as  the  basis  of  an  analytical
test  for  mercury.

These  conclusions  indicate  the  way  of  measuring  sublimation
pressures  which  in  themselves  would  be  extremely  small.

The  Equilibrium  between  a  Liquid  Phase  and  Solid  Sub-
stances— The  Solubility  of  Solid  Substances. — The  description
of  the  particular  cases  in  which  solid  substances  are  in  equilibrium  with
a  liquid  (solution)  should  be  prefaced  by  the  general  remark,  that  here
a  behaviour  is  found  which  is  completely  analogous  to  the  equilibrium
between  a  gaseous  phase  and  solid  substances.  Thus  the  solution  of  a
solid  substance  in  any  solvent  is  a  process  which  has  the  greatest
similarity  to  sublimation.  In  both  cases  the  process  is  ended  as  soon
as  the  expansive  force  of  the  evaporating  or  dissolving  substance  is
held  in  equilibrium  by  the  gas  pressure  of  the  vaporised  molecules,
or  by  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the  dissolved  molecules,  respectively.
And,  therefore,  for  the  reason  already  mentioned  (p.  146),  we  call  the
osmotic  pressure  of  a  saturated  solution,  "  the  solution  pressure  "  of  the
respective  substance,  in  order  to  extend  the  clear  analogy  of  the  vapour
pressure  to  the  sublimation  pressure.

The  solubility  varies  with  the  nature  of  the  particular  substance,,
and  will  always  be  affected  more  or  less  by  any  change  in  its  chemical
composition,  or  physical  properties  (as  the  crystal  form,  e.g.) ;  thus,  e.g.
in  general,  the  different  solid  hydrates  of  a  salt  will  have  different
solubilities.

In  determining  solubilities,  care  must  always  be  given  to  the
nature  of  the  solid  substances  which  exist  in  equilibrium  with  the
solution.

Moreover,  the  solubility  depends  also  upon  the  nature  of  the
solvent,  and  upon  the  temperature ;  usually,  but  not  always,  it  rises
with  the  temperature.

476  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

The  analogy  between  the  solution,  sublimation,  and  dissociation,
respectively,  of  solid  substances  is  very  clearly  expressed  in  the
influence  of  foreign  substances  which  are  present.  The  solubility  of  a
solid  substance  is  no  more  changed  by  the  (moderate)  addition  of
another  substance — provided  that  the  foreign  substance  does  not  react
chemically  on  the  first — than  is  the  sublimation  pressure  changed  by
the  presence  of  foreign  indifferent  gases.

In  what  follows,  as  in  what  has  preceded,  we  will  now  fix  our
principal  attention  upon  dilute  solutions ;  their  laws  have  been,  thus
far,  almost  exclusively  the  subject  of  investigation,  and  we  will  con-
sider especially  the  behaviour  of  substances  which  are  only  slightly
soluble.  When  in  high  concentration, — associated  with  which  there  is
a  deep-seated  change  in  the  whole  nature  of  the  liquid,  and  therefore
in  its  solubility  also, — the  laws  which  will  be  developed  below  suffer
considerable  modifications  ;  yet  these  modifications  rarely  extend  so  far
that  the  same  laws  may  not  serve  as  a  guide  to  the  truth.

The  particular  "  specific  "  influences  which  enter  here  and  tend  to
obliterate  the  simple  regularities  of  dilute  solutions  have  great  interest
and  deserve  a  thorough  study.  It  is  only  recently  that  the  first
deliberate  step  has  been  made  in  this  direction.1

Solubility  varies  very  greatly  with  the  nature  of  the  solvent ;  this
may  be  described  as  an  effect  of  " the  nature  of  the  medium"  but  nothing
more  about  it  is  at  present  known.  If  another  substance -be  added  to
a  solvent  in  a  small  quantity  the  nature  of  the  medium  is  not  altered —
that  is,  a  dilute  solution  of  a  given  substance  has  the  same  solvent
action  as  the  pure  solvent.  When,  however,  a  considerable  quantity
of  the  added  substance  is  present  the  nature  of  the  medium  is  altered,
and  according  to  present  observations  this  may  take  place  somewhat
rapidly — that  is,  with  a  higher  power  (for  example,  the  second)  of  the
concentration  of  the  added  component.  Thus  if  alcohol  is  added  to
an  aqueous  solution  of  cane-sugar,  the  sugar  if  precipitated  because  it
is  much  less  soluble  in  the  newly  formed  medium.

According  to  recent  investigations  2  the  solvent  action  of  water  is
usually  much  reduced  by  addition  of  electrolytes ;  this  is  in  all
probability  related  to  the  fact  (p.  382)  that  the  density  of  water  is
considerably  influenced  by  the  presence  of  other  ions.

A  good  example  of  the  influence  of  the  nature  of  the  medium  is  to
be  found  in  the  researches  of  Villard  on  the  solvent  action  of  compressed
gases.3  In  a  vacuum  or  in  a  dilute  indifferent  gas  solids  and  liquids
dissolve  in  accordance  with  their  vapour  pressure;  if,  however,  the
indifferent  gas  is  strongly  compressed,  say  at  100  atmospheres,  specific
solvent  action  appears ;  thus  bromine  evaporates  in  an  atmosphere  of

1  G.  Bodlander,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  7.  308  and  358  (1891).

2  See  especially  Roth,  Zeitschr. physik.  Chan.,  24.  114  (1897)  ;  Rothmund,  ibid.,  33.
401  (1900)  ;  W.  Biltz,  ibid.,  43.  41  (1903).

3  Journ.  dephys.  [3],  5.  453  (1896)  ;  ref.  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chew.,  23.  373  (1897).

CHAP,  ill CHEMICAL  STATICS HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  477

compressed  oxygen  in  much  greater  quantity  than  in  a  vacuum ;  com-
pressed hydrogen  has  much  smaller  solvent  power.

Solubility  of  Hydrates. — It  may  be  expected  on  theoretical
grounds  that  the  action  of  other  substances  should  affect  the  solubility
in  water  of  salts  containing  water  of  crystallisation  even  when  the
action  is  too  small  to  alter  the  nature  of  the  medium.  We  will  not
go  into  the  thermodynamic  consideration  of  this  influence  here ;  it  is
easily  seen  however  that  the  water  contained  in  the  dissolving  solid  is
taken  up  by  the  solvent  the  more  easily  the  lower  the  vapour  pressure
of  the  dissolving  water,  and  hence  is  more  strongly  dissolved ;  in  other
words,  the  solubility  of  a  hydrate  in  water  is  increased  by  a  foreign
substance  the  more  the  hydrate  reduces  the  vapour  pressure  of  water.
For  further  details  see  the  complete  theoretical  and  experimental
investigation  of  H.  Goldschmidt.1

Equilibrium  between  Solids  and  Solutions.— This  case  is
obviously  to  be  treated  in  the  same  way  as  the  equilibrium  between
solids  and  gaseous  phases.  The  concentration  of  each  kind  of  molecule
present  in  the  solid  state  remains  constant  when  the  equilibrium  is
displaced,  hence  the  law  of  mass-action  can  be  applied  to  homogeneous
solutions  in  the  manner  given  in  the  preceding  chapter.

The  simplest  case  of  this  kind  is  dissociation  on  solution,  such  as
occurs  with  racemic  acid  and  similar  compounds  which,  on  solution,
break  up  into  dextro  and  Isevo  modifications,  and  also  with  many
double  salts  and  salts  with  water  of  crystallisation  which  break  up
into  their  components  (the  two  single  salts  or  salt  and  water),  and
most  frequently  of  all  with  the  solution  of  salt  which  dissociates  into
ions.

The  equations  for  this  case  are  as  follows.2  If  u  is  the  concentra-
tion of  the  undissociated  component  we  have

u  =  const. ;

if  Uj  and  u2  are  the  concentrations  of  theltwo  components  into  which
the  compound  breaks  up  in  solution  the  equation  of  the  dissociation
isotherm  is

Ku  =  uxu9.

So  long  as  the  dissociated  substance  is  present  in  the  solid  state  u
is  constant,  and  we  have  therefore

iijiig  =  const.

We  thus  have  the  same  equation  as  that  given  on  p.  471  for  the
dissociation  of  ammonium  sulphydrate.

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  17.  145  (1895).
2  Nernst,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  4.  372  (1889).

478

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

R.  Behrend  l  has  carried  out  a  study  of  the  foregoing  equation.
If  anthracene  and  picric  acid  are  mixed  in  alcoholic  solution,  anthracene
picrate  is  formed  according  to  the  equation

CUH10  *  C6H2(N02)3OH  =  (C14H10) .  (C^NO^OH) ;

this  becomes  evident  to  the  eye  from  the  marked  red  coloration  of  the
solution,  but  the  compound  is  only  formed  to  a  small  extent,  i.e.  it  is
largely  dissociated  in  solution.

Now  the  solubility  of  anthracene  and  picric  acid  were  determined
and  found  to  be  0'176  and  7*452  grms.  in  100  parts  of  solution  at
25°.  Then  a  series  of  solutions  of  varying  composition  were  analysed,
some  containing  anthracene  and  some  anthracene  picrate  in  solid  form  ;
the  results  of  these  determinations  are  given  in  the  following  table  : —

1

2

3

4

5

6 7

8 9

10

Anthracene
a

0-190

0-206

0-215 0-228

0-236

0-202

0-180

0-162 0-151 0-149

Picric  acids
P

1-017

2-071

2-673

3-233

3-469  !  3-994

5-087 5-843

6-727

7-511

i

Anthracene  diss.

0-176

0-176

0-176

0176

0-183

0-149

0-127

0-109

0-098

'.  0-096

Picric  acids  diss.

0-999

2-032

2-623

3-166

3-401 3-926

5-019

5775

6-659

7-443

Picrate
u

0-032

0-069

0-089

0-119

0-121

0-121

0-121

0-121

0-121

0-121

»1 '  U2

5-5

5-2

5-2

4-7

5-1

4-8

5-3

5-2

5-4 5-9

u

a  and  p  are  the  amounts  of  the  two  components  present  in  the
solution  partly  free,  partly  combined.  In  solutions  1-4  anthracene  was
in  excess,  in  solutions  6-9  solid  anthracene  picrate  was  present ;  5  was
saturated  with  both  bodies,  10  with  the  picrate  and  picric  acid.

Solutions  1-4  contain  more  anthracene  than  corresponds  to  its
solubility  (0*176);  the  excess  must  be  in  the  form  of  picrate  in
solution ;  this  quantity  is  given  in  the  fifth  line  of  the  table.  If  the
amount  of  picric  acid  present  in  the  form  of  picrate  be  subtracted
from  p  we  obtain  the  values  of  u2  given  in  the  fourth  horizontal  line.

Solution  5  is  saturated  both  with  anthracene  and  with
picrate ;  the  amount  of  picrate  here  present,  which  is  equivalent  to
0-236  -  0-176  =  0'060  grms.  of  anthracene,  and  therefore  amounts

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  15.  183  (1894).

CHAP.  Ill CHEMICAL  STATICS  -  HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  479

229  +  178
to 0-060-  -  =  0'137 (since 229 and  178 are the molecular

1/0

weights  of  picric  acid  and  anthracene),  gives  the  amount  of  undissociated
picrate  which  must  be  present  in  all  the  solutions  containing  solid
picrate  in  excess.  This  amount  may  however  also  be  calculated  from
solution  10,  which  is  saturated  with  picric  acid  and  picrate,  and
contains  7*511  -  7*452  =  0*059  of  picric  acid  more  than  corresponds
to  the  solubility  of  picric  acid.  This  quantity  can  also  only  be
present  as  picrate,  and  we  thus  find  for  the  amount  of  undissociated

229  +  1  78
picrate  0'059  -  —  -  --  =  0*105. The  mean  of  these  two  determina-

-j  £  t/

tions  (0*137  and  0'105)  is  0*121  ;  this  is  taken  as  the  value  of  u  in
solutions  5-10  with  solid  picrate  present.  ut  in  these  solutions  is
naturally  calculated  by  subtracting  u  equivalents  of  anthracene  from
the  total  amount  of  anthracene  present  as  picrate,  and  u2  is  determined
in  a  similar  manner.

The  theory  requires  that  for  all  the  solutions  the  expression

should  hold,  and,  in  point  of  fact,  this  expression  was  found  constant
so  far  as  the  errors  of  observations  would  allow.  In  solutions  5-10
on  account  of  the  constancy  of  u

u^  =  const.,
and  for  the  solutions  1-5  on  account  of  the  constancy  of  ux

—  =  const.
u

Several  Phases  of  Variable  Composition  —  The  Vapour
Pressure  of  Solutions.  —  We  may  now  advance  a  step  further  and
consider  the  case  where  several  phases  of  variable  composition  occur
in  a  system  :  these  phases  may  occur  in  the  gaseous  or  liquid  state.

The  state  of  equilibrium  which  is  established  between  a  dilute
solution  of  a  substance  which  is  not  noticeably  volatile,  and  the  vapour
emitted,  is  completely  determined  by  the  formula  for  the  vapour
pressure  :  according  to  this,  the  relative  depression  of  the  vapour  pressure^
which  is  experienced  by  the  solvent  on  adding  a  strange  substance,  is  equal
to  the  ratio  of  the  number  of  dissolved  molecules  to  the  number  of  molecules
of  the  solvent  (p.  150).  For  concentrated  solutions,  this  law  is  at  least
suitable  as  a  first  approximation.

In  the  sense  of  the  kinetic  method  of  the  consideration  of  chemical
equilibrium,  we  must  conceive  of  this  law  also  in  a  dynamic  way  ;
thus,  e.g.  in  the  coexistence  of  a  water  solution  and  of  water  vapour,

480  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

at  every  moment,  as  many  molecules  of  water  vapour  will  be  emitted,
from  every  portion  of  the  surface  of  a  solution,  as  are  precipitated
by  condensation.

We  will  now  consider  that  case  which  is  in  extreme  contrast  to  the
last — namely,  where  only  the  dissolved  substance  evaporates  from  the
solution,  or  at  least  where  its  volatility  is  more  pronounced  than  that
of  the  solvent ;  and  where  the  vapour  pressure,  exerted  by  the  vapour
emitted  by  the  solvent  and  by  the  solution,  is  due  almost  exclusively
to  the  molecules  of  the  dissolved  substance.  When  the  dissolved  sub-
stance, as  such,  stands  at  the  same  osmotic  pressure  that  its  vapour  has
at  the  same  concentration,  or  in  other  words,  when  its  molecular  con-
dition does  not  change  on  evaporation,  then,  according  to  p.  154,  a
proportionality  must  exist  between  the  concentrations  of  the  dissolved
substance  in  the  two  phases  of  the  system  considered.

Under  these  circumstances,  Henry's  law  of  absorption  holds  good.
Let  us  denote  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the  dissolved  substance  in  the
solution  by  TT  •  and  by  p,  the  gas-pressure  which  the  evaporated  sub-
stance has  in  the  space  in  contact  with  the  solution.  Then  at  constant
temperature,  we  have

7T  =  Lp,

or

c  =  LC,

where  c  and  C  are  the  concentrations  in  the  two  phases.

The  proportional  factor  L  we  will  call  the  solubility  coefficient  of  the
respective  substance.  It  has  this  simple  relation  to  the  absorption
coefficient,  in  that  it  may  be  obtained  from  the  latter  by  multiplication
by  (1  +  0'003 6 6t),  where  t  denotes  the  temperature  of  the  experiment.
By  the  term  "absorption  coefficient,"  according  to  the  example  of
Bunsen,1  is  meant  the  volume  (referred  to  0°  and  760  mm.  pressure)
of  the  gas  which  is  absorbed  by  unit  volume  of  the  solution.

The  proportionality  between  the  osmotic  pressure  and  the  gas
pressure  may  be  easily  understood  by  means  of  the  molecular  theory.
When  the  solution  is  in  equilibrium  with  the  vapour  in  the  space  above
it,  then  at  every  moment  there  are  as  many  molecules  of  the  dissolved
substance  emitted  by  the  solution  as  are  precipitated  upon  it  from  the
gas  space.  But  now  since  the  quantity  both  of  the  emitted  and  of  the
absorbed  molecules  is  proportioned  to  their  number,  therefore  these
quantities  must  also  be  proportional  respectively  to  the  concentration
in  the  solution  and  in  the  gas  space ;  and  there  must  also  be  a  pro-
portionality between  the  two  latter  values.

It  thus  becomes  obvious  how  the  identity  of  the  molecular  weights  of
the  dissolved  substance  in  the  solution  and  in  the  gas  space  is  a  neces-
sary condition  for  the  relevancy  of  Henry's  law  •  because  otherwise  the
number  of  the  emitted  and  of  the  precipitated  molecules  would  not  be

1  Gasometrische  Methoden,  Braunschweig  (Brunswick),  1877.

CHAP,  ill CHEMICAL  STATICS  -  HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  481

proportional  to  the  concentration.  If  different  molecular  species,  but
such  as  do  not  react  upon  each  other,  are  present,  they,  of  course,  do
not  have  any  influence  on  each  other,  i.e.  each  of  the  different  gases
of  a  mixture  is  dissolved  as  though  the  others  were  not  present
(absorption  law  of  Dalton).

The  Law  of  Distribution.  —  Moreover,  the  case  where  several
molecular  species  (which  may  react  chemically  upon  each  other)
evaporate  at  the  same  time,  from  any  selected  solvent,  —  this  may  like-
wise be  referred  to  the  preceding  case  by  means  of  a  kinetic  treat-
ment. For  the  method  of  treatment,  which  was  advanced  for  the  case
of  one  molecular  species,  may  be  applied  unchanged  to  each  of  several
molecular  species  participating  in  the  chemical  equilibrium,  which
has  become  established  between  the  solution  and  the  vapour  space  in
contact  with  it.

We  thus  arrive  at  the  result,  that  at  a  given  temperature  for  every
molecular  species  there  exists  a  constant  ratio  of  distribution  between  a  solvent
and  its  vapour  space  ;  and  this  is  independent  of  the  presence  of  other  mole-
cular species,  it  being  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  the  particular  molecular
species  is  chemically  reactive  with  the  other  or  not.1

The  simultaneous  Evaporation  of  the  Solvent  and  of  the
Dissolved  Substances.  —  This  case,  which  is  of  frequent  occurrence
in  nature,  may  be  solved  by  a  combination  of  the  laws  just  given.
It  may  be  stated  as  follows  :  —

1.  The  partial  pressure  of  the  solvent  in  the  vapour  which  stands
in  equilibrium  with  the  solution  is  equal  to  the  vapour  pressure  p  of
the  pure  solvent  at  the  respective  temperature,  diminished  by  the
depression  occasioned  by  the  dissolved  substance  ;  this  depression,
according  to  van't  Hoff's  vapour-pressure  formula,  is  estimated  to  be

where n denotes the total  number  of  dissolved  molecules,  in  pro-
portion to  N  molecules  of  the  solvent.

2.  The  vapour  pressures  p1,  p2  .  .  .  of  the  dissolved  substances  can
be  calculated  from  the  formulae

if  irv  7r2  .  .  .  denote  the  partial  osmotic  pressures  of  the  particular
molecular  species  existing  in  the  solution,  and  if  Lp  L2  .  .  .  denote
their  respective  solubility  coefficients.

The  partial  pressure  of  each  of  the  particular  molecular  species
in  the  gas  space  is,  moreover,  proportional  to  the  concentration  in  the

1  Nernst,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  8.  110  (1891)  ;  see  also  Aulich,  ibid.,  8.  105.

2  I

482

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

solution.  When  no  change  of  the  molecular  state  (i.e.  neither  disso-
ciation nor  any  other  reaction  between  the  dissolved  and  the  evapor-
ating substances)  is  associated  with  a  change  in  the  concentration,
either  in  the  solution  or  in  the  gas  space,  then  the  total  pi'essure  of  the
dissolved  substances  in  the  saturated  vapour  is  proportional  to  the
concentration  in  the  solution.  But  this  ceases  to  be  true  when  there
occurs  a  displacement  of  the  equilibrium  existing  between  the  dis-
solved substances  (the  displacement  being  identified  with  a  change
in  the  number  of  molecules),  as  a  result  of  a  change  in  the  concen-
tration.

In  order  to  prove  these  requirements  of  his  theory,  the  writer
investigated  the  equilibrium  existing  between  solutions  of  acetic
acid  in  benzene  and  their  saturated  vapour.  Acetic  acid,  both
in  solution  and  in  a  state  of  vapour,  is  a  mixture  of  the  molecules
(CH3C09H)  and  (CH3C02H)2 ;  and  since  the  degree  of  dissociation
changes  with  the  concentration,  it  was  anticipated  that  Henry's  law
would  not  hold  good  for  the  vapour  of  acetic  acid.

The  measurements  of  the  partial  pressure  of  the  vapour  of  acetic
acid  were  accomplished  by  determining  the  changes  of  the  boiling-
point  occasioned  by  the  addition  of  acetic  acid  to  benzene,  and  were
exactly  measured  by  Beckmann's  apparatus.

The  partial  pressures  sought  were  obtained  by  the  differences
between  the  observed  changes  in  the  boiling-point  and  those  calculated
from  the  vapour  pressure  formula.  In  the  following  table,  m  denotes
the  number  of  g.  of  acetic  acid  dissolved  in  100  g.  of  benzene;  and
x  its  degree  of  dissociation,  as  is  inferred  from  the  boiling-point
determinations  of  dilute  solutions  of  related  non-volatile  acids,  and
calculated  for  the  different  concentrations,  according  to  the  equation
of  the  isotherm  of  dissociation,  viz.

1  -x

=  constant.

Here  p  is  derived  from  the  changes  in  the  boiling-point,  the  partial
pressure  of  the  acetic  acid  being  expressed  in  mm.  of  mercury.

m

X

pObs.

p  Calc.

A

a

0-150

0-20

2-4

2-6

2-24

0-87

0-663

o-io

6-6

6-5

2-44

070

1-64

0-065

11-8

11-6

2-61

0-60

1-87

0-061

12-9

12-6

2-63

0-58

2-60

0-055

16-1

157

271

0-54

4-13

0-042

21-8

21-4

2-81

0-48

5-00

0-038

23-6

23-9

2-83

0-47

6-83

0-033

31-4

31-1

2-96

0-40

7-53

0-031

33-5

33-4

2-99

0-38

8-42

0-029

36-4

36-4

3-02

0-36

1

CHAP,  ill CHEMICAL  STATICS HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  483

Here  we  are  not  concerned  with  the  proportionality  between  m
and  p  which  is  required  by  the  ordinary  conception  of  Henry's  law ;
but  this  holds  true,  nevertheless,  for  the  two  particular  molecular
species,  viz.  the  double  and  the  single  molecules,  of  which  the  acetic
acid  vapour  is  composed.  This  is  shown  by  the  following  calculation.

The  number  of  normal  molecules  in  the  solution  is  proportional  to
the  value  of  mx,  or  also  of  >/m(l  —  x).  The  degree  of  dissociation  a
for  the  gaseous  state  is  calculated  from  the  vapour  density  A  of  acetic
acid  to  be

4-146 -A
—A"'

where 4'1 46  represents  the  [superior]  limitingvalue  of  the  vapour  density
of  acetic  acid,  a  having  the  value  of  zero  (a  =  0).  The  vapour  pressures
A,  given  in  the  fifth  column,  and  corresponding  to  the  temperature  of
observation  (the  boiling-point  of  benzene  being  80°),  are  calculated
from  the  equation  of  the  isotherm  of  dissociation  (p.  440),  viz.—

A -2-073

(4-146  -A)2p

where,  after  the  example  of  Gibbs,1  at  80°,  K  may  be  placed  at  0'0201.
Now,  since  the  number  of  normal  molecules  in  unit  volume  of  the
vapour  is  proportional  to  the  product  of  the  mass  of  the  acetic  acid
vapour  in  unit  volume  and  its  degree  of  dissociation  ;  therefore,  corre-
sponding to  the  expression

Apa  =  Ap  =  p(4-146  -  A),

a  proportionality  must  exist  between  the  values,

\/m(l  -  x), and p(4'146  -  A).

Now,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  we  find  that  the  values  of  p  given  in  the
fourth  column,  and  calculated  from  the  formula

4-146-A

coincide  with  the  results  of  observation  in  a  remarkable  way. The
proportional  factor  14*4  corresponds  to  the  solubility  coefficients  of  the

CHQC02H  molecules.

Similar  results  are  obtained  in  the  measurement  of  the  pressures  of
ethereal  solutions  of  water,  which  substance,  like  acetic  acid,  tends  to
form  double  molecules,  in  this  case  (H20)2.

1  Sitt.  Journ.  (Am.  J.  Sci.},  18.  371  (1879).

484  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  ill

The  Mutual  Solubility  of  Liquids. — Many  liquids  have  the
property  of  mutually  dissolving  each  other  to  a  limited  extent,  as
water  and  ether,  e.g.  For  each  temperature  there  is  a  corresponding
solubility  of  the  one  in  the  other,  and  conversely  of  the  other  in  the  one.
The  connection  between  these  two  mutual  solubilities  has  not  been
explained  as  yet.  Only  a  few  facts  are  known  experimentally  regard-
ing this.

Regarding  the  influence  of  temperature,  sometimes  both  of  the
mutual  solubilities  increase  with  increasing  temperature.  It  may
happen,  as  in  the  case  of  water  and  phenol,1  that  the  composition  of
the  two  solutions  may  approach  nearer  and  nearer  together  on  raising
the  temperature,  until  complete  miscibility  occurs,  a  phenomenon  which
reminds  one  of  the  critical  temperature.

Sometimes  both  solubilities  may  diminish  with  increasing  tem-
perature.

And,  finally,  the  one  may  increase  and  the  other  may  diminish,  as
is  the  case  with  water  and  ether.  Thus  if  one  warms  water  saturated
with  ether  [the  water  being  the  solvent],  or  cools  ether  saturated  with
water  [ether  being  the  solvent],  in  both  cases  it  is  noticed  that  a
cloudiness  is  formed  in  the  originally  clear  liquids.  From  this  it
follows  that  the  solubility  of  ether  in  water  diminishes  with  rising
temperature ;  but,  inversely,  that  that  of  water  in  ether  increases  with
the  temperature.

Two  liquids,  which  are  mutually  soluble  to  a  limited  degree,  are
in  equilibrium  with  each  other  when  they  have  dissolved  each  other
to  saturation.  From  this  it  follows  that  the  saturated  vapours  emitted
by  each  of  the  two  layers  [of  the  two  solutions]  have  the  same  pressure  and
the  same  composition.  And,  moreover,  because  the  two  layers  of  the
mixture  are  in  equilibrium  with  each  other,  their  saturated  vapours
must  be  also ;  for  otherwise  the  condition  of  equilibrium  would  be
destroyed,  resulting  from  a  distiljation  process  which  would  change
the  composition  of  the  two  layers.  This  requirement  of  the  theory
has  been  experimentally  established  by  Konowalow  (p.  112).

Moreover,  the  partial  pressure  of  each  one  of  the  two  ingredients
must  be  smaller  than  that  corresponding  respectively  to  each  of  the
pure  solvents,  because  each  of  the  solvents  has  experienced  a  depression
of  its  own  particular  pressure,  by  reason  of  having  dissolved  some  of
the  other  solvent.  The  magnitudes  of  these  depressions  depend  of
course  upon  the  respective  molecular  weights,  and  upon  the  mutual
solubilities.  They  are  very  small  when  the  solubility  is  at  a  minimun,
as  is  the  case,  e.g.,  with  water  and  carbon  disulphide.  In  such  cases
the  resulting  vapour  pressure  is  simply  [nearly]  equal  to  the  sum  of
the  two  vapour  pressures  which  each  of  the  two  liquids  respectively
would  have  independently.

When  one  of  two  liquids  [A  and  B]  (the  mutual  solubility  of
1  Alexejew,  Wied.  Ann.,  28.  305  (1886).

CHEMICAL  STATION

-HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS

485

which  for  each  other  is  limited)  dissolves  still  another  substance  [C],
then  the  mutual  solubility  of  the  former  [A  or  B]  for  the  other  [B  or
A]  is  diminished,  in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  solubility  already
stated  (see  p.  141).

The  Distribution  of  a  Substance  between  Two  Solvents.—

The  laws  which  have  already  been  stated  for  the  evaporation  of  a
substance  existing  in  solution,  i.e.  for  the  distribution  of  a  substance
between  a  gaseous  and  a  liquid  phase,  may  be  applied  without  further
remark  to  the  distribution  of  a  substance  between  two  liquid  phases ;
this  is  not  surprising,  in  view  of  the  analogies  between  evaporation
and  solution,  which  have  been  repeatedly  emphasised.

Now,  by  the  distribution  coefficients  of  a  substance  between  two
solvents,  we  mean  the  ratio  of  the  spatial  concentrations  which  the  one
substance  has  in  these  two  solvents,  when  the  condition  of  equilibrium
shall  have  been  established;  and  thus,  by  a  simple  extension  of
the  law  developed  on  p.  475,  we  arrive  at  the  following  results,
viz.  : —

1.  If  the  dissolved substance  has  the same  molecular  weight  in
each  of  the  two  solvents,  then  the  coefficient  of  distribution  is  constant  for
any  given  temperature  (compare  also  p.  155).

2.  In  the  presence  of  several  dissolved  substances,  each  molecular
species  distributes  itself  as  though  the  others  were  not  present.

3.  If  the  dissolved  substance  does  riot  exist  as  a  unit,  but  is  influenced
by dissociation, then  law 1 holds  good for  each of  the  molecular
species  resulting  from  the  dissociation. This  also  follows  immediately
from  the  application  of  law  2.

Thus  succinic  acid  is  divided  between  ether  and  water,  with  the
following  constant  coefficient  of  distribution : —

,

Co

0-024

0-0046

5-2

0-070

0-013

5-2

0-121

0-022

5-4

Here  cx  and  c2  denote  the  number  of  g.  of  acid  dissolved  in  10  c.c.
of  water  and  of  ether  respectively.  This  was  to  be  expected,  because
succinic  acid  has  its  normal  molecular  weight  both  in  ether  and  also  in
water,  disregarding  its  very  slight  electrolytic,  dissociation  in  the  latter.
Similar  results  were  found  by  Berthelot  and  Jungfleisch1  for  similar
cases.

But,  as  was  to  be  expected,  very  different  results  were  found  by  the

1  Ann.  cliim.  phys.  [4],  26;  396  (1872)  ;  Berthelot,  ibid.,  408.

486

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

writer1  in  the  study  of  the  distribution  qf  substances  which  have
different  molecular  weights  in  the  two  solvents.  Thus,  cx  and  c2  denoting
the  varying  concentrations  (i.e.  the  number  of  g.  in  10  c.c.  of  the
solvent)  of  benzoic  acid  in  water  and  benzene  respectively,  the  follow-
ing results  were  found  :—

Cl

C-2

£1

C2

3L
^

0-0150

0-242

0-062

0-0305

0-0195

0-412

0-048

0-0304

0-0289

0-970

0-030

0-0293

Here  we  are  not  concerned  with  the  constancy  of  the  quotient

p

— ,  because the  acid  has its  normal  mol. wt. in  water  (disregarding

C2

again  a  very  slight  electrolytic  dissociation),  while  in  benzene  the
double  molecules  preponderate.  Now,  the  number  of  normal  molecules
in  the  latter  solvent  [benzene],  according  to  the  laws  of  dissociation,  is
proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  concentration ;  and  thus  the
law  of  distribution  requires  a  proportionality  between  cx  and  v/cT  ',

as  a  matter  of  fact  we  find  the  values  of  the  expression  f  — =  1,  as  given

\  v  C2/

in  the  last  column,  very  constant.

This  constancy  disappears  at  extreme  dilution,  because,  in  this
case  the  benzoic  acid  in  the  benzene  is  decomposed  increasingly  into
single  molecules.  The  writer  calculated  the  degree  of  dissociation

£»

from  the change  in }— ,  and  thus  proved  that  the equation  of  the
vc2

isotherm  of  dissociation  also holds  good for  the decomposition,  in
solution,  of  double  molecules  [into  single  molecules].

Hendrixson 2  has  more  recently  made  measurements  of  this  kind  and
thoroughly  established  the  theory.  The  following  table  refers  to  the
partition  of  benzoic  acid  between  benzene  and  water  at  10° ;  cx  is  the
number  of  grms.  of  benzoic  acid  contained  in  the  aqueous  phase  for
200  grms.  of  water,  c.7  the  corresponding  quantity  for  the  benzene
phase ;  a  is  the  degree  of  electrolytic  dissociation  in  water  (see  the
following  chapter),  c1(l  -  a)  therefore  the  quantity  of  benzoic  acid  in
its  normal  state  in  the  aqueous  phase.  Taking  as  the  ratio  of

1  Nernst,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  8.  110  (1891).
2  Zeitschr.  anorg.  Chem.,  13.  73  (1897).

CHAP. Ill

CHEMICAL  STATICS HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS

487

partition  for  normal  molecules  k  =  0*700,  it  follows  that  the  number
of  normal  molecules  in  the  benzene  phase  is

m

0-700

the  number  of  double  molecules  in  the  benzene  phase  is  therefore
naturally  c2  -  m.  To  test  the  theory  the  last  column  gives  the
dissociation  constant

™2

K  =

C0-m

which  is  found  to  be  constant  within  the  limit  of  errors  of  observa-
tion;  this  proves  both  that  the  dissociation  isotherm  holds  for  the
dissociation  of  double  molecules  into  simple,  and  that  the  simple
molecules  (as  also  the  double  molecules)  possess  a  ratio  of  partition
independent  of  concentration  or  degree  of  dissociation.

Co

a

m

c2-m

:—  L

c2-m

0-0429

0-1449

0-169

0-0357

0-0510

0-0939

0-0277

0-0562

0-2380

0-149

0-0474

0-0677

0-1703

0-0269

0-0823

0-4726

0-125

0-0720

0-1029

0-3697

0-0286

0-1124

0-8843

0-104

0-1007

0-1439

07404

0-0279

0-1780

2-1777

0-0866

0-1626

0-2323

1-9454

0-0277

0-2430

4-0544

0-0747

0-2249

0-3213

3-7331

0-0276

0-2817

5-4851

0-0695

0-2621

0-3743

5-1108

0-0274

Mean  K  —

0-0277

In  the  same  way  it  was  found  that

k  =  0-477  K  =  0-122.

Application  of  the  Law  of  Partition  to  Determination  of
Chemical  Equilibrium. — Just  as  on  p.  475  the  solubility  was  applied
to  determine  the  ratio  in  which  the  different  species  of  molecules  take
part  in  equilibrium,  so  we  may  make  use  of  the  partition  of  a  substance
between  two  solvents  for  the  same  object.  This  has  been  done
practically  in  the  table  in  the  foregoing  paragraph ;  the  following
examples  which  illustrate  the  application  of  this  method  to  more
complicated  cases  show  that  the  law  of  partition  has  a  certain  advantage
as  compared  with  the  principle  of  constant  solubility  in  application  to
such  cases,  for  the  latter  refers  only  to  a  single  concentration,  namely
that  of  saturation,  whereas  the  former  is  not  so  limited.

488  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

1.  Bromine  is  shared  between  water  and  carbon  disulphide  in  a
constant  ratio,  the  molecular  weight  corresponding  to  the  formula  Br2
in  both  solvents. If  potassium  bromide  is  added  to  the  water,  it  is
found  that  a  considerably  larger  amount  of  bromine  passes  into  the
aqueous  layer. This  quantity  must  be  used  in  forming  a  new  species
of  molecule ;  Roloff,1  who,  at  my  instance,  first  made  use  of  the  law  of
partition  to  study  chemical  equilibrium,  was  able  to  show  that  bromine
forms,  by  addition  of  potassium  bromide,  the  electrolytically  strongly
dissociated  salt  KBr3.

2.  The  ratio  of  partition  of  chlorine  between  water  and  carbon
tetrachloride  varies  considerably  with  the  concentration. This,  as  was
shown  by  A.  A.  Jakowkin,2  depends  upon  the  fact  that  chlorine  acts
on  water  according  to  the  equation

C12  +  H20  =  HC1  +  HC10.

If  the  amount  of  unchanged  chlorine  is  used  for  the  calculation,  the
constant  ratio  of  partition  is  arrived  at ;  in  calculating  this  the  electro-
lytic dissociation  of  the  hydrochloric  acid  formed  must  be  taken  into
account.

The  Freezing  of  Solutions  and  Crystallisation  from  Solutions.

—The  separation  of  solid  substances  from  solutions,  in  many  respects,
may  be  compared  with  the  process  of  the  evaporation  of  a  mixture,  i.e.
the  separation  of  one  of  its  components  in  the  gaseous  form.  When  this
process  results  in  the  precipitation  of  that  ingredient  of  the  solution
which  is  present  in  excess,  i.e.  the  solvent,  it  is  called  a  freezing  of  the
solution ;  and  when  it  results  in  the  separation  of  the  substance  dissolved,
then  it  is  called  a  crystallising  out  of  the  substance  dissolved.  The  processes
of  freezing  and  of  crystallising  out  are  both  to  be  considered  from  the
same  point  of  view ;  and  when  we  are  not  dealing  with  dilute  solutions
where  one  ingredient  is  present  in  large  excess,  but  with  a  mixture,
where  both  ingredients  are  present  in  about  the  same  proportions,  then
we  would  be  in  actual  doubt  whether  the  separation  should  be
regarded  as  a  freezing  or  a  crystallising  out.

In  fact,  it  would  appear  that  neither  ingredient  is  separated  in  an
absolutely  pure  form,  but  that  there  probably  crystallises  out  an
isomorpJious  mixture  containing  both  ingredients,  just  as  every  solution
emits  a  vapour  which  is  a  mixture  containing  both  ingredients.

Now  experiment  shows  that  usually  one  ingredient  preponderates
so  much  in  the  product  which  is  crystallised  out,  that  we  may  practi-
cally regard  it  as  a  separation  in  a  pure  form.  Then,  according  to  this
conception,  the  two  cases  which  are  distinguished  above  are  to  be

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  13.  341  (1894). The  corresponding  investigation  on  the
formation  of  potassium  triodide  has  been  carried  out  by  A.  A.  Jakowkin  (see  ibid.,  20.
19,  1896).

2  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  30.  518  (1897)  ;  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem,,  29.  613  (1899).

CHAP.  Ill CHEMICAL  STATICS  -  HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  489

regarded  as  only  two  limiting  cases  of  the  many  which  occur  in  nature  ;
and  in  fact  examples  are  known,  though  they  are  not  very  numerous,
where  the  solvent  and  the  dissolved  substance  crystallise  out  from  the
solution  in  an  isomorphous  mixture  (pp.  168  and  272).

The  Freezing-Point  of  Dilute  Solutions.  —  There  is  no  difficulty
in  solving  the  case  where  the  pure  solvent  freezes  out  from  a  dilute  solution.
For  the  condition  of  equilibrium  between  the  solidified  solvent  and  the
solution  is  completely  made  known  by  means  of  the  laws  which  have
been  already  described  (p.  151).  These  laws  may  be  formulated  as
follows  :  —

1.  The  addition  of  a  [soluble]  foreign  substance  lowers  the  freezing-
point  [of  the  solvent]  in  all  cases.

2.  The  depression  of  the  freezing-point  of  the  solvent,  occasioned
by  the  addition  of  a  foreign  substance,  is,  in  most  cases,  proportional
to  its  concentration  (Blagden)  ;  and  it  is  so  in  all  those  cases  where  the
dissolved substance  exists  in  the solution  in  its  unit  molecules,  i.e.
when  there  is  neither  dissociation  nor  polymerisation  (van't  Hoff).

3.  The  depression  t  of  the  freezing-point,  occasioned  by  the  addition
of  a  foreign  substance  whose  mol.  wt.  is  M,  is

where  m  denotes  the  number  of  grams  of  the  foreign  substance  in  100
g.  of  the  solvent  ;  E  denotes  the  molecular  depression  of  the  freezing-point^
i.e.  the  depression  occasioned  by  the  addition  of  1  g.-mol.  of  the
foreign  substance  to  100  g.  of  the  solvent  ;  it  varies  with  the  particular
solvent  used  (Raoult).

The  molecular  depression  of  the  freezing-point  may  be  theoretically
calculated  from  the  melting-point  T,  on  the  absolute  scale,  and  from  the
heat  of  fusion  r,  expressed  in  g.-cal  per  g.  of  substance,  from  the  formula
(van't  Hoff),

,, 0-02T2

These  laws  make  it  possible  to  ascertain  by  calculation,  from  the
known  concentration  of  the  solution,  that  temperature-point  at  which
(under  atmospheric  pressure)  the  solution  and  the  solidified  solvent
may  exist  together  in  stable  equilibrium.

The  influence  of  pressure  on  the  freezing-point  of  a  solution  has  not
as  yet  been  experimentally  studied  ;  but  it  may  be  anticipated  that
the  lowering  of  the  freezing-point  experienced  by  the  solvent  on  the
addition  of  a  foreign  substance  is  practically  independent  of  the
external  pressure.  The  laws  formulated  above  strictly  hold  good  only
for  dilute  solutions,  and  in  concentrated  solutions  (e.g.  10  to  20  per  cent)
they  merely  serve  as  tentative  standards.

490  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

The  Crystallising  out  of  Dissolved  Substances. — Reference
has  already  been  made  (p.  488)  to  the  condition  of  equilibrium  which
prevails  when  the  dissolved  substance  is  separated  in  a  pure  form.
Here  we  will  merely  show  the  connection  of  the  preceding  section
with  the  new  point  of  view  to  which  we  have  attained.  Thus,  e.g.  we
may  conceive  of  such  a  condition  of  equilibrium  between  a  solid  salt
and  its  saturated  water  solution,  that  the  freezing-point  of  the  solid
salt  shall  be  depressed  by  the  presence  of  the  water  to  the  temperature
of  the  saturated  solution.  Thus,  while  on  the  one  hand  we  may
justly  parallelise  the  process  of  solution  with  that  of  evaporation,  there
is  also,  on  the  other  hand,  an  undeniable  analogy  with  the  melting  of
a  solidified  solvent  in  presence  of  its  solution.

The  so-called  "  Cryohydrates." — If  one  cools  sufficiently  a  water
solution  which  is  in  contact  with  a  solid  salt,  one  finally  arrives  at  the
freezing-point  of  the  saturated  solution,  where,  with  the  separation  of
ice,  there  is  also  associated  a  separation  of  the  salt  existing  in  the
solution.  At  this  temperature-point  there  is  precipitated  a  mechanical
(not  a  really  isomorphic)  mass  (but  a  eutectic  mixture,  p.  126),  con-
taining ice  and  the  solid  substance,  in  those  proportions  which  cor-
respond to  the  particular  concentration  of  the  saturated  solution.
This  temperature-point  may  be  found  as  the  intersection-point  of  the
solubility  curve  of  the  salt  in  question,  with  the  curve  which
represents  the  dependence  of  the  freezing-point  of  the  solution  upon
its  concentration.  Such  a  solution  does  not  change  its  composition
by  fractional  freezing,  arid  it  must,  therefore,  have  a  constant  freezing-
point,  i.e.  one  which  is  independent  of  the  quantity  frozen  out.1

The  Equilibrium  between  Liquid  and  Solid  Solutions.—

The  most  general  case  is  where  an  isomorphous  mixture  of  the  solvent
and  of  the  dissolved  substance  crystallises  out  of  the  solution ;  that  is
represented  to  us  by  a  system  in  which  a  solid  and  a  liquid  solution
are  in  equilibrium  with  each  other.  According  to  the  views  which  were
advanced  by  van't  Hoff  in  his  Theory  of  Solid  Solutions  (p.  168),  the
study  of  equilibria  of  this  sort  would  appear  to  claim  especial  atten-
tion, because  in  this  way  one  may  perhaps  most  easily  gain  an  insight
into  molecular  dimensions,  and  thus  also  into  the  molecular  structure
of  particular  crystallised  substances.

There  may  be  distinguished  the  following  cases  respecting  the
degree  of  miscibility  of  solid  substances  (p.  120),  viz.  : —

1.  The  two  salts2  may  form  isomorphous  mixtures  in  all  propor-
tions :  then  in  crystallising  out  a  common  solution  of  both  salts,
mixed  crystals  of  every  composition  could  be  formed.

1  Amongst  the  more  recent  work  see  especially  the  investigation  of  Roloff, Zeitschr.
physik.  Chem.,  17.  325  (1895).

2  Of  course,  what  is  said  above  respecting salts  may  be  applied  without  further
remark  to  other  substances.

CHAP,  ill CHEMICAL  STATICS HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  491

2.  The  series  of  mixtures  of  the  two  solid  salts  has  a  gap. Then
the  two  inner  members  must  be  in  equilibrium  with  each  other,  in  a
way  similar  to  the  equilibrium  between  two  mutually  saturated  liquids
(p. 484) ;  and,  therefore,  for  exactly  the  same  reason  that  the  two
mutually  saturated  liquids  are  in  equilibrium  with  the  vapour  having
the  same  composition,  these  two  inner  members  must  be  in  equilibrium
with  the  same  saturated  solution.

In  fact,  Roozeboom  l  succeeded  in  verifying  this  experimentally  by
mixed  solutions  of  potassium  and  thallium  chlorates.  When  one
causes  solutions  of  thallium  chlorate  to  crystallise  out,  by  adding
increasing  quantities  of  potassium  chlorate,  at  first  there  appear  mixed
crystals  containing  the  thallium  chlorate  in  excess.  The  greater  the
quantity  of  the  potassium  salt  added,  the  larger  is  the  proportion  of
this  substance  contained  in  the  mixed  crystals.  But  when  the  pro-
portion of  the  potassium  salt  in  the  mixed  crystals  has  reached  3 6 '3
per  cent,  then  there  appear  also  mixed  crystals  which  contain  98 '0
per  cent  of  the  potassium  salt,  i.e.  the  same  solution  is  at  the  same
time  in  equilibrium  with  these  two  inner  members  of  the  series  of
mixtures.  If  the  proportion  of  the  potassium  salt  in  the  solution  is
carried  further,  then  there  separate  only  mixed  crystals  which  contain
more  than  98  per  cent  of  the  potassium  salt.

The  phenomena  observed  on  evaporating  the  solution  of  these  two
salts  are  completely  analogous  to  those  observed  in  the  evaporation  of  a
mixture,  e.g.  of  ether  and  water.

3.  If  a  double  salt  is  found  in  the  gap  of  the  series  of  mixtures,
then,  from  solutions  of  the  one  salt,  by  successive  and  increasing  addi-
tions of  the  other, there  separate — firstly,  the  mixed  crystals  on  one
side  [of  the  gap] of  the  series  of  mixtures ;  then,  secondly,  when  a
definite  concentration  is  reached, at  the  same  time  there  appear  both
the  inner  end  member  of  the  first  mixed  series  and  also  the  double
salt  [of  the  gap] ;  then,  thirdly,  in  the  interval  of  certain  concentration
limits,  the  double  salt  alone  appears  ;  then,  fourthly,  at  a  definite  point,
the  double  salt,  and  at  the  same  time  the  inner  end  member  of  the
second series  of mixtures ; and,  finally  and  fifthly [with  increasing
addition of  the  second  salt], the  successive mixed crystals of the
second series alone. An example of this  kind is  found  in  Rooze-
boom's 2  investigation  of  the  crystallisation  of  solutions  of  ferric  and
ammonium  chlorides.

There  is  thus  often  a  complicated  series  of  stable  solutions,  and  it
is  necessary  in  referring  to  a  saturated  solution  to  state  the  solid
substances  present.

For  the  case,  where  a  dilute  solid  solution  takes  part  in  the  equili-
brium, all  the  experiments  thus  far  made  may  be  transferred  to  the
laws  which  we  have  learned  in  the  foregoing  sections  regarding  the

Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  8.  504  and  530  (1891).
2  Ibid.,  1O.  145  (1892).

492  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

equilibrium  between  phases  of  variable  composition,  which  are  com-
posed of  gases  or  of  dilute  liquid  solutions.  Especially  the  laws
regarding  the  distribution  of  a  substance  between  two  solvents,  hold
good  also  for  this  case.1

An  interesting  application  of  these  laws  appears  to  be  possible  in
the  theory  of  colour  processes  [dyeing].  According  to  0.  N.  Witt,2
the  absorption  of  the  colour  by  the  fibre  consists  neither  in  a  coarse
mechanical  arrangement,  nor  in  a  chemical  compound  of  the  fibre  and
the  colour ;  but  rather,  and  in  opposition  to  both  of  these  views,  against
which  weighty  suspicions  have  begun  to  develop,  that  the  colouring
consists  .in  a  solution  of  the  dye-stuff  in  the  fibre,  i.e.  in  the  formation
of  a  solid  solution.

Of  the  many  reasons  which  Witt  has  adduced  for  the  plausibility
of  this  view,  it  should  be  mentioned  that  the  coloured  fibre  does  not
show  the  colour  of  the  solid  [pure]  dye-stuff,  but  of  the  dissolved
dye-stuff:  thus,  e.g.,  fibres  coloured  with  fuchsine  are  not  coloured
metal-glance-green  but  red.  Rhodamine  does  not  fluoresce  in  the
solid  state,  but  in  solution ;  but  silk,  coloured  with  rhodamine,  shows
a  clear  fluorescence,  which  argues  for  the  view  that  the  colouring
matter  exists  in  the  dissolved  state.

In  the  sense  of  these  views,  the  colouring  process  is  completely
comparable  to  the  shaking  any  substance  out  of  a  water  solution  by
any  other  solvent,  as  by  ether,  carbon  disulphide,  etc.  And  thus  the
laws  regarding  the  distribution  of  a  substance  between  two  solvents
are  at  once  applicable  to  the  colour  process.

Further,  the  fact  that  the  same  dye-stuff  may  introduce  itself  into
different  fibres,  producing  different  colours,  is  completely  analogous  to
such  cases,  as  where  iodine,  e.g.,  is  dissolved  in  different  solvents,
producing  different  colours.

The  nature  of  the  so-called  "  adjective  colours  "  was  thus  explained
by  Witt,  viz.  that  the  associated  mordant  is  first  dissolved  by  the
fibre,  .and  then,  in  its  turn,  dissolves  the  dye-stuff,  as  a  result  of  a
chemical  action,  as  it  diffused  into  the  fibre ;  and  thus  there  results  an
increase  of  the  solubility  of  the  dye-stuff  in  the  fibre.

Probably  when  the  yarn  takes  up  colouring  matter  absorption
phenomena  occur  and  perhaps  even  chemical  processes,  so  that  it  is  not
a  simple  case  of  the  partition  of  a  substance  between  two  solvents ;
this  is  evidenced  by  the  abnormal  values  obtained  in  investigations  of
the  molecular  weight  of  the  substances  absorbed  by  the  yarn  by  means
of  the  partition.3

1  See  further  the  literature  mentioned  on  p.  272  and  the  observations  of  Muthmann
and  Kuntze,  Zeitschr.  f.  Kristallographie,  23.  368  (1896).

-  Farber-Zeitung,  1.  (1890-91).  Ref.  in  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  7.  93  (1891),  also
in  the  Jahrbuch  der  Chem.,  1.  p.  18  (1891),  and  very  thoroughly  in  the  Chem.
Zentralbl.,  2.  1039  (1891).

3  See  the  literature  mentioned  on  p.  129,  and  also  Zacharias,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,
39.  468  (1902),  and  Kaufler,  ibid.,  43.  686  (1903).

CHAP.  Ill CHEMICAL  STATICS  -  HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  493

The  carrying  down  of  dissolved  salts  by  precipitation  of  oxides,
sulphides,  and  the  like,  so  important  in  analytical  chemistry,  has
been  little  studied  ;  this  phenomenon  occurs  exclusively  with  colloidal
(amorphous)  precipitates.  The  observations  of  van  Bemmelen,1  Linder
and,  Picton  -  and  Whitney  and  Ober  3  show  that  there  must  be  some
chemical  combination  of  the  salt  with  the  colloidal  precipitate.

The  Most  General  Case.  —  Finally,  the  following  very  general
case  will  be  treated  briefly.

Let  there  be  a  reaction  between  a  number  of  vaporised  substances,
which  are  at  the  same  time  dissolved  in  any  selected  solvent,  and  let
the  reaction  proceed  according  to  the  scheme

i^Aj  +  n2A2  +  .  .  .  =  n1/A1/  +  n2'A2'  +  . .  .

That  is,  let  nx  mol.  of  a  substance  A1?  and  n2  mol.  of  a  substance  AQ  .  .  .,
etc.,  unite  to  form  n^  mol.  of  a  substance  A^,  and  n9'  mol.  of  a  sub-
stance A./  .  .  .,  etc.  Equilibrium  will  be  established  when  the  partial
pressures  of  the  particular  molecular  species  are  respectively  p1?
p2  .  .  .,  PJ',  p2'  .  .  .  ,  and  when  their  concentrations  in  the  solution
amount  respectively  to  cp  c2  .  .  .,  c/,  c2'  .  .  .

Then  the  application  of  the  Guldberg-Waage  law  of  chemical  mass-
action  gives  the  two  equations  —

r\  nlr»

EL-E

=K  (1)

Here  K  and  K',  the  reaction  coefficients,  depend  only  upon  the
temperature.

The  law  of  distribution  gives  us  several  equations,  viz.

cx  =  p^, c2  =  p2k2  .  .  ., c/  =  p/k/, c2'  =  p/k/ . . (3)

Here  kv  k2  .  .  .,  k/,  k2'  .  .  .  denote  respectively  the  solubility  co-
efficients of  the  particular  molecular  species ;  and  these  again  depend
only  upon  the  temperature.

From  reactions  (1)  to  (3)  we  conclude  that —

lr  '^l'lr  ^2'

K  =  K'  --1— -? !_u.  a\

K ^IK ^2  ^ '

In  most  cases  the  solubility  coefficients  of  a  molecular  species  for
any  solvent  may  be  directly  determined,  and  this  information  allows

1  Zeitschr.  anorg.  Chem.,  23.  321  (1900).  2  Chem.  Soc.  Journ.,  67.  63  (1895).

3  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  39.  630  (1902).

494  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

one  to  say  beforehand  how  a  number  of  substances  will  react  on  each
other  in  any  solvent,  provided  that  their  reaction  capacity  in  the  gaseous
state  is  known,  and  conversely.

Of  course  a  similar  statement  may  be  made  regarding  the  relation
of  the  distribution  coefficients.  When  solid  substances  take  part  in  the
equilibrium,  their  active  mass  is  constant,1  and  the  same  is  true  of
reacting  molecules,  which  at  the  same  time  play  the  role  of  solvents
(p.  459).  Therefore,  we  may  state  the  following  general  theorem  : —

If  we  know  the  coefficients  of  equilibrium  of  a  reaction  which  progresses
to  a  finish  at  a  definite  temperature,  and  in  any  selected  phase  ;  and  if  we
know  the  distribution  coefficients  of  all  the  molecular  species  compared  with
another  phase  ;  then  the  condition  of  equilibrium  is  also  known  in  the  second
phase  at  the  same  temperature.

This  theorem  should  have  great  practical  significance,  because  it
enables  us  to  anticipate,  from  the  distribution  coefficients,  the  reaction
capacity  in  the  most  various  solvents  or  in  the  gaseous  state,  after  we
have  studied  it  in  one  particular  phase  ;  and  thus  the  problem  con-
concerning  the  "  dissociating  force "  (p.  458),  or  even  concerning  the
influence  of  the  medium,  will  be  referred  to  the  simpler  one  of  the
study  of  the  distribution  coefficients;  and,  whenever  possible,  the  attempt
will  be  made  to  clear  up  the  relation  of  these  [i.e.  the  distribution  co-
efficients] to  the  nature  of  the  substance  in  question,  and  to  the
particular  phase  to  which  they  refer.  But  this  will  be  the  task  of  the
future.

Applications. — The  vapour  above  a  mixture  of  acetic  acid,
alcohol,  water,  and  ester  in  equilibrium  must  also  be  in  equilibrium  ;
hence  the  relation

Ester  x  water

-  =  const.

Alcohol  x  acid

must  hold  for  the  vapour  also  ;  but  the  constant  in  the  gaseous  phase
will  in  general  have  a  different  value  to  that  for  the  liquid.  The
experimental  verification  of  this  law  would  be  not  without  interest.

Kuriloff 2  made  a  very  thorough  investigation  of  the  above  general
theorem,  the  results  of  which  we  will  calculate  in  a  somewhat  different
manner  to  the  author.  The  investigator  mentioned  determined  the
equilibrium  of  solid  /2-naphthol-picrate  in  contact  first  with  water  and
then  with  benzene,  and  also  the  ratio  of  partition  of  the  reacting
molecules,  so  that  all  the  data  necessary  for  testing  the  theory  are
available.

The  equilibrium  in  water  was  determined  by  solubility  measure-
ments in  the  same  way  as  in  the  example  of  anthracene  picrate  given
on  p.  478.  The  solution  contains  6 '09  free  /3-naphthol  and  8 '80  free

1  Provided  that  these  form  no  mixed  crystals,  double  salts,  or  the  like.
2  Zeitschr.  physik.  Cfiem,,  25.  419  (1898).

CHAP.  Ill CHEMICAL  STATICS  -  HETEROGENEOUS  SYSTEMS  495

picric  acid,  besides  1*20  of  picrate  when  the  latter  substance  was
present  in  the  solid  state.  The  numbers  are  in  thousandths  of  a  mol.
per  litre.  The  picric  acid  under  these  circumstances  is  electrolytically
dissociated  to  the  extent  of  94'6  °/Q;  hence  the  product  of  the  free
naphthol  and  the  free  undissociated  picric  acid  is

=  6-09  .  8-80(1  -  0-946)  =  2-89.

Further,  the  coefficients  of  partition  of  the  two  latter  species  of
molecule  between  benzene  and  water  are  67  for  naphthol  and  39  for
the  undissociated  molecules  of  picric  acid.  Hence  in  benzene  the
value  must  be

and  when  both  species  of  molecules  are  present  in  equivalent  quantities
their  concentrations  must  be

Now  the  solubility  of  the  picrate  in  benzene  is  104  '5  ;  hence  the
saturated  solution  of  this  substance  must  be  dissociated  to  the  extent

whilst  measurement  of  the  equilibrium  by  means  of  solubility,  with
excess  of  one  or  the  other  component,  give  0'64  to  0'85  for  the  degree
of  dissociation  of  the  saturated  solution.

Thus  from  the  dissociation  of  the  aqueous  solution  saturated  with
picrate,  and  from  the  ratio  of  partition  of  the  components,  we  can
calculate  how  much  dissociated  substance  is  contained  in  a  saturated
solution  of  picrate  in  benzene.

CHAPTER IV

CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM IN SALT SOLUTIONS

The  Reaction  Capacity  of  Ions. — In  the  preceding  chapter  we
have  become  familiar  with  the  general  theory,  which  instructs  us
regarding  the  chemical  equilibrium  in  any  selected  system,  and
regarding  the  dependence  of  this  equilibrium  upon  the  relative
quantities  of  the  reacting  components.  But  there  is  one  case  which
we  have  not  as  yet  considered  :  viz.  the  part  played  in  the  reactions
by  the  free  ions,  i.e.  the  study  of  water  solutions  of  electrolytes,  or  in
short,  of  salt  solutions.  The  writer  has  devoted  a  special  chapter  to
the  consideration  of  salt  solutions,  partly  for  the  purpose  of  a  general
view,  and  partly  to  show  that  when  one  applies  the  law  of  mass-action — the
universal  value  of  which  can  be  shown  by  numerous  facts — to  the  study  of
salt  solutions,  then  the  hypothesis  of  electrolytic  dissociation  becomes  an
imperative  necessity,  at  least,  according  to  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge.

From  the  standpoint  of  the  hypothesis  of  electrolytic  dissociation
(p.  350),  the  whole  question  is  at  once  solved  by  the  simple  conclusion,
that  the  free  ions  must  participate  in  reactions  in  proportion  to  their  con-
centration (their  active  mass),  just  like  every  other  molecular  species.  Without
the  introduction  of  any  new  hypothesis,  we  are  now  in  a  position  to
handle  the  chemical  equilibrium  between  substances,  which  conduct
electrolytically,  in  just  the  same  simple  manner  which  was  employed
in  considering  the  reactions  between  those  molecular  species  which
were  exclusively  electrically  neutral.

And  thus  nothing  that  is  especially  new  in  principle  will  be  given
in  the  following  paragraphs,  but  many  new  and  surprising  applications
of  the  law  of  Guldberg  and  Waage  will  be  given  :  these  applications
will  far  surpass  the  former  ones  in  simplicity  and  also  in  practical
significance,  because  the  salt  solutions  have  always  exercised  a  con-
trolling interest  in  investigation.

The  great  honour  of  giving  this  point  of  view  its  proper  value
belongs  to  Arrhenius.

Electrolytic  Dissociation. — When  a  molecular  species  A,  which
is  electrically  neutral,  decomposes  into  ions,  thus

496

CHAP.  IV  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN  SALT  SOLUTIONS  4.97

A  =  r^Aj  +  n.2A2  + .  . .  ,
the  law  of  mass-action  requires  that

Kc  =  c1"ic2n2  . . . ,

where  c  denotes  the  concentration  of  the  undissociated  part,  and
c15  c.2  .  .  .  etc.  the  respective  concentrations  of  the  products  (ions)
resulting  from  dissociation,  and  K,  as  usual,  denotes  the  constant  of
dissociation.  Of  course,  the  ions  are  always  produced  in  quantities
which  are  electrically  equivalent.  For  a  binary  electrolyte,  we  will
have

Kc  =  cT'2  ;
then,  since

1  —  a ,  a

c  -  -^r-,  and  Cj  =  Y  »

when  a  denotes  the  degree  of  dissociation,  and  Y  the  volume  contain-
ing 1  g.-mol  of  the  electrolyte  ;  we  thus  obtain

KV(l-a)  =  a2,

from  which,  by  calculation,  we  obtain
KV

Two  methods  (p.  356)  are  already  known  to  us  for  the  determina-
tion of  a  ;  viz.  the  measurement  of  the  osmotic  pressure  (the  freezing-
point,  etc.),  and  the  measurement  of  the  electrical  conductivity;  the
latter  is  much  more  exact,  and  gives,  as  the  degree  of  dissociation,  the
formula

A

a  ==
AQO

This  formula,  which  was  first  experimentally  proven  by  Oswald,1
by  application  to  electrolytic  dissociation,  was  established  with  the
best  results  for  a  large  number  of  organic  acids.  The  following  table,
given  by  van't  Hoff  and  Reicher,2  may  serve  as  an  illustration  :  —

1  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  2.  36  and  270  (1888)  ;  see  also  Planck, Wied.  Ann., 34.
139  (1888).

*  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  2.  779  (1888).

[TABLE

2K

498

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

THE  MOLECULAR  CONDUCTIVITIES  OF  ACETIC  ACID  AT  14-1°.

V

A

100  a  Obs.

100  a  Gale,

0-994

1-27

0-402

0-42

2-02

1-94

0-614

0-60

15-9

5-26

1-66

1-67

18-9

5-63

178

1-78

log  K  =  5'25-10

1500

46'6

147

15-0

Xoo  =316

3010

64-8

20-5

20-2

7480

95-1

30-1

30-5

15000

129

40-8

40-1

[00

316

100

100]

The  coincidence  between  the  degree  of  dissociation  —  as  determined
by  the  conductivities,  and  as  calculated  according  to  the  theoretical
formula,  where  K  =  O'OOOOITS  —  is  very  remarkable.

Inasmuch  as  the  same  form  of  the  isotherm  of  dissociation  holds
good  for  the  ordinary  binary,  and  also  for  the  electrolytic,  dissociation,
therefore  the  laws  developed  (p.  456)  for  electrolytic  dissociation
amount  to  this,  viz.  —

In  a  binary  electrolyte,  the  concentration  of  the  molecules  which  are
electrically  neutral  is  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  total  concentration,
when  the  dissociation  is  very  extensive;  and  when  the  dissociation  is  but
slight,  the  concentration  of  the  ions  (and  therefore  of  the  conductivity  also),
is  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  total  concentration.

The  formula  does  not  exactly  fit  the  observed  values,  in  the  case
of  highly  dissociated  acids  and  salts.  This  is  perhaps  to  be  ascribed
partly  to  the  fact,  that  the  determination  of

Aoo  -  A

is  exposed  to  great  uncertainty,  on  account  of  the  smallness  of  the
difference  between  Aoo  and  A;  here,  apparently,  for  reasons  unknown
at  present,  the  electrical  conductivity  is  not  a  perfectly  exact  measure
of  the  degree  of  dissociation.  An  explanation  of  this  point  would  be
exceedingly  interesting,  but  it  has  not  been  forthcoming  as  yet.

According  to  M.  Rudolphi,1  in  strongly  dissociated  electrolytes  the

T^ > .—  is  much  more  constant  than  ,- r-y

and  for

analogous  compounds  possesses  somewhat  similar  values. Van't  Hoff 2

a  little  later  pointed  out  that  the  expression

,—  or  the  square

1  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  17.  385  (1895).

-  Ibid.  IS.  300  (1895).

OHAl'.  IV  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN SALT  SOLUTIONS  499

of  it  v9,r  is  equally  or  more constant  than  that  of  Rudolphi.

Considering  that

1  -a
c  ='

we  have

V  ' ci  ~  V

5-  =  const.,
c-

that  is,  the  third  power  of  the  ionic  concentration  is  proportional  to  the
square  of  the  undissociated  molecules.  As  F.  Kohlrausch1  showed  van't
Huff's  expression  may  also  be  put  in  the  form  that  the  ratio  of  the
concentration  of  the  undissociated  molecules  to  that  of  the  ions  is
proportional  to  the  mean  distance  between  the  undissociated  molecules.

Electrolytic Dissociation and Chemical Nature.  —  The

question  now  arises, — How  does  the  degree  of  the  electrolytic  dissocia-
tion depend  upon  the  nature  of  the  respective  electrolyte  ? — a  question
which  is  all  the  more  important  because  the  reaction-capacity  depends,
in  a  very  pronounced  way,  upon  the  degree  of  dissociation.  In  what
follows,  there  will  be  grouped  together  some  of  the  most  important
rules  thus  far  recognised  in  this  region  of  work  ;  a  knowledge  of  these
rules  will  serve,  in  a  remarkable  way,  to  elucidate  the  general  view  of
chemical  equilibrium  in  salt  solutions.

1.  The  salts  of  the  alkalies,  of  ammonium,  of  thallium,  and  of  silver,
with  monobasic  acids,  in  dilute  solutions  and  at  equivalent  concentrations,
are  dissociated  to  the  same  degree  ;  and,  moreover,  are  highly  dissociated,  as
is  shown  by  the  figures  for  potassium  chloride,  given  on  p.  359.

2.  On  the  other  hand,  the  greatest  differences  are  found  among
the  monobasic  acids  and  the  monacid  bases  [when  each  is  alone  in  solu-
tion]. Thus,  some  substances,  like  acetic  acid,  ammonia,  etc.,  in  tenth-
normal  solutions,  are  dissociated  only  to  a  small  percentage ;  while
other  substances,  such  as  hydrochloric  acid,  potassium  hydroxide,  etc.,
are  as  highly  dissociated  as  the  salts  enumerated  above.

3.  Certain  electrolytes,  such  as  zinc  sulphate,  cupric  sulphate,  etc.,
which  on  dissociation  are  cleaved  into  only  two  ions,  but  each  with  doubled
electrical charges, are comparatively much less dissociated ;  zinc
sulphate  and  copper  sulphate,  in  a  concentration  of  1  g.-mol.  per  litre,
are  dissociated  only  about  25  per  cent  (see  also  p.  360).

4.  The  behaviour  of  those  electrolytes  which  cleave  into  more  than  two
ions, is much more complicated. According to what is  known at
present,  in  general,  a  dissociation  in  stages  seems  to  take  place. Thus
sulphuric acid does not  decompose  all  at  once  into  the  S04  group
[sulph-ion]  with  a  double  electro-negative  charge,  and two  hydrogen

1  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  18.  662  (1895).

500  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

ions,  each  with  a  single  electro-positive  charge  ;  but  the  decomposition
rather  progresses  according  to  the  two  following  'equations  —

II.

+  H

The  decomposition  is  similar  in  the  case  of  such  substances  as
BaCl2,  K2C03,  etc.

In  general  this  law  holds  good  here,  viz.,  salts  which  have  an
analogous  composition,  in  equivalent  solutions  are  dissociated  electrolytically
to  the  same  degree.  But  this  latter  law  is  by  no  means  a  rule  which
holds  good  without  exception  ;  thus  the  chlorides  of  calcium,  strontium,
barium,  magnesium,  and  copper  are  dissociated  nearly  to  the  same
extent  ;  but  the  chlorides  of  cadmium  and  of  mercury,  though  of
analogous  constitution,  are  cleaved  into  their  respective  ions  much  less
strongly.

+ - +

For  dissociation  such  as  PbCl  Id,  K  |  KS04  etc.,  it  may  be
assumed  with  considerable  probability  that  it  follows  the  rule  of
binary  neutral  salts,  such  as  potassium  bromide.  Von  Ende1  has  recently
demonstrated  this  experimentally  in  the  case  of  lead  chloride.

5.  Many  poly  basic  acids,  within  a  wide  concentration  interval,  act
like  monobasic  acids,  i.e.  the  equation  of  the  isotherm  of  dissociation,
which  was  developed  on  p.  492,  for  binary  electrolytes,  is  also  applic-
able to  them. It  is  only  at  extreme  dilution  that  these polybasic
acids  begin  to  cleave  off  the  second,  the  third,  etc.,  hydrogen  ions.

The  fact  that  extensive  dilution  is  always  required  in  order  to
cleave  off  the  last  hydrogen  ions,  would  indicate  that  it  is  increasingly
difficult  for  the  acid  residue  to  assume  the  last  quanta  of  negative
electricity.

6.  Electrolytic  dissociation,  as  compared  with ordinary  dissocia-
tion, changes  with the temperature but slightly  ; for with rising
temperature,  it  sometimes  slowly  diminishes,  sometimes  increases,  —  in
contrast  to  ordinary  dissociation,  which  always  rapidly  increases  with
the  temperature.

These  rules,  as  shown  by  Ostwald,2  may  be  applied  to  the  deter-
mination of  the  basicity  of  acids.  Since  the  state  of  dissociation
varies  in  a  characteristic  way,  with  the  basicity  of  the  respective  acid
of  a  sodium  salt,  e.g.,  therefore  the  simple  study  of  the  conductivity,
in  its  dependence  upon  the  concentration,  may  be  directed  to  the
explanation  of  this  point.  Of  course  the  same  question  may  be
decided  by  the  measurement  of  the  depression  of  the  freezing-point.

The  Strength  of  the  Affinity  of  Organic  Acids.  —  It  is  to  the

1  Dissertation,  Gdttingen,  1900. 2  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  1.  74  (1887)  ;  2.  901  (1888).

CHAP.  IV  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN  SALT  SOLUTIONS  501

extended  researches  of  Ostwald  1  that  we  are  chiefly  indebted  for  our
knowledge  of  the  relations  prevailing  here  ;  he,  in  common  with  his
students,  has  given  especial  attention  to  the  problem,  how  does  the
capacity  of  organic  acids  to  dissociate  electrolytically,  depend  upon  the
structure  of  the  particular  radical  ?  Unfortunately  the  space  is  not
available  to  consider  in  detail  the  many  interesting  points  which  have
been  developed  by  research  in  this  region ;  and  it  will  be  merely
mentioned  that  the  dissociation  constants,  or  as  they  will  also  be  called,
for  reasons  to  be  given  below,  the  affinity  strengths  (and  which,  as
shown  on  p.  496,  can  be  ascertained  with  the  greatest  exactness),
these  vary  in  a  most  outspoken  way  with  the  constitution  of  the  acid  radical,
This  relation  to  the  constitution  has  not  as  yet  been  explained,  so  as
to  allow  the  value  of  the  dissociation  constant  to  be  numerically
derived  from  the  constitution ;  for  our  knowledge  thus  far  is  limited
to  the  recognition  of  the  regularity  of  the  influence  exerted  by  the
substitution  of  certain  radicals.

According  to  this  the  radicals  may  be  divided  into  negative  and
positive,  according  as  they  favour  the  assumption  of  a  negative  ionic
charge  (acids)  and  therefore  hinder  the  positive  charge,  or  vice  versa.

The  following  substances  act  negatively:  aromatic  radicles  (e.g.
C0H5),  hydroxyl,  sulphur,  halogens,  carboxyl,  nitril  and  cyanogen ;
positively  fatty  radicals  (e.g.  CH3)  addition  of  hydrogen,  especially  the
amido  group.

This  appears  from  the  affinity  constants  of  the  following  series  of
acids  :-*-

100  K

Acetic  acid  CH.jCOOH .  0  "00180

a-Volnic  acid  CH2(C6H5)COOH  .  0 '00556

Glycollic  acid  CH.,(OH)COOH  .  .  0-0152

Thiacetic  acid  CH^COSH  .  0  -0469

Chloracetic  acid  CH.2C1COOH .  .  0'155

Tri-chlor-acetic  acid  CC13COOH  121

Malic  acid  CH,(COOH)COOH  .  0-158

Cyanacetic  acid  CH2(CN)COOH  0-370

Propionic  acid  CIL/CH^COOH  0-00134

Glycocol  CH2(¥H,)COOH  very  small

and  of  bases  : —

Ammonia  NH4OH .  0'0023

Methylamine  NH3(CH3)OH .  O'OSO

Henzylamine  NH3'(CH2C6H5)OH  .  0'0024

Aniline  NH,(C6H5)OH  .  0 -000000011

The  spacial  position  of  the  substituent  in  the  molecule  is  of  consider-
able influence  on  its  action ;  the  nearer  the  substituent  is  to  the  point
at  which  the  ionic  charge  is  taken  up  the  more  effective  it  is  ;  thus  we
have  100  K  in

o-nitrobenzoic  acid  0'616>m-nitrobenzoic  acid  0*0345

1  Jour.pr.  Chem.,  31.  433  (1885)  ; Zcits.  phys.  C/wm.,  3.  170  (1889)  ;  Bethmann,
ibid.,  5.  385  ;  Bader,  ibid,  6.  289  (1890)  ;  Walden,  ibid.,  8.  (1891).

502  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

Trichloracetic  acid  _  CC13  -  COOH 121  Trichlorlactic  acid

Acetic  acid  CH3  -  COOH 0'00180 ' Lactic  acid

.  CHOH  .  COOH H65

CH3  .  CHOH  .  COOH (H)T38

Benzylamine C6H5CH2NH3OH 0-0024  >Toluidine  CH3C0H4NH3OH

circa  1  0  ~  12
Oxalic  acid  COOH-COOH  10>Malonic  acid  C02H.CH2.  C02H  0'158

>Tartaric  acid  C02H.CH2.CH2.C02H  0-00665

We  have  already  met  on  p.  339  with  similar  relations  in  consider-
ing the  influence  of  substituting  radicals  on  the  absorption  of  light  in
the  chromophore.  It  is  obvious  that  the  affinity  constants  are  of
considerable  importance  for  stereochemistry  ;  they  have  indeed  been
repeatedly  used  with  success  in  that  connection.

The  behaviour  of  the  dicarbon  acids  is  especially  interesting  :  the
distance  between  the  two  carboxyls  is  the  determining  factor  between
the  isomeric  maleic  and  fumaric  acids,  as  in  the  previous  case  of
oxalic,  malonic  and  tartaric  acids  ;  these  constants  are  for

,  H.C.COOH  -  H.C.COOH  n

Maleic  acid  TT  ~  nr\rm  1*1  '  >-bumanc  acid,  ^r\r\TT  /^  TT  0'09  ;

on  the  other  hand  the  dissociation  of  the  hydrogen  ion  of  the  second
carboxyl  group  occurs  much  sooner  in  fumaric  acid  than  in  maleic,
which  dissociates  as  a  monobasic  acid  only  up  to  more  than  80y£.  The
explanation  of  this  given  by  Oshvald1  lies  in  the  electrostatic  repulsion
between  a  negative  charge  and  another  of  the  same  sign  so  that  the
charge  due  to  dissociation  of  the  first  hydrogen  ion  hinders  that  of
the  second  more  effectively  the  nearer  the  two  carboxyls  stand,  since
on  dissociation  they  acquire  similar  charges.

The  principle  which  is  at  the  foundation  of  the  investigations
briefly  described  above,  and  to  which  reference  has  already  been  made
(p.  290),  consists  in  the  study  of  the  mutual  influence  of  different  elements
or  radicals  in  the  molecules,  respecting  the  reaction-capacity.  The  measure-
ment of  the  electrolytic  dissociation  constant  of  an  acid,  as  will  be
shown  clearly  below,  consists  merely  in  the  determination  of  the
reaction  capacity  possessed  by  the  "acid  hydrogen"  in  water  solution.

Instead  of  studying  the  reaction  capacity  of  "acid  hydrogen,"  one
can  as  well  study,  as  Ostwald  has  succeeded  in  doing,  the  reaction
capacity  of  another  element  or  radical  in  the  molecule,  of  course  with
due  regard  for  similarity  of  results  :  but  here  the  problem  is  to  find  out  a
method  to  determine  the  reaction-capacity  with  satisfactory  sharpness,  and
under  conditions  which  are  suitably  comparable.  Comparable  conditions

1  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  9.  553  (1892).

CHAP. IV

CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN  SALT  SOLUTIONS

503

may  be  obtained  most  easily  by  determining  the  reaction-capacity  in
the  same  solvent.  The  quantitative  determination  of  the  reaction-
capacity  of  the  radical  in  question,  may  be  accomplished  by  the
measurement  of  a  suitable  chemical  equilibruim.  Thus  it  would  be
very  interesting  to  study  in  an  extended  way  the  question  of  the
capacity  of  the  nitrogen  basis  to  fix  hydrochloric  acid  or  any  other
acid ;  this  could  be  done  very  easily  by  means  of  a  method  patterned
after  that  of  Jellet  (p.  453),  since  one  could  allow  an  optically  active
base  to  compete  for  the  acid  at  the  same  time  with  the  b;ise  to  be
investigated.

It  should  be  remarked,  as  a  matter  of  history,  that  Menschutkin
(p.  450)  was  the  first  to  attack  a  problem  of  affinity  in  an  extended
way ;  perhaps  the  results  of  his  extended  investigations  would  have
been  greater,  if  he  had  studied  the  state  of  equilibrium  of  the  esterifica-
tion  under  conditions  which  were  more  nearly  comparable,  e.g.  in  a
suitable  solvent.

Finally,  there  are  here  appended  some  of  the  most  important
affinity  constants  of  the  acids  investigated  by  Ostwald.

Acid.

Malic  acid  C2H,(OH)(C02H)2
Formic  acid  HCOOH
Benzoic  acid  C6H5  .  COOH
Succinic  acid  C2H4  (C02H  )2
Butyric  acid  C3H7  .  COOH
Acetic  acid  CH3COOH .
Lactic  acid  CH3CH(OH)COOH .
Salicylic  acid  C6H4(OH)  .  COOH
Tri-chlor-acetic  acid  CC13  .  COOH
Cinnamic  acid  CH(C6H5)  .  CH  .  CO.,H

100  K.
0-0395
0-0214
0-0060
0-00665
0-00149
0-00180
0-0138
0-102
121
0-00355

Walker1  has  measured  certain  very  weak  acids,  making  use  of
exceedingly  pure  water  for  the  conductivity  (indirect  methods  for
determining  the  dissociation  of  extremely  weak  acids  will  be  given
below)  ;  acetic  acid  is  taken  for  comparison :

Acetic  acid  C2H302  -  H
Carbon  dioxide  HC03  -  H
Sulphuretted  hydrogen  HS  -  H
Boric  acid  H2B03-H  .
Hydrocyanic  acid  CN  -  H
Phenol  C6H50  -  H .

180000

3040

570

17

"13

1-3

The  Mixture  of  Two  Electrolytes  containing  the  same  Ion.

— As  the  simplest  case  of  equilibrium  between  several  electrolytes,  we
will  first  investigate  the  reaction  which  occurs  on  bringing  together  any
two  electrolytes  with  a  common  ion,  e.g.  two  acids  having  the  hydrogen
ion  in  common.  The  progress  of  the  reaction  can  be  followed  with-
out recourse  to  calculation.

Let  a  second  acid  be  added  to  an  acid  solution  keeping  the  volume

Zeits.  phys.  Chem,,  32.  137  (1900).

504  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

constant,  i.e.  by  adding  the  second  acid  in  the  pure  form  to  a  dilute
water  solution  of  the  first  acid,  so  that  the  concentration  of  the
hydrogen  ions  will  be  increased  ;  then  the  immediate  result  of  this  is
that  the  undissociated  part  of  the  first  acid  is  no  longer  able  to  main-
tain the  equilibrium  between  the  active  masses  of  the  hydrogen  ion
and  of  the  negative  ingredient,  the  masses  of  which  are  now  increased  ;
i.e.  the  dissociation  of  the  acid  retrogrades.  We  observe  a  phenomenon
similar  to  this,  on  adding  free  chlorine  to  phosphorus  penta-chloride,
whereby  the  dissociation  is  caused  to  retreat  by  the  addition  of  one  of
the  dissociation  products  (p.  443).

In  order  to  observe  the  relations  in  a  quantitative  way  we  need
employ  only  rhe  law  of  mass-action.  Let  GI  denote  the  concentration
of  the  electrically  neutral  molecules,  and  c.,  that  of  the  two  ions,  so
that  the  total  concentration  C,  will  be

and  we  will  have

=  c2.

Now  let  a  second  electrolyte  be  added,  which  has  one  ion  the  same  as
one  ion  of  the  first  electrolyte  ;  and  let  the  concentration  of  the
second  electrolyte  be  c0.  Then  when  the  equilibrium  shall  have  been
established,  it  will  be  satisfied  by  the  condition,

c/K  =  c.2'(c2'  +  c0),

where  again,  of  course,  c1/  +  c2'  must  be  equal  to  C.  Obviously  ct'
will  be  greater  than  cx  ;  and  conversely  c2  will  be  smaller  than  c2'  ;
i.e.  the  dissociation  of  the  electrolytes  retrogrades,  on  the  addition  of
a  second  electrolyte  containing  an  identical  ion,  and  in  a  ratio  capable
of  exact  calculation.

This  phenomenon  may  be  very  well  shown  qualitatively  by  a
solution  of  paranitrophenol  ;  the  negative  ion  of  this  acid  is  coloured
an  intense  yellow,  whilst  the  electrically  neutral  molecule  is  colourless.
If  therefore  any  acid  is  added  to  an  aqueous  solution  of  this  substance
the  yellow  coloration  directly  vanishes,  because  the  slight  dissociation
of  this  weak  acid  is  reduced  to  almost  nothing  by  even  a  small  addition
of  hydrogen  ions.  (See  the  section  on  "  The  Theory  of  Indicators.")

Arrhenius  l  succeeded  in  proving  this  law  quantitatively  in  the
following  way.  Thus,  eg.  sodium  acetate  was  added  to  a  solution  of
acetic  acid,  and  then  he  determined  the  velocity  of  the  inversion  of
cane  sugar  contained  in  the  solution  ;  this  velocity  of  sugar  inversion
(as  will  be  thoroughly  demonstrated  in  the  chapter  on  Chemical
Kinetics),  is  a  measure  of  the  number  of  the  free  hydrogen  ions  exist-
ing in  the  solution.  Thus,  this  velocity  amounted  to  074  in  a  solution

1  Zeits.  phys.  C/iem.,  5.  1 (1890)  ; also  2.284  (1888)  ;  and Wied.  Ann.  30.  51
(1887).

CHAP.  IV  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN  SALT  SOLUTIONS  505

containing  J  of  a  mol.  of  acetic  acid  to  the  litre,  and  when  the  equiva-
lent quantity  of  sodium  acetate  was  added,  the  value  sank  to  0'0105,
the  calculated  value  of  the  latter  being  O'OIOO.

If  any  selected  volumes  of  any  two  electrolytes  having  ions  in
common,  as  two  acids,  e.g.,  are  mixed,  then,  in  general,  the  state  of
dissociation  of  each  of  these  will  change  as  a  result  of  their  mixture ;
and  corresponding  to  the  electrical  conductivity  of  the  mixture,  another
state  of  dissociation  will  be  established ;  this  state  of  dissociation  is
not  identical  with  that  corresponding  to  the  mean  of  the  conductivities
of  the  unmixed  components.

But  if  one  selects  the  concentrations  of  the  two  acids  so  that  each
shall  contain  the  same  number  of  free  hydrogen  ions  in  a  litre, — such
solutions  are  called  "  iso-liydric" — then  there  is  no  change  of  their  state  of
dissociation  resulting  from  their  mixture.  If  c  and  cx  are  the  concentra-
tions of  the  electrically  neutral  molecules  and  of  the  ions,  k  the
dissociation  constant,  we  have  the  relation

.........  0)

and  similarly  for  the  second  solution

KC  =  C12, ........ (2)

thus  if  the  volume  v  of  the  first  solution  be  mixed  with  the  volume  V
of  the  second,  the  concentration  of  the  electrically  neutral  molecules
and  of  the  not  common  ions

c,  Cl  C,  C,
will  become

cv  GIV  CV _CTV

V  +  v' y  +  v' V  +  v' V~+V'

whilst the concentration of the ion common  to the two solutions

C  V  +  c  v
reaches the value -4=  -  — Applying the  law of mass  action

V  +  v

to  determine  the  equilibrium  in  the  common  solution  we  have

kc^.0'^, ....... (3)

KC,C,<^; ...... (4)

but  the  equations  (1)  to  (4)  are  satisfied  if

that  is,  in  mixing  isohydric  solutions  no  displacement  of  the  dissocia-
tion occurs,  hence  the  conductivity  of  the  mixture  must  be  the  mean  of  the
conductivities  of  the  two  solutions,  as  is  shown  by  experience.

506  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  ill

If  one  mixes  solutions  of  any  two  electrolytes  having  an  ion  in
common,  and  which  also  have  the  same  dissociation  constant, — as,  e.g.,
two  chlorides  of  univalent  bases, — then  these  solutions  contain  the
common  ion  in  the  same  concentrations  when  the  solutions  are
equivalent.  Hence  it  follows  that,  in  a  mixture  of  such  electrolytes,
each  one  is  dissociated  equally  strongly,  and  just  as  strongly  as  though
it  alone  formed  a  solution  in  proportions  corresponding  to  the  total
concentration.

The  case  of  a  mixture  of  two  acids  in  solution  can  easily  be
treated  by  the  above  method  especially  the  question  of  how  the
conductivity  of  a  mixture  of  two  acids  changes  with  increasing  dilution.
See  for  particulars  A.  Wakemann.1  It  is  especially  interesting  to  note
that  the  dissociation  constant  is  calculated  from  the  conductivity
according  to  p.  499  and  is  by  no  means  constant  for  a  mixture  of  two
acids,  but  varies  considerably  with  the  dilution,  so  that,  as  has  been
shown,  it  can  serve  as  a  criterion  of  the  purity  of  the  acid  under
consideration.

The  Equilibrium  between  any  Selected  Electrolytes. — The

state  of  equilibrium  is  much  more  complicated  in  the  case  of  a  solu-
tion containing  two  binary  electrolytes  having  no  common  ion.  Then
care  must  be  given  to  discriminate  between  the  different  molecular
species  in  the  solution,  viz.,  the  four  free  ions  and  the  four  electrically
neutral  molecules  produced  by  the  combination  of  the  former.  By  a
displacement  of  the  point  of  equilibrium,  four  reactions  may  take  place
beside  each  other ;  namely,  the  dissociation  of  the  (four)  electrically
neutral  molecules  into  the  respective  ions,  to  each  of  which  reactions
there  always  corresponds  an  equilibrium  condition  of  the  form

Kc  =  c1c2,

where  K  denotes  the  corresponding  dissociation  constant,  c  the  con-
centration of  the  molecular  species  that  is  electrically  neutral,  and  cx
and  c2  respectively  the  concentrations  of  the  two  ions.

One  may  easily  convince  himself,  by  a  knowledge  of  the  dissocia-
tion constants  and  of  the  total  concentration,  the  latter  being  ascer-
tained by  chemical  analysis,  that  the  equilibrium  is  definite  and
unequivocal,  and  that  its  ascertainment  is  only  attended  by  difficulties
in  the  way  of  pure  calculation,  which,  however,  are  by  no  means
inconsiderable.  But,  particularly  on  the  basis  of  the  fact  that  binary
salts,  composed  of  univalent  radicals,  are  in  the  same  state  of  dissocia-
tion, and  that  a  very  extended  one,  the  essential  generalisations  may
be  collated  in  the  following  propositions,  as  they  are  formulated  by
Arrhenius.2

1. The  degree  of  dissociation  of  a  weak  acid,  in  the  presence  of

1  Zeits.phys.  C/iem.,  15.  159  (1894).  -  Zcits.  phys.  Chem.,  5.  1  (1890).

CHAP. IV

CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN SALT  SOLUTIONS  507

salts  of  this  acid,  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  quantity  of  salt
present.

2.  When  a  weak  acid  and  several  strongly  dissociated  electrolytes
exist  together  in  the  same  solution,  their  respective  degrees  of  disso-
ciation may  be  calculated  as  though  the  dissociated  part  of  the
particular  electrolyte  were  a  dissociated  part  of  a  salt  (as  a  sodium
salt,  e.g.),  of  this  acid.

There  is  hardly  any  special  proof  needed  to  show  that  the  case,
where  any  arbitrary  number  of  electrolytes  are  in  a  solution,  can  be
solved  by  the  application  of  the  preceding  equation.  Before  advancing
any  farther,  we  will  now  discuss  a  case  which  has  not  been  considered
as  yet,  namely,  the  participation  of  water  in  the  equilibrium ;  i.e.  where
the  hydrogen  ion  and  the  hydroxyl  ion  react  on  each  other.

Neutralisation. — It  may  be  calculated  from  the  fact  that  water
conducts  worse  the  more  carefully  it  is  purified,  and  accordingly  that
the  traces  of  conductivity  which  the  most  carefully  prepared  water
shows  are  partly  due  to  traces  of  salt  in  solution,  that  water  itself
is  very  slightly  dissociated  into  ions.

It  follows  directly  from  this  that  these  two  kinds  of  ions  (H  and
OH),  are  capable  of  existing  beside  each  other  in  water  only  in  the
barest  traces.  Thus  if  we  bring  together  in  a  water  solution  two
electrolytes,  such  that  on  decomposition  one  affords  a  hydrogen  ion
and  the  other  a  hydroxyl  ion, — or,  in  other  words,  if  we  mix  an  acid
with  a  base, — then  in  all  cases  the  same  reaction  occurs,  viz.,

H  +  OH  -  H20,

and  practically  in  absolute  completeness,  i.e.  until  one  of  the  reacting
components  is  exhausted.

Now  this  reaction,  the  necessity  of  which,  as  already  shown,  was
derived  theoretically,  is  in  fact  well  known  and  of  the  greatest  import-
ance ;  it  is  called  the  process  of  neutralisation.

If  the  acid  and  the  base  are  completely  dissociated,  then  the  afore-
said reaction  will  be  the  only  one  which  takes  place ;  and  from  this
there  follows  directly  a  very  remarkable  conclusion,  to  which  attention
was  first  called  by  Arrhenius,  viz.  the  same  reactions  must  correspond  to
the  same •  evolution  of  heat  ("heat  of  reaction").  Therefore  by  mixing
any  selected  strong  base  with  any  selected  strong  acid  in  a  sufficiently
large  quantity  of  water,  there  always  results  the  same  development
of  heat ;  this  is  proved  by  experiment  (see  the  chapter  "  Thermo-
chemistry, I."  Book  IV.).

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  acid  or  the  base  is  not  completely  dis-
sociated, then  side  reactions  other  than  the  aforesaid  reaction,  take
place,  namely,  the  decomposition  into  the  ions ;  and  since  this  is

508  THKOREXICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

usually  associated  with  a  certain  though  very  slight  heat  change,
therefore  under  these  circumstances  one  observes  a  slight  variation  in
the  heat  of  neutralisation.

The  law  of  mass  action  applied  to  the  dissociation  of  water  causes,
since  the  active  mass  of  the  solvent  must  be  constant  (p.  460),  the
relation  that  in  dilute  aqueous  solutions  the  product  of  the  concen-

+

trations  of  the  hydrogen  ions  [H]  and  the  hydro xyl  ions  [OH]  must
be  constant ;  if  the  concentration  of  each  of  these  ions  in  pure  water

is  c0,  we  have

[H][OH]=V.

Electrolytic  dissociation  of  pure  Water. — Although  it  would
seem  to  be  very  difficult  to  determine  this  exceedingly  small  dissocia-
tion of  pure  water,  the  problem  has  been  solved  of  late  years  by
different  investigators  in  very  varied  methods,  and  with  good
agreement.

1.  The  electromotive  force  of  the  acid  alkali  cell  allows  of  cal-
culating the  concentration  of  the  hydrogen  ions  in  an  alkaline  solution
by  means  of  the  osmotic  theory  of  currents  (Book  IV.  Chap,  vii.) ;  it
was  found  in  this  way  that  at 19°  the  normal  solution  of  a  strongly
(80  %)  dissociated  base  it  amounts  to  0*8 .  10~14. It  follows  for  such
a  solution

[H]  -  0-8  .  10-14,  [OH]  =  0-8  ;  therefore  c()  =  0'8  .  10~7  at  19  .
At  a  higher  temperature  it  was  found  in  the  same  way  that
c0=  1-19.  10-7  at  25-  26°.

Ostwald  l  and  Arrhenius  -  attempted  simultaneously  to  determine
c()  in  this  manner ;  the  present  writer  showed  shortly  afterwards  that
the  calculation  was  somewhat  different  to  that  given  by  these  writers,
and  that  the  value  obtained  is  that  given  above.3

2.  A  second  process  lies  in  measuring  the  hydrclyiic  decomposition
of  salts,  the  theory  of  which  is given  below  on  p.  519. Arrhenius4
found  in  this  way

c0=M  x  10-7at  25°.

3.  Both hydrogen and  hydroxyl  ions  cause acceleration of the
process  of  saponification  of  esters  dissolved  in  water ;  AViis,5  at  van't
Hoff's  suggestion,  determined  the  velocity  of  saponification  of  methyl

1  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  11.  521  (1893).  4  Ibid.,  11.  805  (1893).

2  Ibid.,  11.  805  (1893).  ^  Ibid.,  12.  514  (1893).
:i  Ibid.,  14.  155  (1894).

CHAr.  IV  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN  SALT  SOLUTIONS  509

acetate  in  pure  water,  and  calculated  according  to  a  theory  given  by
van't  Hoff  (see  the  following  Chapter)  that

C0=1'2.  10  -7  at  25°.

4.  Finally,  Kohlrausch  and  Heydweiller1  succeeded  in  purifying
water  to  such  an  extent  that  it  showed  its  own  conductivity,  that  is,
was  practically  free  from  conductivity  due  to  impurities.

It  was  known  from  previous  work  of  Kohlrausch  that  water
conducts  the  less  the  more  carefully  it  is  purified  ;  it  appears,  how-
ever, that  a  limiting  value  can  be  reached  below  which  the  conductivity
cannot  be  reduced,  that  is  that  water  possesses  measurable  conductivity
of  its  own  account.  The  method  of  purification  is  distillation  in  vacuum.
A  U-shaped  tube,  one  leg  of  which  ended  in  a  large  reservoir  and  the
other  in  a  small  resistance  cell,  was  provided  with  water  already  very
thoroughly  purified,  and  boiled  for  a  long  time  under  the  mercury
pump.  On  slightly  warming  the  large  vessel  the  mass  of  the  water
was  distilled  over  into  the  resistance  cell  and  its  conductivity  measured.

At  18°  the  conductivity  of  the  purest  water  was  found  to  be
0*0384.  10~6  ohms  per  cm.  (that  of  ordinarily  good  water  is  about
2  x  10  ~G);  the  temperature  coefficient  at  18°  is  5  '8  °/Q,  much  larger
therefore  than  that  of  salt  solutions  (2  to  2  '5  J£)  and  that  of  ordinary
distilled  water  (2  %).

The  degree  of  electrolytic  dissociation  of  the  water  may  be  calcu-
lated from  the  conductivity  found  by  Kohlrausch  and  Heydweiller  ;
according  to  p.  363  the  conductivity  is

K  =  >/0(u  +  v)  -  0-0384  x  10-(j,

where  u,  the  mobility  of  the  hydrogen  ion,  is  318,  and  v,  that  of  the
hydroxyl  ion  is  174;  hence  we  may  calculate  the  ionic  concentration
c0  of  the  pure  water  in  g-ions  per  litre  (  =  1000r/0).

0.78xlQ_7at

at  25°  this  becomes  1'05  x.10"7;  i.e.,  is  in  satisfactory  agreement  with
the  values  mentioned  above,  arrived  at  in  entirely  different  ways.

Even  the  surprisingly  large  temperature  coefficient  of  pure  water
was  predicted  by  Arrhenius  and  exactly  calculated  by  him  (see
Book  IV.  Chap.  iii.).

Water  is  clearly  capable  of  a  second  electrolytic  dissociation
namely

OH  =  6  +  H,

that  is,  water  can  be  treated  as  a  dibasic  acid. Since  therefore  the
1 Wied.  Ann.  53.  209  (1894).

510  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

separation  of  the  second  hydrogen  ion  from  a  dibasic  acid  is  always
much  harder  than  that  of  the  first,  we  may  expect  that  the  second
stage  in  the  electrolytic  dissociation  of  water  is  extremely  slight,  or
that  the  oxygen  ions  with  a  double  negative  charge  in  water  exist  in
infinitesimal  quantities.  Nothing  more  is  known  at  present  as  to
this  second  dissociation.

The  Most  General  Case  of  Homogeneous  Equilibrium.—

Deliberate  consideration  of  the  preceding  paragraph  now  finally
allows  us  to  remove  the  last  limitation,  viz.  that  the  ions  of  water  are
not  included  among  the  reacting  molecular  species ;  and  in  accordance
with  this  we  will  develop  the  general  equilibrium  of  a  solution  con-
taining any  casual  electrolytes.  This  is  possible  by  means  of  the
following  propositions.

1.  The  total  quoMtity  of  each  radical  which  is  present  in  the  solu-
tion, partly  as  a  free  ion  and  partly  combined  with  other  ions, — this
is  either  known  from  the  condition  of  the  experiment,  or  else  may  be
known  by  means  of  analysis.

2.  For  every  combination  of  ions,  we  have  an  equation,  according  to
which  the  undissociated  part  per  unit  of  volume  is  proportional  to  the
product  of  the  active  masses  of  the  ions  contained  in  the  combination.
The  proportional  factor  is  the  dissociation  constant,  which,  according  to
p.  496,  is  known  for  most  molecular  species,  and  can  be determined
by  the  study  of  any  particular  case,  by  means  of  the  conductivity,
by  the  freezing-point,  etc.

3.  Hydrogen ions and hydroxyl ions are capable of existing
together  in  only  the slightest  quantities ; their  product  is  (nearly)
constant,  and  its  magnitude  is  extremely  small  (0'64  or  T14  x  10  ~u
at  18°  or  25°).

By  means  of  the  formulae  afforded  by  the  immediate  application  of
these  propositions,  the  state  of  equilibrium  is  definitely  determined.

Thus  one  is  enabled  to  state  in  every  case  what  part  of  each  radical
exists  in  the  solution  as  a  free  ion,  and  what  part  is  combined  with  other
ions,  provided  he  knows  the  dissociation  constants  of  the  combinations  of  all
of  the  ions.

This  is  a  result  of  the  greatest  importance.  It  indicates  a  partial
solution  of  the  problem  which  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  final  goal  of
the  doctrine  of  affinity,  namely,  the  expression  of  the  mutual  reactions
between  substances,  by  means  of  certain  characteristic  numerical  coefficients.

To  this  class  of  coefficients,  belong  the  dissociation  coefficients  of
electrolytes,  a  knowledge  of  which  enables  us  to  anticipate  the  kind
of  action  which  takes  place  between  them  in  dilute  solution.

We  will  later  obtain  the  result,  that  by  means  of  the  solubilities
of  solid  salts,  one  can  also  definitely  determine  the  state  of  equilibrium
which  is  established  in  dilute  solution  in  the  presence  of  solid
(difficultly  soluble)  salts.

CHAP.  IV  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN  SALT  SOLUTIONS  511

In  the  following  paragraphs,  some  applications  will  make  the
meaning  of  the  preceding  results  more  intelligible.

The  Distribution  of  one  Base  between  two  Acids. — We  can

now  answer,  in  its  most  general  form,  a  question  which  was  formerly
much  discussed,  and  fruitlessly  too,  in  default  of  the  aid  of  the  dis-
sociation theory.  This  question  refers  to  the  distribution  of  a  base
between  two  acids,  when  the  total  quantity  of  the  latter  is  greater
than  that  required  for  neutralisation ;  and  the  distribution  of  an  acid
between  two  bases,  when  the  total  quantity  of  the  bases  is  greater
than  that  required  for  neutralisation.

The  state  of  equilibrium  is  definitely  determined  by  the  absolute
quantities  of  each  of  the  four  radicals  of  the  solution  (either  two  acid
radicals,  the  basic  radical,  and  the  hydrogen  ion,  or  else  respectively
the  two  basic  radicals,  the  acid  radical,  and  the  hydroxyl  ion),  together
with  the  dissociation  constants  of  the  four  electrically  neutral  species
which  may  be  produced  by  the  combination  of  the  four  radicals  afore-
said ;  and  the  calculation  of  this  equilibrium  offers  no  difficulties  except
in  the  way  of  pure  calculation,  which,  though  usually  not  inconsiderable,
are  nevertheless  not  insuperable.

As  an  example  of  such  a  calculation,  we  will  trace  out  the
following  simple  case.

Thus  let  two  weak  (slightly  dissociated)  monobasic  acids,  SH  and
S'H,  compete  for  a  base,  e.g.  NaOH ;  and  let  there  be  in  the  volume  V
1  g.-mol.  of  each  of  the  three  electrolytes.

Let  the  quantity  of  the  undissociated  part  of  the  first  acid  SH,  be
x ;  and  therefore  the  undissociated  part  of  S'H  will  be  1  -  x.  Then
the  quantity  1  -  x  of  the  first  acid  SH,  will  be  concerned  with  the
base ;  and,  moreover,  in  two  ways,  for  a  part  of  the  negative  radical
S  as  a  free  ion,  will  be  electrically  neutralised  by  the  equivalent
quantity  of  the  positive  radical  of  the  base ;  and  a  part  of  the
negative  radical  S  will  unite  to  form  the  electrically  neutral  molecule
SNa.  Then  let  the  first  of  these  fractions  amount  to  at  (1  -  x),
and  the  second  to  (1  —  at)  (1  -  x) ;  here  ax  denotes  the  degree  of
dissociation  of  the  salt  SNa.

And  regarding  the  second  acid  SH,  the  quantity  x  of  this  is  concerned
with  the  base ;  and  of  this  quantity  x,  the  quantity  a9x  is  in  the
form  of  negative  ions  S' ;  and  the  quantity  (1  -  a2)x  is  employed  in
the  formation  of  electrically  neutral  molecules  having  the  composition
S'Na  ;  here  a.7  denotes  the  degree  of  dissociation  of  the  salt  S'Na.

Moreover,  a  fraction  of  the  two  acids  will  be  electrically  dis-
sociated, and  let  the  quantity  of  the  free  H-ions  be  denoted  by  y.  But,
according  to  the  proviso,  both  acids  are  weak,  and  by  the  presence  of
the  sodium  salt  the  dissociation  is  caused  to  retreat  considerably.
Therefore  y  will  represent  an  infinitesimal  quantity,  as  compared  with
x  and  1  -  x.

512  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  ill

We  have  now  to  apply  the  equation  of  the  isotherm  of  dissociation
to  the  four  following  dissociations,  viz.,

I.  NaS  =  Na  +  S.  III.  HS  =  H  +  S.

II.  NaS'  =  Na  +  S'.  IV.  HS'  =  H  +  S'.

In  the  case  of  the  first  two,  —  according  to  the  law  that  binary  salts
composed  of  univalent  ions  are  decomposed  to  the  same  extent,  —  we
make  the  dissociation  constant  as  equal  to  K  ;  and  thus  we  obtain
respectively,

i.  --

Here  (1  -  x)  (1  -  a1)  and  x(l  -  a.2)  are  respectively  the  quantities
of  the  undissociated  molecules  NaS  and  NaS';  (1  -  x)aa  and  xa.2  are

~t"

respectively  the  quantities  of  the  S  and  of  the  S'  ions  ;  and  finally

+

(1  -  x)a1  +  xa2  is  the  quantity  of  the  Na  ions.
By  division  of  these  equations,  we  obtain

1  -  a, ou

=  -1,  or  ax  =  a.,  ;
4  -  Oj a2

i.e.  both  salts  are  dissociated  to  the  same  extent.

When  Kx  and  K2  denote  respectively  the  dissociation  constants  of
the  acids,  by  the  application  of  the  law  of  mass-action  to  reactions  III.
and  IV.,  we  obtain  respectively

in.  Kx=y-x).

.8-

from  which  by  division,  and  recollecting  the  identity  of  a1  and  a.,,  we
obtain

K, (1  -x)2

K,  ~ x-

1  —  x

Here  -  denotes  the  ratio  of  distribution  of  the  two  acids,  and  we  see
x

at  once  that  it  is  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  (mon-acid)  base.  If
(1  -  x)>x,  it  denotes  that  the  base  claims  a  larger  part  of  the  acid  SH
than  it  does  of  the  acid  S'H  ;  and  we  can  express  this  by  saying  that

CHAP.  IV  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN SALT  SOLUTIONS  513

the  first  acid  has  a  greater  "affinity"  for  the  base,  or  that  the  first  acid
is  "  stronger  "  ;  but  we  must  take  care  not  to  include  any  more  in  these
expressions  than  is  implied  by  the  preceding  considerations.  The
greater  "affinity"  or  "strength"  of  the  first  acid  consists  in  this,  and
in  this  solely,  viz.  that  at  the  same  concentration,  '  the  former  acid  is
electrolytically  dissociated  to  a  greater  extent  than  tlie  second  acid  is.

Now,  by  the  use  of  the  proposition,  that  salts  having  an  analogous
constitution  are  dissociated  to  the  same  extent,  the  state  of  equilibrium
is  definitely  determined,  in  that  a  greater  fraction  of  the  more  strongly
dissociated  acid  is  concerned  with  the  base  than  of  the  acid  which  is
dissociated  to  a  less  extent  ;  and  the  ratio  of  distribution  is  quantitatively
equal  to  the  square  root  of  the  ratio  of  the  two  dissociation  constants.

We  may  state  the  result  thus.  Let  us  denote  the  degree  of  dis-
sociation of  the  two  acids  respectively  by  ax  and  a.2,  when  each  is
dissolved  alone  in  volume  Y  ;  then  we  have

or,  since  ax  and  a.,  can  be  neglected  as  compared  with  1  on  account  of
the  slight  dissociation  of  the  acids,  it  follows  that

and,  therefore,

K,  Jl-
K2 x2

1  -  x ax  a1

-  =  -*.  and  1  -  x  =  — —  .
x a2  ax  +  a2

That  is,  the  ratio  of  distribution  is  accordingly  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the
respective  degrees  of  dissociation,  at  the  corresponding  dilution.

One  method  for  the  experimental  determination  of  the  relative
distribution  of  any  one  base  between  two  acids,  was  given  by  Thomsen
as  early  as  1854,  long  before  a  clear  conception  of  the  process  of
neutralisation  was  obtained,  and  before  it  was  developed  as  a  result  of
the  views  regarding  the  theory  of  dissociation.

If  one  equivalent  of  the  base  is  mixed  with  one  equivalent  of  each
of  the  acids  separately,  a  certain  amount  of  heat  is  developed,  which  in
the  two  cases  may  amount  to  a  and  b,  respectively.  Now,  if  we  mix
one  equivalent  of  the  base  with  one  equivalent  of  each  of  the  acids
together,  a  different  quantity  of  heat  will  be  developed,  which  may  be
denoted  by  c.

If  the  first  acid  alone  unites  with  the  base,  and  the  second  acid
has  nothing  to  do  with  the  reaction,  then  c  =  a  ;  and,  conversely,  if
the  second  acid  alone  unites  with  the  base,  then  c  =  b.  Now,  in  fact,
both  acids  participate  in  the  neutralisation,  and  therefore  c  must  lie
between  a  and  b,  provided  that  there  are  no  disturbing  side  reactions,
such  as  the  formation  of  acid  salts,  and  the  like.

2L

514

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

The  quantity  of  the  first  acid  concerned  in  the  neutralisation,  must
amount  to

a-V

the  nearer  c  is  to  a,  the  greater  the  value  of  this  fraction  will  be  ;  and
the  nearer  c  is  to  b,  the  smaller  the  value  of  the  fraction.  Then,
according  to  the  method  of  notation  given  above,  we  shall  have

c  -  b  a  -  ci

1  -  x  =  - ;  x  = -!  •

a  -  b  a  -  b

lL-1x_c-b
x a-  c"

This  method  of  proof  is  free  from  objection,  either  from  the  old
or  the  new  standpoint.  The  change  in  the  views  merely  concerns  the
manner  in  which  the  acid  and  the  base  are  concerned  in  neutralising
each  other.  This  process  consists  not  only  in  the  formation  of  a  salt
from  the  acid  and  the  base,  but  also  at  the  same  time  there  occurs,
and  usually  in  a  preponderating  degree,  according  to  the  circumstances,
the  formation  of  the  free  ions  which  constitute  the  salt.

Instead  of  using  the  "  heat  of  reaction  "  to  determine  the  ratio  of
distribution,  one  may  employ,  with  just  as  good  or  better  results,  the
changes  in  the  volumes  or  in  the  refractive  powers  of  the  solutions,
on  neutralisation,  as  was  shown  by  Ostwald  in  1878  ;  and  by  means  of
a  corresponding  method  of  treatment,  one  obtains  formulae  which  are
exactly  the  same  in  this  case  as  above.  In  particular,  the  method  of
the  determination  of  the  changes  in  volume  unites  accuracy  and
simplicity  of  treatment.

In  the  following  table  are  given  the  results  of  a  number  of  the
determinations  l  conducted  according  to  the  latter  method.

l  -  x  Obs.

1  -  x  Calc.

Nitric  acid  ;  Di-chlor-acetic  acid .....

0-76

0-69

Hydrochloric  acid  ;  Di-chlor-acetic  acid ....

074

0-69

Tri-chlor-acetic  acid  ;  Di-chlor-acetic  acid

071

0-69

Di-chlor-acetic  acid  ;  Lactic  acid ......

0-91

0-95

Tri-chlor-acetic  acid  ;  Mono-chlor-acetic  acid .

0-92

0-91

,, ,, ;  Formic  acid .....

0-97

0-97

Formic  acid Lactic  acid  .......

0-54

0-56

Acetic  acid . . . . .

076

075

Butyric  acid ......

0-80

0-79,

Iso-butyric  acid ......

079

0-79

Propionic  acid ......

0-81

0-80

Gly  colic  acid ......

0-44  (?)

0-53

Acetic acid Butyric  acid ......

0-53

0-54

,, „ Iso-butyric  acid ......

0-53

0-54

1  Ostwald,  Journ.  pr.  Chetn.  [2],  18.  328  (1878).

CHAP. IV

CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN SALT  SOLUTIONS  515

The  significance  of  the  observed  value  of  1  -  x  may  be  illustrated
most  easily  in  the  following  way.  If  four  equivalent  solutions  of  SNa,
S'Na,  SH,  and  S'H,  respectively,  are  mixed,  and  in  the  following  pro-
portions, viz. :  1  -  x  volume  of  SNa,  x  volume  of  S'Na,  x  volume  of
SH,  and  1  -x  volume  of  S'H, — then  there  occurs  neither  contraction
nor  dilation.  It  is  indifferent  whether  one  uses,  instead  of  sodium,
any  other  mon-acid  base  (as  is  also  required  by  theory).  We  conclude
from  this  that  acids  and  salts  exist  together  in  those  relative  proportions
ivhich  correspond  to  the  equilibrium  of  their  mixture.  For  if  this  were
not  the  case  a  reaction  would  take  place,  which  would  consist  in  a
change  of  the  degree  of  dissociation  of  the  four  electrolytes,  and  this
would  be  shown  by  a  change  of  volume.  Therefore  the  value  of
1  -  x  must,  as  determined  experimentally,  coincide  with  the  formula
as  developed  above.

As  a  matter  of  fact  this  does  occur,  as  was  shown  by  Arrhenius.1
In  the  second  column  of  the  preceding  table  are  given  the  values  of
1  -  x,  calculated  by  the  formula  developed  above,  viz.

l-x= a>

ax  +  a2

from  the  ratio  of  the  degrees  of  dissociation  of  the -two  acids  at  the
dilution  employed,  which  amounted  to  three '  litres,  inasmuch  as  the
solutions  which  were  studied,  resulted  from  the  mixture  of  the  three
normal  solutions,  viz.  of  the  base  and  of  the  two  acids  respectively.

With  the  exception  of  the  first  three  values, — where  the  com-
petition [for  the  base]  was  between  very  strong  acids,  and,  therefore,
where  the  proviso  of  the  theoretical  formula  is  not  fulfilled, — and,
with  the  exception  of  one  particular  value  which  probably  involved
some  error, — in  general  a  very  good  coincidence  is  established  between
the  values  of  1  -  x,  as  calculated  from  the  changes  of  volume  on
neutralisation  and  those  calculated  from  the  respective  conductivities
of  the  pure  acids.  As  the  value  of  1  -  x  is  always  greater  than
0'5,  therefore  the  acid  named  first  is  the  stronger  in  all  three
cases.

In  the  competition  between  any  two  weak  acids,  and  at  such
dilutions  that  the  salts  of  the  acids  may  be  regarded  as  completely
dissociated,  the  reaction  progresses  according  to  the  scheme,

SH  +  S'  +  Na  =  S'H  +  S  +  Na,
or  simply

SH  +  S'  =  S'H  +  S.

Now  the  law  of  mass-action  requires  that
Acid  I.  x  acid-ion  II.

=  a  constant.

Acid  II.  x  acid-ion  I.

1  Zeits.  phys.'Chem.,  5.  1  (1890).

516  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  in

This  equation  was  found  to  be  established  by  Lellmann  and
Schliemann,1  though,  to  be  sure,  they  were  not  very  clear  as  to  its
meaning ;  for,  on  the  basis  of  some  misunderstanding,  they  maintain
that  their  research  does  not  harmonise  with  the  dissociation  hypo-
thesis, while  the  reverse  is  the  case.2  The  method  employed  by
them  was  in  principle  that  of  Jellet  (p.  453) ;  only  instead  of  using
the  rotation  of  light,  they  used  the  absorption  of  light  to  analyse
the  state  of  equilibrium.

When  poly-basic  acids — as  sulphuric  acid,  e.g. — are  employed,  then
the  theoretical  treatment  of  the  state  of  equilibrium  is  rendered  much
more  difficult  by  the  formation  of  acid  salts  and  the  like :  this  has  not
been  investigated  as  yet.3

The  Strength  of  Acids  and  Bases. — It  is  a  very  common
experience,  and  one  made  long  ago,  that  the  different  acids  and  bases
exhibit  very  different  "  intensities  "  or  "  strengths  "  in  those  solutions
where  their  acid  or  basic  nature,  as  such,  comes  into  play.  But  in  spite
of  many  strenuous  endeavours  to  accomplish  it,  it  is  only  recently  that
it  has  been  possible  to  find  a  method  for  expressing  their  [relative]
strengths  numerically,  i.e.  for  expressing  the  numerical  coefficient  of
each  particular  acid  and  base,  which  should  make  possible  the  calcu-
lation of  the  degree  of  .their  distribution  in  the  reactions  which  are
characteristic  of  the  respective  acids  and  bases.

This  problem  was  first  deliberately  attacked  in  a  broad  way  by  J.
Thomsen  (1868);  but  it  was  Ostwald  (1878-1887)  who  first  succeeded
in  proving,  beyond  all  doubt,  that  the  property  of  acids  and  bases  of
exerting  their  action  according  to  the  standards  of  definite  coefficients,
finds  its  expression  not  only  in  the  forming  of  salts,  but  also  in  a  large
number  of  other  and  very  different  reactions.

Ostwald  compared  the  relative  order,  in  which  the  acids  compete
for  the  same  base,  according  to  their  strength,  as  obtained  by —

(a)  Thomsen's  thermo-chemical  methods,  with

(b)  His  own  (Ostwald's).  volume-chemical  methods,  and  with  the
relative  order  in  which  the  acids  arrange  themselves, —

(c)  Regarding  their  capacity  to  bring  calcium  oxalate  into  solution  ;
and, —

(d)  Regarding the relative velocities with  which they convert
acetamide  into  ammonium  acetate  ;  and, —

(e)  Regarding the relative velocities with which they cleave
methyl acetate, catalytically, into methyl alcohol and acetic acid ;
and, —

(/)  Regarding  the  relative  velocities  with  which  they  invert  cane
sugar ;  and, —

1  Lieb.  Ann.,  270.  208  (1892).

2  See  Arrlienius,  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.  1O.  670  (1892).

3  See  A.  A.  Noyes,  "  On  the  Separation  of  Hydrogen  Ions  from  Acid  Salt?, Zeitschr.
phys.  Chem.  11.  495  (1893).

CHAP.  IV  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN  SALT  SOLUTIONS  517

(g)  Regarding  their  relative  accelerations  of  the  mutual  action  of
hydriodic  acid  and  bromic  acid.

Ostwald  showed  that  in  all  these  various  cases  investigated,  one
always  obtains  the  same  -order  for  the  relative  strengths  of  the  different  acids,
as  measured  by  the  investigations  just  mentioned ;  particular  cases
will  be  considered  later.  It  should  be  noticed  that  all  the  decomposi-
tions enumerated  above,  were  conducted  in  dilute  water  solution,  and
therefore  the  preceding  scale  refers  only  to  reaction  capacities  under
these  conditions.  The  order  of  succession  of  the  acids  is  apparently
independent  of  the  temperature.

Although  Ostwald's  investigations  give  undoubted  proof  regarding
the  relative  order  of  the  strength  of  the  particular  acids,  yet  great
difficulty  was  experienced  in  ascertaining  the  quantitative  ratios  ;  and  the
numerical  coefficients,  as  calculated  from  the  particular  reactions,
usually  exhibit  great  deviations,  although  sometimes  there  are  surprising
coincidences.  In  particular  the  coefficients  vary  very  greatly  with  the
concentration,  and  in  those  cases  where  the  concentration  of  the  acid
varies  in  the  course  of  the  reaction,  the  calculation  is,  of  course,
entirely  untrustworthy.

A  similar  behaviour  was  found  in  the  study  of  bases,  though  the
observations  were  not  so  extended.

These  seemingly  complicated  relations  may  now  be  explained  in
one  word,  by  the  application  of  the  law  of  chemical  mass-action,  as  its
meaning  was  recognised  by  van't  Hoff  (1885),  and  as  it  was  thereupon
applied  by  Arrhenius  (1887)  to  electrolytic  dissociation,  in  explaining
the  exceptional  behaviour  of  substances  in  water  solution.  The
formulae  to  be  used  here  in  the  calculation  of  the  equilibrium  ratios,
are  of  course  obtained  by  a  specialisation  of  the  general  equations
developed  on  pp.  497  and  on.

The  peculiarities  directly  presented  by  the  conduct  of  acids  and
bases,  which  miist  be  presented  in  the  sense  of  the  views  developed
by  Arrhenius, — peculiarities,  moreover,  which  are  illustrated  both  in  the
old-time  distinction  between  neutral  solutions,  on  the  one  hand,  and
acid  and  basic  [or  rather  alkaline]  solutions  on  the  other,  and  also  in
the  recognition  of  a  polar  contrast  between  the  two  latter  [viz.  acid
and  alkaline  solutions], — all  of  these  peculiarities,  in  the  light  of  the
theory  of  electrolytic  dissociation,  are  now  to  be  conceived  of  in  the
following  way.

The  .reactions  which  are  characteristic  of  acids  existing  in  solution,
and  which  are  common  to  all  acids,  and  which  can  only  be  effected  by
acids, — these  reactions  consist  in  this,  namely,  that  the  dissociation  of

these  bodies,  as  a  class,  results  in  the  production  of  the  same  molecular

+
species,  the  positively  charged  hydrogen  ion  H.

Therefore  those  chemical  actions  which  are  characteristic  of  acids  are  to  le
ascribed  to  the  action  of  the  hydrogen  ions.

518  THEORP:TICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  m

In  the  same  way,  e.g.,  the  chemical  actions  which  are  common  to
the  chlorides  are  to  be  explained  by  the  action  of  the  free  chlorine
ions.

And  in  a  similar  way,  the  reactions  which  are  characteristic  of  bases
existing  in  solution,  justify  the  view  that  the  dissociation  of  this  class  of
substances  results  in  the  production  of  negatively  charged  hydroxyl  ions

(HO).

Therefore  the  specific  action  of  bases  is  due  to  the  hydroxyl  ions.

A  solution  reacts  acid  when  it  contains  free  hydrogen  ions ;  and
alkaline  (basic)  when  it  contains  free  hydroxyl  ions.  If  we  bring-
together  an  acid  solution  and  an  alkaline  solution,  then,  because  the
positive  hydrogen  ion  and  the  negative  hydroxyl  ion  are  incapable  of
existing  beside  each  other,  the  ions  unite  with  each  other  to  form
electrically  neutral  molecules,  in  the  sense  of  the  equation,

H  +  OH  =  H20,

and  there  results  neutralisation  (p.  507).  Thus  we  find  a  simple
explanation  of  the  polar  contrast  between  acid  and  basic  solutions;  it
consists  simply  in  this,  namely,  that  the  ions  which  are  respectively
characteristic  of  the  acid  and  of  the  base,  together  form  the  two  ingredients  of
the  solvent  [water],  in  which  we  study  the  reaction  capacities.

The  conception  of  the  "  strength "  of  an  acid  or  of  a  base  now
explains  itself.  If  we  compare  equivalent  solutions  of  different  acids,
each  one  will  exert  the  actions  characteristic  of  acids  the  more
energetically,  the  more  free  hydrogen  ions  it  contains.  This  follows  as
an  immediate  deduction  from  the  law  of  chemical  mass-action.

The  degree  of  electrolytic  dissociation  determines  the  relative  strength  of
the  acid ;  and  similar  considerations  lead  to  the  proposition  that —

The  strength  of  bases  depends  upon  the  degree  of  their  electrolytic
dissociation.

Now  the  degree  of  the  electrolytic  dissociation  varies  with  the
concentration,  regularly  in  the  way  indicated  on  p.  498.  At  very
extreme  dilution,  equivalent  solutions  of  the  most  various  acids  contain
the  same  number  of  hydrogen*ions,  or,  in  other  words,  they  are. equally
strong ;  and  a  similar  thing  holds  true  of  bases.

The  dissociation  decreases  with  increasing  concentration,  but  the
variation  changes  at  a  different  rate  for  various  substances.  Thus  the
relative  strengths  of  bases  and  acids  must  vary  with  their  concentra-
tion, as  was  empirically  established  by  Ostwald.

Now  the  dissociation  constant  is  the  measure  of  the  variation  of
the  degree  of  dissociation  with  the  concentration ;  i.e.  we  must  regard
these  magnitudes  as  the  measure  of  the  strengths  of  acids  and  bases.  Thus
by  the  consideration  of  this  special  case,  we  again  obtain  the  same
result  as  that  previously  developed  in  a  general  way  (p.  474),  namely,

CHAP,  iv  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN  SALT  SOLUTIONS  519

the  dissociation  coefficients  are  the  measures  of  the  reaction  capacities  of  all
such  substances,  e.g.  both  acids  and  bases.

The  order  of  succession  of  the  acids,  as  arranged  by  Ostwald  on
the  basis  of  the  most  various  reactions,  must  coincide  with  the  order
of  succession  as  developed  from  their  dissociation  constants ;  and
also,  since  the  depression  of  the  freezing-point  increases  with  the
degree  of  the  electrical  dissociation,  it  must  coincide  with  the  order
of  succession  as  arranged  with  reference  to  the  depression  of  the
freezing-point  in  equivalent  solutions.  This  result  is  established  by
experiment.

The  degree  of  dissociation  a,  of  an  acid,  in  a  definite  concentration
at  which  its  molecular  conductivity  is  A,  according  to  p.  359,  is  calcu-
lated to  be

a= A
Aoo'

The  conductivity  at  very  great  dilution  A  so  ,  according  to  the  law
of  Koelrausch  (p.  363)  is  found  to  be

Aoo  =  u  +  v.

Now  since  u,  the  ionic  mobility  of  hydrogen,  is  more  than
ten  times  as  great  as  v,  the  ionic  mobility  of  the  negative  radical
of  the  acid,  therefore  Aoo  has  approximately  the  same  value  for  the
most  different  acids  (usually  within  less  than  1 0  per  cent) ;  and  there-
fore the  conductivity  of  an  acid  in  equivalent  concentration  corresponds,  at
least  approximately,  to  the  degree  of  its  electrolytic  dissociation,  i.e.  to  its
strength.

On  the  whole,  the  order  of  succession  as  arranged  in  accordance
with  the  conductivities  is  identical  with  the  order  of  succession  as
shown  by  their  acids  in  their  specific  reactions.  The  recognition  by
Arrhenius  and  Ostwald  (in  1885)  of  this  remarkable  parallelism  was
an  important  event,  for  it  amounted  to  the  discovery  of  electro-
lytic-dissociation.

We  will  now  learn,  by  a  detailed  description  of  these  reactions,
how  the  special  case  of  the  distribution  of  acids  and  bases  in  the  most
various  reactions,  may  be  calculated  quantitatively  from  their  dis-
sociation coefficients,  which  Ostwald  calls  the  "affinity  constants."

Hydrolytic  Dissociation. — A  very  important  case  in  which
water  as  a  solvent  participates  in  the  reaction,  is  the  so-called  hydro-
lytic  dissociation;  or  in  short  "hydrolysis"  i.e.  the  decomposition  of  a
salt  into  base  and  acid,  with  the  assumption  of  the  ingredients  of
water.

The  theory  of  this,  according  to  what  has  been  explained,  is  very
simple.  Let  any  selected  quantities  of  an  acid  SH,  and  a  base  BOH,
be  dissolved  in  a  large  quantity  of  water.  Then,  in  general,  the  five

520  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

following  reactions  will  occur  in  one  sense  or  the  other  [i.e.,  advance
or  retrograde],  by  a  change  in  the  relative  proportions.

I.  SB  =  S  +  B.
II,  SH  =  S  +  H.

III.  BOH  =  5  +  OH.

IV.  H2O  =  H  +  OH.

V.  SB  +  H20  =  SH  +  BOH.

Reactions  I.  to  IV.  inclusive  are  cases  of  electrolytic  dissociation  ;
reaction  V.  is  the  equation  of  hydrolytic  dissociation.  Let  Kx  to  K5
inclusive  be  the  respective  reaction  coefficients,  and  let  the  respective
concentrations  of  the  reacting  molecular  species,  which  are  partly
electrically  neutral  molecules,  and  partly  ions,  be  as  follows  :—

SB SH BOH B H S OH

Cl  °2  C8  Cl  C2  Cl'  V

Now,  according  to  the  conditions  of  the  experiment,  the  total  quantity
of  the  radical  S,  is

Cj  +  C2  +  c/  =  m  ;

and  that  of  the  radical  B,  is

Cj  +  C3  +  Cj  =  n  ;
and,  therefore,

Cl  +  C2  =  Cl'  +  G2 >

i.e.  the  solution  contains  the  same  number  of  positive  and  of  negative
ions.  The  active  mass  of  the  solvent,  i.e.  of  the  molecule  H20,  is  very
nearly  constant  (p.  460)  :  it  is  of  course  indifferent  whether  water  in
the  liquid  state  has  this  molecular  weight  or  another  [polymeric].

Now  the  application  of  the  law  of  mass-action  to  reactions  I.  to  V.
inclusive,  gives  respectively  the  following  equations,  viz.

II.  K2C2  =  c1'c2.

III.  K3C3  =  Clc2'.

IV.  K4  =  c02  =  c.2c2'.
V.  K5C^C2C3.

Kj  may,  with  a  satisfactory  approach  to  accuracy,  be  regarded  as  the
same  (p,  499)  for  all  binary  electrolytes  composed  of  univalent  ions.

CHAP.  IV  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN  SALT  SOLUTIONS  521

K2  and  K3  may  be  determined  from  the  conductivity  in  all  cases
where  the  base  is  not  too  weak  ;  for  those  cases  where  the  base  is
very  weak,  these  values  may  be  most  safely  determined  by  a  com-
parison with  a  stronger  base,  respecting  the  competition  for  the  acid
by  the  bases.  K4  is  the  electrolytic  dissociation  constant  of  water,  the
significance  of  which  was  first  recognised  by  Arrhenius;1  its  exact
determination  is  of  the  greatest  importance.

By  multiplying  equations II.  and  III., and dividing  by  I.  we
obtain

rr

C3A  =  CiK^8c*c*''

and  this,  by  substitution  from  IV.,  becomes

By  comparing  this  with  equation  V.,  it  becomes

_K,K4
5  ~  K2K3'

The  reaction  constant  for  hydrolysis  can  therefore  be  calculated
from  the  dissociation  constant  of  the  reacting  molecules,  that  is  the
degree  of  hydrolysis  can  be  calculated  when  we  know  the  strength  of
the  acid  and  base.

In  practically  applying  the  above  equation  we  must  consider  how-
ever, that  the  value  of  K  is  not  constant  (p.  499)  for  strongly  dissociated
electrolytes,  that  is  for  neutral  salts  and  very  strong  acids  and  bases.
In  this  case  the  above  formula  may  be  most  practically  applied  by
treating  these  substances  as  completely  dissociated,  and  afterwards
introducing  small  corrections  on  account  of  the  inaccuracy  of  this
assumption.

The  strongest  hydrolysis  is  of  course  met  with  when  both  the  acid
and  the  base  are  very  weak.  It  may  happen  in  this  case  that  the  salt
is  entirely  decomposed,  namely  when  the  acid  or  base  is  insoluble  and
hence  the  greater  part  of  the  substance  is  precipitated  and  becomes  in-
active. Thus  white  silver  borate  decomposes  on  heating,  with  separa-
tion of  silver  oxide,  in  the  same  way  ferric  acetate  decomposes  in
dilute  solution  on  boiling  almost  completely  into  ferric  hydroxide  and
free  acid.  A  case  in  which  the  salt  decomposes  completely  in  the  cold
at  any  attainable  dilution  is  to  be  found  in  the  behaviour  of  the  salts
of  the  trivalent  metals  towards  carbonates  ;  the  hydroxyl  is  here  pre-
cipitated at  once  because  the  hydrolysis  of  the  carbonate  of  these  metals
is  almost  complete.

1  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  5.  16  (1890).

522  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  ill

Walker l  investigated  quantitatively  the  hydrolysis  of  the  chlorides
of  some  weak  bases  (such  as  aniline)  by  measuring  the  amount  of  free
hydrogen  ions  by  the  velocity  of  inversion  of  methyl  acetate  (see  the
following  chapter).  In  this  case  hydrolysis  occurs  according  to  the
equation

B  +  01  +  H20  =  BOH  +  Cl  +  H
or  more  simply

B  +  H20  =  BOH  +  H  ;

as  we  may  here,  on  account  of  the  strong  dissociation  of  the  hydrochloric
acid,  regard  the  concentration  of  the  hydrogen  ions  as  very  approxi-
mately the  same  as  that  of  the  free  acid,  and,  on  account  of  the  strong

-r

dissociation  of  the  salt,  regard  the  concentration  of  the  B-ions  as  being
that  of  the  undissociated  salt,  and  finally,  on  account  of  the  very
feeble  dissociation  of  the  base,  regard  the  concentration  of  BOH  as
equally  that  of  the  free  base,  AVC  get  the  equation

[BOH]  [H] Base  x  Acid

-™-L  const.

[B]  Salt

which  Walker  found  to  be  confirmed  by  experiment.

In  the  case  stated  by  Walker  the  hydrolysis  was  considerable
despite  the  strength  of  the  acid  because  the  base  was  extraordinarily
weak ;  conversely  Shields 2  measured  the  hydrolysis  of  a  number  of
salts  for  which  the  base  was  strong  and  the  acid  very  weak.  The  rate
of  saponification  of  methyl  acetate  was  determined,  as  the  amount  of
free  hydroxl  ions  is  directly  proportional  to  it  (see  the  following-
chapter),  and,  on  acccount  of  the  strength  of  the  base  used,  this  is
practically  identical  with  the  total  concentration  of  the  free  base.
The  degree  of  hydrolytic  dissociation  at  25°  was  found  for  the
following  salts  in  •£$•  normal  solution  :—

Potassium  cyanide . . .  1 '12  per  cent.

Sodium  carbonate . . .  3'17 ,,

Potassium  phenolate  . .  3  05 ,,

Borax 0'5

Sodium  acetate  ....  G'008 „

Since  in  the  above  cases  the  base  is  very  strong  and  the  acid  very
weak  the  reaction  occurs  practically  according  to  the  equation

ON  +  H20  =  OH  +  HCN

and  by  using  pure  salts,  that  is  by  avoiding  an  excess  of  acid  or  base
1  Zeits.phys.  Ckem.,  4.  319  (1889),  2  Ibid.,  12.  167  (1893).

CHAP.  IV  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN  SALT  SOLUTIONS  523

the  amounts  of  free  acid  and  base  must  be  equal,  so  that  the  law  of
mass  action  gives

Acid  x  Base

-  =  constant,  or  the  base  is  proportional  to  \/salt

that  is,  the  degree  of  hydrolysis  is  proportional  to  the  square  root  of
the  concentration  of  the  undissociated  salt,  and  the  latter  quantity  is  not
very  different  from  the  total  concentration  of  the  salt  when  the
hydrolysis  is  small.

We  may  calculate  the  dissociation  of  water  from  the  fact  that
0*1  normal  sodium  acetate  is  hydrolysed  to  the  extent  of  O'OOS^/.
Since  acetic  acid  in  presence  of  its  salt  is  very  slightly  dissociated,
the  free  base  (NaOH)  almost  completely,  we  have  as  the  concentrations
of  the  acetic  acid  and  the  hydroxyl  ions

[CH8COOH]  =  [OH]  -0-000008  ™*

+
The  amount  of  free  hydrogen  ions  [H]  is  found  from  the  equation

K[CH8COOH]  =  [CH^COO]  [H],

where  K,  the  dissociation  constant  of  acetic  acid,  reaches  0  '0000  178
(p.  498),  and  the  concentration  of  the  negative  ion  of  acetic  acid  is
almost  precisely  that  of  the  salt  (0*1).  We  thus  find

and  according  to  p.  508

c0=V  [H][OH]=  v/1-42.0-8.  10-14=M.10-7

that  is,  pure  water  at  25°  is  O'll  millionths  normal  with  respect  to
the  hydrogen  or  hydroxyl  ions.  Walker  (loc.  cit.  p.  503),  by  means  of
the  values  of  K  given  on  p.  503',  calculated  in  the  same  way  the  hydro-
lysis of  potassium  cyanide,  potassium  phenolate,  and  borax  to  be  0'96,
3'0  and  0*3^  in  striking  agreement  with  the  experiments  of  Shields.

The  Theory  of  Indicators.1 — Many  of  the  so-called  ^colour-
reactions  "  may  be  explained  by  a  change  in  the  electrolytic  dissociation,
whether  it  is  a  result  of  dilution  or  of  the  addition  of  some  foreign
substance.

We  have  already  seen  (p.  384),  that  each  particular  ion  has  its
own  definite  absorption  of  light,  and  that  in  general  this  changes  when

1  Ostwald,  Lehrb.  d.  ally.  Ghim.,  2nd  edit.,  1891,  Bd.  I.  p.  799.  [See  this  part
translated  by  P.  M.  M.  Muir,  "  Solutions,"  pp.  268-272.  London  and  New  York,  1891.
— TR.]  ;  Grundlagen  d.  ancdyt.  Chemie.,  chap,  vi.,  2nd  edit.,  Leipzig,  1897.

524  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  in

the  ion  unites  with  another.  Thus  cupric  chloride  has  a  green  colour,
which  is  occasioned  by  the  undissociated  molecules ;  and  it  is  only  at
extended  dilution  that  the  blue  colour  of  the  cupric  ions  appears,
which  is  exhibited  by  all  cupric  salts  dissolved  in  much  water.  If  one
adds  hydrochloric  acid  to  a  dilute  solution  of  cupric  chloride,  the  dis-
sociation retreats,  and  the  solution  again  becomes  a  clear  green.

The  quantitative  study  of  the  gradual  change  in  coloration  is  an
elegant  method  of  investigating  chemical  equilibrium,  which  was  first
introduced  by  Gladstone  (1855).  It  has  been  used  since  by  Salet
(p.  347),  Magnanini,1  Lellmann  (p.  516),  and  others.

Upon  phenomena  like  this,  depends  the  common  use  of  indicators
in  A'olumetric  analysis,  i.e.  substances  which  in  acid  solutions  have
colours  different  from  those  in  alkaline  [or  neutral]  solutions.  Every
weak  acid  or  base  [or  salt]  is  suitable  for  such  a  purpose  when  its
radical  has,  as  an  ion,  a  colour  different  from  that  which  it  has  in  an
electrically  neutral  molecule.

The  acid  or  base  must  be  weak  so  that  a  very  slight  excess  of
hydrogen  or  hydroxyl  ions  mny  cause  a  great  change  in  coloration.
Thus  paranitrophenol  is  an  acid  indicator ;  the  undissociated  molecule
of  this  acid  is  colourless,  its  negative  ion  is  coloured  an  intense  yello\v.
If  acid  is  present  in  the  solution  the  already  slight  dissociation  of  the
indicator  is  almost  entirely  destroyed  arid  the  solution  becomes  colour-
less. If,  on  the  contrary,  a  base  is  added,  the  strongly  dissociated
solution  of  paranitrophenol  is  formed  and  the  solution  becomes  yellow.
Another  acid  indicator  of  similar  chemical  character  is  phenolphthaleine,
which  is  colourless  in  the  undissociated  state,  that  is,  in  the  presence
of  a  trace  of  hydrogen  ions.  But  as  soon  as  the  solution  becomes
alkaline  the  strongly  dissociated  salt  of  phenolphthaleine  is  formed,  and
the  intense  red  of  its  negative  ion  appears.  Methyl  orange  is  an
example  of  a  basic  indicator ;  in  acid  solutions  it  is  coloured  an  intense
red,  in  alkaline  it  is  yellowish.2

The  above  considerations  show  when  an  indicator  is  useful,  that  is,
when  it  gives  a  sharp  change  of  colour,  and  when  not.  If  it  is  a  strong
or  even  a  moderately  strong  acid  its  dissociation  would  only  be
destroyed  by  a  considerable  excess  of  hydrogen  ions.  On  the  other
hand,  it  must  not  be  too  weak  an  acid,  otherwise,  with  excess  of  base,
the  salt  formed  by  the  base  and  the  indicator  would  be  hydrolytically
decomposed  to  a  considerable  extent,  and  consequently  the  change  of
colour  would  be  weakened.  The  latter  circumstance  becomes  of  more
importance  when  the  base  added  is  weak.  Phenolphthaleine  for
example  is  so  weak  an  acid  that  its  ammonia  salt  is  strongly  dissociated
hydrolytically,  hence  when  ammonia  is  titrated  with  phenolphthaleine

1  Zeits.  phys.  Cheni.,  8.  1  (1891).

2  See  also  oo  this  point  F.  W.  Kiister,  Zeits.  anorg.  C/iem. 13.  136 (1897),  who
shows  convincingly  that  the  acid  function  of  methyl  orange  is  unimportant  as  regards
change  of  colour  (p.  377).

CHAP.  IV  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN  SALT  SOLUTIONS  525

as  indicator  the  red  colour  of  the  ion  of  phenolphthaleine  disappears
on  addition  of  acid  before  the  ammonia  present  has  been  thoroughly
neutralised.  Paranitrophenol  is  a  considerably  stronger  acid,  its
ammonia  salt  is  less  decomposed  hydrolytically  but  the  change  of
colour  remains  sharp.  Hence  weak  bases  may  be  titrated  with
paranitrophenol  but  not  with  phenolphthaleine  as  indicator.  In
titrating  strong  bases  phenolphthaleine  gives  more  exact  results  than
paranitrophenol  because  the  yellow  colour  of  the  negative  ion  of  the
more  strongly  dissociated  paranitrophenol  appears  before  the  neutralisa-
tion is  completely  effected  by  the  alkali  added,  whilst  the  much  more
weakly  dissociated  phenolphthaleine  only  shows  the  red  colour  of  its
negative  ion  when  an  extremely  minute  quantity  of  the  strong  base  is
present  in  excess.  The  same  considerations  apply  naturally  to  basic
indicators  like  methyl  orange,  so  that  we  are  led  to  the  following  rule
as  to  the  use  of  indicators.  A  weak  base  and  a  weak  acid  are  not  to  be
used  together  on  account  of  hydrolysis ;  very  weak  acid  indicators  are
therefore  unavailable  for  titrating  weak  bases,  very  weak  bases  for
titrating  weak  acids.  As  titrating  liquid  strong  acids  and  strong  bases
should  always  be  used  (hydrochloric  acid,  barium  hydroxide).  If  the
indicator  used  is  a  moderately  weak  acid  or  base  the  change  of  colour
can  still  be  used  in  titrating  weak  bases  although  with  a  certain  loss  of
sensitiveness.

In  multivalent  acids  it  may  happen  that,  on  account  of  the  different
strengths  of  its  valencies,  only  one  stage  of  the  dissociation  may  come
into  evidence  on  account  of  the  nature  of  the  indicator  used.  Thus
carbonic  acid  cannot  be  titrated  at  all  with  methyl  orange,  with
phenolphthaleine  it  appears  as  a  univalent  acid  ;  phosphoric  acid  behaves
as  a  univalent  acid  on  titration  with  methyl  orange,  as  a  divalent  acid
on  titration  with  phenolphthaleine.  For  further  details  see  the  study
on  indicators  by  Julius  Wagner.1

The  so-called  "  Hydrate  Theory." — In  the  preceding  chapters
there  has  been  developed  the  theory  of  the  state  of  chemical  equilibrium
in  solution.  The  way  to  this  was  opened  by  those  methods  of  in-  .
vestigation  which  were  based  on  the  fundamental  principles  of  the
doctrine  of  affinity ;  and  respecting  the  fruitfulness  of  these  methods,
they  have  been  put  in  evidence,  by  their  abundant  results,  to  the
enrichment  of  our  experimental  knowledge.

Now  in  addition  to  this  theory  [of  chemical  equilibrium],  another
conception  has  recently  shown  itself ;  this,  by  those  who  represent
it,  has  been  called  the  "Hydrate  Theory  of  Solutions,"  although  it
has  provisionally  failed  utterly  to  show  that  it  deserves  the  name  of
a  "theory  of  solutions."

Mendelejeff2  supposed  that  he  had  discovered  that  the  differential
coefficients  of  the  densities  of  water  solutions  of  sulphuric  acid  and  of

1  Zeits.  anorfj.  Chem.,  27.  138  (1901). 2  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  1.-273  (1887).

526  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  ill

alcohol,  vary  rectilinearly  with  the  per  cent  contained :  but  the
dependence  upon  the  concentration  is  represented  not  by  one  but
by  several  straight  lines  :  breaks  [between  the  curves]  were  supposed
to  correspond  to  definite  hydrates.

In  fact,  Mendelejeff  stated  the  breaks  that  he  supposed  he  had
found,  at  concentrations  corresponding  to  the  following  molecular
ratios,  viz.  :  S03  +  H,0  ;  S03  +  3H20  ;  S03  +  7H20  ;  S03  +  151H.O.
He  found  similar  breaks  in  the  alcohol  solutions.

But  now  it  was  at  once  shown l  by  a  careful  discussion  of  the
material  of  observation,  that  irregularities  of  this  sort  do  not  exist.
But  more  impeachable  still  than  the  experimental  basis,  which  itself
seems  to  be  very  untrustworthy,  are  the  considerations  which  led  to
the  search  for  "  breaks "  [in  the  curve],  and  to  their  theoretical
interpretation.  For  even  if  it  were  granted,  that  the  aforesaid
hydrates  did  exist  in  the  solution,  their  decomposition  would  not  be
manifested  by  irregularities  appearing  suddenly ;  but  here,  as  in
general,  there  would  occur  a  gradual  and  perfectly  continuous  change
of  the  equilibrium  with  the  concentration.

Moreover,  we  have  already  seen  (p.  459)  that,  according  to  the
requirements  of  the  law  of  chemical  mass -action,  any  contingent
hydration  of  the  dissolved  substance  would  be  almost  independent  of
the  concentration,  at  least  at  extended  dilution.

The  Mutual  Influence  of  the  Solubility  of  Salts. — We  have
thus  far  considered  the  equilibrium  in  salt  solutions,  as  though  they
were  homogeneous  systems.  We  will  now  consider  the  case  where  solid
&J>lts  participate  in  the  equilibrium.  The  proposition  that  a  solid  sub-
stance, which  dissociates  on  solution,  has  a  definite  solubility  at  a
definite  temperature,  like  every  other  solid  substance  (p.  475),  holds
good  of  course  for  the  case  where  the  dissociation  is  an  electrolytic
one ;  and  thus  the  propositions  previously  developed  may  be  applied,
without  further  remark,  to  the  case  in  hand.  This  statement  thus
.enables  us  to  consider,  completely,  the  case  where  the  solid  salt
participates'  in  the  equilibrium,  as  will  be  made  plain  from  the
following  example.

We  will  first  consider  the  simple  case  of  a  binary  electrolyte,  and  we
will  investigate  the  change  in  its  solubility  as  it  is  occasioned  by  the
presence  of  another  binary  electrolyte  which  has  a  common  ion.  The
process  can  at  once  be  surveyed  in  a  qualitative  way.

The  saturated  solution  of  the  first  electrolyte,  of  course,  is  never
.completely  dissociated,  for  some  electrically  neutral  molecules  will  be
present  in  the  solution.  The  proposition  (p.  475)  that  the  concentra-
tion remains  unchanged  by  the  presence  of  other  substances  in  the
solution,  may  be  immediately  applied  to  the  concentration  of  these
neutral  molecules.  We  will  now  add  to  the  saturated  water  solution

1  Pickering,  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  6.  10  (1890).

CHAP.  IV  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN  SALT  SOLUTIONS  527

of  the  electrolyte,  another  electrolyte  with  a  common  ion ;  then  in
exactly  the  same  way  that  it  was  found  on  p.  503,  the  dissocia-
tion of  the  first  electrolyte  will  retreat,  and  the  quantity  of  electri-
cally neutral  molecules  will  increase.  But  this  increased  quantity
prevents  the  solution  pressure  of  the  solid  salt  from  remaining  in
equilibrium,  and  therefore  a  definite  part  of  the  dissolved  salt  will  be
precipitated  from  the  solution,  until  the  equilibrium  is  re-established.
Thus  the  solubility  of  one  salt  is  depressed  in  the  presence  of  another  having
a  common  ion.

This  proposition  may  be  proved  .in  a  qualitative  way  without
difficulty.  Thus,  if  'one  adds  to  a  saturated  solution  of  potassium
chlorate  a  solution  of  another  potassium  salt,  as  e.g.  potassium  chloride,
or  a  solution  of  another  chlorate  as  e.g.  sodium  chlorate, — and  this  may
be  done  most  easily  by  adding  a  few  drops  of  a  concentrated  solution
of  the  other  substance, — he  will  observe  .after  a  moment  a  copious
separation  of  solid  potassium  chlorate.  A  saturated  solution  of  lead
chloride  gives  immediately  a  white  precipitate  on  addition  of  a  few
drops  of  chloride  and  so  on.

Of  course  the  mutual  influence  of  solubility  can  also  be  developed
theoretically  in  a  quantitative  way.  Thus  let  m0  be  the  solubility  of  the
solid  electrolyte  in  pure  water ;  and  let  a0  be  the  degree  of  dissociation
corresponding  to  this  concentration  (the  latter  being  expressed,  as
always,  in  g-equivalents  per  litre).  Then  m0  (1  -  a0)  will  denote  the
undissociated,  and  m0a0  the  dissociated  quantity  of  the  electrolyte.
Let  its  solubility  be  m,  and  the  corresponding  degree  of  dissociation  be
a,  in  the  presence  of  another  electrolyte,  the  free  ions  of  which  have
the  concentration  x.

Then  the  theorem  of  the  constant  solubility  of  the  undissociated
part,  gives

mo(l  -«o)  =  m(1  -«)»

and  the  application  of  the  isotherm  of  dissociation,  in  the  two  cases,
gives

Km0(l  -  a0)  =  (ra0a0)2,

Km(l  -  a)  =  ma(ma  +.  x) ;
and,  therefore,  there  must  exist  the  relation,

(m0a0)2  =  ma(ma  +  x),
from  which  we  obtain

DDL  = —  —

this  equation  enables  one  to  calculate  the  solubility  after  the  addition,
from  the  solubility  of  the  salt  in  pure  water,  and  from  the  quantity  of
salt  added.

528

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK III

This  preceding  law  of  solubility,  which  the  writer  developed  in
1889,  and  also  experimentally  verified  (p.  477),  was  later  subjected
to  a  very  careful  test  by  A.  A.  Noyes ; l  its  requirements  were
established  in  a  striking  way.  Thus  Noyes  and  others  have  studied
the  influence  which  the  solubility  of  silver  bromate  experienced  in  the
presence  of  silver  nitrate  and  potassium  bromate.

I.

Addition  of  AgXog
or  of  KBrO3

respectively.

II.
Sol.  of  AgBrO3
on  the  addition  of
AgN03.

III.
Sol.  of  AgBrO3
on  the  addition  of
KBrO3.

IV.

Calc.  sol.  of
AgBr03.

o-

0-00810

0-00810

0-00810

0-00850

0-00510

0-00519

0-00504

0-0346

0-00216

0-00227

0-00206

The  numbers  given  under  II.  are  the  solubilities  on  addition  of
silver  nitrite,  under  III.  those  on  addition  of  potassium  bromate  ;  it
appears  from  the  table  that  equivalent  mixtures  of  silver  nitrite  and
potassium  bromate  displace  the  solubility  of  silver  bromate  equally
and  by  practically  the  amount  that  is  calculated  from  the  laAv  of  mass
action.  It  also  appears  that  a  relatively  small  addition  of  a  foreign
substance  is  sufficient  to  reduce  the  solubility  [of  the  AgBrOJ  one-
fourth.  The  fact  that  the  calculated  values  in  this  case,  as  well  as  in
the  numerous  other  cases  observed  by  Noyes,  are  smaller  than  the
observed  values,  may  perhaps  be  explained  by  the  possibility  that  the
neutral  salts  are  not  so  highly  dissociated  electrolytically,  as  would
be  indicated  by  a  calculation  from  the  conductivity.

Moreover,  Noyes  also  found  that  equivalent  quantities  of  chlorides
of  univalent  bases,  depress  the  solubility  of  thallous  chloride  to  the
same  degree;  this  is  a  further  proof  of  the  proposition  (p.  499)  that
these  substances  [i.e.  salts  of  univalent  bases]  are  dissociated  to  the
same  extent  when  in  equivalent  solutions.

Moreover,  the  addition  of  the  chlorides  of  the  divalent  metals,  Mg,
Ca,  Ba,  Mn,  Zn,  and  Cu,  have  the  same  effect  in  depressing  the
solubility ;  from  which  it  is  to  be  inferred  that  these  substances,  in
equivalent  solutions,  experience  the  same  degree  of  dissociation.  In
this  way,  Noyes  found  the  following  values  for  the  degree  of  dissocia-
tion of  the  chlorides  just  enumerated.

1  ZeUs.  phys.  Chem.,  6.  241  (1890)  ;  9.  603  (1892)  ;  26.  152  (1898).

[TABLE

CHAP. IV

CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN SALT  SOLUTIONS

529

Concentration.

Degree  of  Dissociation.

0-0344

82-2%

0-0567

77-6%

0-1045

69-4%

0-2030

61-5%

These  values  are  calculated  as  though  the  salt  decomposed  according
to  the  scheme

CaCL2  -  Ca  +  Cl  +  Cl ;

but  there  is,  doubtless,  at  the  same  time  a  decomposition  according  to
the  scheme

CaCl2  =  CaCl  +  Cl,

although  this  latter  may  not  amount  to  very  much.

In  contrast  to  the  salts  just  mentioned,  CdCl.2  is  dissociated  to  a
much  smaller  degree.  Thus,  in  investigating  the  influence  of  solubility,
we  possess,  in  the  suitable  choice  of  substances  which  are  soluble  with
difficulty,  a  method,  which  is  applicable  to  every  kind  of  ion,  for  the
determination  of  the  number  of  the  particular  kind  of  ions  contained
in  a  solution.

As  an  example  of  the  mutual  influence  of  the  solubilities  of  tenary
electrolytes,  Noyes  studied  the  diminution  of  the  solubility  of  lead  chloride
on  the  addition  of  the  chlorides  of  Mg,  Ca,  Zn,  and  Mn.  As  would  be
expected,  these  latter  substances  act  with  the  same  strength  [of  depres-
sion of  solubility].  The  degree  of  this  influence  is  given  by  the  pro-
position, that  the  product  of  the  lead  ions  and  the  square  of  the  chlorine
ions  must  be  constant.

As  before,  let  m0  denote  the  solubility  of  PbCl2  in  pure  water,  and
m  its  solubility  after  the  addition  of  x  chlorine  ions  ;  and  let  a0  denote
the  original  dissociation,  and  a  that  after  the  addition.  Then  the  law
of  mass-action  requires  that

and

mo(1  -<*0)  =  m(l-a),
(m0a0)3  =  ma(ma  +  x)'2.

Then,  since  PbCl2  is  dissociated  just  as  strongly  as  the  added
chloride,  x  is  equal  to  the  quantity  of  chloride  added  multiplied  by  a.
Thus  Noyes  found  the  following  results  : —

2M

530

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK III

n

i

Found.

Calc.

0-05

0-697

0-0502

0-0522

o-io

0-661

0-0351

0-0351

0-20

0-605

0-0218

0-0176

m0  =  0-0777

=  0733.

The  values  of  a  are  taken  from  the  preceding  table.  The  coincidence
between  calculation  and  observation  is  fair.

To  precipitate  an  insoluble  salt  as  far  as  possible  it  is  therefore
convenient  to  use  an  excess  of  the  precipitating  material  in  order  to
displace  the  solubility  of  the  precipated  salt.  It  is,  however,  sufficient,
especially  in  the  case  of  very  insoluble  substances,  to  use  a  quite  small
excess.  For  example,  the  concentration  of  a  saturated  solution  of
silver  chloride  at  atmospheric  temperature  is  about  TOO^OO"  normal ;
if  chlorine  ions  are  added,  to  precipitate  silver,  only  to  the  extent  of
TTTbir  normal  in  excess,  the  concentration  of  the  silver  ions,  as  appears
from  the  preceding  formulae,  is  reduced  to  a  normality  of  Toooo'oo~o-1
Lead  sulphate  is  appreciably  soluble,  hence  the  prescription  of  analytical
chemistry  to  wash  this  substance  with  water  acidulated  with  sulphuric
acid  rather  than  with  pure  water,  since  the  acid  reduces  its  solubility
to  an  amount  small  as  regards  analysis.

Moreover,  Noyes  succeeded  in  proving,  both  by  theory  and  by
experiment,  that  conversely  the  solubility  of  a  salt  must  increase  on  the
addition  of  a  second  electrolyte  containing  no  ion  in  common.

Thus,  to  follow  out  a  preceding  example,  if  one  adds  some  K1TO3
to  AgBr03,  then  a  number  of  molecules  of  AgN03  and  also  of  KBr03
will  be  formed.  This  will  result  in  a  diminution  in  the  number  of  the
molecules  of  AgBr03,  which  must  be  replaced  from  the  solid  salt.  In
this  and  in  analogous  cases  the  increase  of  the  solubility  is  of  course
very  slight ;  but  the  increase  would  be  very  great  if  one  should  add,
e.g.,  HN03  to  a  saturated  solution  of  CH3  .  CO  .  OAg  ;  because  here,  on
account  of  the  small  dissociation  constant  of  acetic  acid,  there  will  be
produced  a  very  considerable  quantity  of  undissociated  acetic  acid
molecules  as  a  result  of  the  addition  of  the  HN03 ;  and  as  the  product
of  the  silver  ions  and  the  acet-ions  must  regain  its  former  value,  a
considerable  quantity  of  solid  silver  acetate  must  therefore  pass  into
solution.

A  similar  explanation  may  be  given  of  the  well-known  fact  that
calcium  oxalate  is  soluble  in  strong  acid,  for  the  product  of  the  con-
centration of  the  calcium  ions  and  the  oxalic  acid  ions  (the  so-called

1  See  the  interesting  study  by  C.  Hoitsema,  Zeits.  phys.  Ghem,,  20.  272  (1896).

CHAP.  IV  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN  SALT  SOLUTIONS  531

solubility  product)  is  much  diminished  when  a  strong  acid  is  present,
since  the  hydrogen  ions  of  the  latter  combine  with  the  oxalic  ions  and
raise  the  concentration  of  the  latter;  hence  for  equilibrium  more
calcium  must  go  into  solution  and  the  amount  may  become  quite  large.
As  another  example  may  be  mentioned  the  solubility  of  zinc  sulphide
in  strong  acids  whose  hydrogen  ions  combine  with  the  doubly  negative
sulphur  ions  of  the  zinc  sulphide  ;  weak  acids  do  not  dissolve  it  because
the  concentration  of  the  hydrogen  ions  is  too  small.  If,  therefore,
sodium  acetate  be  added  to  an  acid  solution  of  a  zinc  salt  the  formation
of  slightly  dissociated  acetic  acid  reduces  the  concentration  of  the
hydrogen  ions  to  a  small  amount  and  the  zinc  is  satisfactorily  pre-
cipitated by  sulphuretted  hydrogen.

Anomalies  due  to  Formation  of  Complex  Ions. — There  are
cases  in  which  the  solubility  of  a  salt  is  raised  by  addition  of  another
salt  containing  the  same  ion  ;  thus  potassium  nitrate  and  lead  nitrate
raise  each  other's  solubility,  mercury  chloride  is  more  easily  dissolved
by  water  containing  hydrochloric  acid  than  by  pure  water.  Closer
study  of  these  cases  however  shows  that  the  exception  to  the  general
law  is  only  apparent ;  as  has  been  shown  by  Le  Blanc  and  Noyes l
in  this  and  similar  cases,  new  complex  molecules  are  formed,  so  that
the  solubility  product  is  not  raised  by  the  addition  of  salt  containing
the  same  ion  as  would  otherwise  be  the  case,  but  reduced.

These  anomalous  phenomena  of  solubility  are  consequently  very
important  for  the  study  of  complex  salts  in  solution,  a  subject  which
has  been  very  little  investigated  considering  its  enormous  importance
for  inorganic  chemistry.  As  an  example  of  the  insight  to  be  obtained
by  means  of  relatively  simple  researches  we  may  mention  the  work  of
A.  A.  Noyes  arid  W.  R.  Whitney.2  Potassium  and  sodium  hydroxides
not  only  do  not  reduce  the  solubility  of  aluminium  hydroxide  but
take  up  considerable  quantities  of  this  insoluble  substance.  Yet  it
was  found  that  the  freezing  point  of  the  solutions  is  not  altered  by
addition  of  aluminium  hydroxide.  From  this  it  may  be  concluded
that  on  solution  the  reaction

OH  +  A1(OH)8  =  A10(OH)2  +  H20

takes  place,  that  is,  the  addition  of  aluminium  hydroxide  does  not
alter  the  number  of  molecules  in  solution.  The  potassium  aluminate
has  therefore  in  solution  the  formula  KA10(OH)2  or  KA102  (the
methods  in  use  at  the  present  day  do  not  allow  of  distinguishing
between  these  two  formulse  any  more  than  between  NH3  or  NH4OH
for  ammonia  in  aqueous  solution.  See  the  section  on  "  Normal  and
Anomalous  Reactions.")

1  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  6.  385  (1890).  2  Ibid.,  15.  694  (1894).

532  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

The  Application  of  the  Law  of  Mass  Action  to  Strongly
Dissociated  Electrolytes. — It  has  already  been  remarked  that  the
equation  of  the  dissociation  isotherm  does  not  hold  for  strongly  dis-
sociated electrolytes  such  as  the  neutral  salts.  The  law  of  mass
action  gives  for  binary  electrolytes  the  relation

K .  c  =  c: .  c2 .

A.  A.  Noyes  and  Abbot,1  by  systematic  determinations  of  solubility
have  arrived  at  the  important  conclusion  that  over  a  certain  range  of
concentration  at  least  for  constant  c  (the  concentration  of  the  undis-
sociated  molecules),  for  example,  in  presence  of  the  solid  salt,  the
product  of  the  two  ionic  concentrations  c1.c2  is  constant,  i.e.  independent
of  the  relative  quantities  of  the  two  ions.  On  the  other  hand,  crc2  is
not  proportional  to  c  for  strongly  dissociated  electrolytes,  but  increases
more  slowly  with  increasing  concentration  than  it  should,  that  is,  the
active  mass  of  the  ions  is  not  exactly  proportional  to  the  concentration,
and  the  deviations  from  direct  proportionality  for  all  univalent  ions
appear  to  be  about  the  same  (see  also  p.  499).  It  would  be  of  very
great  importance  to  make  a  quantitative  investigation  of  the  increase
of  the  active  mass  with  the  concentration  in  order  to  determine
precisely  the  chemical  equilibrium  of  salt  solutions ;  the  usual
assumption,  adopted  for  simplicity  in  the  foregoing  deductions,  that
the  active  mass  of  the  ions,  as  that  of  the  other  molecular  species,  is
directly  proportional  to  their  concentration,  is  only  approximately
true,  although  in  most  cases  it  is  sufficient  for  practical  purposes.

In  making  exact  measurements  it  is  found  that  salt  solutions  show
small  but  definite  departure  from  the  law  of  mass  action,  whilst  non-
electrolytes  in  solution  obey  that  law  even  to  a  moderately  high
concentration.  It  appears  not  only  that,  except  for  extremely  dilute
solutions,  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the  ions  is  a  more  complicated
function  of  the  concentration,  but  that  also  disturbing  action  between
ions  and  electrically  neutral  molecules  must  exist.  In  consequence  of
this,  measurements  of  osmotic  pressure  (freezing  point,  etc.),  give
inaccurate  values  of  the  dissociation  of  strong  electrolytes ;  for  an
attempt  made  by  the  author  in  connection  with  calculations  of  Jahn's
to  apply  the  additional  terms  to  the  simpler  formulae  for  osmotic
pressure,  law  of  mass  action,  etc.,  and  obtain  a  closer  agreement  with
experiment,  see  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  36.  487  .(1901).

It  may  be  taken  as  certain  that  the  freezing  point  gives  a  more
correct  determination  of  electrolytic  dissociation  than  conductivity ;
nothing  is  known  for  certain  as  to  the  irregularities  occurring  in
electrolytic  conductivity  which  make  the  equation

a= A.

Aoo
inaccurate.

1  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  16.  125  (1895).

CHAP.  IV

CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN SALT  SOLUTIONS

533

In  any  case  the  deviations  from  the  law  of  mass  action  are
relatively  small,  and  may  be  neglected  for  most  practical  purposes,  as
may  be  seen  from  the  numerous  examples  given  in  this  chapter.

The  Reaction  between  any  number  of  Solid  Salts  and
their  Solution. — This  general  case  may  also  be  solved,  simply  by  the
theorem,  that  the  active  mass  of  the  solid  substances  is  a  constant.

An  example  which  belongs  here,  has  been  already  studied  by
Guldberg  and  Waage  (1867),  namely,  the  state  of  equilibrium  existing
between  the  difficultly  soluble  BaS04  and  BaC03,  and  K2S04  and
K9C03  in  solution.  Here,  in  the  sense  of  the  similar  conception
considered  previously,  we  have  to  deal  with  the  reaction

BaS04  +  K9C03^±BaC03  +  K,S04,
Solid. Dissol.  Solid. Dissol.

and  therefore  the  relation  obtains  that  the  ratio  of  the  carbonate
existing  in  the  solution  to  the  sulphate  in  solution  must  be  a  constant.
Guldberg  and  Waage  allowed  a  equivalents  of  K9C03,  and  b  equi-
valents of  K2S04,  to  react  on  each  other  in  a  water  solution  in  the
presence  of  an  excess  of  solid  BaS04 ;  they  determined  the  quantity  x
of  the  BaC03  formed  after  a  sufficiently  long  interval,  and,  as  a  matter

o -  "Y"

of  fact,  they  found  the  preceding  ratio,  namely  ,  to  be  constant,

as  shown  by  the  following  table  : —

b

a

X

a-x

b+T

o  •

3-5

0719

3-9

0

1

0-176

4-7

0-25

2

0-200

4-0

0-50

•2

o-ooo

4-0

Now  the  application  of  the  preceding  conception  usually  leads  to
results  which  coincide  but  poorly  with  experiment,  because  it  must  also
take  the  electrolytic  dissociation  into  account.  Moreover,  a  reaction
occurs  in  the  sense  of  the  equation,

BaS04  +

Solid. Dissol.

Solid.

+  S04,
Dissol.

and  the  application  of  the  law  of  mass-action  leads  to  the  result  that
in  the  condition  of  equilibrium,  the  ratio  of  the  S04  ions  to  the  CO3
ions  in  the  solution  must  be  constant.  Moreover  by  a  displacement

534  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

of  the  point  of  equilibrium  in  the  solution,  there  also  occur,  in  the
sense  of  the  preceding  reaction,  the  following  side  reactions,  viz.—

+  +

K2S04^±2K  +  S04,  and  K2C03^±2K  +  C08,

by  means  of  which  the  calculation  of  the  equation  of  the  isotherm  of
dissociation  may  be  accomplished.

But  now  it  should  be  observed  that  as  these  two  electrolytes  have
an  analogous  constitution,  and  as  they  are  dissociated  to  the  same
extent  in  a  common  solution  (p.  506),  therefore  it  follows  that  the
total  quantity  of  the  sulphate  existing  in  the  solution  must  stand  in  a
constant  ratio  to  the  carbonate.

Thus  the  older  conception  here  leads  to  results  which  are  only
partially  satisfactory;  in  other  cases — as,  e.g.,  in  the  explanation  of
the  measurements  given  in  the  preceding  paragraph — they  fail  utterly  ;
and  the  contradictions  can  only  be  explained  by  the  aid  of  the  theory
of  electrolytic  dissociation.

But  the  newer  views  lead  us  a  step  farther.  It  follows  from  the
laws  of  solubility  (p.  526)  that,  in  the  presence  of  solid  BaC03  and
BaS04  the  products  of  the  Ba  ions  and  the  C03  ions,  and  of  the  Ba
ions  and  the  S04  ions,  must  be  constant.  Now  the  ratio  of  these
products,  in  the  measurements  given  above,  averages  about  4*0.

Moreover,  since  BaC03  and  BaS04  are  doubtless  dissociated  to  the
same  extent,  therefore  the  value  4'0  is  at  the  same  time  the  ratio  of
the  undissociated  quantities  of  the  carbonate  and  sulphate  in  their
saturated  solution.

Finally,  since  each  of  the  particular  solutions  of  these  two  sub-
stances, considered  by  itself,  is  very  highly  dissociated  on  account  of
its  difficult  solubility,  therefore,  according  to  the  rules  given  on  p.  498,
the  value  4'0  is,  at  the  same  time,  the  ratio  of  the  squares  of  the  total
concentrations  of  the  two  saturated  solutions.1

If  one  pours  a  solution  of  KBr  over  solid  AgCl,  then,  as  can  be
proved  in  a  perfectly  analogous  way,  the  bromine  existing  in  the
solution  will  be  largely  replaced  by  chlorine ;  because  as  AgBr  is
much  less  soluble  than  AgCl,  an  equivalent  quantity  of  AgCl  will  be
changed  into  AgBr.  This  is  also  established  by  experiment.  If  one
knows  the  solubilities  of  AgCl  and  AgBr,  then,  for  a  given  concentra-
tion of  KBr,  we  may  state  the  point  of  equilibrium  which  the  system
strives  to  reach.

The  analogous  equilibrium  between  silver  oxide  and  silver  chloride
in  solutions  of  hydroxides  and  chlorides  has  been  completely
investigated  by  A.  A.  Noyes  and  Kohr.2

When  a  dissolved  salt  is  so  strongly  hydrolysed  that  the  limit  of

1  In  testing  this  deduction  from  the  theory,  it  is  to  be  noted  that  a  saturated  solution
of  barium  carbonate  in  pure  water  is  noticeably  hydrolysed.

2  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  42.  336  (1902).

CHAP.  IV  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN  SALT  SOLUTIONS  535

solubility  of  one  of  the  components  (the  base  or  the  acid)  is  exceeded,
the  solution  becomes  turbid ;  thus  iron  salts  give  off  ferric  hydroxide,
silicates  give  silicic  acid.  To  clear  such  solutions  the  hydrolysis  must
be  reduced  by  an  excess  of  acid  or,  in  the  second  instance,  of  base.

If  sodium  acetate  is  added  to  a  clear,  that  is  a  strongly  acid
solution  of  ferric  chloride,  the  concentration  of  the  hydrogen  ions  is
much  reduced,  the  hydrolysis  is  consequently  increased,  and  colloidal
ferric  hydroxide  is  precipitated.  In  the  same  way  silicic  acid  may  be
precipitated  from  alkaline  soluble  glass  by  addition  of  ammonium
chloride  which  reduces  the  number  of  free  hydroxyl  ions  with  formation
of  ammonia.

In  conclusion,  we  will  collate  the  following  remarks  regarding  the
theoretical  treatment  of  the  equilibrium  between  a  salt  solution  and
any  number  of  solid  salts.

For  every  molecular  species  which  can  be  formed  from  the  ions,
there  exists  a  particular  dissociation  constant,  which  is  given  by  the
ratio  between  the  concentration  of  the  particular  molecular  species
and  the  product  of  the  respective  concentrations  of  the  ions  of  which
it  is  composed.

Further,  every  such  molecular  species  has  a  definite  solubility ;  i.e.
there  is  a  definite  value  of  the  concentration  beyond  which  it  cannot
pass  (excluding  super- saturation) ;  and  this  solubility  remains  un-
changed, other  things  being  equal,  as  long  as  solid  salt  remains  in
contact  with  the  solution.

If  one  knows  the  value  of  the  dissociation  constants,  and  also  the
solubilities  of  all  of  the  molecular  species,  then  the  equilibrium  in  the
solution  is  completely  determined,  and  if  the  total  quantity  of  each
radical  is  known,  one  can  state  how  much  of  each  radical  is  present  as
a  free  ion,  and  how  much  of  each  is  combined  with  other  ions,  partly  in  the
form  of  electrically  neutral  molecules,  and  partly  in  the  form  of  solid  salt
external  to  the  solution.

The  solubilities,  as  defined  above,  have  a  great  practical  interest
and  value.

Moreover,  the  dissociation  coefficients  determine  the  number  of
electrically  neutral  molecules  in  the  solution,  while  the  solubilities
determine  the  number  of  those  which  crystallise  out ;  and  although
we  may  succeed  in  formulating  a  number  of  general  empirical  rules
for  the  values  of  the  dissociated  constants,  yet  this  attempt  fails
entirely  in  the  case  of  the  solubilities.  Thus  all  binary  salts  composed
of  univalent  ions,  exhibit  the  same  degree  of  dissociation  (p.  499),
but  they  do  not  exhibit  the  same  degree  of  solubility ;  moreover,  the
latter  property  varies  with  the  different  polymorphic  [allotropic]
modifications  of  the  same  salt.

Sometimes,  as  has  been  already  mentioned  (pp.  120  and  491)
the  salts  do  not  crystallise  out  from  the  solution  in  the  pure  form,
but  as  isomorphous  mixtures.  Here  the  rule  holds  good  that  the

536  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

solubility  of  each  molecular  species  in  a  mixture  is  always  smaller
than  for  the  particular  species  when  alone.  Again,  the  behaviour  of
dilute  solid  solutions,  when  they  crystallise  out,  is  very  simple.  In  such
cases  the  principles  already  developed  regarding  the  equilibrium
between  phases  of  variable  composition,  may  be  directly  applied  with-
out further  remark.  (See  the  next  section.)

Normal  and  Abnormal  Reactions.1 — The  preceding  develop-
ments now  show  us,  at  the  same  time,  the  reason  for  a  fact  which  has
long  been  known,  viz.,  that  the  [main]  reactions  of  inorganic  chemistry,
i.e.  of  salt  solutions,  are  characterised  by  great  similarity  in  classifica-
tion. Thus,  as  is  well  known,  we  have  so-called  typical  reactions,
for  most  radicals  [collectively]  :  thus  all  acids  colour  litmus  red ;  all
bases  colour  litmus  blue ;  all  chlorides  are  precipitated  by  silver  salts.2
These  facts  are  necessary  results  of  the  dissociation  hypothesis  of
electrolytes.  All  acids  contain  the  same  hydrogen  ion ;  all  bases  the
same  hydroxyl  ion,  all  chlorides  the  same  chlorine  ion,  etc.  ;  and
the  reactions  which  are  typical  for  the  classes  of  substances  collec-
tively are  the  specific  reactions  of  t>he  ion  common  to  them.  Thus  the
behaviour  of  electrolytes  regarding  their  reaction  capacity,  as  also  re-
gards their  other  properties,  is  clearly  additive.

Of  course  it  is  not  necessary  for  all  electrolytes  containing  a  parti-
cular radical  to  exhibit  the  reactions  which  are  typical  for  this  radical ;
they  must  do  so  only  when  the  radical  is  contained  as  a  free  ion.  Thus
sodium  acetate  [CH3  .  CO2Na]  does  not  exhibit  the  reactions  of
hydrogen  ions,  because  the  hydrogen  is  not  contained  as  free  ions,  but
exists  in  the  solution,  combined  with  the  negative  complex  of  the  salt.

Potassium  platinic  chloride  [K2PtCl6]  and  sodium  mono-chlor-
acetate  [CH2C1 .  CO2 .  Na]  do  not  show  the  reactions  which  are  typical
for  chlorine,  because  the  chlorine  does  not  exist  there  as  the  free
ion,  but  rather  associated  with  the  respective  complexes  PtCl6  and
CH2C1 .  C02.  In  this  way  the  contrast  between  the  so-called  normal  arid
the  abnormal  reactions  of  certain  radicals  is  explained.  The  abnormal
reactions  are  those  of  the  new-formed  ion  complex.

It  has  already  been  remarked  that  potassium  bromide  can  take  up
bromide  forming  the  salt  KBr3  ;  the  solubility  of  iodine  in  a  solution
of  potassium  iodide  is  explained  in  the  same  way  by  formation  of

potassium  triiodide,  that  is,  the  complex  ion  J3  is  formed  according  to
the  equation

J  +  J3  -  J3  ;
ammonia  forms  a  new  complex  with  silver  ions.3

1  Ostwald,  Zeits.  phys.  Cliem.,  3,  596  (1889).

2  Ibid.,  see  also  the  work  quoted  on  p.  523  by  the  same  author,  written  in  a  more
popular  form,  and  more  suitable  for  beginners.

3  Bodliinder  and  Fittig,  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  39.  609  (1902).

CHAP.  IV  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN  SALT  SOLUTIONS  537

potassium  cyanide  can  take  up  silver  ions  to  a  large  extent  ;  a  complex
ion  is  formed  according  to  the  equation

Naturally  these  complex  ions  are  more  or  less  dissociated  into
other  components  and  all  possible  steps  are  found.  The  ion  J3  also  is
strongly  dissociated,  the  solution  of  potassium  tri-iodide  therefore  acts
like  a  solution  of  free  iodine.  The  ion  (NH3)2Ag  is  not  so  strongly
dissociated  ;  for  a  solution  of  silver  nitrate  which  contains  ammonia
gives  no  precipitate  of  silver  chloride  on  addition  of  a  chloride,  that
is,  the  concentration  product  of  the  silver  ions  x  chlor-ions  remains
below  the  solubility  product  (10~10).  But  a  precipitate  is  obtain-
able on  addition  of  an  iodide,  that  is,  the  above  ion  dissociates
sufficiently  to  make  the  concentration  silver  ions  x  iodine  ions  exceed
the  solubility  product  for  silver  iodide  about  10~16.  In  the  complex
ion  Ag(Cy)9  the  silver  is  retained  to  an  extraordinary  extent  since  it
is  not  precipitated  even  by  addition  of  iodide  ;  sulphuretted  hydrogen
however  precipitates  it  on  account  of  the  extreme  indissolubility  of
silver  sulphide.

In  this  way  we  obtain  at  the  same  time  a  strict  classification  of
the  double  salts.  The  characteristic  double  salts  are  the  isolated  points
in  the  series  of  mixtures,  afforded  by  their  components  (p.  491).
On  solution  they  decompose  almost  completely  into  the  single  salts,
and  their  ions  therefore  are  simply  those  of  their  components.  The
substances  sometimes  wrongly  called  "double  salts,"  such  as  K2PtCl6,
K4FeCn6  and  the  like,  are  to  be  regarded  as  entirely  different  ;  those
in  solution  conduct  themselves  as  simple  electrolytes  (einheitlicher  Elec-
trolyte}, since  they  afford  only  one  electrically  neutral  molecule,  and  exhibit
only  one  series  of  ions.  The  substances  last  referred  to  are  simple  salts
of  hydro-chloro-platinic  acid  [H2PtCl6],  and  of  hydro-ferro-cyanic  acid
[HgFeGnJ,  etc.,  and  therefore  they  contain  no  platinum  ions,  and  no
iron  ions,  etc.,  respectively.

According  to  present  experience  the  ions,  since  they  have  the
character  of  saturated  compounds  (p.  391)  possess  in  a  high  degree
the  capacity  for  forming  molecular  compounds.

The  systematic  study  of  complex  ions  therefore  tends  to  throw
new  light  on  the  nature  of  compounds  which  do  not  fall  under  the
scheme  of  valency  ;  some  rules  on  this  subject  have  already  been  given
on  p.  375.

It  must  by  no  means  therefore  be  assumed  that  all  chemical
reactions  are  due  to  ions  ;  on  the  contrary  every  molecular  species,  ion,
or  electrically  neutral  molecule,  has  its  peculiar  and  typical  reaction.

538  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

Angeli  and  Boeris  1  have  given  a  striking  example  of  this.  It  is  well
known  that  an  aqueous  solution  of  ammonium  nitrite  decomposes  on
heating  into  water  and  nitrogen  and  the  more  readily  the  more  concen-

+

trated  it  is  ;  in  very  dilute  solutions  where  only  the  ions  NH4  and  N02
are  present  the  reaction  does  not  occur  ;  it  must  therefore  be  concluded
that  it  is  the  undissociated  molecule  NH4N02  that  is  capable  of  the
reaction

NH4N02  -  N2  +  2H20  ;

the  chemists  mentioned  have,  in  fact,  shown  that  on  addition  of  a  salt
with  a  similar  ion,  for  example  ammonium  chloride  or  sodium  nitrite,
the  production  of  nitrogen  is  increased  in  consequence  of  the  reduced
electrolytic  dissociation  of  the  ammonium  nitrite,  whereas  the  salts
which  have  no  ion  in  common  with  ammonium  nitrite  are  inactive.
In  the  same  way  it  seems  as  if  the  oxidising  action  of  nitric  acid  was

exclusively  or  mainly  due  to  the  molecular  species  HN03  and  depends

+
little  or  not  at  all  on  the  ions  H  +  N03.

Formation  and  Solution  of  Precipitates. — Reactions  causing
precipitation  are  of  exceptional  importance  in  analytical  chemistry;
the  theory  of  the  formation  and  solution  of  precipitates  is  indeed
contained  in  the  foregoing  sections,  but  certain  points  of  it  may  be
put  together  here  and  illustrated  by  examples.

A  precipitate  occurs  (unless  it  is  prevented  by  super-saturation)
when  an  electrically  neutral  species  of  molecule  exceeds  the  amount  of
its  solubility  product  (p.  531);  it  goes  into  solution  again  when  the
product  of  the  ionic  concentrations  is  reduced  below  the  solubility  level.

The  latter  can  only  occur  when  other  molecular  species,  either
neutral  or  ionised,  are  added,  causing  an  increase  in  one  or  more  of
the  ions  in  question.  The  following  cases  arise  : —

1.  The  precipitate  to  be  dissolved  is  an  add  ;  then  one  of  the  ions,
namely  the  hydrogen  ion,  can  be  removed  very  completely  by  addition
of  a  base  whose  hydroxyl  ions  conbine  with  it  to  form  water.  If  the
substance  to  be  dissolved  is  a  base  it  may  be  similarly  dissolved  in
acid.  (For  example  benzoic  acid  dissolves  easily  in  caustic  soda,  lime
in  hydrochloric  acid,  etc.)

If  in  these  cases  the  acid  or  the  base  or  both  are  very  weak  the
solvent  action  is  reduced  by  hydrolysis  ;  in  this  way,  as  was  shown  by
Lowenherz 2  the  dissociation  of  extremely  weak  acids  and  bases  can  be
measured.

It  may  be  foreseen  that  in  certain  cases  the  water  itself,  in  con-
sequence of  its  ionisation,  will  alter  the  solubility,  namely  when  the
substance  to  be  dissolved  is  hydrolytically  dissociated.  Thus,  if  the

1  Acad.  Line.  [1892]  [5],  1.  II.  70.

2  Zeits.  phys.  Ch-m.,  25.  385  (1899).

CHAP.  IV  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM  IN  SALT  SOLUTIONS  539

insoluble  barium  carbonate  is  brought  into  contact  with  water,  the
hydrogen  ions  of  the  water  combine  with  the  C03  ions  to  make  the
very  slightly  dissociated  compound  HC03,  and  the  concentration  of
the  hydroxyl  ions  is  accordingly  raised  in  the  same  way  as  if  hydrogen
ions  had  been  added.

2.  Addition  of  hydrogen  or  hydroxyl  ions  may,  however,  occur  in
the  two  preceding  cases  by  means  of  the  salts  of  other  weak  acids
(e.g.  acetic  acid)  or  a  very  weak  base  (e.g.  ammonia). Examples:  the
equation

[Ca]  [OH]2  =  const.

holds  for  the  solubility  of  calcium  hydroxide,  but  in  presence  of
ammonia  ions  a  large  addition  of  hydroxyl  ions  occurs,  since  the
very  slightly  dissociated  ammonium  hydroxide  is  formed.1  In  the
same  way  the  relatively  large  solubility  of  magnesium  hydroxide  in
ammonium  salts  is  explained,  as  well  as  the  fact  that  magnesium  salts
are  either  not  all  or  imcompletely  precipitated  by  ammonia.2

3.  If  the  precipitate  to  be  dissolved  is  the  salt  of  a  weak  acid  its
anions  can  be  largely  combined  with  hydrogen  ions ;  example  :  silver
acetate  dissolves  in  acids. In  the  same  way  salts  of  weak  bases  are
dissolved  by  strong  bases.

4.  Very often the  precipitate dissolves in consequence of  the
formation of  complex ions. Example  : silver chloride dissolves in
potassium  cyanide  (p.  537),  etc.

It  is  obvious  that  the  same  reagents  that  dissolve  a  precipitate
prevent  its  precipitation  when  they  are  added  before  that  takes  place.

Distribution  of  an  Electrolyte  between  Water  and  a
Second  Phase. — This  is  a  case  of  the  general  law  of  distribution
(p.  481)  but  it  must  be  noted  that  the  ions  cannot  be  separated  in
appreciable  quantity  by  partition,  any  more  than  in  diffusion  (p.  366).

The  simplest  method  of  treatment  is  to  regard  the  concentration
of  the  electrically  neutral  molecules  as  proportional  in  the  two  phases.
Since  also  the  concentration  of  the  free  ions  in  the  gaseous  space  or
in  a  solvent  that  will  not  mix  with  water  is  negligible,  it  follows  that
the  ions  must  pass  over  practically  completely  into  the  water.

This  may  be  illustrated  by  some  examples  (see  also  the  table  on
p.  487).  The  partial  pressure  of  hydrochloric  acid  over  its  water
solution  is  simply  proportional  to  the  number  of  its  undissociated
molecules  contained  in  the  solution.

If  an  electrolyte  divides  itself  between  water  and  ether,  there
must  be  a  proportionality  between  the  electrically  neutral  molecules
in  the  water  and  the  concentration  in  the  ether.  Now  the  number

^Investigated  by  Noyes  and  Chapin,  Zeits.  phys.  Ghem,,  28.  518  (1899).
2  See  also  the  thorough  investigation  by  J.  M.  Loven,  Zeits.  anorg.  Chem.,  11.  404
(1896).

540

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

of  electrically  neutral  molecules  in  water  decreases  \vith  increasing
dilution  much  more  quickly  than  proportionally  to  the  concentration ;
and  therefore,  at  slight  concentration,  both  the  vapour  pressures  of
electrolytes,  and  also  their  solubilities  in  another  solvent,  which  is  in
contact  with  the  water  solution,  will  be  very  small.

Thus,  e.g.,  it  is  possible  to  distil  pure  water  off  from  a  solution  of
hydrochloric  acid.

If  one  tries  to  "shake  out"  with  benzene  a  sufficiently  dilute
water  solution  of  an  organic  acid,  then  only  the  slightest  traces  of  the
acid  will  go  over  to  the  benzene,  even  though  it  is  much  more  soluble
in  benzene  that  in  water.

Hydrocyanic  acid  which  is  very  slightly  dissociated  is  much  more
volatile ;  even  dilute  solutions  show  its  characteristic  smell,  so  do
solutions  of  the  salts  of  this  acid,  since  according  to  p.  520,  they  are
markedly  hydrolysed,  i.e.  contain  free  hydrocyanic  acid.

The  following  table  given  by  Kuriloff  (p.  494)  shows  the  partition
of  picric  acid  between  benzene  and  water ;  c1  and  c.2  are  the  concentra-
tions (normalities)  in  the  two  solvents,  a  the  degree  of  electrolytic
dissociation.

Cl

C2

C2

a

Cl

Co(l-a)

0-09401

0-02609

3-6

0-9027

38

0-0779 0-02080

3-7

0-9104

41

0-06339 0-01963

3-2

0-9138 ! 37

0-06184

0-01882

3-3

0-9164

39

0-0359

0-01320

2-7 0-9353

42

0-01977

0-00973

2-0

0-9463

38

Mean .

. 39

Thus,  although  the  undissociated  molecules  of  picric  acid  are
thiry-nine  times  as  soluble  in  benzene  as  in  water,  they  pass  over  almost
completely  into  water  at  great  dilutions.

The  case  of  partition  of  ions  between  a  liquid  and  a  metallic  phase
occurs,  e.g.,  on  shaking  mercury  with  dilute  silver  nitrate  solution ;
mercury  ions  pass  to  a  certain  extent  into  solution  with  precipitation
of  silver.  The  equilibrium  can  be  treated  by  means  of  the  law  of
mass  action  (see  the  interesting  study  by  Ogg,  Dissertation,  Gottingen,
1898;  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  27.  285  (1898)  ).*

1  A  further  series  of  investigations,  in  which  the  methods  of  this  chapter  have  been
applied  to  the  investigation  of  special  problems  in  inorganic  chemistry,  will  be  found  in
the  recent  volumes  of  the  Zeits.  f.  phys.  Chem.,  and  the  Zeits.  f.  anorg.  Chem.

CHAPTER V

CHEMICAL  KINETICS

General  Observations. — As  has  been  previously  emphasised,  the
hypothesis  of  Guldberg  and  Waage  is  the  fundamental  law  of
chemical  kinetics.  According  to  this  law,  the  total  progress  of  a
reaction  occurring  in  a  homogeneous  system,  is  determined  by  the  differ-
ence between  the  two  velocities  with  "which  the  decomposition
advances  from  left  to  right,  and  conversely  from  right  to  left,  in  the
sense  of  the  reaction  equation.

Therefore  at  every  instant  the  velocity  of  a  reaction,  i.e.,  the
quantity  changed  in  a  moment  of  time,  in  the  sense  of  the  reaction
from  left  to  right,  divided  by  the  moment  of  time, — this  velocity  is
given  by  the  velocity  constant  of  the  change  in  the  sense  of  the
equation  from  left  to  right,  multiplied  by  the  active  masses  of  the
molecular  species  standing  on  the  left  side  of  the  equation,  diminished
by  the  velocity  constant  of  the  change  from  right  to  left  in  the  sense
of  the  equation,  multiplied  by  the  active  masses  of  the  molecular
species  standing  on  the  right  side  of  the  equation.

Thus,  e.g.,  if  a  homogeneous  reaction  takes  place  according  to  the
simple  scheme —

.  V  I T -tin  — -tJL-i T -£^-O  y

and  if  c1}  c2,  and  c1/,  c.2'  are  respectively  the  concentrations  of  the
four  reacting  molecular  species  Ap  A2,  and  A^,  A2' ;  and  also  if  dc^
denotes  the  diminution  which  cx  will  experience  in  the  moment  of
time  dt,  where  of  course  the  similar  diminution  of  c9  is  of  the  same
amount, — then  the  reaction  velocity  at  every  moment  will  be

^ci  -  lr _  V ' '

-  —  -  KCjC.2  -  K  Cj  C2  ,

where  k  and  k'  respectively  are  the  velocity  coefficients  of  the  two
opposed  reactions.  If  a  substance  participates  in  the  reaction  with  n
molecules  instead  of  with  one,  then  of  course  cn  will  appear  in  the
equation  instead  of  c.

541

54:2  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY .  BOOK  III

Now  the  velocity  coefficients  are  constant  at  constant  tempera-
ture ;  but  without  exception  they  increase  very  strongly  with  rising
temperature.  Therefore  the  application,  of  the  fundamental  equation
preceding  is  permissible  only  with  the  proviso,  that  the  reaction  can
progress  isothermally,  i.e.,  only  when  there  is  no  change  of  the  temperature  of  the
system,  as  occasioned  by  heat  developed  or  absorbed,  in  the  course  of  the
reaction.

Now  for  the  time  when  t  =  0,  let  the  respective  concentrations  of  the
four  substances  be  ap  a2,  a^,  and  a2'  ;  and  in  the  time  t  let  the  quantity
of  the  substance  ax  decomposed  be  x  g.-mol.,  and  accordingly  the  same
amount  of  a2.  Thus  the  preceding  equation  will  be  written  —

—  =  k(a:  -  x)(a2  -  x)  -  k^a/  +  x)(a2'  +  x)  ;

then  by  knowing  k  and  k',  and  remembering  the  preliminary  con-
dition that,  when  t  —  0,  then  also  x  —  0,  by  integration  one  succeeds
in  obtaining  a  complete  description  of  the  course  of  the  reaction  ;  and
the  result  is  similar  when  the  course  of  the  reaction  is  given  for  an
equation  involving  any  arbitrary  number  of  reacting  molecular  species.
The  ascertaining  of  the  concentrations  in  the  state  of  equilibrium

as  was  thoroughly  demonstrated  in  the  second  chapter  of  this  book,
gives  the  ratio  of  the  two  velocity  constants.

Now  a  very  important  simplification  is  offered  in  the  case  where
the  reaction  advances  almost  completely  in  one  direction  in  the  sense  of
the  equation,  e.g.,  from  left  to  right  ;  this  will  be  applied  to  the  course
of  most  of  the  reactions  thus  far  investigated.  This  means  that  one
of  the  two  partial  reaction-velocities  is  very  great  as  compared  with
the  other  ;  or  that  k  is  very  large  as  compared  with  k'.  In  this  case,
the  right  side  of  the  differential  equation  reduces  to  the  positive
term,  and  the  reaction-velocity  at  every  moment  is  obtained  as
proportional  simply  to  the  product  of  the  active  masses  of  the  molecular
species  standing  on  the  left  side  of  the  reaction-equation.

In  all  cases,  the  integration  of  the  differential  equation  of  the
chemical  change  gives  the  result  that,  strictly  speaking,  the  equi-
librium would  be  reached  only  after  an  infinitely  long  time,  i.e.  —

dx-o

dt '

only  when  t  =  °o  .  •

According  to  this,  a  chemical  system,  like  a  pendulum  which  is
highly  damped,  tends  towards  an  "  aperiodic  "  condition  of  equilibrium.
An  "  over-shooting  of  the  mark  "  is  incompatible  with  all  our  views  of

CHAP,  v  CHEMICAL  KINETICS  543

chemical  processes.  This  would  mean  that,  under  certain  circumstances
the  sense  of  the  reaction  would  depend  upon  the  previous  history  of  the
system;  i.e.  that  in  two  solutions  which  are  absolutely  identical,  the
same  reaction  might  progress  in  opposite  directions,  the  reaction  in
one  solution  approaching  one  state  of  equilibrium,  while  the  reaction
in  the  other  solution  would  shoot  over  towards  the  other  state.  As
a  matter  of  fact,  such  has  certainly  never  been  observed.

The  Inversion  of  Sugar. — Cane  sugar  in  water  solution  in  the
presence  of  acids  is  practically  absolutely  decomposed  into  dextrose
and  levulose.  The  process  advances  so  slowly  that  it  can  be
followed  by  easy  measurement,  as  the  progress  of  the  reaction  can  be
traced  very  easily  and  very  sharply  by  polari-strobometric  analysis.
The  part  not  inverted  turns  the  plane  of  polarised  light  to  the  right,
while  the  mixture  of  the  products  of  inversion  is  laevo-rotatory.

Let  a0  denote  the  (positive)  rotatory  angle  when  the  time  t  =  0
which  corresponds  to  an  original  quantity  of  sugar  a  ;  let  <x0'  denote
the  (negative)  rotatory  angle  after  complete  inversion;  and  let  a  be
that  actually  observed  after  the  time  t.  Then,  since  all  substances
rotate  the  plane  in  proportion  to  their  concentration,  we  have

an  -  a
x  =  a—9 ,

When  the  time  t  =  0,  then  a  =  a0,  i.e.  x  =  0.  When  the  time  t  =  oo  ,
after  complete  inversion,  then  a  -  -  a0',  i.e.  x  =  a.

The  inversion  of  sugar  in  its  progress  has  been  investigated  by  a
great  number  of  observers,  including  Wilhelmy  (1850),  Lowenthal  and
Lenssen  (1862),  Fleury  (1876),  Ostwald  (1884),  Urech  (1884),  Spohr
(1885,  1886,  and  1888),  Arrhenius  (1889),  Trevor  (1892),  and
others.  Therefore,  as  it  plays  a  very  important  role  in  the  history  of
the  doctrine  of  affinity,  it  demands  a  thorough  description.

Corresponding  to  its  progress  according  to  the  equation

C12H22On  +  H20  =  2C6H1206,

the  law  of  mass-action  shows  that  the  velocity  of  the  inversion  at  every
moment  is  proportional  to  the  product  of  the  concentrations  of  the  water  and  of
the  cane  sugar ;  or  since  the  water  is  usually  present  in  large  excess,
and  suffers  only  a  very  slight  change  in  concentration  during  the
course  of  the  reaction,  therefore  the  velocity  must  be  proportional  simply
to  the  concentration  of  the  sugar  itself.  That  is

dx .  ,
drk(a-x);

this  is  the  condition  at  the  start ;  when  t  =  0,  then  also  x  =  0. Let  k

544

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK III

denote  the  coefficient  of  inversion :  then  by  the  integration  of  the  last,  we
obtain

-  ln(a  -  x)  =  kt  +  const. ;

and  as  the  original  condition

from  this  we  obtain

-  In  a  =  const.  ;

k  =  -ln-

t a  -  x

a  +  a0

This  equation  was  discovered,  and  proved  experimentally,  by
Wilhelmy,  before  the  law  of  mass-action  was  advanced.  In  fact  it  is
an  assumption  which  follows  almost  directly  from  the  preceding-
equation,  to  suppose  that  a  constant  fraction  of  the  sugar  is  inverted  at
every  moment  of  time.  The  simple  meaning  of  the  inversion  coefficient
is,  that  its  reciprocal  value  multiplied  by  In 2  gives  the  time  required
for  the  inversion  of  half  of  the  total  quantity,  as  is  seen  at  once  if  we  write

How  well  the  results  of  the  preceding  equation  coincide  with
those  of  experiment,  is  shown  by  the  following  table  for  the  inversion
of  a  20  per  cent  solution  of  cane  sugar  in  the  presence  of  a  0'5  normal
solution  of  lactic  acid,  and  at  a  temperature  of  25° : —

cl

t  (in  minutes)

a

log,,,—

0

34-50°

—

1435

31-10

0-2348

4315

25-00

0-2359

7070

20-16

0-2343

11360 „

' 13-98

0-2310

14170

10-61

0-2301

16935

7-57

0-2316

19815

5-08

0-2291

29925

-1-65

0-2330

00

-1077

—

Mean  0'2328

As  we  are  concerned  only  with  the  proof  of  the  constancy  of  the
expression  given  in  the  third  column,  we  can  of  course  introduce  the
Brigg's  logarithms  instead  of  the  natural  logarithms.

The  Catalytic  Action  of  Hydrogen  Ions. — The  inversion  of
sugar  proceeds  with  marked  velocity  only  in  the  presence  of  an  acid

CHAP. V

CHEMICAL  KINETICS

545

the  quantity  of  which  remains  unchanged  during  the  reaction ;  such
reactions  as  this  have  been  already  called  "catalytic."

The  ultimate  explanation  of  the  preceding  case  is  still  unknown  to
us  ;  but  nevertheless  some  very  remarkable  results  have  been  obtained
regarding  the  regularity  of  behaviour  which  obtains  here.  Arrhenius *
succeeded  in  grouping  in  one  simple  orderly  arrangement  all  the
abundant  material  observed  concerning  this  reaction.  As  the  method
which  is  to  be  pursued  here  is  a  typical  one,  and  as  it  has  already  led
to  important  results  in  similar  cases,  and  still  promises  more,  there-
fore we  will  give  the  results  observed  regarding  the  dependence  of  the
inversion  coefficients  upon  the  nature  of  the  acids  and  salts  which
may  be  present,  and  we  will  also  give  a  brief  theoretical  summary  of
the  same.

The  following  phenomena  were  discovered,  in  a  purely  empirical
way,  by  the  study  of  the  question  of  the  variation  of  the  velocity  of
inversion,  with  the  concentration,  with  the  nature  of  the  acid,  and  in  the
presence  of  neutral  salts.

The  more  concentrated  the  acid,  the  more  quickly  is  the  sugar
inverted,  although  this  does  not  take  place  in  an  exact  proportion.

In  the  case  of  the  stronger  acids,  the  inverting  action  occurs  some-
what more  quickly  than  in  proportion  to  the  amount  contained,  and  the
converse  of  this  is  true  in  the  case  of  the  weaker  acids.

The  velocity  of  the  inversion  varies  very  greatly  with  the  nature
of  the  acid.  Thus  the  strong  mineral  [inorganic]  acids  effect  the
inversion  most  quickly,  and  with  about  the  same  degree  of  rapidity  ;
while  the  fatty  acids,  e.g.,  exert  an  inverting  action  which  is  much
weaker.

In  the  following  table  are  given  some  of  the  results  obtained  by
Ostwald  at  25°,  and  with  an  acid  concentration  of  0'5  normal.  The
figures  refer  to  1  '000  for  hydrochloric  acid,  and  are  well  suited  to  give
a  good  impression  of  the  variability  of  the  inversion  coefficients  : —

Hydrochloric  acid . .

1-000

Tii-chlor-acetic  acid . .

0-754

Nitric „ . .

1-000

Di-chlor-acetic ,, . .

0-271

Chloric „ . .

.  | 1-035

Mono-chlor-acetic  „ . .

0-0484

Sulphuric „ . .

.  | 0-536

Formic „ . .

0-0153

Phenyl-sulphonic  acid  .

1-044

Acetic „ . .

0-0040

The  influence  of  neutral  salts  is  very  remarkable.  In  the  presence
of  an  equivalent  quantity  of  the  potassium  salt  of  the  respective  acid,
the  inversion  velocity  is  increased  about  10  per  cent  in  the  case  of
the  stronger  acids  ;  but  in  the  case  of  acids  weaker  than  tri-chlor-acetic
acid,  the  action  is  diminished,  and  that  the  more  as  the  acid  is  weaker.

In  the  case  of  acetic  acid  this  depressing  action  is  perfectly
enormous  :  thus  as  a  result  of  the  presence  of  an  equivalent  quantity

1  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  4.  226  (1889).

2  N

546  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  ill

of  a  neutral  salt,  the  inversion  velocity  sank  to  ^  of  its  original
value.1

The  addition  of  non-electrolytes,  in  quantities  which  are  not  too
great,  exerts  no  marked  effect.

In  order  to  obtain  a  general  view  of  the  relations  aforementioned,
which  at  first  sight  do  not  seem  to  be  simple,  we  will  notice  at  once
that  it  is  all  the  acids,  but  only  the  acids,  which  exhibit  the  characteristic
capacity  of  inverting  sugar — i.e.  here  we  are  concerned  with  a  specific
action  of  the  free  hydrogen  ions  ;  for  it  is  in  water  solutions  of  acids,  and
in  these  alone,  that  free  hydrogen  ions  are  contained.  Now  if  these
hydrogen  ions  are  the  actual  catalytic  agents,  then,  according  to  the
law  of  mass-action,  it  would  be  expected  that  the  catalytic  action  of  the
acids  would  be  respectively  proportional  to  the  number  of  their  hydro-
gen ions,  i.e.  an  acid  should  invert  the  more  strongly  accordingly  as
it  is  more  highly  dissociated  electrolytically.  This  anticipation  is
found  to  be  completely  verified  in  the  results  of  the  preceding  table,
where  the  acids  are  arranged  in  the  same  relative  order  of  succession  as  that
by  their  respective  degrees  of  electrolytic  dissociation.

But  we  find  only  an  approximate  numerical  proportionality  between
the  quantity  of  the  hydrogen  ions  and  the  inversion  velocity ;  the
reason  for  this  is  that  the  inversion  velocity  increases  more  quickly
than  in  proportion  to  the  acid  concentration  ;  while  the  reverse  is  the
case  with  the  hydrogen  ions,  according  to  the  laws  of  dissociation.
Thus  a  0'5  normal  solution  of  HC1  inverts  6 '07  times  more  quickly
than  a  O'l  normal,  although  the  former  contains  only  about  4 '6 4  times
as  many  hydrogen  ions  as  the  latter.

Moreover,  there  is  a  second  action  which  is  very  influential  here  :
this  was  formulated  by  Arrhenius  as  follows  :—

The  catalytic  activity  of  hydrogen  ions  is  greatly  stimulated  by  the
presence  of  other  ions.

In  this  way,  which,  to  be  sure,  is  rather  puzzling  from  a  theoretical
standpoint,  we  explain  the  fact  that  the  inversion  velocity  of  the
stronger  acids  increases  more  quickly  than  in  proportion  to  their  concen-
tration, because  the  quantity  of  the  free  negative  ions,  which  increases
with  increasing  concentration,  stimulates  the  activity  of  the  hydrogen
ions  :  and  thus,  in  addition,  the  observed  increase  of  the  inverting  action
of  a  stronger  acid  is  explained  by  the  presence  of  its  neutral  salt.

Nevertheless,  although  this  action  of  the  dissociated  part  of  the
neutral  salt  is  very  interesting,  yet  it  has  rather  the  character  of  a  side
reaction  of  secondary  nature.  The  action  of  the  hydrogen  ions  is
much  more  distinct,  and  thus  their  inverting  action  on  a  solution
constitutes  a  very  delicate  reaction  for  the  presence  of  hydrogen  ions.2

1  Spohr,  J.pr.  Chem.  [2],  32.  32  (1885).

2  As  shown  recently  by  Trevor  (Zeits.  phys. Chem.,  10.  321,  1892),  this  reaction
can  be  employed  at  quite  high  temperatures  (100°),  where  the  inversion  velocity  is  much
greater,  in  order  to  detect  very  small  quantities  of  hydrogen  ions.

CHAP.  V  CHEMICAL  KINETICS  547

Now  we  find  in  weak  acids  a  simple  means  for  repressing  the
dissociation  to  any  desired  extent,  and  thus  at  the  same  time  for
diminishing  the  quantity  of  free  hydrogen  ions  to  any  desired  degree.
According  to  the  laws  of  dissociation,  which  were  thoroughly  discussed
on  p.  503,  the  dissociation  retreats  on  the  addition  of  one  of  the  dis-
sociation products,  in  a  way  which  can  be  easily  calculated.  In  fact
(see  above)  the  researches  have  always  shown  a  truly  enormous
diminution  of  the  inversion  velocity  of  the  weaker  acids  in  the
presence  of  their  neutral  sodium  salts ;  and  Arrhenius,  by  a  considera-
tion of  their  side  reactions,  which  are  not  altogether  simple,  suc-
ceeded in  showing  that  the  quantitative  relations  do  in  fact  occur,  as
required  by  theory.

At  all  events,  the  dissociation  does  retrograde  in  the  case  of  the
stronger  acids,  as  HC1,  e.g.,  on  the  addition  of  another  chloride ;  and
although  the  amount  of  the  diminution  of  the  dissociation  may  be
very  slight,  yet  it  does  result.  The  contrary  fact,  that  there  is  an
[apparent]  increase  of  the  dissociation,  which  is  by  no  means  incon-
siderable, is  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  retrograde  action  is
more  than  counterbalanced  by  the  influence  of  the  neutral  salt,  as
mentioned  above.

A  very  exact  investigation  by  W.  Palmaer1  has  yielded  the
important  result  that  in  very  dilute  solutions,  in  which  there  is  no
longer  the  action  of  neutral  salts  referred  to  above,  the  rate  of
inversion  is  directly  proportional  to  the  concentration  of  the  hydrogen
ions.  If  concentrated  solutions  of  cane  sugar  are  used,  the  velocity
coefficient  k  increases  considerably  with  the  concentration  of  the
sugar,  though  it  should  remain  constant  according  to  the  theory.  As
E.  Cohen  has  shown,  this  phenomenon  indicates  that  the  volume  of
the  reaction  is  reduced,  hence  the  number  of  collisions  between  the
molecules  of  cane  sugar  and  the  hydrogen  ions  is  increased,  causing  an
increase  in  the  velocity  of  reaction.2

Again  the  decrease  in  the  rotation  of  the  various  kinds  of  sugar  with
time  proceeds  according  to  the  formula  for  unimolecular  reactions ;
addition  of  salts  usually  accelerates  this,  hydrogen  ions  act  more
strongly,  but  hydroxyl  ions  act  markedly  too.3-

The  Catalysis  of  Esters. — A  phenomenon,  which  in  many
respects  is  very  closely  related  to  sugar  inversion,  is  the  catalysis'  of
the  esters,  i.e.  the  accelerating  influence  of  the  presence  of  acids  in
cleaving  an  ester  in  dilute  water  solution,  into  the  corresponding
alcohol  and  the  corresponding  acid.

According  to  the  discussion  on  p.  447  et  seq.,  as  a  result  of  the-

1  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  22.  492  (1894).  2  Ibid.,  23.  442  (1897).

3  See  the  works  of  P.  Th.  Muller  (1894),  Levy  (1895),  Trey  (1895),  also  the  mono-
graph mentioned  on  p.  331,  by  Landolt  (p.  238  et  seg.),  and  especially  Osaka,  Zeits.
phys.  Ghem.,  35.  661  (1900),  concerning  the  rotation  of  milk  sugar.

548  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  ill

mass-action,  the  cleaving  [saponification]  will  be  complete  in  the  pres-
ence of  a  large  excess  of  water;  and  therefore  we  obtain,  as  the
coefficient  of  the  velocity  with  which  the  ester  and  water  unite  to
form  alcohol  and  acid,  the  same  equation  as  in  the  case  of  sugar
inversion,  viz.

• 1. a

k  =  -  log ,

t 6a-x'

provided  that  in  neither  case  the  concentration  of  the  water  suffers
a  marked  change ;  and  also  provided  that  by  a  we  understand  the
quantity  of  the  substance  present  when  the  time  t  -  0 ;  and  by  x,  the
quantity  of  substance  changed  in  the  time  t.

A  simple  titration  shows  the  progress  of  the  reaction.  The  velocity
of  the  decomposition  at  ordinary  temperatures  is  extremely  small ;  but
it  is  very  greatly  accelerated  by  the  presence  of  an  acid,  although  this
acid  may  not  participate  noticeably  in  the  reaction.  As  was  similarly
true  of  sugar  inversion,  we  can  arrange  the  very  abundant  and  also
apparently  very  complicated  material  here  observed,  for  which  we  are
indebted  to  Ostwald,1  in  a  clear  way,  under  the  following  simple
principles.

1.  The  velocity with  which  the  ester  will  be  split  is  at  every
moment  proportional  to  its  concentration,  i.e.  the  velocity  coefficient
remains  constant,  in  the  sense  of  the  Guldberg-Waage  theory.

2.  The  catalytic  action  of  an  acid  increases  with  the  degree  of  its
dissociation,  and  the  velocity  coefficient  is  approximately  proportional
to  the  number  of  hydrogen  ions.

3.  In  a  secondary  way  the  catalytic  activity  of  the  hydrogen  ions
is  considerably  increased,  as  a  result  of  the  presence  of  neutral  salts.

The  measurement  of  the  velocity  of  the  saponification  of  ether  also
furnishes  a  method  for  determining  the  number  of  hydrogen  ions  in  a
solution.  This  method  was  applied  by  Walker  (p.  523)  in  a  very
ingenious  way  to  investigate  the  "  hydrolylic  dissociation  "  of  salts  :  their
respective  magnitudes  could  be  ascertained  by  measuring  the  velocity
with  which  the  methyl  acetate  added  to  the  solution  was  catalysed  ;
and  this  formed  a  measure  of  the  quantity  of  the  free  acid  separated
from  the  salt,  and  thus  at  the  same  time  the  strength  of  the  base  of
the  respective  salt  (a  chloride)  was  estimated  at  least  approximately.

According  to  the  extensive  investigations  of  B.  Lowenherz,2  the
rate  of  saponification  of  various  esters  by  the  hydrogen  ions  is  nearly
independent  of  the  nature  of  the  alcohol  contained  in  the  ester,  but
depends  largely  on  the  nature  of  the  acid  contained.  The  behaviour
of  salicine  towards  acids  is  similar  to  that  of  cane  sugar,  it  decomposes
into  dextrose  and  saligenin  with  separation  of  a  molecule  of  water.3

1  J.  pr.  Chem.  [2],  28.  449  (1883) ;  see  also  Trey,  ibid.  [2],  34.  353  (1886).

2  Zeits.phys.  Chem,,  15.  389  (1894).
3  A.  A.  Noyes  and  W.  J.  Hall,  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  18.  240  (1895).

CHAP.  V

CHEMICAL  KINETICS

549

Formation  of  Sulphuretted  Hydrogen  from  its  Ele-
ments.— There  is  only  a  very  small  number  of  reactions  occurring
in  the  gaseous  state  which  are  free  from  secondary  disturbances,  such
as  chemical  action  or  absorption  by  the  walls  of  the  vessel ;  and  their
experimental  treatment  mostly  meets  with  very  great  difficulties.
Bodenstein1  has  recently  done  a  great  service  in  systematically
studying  gas  reactions  from  the  point  of  view  of  chemical  kinetics,
and  after  discovering  a  series  of  sources  of  error  has  worked  out
exact  methods  for  it.

He  showed  amongst  other  things  that  with  a  sufficient  excess  of
sulphur  the  formation  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  occurs  according  to
the  formula

dx . .
_  =  k(a-x),

where  a  -  x  is  the  amount  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  present  at  the
time  t.  The  sulphur  which  occurs  as  a  liquid  evaporates  fast
enough  for  its  active  mass  (like  that  of  water  in  the  preceding
example)  to  remain  practically  constant.  The  following  numbers
obtained  at  310°  indicate  the  satisfactory  constancy  of  k(a  =  1000).

t

X

k

720

0-1680

0-000117

1440

0-3049

0-000116

2160

0-4145

0-000114

2880

0-5258

0-000123

4320

0-6610

0-000118

5760

0-7572

0-000118

7200

0-8289

0-000122

8640

0-8494

0-000121

10080

0-9012

0-000123

Mean  .

.  0-000118

It  is  noteworthy  that  catalytic  influences  very  often  occur  in  gas
reactions ;  thus  the  formation  of  seleniuretted  hydrogen  which  is  also
unimolecular  is  mainly  influenced  by  the  catalytic  action  of  solid
selenium.

Unimolecular  Reactions. — The  same  formula  for  the  velocity
coefficient,  and  the  same  course  of  the  reaction  which  we  met  in  the
case  of  the  inversion  of  sugar,  we  find  in  all  cases  where  the  system  suffers
an  essential  change  of  concentration,  as  a  result  of  the  change  of  only  one
molecular  species.

1  Gas  reactions  in  chemical  kinetics,  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  29.  147,  295,  315.  429.
665;  30.  113  (1899).

550  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  in

Thus,  according  to  researches  conducted  by  Harcourt  and  Esson  as
early  as  1865,  potassium  permanganate,  by  oxidising  a  large  excess  of
oxalic  acid  which  is  added,  disappears  according  to  the  logarithmic
formula.

According  to  the  researches  of  van't  Hoff,1  the  same  is  true  of  the
splitting  of  di-brom-succinic  acid  into  brom-maleic  acid  and  hydro-
bromic  acid  ;  and  also  for  the  decomposition  of  mono-chlor-acetic  acid
into  glycolic  acid  and  hydrochloric  acid,  etc.

Following  the  usage  of  van't  Hoff,  we  will  call  reactions  of  this
sort  unimolecular  ;  their  course  always  corresponds  to  the  differential
equation,

dx

In  an  analogous  way,  we  will  call  those  reactions,  in  the  course  of
which  there  is  a  change  in  the  concentration  of  n  molecular  species,
n-molecular  reactions.

Bi-molecular  Reactions  —  The  Saponification  of  Esters.—

The  classical  example  of  this  case,  where  the  concentrations  of  two
molecular  species  are  considerably  changed  in  the  course  of  the  re-
action, is  the  saponification  of  esters.  By  bringing  together  a  base  with
an  ester  in  water  solution,  there  are  formed  gradually  the  corre-
sponding alcohol,  and  the  salt  from  the  positive  ingredient  of  the
base  and  the  negative  ingredient  of  the  ester  :  the  reaction  takes
place  according  to  the  scheme  —

C2H5-O-0-C2H3 + NaOH  CH3COONa + C2H5-OH

Ethyl  acetate.  Sodium  Sodium  acetate.  Ethyl  alcohol.

hydroxide.

Let  a  and  b  represent  the  original  concentrations  of  the  base  and
of  the  ester  respectively  ;  and  let  x  be  the  quantity  of  the  ester
changed  after  the  time  t  ;  this  can  be  easily  and  sharply  determined
by  the  titration  of  the  quantity  of  the  base  yet  remaining.  Thus  the
reaction  velocity  for  every  moment  is  given  by  the  equation,

or  rearranged,

dx  / 1  1 .

=  kdt.

a  -  b\b  -  x a  -  x/
The  integral  of  this  equation  is

— H  In  (b  -  x)  -  In  (a  -  x) =  kt  +  const. ;

1  Etudes  de  dynamique  chimique  (Amsterdam,  1884),  pp.  13  and  113,

CHAP.  V

CHEMICAL  KINETICS

551

and,  since  x  =  0  when  t  =  0,  we  have

—  ( In  b  -  In  a  I  =  const.  ;
a  -b\  /

from  which  we  finally  obtain,  by  subtraction,

k- 1 ln(a~x)b.
(a-b)t (b-x)a

Saponification  was  first  studied  from  the  standpoint  of  the  law  of
mass-action,  by  Warder;1  and  later  and  more  thoroughly  by  van't
Hoff,2  Eeicher,3  Ostwald,4  Arrhenius,5  Spohr,6  and  others.

It  appears  that  the  preceding  formula  harmonises  excellently  with
the  values  obtained  for  the  stronger  bases.  Thus  the  following  results
were  obtained  for  the  action  of  sodium  hydroxide,  which  was  present
in  slight  excess,  on  ethyl  acetate  at  10°;  the  basic  [alkaline]  titration
of  the  reaction  mixture,  and  denoted  by  c,  corresponded  as  follows
to  the  respective  times  t,  counted  in  minutes.

t  (time).

T  (titrat).

k

0

61-95

4-89

50-59

2-36

10-37

42-40

2-38

28-18

29-35

2-33

CO

14-92

The  figures  under  c  denote  the  number  of  c.c.  of  a

1

23-26

normal

acid  solution  required  to  neutralise  100  c.c.  of  the  reaction  mixture  :  in
order  to  reduce  these  figures  to  our  customary  standard  of  concentra-
tion, viz.  g.-mol.  per  litre,  we  must  multiply  them  by  ooVoe

Now  the  quantities  a,  b,  and  x  in  the  preceding  formula  of  course
correspond  thus;  viz.:  a  to  the  original  titration  61 '95  ;  b  to  the
original  titration  minus  the  final  one,  i.e.  61"95-14<92  =  47'03;  and
x  to  61 '9 5  -  c.  The  formula  then  becomes

2-302.  23-26  n10

k=-  ^-^^-. —  log

c.  47-03

14-92.  t &61'95(c- 14-92)

The  factor  2 -302  reduces  the  natural  logarithms  to  the Brigg's
logarithms. The  values  for  k,  given  in  the  third  column  of  the  pre-

1  B.  B.,  14.  1361  (1881).

-  Etudes,  p.  107.

3  Lieb.  Ann.,  128.  257  (1885).

4  J.pr.  Chem.,  35.  112  (1887).

5  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  1.  110  (1887).

6  Ibid.,  2.  194  (1888).

552

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

ceding  table,  vary  about  a  mean  value,  within  the  limits  of  error  of
experiment.  The  significance  of  k,  considering  the  fact  that  the  time
has  been  estimated  in  minutes  and  the  concentration  in  g.-mol.  per
litre,  is  as  follows  :  —

//  k  denotes  the  number  of  g.-inol.  of  the  ester  which  would  le  saponi-
fied in  a  minute,  if  1  g,-mol.  of  ester  and  1  g.-mol.  of  sodium  hydroxide
should  react  on  each  other  in  1  litre,  and  provided  that  one  had  an  apparatus
which  would  constantly  remove  the  resulting  reaction  products  from  the  system,
and  as  constantly  renew  the  corresponding  quantities  of  base  and  of  undecom-
posed  ester.

If  one  causes  equivalent  quantities  of  ester  and  of  base  to  react
on  each  other,  then  the  reaction  velocity  at  each  moment  will  be
simply

which,  when  integrated,  becomes

t(a  -  x)a

The  question  regarding  the  variation  of  the  reaction  velocity  irith  the
nature  of  the  ester  and  of  the  base  has  been  systematically  investigated
by  Reicher ;  his  results  were  as  follows  : —

1. The  saponification  of  methyl  acetate  at  9*4°,  by  the  various  bases.-

k

-

Sodium  hydroxide

2-307

Strontium  hydroxide  . .

2-204

Potassium ,,

2-298

Barium ,,

2-144

Calcium ,, . .

2-285

Ammonium ,,

0-011

2.  The  saponification  of  the  acetic  acid  esters  of  the  various  alcohols,
by  means  of  sodium  hydroxide  at  9*4°.

k

k

Methyl  alcohol .

3-493

Iso-butyl  alcohol

1-618

Ethyl

2-307 i

Iso-amyl ,, . '  .

1-645

Propyl ,,

1-920

•

CHAP. V

CHEMICAL KINETICS

553

3.  The  saponification of  the ethyl esters  of  different  acids,  by
means  of  sodium  hydroxide  at  14 '4°.

k

k

Acetic  acid

3-204

Iso-butyric  acid  .

1731

Propionic  acid .

2-186

Iso-  valeric ., . .

0-614

Butyric  acid . . .

1702

Beiizoic ,, . .

0-830

Thus  it  appears  that  the  strong  bases  possess  a  reaction  velocity
which  is  about  the  same  ;  and  that  as  regards  the  esters,  on  the  whole,
their  reaction  velocity  is  the  smaller,  the  greater  the  number  of  atoms
contained.

These  numbers  show  that  the  nature  of  alcohol  contained  in  the
ester  is  of  less  influence  than  that  of  the  acid ;  this  result  has  come
out  even  more  strongly  in  recent  researches.1

The  influence  of  the  nature  of  the  base  was  afterwards  very  thoroughly
investigated  by  Ostwald,  in  all  the  gradations  between  sodium  and
potassium  hydroxide  (which  operate  most  quickly),  and  ammonia
and  allyl-amine  (which  operate  very  slowly),  and  he  observed  a
remarkable  phenomenon.  In  the  case  of  the  weak  bases  the  pre-
ceding formula  fails  utterly ;  thus  in  the  saponification  of  ethyl  acetate
ly  ammonia,  for  the  times  (t),  he  found  the  following  corresponding
velocity  coefficients,  which  are  not  directly  comparable  with  the  pre-
ceding ones.

t  k

0

60

240

1470

1-64
1-04
0-484

These  values  of  k  vary  too  much  to  be  constant.  Ostwald  found
as  the  reason  for  this  that  the  neutral  salt  produced  (ammonium  acetate)
exerted  a  very  strong  effect  in  hindering  the  progress  of  the  reaction,  which
explains  the  extreme  retardation  of  the  saponification.

Thus  in  the  saponification  of  ethyl  acetate,  when  an  equivalent
quantity  of  ammonium  acetate  was  added  at  the  outset  in  addition
to  the  ammonia,  the  other  conditions  of  the  experiment  being  un-
changed, the  following  values  were  found  : —

t

0

994

6874

15404

k

0-138
0-120
0-119

Hemptinne,  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  13.561  (1894)  :  Lowenherz.  ibid.,  15.  395  (1894).

554  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

As  a  result  of  the  addition  of  the  neutral  salt  of  ammonium,  the
reaction  velocity  becomes  considerably  smaller,  but  at  the  same  time
the  velocity  coefficient  becomes  much  more  constant;  the  latter  fact
is  explained  by  the  circumstance  that  the  concentration  of  the  ammonium
acetate  changes,  relatively,  much  less  during  the  course  of  the  reaction.

This  remarkable  influence,  which  is  exerted  by  the  presence  of
neutral  salts,  was  at  once  investigated  by  Arrhenius,  who,  on  the
basis  of  very  abundant  material  of  observation,  succeeded  in  establish-
ing the  following  propositions,  viz.  : —

1.  The  saponification  velocity  of  the  stronger  bases  in  fairly  ex-
tended dilution  is  only  slightly  changed  (less  than  1  per  cent)  by  the
presence  of  neutral  salts.

2.  The  saponification  velocity  of  ammonia  is  exceedingly  depressed
by the presence of ammonium salts ; and, moreover, equivalent
quantities  of  the  most  different  salts  exert  nearly  the  same  effect.

Thus  the  velocity  coefficient  k  of  the  action  of  a  -fa  normal  solu-
tion of  ammonia  on  the  equivalent  quantity  of  ethyl  acetate,  in  its
dependence  upon  the  quantity  S  of  any  selected  ammonium  salt  of
a  mono-basic  acid, — this  velocity  coefficient  may  be  expressed  by  means
of  the  following  formula,  which  is  purely  empirical,  and  which  refers
to  a  temperature  of  24*7°,  viz. : —

0-1561

k  =

1241S-11413S2'

The  Theory  of  Saponification. — The  relations  described  above,
and  which  seemed  at  first  to  be  very  puzzling,  are  now  shown  to  be

a  necessary  result  of  the  law  of  mass-action,  on  the  assumption  of  the  theory
of  electrolytic  dissociation.

If  we  consider  the  process  of  saponification  in  the  light  of  this
theory,  it  appears  to  consist  in  the  action  of  the  hydroxyl  ions  upon
the  ester  molecule,  in  the  sense  of  the  equation

C2H5-02C2H3  +  Na  +  OH  =  CH^COO  +  Na  +  C2H5OH,
or  more  simply,

C2H5-02C2H3  +  OH  =  CH^COO  +  C2H5OH.

The  positive  ingredient  of  the  base  thus  plays  a  perfectly  indifferent
role.  Therefore  bases  subjected  to  the  same  degree  of  dissociation
must  exert  effects  of  the  same  degree  of  strength  upon  the  ester ;  in
fact  such  is  the  case  with  sodium  and  potassium  hydroxides.  And  the
less  the  base  is  dissociated,  the  weaker  is  the  action  ;  as,  in  fact,  is
shown  by  ammonia,  or  ammonium  hydroxide  rather,  which  is  cleaved
into  its  ions  only  in  the  slightest  degree,  and  which  accordingly
saponifies  with  a  corresponding  slowness.  Moreover,  this  is  established
in  a  very  striking  way  by  the  investigations  of  Ostwald.

CHAP.  V  CHEMICAL KINETICS  555

As  has  been  already  shown  to  be  necessarily  true  in  analogous
cases  in  "  Chemical  Statics,"  so  here  also  the  active  mass  in  the  mechanism
of  the  reaction  corresponds,  not  to  the  total  quantity  of  the  base  introduced,
hit  only  to  the  quantity  which  is  dissociated.

Thus  let  us  denote  the  degree  of  the  dissociation  by  a,  then  the
formula  previously  used,  viz.

d*  =  k'a(a  -  x)(b  -  x),

must  be  corrected.  Now  the  degree  of  dissociation  of  the  base  is
given  by  its  dissociation  constant,  by  its  concentration,  and  by  the
quantity  of  neutral  salt  produced  from  it.  For  the  stronger  bases
(which  are  almost  as  highly  dissociated  as  the  corresponding  neutral
salts  produced  from  them  in  the  reactions),  a  remains  constant  during
the  progress  of  the  reaction.  For  in  a  mixture  of  any  two  equally  dis-
sociated electrolytes  having  ions  in  common,  at  the  same  total  concentra-
tion, the  dissociation  is  independent  of  their  relative  masses  (p.  505),
and  the  latter  always  remains  constant  during  the  reaction.  Thus  if
we  make

k'a  =  k,

then  the  preceding  equation  again  assumes  the  original  form,  which
harmonises  with  experiment.

But  the  behaviour  is  quite  otherwise  in  the  case  of  a  base,  the
degree  of  dissociation  of  which  is  very  different  from  that  of  the
resulting  salt,  e.g.,  when  the  dissociation  of  the  lase  is  much  weaker;  this
is  the  case  with  ammonia  and  ammonium  acetate.  Thus  it  will  result
that  the  degree  of  dissociation  of  the  base  will  be  caused  to  retreat
very  much  during  the  progress  of  the  reaction,  and  also  the  saponifi-
cation  velocity  must  diminish  much  more  quickly  than  it  should,  if
it  corresponded  to  the  diminution  'of  the  concentration  during  the
reaction ;  because  during  the  reactions  there  are  produced  a  relatively
large  number  of  ammonium  ions.  This  in  fact  was  found  to  be  true,
as  above.  In  this  way  also  the  restraining  action  of  the  original  addi-
tion of  ammonium  acetate  is  explained.

Now  by  means  of  the  saponification  constants  of  potassium
hydroxide,  one  may  calculate  in  a  quantitative  way  the  saponification
constant  of  ammonium  hydroxide  in  the  presence  of  any  quantity  of
ammonium  salts,  in  the  following  way.1

The  saponification  constant  of  potassium  hydroxide  at  24*7°,  and
at  a  concentration  of  ^  normal,  amounts  to  6 '41  on  the  scale  pre-
viously employed ;  moreover,  as  shown  by  both  theory  and  by  experi-
ment, it  is  almost  independent  of  the  concentration.  The  saponifica-
tion constant  of  ammonium  hydroxide  at  the  same  concentration,  and
with  or  without  the  presence  of  ammonium  salts,  according  to  theory,

1  Airhenius,  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  2.  284  (1888).

556

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

must  be  as  much  smaller  as  its  dissociation  under  the  same  circumstances
is  less  than  that  of  potassium  hydroxide,  which  latter  substance,  accord-
ing to  its  conductivity,  is  dissociated  into  its  ions  to  the  extent  of  9  7 '2
per  cent.  But  now  the  degree  of  dissociation  of  a  ^  normal  solution
of  ammonium  hydroxide,  as  calculated  on  the  basis  of  its  conductivity
(p.  359),  amounts  to  2*69  per  cent;  and  its  degree  of  dissociation  in
the  presence  of  a  quantity  S  of  a  binary  ammonium  salt, — which  we  may
regard  as  being  completely  dissociated  at  large  dilution,  as  is  the  case
here, — without  noticeable  error  may  be  calculated  by  means  of  the
following  equations  ; — these  equations  are  obtained  by  a  double  applica-
tion of  the  isotherm  of  dissociation,  firstly  to  the  pure  ammonium
hydroxide,  and  secondly  to  that  containing  an  ammonium  salt,  thus —

0'0269\2 _1  -0-0269
-40~

40

1  -a

40UO  +  S)~K  40 '

here  a  denotes  the  degree  of  dissociation  sought,  and  K  denotes  the
dissociation  constant  of  ammonia.  We  thus  find  the  saponification
velocity  k,  in  the  presence  of  the  quantity  S  of  a  neutral  salt,
to  be

and  similarly  for  pure  ammonia,

In  the  following  table  there  are  given  t{ie  values  of  k,  on  the
one  hand  the  results  being  calculated  in  the  way  just  indicated,  and
on  the  other  hand  the  results  being  calculated  according  to  the  formula
(p.  555),  which  was  empirically  deduced  by  Arrhenius  ;  the  latter  values
of  k  may  therefore  be  regarded  as  the  immediate  expression  of  a
direct  observation.

[N.B.  —  In  this  table  the  second  calc.  k  is  marked  "  k  obs."]

S

• 1

k  Calc.

kObs.

0

2-69%

0-177

0-156

0-00125

1-21

0-080

0-062

0-0050

0-71

0-047

0-039

0-0175

0-118

0-0078

0-0081

0-0250

0-082

0-0054

0-0062

0-0500

0-042

0-0028

0-0033

CHAP.  v  CHEMICAL  KINETICS  557

When  one  considers  that  the  calculation  employs  as  its  basis  the
very  much  greater  values  of  the  saponification  coefficients  of  potassium
hydroxide,  the  coincidence  between  the  last  two  columns  must  be
regarded  as  actually  surprising  ;  and  this  may  be  expressed  as  —

The  saponification  velocity,  under  conditions  which  are  similar  in  other
respects,  is  actually  proportional  with  very  close  approximation  to  the  quantity
of  free  hydroxyl  ions  present.  And  also  we  are  able  to  calculate  the  saponi-
fication velocity  of  any  selected  base,  from  its  degree  of  dissociation.

Measurements  of  the  velocity  of  saponification  of  dissolved  esters
is  therefore  a  means  for  determining  the  quantity  of  hydrogen  ions
present  in  a  solution.  Shields  (p.  520)  made  use  of  this  means  in
determining  the  hydrolysis  of  the  salts  of  strong  bases.  E.  Koelichen
showed  that  the  condensation  of  acetone  to  di-acetone  alcohol  in
aqueous  solution  is  accelerated  by  hydroxyl  ions  and  can  therefore  be
used  to  follow  this  reaction  quantitatively.1

Very  remarkable  results  have  been  found  by  Wijs  in  studying  the
rate  of  saponification  methyl  acetate  by  pure  water.  This  process  clearly
occurs  in  the  following  way.  If  the  ester  is  dissolved  in  pure  water
the  saponifying  action  of  its  hydroxyl  ions  yields  acetic  acid  and
methyl  alcohol  according  to  the  equation  :  —

CH3CO,CH3  +  OH  -  CHgCOO  +  CH3OH  ;

hence  the  number  of  hydroxyl  ions  is  reduced,  and  that  of  the
hydrogen  ions  increased.  But  the  hydrogen  ions  also  possess  the
power  of  saponifying  (p.  545),  although  to  a  much  smaller  degree  than
the  hydroxyl  ions  ;  the  comparison  between  the  rate  of  saponification
by  acids  and  alcohols  show  that  the  former  occurs  about  1400  times
as  slowly  as  the  latter.  These  considerations  show  that  at  first  the
rate  of  saponification  in  pure  water  of  the  dissolved  methyl  acetate
must  fall  very  rapidly  on  account  of  the  reduction  in  the  number  of
hydroxyl  ions,  but  later,  when  much  acetic  acid  has  been  formed,  and
the  water  becomes  decidedly  acid,  it  will  increase  again  because  the
catalytic  action  of  the  hydrogen  has  reached  a  considerable  amount.
Hence  there  must  be  a  minimum  of  the  velocity  of  saponification  whose
position  can  be  calculated  as  follows.

Let  us  suppose  the  experiment  so  carried  out  that  the  concentration
of  the  ester  is  kept  constant,  then  the  velocity  of  reaction  is

g«kJPp}>kJH]  (1)

where  k1  and  k2  are  the  velocity  coefficients  for  the  saponification
by  hydroxyl  and  hydrogen  ions  respectively  and  for  the  -constant
concentration  of  the  ester.

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  33.  129  (1900).

558  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  ill

The  equation  (p.  508),

[H][OH]  =  c02

differentiated  gives  the  equation

To  find  the  position  of  the  minimum  we  must  differentiate  equation
(1)  with  respect  to  t  and  put  it  equal  to  zero,

d>_ d[OH] d[H]_
dt2 * dt 2  dt "

Equation  (3)  however  is  satisfied,  as  may  be  seen  by  comparison
with  (2),  when

[H]:[OH]  =  ki:k2,

which  determines  the  position  of  the  minimum  ;  since  hydroxyl  ions
saponify  1400  times  faster  than  hydrogen  ions  the  time  in  question
must  occur  when  the  concentration  of  the  hydrogen  ions  has  become
1400  times  as  great  as  that  of  the  hydroxyl  ions;  it  may  also  be
easily  proved  that  the  minimum  velocity  is  18  times  smaller  than  the
initial  velocity.

To  test  these  relations  experimentally  the  rate  of  decomposition  of
the  ester  was  determined  by  measuring  its  electric  conductivity  ;  it
appeared  that,  in  agreement  with  the  theory,  the  velocity  of  reaction  first  fell
off,  reached  a  minimum,  and  then  rose  again.  To  calculate  the  electrolytic
dissociation  of  water  the  minimum  velocity  is  the  most  favourable,
so  that  the  values  given  on  p.  508  were  determined  by  calculating  the
concentration  of  hydrogen  and  hydroxyl  ions  from  the  observed
velocity.  The  condition  that  the  concentration  of  the  ester  should
remain  constant  is  easily  attained,  since  the  amount  of  ester  decom-
posed in  this  early  stage  of  the  reaction  is  only  a  small  fraction  of  the
whole.

Further  Bi-Molecular  Reactions.  —  A  process  which  is  quite
analogous  to  the  saponification  of  an  ester,  has  been  found  by  van't
Hoff  1  in  the  action  of  sodium  hydroxide  on  sodium  mono-chlor-acetate  ;  this
practically  advances  to  a  completion,  with  the  formation  of  sodium
glycolate  and  sodium  chloride,  according  to  the  equation

C2H2C102Na  +  NaOH  =  C,H303Na  +  NaCl,
or  in  the  sense  of  the  more  recent  conception,

C2n7cio2  +  OH  =  C2n7o3  +  ci.

1  Etudes,  p.  19.

CHAP,  v  CHEMICAL  KINETICS  559

In  this  case,  both  of  the  conceptions  lead  to  the  same  result,  viz.
that  the  metathesis  must  advance  according  to  a  formula  which  will
hold  good  for  bi-molecular  reactions.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the
measurements  gave  a  satisfactory  constancy  for  the  reaction  coefficients,
which  were  0'0128  at  100°,  and  at  70°  amounted  to  only  0-000822
more.  Moreover,  the  more  recent  conception  would  allow  us  to  antici-
pate that  in  using  different  bases,  they  would  be  independent  of  the
nature  of  the  positive  radical,  but  that  the  degree  of  dissociation  would
be  all  important  ;  and  that  in  the  case  of  weak  bases  the  constancy
of  the  velocity  coefficients  would  disappear.  The  experimental  proof
of  these  requirements  of  the  theory  is  wanting  thus  far.

The  action  of  bases  upon  lactones,  which  was  investigated  by  P.
Henry,1  and  which  results  in  the  formation  of  salts  of  the  corresponding
hydroxy-acids,  must  likewise  progress  with  a  velocity  which  is  pro-
portional to  the  strength  of  the  base,  i.e.  to  the  quantity  of  free
hydroxyl  ions  ;  this  has  been  thoroughly  established  by  observation.

We  may  also  mention  the  action  of  methyl  iodide  on  silver  nitrate,
which  occurs  according  to  the  equation

and  was  studied  by  V.  Chiminello  2  in  alcoholic  solution.

Tri-  and  Multi-Molecular  Reactions.  —  When  the  three  molecular
species,  which  vanish  from  the  system  in  a  tri-molecular  reaction,  are
present  in  equivalent  proportions,  then  the  reaction  velocity  is

dx  „

or,  considering  that  x  =  0  when  t  =  0,

1 x(2a  -  x)
"t  2a2(a  -  x)2'

Noyes  3  has  in  recent  years  found  the  first  case  of  such  a  reaction
in  the  action  of  ferric  chloride  on  stannous  chloride

2FeCl3  +  SnCl2  -  2FeCl2  +  SnCl4.

To  prevent  secondary  disturbances  it  was  found  useful  to  add  a  small
amount  of  the  products  of  reaction.

1  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  10.  96  (1892).  2  Gazz.  chim.,  25.  [2],  410  (1896).

3  Zeits.  phys.  Chem..  16,  546  (1895).

560

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

X

a-x

k

2-5

0-00351

0-02149

113

3

0-00388

0-02112

107

6

0-00663

0-01837

114

11

0-00946

0-01554

116

15

0-01106

0-01394

118

18

0-01187

0-01313

117

30

0-01440

0-01060

122

60

0-01716

0-00784

122

In  the  same  way  A.  A.  Noyes  and  E.  S.  Wason1  showed  that
the  reduction  of  potassium  chlorate  by  ferrous  chloride  in  acid  solution
is  a  tri-molecular  reaction ;  the  same  is  true  for  the  reduction  of  silver
salts  by  silver  formate.2

Again  W.  Judson  and  J.  W.  Walker 3  succeeded  in  finding  a  good
example  of  a  quadri-molecular  reaction  in  the  action  of  bromic  acid  on
hydrobromic  acid ;  apparently  this  occurs  (see  the  section  below  on
"  Complication  of  the  Course  of  Reaction  ")  according  to  the  formula

2H  +  Br  +  Br03  =  HBrO  +  HBr02.

Finally,  Donnan  and  Rossignol 4  have  shown  that  the  reaction
2KI  +  2K8Fe(CN)6  =  2K4Fe(CN)0  +  I2

in neutral solutions is quinqui-molecular ; the actual process is
probably  that  given  by  the  formula

2Fe(CN)6  +  31  -  2Fe(CN)(,  +  I3.

That  tri-molecular  reactions  are  rare,  and  those  of  higher  orders
still  rarer,  is  evident  from  the  kinetic  considerations  developed  on
p.  428 ;  the  probability  of  the  simultaneous  collision  of  several
molecules  is  exceedingly  small,  the  velocity  of  poly-molecular  reactions
can  therefore  only  be  appreciable  under  quite  exceptional  conditions.5
Hence  most  apparent  poly-molecular  reactions  really  take  place  by
means  of  simpler  (uni-  ,  bi-  and  very  rarely  tri-molecular)  ones,  which
occur  successively.  This  is  confirmed  by  experience.

The  study  by  0.  Knoblauch  6  on  the  velocity  of  saponification  of
esters  of  polybasic  acids  is  an  excellent  example  of  this.  If  we  indicate

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  22.  210  (1897).
2  A.  A.  Noyes  and  G.  Cottle,  ibid.,  27.  579  (1898).

3  Journ.  Chem.  Soc.,  1898,  p.  410.  4  Trans.  Chem.  Soc.,  83.  703  (1903).

5  See  also  van't  Hotf,  Chemische  Dynamik,  p.  197,  Braunschweig,  1898.

6  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  26.  96  (1898).

CHAP,  v  CHEMICAL  KINETICS  561

by  B"  the  radical  of  a  dibasic  acid  its  ethyl  ester  is  saponified  by
caustic  soda  according  to  the  equation

B"(C2H5)2  +  2NaOH  -  R"Na2  +  2C2H3OH  ;

on  investigating  the  course  of  reaction  it  appears  that  this  is  never  a
tri-molecular  reaction,  but  that  the  process  occurs  in  the  two  stages

1 .  R"(C2H5)0  +  NaOH  -  B"(C2H5)Na  +  C2H5OH

2.  B"(C2H5)Na  +  NaOH  -  B"Na2  +  C2H6OH

consisting  therefore  of  two  consecutive  bi-molecular  reactions.  In
following  the  process  quantitatively  it  is  therefore  necessary  to  apply
the  law  of  mass  action  to  the  two  latter  equations,  that  is,  a  special
velocity  constant  must  be  introduced  for  each  of  the  two  practically
complete  reactions.

It  was  to  be  expected  that  such  a  reaction  process  would  be  found
in  the  gradual  union  of  gaseous  hydrogen  and  oxygen  to  form  water ;  for
this  occurs  with  the  simultaneous  meeting  of  three  molecules,  and  as
van't  HofF1  discovered,  it  advances  at  440°  with  a  velocity  suitable
for  measurement.

A  pear-shaped  glass  tube,  running  off  into  a  long  narrow  tube,  was
filled  with  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  and  then  kept  all  day  long  (tagelang)
in  the  vapour  of  boiling  sulphur  at  440°.  The  narrow  tube  into
which  the  "pear"  extended  at  the  same  time  served  as  a  closed
manometer,  being  separated  from  the  gas  by  a  mercury  index,  and
being  filled  with  air.  Thus  it  was  possible  to  show  the  gradual
diminution  of  pressure  in  the  interior  of  the  "  pear,"  as  it  was  occasioned
by  the  formation  of  water.

Time  in  Amount  of

Hours.  ' '  Knall-gas. "

0  1-000

6  0-974

20  0-931

34  0-902

47  0-881

61  0-863

Now,  the  course  of  the  reaction  is  not  that  which  is  required  by
the  theory,  because  the  calculation  of  the  reaction  coefficients  furnishes
no  constant  numbers.  This  is  due,  as  has  recently  been  shown  by
Boden stein,2  to  the  strong  but  irregular  influence  of  the  glass  walls  of
the  containing  vessel.  When  Bodenstein  used  porcelain  vessels  he
obtained  most  regular  results,  and  showed  the  reaction  to  be  tri-molecular.
The  velocity  was  found  to  be  nearly  proportional  to  the  area  of  the
porcelain  surface,  so  that  the  formation  of  water  did  not  take  place  in
the  interior  of  the  gas,  but  only  by  the  catalytic  action  of  its  surface.
It  is  only  at  higher  temperatures  that  formation  of  water  occurs  in
the  interior,  that  is  without  catalytic  acceleration.

1  Etudes,  p.  52  ;  see  also  V.  Meyer,  Lieb.  Ann.,  269.  49  (1892).
2  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  29.  665  (1899).

2o

562  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

The  Course  and  the  Mechanism  of  a  Reaction.  —  We  have
seen,  in  the  preceding  paragraphs,  that  the  course  of  the  reaction  always
varies  in  a  characteristic  way  with  the  number  of  the  molecular  species,
which  experience  a  considerable  change  in  the  course  of  a  reaction  in
a  system  considered  as  homogeneous.  This  clearly  shows  the  succes-
sion of  the  formulae,  which  serve  to  calculate  the  velocity  coefficients
of  equivalent  quantities  of  the  reacting  ingredients.  These,  in  order,
are  given,  namely,

for  uni-molecular  reactions,  by  the  expression  -In  —  —  ;

u cl  —  X

for  bi-molecular  reactions,  by  the  expression -  -.  —  "—^  ;

t ^£1  —  XJcl

1 x(2a-x)
for  tri-molecular  reactions,  by  the  expression  -  —  —  --  fe,  etc.

~ — ~

These  expressions  are  so  different  from  each  other  that,  if  the  course
of  the  reaction  exhibits  a  constant  velocity  coefficient  by  applying  one
of  the  preceding  formula?,  this  is  never  the  case  in  the  use  of  one  of

the  other  expressions. If  we  make  x  =  —  ,  i.e.  if  we  calculate  the  time

2

required  to  change  one  half  of  the  quantity  of  the  substance  capable  of  change,
we  find  in  the  first  case  that  the  time  is  independent  of  the  original
concentration  of  "a"  employed;  that  in  the  second  case  it  is  inversely
proportional  to  this  ;  that  in  the  third  case  it  is  inversely  proportional
to  the  square  of  this  ;  and  that  in  general,  in  an  n-molecular  reaction,
this  time  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  (n  -  1)  power  of  this  original
concentration.

Thus  one  may  decide  the  question,  How  many  molecular  species
participate  in  a  reaction?  —  simply  in  this  way,  viz.  by  starting  out
with  equivalent  quantities  of  the  reacting  substances,  and  then
determining  in  two  experiments  (which  differ  in  concentration)  the
time  required  to  consume  one  half  of  the  substances  capable  of  re-
action.

The  honour  of  the  task  of  first  showing  the  possibility  of  obtaining
a  glimpse  into  the  mechanism  of  a  reaction  in  its  course,  —  this  belongs
to  van't  Hoff,  who  has  made  some  applications  of  it  in  his  classical
treatise,  Etudes  de  dynamique  chimique  (1884),  which  has  been  frequently
cited  in  what  has  preceded.

Thus  arsine  and  phosphine  decompose  completely  into  their  respec-
tive elements  at  higher  temperatures,  and  formerly  one  was  inclined
to  regard  the  course  of  the  reaction  as  progressing  in  this  wise,  viz.  —

4AsH3  =  As4  +  6H2,
and

= P+6H

2
according  to  this,  a  collision  of  two  of  the  four  molecules  [of  AsH3  or  of

CHAP.  V

CHEMICAL  KINETICS

563

PH3  respectively]  would  be  requisite  for  the  decomposition.  There-
fore, the  calculation  of  the  velocity  coefficients,  according  to  a
formula  good  for  a  quadri-molecular  reaction,  would  give  constant
values.

The  measurement  of  the  results  of  the  gradual  change  of  gases  in
both  cases  was  accomplished  by  determining  the  associated  change  of
pressure,  which  (from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  reaction)  is
as  2  :  3.

In  the  following  table  are  given  the  values  of  pressure  P,  expressed
in  mm.  of  Hg,  for  the  corresponding  times  (in  hours)  for  the  decomposi-
tion of  ar sine,  at  a  temperature  of  310°  (boiling  di-phenyl-amine) : —

t

P

£10g3P^2P

-T(  F°3  V-i"!

tL\3P0-2P/ J

0

784-84

3

878-5

0-03948

0-422

4

904-05

0-03931

0-491

5

928-02

0-03943

0-581

6

949-38

0-03931

0-683

7

969-08

0-03933

0-814

8

987-19

0-03935

0-975

Now,  if  the  reaction  were  actually  quadri-molecular,  then  the  values
of  the  expression,  as  given  in  the  last  column,  should  be  constant,  which
is  not  the  case.  But  if  it  is  assumed  that  the  reaction  takes  place  in  a
uni-molecular  way,  the  calculation  gives  the  results  shown  in  the  third
column,  where  the  variations  to  which  they  are  subject  are  as  small  as
would  be  expected.  This  very  remarkable  result  would  seem  to  indi-
cate that  each  molecule  of  arsine  decomposes  by  itself ;  and  then  that
every  pair  of  hydrogen  atoms  unites  to  form  a  hydrogen  molecule  ;  and
also  that  an  unknown  number  of  arsenic  atoms  unite  to  form  the
molecules  of  solid  arsenic  which  separate  during  the  reaction.

A  similar  result  is  obtained  from  the  decomposition  of  phosphine,
which  was  investigated  at  a  temperature  of  440°  (boiling  sulphur),  but
otherwise  under  similar  circumstances.

As  van't  Hoff  showed,1  the  slow  course  of  such  uni-molecular
reactions  as  the  decomposition  of  arsine  or  phosphine  proves  that  the
molecules  of  a  gas  are  not  all  in  the  same  condition,  otherwise  they
would  either  decompose  simultaneously  or  not  at  all.  The  occurrence
of  all  stages  of  velocity  of  reaction  speak  strongly  in  favour  of  the
kinetic  views,  and  especially  of  Maxwell's  conception  (p.  209),  that  the
temperature  of  a  single  gas  molecule  oscillates  about  a  mean.

Very  often  it  happens  that  a  reaction  will  begin  simply  and
smoothly,  and  it  is  not  until  it  has  advanced  to  quite  a  distance,  and

1  Chem.  Dynamik,  p.  187,  Braunschweig,  1898.

564  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

after  the  resulting  quantity  of  the  reaction  products  has  attained  to
considerable  magnitude,  that  it  is  disturbed  by  side  reactions.  In  these
cases  one  can  draw  some  conclusion  regarding  the  number  of  molecules
of  the  reacting  substances  from  the  dependence  of  the  original  velocity
upon  the  original  concentration  of  the  reacting  substances.

At  equivalent  concentration  c  of  the  reacting  ingredients,  when  n
molecules  react  upon  each  other,  the  original  velocity  is

v  =  kcn  ;

now,  by  observing  the  original  velocities  vx  and  v2  of  two  concentra-
tions cl  and  c2,  which  are  very  different  from  each  other,  we  have,  v

Although  it  is  very  difficult  to  ascertain  the  original  velocity
directly,  and  although  the  results  obtained  in  this  way,  at  all  events,
are  only  approximate,  yet  they  are  usually  sufficiently  accurate  to
discriminate  between  the  results  ;  for  n  represents  a  whole  number  in  all
cases.  Thus  van't  Hoff1  found,  in  studying  the  action  of  bromine
upon  fumaric  acid  in  dilute  water  solution,  —  a  reaction  which  leads
smoothly  to  the  formation  of  di-brom-succinic  acid  only  in  its  first
stage,  —  the  result,

n  =  1'87,  instead  of  2  ;

this  comes  sufficiently  near  to  what  was  expected.

Further  applications  of  this  important  method  are  to  be  found  in
van't  Hoff,2  Nernst,  and  Hohmann,3  and  A.  A.  Noyes.4  In  practice  it
is.  more  accurate,  as  the  author  showed  in  the  work  with  Hohmann
mentioned,  to  determine  the  expressions

la 1 x 1  x(2a-x)
ta~^? ta^t' ~t (a-x)2'61

in  the  initial  stage,  and  see  whether  they  are  independent  of  the
volume  of  the  reacting  mixture  or  inversely  proportional  to  the  first
power  or  inversely  proportional  to  the  second  power.

After  all  this  repeated  and  emphatic  proof,  it  hardly  needs  any
other  special  demonstration  to  show  that  one  cannot  draw  any  con-
clusion by  any  of  the  methods  indicated  respecting  the  question,  —
Whether  a  molecular  species  which  is  present  in  great  excess  (the
solvent,  e.g.)  participates  in  the  reaction  or  not.  The  case  here
resembles  that  previously  encountered  (pp.  268  and  459),  where  it  was
shown  that  the  hydration  of  dissolved  substances  exerts  no  influence
on  the  depression  of  their  freezing-point.

p.  89.  s  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  11.  375  (1893).

2  Chem.  Dynamik,  p.  193.  4  Ibid,  18.  118  (1895).

CHAP,  v  CHEMICAL  KINETICS  565

The  Reaction-Velocity  and  the  Constitution. — The  principle
of  inter-molecular  reactions  (p.  287)  depends  upon  the  study  of  the
readiness  with  which  the  cleavage  products  of  the  compounds  in
question  are  formed ;  this  has  been  repeatedly  applied  to  special
questions  in  stereo-chemistry  (p.  286).

We  have  now  become  familiar  with  the  methods  by  which  the
conception  of  "readiness"  (Leichtigkeit)  (which  is  doubtless  somewhat
vague)  can  be  replaced  by  the  knowledge  of  well-defined  magnitudes
capable  of  numerical  expression,  viz.  the  reaction-velocities.  The
practical  application  of  this  information  will,  to  a  large  extent,  remain
a  task  for  the  future,  but  it  has  already  been  applied  with  great
methodical  skill  in  one  case.

It  was  Evans  *  who  saw  a  connection  between  the  stereo-chemical
constitution  of  chlor-hydrine  and  the  velocity  with  which  it  forms
hydrochloric  acid  in  the  sense  of  the  reaction,

/OH
E( +  KOH  =  KC1  +  H20  +  R  :  0  ;

XC1

the  progress  of  the  reaction  as  it  takes  place  in  dilute  solution  is
ascertained  by  the  titration  of  the  resulting  potassium  chloride.

In  discussing  his  results,  Evans  starts  out  with  the  view  that  the
distance  between  the  chlorine  and  the  hydroxyl  in  the  molecule  [of
the  chlor-hydrine]  conditions  the  velocity  of  the  formation  of  the
oxide,  i.e.  the  velocity  will  be  greater  the  nearer  the  two  radicals  are
situated  with  reference  to  each  other.  Space  does  not  allow  a
thorough  discussion  of  the  results  obtained  regarding  the  constitution
of  the  seven  chlor-hydrines  which  were  investigated.

Further  illustrations  of  chemical  kinetics  which  will  obviously
throw  light  on  the  mechanism  of  chemical  processes  are  to  be  found
in  the  important  works  of  A.  Hantzsch,2  and  especially  H.  Goldschmidt's
investigation  of  the  formation  of  the  amidoazo  compounds,3  of  the  azo
dyes,4  and  of  the  anilides.5  Of  investigations  touching  the  relation
between  constitution  and  velocity  of  reaction,  we  may  mention  Conrad
and  Bruckner. 6  Study  on  the  determination  of  affinity  coefficients,
Wildermann 7  on  the  velocity  of  the  action  of  alcoholic  potash  on  the
halogen  derivatives  of  the  hydrocarbons  of  the  fatty  series,  H.
Groldschmidt 8  on  the  formation  of  esters.

1  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  7.  337  (1891).

2  Ibid.,  13.  509  (1894).

3  H.  Goldschmidt  and  Reinders,  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  29.  1369  and  1899  (1896).

4  Goldschmidt  and  Merz,  ibid.,  30.  670  (1897)  ;  Goldschmidt  and  Buss,  ibid.,  2075  ;
Goldschmidt  and  Biirckle,  ibid.,  32.  355  (1899).

5  Goldschmidt  and  Wachs,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  24.  353  (1897).

6  Zeitschr. physik.  Chem.,  3.  450  ;  4.  273,  450  ;  5.  289  ;  7.  274,  283  (1889-1891).

7  Ibid.,  8.  661  (1891).

8  Ber.  deutsch.  Chem.  Ges.,  28.  3218  ;  29.  2208  (1896)  ;  see  also  Donnan,  ibid.,
2422  ;  and  Kellas,  Zeitschr.  phys.  Chem.,  24.  221  (1897).

566  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

Catalysis.1 — We  have  repeatedly  noticed  in  the  foregoing,
especially  in  dealing  with  the  decomposition  of  esters  and  the  inversion
of  cane  sugar,  the  striking  circumstance  that  many  reactions  take  place
with  increase  of  velocity  in  presence  of  certain  substances,  especially
acids.  Berzelius  gave  to  this  phenomenon  the  name  of  catalysis ;  it
means  therefore  an  increase  in  velocity  of  reaction  caused  by  the  presence  of
substances  which  do  not  take  part  in  it,  although  the  reaction',  is  capable  of
taking  place  without  their  presence.  Acids  and  bases  seem  to  exercise  a
catalytic  action  on  all  reactions  in  which  water  is  affected  or  split  up,
and  their  activity  is  proportional  to  the  concentration  of  the  hydrogen
or  hydroxyl  ions.  One  of  the  longest  known  and  most  important
catalyses  is  the  accelerated  oxidation  of  sulphur  dioxide  by  oxygen
in  presence  of  oxides  of  nitrogen.  Another  well-known  example  of
catalysis  is  the  extraordinary  increase  in  velocity  of  combustion  of
hydrogen  and  of  sulphur  dioxide  in  presence  of  finely  divided  platinum.
Finally,  we  may  mention  the  interesting  researches  of  Dixon  and  Baker  2
who  were  led  to  the  conclusion  that  a  number  of  gas  reactions,  such
as  the  combustion  of  carbon  monoxide,  the  dissociation  of  sal-ammoniac
vapour,  the  action  of  sulphuretted  hydrogen  on  salts  of  the  heavy
metals,  cease  entirely  in  the  absence  of  water  vapour.

But  there  is  also  a  negative  catalysis,  that  is  a  retardation  of
reaction  by  addition  of  another  substance.  The  investigation  of
Bigelow 3  gives  a  remarkable  example  of  this.  He  showed  that  the
oxidation  of  sodium  sulphite  by  oxygen  is  very  much  retarded  by
small  additions  of  organic  substances  such  as  mannite,  benzyl  alcohol,
benzaldehyde,  and  even  that  it  is  practically  stopped.  The  retardation
is  so  enormously  great  that  it  is  strongly  noticeable  with  solutions,
for  example,  of  mannite  of  the  concentration  yWoou-  normal.

The  catalysor  cannot  of  course  affect  the  affinity  of  a  process.  To
do  so  would  be  in  contradiction  to  the  second  law  of  thermo-dynamics,
according  to  which  the  affinity  of  an  isothermal  process,  as  measured
by  the  maximal  work,  depends  only  on  the  initial  and  final  states.
The  activity  of  the  catalysor  therefore  does  not  touch  the  driving
force  of  a  reaction  but  only  the  opposing  resistance,  as  was  early 4
discovered.

Since  the  catalysor  takes  no  part  in  the  reaction  the  reaction
constant  is  not  altered  by  its  presence.  This  was  seen  (p.  434)  to  be
equal  to  the  ratio  between  the  velocity  constants  of  the  two  reactions
in  opposite  signs.  A  catalysor  must  therefore  always  affect  the  velocity  of
the  reverse  reaction.  If,  for  example,  any  added  substance  increases  the
rate  of  formation  of  a  body,  it  must  equally  increase  its  velocity  of

1  Ostwald  has  given  a  sketch  of  catalytic  phenomena  in  a  lecture  to  the  Hamburger
Naturforschefversammluug,  Zeitschr.  f.  Elekkrochemie,  7.  995  (1891).

-  Ti^tis.  Rot/.  Soc.,  175.  617  (1884)  :  Journ.  Cheat.  Soc^  49.  94  and  3S4  (1836).
Ir.physik.  Ohem,,  26.  493  (1898).
)r  example,  B.  Helmholtz,  Erhaltung  der  Kraft,  p.  25.

CHAP.  V  CHEMICAL  KINETICS  567

decomposition.  We  find  an  example  of  this  in  the  known  fact  that
the  presence  of  acids  causes  both  the  formation  and  the  saponifi cation
of  esters  to  take  place  with  increased  velocity.  The  observation  of
Baker  that  in  absence  of  water  vapour  gaseous  ammonium  chloride  does
not  dissociate,  and  on  the  other  hand  dry  ammonia  does  not  combine
with  hydrochloric  acid  may  be  explained  in  the  same  way.

There  is  no  complete  theory  of  catalytic  phenomena  at  the  present
moment.

Attempts  have  often  been  made  to  explain  it  by  means  of  inter-
mediate products  formed  by  the  catalysor  and  the  reacting  substance.
These  intermediate  products,  whose  existence  has  been  proved  in  many
cases,  are  subsequently  decomposed  into  the  catalysor  and  the  product
of  reaction.  Thus  in  the  process  of  manufacturing  of  sulphuric  acid
the  action  of  the  oxide  of  nitrogen  has  been  explained  by  assuming
that  in  the  mixture  of  sulphur  dioxide,  nitric  peroxide  and  air,  nitro-

—  OH

sulphuric  acid,  S02  ,  is  first  formed,  and  this,  by  contact  with

—  2

water,  is  decomposed  into  sulphuric  and  nitrous  acids.  This  method
of  explanation  may  be  employed  when  the  velocities  of  such  intermediate
reactions  are  greater  than  the  velocity  of  the  total  reaction;  this
theory  of  catalysis  has  only  so  far  been  proved  in  a  few  cases,  in  many
others  it  seems  plausible.  In  no  case  does  it  seem  possible  to  explain
all  catalytic  phenomena  from  this  point  of  view.

In  cases  of  catalysis  in  heterogeneous  systems,  for  example  the
acceleration  of  gas  reactions  by  platinum,  it  is  probable  that  the
phenomenon  is  connected  with  that  of  solution  of  the  gases  in  metal.

According  to  the  observations  of  Bredig,1  colloidal  solutions  of
metals  act  in  the  same  way  as  the  metals  themselves.  In  the
decomposition  of  hydrogen  peroxide  a  platinum  solution  containing
only  7  o  o  0*0  o  o  o  of  a  mol.  per  litre  produces  a  measureable  action.
The  catalytic  activity  of  a  colloidal  platinum  solution  recalls  in  many
respects  that  of  organic  ferments,  and  for  this  reason  Bredig  called  it
an  inorganic  ferment.  The  analogy  comes  out  most  strikingly  in  the
change  of  activity  by  time,  by  temperature,  and  by  the  power  of  certain
substances,  which  are  poisons  towards  organisms,  to  poison,  that  is  to
destroy,  the  activity  of  inorganic  ferments  also.  Such  substances  are
sulphuretted  hydrogen,  hydrocyanic  acid,  etc.

Auto -Catalysis. — Acids  produce  a  catalytic  action  on  the  trans-
formation of  oxy -acids  into  lactones ;  the  velocity  of  this  has  been
measured  by  Hjelt,2  and  especially  with  regard  to  catalysis  by  Henry
(p.  559)  and  Collan.3  Thus,  for  example,  y-oxy-valerianic  acid  in
aqueous  solution  is  changed  into  valero-lactone  with  separation  of

1  Anorganische  Fermente,  Leipzig,  1900  ;  Zeitschr.  f.  physik.  Chem.,  31.  258  (1899).

2  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  24.  1236  (1891).

3  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  10.  130  (1892).

568  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

water,  and,  as  usual  in  such  cases,  the  reaction  takes  place  more
quickly  in  presence  of  a  strange  acid  ;  it  is  only  of  course  the  free
hydrogen  ions  that  are  catalytically  active.  Now  the  acid  itself  is
partly  electrolytically  dissociated,  that  is  in  a  solution  of  oxy-valerianic
acid  without  the  addition  of  any  strange  acid  free  hydrogen  ions  occur  ;
it  is  therefore  natural  to  suppose  that  these  must  produce  catalysis,
so  that  the  acids  catalyse  themselves.  This  supposition  may  be  easily
tested  experimentally.  If  to  the  acid  be  added  one  of  its  neutral
salts,  the  dissociation  is  very  much  reduced  in  accordance  with  well-
known  rules,  that  is,  the  number  of  free  hydrogen  ions  is  diminished.
Thus  the  addition  of  the  sodium  salt  must  greatly  hinder  the
conversion  of  the  acid  into  lactone.  Actually  it  is  found  that  the
strength  of  the  acid  in  the  presence  of  its  sodium  salt  remains  unaltered
for  days.  Another  deduction  from  the  theory,  which  is  confirmed  by
experiment,  is  that  the  transformation  of  acid  into  lactone  does  not
follow  the  equation  applicable  to  unimolecular  reactions,  but  that  the
velocity  of  reaction  at  any  moment  is  proportional  to  the  product  of
the  concentrations  of  the  undissociated  acid  and  the  hydrogen  ions.
These  phenomena,  like  so  many  others  in  chemical  kinetics  in  which
actions  of  electrolytes  are  concerned,  would  be  inexplicable  without
the  hypothesis  of  electrolytic  dissociation,  although  in  the  light  of
this  hypothesis  they  become  almost  obvious.

The  Progress  of  Incomplete  Reactions.  —  Finally,  we  will
devote  a  few  words  to  the  general  case  where  the  reaction  stops  at  a
point  where  only  a  small  part  of  the  possible  decomposition  is  effected.
This  occurs  in  esterification  (p.  447)  ;  thus,  e.g.  if  one  mixes  1.  g.-mol.  of
alcohol  with  1  g.-mol.  of  acetic  acid,  the  mutual  action  comes  to  a  pause
after  two-thirds  of  the  ester  has  been  formed,  which  is  in  maximo  possible.

The  reaction  velocity  for  the  time  t,  when  the.  quantity  of  ester
formed  is  x,  is  here  given  by  the  equation,

where  k  and  k'  denote  respectively  the  velocity  constants  of  the  two
opposed  reactions.  If  we  introduce  into  the  preceding  equation  the
value  of  the  ratio  of  these  two  constants,  viz.

as  ascertained  from  the  equilibrium  of  the  system,  then  by  integration  1
we  obtain

1  For  the  way  of  carrying  out  such  calculations  .see,  for  example,  B.  Nernst  and
Schonflies,  Mnfuhrung  in  die  math.  Behandl.  der  Naturwissenschaften,  2nd  edit.  p.  14.
Munchen,  1898.

CHAP.  V

CHEMICAL  KINETICS

569

The  velocity  of  esterification,  under  the  preceding  conditions,  was
measured  at  the  temperature  of  a  dwelling- room  by  Berthelot  and
Pean  de  St.  Gilles ;  their  results  were  as  follows  :—

Time  t

xObs.

x  Calc.

0  days

o-ooo

o-ooo

10

0-087

0-054

19

0-121

0-098

41

0-200

0-190

64

0-250

0-267

103

0-345

0-365

137

0-421

0-429

167

0-474

0-472

190

0-496

0-499

oo

0-677

0-667

The  calculated  values l  of  x,  as  given  in  the  third  column  of  the
preceding  table,  are  obtained  from  the  theoretical  formula,  by  assuming
that

=  0-00575.

Moreover,  the  coincidence  between  experiment  and  calculation  is  good
throughout,  even  at  the  beginning  of  the  series,  where  some  disturbing
side  reactions  seem  to  have  occurred.  We  will  refer  to  the  calculation
again  at  the  close  of  this  chapter.

If  a  small  quantity  of  acid  be  added  to  a  concentrated  solution  of
water  and  alcohol,  the  concentration  of  the  water  and  the  alcohol  may
be  regarded  as  constant,  and  we  have  for  the  velocity  of  reaction

dx_

dt l(a

where  a  is  the  amount  of  acid  added  and  x  is  the  amount  of  ester
formed  in  the  time  t.  This  equation  of  course  holds  also  when  a  small
quantity  of  ester  is  added  to  the  alcohol-water  mixture,  and  a  is  the
quantity  added  to  the  solution,  x  is  the  quantity  of  ester  decomposed
in  the  time  t ;  only  that  in  this  case  the  reaction  proceeds  in  the  opposite
sense.  If  in  the  preceding  equation  we  put  the  reaction  constant

K  =  ^.

1  Guldberg and Waage,  /.  pr.  Chew.  [2],  19.  69 (1879)  ; Ostwald's Klassifcer,
No.  104

570

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

and  integrate,  we  obtain

1

(l+K)x*

This  equation  has  been  tested  in  a  number  of  experiments  by
W.  Kistiakowsky,1  he  has  in  particular  given  an  important  proof  that
the  value  kx  +  k2  obtained  is  the  same  whether  it  is  derived  from  the
formation  or  the  decomposition  of  ester.

The  condition  of  equilibrium  is

a-x0
and  if  it  be  inserted  in  the  above  equation  we  obtain

a  -

a  -  x0  -  x

The  following  table  refers  to  the  formation  and  decomposition
of  methyl  formate  at  25°  ;  the  alcohol-  water  mixture  contains  43  -9  %
of  alcohol.  To  increase  the  velocity  of  reaction  a  small  quantity  of
hydrochloric  acid  was  added,  this  acted  in  a  partially  catalytic  manner.

FORMATION  OF  ESTERS

t

a-xn-x ki+ka

i

0

1374

60

10-75

176

100

9-14

177

210

5-92

174

DECOMPOSITION  OF  ESTERS

t

a  -  x0  -  x

k]+k2

0

19-83

40

16-91

173

60

15-54

176

90

13-82

174

The  means  obtained  for the two series (176 and 175) are in
striking  agreement.

1 Wied. Beibl., 1891, p. 295 ; Chemische  Umwandlung  in  homogenen  Gebilden.
Petersburg,  1895. See  also  0.  Knoblauch,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  22.  268  (1897).

CHAP.  V

CHEMICAL  KINETICS

571

Another  example  of  the  incomplete  course  of  a  reaction  was  found
by  P.  Henry  (p.  559)  in  studying  the  change  of  hydroxy-'butyric  acid
into  the  corresponding  lactone.  Here  an  abundance  of  free  hydrogen  ions
(in  the  form  of  HC1)  were  added  to  accelerate  the  change ;  therefore
the  weaker  hydroxy- butyric  acid  could  be  regarded  as  entirely
undissociated ;  and,  therefore,  if  "  a "  denotes  the  quantity  of  acid
originally  present,  and  x  the  quantity  changed  into  lactone,  then  the
equation  representing  the  course  of  the  reaction  is

dx
dt

-  x)  -  k2x.

If  we  introduce  the  constant  of  equilibrium,  viz.
and  then  integrate,  we  obtain

K--1
'

Ka

In  conducting  the  research,  the  original  concentration  of  the  acid
amounted  to  -g-.-J-,-  g.  -equivalent  per  litre  :  at  the  beginning  a  standard
volume,  removed  by  the  pipette,  consumed  18  '2  3  c.c.  of  a  barium
hydroxide  solution,  excluding  the  hydrochloric  acid  present.  After  a
long  time  the  titration  remained  constant  at  13  '28  c.c.  Therefore
we  have

18-23-13-28

2^68.

The  series  of  determinations  conducted  at  25°  were  as  follows  :  —

t

X

kj+k2

21

2-39

0-0411

50

4-98

0-0408

80

7-14

0-0444

120

8-88

0-0400

220

11-56

0-0404

320

12-57

0-0398

47  hours.

13-28

The  values  in  column  t  denote  minutes ;  the  values  in  column  x  are
the  quantities  of  lactone  produced,  and  expressed  in  c.c.  of  the  barium
hydroxide  solution;  on  the  same  scale  "a"  amounts  to  18 '23.  The
constancy  of  the  value  of  kx  +  k2,  as  calculated  according  to  the
preceding  equation,  is  highly  satisfactory.

572  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

The  same  equation  of  reaction  holds,  as  Kiister l  has  shown,  for
the  mutual  conversion  of  the  two  hexachlor-keto-R-'pentenes ;  a
mixture  of  the  two  isomers  tends  towards  an  equilibrium  which  depends
considerably  on  temperature.  It  may  be  noted  that  the  case  in-
vestigated by  Kiister  was  that  of  a  liquid  mixture  and  the  two
mutually  convertible  species  of  molecules  without  any  solvent.

According  to  Walker  and  Kay,2  the  formation  of  urea  from
ammonium  cyanate  takes  place  in  accordance  with  the  equation

+

NH4  +  CNO  -  CO(NH2)2  ;

if  a  is  the  quantity  of  ammonium  cyanate  present,  a  the  degree  of
dissociation  at  the  time  t,  we  have

Multirotation  of  Milk  Sugar.—  C.  S.  Hudson  3  has  proved  that
this  is  also  a  case  of  incomplete  reaction,  and  has  completely  explained
in  this  way  the  process  of  multirotation  mentioned  on  p.  547.  Both
the  hydrate  and  the  lactone  of  milk  sugar  slowly  change  their  optical
rotation  in  a  freshly  prepared  solution,  for  in  both  cases  the  reaction

Ci2H24012^:C12H22011  +  H20

tends  to  produce  equilibrium  ;  since  the  rotation  of  both  substances  can
be  determined  in  a  freshly  prepared  solution,  the  composition  of  the
solution  at  any  phase  of  the  reaction,  and  finally  the  equilibrium  can
be  determined  polarimetrically.  If  a  mols.  of  the  hydrate  are  dissolved
in  a  large  quantity  of  water,  the  equation

-^  =  k(a  -  x)  -  k'x,

holds,  where  x  is  the  amount  of  lactone  produced.  If  r0  is  the  rotation
of  a  mols.  of  the  hydrate  we  obtain  by  integration,  just  as  on  p.  570

, .  , 1 r0  -  roo

k  +  k  =  -  In  -^ —  ,
t r-  roo  '

where  r  is  the  variable  rotation  and  roo  the  rotation  in  equilibrium.
Hudson  found  this  equation  comfirmed  in  all  cases.

Tautomerism.  —  Let  us  consider  a  mixture  of  two  isomers  which
are  capable  of  mutual  conversion  as  mentioned  above  and  investigated
by  Kiister,  and  let  us  assume  that  the  equilibrium  between  the  two

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  18.  161  (1895).

2  Journ.  chem.  Soc.,  1897,  p.  489  ;  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem,,  24.  372  (1897).
3  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  44.  487  (1903).

CHAP,  v  CHEMICAL  KINETICS  573

isomers  established  itself  very  quickly ;  if  we  attempt  to  separate  the
components  of  such  a  mixture  by  any  chemical  method  of  separation,
the  other  components  will  be  converted  into  the  first  in  consequence
of  the  displacement  of  equilibrium,  that  is,  the  whole  mixture  will  react
as  if  it  consisted  of  the  first  component  exclusively.  If,  on  the  other
hand,  we  apply  a  chemical  reagent  which  acts  only  on  the  second
component,  the  mixture  will  conversely  behave  as  if  it  consisted  of  the
second  component  only.  Such  a  mixture  can  therefore  react  according
to  two  constitutional  formulae,  that  is,  we  have  the  phenomenon  of
tautomerism  described  on  p.  291.  Thus  it  has  recently  been  suggested
repeatedly l  that  hydrocyanic  acid  is  a  mixture  of  the  molecules  NCH
and  CNH  which,  however,  are  mutually  converted  at  ordinary  tempera-
tures so  quickly  that  separation  of  the  two  is  impossible  or  at  least  very
difficult,  just  as  was  the  case  with  the  mixture  studied  by  Kiister  at
higher  temperatures,  because  one  of  the  isomers  passes  into  the  other
too  quickly.  According  to  this  view,  reduction  of  temperature  would
be  the  means  for  isolating  the  two  tautomeric  forms.

The  same  view  of  tautomerism  explains  why,  as  Knorr  2  remarked,
this  phenomenon  is  only  found  in  fluids,  whilst  for  solids  we  must
always  assume  a  definite  structure.

The  most  thorough  test  for  the  accuracy  of  this  view  is  in
separating  the  isomers  and  following  their  mutual  conversion.  Thus
Claisen3  was  able  to  isolate  the  enol  and  keto  forms  of  tribenzoly-
methane  and  similar  substances,  and  Wislicenus4  those  of  formyl-
phenyl  acetic  ester.  These  were  distinguished  not  only  by  their
melting-point  but  by  their  chemical  behaviour,  for  example,  the  acid
properties  of  the  enol  form  and  the  neutral  properties  of  the  keto  form.
The  intensive  coloration  of  the  enol  form  by  ferric  chloride  is  especially
characteristic,  and  was  used  by  Wislicenus  to  follow  the  course  of  the
inversion  and  to  demonstrate  the  establishment  of  equilibrium  for  both
sides.  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  velocity  of  reaction  varies
greatly  with  the  nature  of  the  solvent,  as  in  the  case  of  other  reactions
it  is  greatest  in  methyl  alcohol,  then  follow  ethyl  alcohol  and  ether,
and  finally  chloroform  and  benzene.

Hantzsch 5  has  made  interesting  observations  on  the  transformation
of  tautomeric  forms  of  nitrophenyl-methane  and  similar  bodies,  and  has
shown  that  the  conversion  can  be  followed  by  measuring  the  electric
conductivity.  These  substances  react  sometimes  as  true  nitro  bodies,
sometimes  as  isonitro  bodies —

C6H5  -  CH2  -  N02  C6H6  -  CH  -  NO  -  OH

Phenylnitromethane. Neutral. Stable Isonitrophenylmethane. Acid. Un-
in  the  free  state  ;  in  alkaline  solution  stable  in  the  free  state  ;  stable  as

changes  into  the  other  form.  salt.

1  Similar  ideas  are  to  be  found  in  Laar,  JSer.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  18.  648  (1885).

2  Lieb.  Ann,,  306.  345  (1899).  3  Ibid.,  291.  25  (1896).

4  Ibid.,  291.  147  (1896).  5  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  32.  575  (1899).

574  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

The  passage  of  the  second  acid  substance  into  the  first  neutral  one
is  shown  by  a  decrease  in  conductivity,  which  finally  disappears
altogether.  The  converse  reaction  takes  place  when  the  first  form  is
dissolved  in  alkali.  Here  also  a  slow  decrease  in  conductivity  takes
place  which  is  due  to  the  formation  of  the  alkali  salt  of  the  isonitro-
phenyl- methane  from  the  free  alkali  and  the  neutral  phenyl-nitro-
methane,  producing  the  ion  of  this  acid  in  place  of  the  much  more
rapid  hydroxyl  ion.  The  neutralisation,  which  in  the  case  of  real  acids
is  almost  instantaneous,  takes  place  here  in  a  measurable  time,  that
required  for  the  conversion  of  the  neutral  substance  into  the  acid.
Hantzsch  describes  such  compounds  which  are  not  acids  definitely  as
pseudo-acids.  These  are  also  distinguished  by  an  exceptionally  large
temperature  coefficient  of  conductivity,  and  which  increases  with  rising
temperature ;  also  by  dissociation  constants  which  change  abnormally
fast  when  the  temperature  increases,  and  by  noticeable  colour  change
on  change  of  temperature.

Hollmann l  has  given  another  excellent  example  of  the  equilibrium
between  the  different  modifications  of  a  substance  in  his  study  on  the
modifications  of  acetaldehyde.

According  to  these  investigations  it  may  be  finally  assumed  that
tautomerism  is  nothing  less  than  a  kind  of  isomerism  in  which  the
velocity  of  mutual  conversion  is  very  great.2

Complications  in  the  Course  of  the  Reaction. — It  sometimes
happens  that  the  course  of  a  reaction  is  somewhat  different  from  what
it  should  be,  according  to  the  differential  equation  corresponding  to  the
scheme  of  the  reaction.  In  most  cases  it  is  found  that  the  resulting
products  of  decomposition  give  rise  to  side  reactions  which  disturb  the
simplicity  of  the  relations;  thus  we  saw  on  p.  553  that  the  ammonium
salt  produced  in  the  saponification  of  ethyl  acetate  by  ammonia  acted
in  a  secondary  way  on  the  state  of  dissociation  of  the  base,  thus  giving
rise  to  certain  irregularities ;  these  irregularities  at  first  seemed  to  be
inexplicable  ;  but  they  were  explained  after  the  nature  of  the  disturb-
ance was  recognised.

In  other  cases  the  discrepancy  between  calculation  and  experiment
is  explained  on  learning  that  the  reaction  equation,  which  was  assumed
as  the  basis  of  the  differential  equation,  does  not  correspond  to  the
actual  conditions;  we  have  met  several  examples  of  this.  The
mechanism  of  the  reaction  must  be  known,  in  order  to  apply  the  law
of  mass-action  ;  for  in  order  to  write  out  the  expression  for  the  reaction
velocity,  we  need  to  know  not  only  the  kind  of  molecular  species,  but
also  the  number  of  each  kind  which  participates  in  the  reaction.

It  has  been  already  shown  in  many  cases  that  in  those  reactions

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  43.  129  (1903).

2  A  complete  exposition  of  the  views  on  tautomerism  and  the  experimental  material
is  given  by  Rabe,  Lieb.  Ann.,  313.  129  (1900).

CHAP.

CHEMICAL  KINETICS  575

in  which  electrolytes  participate,  only  those  formulae  are  suited  for
describing  the  course  of  the  reaction  which  are  derived  in  accordance
with  the  [newer]  views  regarding  electrolytic  dissociation ;  while  the
conception  of  the  mechanism  of  the  reaction  which  was  formerly
accepted  as  practical  must  be  repudiated  in  toto.

This  happens  in  the  case  of  a  reaction,  which  advances  to  an  almost
perfect  completion,  and  which  fortunately  has  been  recently  investi-
gated by  Ostwald,1  viz.

HBr03  +  6HI  =  HBr  +  3H20  +  3I2.

The  progress  of  this  reaction  in  water  solution  can  be  measured
very  easily.  Let  us  start  with  equivalent  quantities  of  the  substances
on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  equation ;  thus  at  the  beginning  of  the
reaction  let  there  be  a  mols.  of  HBr03,  and  6  a  mols.  of  HI  in  a
litre  of  the  reaction  mixture ;  then  in  the  sense  of  the  old  conception,
the  equation  representing  the  course  of  the  reaction  will  be

dx  7>

~TT  —  K\a  —  Xy j

dt

here  x  denotes  the  quantity  of  HBrO3  remaining  decomposed  after  the
time  t.

But  it  now  appears  that  the  equation

1  I-kt

(a-x)6 a6"

which  is  obtained  by  integrating  the  preceding  one,  does  not  apply  to
the  course  of  the  reaction.  This  is  clearly  intelligible  from  the  stand-
point of  the  theory  of  electrolytic  dissociation.  For  if  we  assume  that
the  substances  are  completely  dissociated  (which  is  approximately  true
in  the  case  of  very  dilute  solutions),  then  we  obtain  the  following
reaction  scheme,  viz.

7H  +  BK)3  +  61  =  H  +  Br  +  3H20  +  3I2.

One  hydrogen  ion,  which  is  common  to  both  sides  of  the  equation,  can
be  neglected.  On  the  whole,  the  reaction  may  be  dissected  into  the
two  following  particular  reactions,  viz.

6H  +  Br03  =  Br  +  3H20,
and

6f =  3I2.

But  these  two  reactions  do  not  take  place  together  independently  of  each
other-, for they must occur at the same time, because the free
1  Zeits.  phys.  Ohem.,  2.  127  (1888).

576  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  III

[positive]  electric  charges  of  the  H-ions,  at  every  instant,  must  be
neutralised  by  those  of  the  I-ions.

According  to  A.  A.  Noyes,1  the  above-mentioned  case  is  one  of  a
bi-molecular  reaction,  and  is  to  be  explained  by  the  hypothesis  that  the
following  reactions  occur  : —

HI  +  HBr03  =  HBr02  +  HIO,
HI  +  HBr02  -  HBrO  +  HIO,
HI  +  HBrO  =  HBr +  HIO
3HI  +  3HIO  =  3H2O +  3I2 ;

only  the  first  bi-molecular  reaction  requires  appreciable  time  and
therefore  regulates  the  velocity  of  reaction,  whilst  the  other  processes
take  place  instantaneously,  and  consequently  no  appreciable  quantity
of  intermediate  products  exist.  Walker  (p.  560)  has  shown  that  a
similar  assumption  probably  holds  for  the  action  of  bromic  acid  on
hydrobromic  acid.

Indeed,  even  without  this  knowledge,  we  may  predict  that  the
velocity  of  the  decomposition  will  be  accelerated  by  the  addition  of
acids,  i.e.  by  the  addition  of  hydrogen  ions,  because  the  hydrogen
ions  constitute  one  of  the  reacting  molecular  species ;  and  also  that
the  acceleration  occasioned  by  the  addition  will  be  the  greater  the
stronger  the  acid  is,  as  is  clearly  to  be  seen  from  the  results  of
Ostvvald's  researches.

Apparently  the  case  is  very  similar  in  the  behaviour  of  iodic  acid
and  sulphurous  acid  in  their  mutual  reaction  upon  each  other,  which
was  investigated  by  Landolt ; 2  these  substances  react  upon  each
other  in  the  sense  of  the  equation

3S02  +  HI03  =  3S03  +  HI ;

also  the  hydriodic  produced  reacts  upon  the  iodic  acid  in  the  sense  of
the  equation

5HI  +  HI03=3H20  +  3I2.

If  one  adds  thereto  some  starch  paste,  then  as  soon  as  a  sufficient
quantity  of  iodine  shall  have  been  set  free,  there  instantly  appears  a
blue  colour.  The  time  which  intervenes  between  the  preparation  of
the  solution  and  the  appearance  of  the  blue  colour,  and  which  is
usually  counted  in  seconds, — this  was  measured  by  Landolt  for  varying
proportions  of  the  reacting  substances  ;  and  although  this  time  interval
does  not  represent  a  simple  and  direct  measure  of  the  velocity  of  the
reaction,  but  rather  has  a  significance  which  is  somewhat  complicated,

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  18.  118  (1895).

2  B.  B.,  16.  249  (1885) ;  19.  1317  (1886).

CHAP,  v  CHEMICAL  KINETICS  577

nevertheless  it  may  at  least  be  stated  that  the  reaction  progresses  more
quickly  the  shorter  this  time  interval.

Moreover,  he  succeeded  in  representing  the  time  interval  which
elapsed  between  the  preparation  of  the  reaction  mixture  and  the
separation  of  the  free  iodine  (as  shown  by  the  blue  colour  of  the  added
starch),  as  being  in  excellent  coincidence  with  all  his  numerous
observations,  by  means  of  the  empirical  formula  —

.524-35

- O sec-;

here  Cs  and  d  denote  respectively  the  concentration  of  the  sulphurous
and  of  the  iodic  acid  in  g.-mol.  per  cub.  cm.  The  formula  holds  good
for  20°.

The  Influence  of  the  Medium.  —  Strictly  speaking,  we  would
expect  to  find  a  constant  velocity  coefficient  in  the  course  of  the
reaction,  only  in  the  case  of  those  systems  where  the  nature  of  the
medium  in  which  the  reaction  is  completed  experiences  no  essential
change  as  a  result  of  the  decomposition  of  the  reacting  substances.

This  condition  is  fulfilled,  to  be  sure,  only  in  a  faulty  way,  in  the
case  of  esterification  previously  considered,  in  the  progress  of  which  the
nature  of  the  medium  is  changed  considerably  ;  but  the  condition  is
apparently  very  completely  satisfied  in  the  case  of  reactions  occurring
in  gaseous  systems,  and  doubtless  also  in  reactions  occurring  in  dilute
solutions.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  found  in  the  latter  a  most  excellent
demonstration  of  the  law  of  mass-action  in  its  application  to  chemical
kinetics.

The  question,  how  the  reaction  velocity  changes  with  the  nature
of  the  medium  in  which  the  reaction  occurs  has  hitherto  been  attacked
only  in  a  desultory  way.  No  researches  have  been  conducted  to
determine  whether  the  velocity  of  decomposition  in  gaseous  systems  is
influenced  by  the  presence  of  a  [chemically]  indifferent  gas  or  not  ;
whether,  e.g.,  the  decomposition  of  hydrogen  arsenide  [arsine  AsH3]
occurs  in  the  same  time  in  the  presence  of  nitrogen  that  it  would  were
it  alone.

But  from  the  fact  that  the  condition  of  equilibrium  of  a  gaseous
system  (e.g.  the  dissociation  of  a  gas)  is  not  displaced  by  intermixture
with  foreign  indifferent  gases,  it  undoubtedly  follows  that  the  two
opposed  reaction  velocities  (which  in  equilibrium  exactly  compensate
each  other)  would  be  influenced  in  the  same  way,  if  at  all;  and  until
the  experimental  decision  of  the  question,  the  most  probable  pro-
visional assumption  is  that  both  of  the  two  reaction  velocities  remain
unchanged,  i.e.  that  [chemically]  indifferent  gases  are  without  influence  on
the  reaction  velocity.  Actually  E.  Cohen1  showed^  that  the  rate  of

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  25.  483  (1898).

2P

578

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

decomposition  of  arsine  is  not  altered  by  the  presence  of  hydrogen  or

nitrogen.

The  problem,  and  one  very  interesting  for  many  reasons,  respecting
the  change  in  the  reaction  velocity  of  a  chemical  process  which  occurs
in  a  solution,  with  the  nature  of  the  solvent, — this  was  first  attacked  in  a
thorough  way  by  Menschutkin.1  For  this  purpose  he  selected  the
reaction  leading  to  the  formation  of  tetra-ethyl-ammonium  iodide,  from
tri-ethyl-amine  and  ethyl  iodide,  thus —

N(C2H5)3  +  C2H5I  =  N(C2H5)4L

The  procedure  consisted  in  diluting  one  volume  of  an  [equivalent]
mixture  of  the  two  substances  with  15  volumes  of  a  solvent;  this
was  maintained  for  a  definite  time-interval  at  100°  in  a  sealed  glass
tube ;  thereafter  the  quantity  of  the  ammonium  base  produced  was
determined  by  titration,  so  that  the  progress  of  the  reaction  was  ascer-
tained. The  reaction  progressed,  in  each  one  of  the  twenty-three
solvents  studied,  completely  and  normally,  i.e.  in  accordance  with  the
formula  which  holds  good  for  bi-molecular  reactions ;  but  the  value
of  the  velocity  coefficient  k  varied  in  a  very  striking  way  with  the
nature  of  the  solvent,  as  is  shown  by  the  values  given  in  the  following
table :—

Solvent,

k

Solvent.

k

Hexane
Heptane

0-000180
0-000235

Methyl-alcohol .
Ethyl-alcohol .

0-0516
0-0366

Xylene

0-00287

Allyl-alcohol

0-0433

Benzene

0-00584

Benzil-alcohol .

0-133

Ethyl-acetate

0-0223

Acetone

0-0608

Ethyl-ether

0-000757

The  presence  of  a  hydroxyl  group,  and  also  of  an  "  unsaturated
union  "  in  the  molecule,  according  to  this,  seems  to  favour  the  reaction
velocity  ;  and,  as  a  rule,  in  homologous  series,  the  velocity  decreases
with  increasing  molecular  weight.

But  one  circumstance  would  appear  to  be  very  remarkable,  viz.
that,  according  to  this,  those  solvents  which  are  endowed  with  a  great
"  dissociating  force"  towards  the  dissolved  substances  (see  pp.  268  and
458),  these,  on  the  whole,  are  also  those  whicli  impart  the  greatest
reaction  capacity  to  the  dissolved  substances.  But,  as  was  emphasised
by  Menschutkin,  the  enormous  differences  between  the  velocity  constants  can-
not be  ascribed  to  the  purely  physical  action  of  the  solvent,  such  as  might
consist  in  a  difference  between  the  [relative]  number  of  molecular
collisions.

Indifferent  materials  added  to  the  solvent  may  alter  the  "  nature
1  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  6.  41  (1890).

CHAP,  v  CHEMICAL  KINETICS  579

of  the  medium,"  and  consequently  exercise  an  appreciable  influence
on  the  velocity  of  reaction ;  the  action  of  neutral  salts  referred  to
on  p.  545  is  perhaps  to  be  referred  in  part  to  such  an  influence.
According  to  a  thorough  investigation  by  Buchbocks,1  in  the  action
of  foreign  substances  on  the  decomposition  of  carbonyl  sulphide
dissolved  in  water

COS  +  H20  -  C02  +  H2S

some  connection  with  the  viscosity  of  the  solution  is  probable.

According  to  present  experience  the  velocity  of  reaction  in  the
gaseous  state,  at  least  at  ordinary  temperatures,  is  with  few  exceptions
vanishingly  small ;  the  gaseous  state  is  therefore  a  medium  which,  in
accordance  with  its  small  dissociating  power,  imparts  to  the  substance
present  in  it  very  small  capacity  for  reaction.  The  fact  that  oxy-
hydrogen  gas  reacts  slowly  at  the  walls  of  the  vessel  (p.  540)  may  be
explained  by  saying  that  the  gas  absorbed  or  dissolved  by  the  walls
of  the  vessel  constitutes  a  medium  of  greater  facility  of  reaction  ;  it
is  well  known  that  the  facility  of  reaction  is  greater  still  for  oxy-
hydrogen  gas  at  platinum  surfaces.  In  this  way  many  catalytic
processes  can  be,  if  not  explained,  at  least  referred  to  the  apparently
less  difficult  conception  of  the  influence  of  the  medium  discussed  in
this  section.

The  Kinetics  of  Heterogeneous  Systems. — The  velocity  of
reaction  in  heterogeneous  systems  possesses  a  theoretical  interest  not
inferior  to  that  possessed  by  the  reaction  velocity  of  homogeneous
systems ;  because  the  former  are  very  largely  dependent  upon  the
extent  and  the  nature  of  the  separating  surface  between  the  reacting
phases,  and  also  upon  other  circumstances  of  a  secondary  nature,  such
as  the  diffusion  capacity.  For  these  reasons  there  are  difficulties
in  the  way  of  obtaining,  in  such  processes  as  the  solution  of  solid
substances  in  a  solvent  or  of  metals  in  acids,  figures  which  shall  be
constant,  and  which  shall  also  have  a  simple  meaning,  so  that  they
can  represent  a  measure  of  the  velocity  of  the  respective  reactions.

Thus,  especially  in  the  case  of  solid  substances,  the  nature  of  the
surface  is  subject  to  great  irregularities,  and  it  is  very  difficult  to
obtain  the  appropriate  material  in  a  condition  which  is  sufficiently
uniform..

Thus  the  velocity  of  the  solubility  of  pure  zinc  in  acids  is  enor-
mously increased  by  admixture  with  the  slightest  foreign  material.
This  is  simply  explained  by  the  electromotive  action  of  these  foreign
substances  upon  the  zinc,  resulting  in  the  formation  of  innumerable
short  circuits,  and  consequently  resulting  in  the  opportunity  for  the
electrolytic  transference  of  the  zinc  into  the  solution.  For  this  reason

1  Zeits.phys.  Chew.,  23.  123  (1897).

580  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  in

the  numerous  researches  concerning  this question have  not  as yet
produced  any  simple  result.1

According  to  the  law  of  mass-action,  the  following  inferences  are
very  direct  regarding  the  solution  of  metals  in  acids  and  analogous
processes.

1.  The velocity  of the  decomposition at every  instant will  be
proportional to the  extent  of the  contact  surface 0  between the
metal  and  the  acid.

2.  It  will  be  proportional  to  the  concentration  of  the  acid.

Thus,  let  us  denote  by  a  the  acid  titration  possessed  by  the  solu-
tion at  the  beginning  of  the  process  for  the  time  t  =  0  ;  and  by
a  -  x  the  acidity  after  the  time  t,  when  x  equivalents  of  the  metal
shall  have  gone  into  solution.  Then,  according  to  the  assumption
made  above  for  the  reaction  velocity,  i.e.  for  the  quantity  dx  of  the
metal  passing  into  solution  in  the  time  dt,  we  shall  have —

J  =  kO(a-x)  (1)

and  this,  when  integrated  on  the  assumption  that  the  surface  remains
constant  during  the  solution,  becomes

In  — 1-  -  kOt ;
a-x

Boguski  -  succeeded  in  verifying  the  preceding  formula  fairly  well,
by  a  research  concerning  the  solubility  velocity  of  Carrara  marble
in  acids.  A  weighed  marble  plate  was  immersed  in  the  acid,  and
after  a  measured  time  was  removed,  washed,  dried,  and  again  weighed.
The  quantity  x  dissolved  was  thus  ascertained,  corresponding  to  the
time  t,  by  the  diminution  in  weight.

As  was  to  be  expected,  equivalent  solutions  of  HC1,  of  HBr,  and
of  HN03  acted  on  the  marble  with  the  same  velocity.

The  influence  of  temperature  in  particular  was  later  investigated  by
Spring.3  He  showed  that  an  elevation  of  the  temperature  from  15°
to  35°,  and  from  35°  to  55°,  in  each  case  corresponded  to  a  doubling
of  the  solution  velocity ;  and  also  that  the  temperature  excites  a
strong  accelerating  influence  on  reactions  which  occur  in  heterogeneous
systems,  similarly  to  what  has  been  regularly  proved  for  homogeneous
systems.

Iceland  spar  exhibits  a  dual  solution  velocity  according  as  the
attack  of  the  acid  is  directed  towards  the  one  or  the  other  of  its  two

1  De  la  Rive  (1830)  ;  Boguski,  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  9.  1646  (1876)  ;  Kajander,
ibid.,  14.  2050  and  2676  (1881)  ;  Spring  and  van  Aubel,  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  1.  465
(1887)  ; and  others.

2  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  9.  1646  (1876)  ;  see  also  Boguski  and  Kajander,  ibid-.*
10.  34  (1877).

3  Zeits.  phys.  Chem,,  1.  209  (1887).

CHAP,  v  CHEMICAL  KINETICS  581

principal  crystallographic  directions.1  The  quotient  of  the  reaction
velocities  in  the  direction  of  the  basal  section  and  of  the  longitudinal
section  respectively,  amounted—

At  15°  to  1-13
„  35°  „  1-15
,,  55°  „  1-14

Recently  A.  A.  Noyes  and  W.  R.  Whitney  ~  have  established  the
important  fact  that  the  rate  of  solution  is  at  each  moment  proportional
to  the  difference  between  the  concentration  at  the  moment  and  that
required  for  saturation.  They  showed  in  the  same  work,  that  at  the
boundary  between  the  crystals  and  the  solution  the  solid  is  at  each
moment  saturated  ;  the  velocity  of  solution  according  to  this  is  con-
ditioned only  by  the  rate  of  difftision  of  the  saturated  solution  of  the
boundary  layer  into  the  interior  liquid.  By  stirring  the  thickness  of
the  liquid  layer  adhering  to  the  crystal  is  diminished,  and  thus  the
distance  through  which  the  diffusion  has  to  take  place  reduced.

It  is  very  probable  that  this  rule  can  be  generalised,  that  in  the
boundary  layer  the  equilibrium  is  established  with  a  velocity  which,
if  not  infinite,  is  at  any  rate  so  great  that  the  equalisation  by  diffusion
is  slow  compared  with  it.  According  to  this  view,  the  velocity  of
reaction  in  heterogeneous  systems  should  be  calculable  from  the
diffusion  coefficient,  provided  the  distance  through  which  the  diffusion
has  to  take  place  is  known.

This  hypothesis  yields,  as  was  shown  by  the  author  and
E.  Brunner,3  in  a  complete  experimental  study,  the  means  of  treating
theoretically  the  velocity  of  reaction  in  heterogeneous  systems.  With
sufficiently  vigorous  stirring,  which  is  kept  constant  throughout  the
experiment,  it  may  be  assumed  that  the  solution  has  a  homogeneous
composition,  and  that  the  layer  of  constant  thickness  adheres  to  the
surface  of  the  solid  and  causes  diffusion.  If  we  consider,  for  example,
the  solution  of  magnesia  in  acid  according  to  these  principles,  at  the
magnesia  itself  there  would  be  a  slight  alkalinity,  and  the  concentra-
tion of  the  free  acid  would  therefore  be  very  small  ;  under  these
conditions  the  quantity

would  diffuse  to  the  magnesia,  where  D  is  the  diffusion  constant  of
the  acid,  and  the  equivalent  amount  of  magnesia  would  go  into
solution.  The  reaction  constant  k  therefore,  according  to  equation
(1),  becomes

1  Spring,  Zeits.phys.  Chem,,  2.  13  (1888). 2  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.<  23.  689  (1897).
3  Dissertation,  Gottingen,  1903.

582  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  ill

If  the  thickness  of  the  adhering  layer  8  for  a  given  kind  and
velocity  of  stirring  can  once  be  determined  by  experiment,  the  velocity
constant  k  can  be  calculated  in  absolute  measure.  Thus  Brunner,
after  determining  8  as  0'03  mm.  from  a  measurement  of  the  rate  of
solution  of  benzoic  acid,  calculated  the  rate  of  solution  of  magnesia  in
different  acids.

Thus  it  appears  that  it  is  not  the  strength  of  the  acid  which
regulates  the  rate  at  which  it  attacks  magnesia,  but  merely  its
diffusion  constant,  so  that  acetic  acid  which  diffuses  rapidly  acts
more  quickly  than  benzoic  acid,  although  the  latter  is  much  stronger.

Since,  according  to  this,  in  chemical  reactions  which  occur  merely
at  the  boundary  between  two  phases,  the  phenomenon  is  essentially
one  of  diffusion,  it  is  useless  to  try  and  determine  the  order  of  reaction
from  the  rate  at  which  they  proceed,  as  has  often  been  attempted  in
recent  years ;  this  method  of  argument  is  only  applicable,  according
to  kinetic  considerations,  to  the  probability  of  collisions  in  homo-
geneous systems  (p.  428),  and  loses  its  meaning  when  applied  to
heterogeneous  systems.

The  Linear  Velocity  of  Crystallisation,  i.e.  the  velocity  with
which  the  formation  of  crystals  situated  at  a  point  proceeds,  e.g.  in
an  undercooled  liquid  contained  in  a  glass  tube,  has  been  studied  by
Gernez  (1882),  Moore  (1893),  and  in  a  very  complete  manner  both
theoretically  and  experimentally  by  G-.  Tammann.1  The  general
behaviour  is  that  it  increases  at  first  with  the  degree  of  undercooling,
reaches  a  maximum  and,  with  great  undercooling,  diminishes ;  the
decrease  can  go  so  far  that  the  velocity  of  crystallisation  sinks
practically  to  nothing,  so  that  the  undercooled  liquid  loses  its  capacity
of  crystallisation  and  remains  of  a  glassy  character.  The  maximum
rate  of  crystallisation  is,  for  example,  for  phosphorus  60,000,  azo-
benzene  570,  benzo-phenone  55,  salol  4,  betol  1  mm.  per  minute,  it
varies  therefore  in  an  extreme  degree  from  one  substance  to  another.

According  to  Tammann,  the  meaning  of  this  remarkable  fact  is  as
follows.  In  the  boundary  between  the  solid  and  fused  substance  the
temperature  is  that  of  the  freezing-point,  so  that,  when  the  under-
cooling is  not  too  great,  the  velocity  of  crystallisation  measured
corresponds  to  this  temperature,  although  this  varies  within  certain
limits  with  the  degree  of  undercooling.  When  the  undercooling  is
slight  (less  than  15°)  the  velocity  is  less,  partly  on  account  of  the
impurities  always  present,  and  which  are  very  noticeable  with  slight
undercooling,  partly  because  the  number  of  nuclei  for  crystallisation
is  too  small ;  this  makes  the  velocity  very  small  if  the  undercooling
is  very  slight,  and  causes  it  at  first  to  increase  proportionally  to  the
undercooling  before  it  reaches  the  maximum.  When  the  under-

1  Friedlarider  and G.  Tammann,  Zeits.  phi/s. Chem., 24.  152  (1897)  ;  Tammann,
ibid.,  25.  441  ;  26.  307  (1898)  ;  29.  51  (1899).

CHAP,  v  CHEMICAL  KINETICS  583

cooling  is  very  great,  the  heat  of  fusion  does  not  suffice  to  bring  the
boundary  of  the  solid  and  fused  substance  to  the  freezing-point ;  this
reduced  temperature  is  the  cause  of  the  decrease  in  the  velocity  of
crystallisation  on  great  undercooling.

It  was  of  importance  to  establish  the  fact  that  slight  impurities
influence  the  rate  of  crystallisation  very  largely ; l  this  phenomenon
may  be  used  to  decide  whether  a  liquid  mixture  which  solidifies  to  a
homogeneous  mass,  such  as  CaCl2  +  6HQ0  or  S03  +  H20,  is  a  compound
or  not.  In  the  first  case,  a  slight  addition  of  one  of  the  components
would  alter  the  velocity  of  crystallisation  very  little,  in  the  latter  case
very  much.  See  the  interesting  study  by  F.  A.  Lidbury,  ibid.,  39.
453  (1902).

The  Kinetic  Nature  of  Physical  and  Chemical  Equilibrium.

— In  concluding  this  description  of  the  progress  of  chemical  processes,
we  will  turn  back  again  to  describe  the  condition  of  equilibrium.

It  has  been  shown  repeatedly  that,  in  the  sense  of  the  kinetic  mole-
cular theory,  no  condition  of  equilibrium  between  substances  capable  of  mutual
reaction  can  be  regarded  as  a  static,  hit  rather  it  must  be  regarded  as  a  dynamic
equilibrium;  and  this  is  true  whether  the  action  is  physical  or  emphatic-
ally chemical,  and  also  whether  the  equilibrium  is  established  in  a
homogeneous  or  in  a  heterogeneous  system.  According  to  this  view,  it
is  not  assumed  that  the  material  transformation  has  entirely  ceased
in  the  state  of  equilibrium  ;  but  only  that  the  reaction  progresses  with
the  same  velocity  in  the  one  direction  as  in  the  other,  and  that  therefore
for  this  reason  in  summation  no  change  can  be  detected  in  the  system.

In  this  same  way  we  were  able  to  account  for  the  equilibrium —

(a)  Between  water  and  water  vapour  (p.  219).

(b)  Between  alcohol  and  acetic  acid  on  the  one  side,  and  ester  and
water  on  the  other  (p.  426).

(c)  Between  the  different  states  of  the  same  substance  existing  in
solution,  and  in  the  gaseous  state  (p.  481).

(d)  Between  the  different  parts  of  one  substance  distributed  between
two  solvents  (p.  485),  etc.

In  all  of  these  cases  the  state  of  equilibrium  was  defined  by  the
statement,  that  at  every  instant  the  amount  of  the  decomposition  in
the  sense  of  the  reaction  equation  in  one  direction  is  the  same  as  that
in  the  other  direction.

The  question  now  arises,  How  great  is  this  decomposition  in  each  par-
ticular case  ? — a  question  which,  so  far  as  known  to  the  writer,  has
previously  been  neither  asked  nor  answered.  It  is  evident,  in  any
event,  that  in  the  sense  of  the  theoretical  molecular  method  of  treatment,
this  question  is  fully  qualified  to  demand  a  hearing,  although  from  the
nature  of  the  case  it  may  elude  a  direct  experimental  decision.  It
certainly  would  be  very  interesting  to  know  how  much  ester  and  water

1  Bogojawlensky,  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  27.  585  (1898).

584  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  III

are  formed  in  unit  time  in  the  state  of  equilibrium  established  between
these  substances  on  the  one  hand,  and  how  much  alcohol  and  acetic
acid  on  the  other.  Of  course  the  same  quantity  of  ester  and  water  must
be  formed  that  is  decomposed  in  the  same  time  into  alcohol  and  water.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  answer  to  this  question  is  possible  in  all
cases  where  we  can  measure  the  reaction  velocity  of  a  reaction  which
does  not  advance  to  a  completion,  e.g.  it  is  possible  in  all  of  the  cases
enumerated  above.

Thus,  again,  let  us  denote  by  k  and  k'  (p.  568)  the  coefficients  re-
spectively corresponding  to  the  partial  reaction  velocities  in  the  two
opposite  directions  of  the  reaction  equation.  Then  the  measurement
of  the  actual  velocity  gives  the  difference

k-k',
and  the  measurement  of  the  condition  of  equilibrium  gives  the  quotient

k"

from  which  both  k  and  k'  can  be  calculated,  and  also  the  opposite
[counterbalanced]  decomposition  in  the  state  of  equilibrium.

From  the  velocity  of  esterification,  which  was  experimentally
measured  for  equivalent  quantities  of  alcohol  and  acid,  we  found  that
the  difference  between  the  coefficients  amounted  to

_, 31. 2-x
k  -  k  =  -  -  In

4t 2-3x'

and,  since  the  undecomposed  quantity  x  was  estimated  in  equivalents,
and  the  time  t  in  days,  this  becomes

|(k-k')  =  0-00575.

o

Also,  according  to  p.  448,
from  which,  by  calculation,

=  0-00575.

Now  since  in  equilibrium,  J  equivalent  of  alcohol  and  of  acid  are  present,
therefore  it  follows  that  the  velocity  (previously  called  "partial")  of
the  change  in  the  state  of  equilibrium  is

CHAP,  v  CHEMICAL  KINETICS  585

Therefore  in  the  system,  as  it  exists  in  equilibrium,  and  consisting  of

J  g.-mol.  alcohol  +  J  g.-mol.  acetic  acid  +  J  g.-mol.  ester  +
§  g.-mol.  water

in  the  course  of  a  day,  0*00064  g.-mol.  of  alcohol  and  acetic  acid  are
transformed  ;  and  of  course  the  same  quantity  [of  ester  and  water]  in
the  same  time  is  retransformed.  From  the  smallness  of  this  number
it  is  obvious  that  we  are  not  to  conceive  of  the  mutual  exchange  as
always  being  a  very  "stormy"  one.  Of  course  with  increasing  tem-
perature (the  preceding  values  refer  to  the  temperature  of  a  dwelling-
room),  the  velocity  of  exchange  will  increase  in  the  same  proportion
as  the  value,  k  —  k',  i.e.  very  rapidly.  The  greater  this  decomposition
in  equilibrium  is,  the  more  quickly  will  the  system  strive  to  adjust
itself  to  the  new  condition  of  equilibrium,  when  the  old  one  is  displaced
from  some  change  'in  the  concentration  or  the  like.  We  may  there-
fore suitably  designate  its  reciprocal  value  as  the  retardation  (Dampfung)
of  the  system.

Moreover,  particular  attention  should  be  called  to  this,  viz.  that
we  must  regard  the  law  of  mass-action  as  an  empirical  law  which  is
certainly  proved,  and  therefore  one  which  is  independent  of  every
theoretical  molecular  speculation.  If  the  latter  should  at  some  future
time  come  to  be  regarded  as  unsatisfactory,  and  especially  if  the  kinetic
conception  of  physical  and  chemical  equilibrium  should  have  to  be
relinquished  as  unreliable,1  nevertheless  the  laws  developed  in  this
book  regarding  the  decomposition  of  matter  would  remain  com-
pletely undisturbed  ;  and  in  addition,  it  would  be  the  duty  of  every
new  theory  to  give  an  account  in  its  own  way  regarding  the  empirical
facts  of  chemical  mass-action.

How  far  the  law  of  mass-action  can  be  proved  in  a  thermodynamic
way,  entirely  independently  of  every  molecular  hypothesis,  will  be
discussed  in  the  last  book.

1  This  is  all  the  less  likely  since  chemical  kinetics  has  brought forward  a  most
striking  confirmation  of  the  kinetic  hypothesis.

BOOK IV

THE TRANSFORMATIONS OF ENERGY
(THE DOCTRINE OF AFFINITY, II)

CHAPTER I

THERMO-CHEMISTRY I
THE APPLICATIONS OF THE FIRST LAW OF HEAT

General  Remarks. — In  the  preceding  books  we  have  considered
the  transformations  of  matter,  in  their  dependence  upon  the  relative
quantities  of  the  substances  which  mutually  react  upon  each  other.
Inasmuch  as  we  invariably  considered  the  displacement  of  the  equi-
librium and  the  progress  of  the  reaction  as  taking  place  isothermally,
and  as  variations  in  temperature  were  thus  excluded,  disregarding  the
introduction  of  electrical  energy  and  the  action  of  light,  we  conceived
the  chemical  changes  as  being  purely  material,  without  reference  to
their  associated  changes  of  energy.

Now  both  the  state  of  equilibrium  and  the  reaction  velocity  are
dependent  upon  a  number  of  other  factors  besides  the  relative  quan-
tities [of  the  reacting  substances] ;  the  action  of  these  factors  collec-
tively may  be  regarded  as  being  associated  with  the  introduction  of
energy  into,  or  the  abstraction  of  energy  from,  the  system  considered.
These  factors  are  especially  temperature,  pressure,  electrification,  and
illumination.

And,  conversely,  a  chemical  change  is  on  its  part  invariably  accom-
panied by  changes  of  energy,  which  are  exhibited  by  a  change  in  one  or
more  of  the  factors  just  enumerated.

On  the  one  hand,  the  action  of  the  pressure  and  of  the  tempera-
ture upon  chemical  reaction  is  by  far  the  most  important  and  far-
reaching  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  development  of  heat,  and  the
performance  of  external  work  by  chemical  processes,  are  equally  im-
portant.

586

CHAP.  I  THE  APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  FIKST  LAW  OF  HEAT  587

The  description  of  these  later  relations  constitute  the  subject  of
thermo- chemistry,  to  which  the  first  five  chapters  of  this  book  are
devoted.  In  the  last  two  chapters  there  will  be  presented  the  funda-
mentals of  electro-chemistry  and  of  photo-chemistry  respectively.

Heat  of  Reaction. — As  was  stated  in  the  introduction,  p.  7,  in
all  processes  which  occur  in  nature,  we  can  discriminate  the  following
changes  of  energy,  viz.  : —

1.  The  giving  off,  or  the  taking  on,  of  heat.

2.  The  performance  of  external  work.

3.  The  variation  of  the  internal  energy.

Let  us  consider  a  chemical  system,  and  that  a  simple  one ;  and
after  it  has  experienced  some  change  in  its  substance,  let  it  return
again  to  its  original  temperature,  which  it  had  before  it  had  begun  to
change.  Then,  according  to  the  law  of  the  conservation  of  energy  [JW  =  A,
and  U  —  A  -  Q],  the  heat  Q  developed  in  the  change,  increased  by  the
external  work  A,  performed  by  the  system,  is  equal  to  the  diminution
[U]  of  the  system's  internal  energy.

Now  the  heat  developed  by  a  reaction  can  be  easily  measured,  by
immersing  the  flask  containing  the  reaction  mixture  in  the  water  of
a  calorimeter,  and  then  conducting  the  reaction  in  a  suitable  way.
The  amount  of  the  heating  of  the  water  in  the  calorimeter,  together
with  "  the  water  value "  of  the  calorimeter  itself,  corresponds  to  the
heat  developed  by  the  reaction.  The  amount  of  work  which  is
associated  with  the  reaction  consists  almost  always  in  overcoming  the
atmospheric  pressure.  This  work  performed,  therefore,  can  be  esti-
mated in  litre  atmospheres,  from  the  change  in  volume  associated  with
the  reaction  as  given  in  litres  ;  and  this  by  multiplication  by  24'25
can  be  reduced  to  g.-cal.  (p.  12).

The  sum:  of  the  heat  produced  in  the  reaction,  and  of  the  external  work
performed,  loth  of  these  quantities  being  expressed  in  g.-cal.  (p.  12),  we
will  call  the  heat  of  reaction  in  question :  of  course  this  can  be  either
positive  or  negative  (a),  according  as  heat  is  either  produced  or  absorbed  by
the  reaction;  and  (b),  according  as  external  work  is  performed  either
against  the  external  pressure,  or  by  the  external  pressure  upon  the  system.
This  heat  of  reaction  represents  the  change  of  the  total  energy  [U]  of  the
system.

Of  course,  other  things  being  equal,  the  heat  developed  and
the  work  performed  are  proportional  to  the  quantity  of  the
substance  which  is  changed.  Wherever  nothing  is  stated  to  the
contrary,  the  heat  of  reaction  will  always  refer  to  the  change  of  1  g.
equivalent.

Thus,  e.g.,  it  is  observed  that  in  the  solution  of  1  g.-atom  of  Zn
( =  65*4  g.)  in  dilute  H2S04,  at  20°,  there  are  developed  34,200  g.-cal.
At  the  same  time  1  g.-mol.  of  H  ( =  2  g.)  is  set  free,  whereby  a  certain
amount  of  work  is  performed  against  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere.

588  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  IV

Now  since  1  g.-mol.  of  any  gas  at  Oc  occupies  22 '42  litres,  therefore
at  the  absolute  temperature  T  it  occupies

T

22 -42  —  litres  (p.  40),

and  therefore  the  external  work  performed  by  the  systern^amounts
to

22-42^  -  0-0821  T  litre  atm. ;

and  since  1  litre  atm.  is  equal  to  24'25  g.-cal.,  it  amounts  to  1'99  T,
or  in  round  numbers  to  2  T  g.-cal. ;  therefore  in  the  solution  of  Zn,
the  work  of

2(273 +  20*)  =  586  g.-cal.

will  be  performed  against  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere,

Thus  the  heat  of  reaction,  or  the  difference  between  the  values
of  the  internal  energy  possessed  by  the  system  before  and  after  the
solution  of  the  Zn,  amounts  to

34,200  +  586  =  34,786  g.-cal.

Thus  it  is  obvious  in  this  example  (where  a  gas  is  developed,  and
where  the  change  of  the  volume  of  the  system,  as  a  result  of  the
reaction,  is  very  considerable)  that  the  external  work  performed  only
plays  the  role  of  a  correction  value :  and  moreover  in  all  cases,  where  the
reacting  and  resulting  substances  are  collectively  solid  or  liquid,  the
change  of  volume  is  of  a  much  smaller  order  of  value,  so  that  in  these
latter  cases  all  the  changes  of  volume  can  be  disregarded,  being
infinitesimal  in  comparison  with  the  unavoidable  errors  of  observation.

In  the  case  of  the  combustion  of  hydrogen  and  oxygen  to  form
liquid  water,  for  every  g.  of  H  there  results  68,400  cal.  Now  in  this
process  there  disappears  1  '5  g.-mol.  of  the  gases  ;  and  thus  the  atmo-
spheric pressure,  at  the  same  time,  performs  the  work  of

586  x  1-5  =  880  cal.,

so  that  the  change  in  the  total  energy  amounts  to
68,400-880  =  67,520.

The  Thermo -chemical  Method  of  Notation.— When  a  re-
action occurs,  according  to  the  general  scheme,

n1A1  +  n2A2  + .  .  .  =  n/A/  +  n2'A2'  + . . .,

then  there  will  be  associated  with  it  a  certain  heat  of  reaction, and
*  20  =  20°,  the  average  temperature  of  a  room. — TR.

CHAP.  I  THE  APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  FIRST  LAW  OF  HEAT  589

this  will  amount  to  U  when  nx  g.-mol.  of  the  substance  Al  unites  with
n2  g.-mol.  of  the  substance  A2,  etc.  Then,  according  to  the  law  of  the
conservation  of  energy  [First  Law],  this  will  amount  to  -  U  when  n1/
g.-mol.  of  the  substance  A^  unites  with  n2'  g.-mol.  of  the  substance  A/.
The  value  of  U  corresponds  to  the  energy-difference  between  the  two
systems,

n^  +  n2A2  + . . ., and  n1'A1/  -f  n2'(A2')  + . . .

The  content  of  energy  of  a  chemical  system  is  equal  to  the  sum
of  the  contents  of  energy  of  the  particular  components.  If  we  denote
the  content  of  energy  of  1  g.-mol.  of  a  substance  A  by  the  symbol

(A),

then  the  content  of  energy  of  n-mol.  of  the  substance  A  will  be
represented  by

n(A).

The  contents  of  energy  of  the  two  systems  considered  above  will  be
denoted  by  the  symbols

n1(A1)  +  n2(A2)  + . . ., and  n^A/)  +  n2'(A2')  + . . . ;
and

U  =  n^Aj)  +  n2(A2)  + .  .  .  -  n^A/)  -  n2'(A2')

will  denote  the  amount  of  the  heat  of  reaction  taking  place  between
them,  because  U  corresponds  to  the  difference  between  the  contents  of
energy  of  the  two  systems,

When  U  is  positive,  i.e.  when  the  progress  of  the  reaction,  in  the
sense  of  the  equation  from  left  to  right,  is  associated  with  a  develop-
ment of  heat,  then  the  reaction  is  called  "exothermic."  The  opposite
reaction,  therefore,  is  associated  with  the  absorption  of  heat,  and  is
called  "  endothermic."

Thus,  e.g.,  the  symbolic  equation

(S)  +  (02)-(S02)  =  71,080

denotes  the  union  of  32  g.  of  S  with  32  g.  of  0,  and  corresponds  to
the  development  of  71,080  g.-cal.,  and  the  formation  of  sulphur
dioxide  from  the  respective  elements  is  an  exothermic  reaction.

As  a  rule  the  heat  of  reaction  refers  to  the  measurement  of
substances  which  react  in  dilute  water  solution.  The  energy  content
of  a  substance  A,  which  is  dissolved  in  a  large  quantity  of  water,  is
denoted  by  the  symbol

(A  aq.),

(aq.  =  aqua  or  water),  and  therefore  the  quantity  of  heat  which  is
developed  by  the  solution  of  1  g.-mol.  of  a  substance  A,  in  a  large

590  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  iv

quantity  of  water,  the  so-called  "  molecular  heat  of  solution,'1  corresponds
to  the  expression

U  =  (A)-(Aaq.).

Thus,  e.g.,  the  meaning  of  the  thermo-chemical  equation,
(HC1  aq.)  4-  (NaOH  aq.)  -  (NaCl  aq.)  =  13,700,

is,  that  by  neutralising  1  equivalent  of  HC1  by  1  equivalent  of  NaOH
in  dilute  solution,  there  are  developed  13,700  g.-cal.,  the  so-called
"  heat  of  neutralisation."

It  is  usually  the  custom  to  abbreviate  the  preceding  method  of
notation  in  those  cases  where  the  resulting  condition  of  the  system,
after  the  end  of  the  reaction,  can  be  seen  directly  from  a  description
of  the  original  condition.  In  such  a  case,  the  difference  between  the
energies  contained  by  the  system  in  its  original  and  in  its  final  con-
dition is  denoted  by  enclosing  the  formulae  of  the  reacting  substances
in  a  common  parenthesis,  the  formulae  being  separated  by  commas.
Thus,  e.g.,  instead  of

(S)  +  (02)-(S02)  =  71,080,
we  write  the  shorter  form

(S,  02)  =  71,080;
and  instead  of

(HC1  aq.)  +  (NaOH  aq.)  -  (NaCl  aq.)  =  13,700,

the  shorter  form

(HC1  aq.,  NaOH  aq.)  =  13,700  ;

and  similarly  in  other  cases. Then,  of  course,  e.g.,  the  formula
-  (HC1  aq.,  NaOH  aq.)

will  denote the quantity of  heat  which  will  be  absorbed by the
decomposition  of  a  water  solution  of  NaCl  to  a  water  solution  of  NaOH
and  of  HC],  viz.  13,700  cal.
Similarly  the  notation

(A)  +  (B)-(AB)  =  U,
is,  of  course,  identical  with

(A)  +  (B)  =  (AB)  +  U,

because  the  thermo-chemical  equations  denote  simply  the  summations
of  energy  magnitudes,  and  accordingly  we  may  apply  the  ordinary
algebraic  transformations  to  them.  Thus,  e.g.,  if,  from  the  preceding
equation,  we  substract  the  following  one,  viz.

(A)  +  (C)  =  (AC)  +  U,

CHAP.  I  THE  APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  FIRST  LAW  OF  HEAT  591

\ve  obtain  as  an  immediate  result  from  the  two  preceding  formulae,
the  equation

(B)  +  (AC)  =  (AB)  +  (C)  +  U  -  IT ;

from  this  latter  equation  we  deduce  the  result  that  the  substitution  of
B  in  the  place  of  C,  in  the  compound  AC,  corresponds  to  a  heat  of
reaction  of  U  —  U'.

We  do  not  know  the  value  of  (A)  itself,  ie.  the  absolute  content
of  energy  of  1  g.-mol.  of  a  substance,  although  sometimes  the  kinetic
theory  of  gases  leads  to  a  (hypothetical)  conception  of  its  magnitude.
Thus,  according  to  the  accepted  views  in  the  light  of  this  theory,  the
energy  content  of  monatomic  mercury  vapour  consists  solely  in  the
translatory  energy  of  its  atoms ;  and  this,  at  the  temperature  T
(p.  204),  in  "absolute  units"  amounts  to

^»'  =  183,900^.

But  the  knowledge  of  the  total  energy  content  of  a  substance  is,  for
practical  purposes,  entirely  without  significance,  because  we  deal
only  with  the  energy  differences  of  various  systems,  a  knowledge  of
which  is  furnished  by  thermo-chemical  measurements.

Finally,  it  should  be  noted  that,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  the  atoms
instead  of  the  molecules  are  denoted  in  the  thermo-chemical  formulae.
Thus,  e.g.,  the  equation

(H2,  0)  =  67,520

does  not  denote  the  heat  of  reaction  consequent  upon  the  union  of
atomic  oxygen,  something  which  is  entirely  unknown  to  us,  but  only
the  union  of  1  g.-atom  (16  g.)  of  ordinary  oxygen  with  [the  requisite
quantity  of]  hydrogen.  Strictly  speaking,  it  would  be  more  correct
to  write

(2H2,  02)  =  2x67,520,

but  error  is  certainly  guarded  against  in  such  and  all  similar  cases.

The  Law  of  Constant  Heat  Summation. — If  we  allow  a  system
to  experience  various  chemical  changes,  so  that  it  finally  returns  to
its  original  condition,  then  the  sum  of  the  heat  of  reaction  associated
with  these  processes  is  equal  to  zero ;  for  otherwise  it  would  mean
a  loss  or  a  gain  of  the  total  energy,  which  would  contradict  the  first
law  of  thermodynamics.  If  we  bring  the  system  to  the  same  final
condition  by  means  of  two  different  ways,  then  the  heat  of  reaction
must  be  the  same  for  both  methods,  i.e.—

The  energy  differences  between  two  identical  conditions  of  the  system
must  be  the  same,  independently  of  the  way  by  which  the  system  is  trans-
ferred from  one  condition  to  the  other.

It  is  particularly  worthy  of  notice  that  this theorem,  which  of

592  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  IV

course  holds  good,  not  only  for  all  chemical  processes,  but  also  as  a
general  proposition,  was  clearly  stated  by  Hess1  as  "the  law  of  constant
heat  summation"  and  moreover  also  experimentally  proven  by  him  as
early  as  1840;  and  this  was  before  "the  law  of  the  conservation  of
energy"  had  emerged  from  the  realm  of  hazy  anticipation,  over  the
threshold  and  into  the  consciousness  of  the  scientific  world.

The  following  example  will  serve  to  explain  the  meaning  of  "  the
law  of  constant  heat  summation"

We  will  consider  a  system,  consisting  of  1  g.-mol.  of  ammonia
(NH3),  1  g.-mol.  of  hydrochloric  acid  (HC1),  and  a  large  quantity  of
water  in  the  two  following  conditions,  viz.  : —

1.  Where  the  three  substances  exist  separate  from  each  other.

2.  Where  the  three  substances  form  a  homogeneous  solution  of
ammonium  chloride  in  a  larger  quantity  of  water.

AVe  can  cause  the  system  to  pass  from  the  first  to  the  second
condition  in  two  different  ways  :  thus,  on  the  one  hand,  the  two  gases
[HC1  and  NHJ  can  unite  to  form  solid  ammonium  chloride,  and  then
this  can  be  dissolved  in  water ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  the  two  gases
can  be  separately  absorbed  by  water,  and  then  the  resulting  solutions
can  be  caused  to  neutralise  each  other.  The  respective  heats  of  reaction
result  as  follows  : —

The  First  Way.  The  Second  Way.

(NH3,  HC1)=  +42100  cal.  (NH3,  aq.)=  + 8400  cal.

(NH4C1,  an.)=  - 3900 „  (HC1,  aq.)=  +  17300 ,,

(NH3,aq.,'HClaq.)  =  +12300 ,,

(NH3,  HC1,  aq.)  =  +38200  cal.  (NH3,  HC1,  aq.)  =  +38000  cal.

Now,  in  fact,  the  energy  difference  between  the  initial  and  the
final  states  of  the  system  amounted  to  the  same  in  both  cases,  i.e.
within  the  limits  of  error.

The  theorem  of  "  the  constancy  of  the  heat  summation  "  is  very
important,  and  has  a  many-sided  application  in  practical  thermo-
chemistry. Only  very  few  reactions  are  suited  for  a  direct  investi-
gation in  the  calorimeter,  because  it  is  absolutely  necessary  for
exactness  of  measurement —

(a)  That  the  reaction  shall  be  such  as  can  be  easily  effected.

(//)  That  it  shall  take  place  quickly,  in  order  to  avoid  a  large  loss
of  heat  from  radiation.

(c)  That  the  reaction  shall  be  free  from  side  reactions,  which  can-
not usually  be  taken  into  consideration.

But  even  in  those  cases,  where  the  conditions  of  [readiness],
quickness,  completeness,  and  simplicity  of  reaction  are  not  well
fulfilled,  it  is  usually  possible  to  accomplish  the  purpose  by  certain
circuitous  ways ;  thus,  by  the  assistance  of  certain  suitable  inter-

1  Ostwald's  Klassiker,  No.  9.

CHAP.  I  THE  APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  FIRST  LAW  OF  HEAT  593

mediate  substances,  the  system  can  be  transferred  from  the  one
condition  to  the  other,  the  energy-difference  between  which  is  to  be
measured.  Thus  it  is  not  possible  to  determine  directly  the  energy-
difference  between  charcoal  and  diamond,  because  the  transformation
of  one  modification  into  the  other  has  not  been  accomplished.  But  if
we  can  change  charcoal  and  diamond  into  the  same  compound  by
means  of  an  intermediate  substance,  then  the  difference  between  these
two  quantities  of  heat  gives  the  heat  value  for  the  conversion  of  one
modification  into  the  other.

Such  an  intermediate  substance,  and  one  which  is  very  commonly
used,  is  oxygen.  Thus,  e.g.,  the  different  modifications  of  carbon  when
burnt  in  "the  calorimetric  bomb"  (see  below),  gave  the  following
results : —

Diff.
Amorphous  carbon  .  .  . 97650

2840
Graphite  .  .  .  .94810

500
Diamond  .  . 94310

This  table  means  that  2840  cal.  would  be  developed  by  the
conversion  of  12  g.  of  charcoal  into  graphite;  and  500  cal.  by  the
conversion  of  12  g.  of  graphite  into  diamond ;  [and  therefore  3340  cal.
by  the  conversion  of  12  g.  of  charcoal  into  diamond].

In  a  similar  way,  the  "  heats  of  formation  "  of  organic  compounds
can  be  ascertained  from  the  respective  heat  values  of  their  combustion
in  oxygen.  By  this  process  the  compound,  whose  "  heat  of  formation  "
is  unknown,  is  changed  into  compounds  (C0.7,  H,0,  etc.),  the  heats  of
formation  of  which  are  known.

Thus  the  energy-difference  between  (H2,  I2)  and  2(HI)  is  not
obtainable  by  a  direct  measurement,  because  hydrogen  and  iodine
unite  with  each  other  only  very  slowly.  But  suppose —

(a)  That  we  dissolve  the  hydriodic  acid  in  water.

(b)  That  we  neutralise  it  with  potassium  hydroxide.

(c)  That  we  set  the  iodine  free  by  means  of  chlorine.

(d)  That  we  decompose  the  potassium  chloride  which  is  formed  into
potassium  hydroxide  and  hydrochloric  acid.

(e)  That  we  decompose  the  hydrochloric  acid  which  is  formed  again
into  chlorine  and  hydrogen.

Then  by  means  of  the  intermediate  substances  H2O,  KOH,  and
C1.2,  we  can  proceed  from  gaseous  hydriodic  acid  to  free  hydrogen  and
free  iodine  ;  and  we  can  do  it  by  means  of  reactions  which  progress
quickly  and  smoothly,  in  one  sense  or  in  the  other,  and  by  reactions
each  one  of  which  has  a  heat  of  reaction  capable  of  good  measure-
ment.

In  fact,  the  heat  of  formation  of  gaseous  hydriodic  acid  [from  the
respective  elements]  has  been  determined  in  this  way.

2Q

594  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

The  Influence  of  Temperature  upon  the  Heat  of  Reaction.  —

If  we  allow  the  same  reaction  to  occur,  once  at  the  temperature  t1  and
again  at  the  temperature  t2,  then  the  heat  of  reaction  will  be  different
in  the  two  cases  ;  let  them  amount  to  U^  and  U2  respectively.

Now  we  can  imagine  the  following  cyclic  process  to  be  carried  out.
Let  the  reaction  occur  at  the  temperature  tp  whereby  the  quantity  of
heat  U1  will  be  developed  ;  then  we  raise  the  temperature  of  the
system  to  t2,  whereby  there  is  required  the  introduction  of  (t9  -  tx)c'
g.-cal.  of  heat,  where  c'  denotes  the  heat  capacity  of  the  substances
resulting  from  the  reaction.

Now  let  the  reaction  occur  in  the  opposite  sense  at  t2  :  this  process
is  associated  with  the  quantity  of  heat  U9  ;  then  let  the  system  be
cooled  to  t1?  whereby  the  quantity  of  heat  (t2  -  tx)c  will  be  given  off,
where  c  denotes  the  heat  capacity  of  the  reacting  substances.  The
system  has  now  returned  to  its  original  condition.

Now  the  law  of  the  conservation  of  energy  requires  the  relation,  that
the  heat  absorbed  by  the  system  shall  be  the  same  as  that  given  out  ;
that  is,  that

U2  +  (t2  -  t^c'  =  Ul  +  (t2  -  tjc,
and  hence

U2  -  U,

~~

that  is,  the  excess  of  the  heat  capacity  of  the  reacting  substances,  orer  the
heat  capacity  of  the  resulting  substances,  gives  the  increase  of  the  heat  of
reaction  per  degree  of  temperature  elevation.

Now  the  specific  heats  of  the  substances  taking  part  in  the  reaction
equation  are  obtainable  by  direct  measurement  ;  therefore  the  tempera-
ture coefficient  of  the  heat  of  reaction  can  be  determined  much  more
exactly  in  this  indirect  way  than  is  possible  by  a  direct  measurement
of  the  heat  of  reaction  at  two  different  temperatures.  The  preceding
equation,  moreover,  follows  directly  from  the  application  of  the  universal
theorem  developed  on  p.  9.

On  p.  176  we  derived  the  proposition  that  the  specific  heats  of
solid  compounds  constitute  an  additive  property  ;  or,  in  other  words,  in
the  union  of  solid  substances  to  form  solid  compounds  the  heat
capacities  remain  unchanged.  Then,  according  to  what  has  preceded,
this  law  can  be  extended  thus  :  —

The  heat  of  combination  of  solid  substances  is  independent  of  the
temperature.

The  application  of  the  calculation  to  special  cases  shows  that  the
temperature  coefficient  of  such  substances  as  iodine  and  silver,  in  any
case,  must  be  smaller  than  O'OOOl.

Of  course  in  every  case,  in  thermo-chemical  statements,  reference  must
be  made  to  the  temperature  at  which  the  measurements  are  conducted.

Thermo-Chemical  Methods.  —  In  general,  the thermo-chemical

CHAP.  I  THE  APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  FIRST  LAW  OF  HEAT  595

methods  are  those  of  calorimetry,  the  fundamentals  of  which  will  be
found  described  in  every  text-book  of  physics.  The  water-calorimeter
is  used  altogether  most  frequently ;  although  sometimes,  in  recent  work,
use  has  been  made  of  Bunsen's  ice-calorimeter,  especially  when  the
measurements  concern  very  small  quantities  of  heat.  The  values
obtained  by  means  of  this  last  apparatus  of  course  hold  good  for  0°,
and  therefore  they  are  not  directly  comparable  with  those  obtained  by
means  of  the  water-calorimeter,  which  usually  refer  .to  a  temperature
somewhere  near  18°.  In  the  comparison  of  different  observations,
notice  should  be  given  to  the  remarks  concerning  the  unit  of  energy
on  p.  11.

Here,  as  in  all  cases,  we  assume  the  calorie  referred  to  water  at  18°
as  unit.

Now  since,  in  the  case  of  those  chemical  reactions  which  occur  very
quickly,  it  takes  a  certain  amount  of  time  before  the  reaction-heat
becomes  uniformly  distributed  through  the  calorimeter,  therefore  a
correction  must  be  made  for  the  heat  absorbed,  or  that  given  off  by
radiation  during  the  reaction.  As  is  well  known,  this  correction  is
obtained  in  this  way :  the  course  of  the  thermometer  is  observed
from  some  time  before  the  beginning  of  the  particular  experiment
till  some  time  after  its  close.1  This  correction  involves  the  most
dangerous  sources  of  error  in  thermo -chemical  measurements,  and
therefore  the  conditions  for  the  investigation  must  be  so  arranged
that  the  amount  of  this  correction  shall  be  as  small  as  possible.  This
end  will  be  obtained  by  paying  attention  to  the  following  con-
ditions : —

1.  The  reaction,  the  heat  of  which  is  to  be  determined,  must  take
place  as  quickly  as  possible.

2.  The  heat  capacity  of  the  calorimeter  must  be  as  great  as  possible,
and  thus  the  change  of  the  temperature  of  the  calorimeter,  resulting
from  the  heat  developed  by  the  reaction,  will  be  made  as  small  as
possible.

The  second  condition  requires  the  use  of  a  sensitive  thermometer
in  order  to  determine  the  changes  of  temperature  very  accurately,  e.g.
within  y^Vo-th  Part  °f  ^ts  amount.  The  thermometer  described  on
p.  258,  and  recommended  by  Beckmann,  is  very  well  suited  for  this
purpose ;  this  thermometer  shows  differences  of  y-oVo^h  °f  a  degree  of
elevation  of  temperature,  and  therefore  it  allows  an  exact  measurement
within  this  limit

The  accompanying  cut  (Fig.  31)  shows  a  model  of  a  calorimeter
which  can  be  constructed  out  of  simple  material,  as  recommended  by
Ostwald.  The  writer  can  recommend  it  from  experience.2

A  narrow  beaker  glass,  which  is  cut  down  somewhat  at  the  upper

1  For  more  particulars  see  the  handbooks  of  physics,  or,  e.g.,  Ostwald,  Allg.  Chem.,
•2nd  edit.,  p.  572  (1891).

2  Zeit.  phys.  Chem.,  2.  23  (1888).

596

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  IV

end,  rests  on cork  supports  fastened  with  shellac  in  a  second  larger
beaker. This  is  provided with  a  wood cover, which  rests  on  the

outer  beaker.  Through  this  cover  there
pass  a  Beckmann  thermometer,  a  thin
test-tube  in  which  the  reaction  is  to  -be
effected,  and  a  stirring  apparatus  made
of  brass  or  better  of  platinum,  and  pro-
vided with* a  handle  of  some  non-con-
ducting material  (as  hard  gum,  wood
[cork],  or  the  like).

If  it  is  desired  to  measure  heats
of  dilution  or  solution,  the  substance
in  question  is  placed  in  the  test-tube ;
then  after  the  temperature  equilibrium
is  established,  the  bottom  of  the  test-
tube  is  punctured  with  a  glass  rod.

An  advantage  of  this  apparatus  is  its
transparency.  Again,  if  the  capacity  of
the  inner  beaker  is  about  a  litre,  then
the  ':  water  value "  of  the  glass,  the
stirrer,  the  thermometer,  and  all,
amounts  to  only  a  few  per  cent  of  the
total  heat  capacity.

With  slight  changes,  this  so-called
"  universal "  calorimeter  may  be  em-
ployed also  for  the  measurement  of
specific  heats,  of  heats  of  fusion,  etc.
If  one  operates  with  salt  solutions,  it  is
important  to  notice  the  rule  regarding
the  heat  capacity  given  on  p.  106.

Steinwehr  has  described  an  apparatus  l  for  studying  the  thermo-
chemistry of  dilute  solutions  capable  of  measuring  very  small
quantities  of  heat.

Kegarding  the  determination  of  the  heat  of  combustion,  we  will  say
something  more  later.  A  method  for  the  theoretical  calculation  of
the  reaction-heat  from  the  change  of  chemical  equilibrium  will  be
considered  in  the  second  and  third  chapters  of  this  book.

As  a  matter  of  history,  it  should  be  noticed  that  besides  Hess,
Andrews,  Graham,  Marignac,  Favre,  Silbermann,  and  others,  J.
Thomsen  in  Copenhagen  since  1853,  and  Berthelot  in  Paris  since
1865,  especially  have  subjected  the  most  various  reactions  to  a
thorough  and  systematic  chemical  examination.2

1  Zeits.phys.  Uiem.,  36.  185  (1901).

>2  Thomsen  has  collected  his  measurements  in  the  work  entitled  Thermo-chemisclie
Untersuchungen,  Leipzig,  1882-86  ;  and  Berthelot  has  collected  his  in  his  Esso.i  de
m&anique  chimique,  Paris  (1879).  See  also  Naumann,  Therm ocft em ie,  Braunschweig

CHAP. I

THE  APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  FIRST  LAW  OF  HEAT  597

Gases  and  Solutions. — The  internal  energy  of  gases,  as  already
shown  (p.  42),  does  not  change  with  their  volume ;  and  therefore  the
heats  of  reaction  are  independent  of  the  density  of  the  reacting  gases.
Also  the  intermingling  of  gases  is  without  influence  [on  the  heat  of
reaction].  Of  course  these  laws  hold  good  only  when  no  external
work  is  performed,  such  as  forcing  back  the  atmospheric  pressure.
When  this  happens,  then  the  reaction-heat  is  diminished  by  an  amount
which  is  equal  to  the  work  performed  against  the  atmospheric
pressure  (p.  587).  In  the  case  of  strongly  compressed  gases  which  are
cooled  by  simple  expansion  (without  the  performance  of  external
work),  the  preceding  laws  no  longer  hold  strictly  true.

A  complete  analogy  is  found  in  the  conduct  of  dilute  solutions.
Since  the  energy  of  dissolved  substances  is  independent  of  the  concen-
tration (p.  148),  therefore  the  latter  has  no  influence  on  the  reaction-
heat  of  a  dissolved  substance.  The  energy  of  "  (A  aq.)  "  is  independent
of  the  dilution  of  the  solution,  and  herein  consists  the  correctness  of
the  introduction  of  this  symbol  (p.  589).

Thus,  e.g.,  if  one  determines  the  heat  of  solution  of  a  substance  in  a
large  quantity  of  water,  this  heat  of  solution  itself  is  independent  of
the  quantity  of  water  used.

If  one  determines  the  heat  of  combination  of  a  metal  with  an  acid,
this  heat  is  independent  of  the  concentration  of  the  acid  when  the
latter  is  dissolved  in  a  large  quantity  of  water,  etc.

But  this  rule  ceases  to  hold  good  for  concentrated  solutions  when
these  exhibit  marked  heat  phenomena  on  dilution.  Thus,  e.g.,  the  heat
of  solution  of  zinc  in  concentrated  sulphuric  acid  is  very  different  from
that  in  the  dilute  acid.

The  heat  of  dilution  has  already  been  discussed  (p.  114).  We  will
only  recall  here  that  the  following  equation,  viz.—

(H2S04  +  3H20)  +  2(H20)  -  (H2S04  +  5H,0)  =  1970,

which  states  that  by  the  addition  of  two  more  mol.  of  H90  to  a  solu-
tion having  the  composition  (H2S04  +  3  H20),  there  will  be  produced
1970  g.-cal.  Moreover,  the  heat  of  dilution  may  be  positive,  as  in  the
case  of  sulphuric  acid ;  or  negative,  as  in  the  case  of  saltpetre.

The  Changes  of  the  State  of  Aggregation. — When  a  sub-
stance changes  its  state  of  aggregation,  whether  the  change  consists  in
evaporation  [condensation],  solidification  [fusion],  sublimation,  or  finally

(Brunswick),  1882  ;  and  H.  Jahn,  Thermochemie,  Wien  (Vienna),  1892.  Thermo-
chemical  data  collected  from  different  observers  will  be  found  in  the  Chemiker-
kalender.  The  figures  given  in  what  follows  are  largely  taken  from  the  critical  and
very  complete  collection  made  by  Ostwald,  Allg.  Chem.,  2  Ann.  (2nd  edit.),  II.  Leipzig,
1893.  [Mention  should  also  be  made  of  the  work  of  Stohmann  of  Leipzig,  Jour.
Prak.  Chem.  Probably  the  best  work  in  English  on  thermo-chemistry  is  Muir's
Elements  of  Thermal  Chem.  (1885).— TR.]  Berthelot  gives  a  new  collection  of  data  in
his  Thermochimie,  Paris.  1897.

598  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

in  a  change  from  one  [allotropic]  modification  to  another,  the  changes
are  always  associated  with  a  change  in  the  content  of  energy ;  and
therefore  the  reaction-heat  also  is  changed  to  the  same  amount.

This  is  especially  noticed  in  those  reactions  where  there  is  a  pre-
cipitate thrown  down  and  the  state  of  the  latter  must  be  considered.
Thus,  e.g.,  if  mercuric  iodide  is  precipitated  from  a  solution  of  mercuric
chloride  by  a  solution  of  potassium  iodide,  at  first  the  yellow  modifica-
tion comes  down ;  but  this  quickly  changes  to  the  red  variety,  with
the  necessary  accompaniment  of  a  considerable  heat  of  reaction.

The  natural  supposition  that  those  allotropic  changes,  which  occur
exother molly,  would  be  associated  with  an  increase  in  density — this  does
not  appear  to  be  established,  although  the  investigation  has  been
thorough.1

Thus,  e.g.,  the  energy-difference  between  water  at  1 00°,  and  water-
vapour  at  the  same  temperature,  is  expressed  by  the  equation

(H20)  -  (H20)  =  536-4  x  18  -  2  x  373  =  8910 ;
Liquid Gas

because  the  heat  vaporisation  of  1  g.  of  water  was  found  to  be  536'4,
and  the  external  work  performed  was  shown  to  be  2T  =  746.
The  energy-difference  between  ice  and  liquid  water  is

(H20)-(H20)  =  79x  18  =  1422,
Solid Liquid

because  79  cal.  are  set  free  in  the  freezing  of  1  g.  of  water.  On
account  of  the  slight  change  of  volume,  the  external  work  performed
here  has  only  a  minimal  value.

'  The  energy-difference  between  1  g.-atom  of  the  orthorhombic  and
the  monoclinic  modification  of  sulphur  amounts  to

(Sr)-(Sm)  =  32x2-52  -80-6.

Thus  in  all  cases  where  doubt  prevails,  the  thermo-chemical  results  can
afford  information  respecting  the  state  of  aggregation,  or  the  modification
respectively,  of  the  reacting  substances,  or  of  those  produced.

The  Heat  of  Solution. — By  the  "heat  of  solution"  is  meant,  as
already  stated,  the  quantity  of  heat  produced  by  the  solution  of  1  g.
of  a  substance  in  a  large  quantity  of  the  solvent.  If  the  heat
of  dilution  of  a  substance  is  known,  then  of  course  it  is  possible  to
calculate  the  quantity  of  heat  [of  solution]  when  dissolved  in  any
quantity  of  the  solvent,  however  great.  The  quantity  of  heat  observed
when  the  substance  is  dissolved  to  exact  saturation  is  always  more  or
less  different  from  the  heat  of  solution  as  defined  above  ;  and  sometimes
it  has  a  sign  opposite  from  that  of  the  heat  of  solution.

1  Petersen,  Zeits.  phyr.  Chem  ,  8.  601  (1891).

CHA1'.  I

THE  APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  FIRST  LAW  OF  HEAT

599

In  the  following  tables  are  given  l  the  heat  of  solution  of  some
substances  in  a  large  quantity  of  water  at  18-20° : —

HEAT  OF  SOLUTION  OF  GASEOUS  SUBSTANCES

Substance.

Formula.

Heat  of  Solution.

Chlorine . .

C12

+ 4870

Carbon  dioxide  ....

C02

+ 5880

Ammonia  .....

NH.?

+ 8430

Hydrofluoric  acid

HF

-1-11800

Hydrochloric  ,,

HC1

+  17310

Hydrobromic  .,

HBr

+  19940

Hydriodic ,  ,

HI

+  19210

HEAT  OF  SOLUTION  OF  LIQUID  SUBSTANCES

Substance.

Formula.

Heat  of  Solution.

Methyl  alcohol  ....
Ethyl ,,....
Propyl ,  , . . ,

CH40
C2H60
C3H80

+ 2000
+ 2540
+ 3050

Ethyl  ether ....
Acetic  Acid ....
Sulphuric  acid  ....

C4H100
C2H402
S04H2

+ 5940
+ 420
+  17850

HEAT  OF  SOLUTION  OF  SOLID  SUBSTANCES

Substance.

Formula.

Heat  of  Solution.

Potassium  hydroxide

KOH

+  12500

(cryst.

hydrate)

KOH  +  2H20

30

Lithium  chloride

LiCl

+ 8440

Sodium  chloride

' NaCl

- 1180

Potassium  chloride .

KC1

- 4440

Sodium  bromide

NaBr

190

,, ,, (hydrate).

NaBr  +  2H20

- 4710

Potassium  sulphate .

K2S04

- 6380

Mercuric  chloride

HgCl2

- 3300

Sodium  acetate  ....

NaC2H302

+ 4200

,, benzoate

NaC7H502

+ 800

Benzoic  acid ....

C6H5C02H

- 6700

Silver  chloride  ....

AgCl

-15800

,, bromide  ....

AgBr

-  20200

,, iodide ....

Agl

-  26600

Cane  sugar ....

C12H22On

800

1  From  Horstmann,  Theoret.  Chem.,  p.  502,  Braunschweig  (Brunswick),  1885.

600  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

The  figures  for  gases  include  the  external  work  :  therefore  in  order
to  obtain  the  heat  of  true  solution,  the  quantity  +580  must  be
subtracted  from  the  figures  given  above.

All  of  the  gases  thus  far  examined  dissolve  with  evolution  of  heat.
A  similar  thing  is  true  of  liquids,  at  least  as  a  rule ;  while  solid  sub-
stances sometimes  dissolve  with  a  development  of  heat,  but  more  often
with  absorption  of  heat.

The  explanation  of  this  is  simple.  If  one  starts  out  with  the
assumption  that  a  gaseous  substance  always  has  a  positive  solution-
heat,  then  in  the  liquid  state  it  will  dissolve  either  with  absorption  or
with  evolution  of  heat,  according  as  its  heat  of  vaporisation  exceeds  the
heat  of  solution,  or  not.  And  similarly,  the  signs  for  the  solution-heat
of  substances  in  the  solid  state  are  conditioned  by  the  difference  between
their  heat  of  sublimation  and  heat  of  solution  in  the  gaseous  state.

The  general  rules  for  the  solution-heat  of  the  different  states  of
aggregation  as  just  given  therefore  mean  that,  as  a  rule,  the  heat  of
solution  in  the  gaseous  state  is  greater  than  the  heat  of  vaporisation  ;
but  it  is  usually  smaller  than  the  heat  of  vaporisation  plus  the  heat  of
fusion,  i.e.  it  is  smaller  than  the  heat  of  sublimation.

In  general,  in  comparing  substances  which  are  chemically  analogous,  and
soluble  with  difficulty,  the  heat  of  precipitation  ( =  the  negative  value  of  the
heat  of  solution)  is  the  greater  the  moi~e  insoluble  the  substance  is.1

We  will  consider  later  a  method  for  the  determination  of  the  heat
of  solution  of  salts  which  are  soluble  with  difficulty.  The  difference
between  the  solution-heats  of  one  substance  in  two  solvents  would,  of
course,  allow  the  calculation  of  the  heat  phenomena  in  the  distribution
of  one  substance  between  two  solvents  (p.  485).

The  Heat  Of  Formation. — By  the  "heat  of  formation"  of  a  chemical
compound  is  meant  the  quantity  of  heat  which  is  given  off  in  the  formation
of  the  compound  from  its  respective  ingredients.

This  is  the  thermo-chemical  characteristic  of  the  compound  in  question.
If  one  knows  the  "  heats  of  formation  "  of  all  the  substances  which
participate  in  any  selected  chemical  reaction,  then  he  knows  also  the
heat  of  reaction.

Thus  we  can  first  imagine  the  particular  substances  standing  on
the  left  side  of  the  reaction  equation  to  be  decomposed  into  their
respective  elements ;  and  then  imagine  the  elements  to  unite  to  form
the  substances  standing  on  the  right  side  of  the  reaction  equation.
Then  in  the  first  of  these  [hypothetical]  stages  there  would  be
absorbed  a  quantity  of  heat  which  would  be  equal  to  the  sum  of  the
"heats  of  formation  "  of  all  the  substances  standing  on  the  left  side  of
the  equation  ;  and  in  the  second  [hypothetical]  stage  there  would  be
developed  a  quantity  of  heat  equal  to  the  "  heats  of  formation  "  of  all
the  substances  standing  on  the  right  side  of  the  equation.  It  is  a

1  Thomsen,  Jour,  prakt.  Chem.  [2],  13.  241  (1876).

CHAP. I

THE  APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  FIRST  LAW  OF  HEAT

601

matter  of  indifference  whether  the  chemical  process  actually  takes  place
in  this  way  or  not ;  because  the  change  of  total  energy  of  any  system
is  independent  of  the  way  in  which  the  change  is  accomplished.  We
thus  develop  the  proposition  that —

The  heat  of  reaction  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  heats  of  formation  of  the
substances  formed,  minus  the  sum  of  the  heats  of  formation  of  the  substances
used  up.

Here  will  be  given  some  "  heats  of  formation "  which  will  find
application  in  subsequent  calculations.  The  figures,  as  always,  refer
to  constant  volumes,  i.e.  they  are  corrected  for  the  external  work  per-
formed, whatever  it  may  be.  The  remarks  in  the  last  column  refer
to  the  condition  of  the  reacting  substances.

Reaction.

Heat  of  Reaction.

Remarks.

2H  +  0  =  H20

+ 67520

Liquid  water.

C  +  20  =  C02

+ 94300

Diamond.

C+0=CO

+ 26600

t

S  +  20  =  S02

+ 71080

Orthorhombic  sulphur.

H+F=HF

+ 38600

Gaseous  fluorine.

H  +  C1-HC1

+ 22000

,  , chlorine.

H  +  Br  =  HBr

+ 8400

Liquid  bromine.

H  +  I  =  HI

6100

Solid  iodine.

N  +  3H=NH,

+ 12000

N+0=NO

- 21600

NN-2b=NX)a

7700

Dissociated  nitric  dioxide.

2tf  +  40  =  N004

2600

Bi  -molecular  nitric  dioxide.

K+F=KF

+  109500

...

K  +  C1  =  KC1

+  105600

K  +  Br  =  KBr

+ 95300

K  +  I  =  KI

+ 80100

The  rise  of  temperature  due  to  a  reaction  (e.g.,  flame  temperatures)
can  be  calculated  from  the  heat  of  reaction  and  the  thermal  capacity  C
of  the  resulting  products  ;  for

*  /Cdt  =  q

*t0

where  t0  is  the  initial,  t  the  final  temperature.  The  variation  of  C  with
temperature  must  of  course  be  known.  See  Nernst  and  Schonflies,
Mathem.  Belmndl.  d.  Naturwissensch.,  II.  edit.  p.  136,  Munich,  1898.

The  Heats  of  Combustion of  Organic  Compounds.— The

work  of  the  investigators  previously  mentioned  enables  us  to
infer  the  heat  of  reaction  of  almost  all  the  more  important
reactions  of  inorganic  chemistry,  directly  from  the  table,  or  else  to
calculate  them  indirectly;  yet,  on  'the  other  hand,  we  do  not  find
ourselves  so  fortunate  regarding  many  reactions  of  the  carbon

602  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

compounds.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  the  number  of  reactions
which  take  place  quickly,  and  without  the  formation  of  side  products,
and  which  at  the  same  time  are  suited  for  thermo-chemical  investigation,
is  very  much  smaller  in  organic  than  in  inorganic  chemistry.  There
is  only  one  reaction  which  occurs  quickly  and  smoothly  in  all  cases,
viz.  the  combustion  of  the  substance  in  an  excess  of  oxygen,  whereby  all  the
carbon  is  oxidised  to  carbon  dioxide,  and  all  the  hydrogen  to  water.
Therefore,  on  the  whole,  organic  thermo-chemistry  employs  the  same
reaction  which  has  been  long  used  in  elementary  analytical  analysis,
i.e.  combustion.

Regarding  the  experimental  side,  the  method  followed  almost  ex-
clusively at  present  consists  in  inclosing  the  substance  in  a  vessel  of
steel,  lined  with  platinum ;  then  this  is  filled  with  oxygen  under  a
pressure  of  about  20  atm.  ;  and  then  the  substance  is  ignited  by  a  bit
of  iron  wire  made  incandescent  by  an  electric  current  (Berthelot's
calorimetric  bomb) :  this  whole  apparatus  is  immersed  in  a  water  calori-
meter, which  absorbs  the  heat  developed.

In  this  way  one  obtains  the  heat  of  combustion  at  constant  volume,  or
simply  the  heat  of  combustion  which  corresponds  to  the  change  of
total  energy.  The  heat  of  combustion  at  constant  pressure  still
includes,  so  to  speak,  the  accidental  amount  of  external  work,  and  is
corrected  by  subtracting  the  value  of  "  2T "  as  many  times  as  the
number  of  molecules  produced  exceeds  those  which  disappear.

The  heat  of  formation  may  be  calculated  from  the  heat  of  combustion
thus.  From  the  sum  of  the  heats  of  formation  there  is  substracted  the
heat  of  the  resulting  liquid  water  (67,500  per  mol.)  and  of  the  result-
ing carbon  dioxide  (94,300  per  mol.),  and  that  of  the  sulphurous  acid
formed  if  any  (71,100  per  mol.);  and  thus  by  the  use  of  the  figures
given  in  the  last  table  we  obtain  the  heat  of  formation,  from  the
diamond,  from  gaseous  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  and  finally,  from  ortho-
rhombic  sulphur,  at  the  temperature  of  the  experiment.

Now,  since  the  heats  of  combustion  have  been  determined  for  the
most  important  organic  compounds,  the  heats  of  formation  are  also
known ;  and  therefore,  according  to  p.  600,  the  heat  of  reaction
between  these  compounds  can  be  calculated.  Therefore  it  is  never
necessary  to  calculate  the  heat  of  formation,  but  one  can  obviously
obtain  the  heat  of  reaction  of  every  reaction,  from  thv  sum  of  the  heats  of
combustion  of  the  substances  which  have  disappeared,  minus  the  sum  of  the
heats  of  combustion  of  the  substances  formed.

But  the  results  of  such  calculations  are  usually  very  inexact,
because  the  reaction-heat  is  the  resulting  difference  between  magni-
tudes which  are  only  slightly  different ;  and  of  course  the  errors
of  observation  in  these  cases  amount  to  a  very  considerable  per
cent.

Thus,  e.g.,  the  heat  of  combustion  of  fumaric  acid  was  determined
to  be  320,300,  while  that  of  the  geometrical  isomer,  maleic  acid,  is

CHAP.  I  THE  APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  FIRST  LAW  OF  HEAT  603

326,900.  Therefore  the  transformation  of  maleic  acid  to  the  more
stable  fumaric  acid  will  develop  6600  calories.  But  this  latter  number
is  extremely  uncertain,  for  if  the  errors  of  observation  in  the  deter-
mination of  the  heat  of  combustion  amounted  to  only  0'5  per  cent,
even  then  the  uncertainty  in  the  difference  would  amount  to  over
50  per  cent.

Reference  has  been  already  made  (p.  317)  to  the  relation  between  the
constitution  and  the  heat  of  combustion.  We  enumerate  here  the  heats  of
combustion  of  some  important  substances  ;  these  are  expressed  in
calories  ( =  1000  g.-cal.),  in  order  to  avoid  the  repetition  of  ciphers.

Ethyl  alcohol
Mannite
Cellulose
Cane  sugar
Acetic  acid
Benzoic  acid
Ethyl  acetate
Urea

340
727
680
1355
210
772
554
152

The  formation  of  ethyl  acetate  from  the  acid  and  alcohol  (p.  448),
according  to  these  figures,  would  correspond  to  a  heat  of  reaction  of

340  +  210-554-  -4,
which  is  quite  a  small  amount.

The  Thermo-Chemistry  of  Electrolytes.— The  hypothesis  of
electrolytic  dissociation  has  thrown  new  light  on  the  meaning  of  the
heat  of  reactions  which  take  place  in  salt  solutions ;  and  some  rules
which  were  previously  discovered  in  an  empirical  way  find  a  simple
explanation  as  necessary  deductions  from  the  theory.

If  two  solutions  of  electrolytes,  which  are  completely  dissociated,
are  mixed,  there  is  of  course  no  development  of  heat,  provided  that  the
ions  of  the  two  electrolytes  do  not  unite  to  form  an  electrically  neutral
molecule  nor  a  new  ion  complex.  This  case  is  illustrated,  e.g.,  in  the
mixture  of  most  salt  solutions.

Experiment  establishes  the  conclusion.  The  so-called  Law  of  the
thermo-neutrality  of  salt  solutions l  is  nothing  else  than  an  expression  of
the  experience  that  no  heat  phenomena  result  from  the  mixture  of  salt
solutions  (provided  that  no  precipitate  [and  no  volatile  compound]  is  pro-
duced). .

Let  AB  and  A'B'  be  two  salts  which  obey  the  "  law  of  thermo-
neutrality."  Then  no  noticeable  heat  of  reaction  will  result  from  their
mixture,  thus

(AB  aq.)  +  (A'B'  aq.)  -  (AB,  A'B'  aq.).

A  similar  thing  also  holds  good  for  the  mixture

(AB'  aq.)  +  A'B  aq.)  =  AB',  A'B  aq.).
1  Usually  called  "Hess's  Law." — TR.

604  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

But  now  the  two  resulting  solutions,  which  are  expressed  by  the
symbols  standing  on  the  right  sides  of  the  two  equations,  are  identical ;
therefore

(AB  aq.)  -  (AB'  aq.)  -  (A'B  aq.)  -  (A'B'  aq.) ;

or,  in  other  words —

The  difference  between  the  heats  of  formation  of  any  two  salt  solutions
having  a  common  ion  is  a  constant  which  is  characteristic  for  loth  of  the
two  other  radicals,  and  is  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  common  ion.
Thus,  e.g.,

H  +  Cl  +  aq.  =  (HC1  aq.) +  39320
H  +  I  +  aq._HHI  aq.)_ +  13170
Cl  +  (HI  aqy=T^(HCTaq.)  +  26150  ;
and

K  +Cl  +  aq.  =  (KC1  aq.)  +  101170
K+I  +aq.  =  (KIaq.)  +  75020
Cl  +  (KI  aq.)  -  IT(KClaq.)+  26150.

Thus  in  fact  it  does  result  that

(HI  aq.)  -  (HC1  aq.)  -  (KI  aq.)  -  (KC1  aq.) ;

and  thus  if  one  replaces  the  iodine  in  [any]  iodide  in  a  dilute  water
solution  by  chlorine,  he  always  observes  the  same  quantity  of  heat  to
be  developed,  viz.  26,150  cal.  In  this  case,  of  course,  one  is  always
concerned  with  the  same  reaction,  viz.  the  replacing  of  the  iodine  ion
by  the  chlorine  ion.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  substitute  the  iodine  in  dissolved
potassium  iodate  (KI03)  by  chlorine,  we  observe  an  entirely  different
heat  of  reaction,  viz. — the  absorption  of  31,700  cal.  instead  of  the
development  of  26,150  cal. ;  for  here  iodine  and  chlorine  are  not  ions,
and  therefore  an  entirely  different  reaction  occurs.

The  case  is  quite  different  where  the  mixture  results  in  the  union  of
ions  to  form  electrically  neutral  molecules,  which  may  remain  or  may  be
removed.

We  have  already  met  the  most  important  example  of  this  case  in
the  process  of  neutralisation  on  p.  507.  If  one  mixes  a  strong  acid  with
a  strong  base,  the  hydrogen  ions  and  the  hydroxyl  ions  unite  almost
completely  to  form  molecules  of  water.  The  negative  ion  of  the  acid  and
the  positive  ion  of  the  base  remain  free  if  the  salt  produced  by  their
union  is  highly  dissociated  (as,  e.g.,  is  always  the  case  with  univalent
bases  and  acids).

We  thus  develop  the  important  theorem,  that —

The  neutralisation  of  a  strong  acid  by  a  strong  base  must  always  exhibit
the  same  heat  of  reaction.

CHAP. I

THE  APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  FIRST  LAW  OF  HEAT

605

The  following  table  shows  how  remarkably  the  theorem  is  proved
by  experiment : —

TABLE  OF  THE  HEATS  OF  NEUTRALISATION  OF  ACIDS  AND  BASES

Acid  and  Base.

Heat  of  Neutralisation.

Hydrochloric  acid  and  sodium  hydrox.

13700

H}Tdrobromic .

j  ?

13700

Nitric

13700

lodic ,

13800

Hydrochloric .

j

lithium

13700 '

,, ,

,

potassium

13700

It 5

f

barium

13800

,,.

'

calcium

13900

In  the  case  of  the  di-acid  bases  [as  barium  hydrox.],  the  figures  do
not  of  course  refer  to  a  molecule,  but  only  to  one  equivalent  of  the
base.  Neglecting  the  slight  correction  required  by  the  incomplete
dissociation,  these  figures  simply  mean  that  they  give  the  heat  de-
veloped by  the  reaction

H  +  OH  =  H20  ;

or  in  the  language  of  thermo-chemistry,  we"  obtain '

(H  aq.,  OH  aq.)  =  13,700.

When  the  acid  or  the  base  is  only  partially  dissociated  electrolytically,
then  the  heat  of  neutralisation  changes  by  the  amount  of  energy  which
comes  into  play  in  splitting  the  molecules  into  the  ions.  In  fact,  the
following  example  shows  that  the  heat  of  neutralisation  assumes  values
which  are  noticeably  different  under  such  circumstances  as  those  just
mentioned.  Thus  the  heats  of  neutralisation  of  the  following  weak  acids,
by  sodium  or  potassium  hydroxide,  are  as  follows  : —

Acid.

Heat  of  Neutralisation.

I
Heat  of  Dissociation  '

Acetic  acid . ...
Di-chlor-acetic  acid
Phosphoric ,.
Hydrofluoric

13400
14830
14830
16270

+ 300
-1130
-  1130
-2570

If  these  acids  were  completely  dissociated,  we  should  obtain  a  heat
development  of  13,700  cal.  in  the  neutralisation.  The  deviations  from
this  normal  value  are  to  be  ascribed  to  the  electrolytic  dissociation.
The  differences  are  given  in  the  last  column ;  these  denote  the  respective

606  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

quantities  of  heat  which  would  be  required  for  the  electrolytic  dissociation  of
the  acids  in  question.  These  figures  only  claim  to  be  approximately  correct.
Because,  on  the  one  hand,  the  differences  between  magnitudes  which
are  not  very  far  apart  are  attended  by  considerable  errors  of  observa-
tion ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  calculation  is  based  on  the  faulty
assumption  that  the  acid  is  not  at  all  dissociated,  and  that  the  base
and  the  neutral  salt  are  completely  dissociated.1  Nevertheless,  these
figures,  which  we  will  obtain  in  a  perfectly  independent  way  in  the
following  chapter,  are  well  suited  to  give  us  a  conception  of  the
amount  of  the  changes  of  energy  which  are  associated  with  the  separation
into  ions.

Of  course  it  happens  in  all  these  changes  that  sometimes  heat
will  be  absorbed,  and  again  it  will  be  set  free ;  and  conversely,  that  in
the  union  of  ions  to  form  electrically  neutral  molecules,  sometimes
heat  will  be  developed,  and  again  it  will  be  absorbed ;  and  that  the
final  absolute  amount  is  not  very  great  in  any  case.

On  neutralising  ammonia,  a  base  which  is  only  slightly  dissociated,
with  a  strong  acid,  there  results  a  heat  development  of  12,300  cal.;
therefore  the  heat  used  in  cleaving  the  ammonium  hydroxide  into  its
ions  is  estimated  to  be

13,700-  12,300-  +  1400  cal.

The  calculation  of  the  most  general  case,  viz.  where  neither  the  base,
nor  the  acid,  nor  the  neutral  satt  formed  is  dissociated,  is  as  follows : —

Let  the  degree  of  dissociation  of  the  acid  SH  be  av  and  let  that
of  the  base  BOH  be  a2 ;  now  from  the  mixture  of  the  acid  and  alka-
line solution,  each  of  which  contains  one  equivalent,  there  results  an
equivalent  of  the  salt  BS ;  let  the  degree  of  dissociation  of  this  salt
be  a ;  there  also  results  a  molecule  of  water,  and  in  the  sense  of  the
equation

SH  +  BOH  =  BS  +  H20.

Now  the  heat  of  neutralisation  is  made  up  as  follows  : —

1 .  From  the  heat  of  dissociation  a  of  water.

2.  From  the  heats  of  dissociation  Wx  of  the  acid,  and  W.,  of  the
base,  which  participate  to  the  respective  amounts  of

W^l  -  ai), and  W2(l  -  a2).

3.  From  the  heat  of  dissociation  W  of  the  salt,  which  participates
;to  the  extent  of

W(l-a).

Now  by  observing  that  the  acid  and  the  base  are  electrolytically

1  The  heat  of  dilution  of  some  weak  acids  in  dilute  solution,  from  which  the  heat  of
.dissociation  maybe  calculated,  has  been  measured  by  E.  Petersen  (Zeitschr.  phys.  Chem.,
11.  174,  1893  ;  see  also  v.  Steiuwehr,  I.e.,  p.  586.

CHAP.  I  THE  APPLICATIONS  OF  THE  FIRST  LAW  OF  HEAT  607

dissociated  in  the  solution,  and  conversely,  that  the  water  and  the
undissociated  salt  are  formed  by  the  union  of  ions,  we  obtain  as  the
expression  for  "  q  "  the  heat  of  neutralisation,

q  =  x  +  W(l  -  a)  -  Wj(l  -  ax)  -  W2(l  -  o2).

Now  let  us  mix  the  slightly  dissociated  salt  of  a  weak  add  with  a
stronger  acid-  then  we  have  a  process  which  is  comparable  with  the
neutralisation  of  a  strong  acid  by  a  strong  base;  because  here,  in
consequence  of  the  mixture,  two  ions  unite  smoothly  to  form  an
electrically  neutral  molecule.

Thus  if  we  mix,  e.g.,  a  sodium  salt  of  the  weak  hydrofluoric  acid
with  hydrochloric  acid,  then  the  reaction  progresses  almost  completely
in  the  sense  of  the  reaction

H  +  F  =  HF,

and  the  heat  of  reaction  observed  is  that  of  this  reaction.  Thomson
found  that  2360  cal.  were  associated  with  this  mixture,  a  value  which
is  only  sligjitly  different  from  the  value  given  above  for  the  heat  of
dissociation  of  hydrofluoric  acid.

If  the  formation  of  an  insoluble  precipitate  results  from  the  union  of
two  electrolytes  which  are  completely  dissociated,  then  the  negative
value  of  the  observed  heat  of  reaction  corresponds,  of  course,  to  the
heat  of  solution  of  the  precipitated  substance.  Thus,  e.g.,  if  we  mix  a
[soluble]  silver  salt  and  a  chloride,  solid  silver  chloride  is  precipitated,
and,  according  to  Thomsen,  a  heat  development  of  15,800  cal.  is  ob-
served, which  corresponds  to  the  simple  reaction

Ag  +  CUAgCl
Dissolved Solid

Finally,  we  would  observe  that  it  is  possible  to  calculate  the  heat
of  reaction  on  mixing  any  selected  solution,  provided  that  we  know
the  heats  of  dissociation,  and  the  heats  of  solution,  of  all  the  molecular
species  which  come  into  consideration.

According  to  the  principles  developed  in  Chap.  IV.  of  the  pre-
ceding book,  we  can  predict  the  progress  of  the  reaction  from  the
dissociation  constants,  and  from  the  solubility  coefficients,  of  all  the
molecular  species  which  are  to  be  considered.  But  if  we  know  to
what  extent  electrolytic  dissociation,  and  the  formation  of  precipitates,
have  taken  place,  and  if  we  know  the  heat  value  of  each  of  these  pro-
cesses, then  of  course  we  can  state  the  heat  of  reaction  of  the  total
process.

In  thermo-chemical  relations  the  heats  of  dissociation  and  of  solu-
tion go  hand  in  hand  with  the  coefficients  of  dissociation  and  of
solubility.  The  following  chapter  will  give  us  the  interesting  result
that  these  magnitudes  are  closely  related  in  pairs.

CHAPTER II

THERMO-CHEMISTKY II
TEMPERATURE AND COMPLETE CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM

The  Application  of  the  Second  Law  of  the  Mechanical  Theory
Of  Heat:  Historical.  —  The  application  of  the  second  law  of
thermodynamics  to  chemical  processes  was  a  step  having  fundamental
significance,  because  for  the  first  time  it  afforded  an  insight  into  the
relations  between  chemical  energy,  heat,  and  capacity  for  external  work  ;
and  thereby  for  the  first  time  it  was  possible  to  answer  the  questions,
viz.  how  far  is  the  energy  which  is  set  free  in  chemical  processes
convertible  [into  work]  without  limitation  1  and  is  it  [the  energy]  more
of  the  nature  of  heat,  or  more  of  the  nature  of  the  kinetic  energy  of
moving  masses  1  and  although  it  is  not  possible  to  give  a  satisfactory
answer  to  these  questions  in  every  special  case,  yet  it  is  possible
to  outline  clearly  the  way  leading  to  a  systematic  mode  of  attack.

The  honour  of  having  first  considered  chemical  processes,  and
dissociation  in  particular,  from  the  standpoint  of  thermodynamics,
undoubtedly  belongs  to  A.  Horstmann,1  and  as  a  result  of  his  calcula-
tions, the  fruitfulness  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat  in  this  region
also  was  demonstrated.

Then  shortly  afterwards  the  problem  was  treated  very  thoroughly
and  in  certain  special  aspects  by  J.  W.  Gibbs ; 2  but  unfortunately  the
calculations  of  this  author  have  a  character  which  is  entirely  too
generalised  to  be  capable  of  a  simple  and  direct  application  to  special
cases  of  investigation.

Thus  it  came  about  that  independently  of  Gibbs's  work,  and  a  little
later,  there  were  discovered  a  large  number  of  theorems,  which  may
be  deduced  directly  by  specialisation  of  his  formulae ;  some  of  these
are,  e.g.—

Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  2.  137  (1869)  ;  4.  635  (1871) ;  Lieb.  Ann.,  170.  192
(1873).

2  Trans. Conn.  Acad.,  3.  108  and  343  (1874-1878) ; German  translation  by  W.
Ostwald,  Leipzig,  1892.

608

CHAP. II

TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM 609

(A)  The relation between the development of heat and the
temperature  coefficient  in  the  dissociation  of  a  gas.

(B)  The relation between the development of heat and the
temperature  coefficient  of  a  galvanic  element.

The  first  of  these  problems  in  particular  has  been  repeatedly
subjected  to  treatment.1

Regarding  some  of  the  more  recent  treatises  on  the  application  of
chemical  processes  to  thermodynamics,  reference  should  be  made  to
the  monographs  of  Le  Chatelier,2  and  especially  to  that  of  van't  Hoff,3
the  study  of  which  cannot  be  too  highly  commended,  as.  leading  to
a  more  profound  knowledge  of  the  important  and  difficult  problems
presented  here.

Mathematical  deduction  has  gained  greatly  in  clearness  and
elegance  from  the  more  recent  methods  of  treatment  of  Planck 4  and
Riecke ; 5  the  latter  treatise  is  based  entirely  on  the  application  of  the
thermodynamic  potential,  and  therefore  has  unquestioned  advantage  for
all  those  who  are  conversant  with  the  potential  theory  of  physics.

Of  course  the  distinctions  between  the  various  methods  of  treatment
are  of  a  purely  conventional  nature  ;  one  method  can  proceed  no  farther
than  another.  In  his  own  method  of  presentation,  the  writer  would
endeavour  to  bring  all  in  as  close  contact  as  possible  with  the  results  of
experiment,  hoping  thereby  to  make  the  subject  in  many  points  more
intelligible  than  it  has  been  made  hitherto.

In  this  and  the  following  chapter  we  will  describe  the  most  im-
portant applications  made  thus  far  of  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics
to  chemical  processes.  We  will  then  consider  next  complete  chemical
equilibrium,  which,  according  to  the  developments  made  on  p.  464,  is
conditioned  by  the  temperature  alone ;  and  then  we  will  consider
incomplete  chemical  equilibrium,  which  is  conditioned  not  only  by  the
temperature,  but  also  by  the  relative  quantities  of  the  reacting  substances.

Gibbs's  "Phase  Rule." — The  "complete  chemical  equilibrium"
(p.  464)  was  characterised  in  this  way,  viz.  for  every  temperature
there  existed  only  one  definite  pressure  at  which  the  different  phases
of  the  system  were  in  equilibrium  with  each  other.  If  we  change  this
pressure  at  constant  temperature,  then  the  reaction  advances  to  a
completion  in  one  sense  or  the  other,  i.e.  until  one  or  more  of  the
phases  are  exhausted.  If  the  external  pressure  is  only  changed  a  very
little,  then  each  phase  maintains  its  composition  unchanged  during
the  reaction.

1  van  der  Waals,  Beibl,  4.  749  (1880)  ;  Boltzmann, Wied.  Ann.,  22.  65  (1884)  ;
and  others.

'2  Recherches  sur  les  equilibres  chimiques. Paris,  1888.

3  Etudes  de  dynamique  chimiqne. Amsterdam,  1884.

4  Wied.  Ann.,  30.  562  ;  31.  189  ;  32.  462  (1887)  ;  we  may  here,  again  refer  to
the  work  of  Planck  quoted  on  p.  22.

5  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  6.  268,  411  (1890)  ;  7.  97  (1891).

2R

610  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  iv

We  have  already  become  acquainted  with  numerous  examples  of
chemical  equilibrium.  In  addition  to  the  simplest  case  of  equilibrium
between  different  states  of  aggregation,  there  belong  in  this  category,
the  dissociation  of  ammonium  chloride,  excluding  an  excess  of  the
dissociation  products,  the  dissociation  of  calcium  carbonate,  etc.

A  very  remarkable  law  regarding  complete  heterogeneous  equilibrium
was  discovered  by  Gribbs  in  a  theoretical  way  ;  this  was  afterwards
thoroughly  proved  experimentally,  and  hence  it  is  suited  to  be  used  as
a  safe  guide  in  the  investigation  of  special  cases.  It  may  be  formulated
as  follows  :  —

It  is  necessary  to  assemble  AT  LEAST  n  different  molecular  species,  in
order  to  construct  a  complete  heterogeneous  equilibrium  consisting  of  n  +  1
different  phases.

Thus,  in  order  to  establish  the  complete  equilibrium,

Liquid Vapour

only  one  [n]  molecular  species  (H20)  is  required,  because  this  consists
of  two  [n  +  1]  phases.

In  order  to  establish  the  complete  equilibrium  between  calcium
carbonate  and  its  decomposition  products  (three  phases),  we  need  at
least  the  two  molecular  species,  viz.  CO2  and  CaO.

By  bringing  together  salt  and  water,  we  can  establish  the  three
phases  of  the  complete  equilibrium  between  the  solid  salt,  its  solution,
and  the  vapour  of  the  solution.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  two  molecular  species,  e.g.  react  upon
each  other  in  two  phases  only,  the  equilibrium  will  be  incomplete,  i.e.
the  progress  of  the  reaction  is  associated  with  a  change  in  the  equi-
librium pressure.  Thus  if  we  let  any  mixture  of  water  and  alcohol
evaporate,  the  maximal  pressure  of  the  mixture  changes  with  the  pro-
gress of  the  reaction,  in  spite  of  keeping  the  temperature  constant.  This
reaction  would  become  complete  if  we  should  allow  the  water  to
freeze,  e.g.,  and  a  third  phase  should  thus  be  added  to  the  system.

Of  course  we  can  imagine  the  heterogeneous  system  in  question
to  be  constructed  of  more  than  "  n  "  molecular  species,  as,  e.g.,  in  the
equilibrium  between  calcium  carbonate  and  its  decomposition  products,
thus,  CaC03,  CaO,  Ca,  C02,  etc.  But  we  must  limit  the  minimal  value
of  "  n,"  and  for  the  preceding  system  this  amounts  to  2,  whether  we
imagine  the  construction  of  the  system  to  be  from  CaO  and  C09,  or
from  CaC03  and  CaO,  etc.  And  thus  the  limitation  "  at  least  "  is  seen
to  have  an  essential  meaning^1

1  If  solid  sal-ammoniac  be  volatilised  without  excess  of  its  products  of  dissociation,  the
system  can  be  built  up  of  one  kind  of  molecule  (NH4C1)  only,  so  that  we  may  put  n  =  1  ,
on  which  point  a  singular  mistake  has  arisen.  See  my  remarks  in  Zeits.  phys.  Ghem.,
43.  113  (1903).

CHAP.  II TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM 611

The  proof  of  "  the  phase-rule,"  as  it  was  accomplished  by  Gibbs  1
himself,  can  be  shown  in  a  simple  way  as  follows  : — 2

Let  the  heterogeneous  system  considered  consist  of  y  phases,  for
the  construction  of  which  we  need  at  least  n  different  molecular  species.
We  will  select  one  phase  in  which  all  the  molecular  species  are  present,
there  always  being  one  such  phase  at  least.  Thus,  e.g.,  each  molecular
species  must  occur  in  every  liquid  phase,  because  each  molecular  species
has  a  definite  solubility,  though  it  may  be  perhaps  immeasurably
small ;  and  hence  each  species  may  be  present  in  quantities  which  are
too  small  to  be  weighed.  A  similar  thing  holds  good  for  the  gaseous
phase  of  the  system,  because  every  molecular  species  has  a  finite
vapour  pressure.

Let  the  concentration  (i.e.  the  number  of  g.-mol.  per  litre)  of  n
molecular  species  in  the  selected  phase  be  respectively,  cv  c2,  .  .  .  cn.
The  composition  of  the  phase  will  change  in  a  way  which  is  perfectly
definite  and  unequivocal,  if  we  change  the  external  conditions  of  the
system,  viz.  the  temperature  T,  and  the  pressure  p ;  and  of  course  if
we  also  change  the  concentration  of  each  of  the  particular  molecular
species.  Therefore  an  equation  must  exist  which  so  relates  the
quantities  cv  c2,  .  .  .  cn,  p,  and  T,  with  each  other,  that  a  variation
in  the  value  of  one  of  their  magnitudes  necessitates  a  variation  in  all
the  others.  We  thus  obtain  the  equation

F^,  c.2,  .  .  .  cn,  p,  T)  =  0,

where  Fx  is  the  symbol  for  any  selected  function  of  the  variable  con-
sidered.

The  fact  that  such  characteristic  equations  are  only  very  incom-
pletely known  at  the  present  time  does  not  impair  the  stringency  of
the  proof ;  it  is  enough  to  know  that  there  is  such  an  equation  in  each
case.  For  two  molecular  species  we  obtained  on  p.  242  a  characteristic
equation  of  the  form

f (clf  c.2,  p,  T).

In  the  present  case  the  equations  must  be  much  more  complex,  not
only  because  there  are  more  kinds  of  molecule,  but  because  the  relative
quantity  of  each  substance  may  vary  with  displacement  of  equilibrium.

Every  other  phase  of  the  system  has  its  own  characteristic  equation  •
but  now  the  composition  of  one  phase  unequivocally  conditions  that
of  all  other  phases  which  may  be  in  equilibrium  with  it ;  therefore  all
phases  which  are  in  equilibrium  with  one  phase  must  be  in  equilibrium
with  each  other,  and  this  is  possible  only  with  perfectly  definite  ratios
of  concentration.  Thus,  e.g.,  it  is  evident  that  from  the  condition  of  a

1  Trans.  Conn.  Acad.,  3.  108  and  343  (1874-78).

2  Taken  mainly  from  that  of  Riecke  (Zeits.  phys.  Ghem.,  6.  272),  for  which  see  further
details.

612  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

liquid  phase,  the  composition  of  the  gaseous  phase  in  contact  with  it  is
also  given.

Therefore  it  follows  that  the  compositions  of  all  the  other  phases
are  definite  and  unequivocal  functions  of  the  same  variables  upon  which
the  selected  phase  depends ;  and  also  that  for  every  phase  there  "must
exist  an  equation  of  condition  of  the  form

F(c15  c.2,  .  .  .  cu,  p,  T)  =  0.

We  obtain  as  many  equations  of  condition  of  this  sort  as  there  are
phases  in  our  system,  i.e.  "  y  "  in  number.

Now  the  number  of  the  variables,  cv  c9,  .  .  .  cn,  p,  T,  amounts  to
n  +  2  ;  therefore  in  order  that  they  may  be  unequivocally  determined
by  the  equations  of  condition,  which  are  "  y  "  in  number,  it  is  necessary
that  there  shall  be  as  many  equations  as  there  are  variables,  i.e.  it
follows  that

y-n  +  2.

Now  this  amounts  to  stating  that  when  n  molecular  species  react  in
n  +  2  phases,  an  equation  of  condition  is  possible  between  all  of  them,  only
when  the  conditions  of  temperature  and  pressure  are  definite  and  unequivocal ;
and  also  when  the  ratio  of  concentration  of  each  of  the  particular  phases  is
perfectly  definite.

Moreover,  associated  with  the  coexistence  of  the  n  +  2  phases,  there  is  a
unique  point,  the  so-called  "  point  of  transition "  ( Uebergangspnnkt).
We  will  soon  learn  something  more  regarding  the  peculiarities  of  this
point.

Therefore,  in  order  to  have  a  complete  equilibrium,  i.e.  when,  during
a  finite  interval,  for  every  value  of  the  temperature  T,  there  corresponds
a  perfectly  definite  equilibrium  pressure  p,  and,  of  course,  a  perfectly
definite  composition  of  each  of  the  particular  phases, — for  this  we
must  have  one  equation  less  than  the  number  of  variables,  i.e.  it  must
follow  that

y  =  n  +  1.

But  this  is  nothing,  except  the  "  phase-rule " ;  for  this  result
stated  that —

The  number  of  phases  in  a  complete  equilibrium  must  be  one  more  than
the  number  of  reacting  molecular  species.

Finally,  when

y<n+  1,

then,  with  given  external  conditions  of  temperature  and  pressure,
c15  c2,  .  .  .  cn,  remain  more  or  less  indefinite,  and  therefore  the  com-
position of  all  the  phases  also ;  here  we  are  dealing  with  an  incomplete

The  Point  of  Transition. — The conditions of complete equi-

CHAP.  II TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM 613

librium  require  that,  within  a  finite  temperature  interval,  for  every  tem-
perature point  there  shall  correspond  a  definite  pressure  value,  at  which
all  of  the  phases  of  the  system  may  be  coexistent.  This  temperature
interval  is  always  limited,  as  a  result  of  the  fact  that  one  of  the  phases
suddenly  ceases  to  be  capable  of  existence,  and  hence  disappears  from
the  system.  Thus,  e.g.,  to  take  the  simplest  case  imaginable,  let  us
study  the  equilbrium  in  the  equation

Liquid Gaseous

at  different  temperatures.  Then,  on  the  one  hand,  according  to  what
was  said  above,  we  can  follow  the  measurements  of  the  vapour
pressure  of  liquid  water  only  up  to  the  critical  temperature  ;  and,  on
the  other  hand,  the  investigation  can  be  conducted  uninterruptedly  at
lower  temperatures,  till  we  arrive  at  the  freezing-point  of  water  (in
so  far  as  we  deal  with  the  vapour  pressure  itself)  ;  beyond  this  the
liquid  water  ceases  to  be  capable  of  existence,  except  in  the  labile
condition  of  an  under-cooled  liquid.  But  usually  another  phase
appears  to  take  the  place  of  the  one  which  has  disappeared.  Thus,
in  the  latter  case,  where  we  arrive  at  a  new  complete  equilibrium,
thus  :

H20^±H20,

Solid  Gas

we  deal  with  the  sublimation  of  ice.

That  temperature  point,  where  one  phase  of  a  complete  hetero-
geneous equilibrium  vanishes,  and  where  another  takes  its  place,  we
call  "the  point  of  transition"  Thus  at  the  point  of  transition,  and  at
the  corresponding  pressure,  there  are  coexistent  beside  the  others,  not
only  the  phases  which  have  begun  to  disappear,  but  also  those  which
are  beginning  to  appear.

Now,  since  there  were  n  +  1  phases  composed  of  n  molecular  species
before  the  "  point  of  transition  "  was  reached,  therefore,  at  the  point  of
transition  itself,  there  are  n  +  2  phases,  each  one  of  which  is,  of  course,  made
up  of  the  same  molecular  species,  —  a  singular  state.

In  order  to  obtain  a  deeper  insight  into  those  relations,  the  general
meaning  of  which  is  obvious,  we  will  consider  some  special  cases  in
what  follows.

The  Equilibrium  between  the  different  Phases  of  Water.

—We  can  easily  determine  the  "  point  of  transition  "  at  which  the
liquid  phase  vanishes  from  the  system,  —  water~"^"water  vapour,  —
only  to  be  replaced  by  the  solid  phase,  ice.

At  atmospheric  pressure  water  freezes  at  0°  ;  and  somewhat  below
this,  under  its  own  vapour  pressure,  which,  to  be  sure,  is  very  small  as
compared  with  the  atmospheric  pressure,  viz.  at  +  0'007  7°,  because  the

614

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK IV

freezing-point  is  raised  by  this  amount  by  diminishing  the  pressure
one  atmosphere  (p.  71).  The  pressure  corresponding  to  the  "point  of
transition,"  according  to  Regnault's  vapour-pressure  tables,  is  4*57  mm.
Therefore,  under  these  conditions  of  temperature  and  pressure  [viz.
0'0077°  and  4'57  mm.],  and  under  these  alone,  are  the  three  phases — ice,
liquid  water,  and  water  vapour,  coexistent.

For  the  purpose  of  understanding  clearly,  not  only  this  case,  which
is  the  simplest  conceivable,  but  also  for  the  treatment  of  the  behaviour
of  complicated  equilibria,  we  may  use  with  advantage  a  graphic
method  which  represents,  in  a  universal  way,  the  nature  of  the
condition  of  equilibrium  in  its  dependence  upon  the  external  con-
ditions of  temperature  and  pressure.1

In  a  co-ordinate  system  (Fig.  32),  let  the  abscissae  represent  the
temperature  T  (properly  on  the  absolute  scale) ;  and  let  the  ordinates
represent  the  pressure  p ;  on  this  we  will  plot  the  curves  along  which
two  different  phases  of  water  are  coexistent.  We  will  call  these
"  the  limiting  curves  "  (Grenz-kurveri)  of  the  system  considered.

In  general,  if  we  are  considering  a  system  composed  of  a  number
of  phases,  and  for  the  construction  of  which  there  are  requisite  n
molecular  species, — then  the  meaning  of  "  the  limiting  curves  "  is  that
under  the  definite  and  unequivocal  conditions  of  temperature  and
pressure,  n  +  1  different  phases  are  capable  of  existing  beside  each
other.

These  "limiting  curves"  are  well  known  in  the  case  of  water;
and  it  is  directly  evident  that  there  must  be  three, — and  each  one  of
these  phase-pairs  must  consist  respectively  of  a  combination  of  two

of  the  coexistent  conditions
of  aggregation  of  water.

Thus  we  obtain  the  plot-
ting of  the  curves  shown  in
Fig.  32.  Thus  liquid  water
and  water  vapour  &re  coexistent
along  the  curve  OA.  This
is  also  the  "curve  of  vapour-
pressure,"  and  it  is  especially
well  known  in  the  first  part ;
its  upper  end  is  found  at
T  =  273°  +364-3°,  which  is
~~  the  "  critical  temperature "
of  water.

At  the  conditions  cor-
responding to  the  point  0  (and  which  we  previously  determined
as  T  =  273° +  0-0077°,  and  p  =  4'57  mm.),  water  freezes.  Hence
the  continuation  of  the  curve  AO,  along  the  limiting  curve  OB,
represents  the  conditions  under  which  ice  [solid  H20]  and  water
1  Roozeboom,  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  2.  474  (1888).

Gaseous

273

Fig.  32.

CHAP.  II TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM 615

vapour  are  coexistent ;  this  represents  the  "  vapour-pressure  curve "
of  ice  (p.  74).  On  account  of  the  smallness  of  the  vapour  pressure
of  solidified  water,  it  has  been  traced  only  a  short  distance  down-
wards from  0.  But  from  the  kinetic  treatment  of  the  properties
of  matter,  we  may  predict  with  great  certainty, — that  it  intersects  the
zero-point  of  our  system  of  co-ordinates, — also  that  the  vapour  pressure
of  ice  will  become  zero  at  the  absolute  zero-point  of  temperature, —
and  also  that  at  this  point  [viz.  abs.  0°]  water  vapour  ceases  to  be
capable  of  existence  as  such.

Finally,  the  "  limiting  curve "  OC  represents  the  conditions  for
the  coexistence  of  water  and  ice.  Since  the  freezing  of  water  is
accompanied  by  an  increase  of  volume,  the  melting-point  of  ice  sinks
with  increasing  pressure,  and  by  an  amount  which  is  0'0077°  per  atm.,
a  relatively  small  amount.  And,  moreover,  since  the  depression
of  the  melting-point  is  proportional  to  the  external  pressure,  at
least  at  pressures  which  are  not  too  high,  OC  represents  a  direction
which  is  only  slightly  inclined  to  the  p  axis.  Here  also  we  can  follow
the  course  of  the  curve  OC  only  a  slight  distance  from  0  ;  but  we
may  fairly  surmise  that,  on  further  extension,  the  curve  OC  would
bend  in  a  convex  way  towards  the  p  axis,  and  ultimately  would  touch
it  asymptotically  at  infinity.

The  point  0,  in  which  all  the  limiting  curves  anastomose,  and
therefore  in  which  all  of  the  three  phases  are  coexistent,  is  a  very
remarkable  point  in  the  p,  T,  plane ;  it  has  been  already  called  "  the
point  of  transition"  According  to  the  number  of  limiting  curves  which
unite  at  this  point,  we  may  call  it  "  three-fold,"  "  four-fold,"  etc.  ;  or
"triple,"  "quadruple,"  etc.  In  the  case  of  water,  0  is  a  "triple
point."

The  limiting  curves  are,  of  course,  curves  of  complete  equilibrium.
If  we  are  considering  one  point  of  one  of  the  curves,  and  if  we  change
the  pressure  and  temperature  in  a  way  which  is  different  from  what
corresponds  to  the  course  of  the  curve,  then  a  complete  reaction  occurs,
and,  according  to  the  circumstances,  one  of  the  two  phases  vanishes.

Moreover,  the  limiting  curves  divide  the  plane  (p,  T)  into  three
fields,  each  of  which  corresponds  to  the  existence  of  one  of  the  three
phases.  This  does  not  state  that  the  phases  cannot  exist  beyond  the
limits  of  their  respective  fields.

Thus,  e.g.,  it  is  known  that  liquid  water  may  exist  at  a  temperature
and  pressure  which  are  below  the  point  0.  But  in  that  case  the
existence  of  water  is  a  labile  one,  i.e.  it  is  in  an  "  under-cooled  "  state.

A  similar  thing  is  true  of  water  vapour,  which  we  know  can  exist
at  temperatures  and  pressures  where  it  should  have  become  liquefied,
according  to  the  course  of  the  limiting  curve.

Moreover,  these  labile  conditions  play  a  much  more  important
role  in  nature  than  we  are  usually  inclined  to  believe.  It  has  been
proved  repeatedly  that  some  very  stable  substances,  especially  such  as

616  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  iv

usually  exist  in  the  solid  state  of  aggregation,  may  be  brought  into  a
state  which  is  comparable  to  that  of  an  "  under-cooled  "  liquid ;  and
thus,  according  to  the  laws  of  chemical  equilibrium,  they  are  for
the  time  being  deprived  of  their  right  to  existence  [in  their  proper
phase].

We  should  not  attach  to  the  term  "  labile "  any  such  notion  as
that  the  system  necessarily  needs  only  a  slight  disturbance  in  order
to  change  it  to  the  more  "  stable  "  form.

In  this  way  we  can  explain  why  it  is  that  a  well-known  fourth
modification  of  water,  i.e.  "electrolytic  gas,"  has  no  place  in  the  (p,  T)
plane ;  at  least  there  is  none  in  the  region  thus  far  considered.
"  Electrolytic  gas "  at  the  ordinary  conditions  of  temperature  and
pressure  is  in  just  as  much  a  labile  condition  as  is  under-cooled  water,
because  it,  electrolytic  gas,  can  be  changed  into  the  stable  form  of
water  by  several  kinds  of  disturbance ;  as,  e.g.,  by  a  suitable  elevation
of  the  temperature.

Later,  and  in  an  entirely  different  way,  we  will  also  obtain  the
result  that  the  system

2H2  +  02

is  by  no  means  in  equilibrium,  under  ordinary,  conditions  of  tempera-
ture and  pressure,  although  the  mixture  may  apparently  be  preserved
unaltered  for  any  period,  however  long.

Moreover,  the  following  circumstance  is  very  remarkable.

Let  one  in  imagination  come  down  on  the  curve  AO  at  constant
volume,  removing  heat  from  the  system,  consisting  of  water  and  water
vapour,  which  are  enclosed  in  a  suitable  vessel.  As  one  arrives  at  O
the  water  freezes ;  and  now  it  obviously  depends  upon  the  relative
quantities  of  the  phases  present,  as  to  which  of  the  phases,  the  liquid
or  the  gaseous,  will  disappear  on  further  cooling,  i.e.  whether  one  will
progress  along  the  curve  OB,  or  along  OC,  with  the  continued  removal
of  heat.  If  the  expansion  of  [or  volume  occupied  by]  the  gaseous
phase  is  sufficiently  great,  then  all  the  water  will  freeze,  and  one  will
advance  along  the  curve  OB.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  volume  of
the  liquid  water  is  sufficiently  great  in  comparison  with  the  gaseous
phase,  then  all  the  water  vapour  condenses,  as  a  result  of  the  increase
of  volume  resulting  from  the  freezing,  and  from  the  associated  increase
of  pressure ;  thus  the  melting-point  will  be  strongly  depressed,  so  that
one  will  advance  along  the  curve  OC.

The  Equilibrium  between  Water  and  Sulphur  Dioxide.—

The  system  just  described  could  be  constructed  of  a  single  molecular
species,  viz.  H20.  We  will  select  as  a  further  and  more  complicated
example  of  complete  heterogeneous  equilibrium  a  system  composed  of
H20  and  S02,  i.e.  two  molecular  species ;  this  has  been  very  thoroughly
investigated  by  Eoozeboom.1

1  Zeits.  phys.  Chem,,  2.  450  (1888).

CHAP.  II TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM 617

And  again,  we  will  plot  in  a  co-ordinate  system,  the  curves  along
which  complete  equilibrium  can  exist.

Now,  since  we  allow  two  molecular  species  to  meet  here,  according
to  Gibbs's  "  phase-rule,"  on  the  limiting  curves,  three  phases  must  be
capable  of  existing
beside  each  other;
and  it  is  only  at  the
singular  point  that
the  coexistence  of  four
phases  is  possible.

By  bringing  to-
gether S02  and  H20,
the  four  following
homogeneous  systems
can  be  traced  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the
point  L  (Fig.  33).

1.  The solid

A-'

can  easily  be  caused
to  separate  out,  by
cooling  a  water  solution  which  is  saturated  with  S02.

2.  A  solution  of  S02  in  water,  which  we will  designate  by  the
symbol  fl.(H20  +  xS02). Here  x  denotes  the  number  of  g.-mol.  which
are  present  in  the  solution,  for  1  g.-mol.  of  H2O  (18  g.) ;  on  account
of  the  excess  of  water  in  the  solution,  x  is  always  less  than  one. [fl.  =
fluid  or  liquid  ;  and  similarly  in  the  other  symbols. — TR.]

3.  A  solution  of  water  in  liquid  sulphurous  acid,  corresponding  to
the  symbol  fl.(S02  +  yH20) ; here,  similarly to  x, y  is  always  less
than  one.

4.  A  gas  mixture, composed of S02  and H20, which we will
designate  by  the  symbol  "gas  (S02  +  zH20)."

The  three  phases  2,  3,  and  4  are  coexistent  along  the  curve  LE ;
the  first  two  are  composed  of  the  two  liquids,  water  and  sulphurous
acid.  These  do  not  mix  with  each  other  in  all  proportions,  but  only
partially  dissolve  each  other  like  ether  and  water,  e.g.,  thus  "x"
corresponds  to  the  solubility  of  S09  in  water,  and  "  y "  to  the
solubility  of  water  in  S02.  Both  of  these  solubilities  vary  with  the
temperature,  and  of  course  they  must  be  determined  for  a  number  of
temperature  points,  in  order  to  have  exact  knowledge  regarding  the
aforesaid  equilibrium :  this  has  not  been  done  as  yet.

The  gaseous  phase  consists  of  the  vapour  emitted  by  the  two
liquids ;  and  the  pressure  p,  which  corresponds  to  any  particular
point  of  the  curve  LE,  is  the  vapour  pressure  of  the  two  liquids  at
the  corresponding  temperature.

Roozeboom  did  not  determine  the  value  of  "  z " ;  but  it  should

618

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  IV

be  noticed  that,  by  means  of  the  rules  already  given  (p.  484),  the
composition  of  the  gaseous  phase,  and  therefore  the  value  of  z  also,
may  be  calculated,  at  least  approximately,  from  the  mutual  solu-
bilities, and  from  the  known  vapour  pressures  of  the  pure  solvents  at
the  pressure  p1.

If  we  cool  the  system  just  described,  at  constant  volume,  when
the  quantities  of  the  particular  phases  are  in  suitable  proportions,  we
advance  along  the  curve  LD ;  here  the  water  solution  of  S09  dis-
appears, and  there  appears  the  solid  hydrate  No.  1,  (S02 .  7H20) ;
while,  the  two  other  phases,  No.  3,  fl.(S02  +  yH90),  and  No.  4,  gas
(S02  +  zH20),  remain.

The  values  of  y  and  of  z  were  not  measured.

The  pressure  p  of  the  gaseous  phase  (the  pressure  of  dissociation
of  the  solid  hydrate  in  the  presence  of  a  saturated  water  solution  of
sulphur  dioxide)  is  of  course  independent  of  the  relative  quantities  of
the  solid  and  liquid  phases.  This  pressure  p  has  the  following  values
for  the  corresponding  temperatures  T  : —

T

P

T

P

273  +  0-1°
273  +  3-05
273  +  6-05
273  +  9-05

113-1  cm.  Hg.
127-0
141-9
158-2

273  +  11-0°
273  +  11-9
273  +  12-1

170-1  cm.  Hg.
176-2 ,.
177-3

If  we  advance  along  the  curve  DL,  by  raising  the  pressure  and
the  temperature,  and  by  a  suitable  choice  of  the  relative  proportions
of  the  particular  phases,  we  can  make  the  gaseous  phase  disappear  at
the  point  L,  and  thus  cause  a  water  solution  of  sulphur  dioxide  to
appear.  We  thus  arrive  at  the  system  composed  of  the  solid  hydrate
No.  1,  (S02.7H20),  and  of  the  solutions  No.  2  and  No.  3,  viz.
fl.(H2O  +  xSO2),  and  fl.(S02  +  yH20) ;  here  the  hydrate  is  found  in
equilibrium  with  its  fusion  products,  viz.  the  mutually  saturated
solutions  of  water  and  sulphur  dioxide.

At  a  pressure  of  177 '3  cm.,  the  melting-point  of  the  hydrate  is  at
T  =  273°  +  12-1°.  This  increases  with  the  pressure;  at  20  atm.  it
is  at  12'9°,  and  at  225  atm.  it  is  at  17'1°.  Now,  since  this  apparently
increases  proportionally  with  the  pressure,  and  indeed  only  a  few
degrees  in  proportion  to  these  enormous  changes  of  pressure,  the
limiting  curve  LX  advances  in  a  direction  only  slightly  differing  from
a  straight  line.

The  values  of  x  and  y,  i.e.  the  mutual  solubilities  of  water  and
sulphur  dioxide  in  the  presence  of  the  solid  hydrate,  are  not  known
as  yet.  They  should  not  differ  very  much  from  those  corresponding
to  the  curve  LE,  because  the  mutual  solubilities  of  two  liquids  vary
only  slightly  with  the  pressure.

CHAP.  II TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM 619

Advancing  down  along  the  system  of  curves  LE  or  LX,  we  can,
by.  cooling,  proceed  down  along  the  curve  LD,  already  described  ;  or
by  suitable  proportions  of  the  particular  phases,  we  can  proceed  down
along  the  curve  LB.  Here  the  phases  1,  2,  and  4,  viz.  (S09 .  7H20),
fl.(H20  +  xS02),  and  gas  (S02  +  zH20),  are  in  equilibrium ;  here  we
have  to  consider  a  system  composed  of  the  solid  hydrate,  of  its
saturated  solution  in  water,  and  of  the  vapours  emitted  by  these.
The  concentration  of  the  saturated  solution  has  the  following  values
at  the  corresponding  temperatures  : —

6400

6400

T

x  is

T

X-I8"

273  +  0°

10-4

273+ 7°

17-4

273  +  2

11-8

273+ 8

19-1

273  +  4

13-5

273  +  10

23-6

273  +  6

16-1

273  +  12-1

31-0

The  numbers  denote  the  parts  of  S02  to  100  parts  of  H90.  In  order
to  obtain  the  value  of  x  (i.e.  the  number  of  molecules  of  S09  to  one
mol.  of  H2O),  they  must  be  multiplied  by

18  1

6400

where  64  =  the  mol.  wt.  of  S02,  and  18  =  the  mol.  wt.  of  water.

The  vapour  pressure  p  of  the  saturated  solution  was  as  follows  at
the  corresponding  temperatures  : —

T

P

T

P

273-6°

13-7 cm.  Hg.

273+ 4-45°

51-9  cm.  Hg.

273-4

17-65

273+ 6-00

66-6

273  -  3

20-1

273+ 8-40

92-6

273-2-6

21-15

273  +  10-00

117-7 ,

273  -  2

23-0

273  +  11-30

150-3

273-1

26-2

273  +  11-75

166-6

273-0

29-7

273  +  12-10

177-3

273  +  2-8

43-2

Thus  the  four  limiting  curves  anastomose  in  the  point  L  ;  and
although  only  three  phases  are  coexistent  at  every  other  point  of
the  respective  curves,  yet  at  this  point  L,  and  only  at  this  point,
there  is  a  coincidence  with  each  other  of  the  four  following  phases,
viz. —

1.  The  solid  hydrate,  S02  .  7H20.

620  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  IV

2.  A  water  solution  of  S02,  having  the  composition  (H90  +  0'087S09).

3.  A  solution  of  H20  in  liquid  S02  (i.e.  S02  +  yH2O).

4.  A  gas  mixture  of  S02  and  H20  (i.e.  S02  +  zH20).

Inasmuch  as  each  one  of  these  systems  can  be  made  from  the
two  molecular  species,  S02  and  H20,  therefore,  during  a  finite  tempera-
ture interval,  according  to  the  "phase  rule,"  a  complete  equilibrium
can  be  established  for  only  three  of  these  systems.  All  four  may
coexist  only  at  the  transition  point  L,  which  is  in  this  case  a  quadruple
or  fourfold  point  ;  it  is  situated  at

T-273°  +  12-1°, andp=  177'3  cm.

Roozeboom  did  not  determine  the  values  of  y  and  z  for  the  point
L  ;  but  we  may  form  a  conception  of  their  magnitude  in  the  following
way  :  —

The  pressure  177'3  in  the  gas  mixture  S02  +  zH20  is  composed
of  the  partial  pressures  of  the  particular  gases.

Now,  since  a  water  solution  of  S02  is  present  at  the  transition
point,  therefore  the  partial  pressure  of  the  water  vapour  is  equal  to
the  partial  pressure  of  pure  water  at  the  temperature  in  question
(12'1°),  viz.  T05  cm.,  minus  the  depression  experienced  by  1  mol.  of
H20  on  dissolving  0-087  mol.  of  SO2;  and  this  latter  magnitude,
according  to  the  van't  Hoff  law  of  vapour  pressure,  may  be  estimated
in  round  numbers  as  equal  to

1-05  x  0-087  cm.

Thus  the  partial  pressure  of  the  water  vapour  amounts  approximately
to  0'9  cm.

Therefore  that  of  the  sulphur  dioxide  is

177-3  -0-9  =  176-4  cm.
Therefore  the  value  of  z  is  estimated  to  be

=  0-0051.

t  6*4

The  concentration  y  of  water  in  sulphur  dioxide  is  found  by
means  of  the  law  for  the  molecular  depression  of  the  vapour  pressure.
According  to  Regnault,  at  12-1°,  pure  liquid  sulphur  dioxide  has  a
vapour  pressure  of  185  cm.  But  now,  since  sulphur  dioxide  saturated
with  water  is  present  at  the  point  L,  and  since  the  partial  pressure  of
sulphur  dioxide  so  saturated  amounts  to  only  176'4,  therefore,  in
order  to  occasion  the  depression  of  8*6  cm.  [  =  185  -  176'4  =  8'6],

8"f .=  0-05  mol.  of  H20
176'4

CHAP.  II TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM 621

must  be  dissolved  in  every  molecule of S02 ;  and  thus  the  value
[0*05  mol.  H20]  corresponds  to  the  value  of  y.

As  stated  above,  the  equilibrium  pressures  in  the  system,
S02 .  7H20,  liq.  fl.(H20  +  xS02),  and  gaseous  (S02  +  zH20),  and  which
are  given  by  means  of  the  curve  LB,  these  pressures  have  been
measured  as  far  down  as  -  6°  (Celsius).  But  the  system  is  in  labile
equilibrium  beyond  the  point  B  (which  corresponds  to  the  temperature
of  -  2'6°  and  to  the  pressure  of  21 '1  cm.);  because  the  liquid  phase
vanishes  at  once  on  the  appearance  of  ice,  and  completely  solidifies
to  ice  and  solid  hydrate.  Thus,  instead  of  advancing  along  BA,  the
labile  extension  of  the  curve  LB  (and  which  is  figured  as  a  dotted
line  in  Fig.  33),  one  advances  along  the  curve  BC.  This  curve  refers
to  the  three  phases  forming  the  system  in  question ;  these  are —

1.  The  solid  hydrate.  •

2.  Ice.

3.  The  gas  mixture  (S02  +  zH20).

The  vapour  pressures  of  a  mixture  of  ice  and  the  solid  hydrate
are  as  follows  : —

T

•
P

T

P

273-2-6°
273-3
273-4

21-15  cm.  Hg.
20-65
19-35

273-6°
273  -  8
273-9

17  '7  cm.  Hg.
16-0
15-0

The  vapour  pressures  are  considerably  greater  than  would  be  the
case  if  the  system  were  under-cooled,  i.e.  if  the  solidification  of  the
water  solution  of  S02  had  not  occurred,  as  can  be  readily  seen  from
the  curve  tracing  (Fig.  33).  The  gas  mixture  emitted  by  the  ice  and
the  solid  hydrate  of  course  consists  of  H20  and  S02.  Now  since  ice
is  present,  the  partial  pressures  of  the  water  vapour  are  simply  equal  to  the
vapour  pressures  of  ice  at  the  corresponding  temperatures ;  and  these  can  be
taken  directly  from  Regnault's  tables,  and  thus  the  values  of  z  can  be
obtained.1  They  are  very  small  in  comparison  with  the  total
pressures.

Along  the  curve  BF  [Fig.  33],  ice,  the  water  solution  of  sulphurous
acid,  and  the  gaseous  mixture  (S02  +  zH20),  are  capable  of  coexistence.
The  corresponding  values  of  the  pressure  and  temperature  are  so
correlated  that  the  pressure  first  conditions  the  concentration  of  the
sulphurous  acid,  and  then  this  concentration  in  turn  conditions  the
lowering  of  the  freezing-point  of  water.  For  small  pressures,  i.e.
at  slight  concentration  of  the  sulphurous  acid,  the  curve  tends  to
approach  the  freezing-point  F  of  pure  water  at  T  =  273°.

1  Roozeboom  did  not  draw  this  conclusion,  but  its  correctness  appears  to  the  author
to  be  beyond  doubt.

622  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

Finally,  along  the  curve  BZ,  there  are  capable  of  coexistence,  ice,
the  solid  hydrate,  and  the  melted  mixture  of  the  two  (i.e.  a  water
solution  of  sulphurous  acid).  Inasmuch  as  the  melting  is  attended
by  a  diminution  of  volume,  the  curve  must  be  recurrent  (rucklaufig),
i.e.  the  temperature  of  equilibrium  must  fall  with  an  elevation  of
the  pressure.  But  this  has  not  been  investigated  in  detail.

Thus  the  point  B  represents  a  second  quadruple  point  ;  here  there  co-
exist the  four  following  phases,  viz.  :—

1.  Ice.

2.  The  solid  hydrate,  S02.  7H20.

3.  A  water  solution  of  SO2,  having  the  composition  (H20  +  0  -024S02).

4.  A  gas  mixture  of  S02  and  H20  (i.e.  S02  +  zH20).
The  co-ordinates  of  this  point  are

T=  273  -2-6°, and  p  =  2M  cm.

Inasmuch  as  the  vapour  pressure  of  ice  at  -  2*6°  amounts  to  0*38
cm,,  from  this  statement  the  value  of  z  amounts  to

The  areas  in  Figs.  32  and  33,  enclosed  by  the  curves,  constitute
regions  of  incomplete  equilibrium.

The  Hydrates  of  Ferric  Chloride.  —  As  an  example  of  a  more
extended  investigation  of  those  systems,  all  of  whose  phases  can  be
formed  of  two  molecular  species,  such  as  H20  and  Fe2Cl6,  we  will
describe  Roozeboom's  l  research  on  the  hydrates  of  ferric  chloride.
This  led  to  a  broadening  of  our  view  in  several  respects.

At  the  transition  points  of  this  system,  the  four  following  phases
are  capable  of  existing  beside  each  other,  viz.  :—

1.  The  solid  hydrate,  Fe2Cl6.  mH20.

2.  The  solid  hydrate,  Fe2Cl6  .  nH20.

3.  The  saturated  solution.

4.  Water  vapour.

For  the  case  where  the  hydrate  ice  occurs,  we  can  make

n  =  oo

and  for  the  case  where  water-free  ferric  chloride  separates  as  a  solid
phase,  we  can  make

n  =  <X

The  four "  limiting  curves  "  which  anastomose  at the  transition
point  are  composed  of  (a)  and  (6),  the  vapour-pressure  curves  of  the

1  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  10.  477  (1892).

CHAP.  II TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM

623

two  saturated  solutions  of  the  hydrate  ;  (c),  of  the  vapour-pressure
curve  of  a  mixture  of  the  two  solid  hydrates ;  (d),  and  of  the  vapour-
pressure  curve  of  a  solution  which  is  at  the  same  time  saturated  with
both  the  hydrates.

By  means  of  these  numerous  curves,  Roozeboom  investigated  the
solubility  curves  of  particular  hydrates  at  ordinary  pressures ;  and  thus
one  obtains  a  fairly  complete  view  of  the  relations  which  prevail  here.

The  following  tables  contain  the  results  of  his  measurements : —

THE  COMPOSITION  OF  THE  SATURATED  SOLUTIONS

n'  =  number  mol.  Fe2Cl6  to  100  mol.  H20,
n"  =  HQ0 ,, 1

Fe2Clc.

I.  Ice  (AB)

t

n'

n"

0°

1

00

-10

1-00

100

--20  -5

1-64

61

-27-5

1-90

52-6

-  40

2-37

42-2

-55

2-75

36-4

II.  Fe2Cl6.  12H20(BCD)

t

n'

n"

-55°

275

36-4

-41

2-81

35-6

-27

2-98

33-6

0

4-13

24-2

10

4-54

22-0

20

5-10

19-6

30

5-93

16-9

35

678

14-8

36-5

7-93

12-6

37

8-33

12-0

36

9-29

10-8

33

10-45

9-57

30

11-20

8-92

27-4

12-15

8-23

20

12-83

7-80

10

13-20

7-57

8

13-70

7-30

624

THEOR ETICAL  CHEMISTRY

III.  Fe,Cl,  .  7H20(DEF)

t

n'

u"

20°

11-35

8-81

27-4

12-15

8-23

32

13-55

7-38

32-5

14-29

7-00

30

15-12

6-61

25

15-54

6-47

IV.  Fe.Cl, .  5H20(FGH)

t

n'

n"

12°

12-87

7-77

20

13-95

7-17

27

14-85

6-73

30

15-12

6-61

35

15-64

6-40

50

17-50

5-71

55

19-15

5-2-2

56

20-00

5-00

55

20-32

4  92

V.  Fe.7Cl/.  4H20(HJK)

t

n  '

n"

50°

19-96

5-01

55

20-32

4-92

60

20-70

4-88

69

21  -53

4-64

72-5

23-35

4-28

73-5

25-00

4-00

72-5

26-15

3-82

70

27-90

3-58

66

29-20

3-43

CHAP.  II TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM 625

VI.  Fe2Cl6  -  Anhydride  (KL)

't

n'

n''

66°

29-20

3-43

70

29-42

3-40

75

28-92

3-46

80
100

29-20
2975

3-43
3-33

In  order  to  explain  this  according  to  Roozeboom's  method,  we  will
employ  another  graphic  delineation,  Fig.  34,  which  differs  slightly  from

••30

FesCl6.L

too

those  in  the  preceding  cases.  Inasmuch  as  the  concentration  of  the
solutions  here  commands  our  chief  interest,  therefore  we  will  express
the  abscissce  in  terms  of  temperature  (on  the  ordinary  scale) ;  and  the
ordinates  in  terms  of  the  composition,  expressed  in  molecules  of  Fe9Cl6
to  100  mol.  of  H20  (i.e.  the  n'  of  the  preceding  tables).

Fig.  34  gives  a  good  general  view  regarding  the  behaviour  of  the
equilibria.

2s

626  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

If  we  start  out  from  the  equilibrium,  water  +  ice,  and  add  thereto
ferric  chloride,  we  obtain  the  curve  AB  (Table  I.  of  the  preceding),  i.e.
the  curve  of  the  depression  of  the  freezing-point  by  adding  the  salt.
At  about  -  55°  we  reach  the  point  B,  which  corresponds  to  the  satura-
tion point  of  the  hydrate  of  12H20  ;  here  there  separates  the  so-called
"  cryo-hydrate,"  i.e.  a  mechanical  mixture  of  ice  and  solid  salt  (p.  490).

A  further  addition  of  ferric  chloride  causes  the  ice  to  disappear,
and  we  advance  along  the  curve  BC,  which  is  the  solubility  curve  of  the
hydrate  with  12H20.

At  37°  the  concentration  of  the  saturated  solution  becomes  equal
to  that  of  the  solid  hydrate,  and  at  this  temperature  either  the  solution
Fe2Cl6  +  1 2H20  congeals  smoothly  to  the  solid  hydrate,  or  else  this
solidified  hydrate  is  changed  smoothly  to  a  homogeneous  liquid.  Thus
37°  is  the  melting-point  of  this  hydrate.

Now,  if  we  add  anhydrous  ferric  chloride  to  this  melted  hydrate,
we  will  advance  along  the  curve  CDN.  Of  the  two  branches  which
diverge  from  C,  the  one,  CB,  corresponds  to  the  curve  of  the  depres-
sion of  the  freezing-point  occasioned  by  adding  H20 ;  the  other,
CDN,  corresponds  to  the  curve  of  the  depression  of  the  freezing-point
of  the  hydrate,  occasioned  by  the  addition  of  Fe2Cl6.  Thus  below  the
melting-point  [37°]  of  the  pure  hydrate  [Fe2Cl6  +  12H20]  it  is  possible
to  prepare  two  saturated  solutions,  one  of  which  contains  more  H20,
and  the  other  less  than  the  hydrate  in  question,  as  it  stands  in  equili-
brium with  the  solution.  We  will  return  to  this  remarkable  pheno-
menon a  little  later.

In  a  perfectly  similar  way,  one  finds  for  the  hydrate  with  7H20
the  curve  DEF ;  for  the  hydrate  with  5H20,  the  curve  FGH ;  and  for
the  hydrate  with  4H20,  the  curve  HJK.  At  K  begins  the  almost
straight  solubility  curve  of  anhydrous  Fe2Cl6.  The  melting-points  of
the  respective  hydrates  are,  at  C  (37°) ;  at  E  (32'5°) ;  at  G  (56°) ;  and
at  J  (73-5°).

The  respective  curve  fractions  DN,  FM,  DO,  FP,  and  HR,  corre-
spond to  certain  labile  conditions.  Ice  and  the  hydrate  containing
most  water  are  in  equilibrium  at  the  point  B.  At  the  points  D,  F,
and  H  the  respective  contiguous  hydrates  are  in  equilibrium.  And
finally,  at  K,  the  hydrate  containing  the  least  quantity  of  water  is  in
equilibrium  with  the  anhydrous  Fe2Cl6.

The  composition  of  the  respective  solutions  at  each  of  these  points
lies  between  the  composition  of  the  two  respective  solid  bodies
[hydrates],  because  at  these  respective  points  [D,  F,  H,  and  K]  the
second  branch  of  a  hydrate  containing  more  water  intersects  the  first
branch  of  one  containing  less  water.  These  respective  points  [of  the
intersection  of  the  respective  curves]  are,  at  -  55°  [B]  ;  at  2 7 '4°  [D] ;
at  30°  [F] ;  at  55°  [H] ;  and  at  66°  [K] ;  and  these  points  also  repre-
sent the  temperatures  at  which  there  solidify  mixtures  of  the  two
respective  [contiguous]  hydrates.

CHAP.  II TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM 627

In  order  to  obtain  a  clear  picture  of  the  relations  which  prevail
here,  let  one  imagine  the  concentration  and  temperature  of  a  solution
of  ferric  chloride  to  be  given  by  a  point  which  lies  in  the  right-hand
side  of  the  region  bounded  by  the  multiple  curves  ABCDEFGHJKL.
On  cooling,  the  solution  at  first  traverses  a  horizontal  line,  the  com-
position remaining  constant ;  and  at  a  definite  temperature,  its  path
will  cut  one  of  the  portions  of  the  curve,  say  FGH,  e.g.  If  we  suppose
supersaturation  to  be  excluded  at  the  moment  of  the  intersection,  there
will  occur  the  separation  of  a  solid  substance  having  the  composition,
e.g.  Fe2Cl6 .  5H20  [to  correspond  to  the  curve  FGH].  By  more  ex-
tended cooling  the  curve  will  retreat  towards  lower  temperatures  until
it  reaches  its  final  point,  where  another  solid  substance  appears,  and
complete  solidification  will  result.

If  the  solution  should  have  the  same  composition  as  its  hydrate,
it  would  solidify  completely  at  its  melting-point.  If  the  solution
should  have  a  composition  corresponding  to  the  intersection  of  any  two
of  the  contiguous  curves  [as  at  the  points  B,  D,  F,  H,  or  K],  then  it
would  solidify  completely  at  the  temperature  of  the  point  in  question.1

Most  interesting  phenomena  would  be  observed  if  one  should
evaporate  down  a  dilute  solution  of  ferric  chloride,  and  the  results
would  be  most  striking  between  30°  and  32°.  Here,  by  the  removal
of  water  vapour,  the  dilute  solution  would  first  dry  down  to
Fe.,Cl6 .  12H20.  It  would  then  liquefy,  and  then  dry  down  to
Fe2Cl6 .  7H20.  It  would  then  liquefy  again,  and  a  third  time  dry
down,  this  time  to  Fe2Cl6.  5H20.

The  whole  series  of  these  phenomena  corresponds  to  the  respective  stable
condition.  This  very  remarkable  behaviour  would  be  inexplicable
were  it  not  a  necessary  result  conditioned  by  the  relations  which  are
illustrated  in  the  curves  shown  in  Fig.  34.

Regarding  the  curve  branches,  e.g.  BCD  and  DEF  [of  one  curve],
it  follows  that,  within  the  limits  of  a  certain  temperature  interval,
there  are  two  saturated  solutions  having  a  different  composition,  which
are  in  equilibrium  with  the  respective  solid  hydrates.  One  of  these
always  contains  more  water,  the  other  less  than  the  solid  hydrate.

The  second  kind  of  saturated  solution  was  fortunately  discovered
by  Roozeboom  in  an  investigation 2  on  the  hydrates  of  calcium  chloride.
It  should  be  particularly  emphasised  that  both  of  these  solutions  [i.e.
on  both  branches  of  any  one  curve]  are  stable  throughout,  and  nowhere
supersaturated.

Supersaturation  only  occurs  in  a  solution  when  its  melting -point
lies  in  the  region  to  the  left  of  the  curve  ABCDEFGHJKL.  Super-
saturation  may  be  produced  by  adding  to  a  solution  a  piece  of  its
respective  hydrate  in  the  solid  state,  when,  according  to  circumstances,
the  proportion  of  ferric  chloride  will  be  either  diminished  or  increased,

1  These  two  cases  are  good  examples  of  the  "  eutectic  and  dystectic  " mixtures
described  by  the  writer  on  p.  127.  2  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  4.  31  (1889).

628  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

accordingly  as  the  supersaturated  solution  belongs  to  the  first  or  the
second  category  [i.e.  to  the  first  or  second  branch  of  any  particular
curve].

The  writer  has  described  this  particular  investigation  at  this
length,  because,  in  his  judgment,  it  is  entitled  to  claim  very  high
methodical  value.  Before  the  work  of  Eoozeboom,  only  one  of  the
hydrates  of  ferric  chloride,  viz.  the  highest  one,  was  certainly  recog-
nised, the  others  being  entirely  unknown.  But  the  investigation  of  the
equilibria  led  at  once  and  of  necessity  to  the  discovery  of  the  others.
While  Roozeboom  was  studying  the  "  solubility  curve  "  of  the  hydrate
with  5H20,  he  found  certain  irregularities  which  he  suspected  to  be
due  to  the  existence  of  another  hydrate,  and  thus  he  was  led  to  the
discovery  of  the  hydrate  Fe2Cl6 .  7H20.  Now  the  stable  part  of  its
solubility  curve  extends  only  over  the  portion  DEF,  i.e.  from  27*4°
to  32-5°,  and  from  30°  to  32'5°.

Thus  this  hydrate  would  hardly  have  been  discovered  without  a  systemcdic
investigation  of  this  sort.

Roozeboom  and  his  students  l  have  studied,  with  similar  thorough-
ness, a  number  of  other  conditions  of  equilibrium  of  the  systems  com-
posed of  two  molecular  species.

Detection  of  Chemical  Compounds  by  Means  of  Melting
Curves. — A  curve  of  melting-points  may  always  be  used  to  detect
chemical  compounds  of  two  substances  in  the  same  way  as  for  water
and  ferric  chloride  in  the  example  given  above ;  each  compound  is
indicated  by  a  peak,  since  an  excess  of  either  component  lowers  the
melting-point  of  the  compound.  This  assumes  that  the  compound
crystallises  pure,  and  not  as  an  isomorphous  mixture,  otherwise  an
excess  of  one  component  does  not  necessarily  lower  the  melting-point.2
The  question  whether  the  same  compound,  e.g.  a  hydrate  of  ferric
chloride,  exists  in  the  liquid  state,  can  of  course  not  be  settled  by  this
method.

This  method  is  especially  useful  in  studying  racemic  mixtures ;  on
account  of  the  exact  similarity  of  the  dextro  and  laevo  forms,  the
melting  curve  must  be  symmetrical  about  the  racemic  compound.
According  to  the  extensive  investigations  of  Adriani,3  three  cases  are
to  be  distinguished  :—

1.  A  continuous (convex or concave) curve, indicating mixed
crystals.

2.  Two  curves,  cutting  at  the  composition  of  the  racemic  mixture,
give  a  eutectic  point  (no  compound).

3.  Three  curves,  the  central  one  with  a  maximum,  indicating  a
racemic  compound ; eutectic points lie symmetrically  on  each side
(mixture  of  the  compound  with  the  dextro-  or  laevo-body).

1  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  4.  31  (1889).

2  See  especially  Roozeboom,  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  3O.  385  (1899).
3  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  33.  453  (1900).

CHAP.  II TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM 629

Systems  of  Three  Components. — The  investigation  of  such
systems  is,  of  course,  much  more  complex,  as  the  multiplicity  of  forms
involved  in  complete  equilibrium  has  already  reached  an  extraordinarily
high  degree.  For  the  same  reason  their  experimental  investigation
is  very  incomplete ;  the  only  systems  thoroughly  studied  so  far  are
CuCl2,  KC1,  H20  l  and  PbI2,  KI,  H20,2  as  well  as  those  due  to  mixing
K2S04,  MgS04J  H203  and  FeCl3,  HC1,  H20.4  The  complex  relations
discovered  in  these  systems  cannot  be  described  here,  but  may  be
found  in  van't  HofFs  "  chemical  dynamics  "  already  quoted.  In  the
same  book  the  still  more  complex  behaviour  of  the  system  of  four
components,  MgS04,  K2S04,  KC1,  H2O,  investigated  by  Lowenherz  5
is  described."

The  phase  rule,  it  must  be  noted,  is  only  a  scheme  into  which
complete  heterogeneous  equilibrium  fits,  and  which,  therefore,  any
experimentalist  in  this  region  must  be  familiar  with,  just  as  the
analytical  chemist  must  bear  in  mind  the  conservation  of  mass  during
his  operations.  But  when  B.  Roozeboom,  very  naturally  overrating
the  rule  that  guided  him  in  his  fine  experimental  work,  says  that  there
is  no  better  point  of  view  in  heterogeneous  equilibrium6  than  Gibbs's
phase  rule,  the  statement  is  as  misleading  as  if  the  analytical  chemist
made  it  with  respect  to  the  law  of  conservation  of  mass.  It  must  not
be  forgotten  that  for  the  more  frequent,  and  by  far  the  more  important
heterogeneous  equilibria,  viz.  the  incomplete,  the  phase  rule  has  nothing
to  say.  But  apart  from  this,  research  must  not  be  too  limited
in  its  object,  and  chemistry  would  almost  be  reduced  to  a  triviality
if  it  followed  Koozeboom's  suggestions.  Molecular  theory,  thermo-
dynamics of  incomplete  equilibrium,  and  especially  the  law  of  mass
action,  are  far  more  important  guides,  and  of  deeper  meaning,  than  the
scheme  of  the  phase  rule,  useful  and  even  indispensable  as  the  latter  is
to  chemical  research.7  Roozeboom  expresses  these  views  in  reviewing
a  book,  The  Phase  Rule,  by  Bancroft  (Ithaca  and  Leipzig,  1897),  which
contains  a  summary  of  the  work  on  the  subject,  of  which  he  says,  "  The
chemist  will  be  astonished  at  the  important  development  this  branch
of  his  science  has  reached,  and  what  a  precious  guide  the  phase  rule
is  ; "  whilst  Ostwald  8  much  more  correctly  remarks,  "  No  reader  can  get
through  the  248  pages  of  the  book  without  a  certain  feeling  of  tired-
ness." We  may  refer  also  to  the  good  and  brief  exposition,  Die
Phasenregel  und  ihre  Anwendungen,-  by  W.  Meyerhoffer  (Leipzig  and

1  Meyerhoffer,  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  5.  97  (1890)  ;  9.  641  (1892).

2  Schreinemakers,  ibid.,  9.  57  (1892).
Van  der  Heide,  ibid.,  12.  416  (1893).

Roozeboom  and.  Schreinemakers,  ibid.,  15.  588  (1894).

Ibid.,  13.  459  (1894) ;  and  23.  95  (1897).  -

Journ.  phys.  Chem.,  1.  559  (1897).

Thus  van't  Hoff  remarked,  "  It  is  a  pity  that,  valuable  as  the  contents  of  the  phase
rule  is,  there  has  been  a  certain  exaggeration  of  its  scope  (Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Qes.,  35.
4252  (1892).

8  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  23.  706  (1897).

630  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

Wien,  1893),  to  the  paper  of  van't  Hoff  quoted  on  p.  481  and  the
monograph,  Zinn,  Gips,  und  Stahl  (Miinchen,  Oldenbourg,  1901).  It
is  with  especial  pleasure  that  one  notes  that  Roozeboom  has  begun
to  put  his  researches  on  the  phase  rule  into  book  form  (the  first
volume  published  by  Vieweg,  Brunswick,  1901).

The  Thermodynamics of  Complete Equilibrium.  —  If  we

allow  a  complete  equilibrium  to  pass  beyond  "the  limiting  curve"
(p.  614),  one  phase  will  disappear  and  a  new  one  will  appear;  both
these  phases  are  coexistent  in  the  limiting  curve  itself.

Let  us  denote  by  Q  the  quantity  of  heat  absorbed  in  the  transition,
by  V0  the  associated  increase  of  volume  of  the  system,  and  by  A  the
maximal  external  work  which  the  system  sustains  as  a  result  of  the
designated  change.  Thus  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  gives
the  equation  (p.  22),

Both  Q  and  A  refer  to  a  definite  change  of  volume  V0  of  the  system,
e.g.  an  increase  of  volume  of  1  c.c.  If  we  denote  by  p  the  pressure  at
that  point  of  the  limiting  curve  where  the  transition  occurs,  then  it
follows  that

A  =  Y0p, and  dA  =  V0dp  ;
and  we  find  that

Q  =  T^VO . . . -  ., (I.)

This  equation  embraces  all  that  the  second  law  can  teach  us  concerning
a  chemical  system  which  stands  in  complete  equilibrium.  It  is  obvious
that  the  thermodynamic  formulae  derived  for  evaporation  (p.  59),  for
sublimation  (p.  73),  and  for  the  process  of  melting  (p.  70),  are  special
cases  of  equation  (I.)  ;  because,  as  is  shown  on  p.  464  and  following,
the  conditions  of  equilibrium  between  different  states  of  aggregation
are  to  be  enumerated  among  the  cases  of  complete  equilibrium.

Now,  since  we  have  seen  that  the  important  applications  of  equa-
tion (I.),  cited  in  the  places  just  mentioned  in  Book  I,  and  their
manipulation  in  complicated  cases,  offer  no  particular  difficulties,  —
therefore  we  may  be  excused  from  describing  here  any  further  special
applications,  and  especially  so,  because  we  shall  have  frequent  dealings
with  the  preceding  equation.

Equation  (I.)  gives  simple  results  when  it  is  applied  to  the  passage
across  the  limiting  curves  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  their  points  of
intersection,  i.e.  of  their  transition  points.

Let  us  imagine  the  system  to  be  conducted  around  the  transition
point  in  a  very  small  curve;  then  all  of  the  n  limiting  curves

CHAP.  II TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM 631

will be crossed, and we will obtain n equations of the form of
(I.),  viz.-

Q-TdpV or  TV  -dTQ
(J-l^Vo,  vo-^-

If  we  add  these  n  equations,  it  follows  that

now  2Q  is  the  sum  of  the  heat  developed  in  circling  around  the
transition  point,  and  accordingly,  as  is  true  in  every  reversible  and
isothermal  heat  process  (p.  22),  is  equal  to  zero;  and  a  similar  thing
is  true  of  2V0,  because  the  system  returns  to  its  original  volume ;  and
of  course  2TV0  is  also  equal  to  zero,  because  T  changes  only  to  an
infinitesimal  amount  during  the  passage  around  the  circle.  And  thus
we  find  that

2dpVo  =  sdTQ  =  0

These  phenomena,  which  are  observed  in  passing  from  one  phase  to
another,  are  the  relations  which  must  exist  between  the  values  of  the

trigonometrical  tangents  of  the  angle  -^  (with which  the  limiting

curves  anastomose  in  their  common  intersection  point),  and  their
latent  heats  on  the  one  hand ;  and  the  changes  of  volume  on  the
other.

Reference  should  be  made  to  the  investigation  of  Riecke1  for
several  more  broadly  generalised  relations,  which  are  required  by
thermodynamics  for  the  particular  factors  of  the  complete  equilibrium.

Tammann  (monograph  quoted  on  p.  99)  has  discovered  the
following  theorem  on  the  position  of  curves  that  terminates  in  a  triple
point :  "  The  prolongation  of  each  curve  of  equilibrium  must  lie  between
the  other  two  curves."  The  proof  of  this  theorem  rests  on  the
consideration  that  on  a  temperature  entropy  diagram  a  triangle
corresponds  to  the  triple  point ;  now  the  corresponding  statement
necessarily  holds  for  the  perpendiculars  to  the  three  sides,  and  this
leads  to  the  above  theorem.

Condensed  Systems. — Although  the  cases  enumerated  thus  far
are  subject  to  the  universal  laws  of  complete  equilibrium,  yet  the  com-
plex cases  (which  van't  Hoff2  calls  "condensed  systems")  offer  certain
peculiarities  which  justify  us  in  giving  them  a  special  description.

Such  are  the  heterogeneous  systems,  all  the  reacting  components  of  which
are  in  the  solid  or  liquid  state,  but  not  in  the  gaseous  state.

1  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  6.  268,  411  (1890).  2  Etudes  de  dyn.  chim.,  p.  139.

632  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

The  simplest  type  of  this  sort  of  reactions  is  the  melting  of  a  solid
body.  The  condition  of  equilibrium  with  which  we  are  here  concerned,
and  which  consists  in  the  coexistence  of  a  solid  body  and  its  melted
product, — this  is  a  "  complete  equilibrium  "  ;  because  for  any  definite
temperature  there  is  only  one  pressure  at  which  both  phases  of  the
system  are  stable  beside  each  other.  This  pressure  changes  with  the
temperature,  and  in  such  a  way  that  it  can  '  be  calculated  from
Thomson's  formula,  with  the  aid  of  the  change  of  volume  in  the
melting,  and  the  heat  absorption  associated  therewith  (p.  70).  The
temperature  at  which  the  two  phases  can  coexist  at  atmospheric
pressure  is  called  the  "  melting-point "  of  the  solid  body.

In  contrast  to  those  reactions,  where  a  gaseous  phase  either  appears
or  disappears  in  the  "  condensed  system,"  the  change  of  volume
occasioned  by  the  change  of  phase  is  relatively  very  small;  and  there-
fore, according  to  equation  (I.)  (p.  630),  the  influence  of  the  pressure
on  the  equilibrium  is  so  much  the  smaller.  Thus  while  the  boiling-
point  varies  greatly  with  the  external  pressure,  the  melting-point
changes  to  only  a  relatively  small  extent.

And  therefore  we  must  consider  this  as  the  characteristic  peculiarity
of  the  reactions  of  "  condensed  systems,"  viz.  in  that  they  group  themselves
in  a  purely  quantitative  contrast  to  those  reactions  whose  substances  are
volatilised.

Thus  for  most  purposes  it  is  immaterial  whether  we  study  the
"  condensed  systems  "  at  atmospheric  pressure,  or  at  some  other  pres-
sure not  very  far  removed  from  it ;  and  it  is  still  less  important  to
notice  the  slight  variations  of  the  atmospheric  pressure.

That  temperature  at  which  all  phases  of  a  condensed  system  can
exist  beside  each  other  is  called  the  "  temperature  of  transformation  "
(  Umwandlungs-temperatur).  Below  this  the  reaction  will  advance  to  a
completion  (i.e.  until  one  phase  at  least  is  completely  exhausted)  in
one  direction  or  in  the  opposite.

The  "  transformation  temperatures  "  of  the  systems  described  on
pp.  616  and  622  can  be  found  by  searching  out  the  temperature
points  corresponding  to  the  atmospheric  pressure  on  the  limiting  curves
which  separate  the  region  of  liquid  and  solid  phases.  Moreover,  these
transformation  temperatures,  as  will  be  more  thoroughly  shown  later,
usually  lie  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  intersections  of  the  limiting
curves,  i.e.  near  the  transition  points.

If  we  allow  the  transformation  in  a  condensed  system  to  complete
itself  in  one  sense,  a  little  below  the  transformation  temperature,  and
if  we  then  warm  it  a  little  above  the  transformation  temperature,  so
that  the  reaction  will  play  itself  out  in  the  reverse  sense — then  after
cooling  down  to  the  ordinary  temperature,  the  system  is  again  in  its
original  condition.  These  two  contrasted  transformations  complete
themselves  spontaneously,  and  are  able  to  perform  a  certain  amount
of  external  work,  although  this  is  usually  very  slight.

CHAP.  II TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM 633

Therefore,  in  this  cyclic  process,  heat  must  fall  from  a  higher  to
a  lower  temperature.  That  is,  the  transformation  below  the  temperature
of  transformation  must  occur  with  a  development  of  heat  ;  and  above  this
temperature  with  absorption  of  heat  ;  or  the  system  ivhich  is  stable  at  higher
temperatures  is  formed  from  the  system  which  is  stable  at  lower  temperatures
with  an  absorption  of  heat.

As  is  well  known,  it  always  takes  an  elevation  of  temperature  to
melt  a  solid  substance  ;  this  fact  necessarily  requires  that  there  shall
be  an  introduction  of  heat  in  order  to  melt  a  substance.

Allotropic  Transformation.  —  An  important  example  of  con-
densed systems  is  found  in  the  equilibrium  between  two  modifications  of  the
same  substance.

The  transformation  of  orthorhombic  into  monoclinic  sulphur  has  been
well  studied.  At  atmospheric  pressure  these  two  phases  are  in
equilibrium  at  95'6°.  If  the  temperature  is  maintained  constant,
then  above  this  temperature  the  orthorhombic  sulphur  goes  over  to
the  monoclinic  variety,  while  below  this  temperature,  conversely,  the
monoclinic  variety  changes  to  the  orthorhombic  ;  in  both  cases,  the
reaction  occurs  without  change  of  composition  of  one  of  the  phases,
and  therefore  it  occurs  completely,  as  is  the  case  in  all  such  reactions.

The  transformation  temperature,  which  is  completely  analogous  to
the  melting-point,  varies  with  the  external  pressure  ;  and  also,  as  is
directly  obvious  from  the  considerations  of  the  preceding  section,  it
occurs  according  to  a  method  given  by  the  same  formula  of  Thomson,
and  which  makes  disclosures  regarding  the  dependence  of  the  melting-
point  upon  the  external  pressure.

Thus  if  dT  denotes  the  elevation  of  the  transformation  temperature
corresponding  to  the  increase  of  pressure  dp  ;  and  if  o-  and  r  denote
respectively  the  specific  volumes  of  the  monoclinic  and  orthorhombic
sulphur,  at  the  transformation  temperature  T,  on  the  absolute  scale  ;
and  if  r  denotes  the  amount  of  heat  in  g.-cal.  absorbed  by  the  trans-
formation of  1  g.  of  sulphur,  then,  according  to  p.  70,  we  have

dp  1000r'

and  since

T  =  273  +  95-6°, cr  -  r  =  0'0126  c.cm., and  r  =  2'52  cal.,
therefore

f  =  0*045*.

dp

That  is,  the  temperature  of  transformation  must  rise  0'045°,  on
account  of  the  elevation  of  the  external  pressure  [per  atm.].  The
experimental  test  of  this  theoretical  prediction,  as  conducted  by

634  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

Reicher,1  confirms  quantitatively  that  the  elevation  of  the  transforma-
tion temperature  amounts  to  about  0'05°  per  atm.

Similarly  one  always  obtains  the  same  kind  of  results  in  a  large
number  of  analogous  cases,  i.e.  when  we  find  two  modifications  of  a
dimorphous  substance,  there  is  always  a  temperature,  corresponding  to
the  melting-point,  above  which  only  the  one  variety  can  correspond  to
the  state  of  equilibrium  (at  atmospheric  pressure),  and  below  which
only  the  other  variety  can  so  correspond  ;  and  by  passing  beyond
this  temperature,  there  occurs  a  total  transformation  of  one  modification
into  the  other.2  This  regularity  of  behaviour  has  been  called  by  van't
Hoff  "  the  incompatibility  of  condensed  systems."

Although  the  influence  of  pressure  on  the  temperature  of  trans-
formation of  allotropic  modifications  may  be  very  slight,  yet  it  really
manifests  itself  in  all  cases,  and  may  become  considerable  when  the
action  of  enormous  pressures  is  concerned.3  This  point  is  of  great
importance  in  mineralogy.  In  rocks  which  are  cooling  under  enor-
mous pressure,  certain  modifications  may  be  formed,  the  preparation  of
which  has  not  been  accomplished  as  yet  in  the  laboratory,  because  it
has  not  been  possible  to  establish  the  conditions  suitable  for  their
formation.

In  general,  the  study  of  the  relations  of  the  equilibrium  between
the  allotropic  forms  of  the  same  substance  is  usually  rendered  im-
possible by  reason  of  the  slowness  of  the  transformation.  Thus  we  do
not  know  certainly  which  of  the  modifications  of  carbon  is  the  more
stable,  or  where  the  temperature  of  transformation  lies,  etc.  Moreover,
the  conclusion  that  diamond  must  be  more  stable  than  graphite  at
higher  temperatures,  because,  according  to  p.  593,  it  can  be  formed
from  graphite  with  absorption  of  heat ;  this  conclusion  is  not  inevitable;
for  the  heat  of  transformation  changes  with  the  temperature,  on  account
of  the  difference  between  the  specific  heats  of  the  two  modifications ;
and  therefore  the  heat  of  transformation  may  vary  with  the  tempera-
ture of  transformation,  on  which  it  alone  depends ;  and  even  the  signs
prefixed  may  be  different  from  those  referred  to  ordinary  tem-
peratures.4

As  to  the  velocity  of  the  change  there  are  the  greatest  differences.
In  some  cases,  e.g.  Tetrabrommethane,  it  is  as  rapid  as  the  solidification
of  a  liquid ;  in  others  so  slow  that  the  two  modifications  can  be  kept
year-long  without  the  transformation  taking  place.  Then  it  is  hardly
possible  to  tell  which  is  the  stable  form,  or  where  the  transition
temperature  lies,  e.g.  between  graphite  and  diamond,  between  quartz
and  tridymite.  In  fusion,  so  far,  equilibrium  has  only  been  over-

1  Z&it.  f.  Krist.,  8.  593  (1884).

2  For  other  similar  examples,  see  0.  Lehmann,  Molecular  Physik,  1.  Leipzig,  1888;

3  See  especially  the  researches  and  calculations  in  Tammann's  work  quoted  on  p.  99.

4  On  the  formation  of  diamond  see  the  very  interesting  work  of  Moissan,  The  Electric
Furnace.

CHAP.  II TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM 635

stepped  in  one  sense  by  under-cooling  the  liquid  ;  it  has  not  been
found  possible  to  overheat  the  solid  without  melting  it  ;  but  in  solid
transitions  both  things  are  possible,  so  that  a  body  can  often  be
heated  well  above  its  transition  point  without  being  turned  into  the
stable  form.  The  transition  is  usually  hastened  by  contact  with  already
transformed  material,  just  as  an  undercooled  liquid  can  be  made  to
freeze  by  contact  with  a  crystal  of  the  solid.  E.  Cohen  l  has  studied
a  good  instance  of  this  in  tin.  The  white  form  in  which  tin  is  usually
known  is  really  only  stable  above  20°,  but  can  be  very  much  under-
cooled  without  conversion  into  the  grey  form.  In  very  cold  winters
spontaneous  conversion  sometimes  takes  place,  and  the  mass  of  tin  falls
into  powder.  If  the  white  tin  is  "  infected  "  with  a  trace  of  grey  tin,
the  conversion  into  the  grey  form,  "  the  tin  disease,"  goes  on  at  ordinary
temperature.

The  Melting  of  Salts  containing  Water  of  Crystallisation.

—  Among  the  other  phenomena  which  belong  here,  and  in  contrast  to
those  preceding  which,  although  of  a  physical  nature,  have  been
included  in  the  chemical  section,  is  the  so-called  melting  of  salts
containing  water  of  crystallisation.  The  fact  that  their  fusion  is  usually
accompanied  by  the  separation  of  a  salt  containing  less  water  of
crystallisation,  shows  that  here  we  are  not  dealing  with  a  case  of
simple  fusion,  i.e.  with  the  uniform  change  of  a  solid  into  a  liquid.

Thus  from  the  fusion  of  Glauber's  salt,  there  not  only  results  a
liquid  product  (which  is  a  saturated  water  solution  of  Glauber's  salt,
S04Na2  .  1  OH20),  but  also  the  solid  anhydrous  salt,  S04Na2.

Now  it  is  at  once  evident  that  here  we  are  dealing  with  a  "  com-
plete equilibrium  "  ;  for  in  the  liquefaction  of  Glauber's  salt  we  must
distinguish  the  three  phases,  viz.  S04Na2.10H20  (solid);  S04Na2
(solid)  ;  and  H20  +  xS04Na2  (saturated  solution).  And  it  is  also
evident  that  for  the  construction  of  the  three  phases,  there  are  re-
quired at  least  the  two  molecular  species,  H20  and  Na2SO4.

Therefore,  according  to  the  phase-rule,  for  a  given  pressure  there
can  correspond  one,  and  only  one,  temperature  at  which  all  three
phases  can  coexist  beside  each  other.  Below  this  temperature  the
reaction,

S04Na2.  10H2Cq±S04Na2  +  10H20,

will  advance  to  a  completion  in  the  sense  of  the  equation  from  right
to  left  ;  above  this  temperature,  completely  from  left  to  right.

This  temperature  (33°),  which  corresponds  to  the  atmospheric
pressure,  is  called  the  "  temperature  of  transformation  "  (  Umwandlungs-
temperatur).  On  account  of  the  very  slight  changes  in  volume  associ-
ated with  the  reaction,  this  temperature  varies  to  only  an  inconsiderable
degree  with  the  external  pressure.

1  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  30.  601  (1899)  ;  33.  57  (1900)  ;  35.  588  (1900).

636  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

The  Formation  of  Double  Salts. — Now  there  are  known l  to  us
a  number  of  transformation  temperatures  of  condensed  systems  which
consist  of  four  phases ;  therefore,  according  to  the  phase-rule,  they
must  be  constructed  of  at  least  three  molecular  species.

These  reactions  include  the  formation  of  double  salts,  such  as  blodite
(astrakanite,  simonite),  (S04)2Na2Mg .  4H20,  from  the  sulphates  of
sodium  and.  magnesium.  This  reaction  occurs  according  to  the
equation

S04Na2.  10H20  +  S04Mg.  7H20^±(S04)2Na2Mg .  4H2O  +  13H20.

The  four  phases  coexistent  in  equilibrium  are  formed  from  the  three
solid  salts  and  their  saturated  solution.  The  temperature  of  equili-
brium is  21 '5° ;  above  this,  only  the  phases  occurring  on  the  right  side
of  the  reaction  equation  are  coexistent ;  below  this  temperature  only
those  on  the  left.  This  will  appear  from  the  following  considerations.

If  a  mixture  of  finely  pulverised  blodite  arid  water,  in  the  propor-
tions given  above,  is  prepared  below  21*5°,  the  mixture,  which  first  was
a  thin  paste,  hardens  in  a  short  interval  to  a  completely  dry  and  solid
mixture  of  the  first  two  sulphates.  This  does  not  Jiappen  above  2T50.

Conversely,  if  one  mixes  the  two  sulphates  of  sodium  and  mag-
nesium in  molecular  proportions,  and  reduces  them  to  a  fine  powder,
then  above  21  '5°  blodite  is  formed  after  a  longer  or  shorter  interval,
and  the  water  which  is  set  free  occasions  a  partial  liquefaction  of  the
blodite;  but  below  21*5°  the  mixture  of  the  finely  powdered  sulphates
of  sodium  and  magnesium  remains  unchanged.

A  still  further  complication  should  be  noticed  here,  viz.  the  lique-
faction of  the  Glauber's  salt,  which,  as  mentioned  above,  in  the  absence
of  other  salts,  occurs  at  33° ;  but  here,  as  a  result  of  the  presence  of
the  magnesium  sulphate  in  molecular  proportions,  the  melting-point
experiences  a  depression  of  7°,  just  as  the  melting-point  of  water  is
depressed  by  the  presence  of  dissolved  salts.

The  relations  are  completely  analogous  in  the  formation  of  sodium-
ammonium-racematej  a  double  salt,  which  can  be  formed  above  27°  by
rubbing  together  a  dry  mixture  [in  molecular  proportions]  of  right  and
left  sodium-ammonium-tartrates ;  but  the  double  salt  [i.e.  the  race-
mate]  cannot  be  so  formed  below  this  temperature.

Here,  at  the  temperature  of  transformation,  the  following  four
phases  are  coexistent,  viz.  the  three  solid  salts  and  their  saturated
solution.

At  every  other  temperature  the  reaction

2C406H4NaNH4 .  4H20^±(C406H4NaNH4)2 .  2H20  +  6H20

advances  to  a  completion  either  in  one  sense  or  the  other.  Thus,  if
one  attempts  to  cleave  the  optically  inactive  mixture  of  the  right  and

1  van't  Hoff  and  van  Deventer,  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  1.  170  (1887).

CHAP.  II TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM 637

left  compound,  by  the  method  described  on  p.  334,  he  will  find  it
absolutely  necessary  to  work  on  the  appropriate  side  of  the  tempera-
ture of  transformation ;  in  this  case,  e.g.,  below  it.

The  formation  of  calcium- copper-acetate  (CaCu(Ac)4 .  8H20)  from
the  two  salts  (Ca(Ac)2 .  H20  and  Cu(Ac)2 .  H20),  and  the  corre-
sponding quantity  of  water,  6H20, — this  exhibits  some  peculiarities,1
inasmuch  as  the  formation  takes  place  easily  at  lower  temperatures,
but  not  above  76° ;  also,  by  raising  them  above  this  temperature,  the
double  salts  are  decomposed,  instead  of  forming  the  single  salts
described  above ;  and  also  this  decomposition  of  the  double  salts
occasioned  at  higher  temperatures  is  accompanied  by  a  very  consider-
able contraction,  and  by  a  very  apparent  change  in  colour,  as  the
double  salt  is  blue,  the  copper  acetate  is  green,  and  the  calcium
acetate  is  colourless.

The  formation  of  cupric-potassium-chloride  (CuCl2KCl),  and  also
that  of  cupric-di-potassium- chloride  (CuC]22KCl .  2H20),  has  been
thoroughly  investigated  by  MeyerhofFer.2  There  are  two  correspond-
ing reactions,  viz.—

CuCl22KC12H20^±CuCl2KCl  +  KC1  +  2H20 ;
CuCl22KC12H20  +  CuCUH205±2CuCl2KCl  +  4H20  ;

and  to  these  there  correspond  respectively  the  transformation  tempera-
tures of  92°  and  55° ;  below  these  temperatures,  only  the  systems  on
the  left  side  are  coexistent ;  above  them,  only  those  on  the  right  side.
In  both  cases,  at  the  respective  transformation  temperatures,  there  are
four  different  phases  which  are  coexistent,  and  in  both  cases  the  same
three  molecular  species  (viz.  H20,  KC1,  and  CuCl2)  are  required  to
construct  the  four  respective  phases.

The  systems  standing  on  the  left  differ  by  the  presence  of  a  mole-
cule of  cupric  chloride ;  and  the  fact  that  this  molecule  occasions  a
depression  of  about  37°  in  the  transformation  of  the  cupric-potassium-
chloride,  reminds  us  again  of  the  depression  of  the  freezing-point  of
a  solvent  by  the  addition  of  a  foreign  substance.3

The  Double  Decomposition  of  Solid  Salts. — In  conclusion,
some  condensed  systems  are  known  where  five  phases  are  coexistent  in
the  equilibrium,  and  hence  where  four  molecular  species  are  required
to  construct  the  phases.  This  is  the  case  in  the  double  decomposition  of
solid  salts-;  as,  e.g.  of  magnesium  sulphate  and  sodium  chloride  to  form
the  double  salt  blodite  (a  sodium-magnesium-sulphate)  and  magnesium
chloride.  This  occurs  in  the  sense  of  the  following  equation,  viz.,

2NaCl  +  2S04Mg  .  7H20^±(S04)2MgNa2 .  4H20  +

MgClj, .  6H20  +  4H20.

1  Reicher,  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  1.  221  (1887).

2  Ibid.,  3.  336  (1889),  and  5.  97  (1890).

3  For  further  examples,  see  van't  Hoff,  Bildung  und  Spaltung  von  Doppelsalzen
(Leipsic,  1897).

638  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  IV

The  transformation  temperature  is  at  31°;  below  this  temperature,  if
one  mixes  finely  pulverised  blodite  with  magnesium  chloride  and
water,  in  the  aforesaid  proportions,  the  thin  paste  at  once  solidifies  to
a  solid  mass,  which  is  completely  dry,  and  which  consists  of  sodium
chloride  and  magnesium  sulphate ;  but  above  31°  the  mixture  remains
unchanged.  And  conversely,  an  equi-molecular  mixture  of  NaCl
and  MgS04.  (H20)7  changes  into  blodite  and  MgCl2  only  above  31°,
accompanied  by  a  partial  liquefaction,  which  is  occasioned  by  the  water
which  is  eliminated.

At  the  temperature  of  transformation  there  are  five  phases  co-
existent together,  which  are  composed  of  the  four  solid  salts  and  their
saturated  solution.

The  relations  are  precisely  analogous  in  the  reaction

S04Na2 .  10H2O  +  2KC1^±S04K2  +  2NaCl  +  10H20,
the  transformation  temperature  of  which1  is  3'7°.

The  Vapour  Pressure  and  the  Solubility  at  the  Tempera-
ture of  Transformation. — In  all  of  the  condensed  systems  enu-
merated above,  we  have  considered  the  cases  where —

a.  The  n  molecular  species  react  in  n  +  1  phases,  and  where

b.  The  phases  were  in  complete  equilibrium.

But  now  we  can  imagine  another  new  phase  to  be  added  to  the
system  in  all  of  these  cases,  viz.  the  gaseous  phase ;  because  we  can
think  of  the  system  as  standing  under  its  own  vapour  pressure
instead  of  that  of  the  atmosphere.  Of  course,  as  a  result  of  this
pressure,  the  transformation  temperature  will  be  displaced ;  but  this
displacement,  on  account  of  its  slight  dependence  upon  the  external
pressure,  is  relatively  small,  and  rarely  amounts  to  a  tenth  of  a  degree,
for  this  independence  of  the  external  pressure  is  a  prominent  charac-
teristic of  condensed  systems.

Under  these  circumstances  we  will  have  to  consider  the  system  as
containing  n  4-  2  phases,  for  the  construction  of  which  we  need  only  n
molecular  species.  That  point  at  which  the  n  +  2  phases  can  coexist
is  the  "transition  point"  (Uebergangs-punkt),  in  the  sense  defined  on
p.  612,  and,  moreover,  it  is  an  (n  +  2)-fold  point.

The  space  above  the  n-systems  will  be  filled  by  the  vapours  emitted
by  each  of  the  solid  or  liquid  phases ;  and  although  the  vapour
pressure  of  each  one  of  the  substances  (as  of  the  water-free  salts,  e.g.)
may  be  extremely  small,  nevertheless  it  is  not  absolutely  zero ;  and
this  total  vapour  pressure  therefore  has  a  definite,  though  small,
amount.

Now,  let  us  consider,  on  the  one  hand,  the  phases  standing  on  the
left  side  of  the  reaction  equation,  and  on  the  other  hand,  those  stand-
ing on  the  right  side ;  these  are  mutually  convertible  into  each  other.
1  van't  Hoff  and  Reicher,  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  3.  482  (1889).

CHAP.  II TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM 639

No\v,  from  the  fact  that  they  are  capable  of  co-existing  beside  each
other  in  stable  forms,  at  the  respective  conditions  of  temperature  and
pressure,  therefore  it  necessarily  follows  that,  at  the  temperature  of
equilibrium,  the  separate  vapours  emitted  ly  the  two  particular  groups  of
phases  must  have  the  same  composition  and  density.

Therefore  the  vapour -pressure  curves  of  two  systems  which  are
mutually  convertible  into  each  other,  as  e.g.,  ice  and  water,  ortho-
rhombic  and  monoclinic  sulphur,  Glauber's  salt  and  the  saturated  water
solution  of  Na2S04  .  H20,  etc.  etc., — these  curves  must  cut  each  other  at
the  transition  point,  and  also  approximately  at  the  adjacent  temperature
of  transformation  :  this  inference  has  been  most  conclusively  proven  in
all  the  cases  thus  far  investigated.

Now  it  is  usually  possible  to  investigate  the  vapour  pressures  of  the
two  systems  separately  from  each  other,  i.e.  the  one  above  and  the  other
below  the  transformation  temperature,  where  each  respectively  is  in  a
labile  condition.  Then,  of  course,  the  vapour  pressure  of  that  system
which  is  the  stable  one  [relatively]  will  be  the  smaller ;  and  the  vapour
pressure  of  that  which  is  the  labile  one  will  be  the  greater.  And,  as  a
matter  of  fact,  the  measurements  made  thus  far  have  given  this  result,
viz.  that  before  the  transformation  temperature  is  reached,  the  stable
system  does  show  the  smaller  vapour  pressure,  but  that  above  this
point  the  same  system,  which  has  now  become  the  labile  one,  exhibits
the  greater  vapour  pressure.

An  analogous  inference  is  drawn  for  the  solubility  of  the  two
groups  of  phases  which  are  convertible  into  each  other  in  the  sense  of
the  respective  reaction  equations.

Thus  let  us  consider  the  two  systems  in  any  solvent  (which  is
chemically  indifferent)  at  the  temperature  of  transformation  ;  then  at
this  point  the  two  solutions  must  have  the  same  composition  and
concentration.  For  otherwise,  if  the  two  solutions  could  communicate
with  each  other  by  means  of  diffusion,  an  equalisation  of  the  difference
in  composition  would  take  place  ;  and  during  this  adjustment,  wherever
the  two  groups  of  phases  are  in  contact  with  each  other  by  means  of
the  intermediate  solution  present,  the  constancy  of  the  concentration
would  be  [adjusted  and]  maintained  by  continuous  solution  or  crystal-
lisation, and  thus  a  process  of  this  sort  would  necessarily  occur,  until
one  or  more  of  the  phases  would  disappear,  which  is  impossible;  hence
the  two  systems  of  phases  must  be  in  equilibrium.

This  conclusion  has  been  experimentally  verified  in  a  great  number
of  cases  by  van't  Hoff  and  his  students.

Thus,  e.g.,  a  saturated  water  solution  of  blodite  at  the  transforma-
tion temperature,  21 '5°,  has  the  same  concentration  as  a  saturated
solution  of  sodium  and  magnesium  sulphates.

As  before,  the  mixture  of  the  two  sulphates,  as  the  more  stable
system,  had  the  lesser  solubility,  and  the  solution  of  blodite,  as  the
labile  system,  the  greater  solubility.

640  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

Thus  the  solution  of.  the  less  stable  system  partakes  of  the  character
of  a  supersaturated  solution,  as  follows,  in  fact,  from  the  crystallisation
occasioned  by  contact  with  the  ingredients  of  the  other  systems.

Above  the  transition  point  the  two  systems  exchange  their
r61e,  and  the  solubility  curves  intersect  each  other  at  the  transition
point.

Amorphous  substances  (p.  98),  since  they  are  in  an  unstable  state,
must  have  greater  vapour  pressure  and  solubility  than  crystalline.

The  Determination  of  the  Temperature  of  Transformation.

—In  most  cases  it  is  easy  to  obtain  an  upper  and  a  lower  limit  for  the
temperature  of  transformation,  because  it  is  easy  to  find  two  temperature
points,  at  one  of  which  the  reaction  advances  in  one  direction,  while  at
the  other  point  the  reaction  advances  in  the  other.  But  on  account  of
the  slowness  of  the  reactions,  it  is  only  in  the  rarest  cases  that  a
very  exact  determination  can  be  made  in  this  way.

Yet  this  can  be  almost  always  accomplished  by  means  of  the
following  methods,  devised  by  van't  Hoff,  and  which,  in  part,  remind
us  of  the  melting-point  determination  (p.  328) :—

1.  The  fact  that  the  change  of  the  condensed  systems  of  the  one
group  into  the  other  group  is  almost  always  associated  with  more  or
less  change  in  volume  can  be  applied  in  the  following  way.

The  ingredients  of  the  one  group,  intimately  mixed,  are  placed  in
a  dilatometer,  which,  it  should  be  noticed,  is  filled  with  an  indifferent
liquid,  as  oil.  The  bulb  of  the  dilatometer  is  then  placed  in  a  water
bath,  the  temperature  of  which  is  very  gradually  elevated  through
the  requisite  interval ;  the  oil  level  in  the  projecting  capillary  tube
then  varies  very  gradually.  But  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of
the  point  of  transformation  temperature  there  is  exhibited  a  sudden
and  very  significant  displacement  of  the  oil  level,  occasioned  by  the
complete  transformation,  and  which  is  sharply  contrasted  with  the
otherwise  gradual  change.

It  is  advisable,  as  a  rule,  in  order  to  expedite  the  occurrence  of  the
reaction,  and  to  avert  any  delay  of  the  system  in  the  labile  condition,
to  mix  with  the  substances  a  little  of  the  ultimate  products  of  decom-
position.

2.  The fact that  the  change  is almost  always  accompanied by
either  a  development  or  an  absorption  of  heat ;  this  can  be  used  to
determine  the  transformation  temperature  in  a  way  similar  to  that  in
which  the  development  of  heat  in  freezing  allows  an  exact  determina-
tion of  the  freezing-point.

Those  systems  which  are  changed  into  others  with  a  development
of  heat  become  under-cooled ;  then  when  the  reaction  occurs,  the
temperature  mounts  to  the  transformation  temperature,  which  may  be
read  off  by  means  of  a  thermometer  which  dips  into  the  mixture.

3.  One  may  study  the  vapour -pressure  curves,  or  the  solubility

CHAP.  II TEMPERATURE  AND  COMPLETE  CHEMICAL  EQUILIBRIUM 641

curves,  of  the  two  systems,  and  may  thus  search  out  the  intersection
point  which  corresponds  to  the  temperature  desired.

In  order  to  measure  the  very  slight  differences  of  vapour  pressures
which  are  met  here,  it  is  advantageous  to  use  the  differential  .tensimeter.1

Thus, in ascertaining the  temperature  of transformation  of  the
system,

S04Na2  .  10H20^±S04Na2  +  10H20,

the  results  showed  an  identity  of  vapour  tensions  at  32'5°  -  32'6°  ;
while  the  interpolation  of  the  following  results  of  Loewel,  in  determin-
ing the  solubilities  of  the  two  solid  salts,  showed  an  identity  of
solubility  at  32'65°.

Solutions  of

•

S04Xa2

SOjXao  .  lOHoO

31-84°

40

50-37

32  78°

5076

49-71

Thus  the  two  determinations  of  the  temperature  coincide  with  each
other  remarkably,  and  also  sufficiently  well  with  the  so-called  melting
point,  33°,  which  is  directly  determined.

1  Bremer,  Zeits.  phys.  Cheni.,  1.  424  ;  Prowein,  ibid,,  1.  10  (1887).

2T

CHAPTER 111

THERMOCHEMISTRY III

TEMPERATURE AND INCOMPLETE EQUILIBRIUM

The  Thermodynamics  of  Incomplete  Equilibrium.  —  Although
the  influence  of  temperature  on  a  complete  equilibrium  is  always  such
that,  at  constant  pressure,  the  slightest  change  of  temperature  is  suffi-
cient to  cause  one  of  the  phases  to  vanish  completely,  thus  occasioning
an  entire  rearrangment  of  the  system,  yet  a  similar  change  of  the
temperature  has  an  entirely  different  effect  in  the  case  of  an  incomplete
equilibrium.  Here  a  slight  change  in  the  temperature  never  occasions
more  than  a  very  slight  change  in  the  equilibrium  ;  because  the
relative  proportions  of  the  reacting  ingredients  are  always  so  changed
by  a  displacement  of  the  equilibrium  in  one  sense  or  the  other,  that
there  is  a  compensation  for  the  slight  change  in  the  reaction  coefficient
occasioned  by  a  slight  change  in  the  temperature.

The  results  of  a  variation  in  the  external  pressure,  at  constant
temperature,  are  exactly  similar  to  the  preceding  ;  in  the  former  case
[that  of  complete  equilibrium],  one  observes  the  complete  elimination
of  one  of  the  phases  ;  in  the  latter  case  [that  of  incomplete  equilibrium],
one  observes  only  a  very  slight  displacement  of  the  equilibrium  [by
a  change  of  the  external  pressure  at  constant  temperature].

If  we  denote  by

8p

the  change  experienced  by  the  pressure  of  a  reaction  mixture,  from
the  temperature  elevation  dT,  at  constant  volume  ;  and  by

8Q

the  heat  absorption  which  takes  place  if  we  increase  the  volume  of  the

642

CHAP,  ill TEMPERATURE  AND  INCOMPLETE  EQUILIBRIUM  643

reaction  mixture  by  DV,  at  constant  temperature,  then,  according  to
p.  24,  the  equation

8Q_T9p
8V"  i8T

holds  good  here.

This  equation  is  a  special  case  of  equation  (I.)  on  p.  630,  and
which  was  obtained  when  Q  and  V  were  proportional  to  each  other ;
it  contains  all  that  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  can  stale  regarding  the
incomplete  equilibrium.

Equation  (II.)  is  applicable  both  to  gaseous  systems  and  also  to
solutions,  provided  that  in  the  former  cases  the  equilibrium  pressure
p  is  measured  by  means  of  an  ordinary  manometer,  and  in  the  latter
case  by  means  of  an  osmotic  apparatus.  It  also  continues  to  be
applicable  even  when  the  gases  or  the  dissolved  substances  react  in  a
fairly  high  state  of  concentration,1  or  when  various  solid  substances
participate  in  the  equilibrium.

By  applying  the  preceding  formula  to  the  equilibrium  between  a
solution  and  its  vapour,  one  may  easily  convince  himself  that  he  will
be  led  to  the  equation  of  Kirchhoff,  which  was  developed  on  p.  11 8,  by
a  method  identical  in  principle  with  the  preceding.

But  equation  II.  is  sometimes  inconvenient  on  account  of  its  very
universality,  so  that  the  desire  is  aroused  for  a  more  convenient
form.  Such  a  form  can  be  obtained  if  again,  as  in  the  consideration
of  incomplete  equilibrium  in  the  previous  book,  we  limit  ourselves  to
this  condition,  viz. — that  the  phases  of  systems  of  variable  composition,  shall
be  either  gaseous  and  at  not  too  high  pressure,  or  else  solutions  at  not  too  high
concentration.

The  Reaction  Isotherm,  and  the  Reaction  Isochore. — It  was

van't  Hoff  who  succeeded  in  reducing  to  a  very  simple  form,  the
equations  which  are  obtained  by  the  application  of  the  second  law  of
thermodynamics  to  the  special  chemical  processes  described  above.

Let  us  consider  a  chemical  system  consisting  of  one  phase  which
has  a  variable  composition  (as  a  gas  mixture  or  a  dilute  solution),  and
of  any  arbitrary  number  of  phases  of  constant  composition ;  then  when
we  are  considering  reactions  which  are  in  progress,  the  following
scheme  holds  good,  viz.

v1a1  +  i/9a2  +  .  .  .  +  n1A1  +  n2A2  +  .  .  .7~^"v1/a1/  +  v%&%  +  .  .  .

+  n/A/  +  n2'A2'  +  .  .  .

Here  ap  a2, . . .  a/,  a2' .  .  .  denote  the  respective  solid  substances  reacting,
with  the  respective  number  of  molecules,  vv  v2,  .  .  .  i/j',  v.2' .  . . ;  and  we

1  Compare,  e.g.,  van  Deventer  and  van  tier  Stadt,  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  9.  43  (1891).

644  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

also  suppose  that  the  reaction  progresses  according  to  the  equation  for
the  law  of  mass-action,  viz.

P  'nj'p  'n./

K  =  5L_3-  . . . (III.)

c1"1c211^ .  .  .

where  cr  c9,  .  .  .  c1/,  c2'  .  .  .  denote  the  concentrations  of  the  molecular
species,  Ap  A2,  .  .  .  A/,  A2'  .  .  .

The  equilibrium  coefficient  K  is  constant  at  a  given  temperature  ;  i.e.  it
is  independent  of  the  relative  proportions  of  the  reacting  substances  ;  its  change
with  the  temperature  is  determined  by  the  following  equation  deduced  by  van't
Hoff;  viz.

dlnK_ q
dT  RT2  ;

here,  as  always,  In  denotes  the  natural  logarithm  ;  q  the  heat  of
reaction  measured  at  the  abs.  temp.  T;  and  R  denotes  the  gas
constant.

This  equation  has  a  very  great  importance  and  a  many-sided
application,  as  will  appear  in  the  following  sections  ;  and  he  Avho  would
penetrate  deeper  into  the  relations  between  heat  and  chemical  energy,
must  be  familiar  with  its  meaning  and  manipulation.

While,  on  the  one  hand,  the  equation  of  Guldberg  and  Waage,
viz.

_ c  'ni'c  '"2  .  .  .

is  able  to  instruct  us  regarding  the  influence  of  changes  in  concentra-
tion at  constant  temperature  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  van't  Hoff  equation,
viz.

d  In  K  _ q

~dT~ ~ITF'

instructs  us  regarding  the  influence  of  temperature  upon  the  equilibrium
of  a  system  at  constant  volume.  Therefore  I  suggest  that  the  former  be
called  the  equation  of  the  reaction  isotherm,  and  the  latter  the  equation  oj
the  reaction  isochore.

The  latter  is  a  differential  equation  ; its  integral  is

where  B  represents  the  integration  constant.

If  the  value  of  K,  at  the  temperatures  T:  and  T2  respectively.
amounts  to  K^  and  K2,  then  we  obtain

CHAP.  Ill  TEMPERATURE  AND  INCOMPLETE  EQUILIBRIUM  645

and

and  by  subtraction  we  obtain

lnK2-lnK1= if™  -,
K\12

In  effecting  the  integration,  it  was  provided  that  q  should  not
change  with  the  temperature,  which  is,  in  fact,  only  approximately  ful-
filled. But,  if  the  changes  are  but  slight,  and  if  the  temperatures  Tx
and  T2  are  not  too  far  removed  from  each  other,  then  the  preceding
equation  will  be  useful  in  all  cases,  and  will  give  a  value  of  q
corresponding  to  the  temperature

Tl  +  T2

2

The  Derivation  of  the  Reaction  Isotherm. — The  equation  of
the  reaction  isotherm,  which  we  have  learned  to  regard  as  the  universal
expression  of  the  law  of  chemical  mass-action,  can  be  made  to  appeal-
correct,  at  least  in  all  probability,  by  means  of  kinetic  considerations,  as
we  have  already  seen  on  p.  430.  Moreover,  as  we  have  already
thoroughly  shown  in  the  third  book,  a  widely  extended  experience  has
shown  us  that  the  law  of  mass-action  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  reality  well
grounded  on  facts.

Yet,  in  spite  of  all  this,  it  will  not  be  superfluous  for  the  real  im-
portance of  this  fundamental  chemical  law,  to  ask  a  further  question,
viz.  how  it  stands  as  regards  the  requirements  of  thermodynamics  1

Let  us  consider  the  following  process.  There  is  given  a  system,
in  equilibrium,  and  which  is  gaseous,  or  else  consists  of  a  dilute
solution ;  and  moreover,  let  it  be  in  contact  with  various  solid
substances.

Let  the  reaction,  the  equilibrium  of  which  has  been  established,
progress  according  to  the  scheme  designated  above  (p.  643);  viz.

v1a1  +  v2a.2  +  .  .  . +  n1A1  +  n2A2 .  .  .  ^j'/a/  +  v2'a2'  +  .  .  .  +  n/A/

+  n2'A2'  +  ....-.

and  again  we  denote  the  concentration  of  the  molecular  species  A  by  c
(of  course  adding  the  corresponding  indices).  Also,  let  all  the  mole-
cular species  be  in  the  free  state  ;  and  let  those  denoted  by  a  be  in  the
solid  state,  as  they  also  participate  in  the  equilibrium  :  and  let  those
denoted  by  A  be  present  in  unit  degree  of  concentration,  either  as  gases
if  the  phase  of  variable  composition  of  the  system  considered  is  gaseous,
or  else  dissolved  in  the  respective  solvent  if  the -variable  phase  forms
a  solution.

646  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

The  following  process  we  will  consider  thermodynamically  in  this
section  and  the  following  one.  We  will  suppose  the  v  or  n  molecules
of  the  substances  occurring  on  the  left  side  of  the  equation,  to  be  introduced
into  the  mixture  ;  and  at  the  same  time  the  v  or  n  molecules  of  the  substances
on  the  right  side  of  the  equation,  to  be  removed  from  the  reaction  mixture.

On  account  of  its  simplicity,  we  can  suppose  this  process  to  be  so
conducted  that  the  reaction  mixture  shall  preserve  its  composition  un-
changed, that  at  every  moment  the  same  equivalent  quantity  of  A
molecules  shall  be  driven  in,  as  of  A7  molecules  that  are  driven  out,  so
that  the  change  in  the  reaction  mixture  shall  continually  complete
itself  from  left  to  right,  without  the  occurrence  of  any  marked  change
in  its  relative  concentration.

In  this  way  it  is  clearly  possible  to  conduct  the  reaction  isothermally
and  reversibly  :  it  remains  to  calculate  the  work  so  performed.

It  will  be  simpler  first  to  take  a  particular  case,  viz.  the  formation
of  water  vapour  according  to  the  equation

2H2  +  02  =  2H20.

Let  cp  c2,  c1/  be  the  concentrations  of  the  reacting  molecular  species
in  equilibrium,  and  suppose  the  substances  originally  in  the  free  state
with  concentrations  C1,  C2,  C1/.

We  will  first  deal  with  the  problem  of  calculating  the  work  involved
in  transferring  a  mol.  of  gas  from  a  space  at  concentration  C  to  one  at
concentration  c  ;  and  for  simplicity  we  assume  that  both  spaces  are
so  large  that  the  addition  or  withdrawal  of  a  mol.  makes  no  appreciable
difference  to  the  concentration.  If  the  pressure  and  volume  [of  one
mol.]  in  the  two  spaces  are  PY  and  pv  respectively,  the  mol.  must  first
be  withdrawn  from  space  I,  by  which  the  amount  of  work  PV  is  gained,

then  expanded  to  volume  v,  yielding  work  =  RTln  - (see  p.  52)  and

finally  introduced  under  the  constant  pressure  p  into  space  II,  which
requires  work  pv  ;  hence  the  work  to  be  calculated  is

PV  +  RT  In  ~  -  pv,

or  since

PY  =  pv,
simply

snce

Y  :  v  =  c  :  C.

In  conveying  n  mols.  the  work  is,  of  course,

nRT  In  -
c  .

CHAP,  in TEMPERATURE  AND  INCOMPLETE  EQUILIBRIUM  647

We  can  now  calculate  the  maximum  work  done  when  hydrogen  and
oxygen  of  concentration  Cv  C2  are  converted  isothermally  and  revers-
ibly  into  water  vapour  of  concentration  C1/.  If  two  mols.  of  hydrogen
are  taken  from  a  space  of  concentration  Cx  into  a  space  where  the
concentration  is  cv  and  there  is  equilibrium  with  the  other  molecular

r1  p

species,  we  gain  work  2RT  In  —  1  ;  for  a  mol.  of  oxygen  RT  In  —  ,  and

Cl  C2

0  '
to  remove  the  water  vapour  formed,  requires the  work 2RTln—  \.

ci
Hence  the  work  to  be  gained  is

A  =  2RT  In  ^  +  RT  In  ^  -

Cj  c2

or

The  maximal  work  must,  however,  be  independent  of  the  nature
of  the  reaction  mixture,  which  only  plays  the  part  of  an  intermediary
which  suffers  no  appreciable  change  during  the  process.  This  is  only

c  '2
possible  if,  at  constant  temperature,  the  expression  RT  In  —  |—  ,  and

c  '2  <VC2

therefore  —  J remains  constant;  this  is,  however,  nothing  else  than

Ci~c2
the  law  of  mass-action.

There  is  now  no  difficulty  in  dealing  with  the  most  general  case.
We  have  only  to  calculate  the  work  done  in  introducing  into  the
mixture  the  substances  on  the  left  of  the  equation,  and  removing  those
on  the  right,  the  process  being,  of  course,  isothermal  and  reversible.

The  work  done  in  introducing  or  removing  the  molecular  species  a
and  a'  which  are  solid,  is,  of  course,  nothing  ;  hence  the  two  parts  of
the  total  work  are

nJRTln—  *  +n,RTln^.

r  f

c1  c2

and

-  (n/RT  In  -1,  +  n2'RT  In

\  C-.  C

and  the  total  is

fj  nlO  "2

A  =  RT  In  gjJgL^JLL.  +  RT  In

Cj_  ni  C2  "2  .  .  .  cc .  .  .

Since  A  does  not  depend  on  the  nature  of  the  reaction  mixture

is  constant  ;  i.e.  we  have  the  law  of  mass-action  in  its  most  general  form.

648  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

If  the  concentrations  Clf  C,7,  . .  .  C/,  C9'  are  all  unity  we  have  simply
A  =  RT  In  K  ;

so  that  the  maximal  work  can  be  very  simply  derived  from  the
constant  K.

Assuming  that  the  process  described  is  realisable  in  all  cases,  then
the  proof  given  above  may  claim  strict  validity,  i.e.  the  law  of  chemical
mass-action  is  a  necessary  conclusion  from  thermodynamics.  We  can
hardly  doubt  its  possibility  of  realisation  in  those  cases  where  there  are
several  molecular  species  on  both  the  left  and  the  right  sides  of  the
equation.

But  when  this  is  not  the  case,  as  when  we  are  given  a  case  of  dis-
sociation to  consider,  then  the  suspicion  arises  that  the  respective
molecular  species  cannot  be  removed  from  the  reaction  mixture  in  a
pure  state,  but  that  they  are  dissociated — that  is,  that  if  we  had  a
mixture  of  PC15,  of  PC13,  and  of  free  C12,  and  if  we  should  remove  the
first  molecular  species  PC15,  it  would  at  once  dissociate.

Now,  regarding  this  suspicion,  we  find  help  in  the  remark  that  the
molecular  species  in  question  may  be  removed  from  the  reaction
mixture  so  quickly  and  may  be  brought  to  such  a  state  that  dissocia-
tion cannot  take  place  ;  thus,  e.g.,  it  may  be  brought  to  a  state  of  strong
condensation,  or  into  a  solvent  which  does  not  occasion  dissociation  ;
arid  thus  the  process  described  above  may  be  modified  in  a  way  which
is  perfectly  immaterial  for  the  final  result.  If  we  assume  the  possi-
bility of  working  with  sufficient  rapidity,  then  the  process  described  is
realisable  in  all  cases,  and  we  find  that  the  law  of  mass-action  is  a  strict
postulate  of  thermodynamics.

Now,  the  maximal  work  F  is  not  only  independent  of  the  relative
concentration,  but  is  also  independent  of  the  whole  nature  of  the  reac-
tion mixture,  e.g.  it  is  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  solvent  in
which  the  equilibrium  of  the  reaction  considered  is  established.

Moreover,  we  find  from  simple  considerations,  that  if  we  know
the  equilibrium  constant  K  for  any  particular  phase,  and  also  if  we  know
the  distribution  coefficients  of  the  reacting  molecular  species  as  compared  with
any  other  selected  phase,  then  we  are  also  al>le  to  state  the  condition  of
equilibrium  of  this  phase.  This  result  has  been  already  obtained  in  an
entirely  different  way  (p:  494).

If  the  solvent  is  to  be  counted  in  as  one  of  the  reacting  molecular
species,  then  it  may  be  easily  shown  (p.  116),  that  for  the  transference
of  n  molecules,  there  is  required  the  work

i c
n  In  — ,

co

where  c  and  c0  denote  respectively  the  concentrations  at  the  tempera-
ture in  question,  of  the  saturated  vapour  (of  the  solution  containing  the

CHAP,  in TEMPERATURE  AND  INCOMPLETE  EQUILIBRIUM  649

reacting  substances),  and  of  the  pure  solvent.  Now,  c0  is  constant  at
n  given  temperature  ;  whence  it  follows  that  the  solvent  participates
with  the  active  mass  c  ;  i.e.  we  may  regard  the  active  mass  of  a  solvent  as
proportional  to  the  concentration  of  the  vapour  emitted  ly  it,  as  was  proved
by  the  proposition  given  on  p.  459.  This  result  could  not  be  deduced
from  kinetic  considerations,  and  was  first  discovered  by  the  writer
in  the  aforesaid  way.  Thermodynamics  is  here  able  to  conduct  us
farther  than  hitherto,  and  it  should  be  emphasised  that,  in  the
consideration  of  concentrated  reaction  mixtures,  it  alone  at  present  is  able  to
undertake  the  management  of  the  theoretical  treatment.  If  we  were
in  the  possession  of  rules  for  the  vapour  pressure  of  mixtures  of  any
arbitrary  degree  of  concentration,  then  we  would  be  able  to  manipulate
the  reactions  of  these  systems  with  the  same  completeness  as  in  the
case  of  the  reactions  of  dilute  solutions.

Finally,  in  order  to  consider  briefly  the  case  of  electrolytic  dissocia-
tion from  the  standpoint  of  thermodynamics,  it  necessarily  follows,
from  Chap.  IV.  of  the  preceding  book,  that  the  thorough  application
of  the  law  of  mass-action  leads  to  this  purely  experimental  result,  viz.,
for  the  compression  of  an  electrolyte  which  is  dissociated  into  n  ions,  n
times  as  much  work  is  required  as  in  the  case  of  the  undissociated  sub-
stance.

The  Derivation  of  the  Reaction  Isochore.—  The  equation  of  the
reaction  isochore  is  at  once  given  by  the  application  of  the  fundamental
equation  on  p.  23,  viz.

We  found  the  maximal  work  A  to  be

n  n  jp  n.»
A  =  KTlnc-2;;- .RTlnK,

whence

dA  C"iC21!2  .  .  .

^

and  for  the  decrease  in  total  energy  U  we  have  the  heat  of  reaction

by  q  we  mean  the  quantity  of  heat  which  is  evolved  when  the  process
occurs  without  the  performance  of  external  work.

dA
Therefore  it  follows  on  introducing  the  value  of  A,  U  and  -yT

that  _ dlnK

dT

This  is  the  equation  of  the  reaction  isochore.

650  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

Now  it  should  be  expressly  emphasised  that,  as  also  doubtless
follows  from  the  derivation  of  the  equation  of  the  reaction  isochore,
that  here  we  are  dealing  with  the  concentration  and  not  with  the  partial
pressure  of  the  particular  molecular  species.  It  was  immaterial  in
the  application  of  the  equation  of  the  reaction  isotherm  whether  we
worked  with  one  or  with  the  other  of  these  magnitudes  (p.  438) ;  but
this  is  not  the  case  with  the  reaction  isochore,  since  at  constant
volume  the  concentration  of  a  substance  remains  constant  but  not  its
pressure.

In  what  follows  we  will  make  several  applications  of  the  integrated
form  of  the  preceding  equation,  viz.

If  we  express  the  heat  of  reaction  q,  as  is  usual  in  calorific  measure,
then  R  amounts  to  1*991.  If  we  work  with  the  ordinary  logarithms
instead  of  the  natural,  then  finally  we  will  have

4-584(logK2-logK1)T1T

"V^T

Vaporisation.  —  We  have found  for  the  equilibrium  between  a
simple  liquid  and  its  saturated  vapour,  the  relation

K  - -  -P-  •
~

i.e.  for  every  temperature  there  corresponds  a  definite  concentration
of  the  saturated  vapour.  Now  if  we  denote,  by  px  and  p2  respectively,
the  values  of  the  vapour  pressure  corresponding  to  the  temperatures
T!  and  T2  (which  are  only  slightly  different  from  each  other),  then
we  obtain  from  the  preceding  equations  the  expression

-.T, "T,- RVT, V
From  the  figures  which  Eegnault  obtained  for  water,  viz.,

1^  =  273°,  P!= 4-54  mm.,

T2=273°  +  11-54°, p2=  10-02  mm.,

it  follows  that  q  =  -  10,050.  Now  the  molecular  heat  of  evaporation
A,  at  5'77°,  was  found  to  be  10,854  ;  and  if  we  subtract  from  this
latter  value  the  external  work,  2T  =  558,  then  it  follows 'that

q-  -10,296,
a  value  which  is  in  satisfactory  accord  with  the  preceding.

CHAP.  Ill TEMPERATURE  AND  INCOMPLETE  EQUILIBRIUM  651

We  have  previously  (p.  62)  found  that

d  In  p
dT '

Now  if  we  compare  this  equation  with  that  obtained  by  the  applica-
tion of  the  reaction  isochore,  viz.

din!

?

dT

we  obtain,  in  harmony  with  the  preceding,  the  equation

dlnT

The  Dissociation  of  Solid  Substances.  —  The  heat  of  sublimation
of  a  solid  substance  can  be  calculated  from  its  vapour  pressure  at  two
different  temperatures,  in  exactly  the  same  way  that  the  heat  of
vaporisation  is  calculated  for  a  liquid.  Therefore  here  we  will  consider
only  the  case  where  the  sublimation  is  attended  with  dissociation.

Let  us  suppose  that  the  solid  substance  is  broken  up  into  nx  mol.
of  the  substance  A1?  and  n9  mol.  of  the  substance  A2,  and  that  the
partial  pressures  of  the  particular  molecular  species  amount  respectively
to  p15  p.2,  etc.  Then,  according  to  p.  473,

II  the  decomposition  products  in  the  vapour  space  in  contact  with  the
solid  bodies  are  present  in  the  same  proportion  in  which  they  are
produced  by  the  reaction,  then  we  shall  have

n

_P  i  _P  2

Pi —  JT  - ,  Uo  —  -T  - i

DJ  +  n2  +  .  .  . .  iij  +  iig  +  .  .  .

where  P  denotes  the  total  pressure  (dissociation  pressure)  of  the  gases.
If  this,  for  the  two  temperatures,  Tx  and  T2  respectively,  amounts  to
P1  and  P2,  then  it  is  calculated  that

1 X2/

In  the  dissociation  of  ammonium  sulphhydrate,  nx  =  1 ,  and  n9  =  1  ;  thus

NH5S  =  NH3  +  H,S.
And  therefore  we  will  find  that

Px P2  _ q /  1 1

652  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

And  from  the  figures

T1  =  273  + 9-5°, P1=175  mm.,
T2  =  273  +  25-1°, P2  =  501  mm.,

it  follows  that  q=  -  21,450  g.-cal.

Now  the  thermo-chemical  measurements  give  22,800  as  the  mole-
cular heat  of  sublimation  of  NH4SH  ;  and  if  we  subtract  from  this
value  the  amount  of  the  external  work,  i.e.

4T=1160,

we  obtain  as  the  value  of  q  observed, =  -  21,640  g.-cal.1

It  is  of  some  historical  interest  to  revert  to  the  fact  that,
by  a  calculation  which  is  completely  analogous  to  the  preceding,
Horstmann2  in  1869  ascertained  theoretically  the  heat  of  sublima-
tion of  ammonium  chloride,  and  thus  for  the  first  time  applied  the
second  law  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  heat  [thermodynamics]  to
chemical  processes  ;  and  Horstmann  and  his  successors  have  pushed
on  the  investigations  in  this  field,  with  clear  and  brilliant  results.

Of  course  a  similar  calculation  can  be  made  for  the  dissociation  of
compounds  containing  ivater-of-crystallisation  ;  and  thus  the  combining
heat  of  water-of-crystallisation  can  be  theoretically  calculated  from  the
change  of  the  dissociation  pressure  with  the  temperature.  Horstmann
has  already  called  attention  to  this,  and  Frowein  3  has  performed  the
task  with  good  results.

Moreover,  the  curve  of  the  dissociation  pressure  of  calcium  carbonate  4
has  made  possible  the  calculation  of  the  heat  of  formation  of  this
substance  from  C02  and  CaO.

The  Dissolving  of  Solid  Substances.  —  The  analogy  between
the  processes  of  dissolving  in  any  solvent,  and  of  evaporation,  is
shown  in  this,  viz.  —  that  the  same  formula  which  allows  us  to  find
the  heat  of  vaporisation  from  the  change  of  the  density  of  the
saturated  vapour  with  the  temperature,  allows  the  calculation  of  the
Imit  of  solution  from  the  change  of  solubility  with  the  temperature.  Thus,
since  every  substance  has  a  definite  solubility  in  a  definite  solvent
at  a  definite  temperature,  we  have  simply

here  c  denotes  the  concentration  of  the  saturated  solution  at  the
temperature  T.  Let  us  suppose  that  c  has  the  respective  values  cx
and  c2,  at  the  temperatures  T1  and  T9  ;  then  for  the  heat  q  absorbed

1  vau't  Hoff,  fitudes,  p.  139.

2  B.B.,  2.  137  (1869)  ;  more  thoroughly  14.  1242  (1881).

3  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  1.  5  (1887).

4  Le  Chatelier,  I.e.  98.

CHAP,  ill TEMPERATURE  AND  INCOMPLETE  EQUILIBRIUM  653

in  the  solution,  i.e.  the  negative  value  of  the  heat  of  solution  of  1  g-mol.
of  the  dissolved  substance,  we  obtain

1 1

From  the  solubility  of  succinic  acid  in  water  with  the  following
values,  viz.

c2  =  4'22; T2=273°  +  8-5°,

van't  HofF1  calculated  the  value  of  q  to  be  -  6900,  while  the  direct
measurement  by  Berthelot  gave  -  6700.

The  values  of  the  solubility  denote  the  weight  per  cent.  By  the
term  g.-mol.  is  meant  of  course  that  quantity  of  the  dissolved  sub-
stance which  exerts,  at  the  same  volume  and  temperature,  the  same
[osmotic]  pressure  as  the  pressure  of  1  g-mol.  of  an  ideal  gas.  And
therefore  the  applicability  of  the  preceding  formula  gives  us  informa-
tion regarding  the  molecular  condition  [of  the  substance  in  question]
in  the  solvent  used.  In  the  special  case  just  considered  (succinic
acid),  it  was  dissociated  electrolytically  to  only  a  slight  extent,  and
therefore  had  the  normal  mol.  wt.

Moreover,  conversely,  from  the  comparison  of  the  observed  heat
of  solution  with  that  calculated,  it  is,  of  course,  possible  to  draw  an
inference  as  to  the  size  of  the  molecule  in  the  respective  solvent.

The  correction  for  the  external  work  performed,  a  correction  which
must  be  considered  in  the  case  of  the  heat  A  of  vaporisation  (see
above),  can  be  neglected  in  the  case  of  the  heat  of  solution,  because
no  considerable  external  work  is  associated  with  the  solution  of  a
solid  substance.

See  also  p.  145,  where  Q,  denotes  the  heat  of  solution  under  the
osmotic  pressure  of  the  saturated  solution.  This  differs  from  q  by  the
amount  of  the  external  work,  viz.  2T.

The Dissociation of  Solid Substances  by  Dissolving.  —

This  case  is,  of  course,  treated  in  a  way  exactly  similar  to  that  for  the
dissociation  of  solid  substances  in  vaporisation  (p.  651).

As  an  example  we  will  consider  the  dissolving  of  silver  chloride  ;
thus,

AgCl  =  Ag  +  Cl.

If  the  solubility  of  this  substance  at  Tl  and^  T2  is  c1  and  c2  re-
spectively, then  it  follows  that

Lois  de  I'equilibre,  etc.,  p.  37  (1885).

654  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

F.  Kohlrausch  and  F.  Rose  l  have  measured  the  conductivity  of
saturated  silver  chloride  solutions  at  a  number  of  different  tempera-
tures, and  give  as  the  solubility  ct  at  f  the  formula

ct  =  c18[l  +  0'049(t  -  18)  +  0'00089(t  -  18)2]

for  temperatures  above  18°.

Applying  the  unintegrated  equation

which  is  suitable  we  get

dine  0-049  +  2  -  <H)0089(t-  18)

dT 1  +  0'049(t  -  18)  +  0-00089(t  -  18)2

From  this  may  be  calculated  at  22°  that  q  =  -46,000,  whilst  on
p.  607  we  found  -  15,800.  The  agreement  is  remarkable,  c18  is
r05  x  10  ~5  g.  equiv.  per  litre.

The  Dissolving  of  Gases. — For  gases  we  have

K C/
K=c'

where  c  denotes  the  concentration  in  the  gaseous  state,  and  c'  that  in
solution  (Law  of  Henry).  Let  us  denote  the  Bunsen  coefficient  by  a ;
then,  according  to  p.  480,

v T

K  =  a273j
and  therefore

dlnK KP da

q  = -dT~ ^r'dT  +

The  heat  of  solution  Q,  amounts  to

Q  =  KT-q,
and  therefore,  according  to  Kirchhoff  (1858)

RT2 da
M~ "T 'dT'

Thus  Naccari  and  Pagliani 2  found  for  carbonic  acid,  that
a  -  1-5062  -  0-03651 1  +  0-000292  t2 ;

from  which,  for  t=20  (i.e.  T  =  273°  +  20°),  Q  is  calculated  to  be
4820 ;  while  Thomsen  by  a  direct  measurement  found  5880.  It  is

1 Wied.  Ann.,  50.  136  (1893)  ; see  also  F.  Kohlrausch,  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  44.
197  (1903).

5  Ar.  dim.  [3],  7.  71  (1880).

CHAP.  Ill TEMPERATURE  AND  INCOMPLETE  EQUILIBRIUM  655

probable  that  the  measurements  of  the  absorption  coefficients  are  not
accurate  enough  for  this  calculation  •  thus,  for  instance,  the  older
measurements  of  Bunsen  are  entirely  unsuited  for  this  purpose.

The  Dissociation  of  Gaseous  Substances.  —  Let  us  suppose
that  a  molecular  species  A,  whether  it  exists  as  a  gas  or  in  dilute
solutions,  decomposes  according  to  the  universal  reaction  equation  of
dissociation,  viz.

A  =  n:AT  +  n2A2  +  .  .  .  ;

then  the  condition  of  equilibrium  is  denoted  by  the  equation

Kc  =  Cj^Cg"*  .  . .  ;

where  c,  cp  c9  .  .  .  are  respectively  the  concentrations  of  A,  A1,
A2.  .  .

If  the  dissociation  products  are  present  in  equivalent  proportions,
and  if  x  denotes  the  dissociation  coefficient,  then,  if  1  g.-mol.  occupies
the  volume  v,  we  have

1  -  x  n^x  n9x

C/i — __  -  /-> — _ £

5 Vi  5 ^o  —  » • * •

V  V  2 V

and  therefore

_  n^in^  .  .  .

Let  us  suppose  that  the  g.-mol.  considered,  at  the  temperatures  Tx
and  T2,  occupies  the  volumes  v1  and  v2  respectively,  and  that  it  is
dissociated  to  the  fractional  extent  of  xl  and  x2  respectively.  Then
the  equation  of  the  reaction  isochore,  in  the  calculation  of  the  heat  of
dissociation,  gives  the  relation

_  2
n  ~  ~  n  •  -  *

Let  us  apply  this  equation  to  the  dissociation  of  nitrogen  dioxide,
viz.

N204=2N02;
then

nx  =  2, n2  . .  .  =  0,
and  we  obtain

-TO  n

,  X92  X^

In  -  -  In  -

Let  the  vapour  density,  at  the  temperatures  Tl  and  T2,  and  at
atmospheric  pressure,  be  Ax  and  A2  respectively ;  then,  according  to
p.  440,  we  shall  have

3-179  -A,  3-179-A-

x1= -T-~, andx2=  -2;

656  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  iv

here  3 '17  9  denotes  the  [theoretical]  vapour  density  without  dissocia-
tion, as  calculated  from  its  molecular  weight,  N904  =  96.

Now the  volumes  occupied  by 1 g.-mol. of  N904, in  the two
cases,  are  respectively

vx  =  0-0821T1° — , and  v2  =  0-082 1T2— ;

—*-|  — V»

because  the  g.-mol.  of  an  ideal  gas  at  T,  and  at  atmospheric  pressure,
occupies  the  volume,  0'0819T  litre;  and  the  volume  of  1  g.-mol.
of  N904,  as  a  result  of  the  partial  decomposition,  is  increased  in  the

3*179

ratio  ' '  • Moreover,  we  also  observe  that

_  3-1 79

~  A
and  we  finally  obtain

2  -v  2  n. /  1  ]

T  (} x  -\ Tfl-x2^ 9  VT

L2\L "  X2  /  Ll(l Xl  )  .1  *

From  the  values

T!  =  273  + 26-7°,  Ax  -  2'65,  x,  =  0-1996,
T2=273  +  111-3°,  A9=  1-65,  x2  =  0-9267,

it  follows  that

q= -  12,900.

The  dissociation  of  96  g.  of  N904  then  consumes  the  very  con-
siderable quantity  of  heat  of  12,900  g.-cal.,  provided  that  it  occurs
without  the  performance  of  external  work;  as,  e.g.,  in  this  way,  viz.,
when  a  vessel  filled  with  "  nitrogen  dioxide  "  [N204]  is  connected  with
another  one  which  is  exhausted.  During  the  equalisation  of  the
pressure,  as  the  enclosed  gas  mass  assumes  an  enlarged  volume,  a
certain  fraction  of  it,  which  can  be  calculated  from  the  equation  of
the  isotherm  of  dissociation,  is  cleaved  into  the  single  molecules
[NOJ.

No  experiments  have  as  yet  been  conducted  leading  to  the  direct
measurement  of  q ;  but  by  means  of  the  mean  specific  heat  of
nitrogen  dioxide  (as  measured  by  Berth elot  and  Ogier  (p.  347),  at
atmospheric  pressure  between  27°  and  150°),  van't  Hoff1  calculated
the  heat  of  dissociation  in  this  way ;  viz.,  from  the  quantity  of  heat
required  for  the  elevation  of  temperature,  he  subtracted  the  energy
required  for  the  simple  warming  of  the  gas,  and  also  the  energy
consumed  in  the  performance  of  the  external  work,  and  thus  he
obtained  the  energy  employed  in  the  dissociation.  It  coincides  well
with  the  calculated  value  2

q=  -12,500.

1  Etudes,  p.  133.  2  See  also  Boltzmann,  Wied.  Ann.,  22.  68  (1884).

CHAP,  ill TEMPERATURE  AND  INCOMPLETE  EQUILIBRIUM  657

All  the  vapour-density  determinations  of  nitrogen  dioxide  are  in
harmony  with  the  preceding  formula  ;  moreover,  the  variation  of  the
specific  heat  of  this  gas,  as  observed  by  Berthelot  and  Ogier,  can  be
completely  calculated  in  a  theoretical  way,  as  was  recently  and
thoroughly  shown  by  Swart.1

The  heats  of  dissociation  of  several  other  gases  have  been  calcu-
lated as  follows,  from  the  variation  of  the  degree  of  dissociation  with
the  temperature  :  —

Vapour  of  iodine . . . 28,500
„ „  acetic  acid  . . . 20,000
Methyl-ether-hydro-chloride2 . 8,600

Thus  it  appears  that  in  general  the  quantities  of  heat  associated
with  the  dissociation  of  gases  are  quite  considerable  ;  their  variation
with  the  temperature  is  obtained  from  the  differences  of  the  specific
heats  of  the  dissociation  products  (referred  to  constant  volume),  as
compared  with  the  specific  heats  of  the  undissociated  molecules.  On
account  of  the  magnitude  of  the  heat  of  dissociation,  this  variation
can  be  neglected,  especially  if  it  does  not  involve  too  great  a  tempera-
ture interval,  for  it  numbers  only  a  few  calories  and  rarely  exceeds  1  0.

Therefore  we  may  regard  q  as  being  independent  of  the  tempera-
ture, in  the  equation  for  the  reaction  isochore,  and  thus  can  use  the

integrated  form

. T_ q

In  K.  = +  a  const.
Kl

Now  if  we  substitute  the  value  of  K,  viz.,

Jx*_  4x2P

'  (T7  x)v  ~  (1  -~  '

(where  P  =  the  total  pressure  of  the  gas  in  the  preceding  equation),

we  obtain

. (1  -  X2)T  q

^~ "  RT  +  a  const"  ;

or after introducing the theoretical vapour density 8, and that
observed  A,  we  obtain

(2A  -  8)T  q

>-A)2P=-RT  +  aCOnSt

This  is  a  general  equation  of  condition  for  gases  existing  in  the  state  of
Unary  dissociation.

In  order  to  determine  q  and  the  integration  constant,  use  is  made
of  the  measurements  of  the  vapour  density  at  different  temperatures  ;
and  then  by  means  of  the  two  preceding  formulae,  one  can  calculate

1  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  7.  120  (1891). See  also  Schreber,  ibid.,  24.  651  (1897).
2  See  p.  441.

2  U

658

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  IV

the degree of dissociation, and  also the vapour density, for any
arbitrary  condition  of  temperature  and  pressure.

It  should  be  observed,  in  making  calculations  of  this  kind,  that
the  constants  in  the  two  equations  have  different  values,  as  is  apparent
from  the  derivation.  It  is  more  convenient  to  manipulate  the  first  form,

1  -  x2
especially  when  one  has  calculated  a  table  for  In  —  2—  for  every  case.

X

It  was  shown  by  Gibbs1  (1879)  that  all  the  observations  on  the
vapour  densities  of  formic  acid,  acetic  acid,  and  phosphorus  penta-
chloride,  can  be  satisfactorily  represented  by  means  of  the  preceding
equations.

The  Dissociation  of  Dissolved  Substances.  —  The  formulse
developed  in  the  preceding  section  can  be  applied  to  this  case  without
further  remark.

Thus  let  Vj  and  v2  denote  respectively  the  volumes  of  solutions
containing  1  g.-mol.  [of  the  solid  substance  in  question],  at  the
temperatures  Tx  and  T2  ;  and  let  xx  and  x0  be  the  respective  degrees
of  dissociation  under  these  conditions.  Thus,  as  a  special  formula  for
the  case  of  a  binary  electrolyte,  we  have

K,  (l-x2)v2 2VI\

on  account  of  the  very  slight  expansion  of  water  solutions  from  heat,
one  may,  Avithout  hesitation,  make  v1  -  v9,  if  the  same  solution  is  being
compared  at  two  different  temperatures.

Unfortunately  there  are,  as  yet,  no  satisfactory  numerical  data  at
hand  for  the  calculation  of  the  heat  of  ordinary  dissociation  in  solution
(p.  455).  Inasmuch,  however,  as  the  measurement  of  the  electrical
conductivity  affords  a  very  exact  determination  of  the  degree  of
electrolytic  dissociation,  the  data  for  the  calculation  of  the  heat  of
dissociation  are  furnished  by  the  very  simple  and  exact  measurement  of
the  temperature  coefficients  of  the  conductivity.21

In  this  way  Arrhenius  3  ascertained  the  heats  of  dissociation  for

Electrolyte.

q

Acetic  acid

- 28

Propionic  acid . .

183

Butyric  acid

427

Phosphoric  acid
Hydrofluoric  acid

2103
3200

1  Sill.  Jour.,  18.  277  (1879) ;  see  also  p.  483.

2  The  heat  of  dissociation of  benzoic  acid  in  benzene in 8710 cal. according  to
Hendrixson's  (p.  486)  experiments  on  the  distribution  between  two  solvents.

:!  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,4..  96  (1889),  9.  339  (1892)  ;  see  also  Petersen,  ibid.,  11.  174
(1893).

CHAP.  Ill TEMPERATURE  AND  INCOMPLETE  EQUILIBRIUM  659

the  respective  electrolytes,  as  given  in  the  preceding  table  :  the  figures
refer  to  a  temp,  of  21 '5°.

At  higher  temperatures  the  heat  of  dissociation  increases,  i.e.  the
specific  heat  of  the  electrically  neutral  molecules  is  greater  than
that  of  the  free  ions ;  and  thus  the  heat  of  dissociation  of  acetic  acid
at  higher  temperatures  is  negative.

In  this  way  the  result  was  ascertained,  that  the  dissociation  of  a
substance  into  its  ions  is  usually  attended  with  a  development  of  heat.

The  value  for  hydrofluoric  acid  [3200]  coincides  in  a  very  interest-
ing way  with  the  value  2570,  as  found  on  p.  607,  especially  when  we
consider  that  the  latter  can  only  be  estimated  in  a  general  way.

A  stricter  calculation  shows  that  the  coincidence  between  the
heats  of  dissociation,  as  calculated  from  the  conductivities,  with  the
thermo-chemical  measurements  of  Thomsen,  is  most  excellent ;  this  is
shown  by  the  following  results,  which  are  calculated  according  to  the
more  exact  formula  of  Arrhenius  (p.  607) ;  here  x,  the  dissociation
heat  of  water,  is  put  at  13,210;  and  the  values  of  W,  Wv  and  W2,
are  ascertafned  from  the  conductivities.

Acid.

Obs. Calc.

HC1

13,700

13,740

HBr

13,760

13,750

HN08

13,810

13,680

C2H5COOH

13,400

13,450

HF

16,120

16,270

The  figures  refer  to  the  heat  developed  on  neutralising  the  acid
with  sodium  hydroxide,  when  the  concentration  of  acid  and  base  is

normal.

Attention  should  be  especially  directed  to  the  fact  that  the  value  of
the  heat  of  neutralisation  does  not  stand  in  any  direct  relation  to  the  strength
of  the  acid.  Thus  propionic  and  hydrofluoric  acid  are  both  weak  acids  ;
yet  the  neutralisation  heat  of  the  former  is  smaller  than,  and  that  of
the  latter  is  greater  than,  the  heat  of  neutralisation  of  either  of  the
three  strong  acids,  HC1,  HBr,  or  HN03.  This  shows,  therefore,  that,
we  cannot  detect  any  simple  relation  between  the  heat  of  dissociation
of  acids  and  their  strength.  And  therefore  it  is  not  allowable  to  do,
as  is  often  wrongly  done,  viz.,  to  measure  the  affinity  between  an  acid
and  a  base  by  the  quantity  of  heat  developed  on  neutralising  them.

If  an  electrolyte  develops  heat  by  decomposing  into  its  ions,  then
its  dissociation  must  diminish  with  rising  temperature.  Therefore  if
a  solution  of  such  an  electrolyte  is  warmed,  then  the  number  of  con-
ducting molecules  is  diminished,  which,  of  course,  causes  its  conductivity

660  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOKIV

to  diminish.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  conductivity  increases  con-
siderably as  a  result  of  the  diminished  ion  friction  ;  and  as  the  latter
influence  preponderates,  therefore  usually  an  increase  of  the  conduc-
tivity of  water  solutions  is  observed  with  rising  temperature.

It  was  Arrhenius  who,  guided  by  such  considerations  as  the
preceding,  first  discovered  those  electrolytes,  where,  conversely,  the
restraining  influence  of  the  retrograding  dissociation  preponderates,
Thus  phosphoric  and  hypo-phosphorous  acid  at  the  respective  tempera-
tures of  54°  and  75°,  show  maxima  of  conductivity,  and  above  these
respective  temperatures  they  have  negative  temperature  coefficients.
No  one  before  this  had  suspected  the  existence  of  such  electrolytes.

Electrolytic  Dissociation  of  the  Solvent.-—  We  found  on  p.  508
for  the  dissociation  of  water

whence  the  heat  of  dissociation  is

T>T,  2 dco
q=  %dT'

In  this  equation  q  is  known,  so  that  the  temperature  coefficient  of
the  dissociation  can  be  calculated.  Since  the  temperature  coefficient
of  the  ionic  friction  is  known,  that  of  the  conductivity  may  be  arrived
at  theoretically,  and  Kohlrausch  and  Heydweiller  l  calculated  it  as
5  -81  °/Q  at  18°  :  this  is  unusually  large,  because  the  increase  in  ionic
mobility  is  joined  to  a  rapid  rise  of  dissociation  with  temperature.
These  observers  found  that  with  increased  purity  the  temperature
coefficient  increased  from  2  '4%  as  shown  by  ordinarily  "pure  water"
to  a  maximum  of  5'32^/;  it  appears,  then,  that  the  theoretical
temperature  coefficient  is  nearly,  but  not  quite  reached,  so  that  the
most  completely  purified  water  is  probably  not  quite  pure.  They
estimated  the  remaining  trace  of  impurity  from  the  difference  between
the  observed  and  theoretical  temperature  coefficient,  and  in  this  way
obtained  a  fairly  accurate  value  for  the  dissociation  of  water.  They
found  at

t  = 0° 10° 18° 34° 50°,
c0  =  0-35 0-56 0-80 1'47 2'48  ;

where  c0  is  the  amount  in  mols  dissociated  in  10,000,000  litres.

The  Most  General  Case.  —  The  calculation  of  the  heat  of
reaction,  which  is  associated  with  the  displacement  of  the  condition  of
equilibrium  between  any  arbitrary  number  of  gaseous  or  dissolved
substances,  according  to  what  has  preceded,  does  not  offer  any  more
difficulties  in  any  case  \  for  the  calculation  can  be  accomplished  by  a
knowledge  of  the  equilibrium  at  two  temperatures  which  do  not  lie

1 Wied.  Ann.,  53.  209  (1894).

CHAP,  ill TEMPERATURE  AND  INCOMPLETE  EQUILIBRIUM  661

too  far  apart.  Therefore  we  devote  a  little  space  to  the  discussion  of
such  examples  :  thus  we  have  already  (p.  444)  discussed  the  case
of  the  decomposition  of  carbon  dioxide  from  the  standpoint  of  the  law
of  mass-action  ;  thus,  —

2C02  =  02  +  2CO.

We  found  the  equation  for  this  case  to  be

2  _
1 -"

where  the  concentrations  of  the  molecular  species,  C02,  02,  and  CO
amount  respectively  to  c1?  c2,  and  c3.  We  will  assume  no  excess  of
[either  of]  the  decomposition  products,  and  will  denote  the  total
pressure  by  P,  and  the  dissociation  coefficient  by  x,  corresponding  to
the  pressure  P  and  the  temperature  T.  Then  we  will  obtain

9 9Y  Y  9Y

pj  ~  JX  p X  p ZX

2  +x  2+x  2  +  x.

ci=

and  therefore

RT  C2  =  -TJT~' C3~^T~

F  -  -

~ET  '  (2  +  x)(l-x)2'

Now  if  the  degrees  of  dissociation,  at  the  temperatures  T1  and  T2,  and
at  the  pressures  Px  and  P2,  amount  respectively  to  x1  and  x2,  then  we
obtain

P  v  3  P  Y  3  ft  /  1  1 \

in  _ r2x2  __  ln rixi _  =  _  Sf  J:  _  _L  \

T2(2  +  x2)  (1  -  x2)* Tx(2  +  x,)  (  1  -  Xl) RVT, T/

By  means  of  the  heat  of  combustion  of  carbon  monoxide  —  as
measured  directly  at  lower  temperatures,  and  capable  of  being
calculated  for  higher  temperatures  from  the  difference  of  the  specific
heats  —  from  these  Le  Chatelier  ascertained  the  heats  of  dissociation
given  on  p.  445.  They  coincide  well  with  those  observed.  Of  course
both  in  the  preceding  formula  and  in  all  other  similar  cases,  q  refers
to  the  mean  temperature  between  Tl  and  T2.

With  increasing  temperature  the  heat  of  dissociation  (  -  q)
diminishes,  and  in  all  probability,  at  a  temperature  (5000°),  which
certainly  lies  too  high  for  experiment,  q  becomes  0  ;  above  this
temperature  q  would  assume  a  negative  value.  But  a  positive  value
of  q  would  correspond  to  a  decrease  of  the  dissociation  coefficient  with  the
temperature,  and  this  leads  us  to  the  unexpected  result  that  at  very  high
temperatures  the  dissociation  of  carbon  dioxide  must  retrograde.  .  Of  course
this  result  —  obtained  as  it  is  by  an  extrapolation  of  the  specific  heats
of  reacting  gases  at  lower  temperatures,  to  very  high  temperatures  —
this  is  not  to  be  adopted  beyond  all  doubt.  But  we  have  no  reason
for  regarding  a  retrograding  of  the  gaseous  dissociation  with  the
temperature  as  impossible  \  for  this  is  certainly  the  case  with  electro-

662  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  iv

lytic  dissociation  [i.e.  within  the  limits  attainable  by  experiment.  —  Tu.].
Moreover,  Troost  and  Hautefeuille  in  the  dissociation  of  silicon  chloride,
and  Ditte  in  the  dissociation  of  hydrogen  selenide,  both  observed  a
dissociation  maximum  ;  and  probably  many  molecular  species  unknown
to  us  are  formed  at  high  temperatures.

The  Process  Of  the  Blast  Furnace.  —  In  conclusion,  an  example
taken  from  the  monograph  of  Le  Chatelier,  will  show  us  how  the
equations  of  the  reaction  isotherm  and  of  the  reaction  isochore  find
immediate  application  in  practice.

The  production  of  iron  by  means  of  the  blast  furnace  occurs  accord-
ing to  the  equation

Experience  shows  that  an  equilibrium  is  established  between  the
reacting  substances,  and  also  that  there  escapes  from  the  blast
furnace  a  mixture  of  carbon  monoxide  and  carbon  dioxide.  There-
fore it  was  hoped  that  a  larger  product  would  be  obtained  by  build-
ing furnaces  of  very  large  dimensions.  But  the  results  of  the
undertaking  were  disappointing,  even  with  the  great  expense  involved
in  the  work.

Now,  on  the  one  hand,  the  law  of  mass-action  teaches  that  the
ratio  of  the  two  gases  [viz.  CO  and  C02],  at  constant  temperature,
must  be  constant  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  as  the  heat  of  reaction  of
the  process  amounts  to  very  little,  that  therefore  the  temperature
exerts  a  very  slight  influence  relatively  on  the  amount  of  the  product.
Moreover,  as  the  furnaces  of  moderate  dimensions  nearly  succeeded  in
reaching  the  limit  below  which  the  ratio  of  carbon  monoxide  and
dioxide  cannot  be  lowered,  therefore,  as  was  to  be  expected,  a  further
enlargement  of  the  furnace  cannot  succeed  in  increasing  the  relative
amount  of  the  product.1

The Law  of  the  Mutuality  (Fertretbarkeit)  of  Phases.-  -If

two  phases,  respecting  a  certain  definite  reaction,  at  a  certain  temperature,  are
in  equilibrium  with  a  third  phase,  then  at  the  same  temperature  and  respecting
the  same  reaction,  they  are  in  equilibrium  with  each  other.

This  obvious  generalisation  is  an  immediate  conclusion  from  the
considerations  advanced  on  p.  612.

Moreover,  it  also  necessarily  follows  from  the  proposition  given  on
page  19,  viz.  that  it  is  not  possible  to  construct  an  apparatus  which
shall,  at  constant  temperature,  be  able  to  furnish  external  work
continuously.

For  if  two  phases,  A  and  B,  were  in  equilibrium  with  a  third,  G,

1  Of  course  this  does  not  affect  the  positive  result,  that  large  furnaces  may  handle
a  large  product  more  cheaply  than  a  small  furnace  can  handle  a  correspondingly
small  product,  with  the  same  ratio  of  gaseous  products  in  both,  an  important  item
from  a  business  standpoint.  —  TR.

CHAP.  Ill TEMPERATURE  AND  INCOMPLETE  EQUILIBRIUM  663

but  not  with  each  other,  then  in  the  combination  arranged  in  a  cyclic
way  as  follows,

C
A B,

at  first  there  would  occur  a  displacement  between  A  and  B,  but  this
would  disturb  the  equilibrium  with  C.  And  thus,  at  constant
temperature,  the  respective  reactions  between  A  and  B,  between  B  and
C,  arid  between  C  and  A,  would  take  place  continuously,  without  ever
establishing  an  equilibrium  [which  is  absurd,  hence  the  validity  of  the
preceding  proposition. — TR.].

We  have  already  made  repeated  applications  of  this  law,  which
clearly  illustrate  its  fruitfulness.

Thus,  for  example,  let  us  consider,  as  a  reaction,  the  mutual
removal  of  different  phases  from  water  ;  then  the  preceding  law  teaches
that  two  liquid  or  solid  phases  which  are  in  equilibrium  with  water-
vapour  of  the  same  pressure,  must  also  be  in  equilibrium  with  each
other.

If  we  consider  a  liquid  with  one  solid  salt,  then  the  latter  will
absorb  more  water,  the  smaller  the  dissociation  pressure  of  its  water-of-
crystallisation  (p.  469).  This  observation  gives  us  the  theory  of  the
method  of  drying  [as  by  a  desiccator].

If  we  have  once  investigated  the  equilibrium  between  water  vapour
and  ether  containing  water, — then  conversely  the  quantity  of  water
which  will  be  extracted  from  the  ether  by  a  salt  capable  of  combining
with  water-of-crystallisation, — this  will  give  the  dissociation  pressure
of  the  salt,  as  was  shown  by  Linebarger.1

Moreover,  the  identity  of  the  law  of  the  relative  depression  of  the
solubility  (p.  152),  with  the  law  of  the  relative  depression  of  the  vapour
pressure,  is  an  immediate  deduction  from  the  preceding  principle.

According  to  p.  471,  the  product  of  the  partial  pressures  of
ammonia  and  hydrochloric  acid  over  sal-ammoniac  is  constant;
according  to  the  above  law  the  product  must  be  the  same  over  a
saturated  solution  of  sal-ammoniac.  Since,  however,  free  ammonia  is
present  in  the  solution,  in  consequence  of  hydrolysis,  but  hardly  any
free  hydrochloric  acid,  so  that  the  partial  pressure  of  the  ammonia  is
the  greater,  and  on  evaporating,  the  distillate  is  found  to  be  alkaline,
the  residue  acid.

Influence  of  the  Extent  of  a  Phase. — The  general  law  was
stated  on  p.  464,  and  has  been  applied  since,  that  equilibrium  in
heterogeneous  systems  is  independent  of  the  extent  of  the  phases,  e.g.
the  vapour  pressure  of  a  liquid  is  independent  of  the  amount  of  liquid,
the  solubility  of  a  solid  independent  of  the  amount  of  solid.  A  simple

1  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  13.  500  (1894).

664  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

tbermodynamic  theorem  shows,  however,  that  this  is  only  true  when
the  extent  of  the  phase  does  not  fall  below  a  certain  minimum.

If  from  a  given  heterogeneous  system  we  allow  unit  mass  of  one
phase  to  disappear,  by  means  of  a  change  in  pressure,  the  system  does
a  certain  amount  of  work  A0.  If  now  we  first  suppose  this  unit  mass
divided  into  n  equal  parts,  separate  in  space,  and  that  to  perform  this
separation  requires  An  of  work,  then  we  must  have

A  =  A'  -  An,

where  A'  is  the  work  done  when  the  unit  of  mass  is  removed  in  n
portions.

So  long  as  the  subdivision  is  not  pushed  too  far,  An  remains  in-
finitesimal, so  that  the  law  as  originally  stated  is  true.  If  the  work
of  subdivision  becomes  appreciable,  so  that  A'  differs  from  A,,  the
active  mass  is  changed  ;  for  the  modified  equilibrium  we  have  simply

A  =  RT  In  K  =  RTln  K'  -  An,

where  K'  is  the  new  reaction  constant ;  the  latter  may  be  calculated
when  An  is  known.

This  can  easily  be  found  for  a  liquid  from  the  surface  tension  ;
in  this  case  the  equation  becomes  identical  with  the  formula
given  by  Lord  Kelvin  in  1870  for  the  vapour  pressure  over  small
drops.

The  work  of  subdivision  for  solids  is  unknown ;  but  G.  A.  Hulett 1
showed  experimentally  that  very  fine  powder  is  more  soluble  than
large  crystals  ;  e.g.  barium  sulphate,  ground  into  powder  of  about
10~5  cm.  diameter,  is  nearly  twice  as  soluble  as  larger  crystals  of  the
same  salt.  This  is  a  fact  of  importance  for  the  theory  of  spontaneous
crystallisation  (p.  242).

The  Influence  of  the  Temperature,  and  of  the  Pressure,
upon  the  State  of  Chemical  Equilibrium. — Thus  far,  on  the  whole
we  have  employed  our  fundamental  thermo-chemical  formula,  viz.,

dlnK  q

dT  ET2'

in  order  to  calculate,  from  the  displacement  of  a  chemical  equilibrium,
the  heat  of  reaction  which  is  associated  with  that  reaction,  the  equi-
librium of  which  we  are  investigating.  But,  of  course,  we  can,  con-
versely, reason  from  the  heat  of  reaction  to  the  influence  of  the
temperature,  and  then  obtain  the  following  law —

If  we  heat  a  chemical  system,  at  constant  volume,  then  there  occurs  a
displacement  of  the  state  of  equilibrium,  and  in  that  direction  towards  which
the  reaction  advances  ivith  absorption  of  heat.

1  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  37.  385  (1901).

CHAP,  in TEMPERATURE  AND  INCOMPLETE  EQUILIBRIUM  665

If  q  >  0,  K  decreases  with  increase  of  temperature,  and  the
equilibrium  is  displaced  on  increase  of  temperature  in  the  sense  of
the  chemical  equation  from  right  to  left,  i.e.  in  the  sense  in  which
the  reaction  proceeds  with  absorption  of  heat.

Of  course,  the  preceding  formula  primarily  proves  this  law  only
for  those  systems  for  which  it  is  valid,  i.e.  only  for  those  systems  in
which  the  phase,  having  a  variable  composition,  is  represented  by  a  gas
mixture  or  a  solution.

We  have  already  seen  that  it  [i'.e.  the  preceding  formula]  is  also
applicable  to  condensed  systems.  Thus  it  is  universally  valid.

Those  chemical  forces  which  condition  a  development  of  heat,  will
always  be  weakened  by  an  increase  of  temperature ;  and  conversely,
those  which  condition  an  absorption  of  heat  will  be  strengthened  by
such  an  increase  in  temperature ;  and  it  is  this  fact  which,  primarily,
gives  the  preceding  proposition  its  universal  validity.

This  law,  which  van't  Hoff  called  the  "principle  of  mobile  equili-
brium "  (principe  de  Vequilibre  mobile),  assists  us  in  a  wonderful
way  in  becoming  acquainted  with  the  subject.  Thus  it  shows  us  at
once  that,  e.g.,  the  pressure  of  a  gas,  the  vapour  pressure,  the  degree  of
dissociation,  etc.,  must  each  and  all  increase  with  the  temperature ;
because  heat  absorption  is  respectively  associated  with  the  expansion
of  gases,  with  evaporation,  and  with  the  decomposition  of  complex
molecules  into  more  simple  ones.

Thus  the  reaction  of  acetic  acid  and  alcohol  in  forming  water  and
an  ester,  is  not  accompanied  by  a  marked  development  of  heat  (p.  603),
and  therefore  the  state  of  equilibrium  between  these  substances  is
independent  of  the  temperature  (p.  448).

Substances  formed  with  absorption  of  heat,  such  as  ozone,  acetylene,
hydrogen  peroxide,  are  unstable  in  considerable  concentration  at
ordinary  temperature,  but  must  gain  in  stability  on  heating.

Completely  parallel  with  the  preceding  law  we  may  state  another,
which  gives  an  explanation  of  the  influence  of  pressure  upon  a  chemical
equilibrium,  viz. —

If  we  compress  a  chemical  system  at  constant  temperature,  there  follows
a  displacement  of  the  equilibrium  in  that  direction  which  is  associated  with  a
diminution  of  volume.

This  proposition  can  be  easily  derived  for  gaseous  systems,  from
the  law  of  mass-action  (see  p.  436).  Indeed  it  holds  good  universally.

Thus  the  solubility  of  a  salt  in  water,  e.g.,  will  increase  with  the
pressure,  provided  that  the  dissolving  is  associated  with  a  contraction
of  the  solution  plus  the  salt ;  and  conversely,  the  solubility  will  decrease
if  the  separation  of  the  salt  [from  the  solution]  is  associated  with  a
diminution  of  the  volume  of  the  system.1

Moreover,  those  chemical  forces  are  strengthened  by  compression,
which  condition  a  diminution  of  volume ;  and  those  chemical  forces
1  F.  Braun,  Wied.  Ann.,  30.  250  (1887)  ;  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  1.  259  (1887).

666  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

are weakened by compression, which condition an increase in
volume.

The  influence  of  pressure  on  equilibrium  in  dilute  solution  is
obtained  as  follows.1  If  dv  mols  of  a  reactive  mixture  are  converted,
the  work  di/RT  In  K  is  done  (p.  648) ;  if  the  mixture  is  at  pressure  p,
and  suffers  a  change  in  volume  dv,  the  work  pdv  is  given  out.  Hence

dA  =  RTln  K  .  di/ +  pdv  ;
but  this  equation  is  of  the  form

dA  *  (^1dtD1  +  ^2dft)2  [T  const.],
so  that,  according  to  p.  26,

a^  =  a®2

or  in  the  special  case  considered,

8RTlnK_8p
dv 8v
or

RT31nK  =  |,  =  Vo)

whence  V0  is  the  change  in  volume  due  to  conversion  of  one  mol.

Fanjung 2  applied  this  equation  to  the  influence  of  pressure  on  the
dissociation  of  weak  acids.  He  found  the  dissociation  constant  under
different  pressures  by  means  of  the  conductivity,  and  found,  e.g.,  for
acetic  acid,

pl  = 1  atmo.  log10  Kx  -  0'254  -  5,

p2  =  260  atmo.  log10  K2  =  0'305  -  5.
Since  K  and  p  vary  proportionally  within  wide  limits  we  have

din  K  _  9.oA9  l°g10 Kg  -  1°£10  KI

dP  P2  -  Pi

and

V0  =  0-0821  (273  +  18)  2-302  °'305 o~°'254  =  0-0108.

J59

Since  p  is  expressed  in  atmos.  and  R  (  =  0'0821)  in  litre-atmospheres,
we  get  V0  in  litres ;  i.e.  when  the  ions  of  acetic  acid  combine  to  form
undissociated  molecules  there  is  an  increase  in  volume  of  10 "8  c.c.  per
mol;  according  to  p.  381,  the  molecular  volume  of  acetic  acid  when
ionised  is  40 '5,  and  when  undissociated  5T1,  an  increase  of  10 '6  c.c.

1  Planck,  Wied.  Ann.,  32.  494  (1887).  -  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  14.  673  (1894).

CHAP.  Ill TEMPERATURE  AND  INCOMPLETE  EQUILIBRIUM  667

This  is  as  good  an  agreement  as  could  possibly  be  expected;  Fanjung
found  equally  good  results  for  the  other  acids  studied.

As  electrolytic  dissociation  always,  so  far  as  known,  involves
contraction,  the  dissociation  must,  as  with  acetic  acid,  always  be
favoured  by  increase  of  pressure.

It  is  possible,  following  Le  Chatelier,1  to  unite  the  two  preceding
laws  in  the  following  principle  : —

Every  change  of  one  of  the  factors  of  an  equilibrium  occasions  a  rearrange-
ment of  the  system  in  such  a  direction  that  the  factor  in  question  experiences
a  change  in  a  sense  opposite  to  the  original  change.

This  reminds  us  of  the  mechanical  principle  of  ACTION  and
REACTION.

Effect  of  non-uniform  Pressure. — So  far  we  have  always  assumed
that  the  external  pressure  (as  measured  by  a  manometer)  is  the  same
in  all  parts  of  the  chemical  system.  Le  Chatelier2  has  considered  the
interesting  case  of  a  fluid  or  a  solid  compressed  by  a  piston  that  is  not
gas  tight,  so  that  one  phase  of  the  system  may  have  quite  a  different
pressure  to  a  second  phase  in  contact  and  equilibrium  with  it.  The
thermodynamic  treatment  of  this  case  also  can  be  carried  out  exactly.

If  dv  mols.  of  a  solid  or  liquid  of  vapour  pressure  TT  are  distilled
isothermally  into  a  phase  of  pressure  TTO,  the  work

RTln^.dv

^o

is  gained  ;  if  at  the  same  time  the  system  which  is  under  pressure  p
contracts  by  dv,  the  external  work  pdv  is  done  ;  so  that

dA  =  RTln-di>-pdv;

^o
and  as  on  p.  666  we  find

8KTln7r_ 8p

8v  ~dv'

or

ET 877^  _8v
TT  '  dp dv9

the  percentage  change  which  the  vapour  pressure  suffers  as  a
consequence  of  the  external  pressure  is  therefore

_100
RT *

Bv
where  by  ~-  =  V0  is  meant  the  increase  in  volume  that  the  solid  or

1  tfquilibres,  p.  210.

a  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  9.  335  (1892).  See  also  the  more  complete  treatment  by
E.  Riecke,  Gott.  Nachr.  (1894),  No.  4.

668  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

liquid  suffers  by  evaporation  of  one  mol.,  and  which  naturally  is  always
negative.  Thus  for  ice  V0  =  -  19'65  c.c.  RT  =  22,420  c.c.  if  p  is

reckoned  in  atmospheres. Hence -  per atmo.  increase of pressure

7T

is  0 '00088,  i.e.  the  vapour  pressure  of  ice  is  increased  by  pressure  to
the  extent  of  0'088  °/Q  per  atmo.  This  is,  moreover,  equal  to  the  fall  in
vapour  pressure  produced  by  an  equal  osmotic  pressure  in  the  interior
of  a  liquid.  Similar  considerations  show  that  the  solubility  of  solid
is  increased  if  whilst  it  is  in  contact  with  the  solvent  it  is  compressed
by  a,  sieve-like  arrangement.  Also  a  consideration  of  the  diagram  Fig.
15  (p.  142)  shows  at  once  that  compression  of  ice  (or  other  solid)  must
lower  its  melting  point  by  a  calculable  amount  if  it  is  in  contact  with
the  uncompressed  liquid ;  for  the  melting  point  is  the  point  at  which
solid  and  liquid  have  the  same  vapour  pressure.

It  is  well  known  that  ice  can  be  cut  by  pressing  a  wire  through  it.
The  solidification  of  moist  precipitated  powders  by  pressure  is  another
phenomenon  that  falls  into  this  category.

Thermodynamic  Potential. — If  we  consider  two  phases  in
contact,  work  can  be  done  if  one  gains  at  the  cost  of  the  other ;  if  the
volume  increases  by  dv,  work  is  done  to  the  extent  pdv  where  p  is  the
pressure  on  both  phases.  On  the  other  hand,  components  of  the  one
phase  may  pass  over  into  the  other,  and  then  for  dv  mols.  the  work  done
must  be  expressed  as  (/^  -  /j.2)  dv,  where  /^  and  ^2  are  factors  peculiar
to  the  phases  and  components  in  question.  We  find  therefore  that

dA  -  pdv  -  2(/*1  -  pz)dv  (T  const.)  . . .  . (1)

where  the  sum  is  to  be  taken  for  all  the  components.  The  reason  for
the  negative  sign  of  dv  is  that  we  understand  by  \>  the  amount  of  the
given  component  in  the  first  phase,  and  this  after  the  reaction  becomes
v  —  dv.

(pi  ~  f^-z)  *s  called,  after  Gibbs,  the  difference  in  thermodynamic
potential  for  the  given  component ;  /^  and  yu,2  are  therefore  the  thermo-
dynamic potentials  of  the  component  in  the  two  phases.

For  equilibrium,  according  to  p.  28,

SA  =  0 (2)

for  all  possible  isothermal  changes  consistent  with  the  conditions  of
the  system.  If  the  system  is  kept  at  constant  volume

8A.  =  2(7^

and  since  this  relation  must  hold  for  all  the  (infinitesimal)  variations
Sv,  it  follows  that

//i  =  //2,  //!  -  //'2,  etc.  . (3)

i.e.  if  two  phases  maintained  at  constant  temperature  and  volume  are  to  be

CHAP.  Ill TEMPERATURE  AND  INCOMPLETE  EQUILIBRIUM  669

in  equilibrium, the  thermodynamic  potential  of  each  component  must  be
identical  in  the  two  phases.

Example. — If  a  molecular  species  in  the  gaseous  state  or  in  dilute
solution changes in concentration from c  to c0, the  work  done  is

f*

RT  In  —  ;  hence
co

/xdv  =  (RT  In  c  -  A)di/,

where

A  =  RT  In  c0.

Hence  the  thermodynamic  potential  of  this  molecular  species  is

p  =  RT  In  c  -  A
for  two  coexistent  phases  in  equilibrium

RT  In  c'  -  A'  =  RT  In  c"  -  A",

or

c'
7'  =  e

Since,  however,  the  expression  on  the  right  is  constant  for  any  given
molecular  species,  at  a  given  temperature,  it  follows  that  for  equilibrium
there  must  be  a  constant  ratio  of  partition  between  the  two  phases ;
this  is  the  law  enounced  on  p.  481.

In  equilibrium  the  different  states  of  aggregation  have,  according  to
the  above,  equal  thermodynamic  potentials  (but  not  equal  free  energy).
For  further  applications  of  the  thermodynamic  potential  see  the
references  on  pp.  608  and  609  ;  it  should  be  remarked,  however,  that
the  theory  of  thermodynamic  potential  is  essentially  equivalent  to
the  thermodynamic  treatment  adopted  in  this  book.

CHAPTER IV

THERMO-CHEMISTRY IV

TEMPERATURE AND THE REACTION VELOCITY

The  Acceleration  of  Chemical  Reactions  by  Means  of  an
Elevation  of  the  Temperature. — In  the  last  two  chapters  we
have  sought  to  formulate  the  influence  of  the  temperature  upon  chemical
equilibrium,  but  in  this  chapter  we  return  again  to  chemical  kinetics.

The  problem  for  investigation  here  is  perfectly  clear.  In  the  last
chapter  of  the  preceding  book,  we  became  acquainted  with  certain
equations  which  enable  us  to  calculate  the  course  of  reactions  which
occur  at  constant  temperature,  and  therefore  they  enable  us  to
express  the  influence  of  temperature  in  numerical  values  of  the  velocity-
coefficients.

Here  we  are  to  consider  the  solution  of  the  problem  of  penetrating
into  the  nature  of  these  temperature  functions.

The  following  result  has  been  obtained  in  a  purely  empirical  way,
viz. —

All  experimental  measurement  has  shown  that  the  velocity  with  which  a
chemical  system  strives  to  reach  its  state  of  equilibrium,  increases  enormously
with  the  temperature.

This  appears  to  be  a  universal  phenomenon,  and  such  is  its  im-
portance for  the  course  of  chemical  decomposition,  and  such  also  is
its  significance  for  the  so-called  "  stormy  reactions "  (decrepitation,
explosion,  etc.)  that  it  will  be  described  at  once.

As  an  example  of  this  we  will  give  the  figures  obtained  for
the  velocities  according  to  which  cane-sugar  is  inverted  at  the  respective
temperature  t,  the  other  conditions  being  unchanged : —

[TABLE

670

CHAP.  IV

TEMPERATURE  AND  THE  REACTION  VELOCITY

671

t

Inversion  Coefficient.

25°

9'67

40

73-4

45

139

50

268

55

491

It  appears  that  an  elevation  of  only  30°  is  sufficient  to  increase
the  reaction  velocity  fifty-fold ;  and  the  increase  is  similarly  rapid  in
many  other  cases  which  have  been  investigated.1

It  is  very  easy,  from  the  standpoint  of  the  molecular  theory,  to
account  for  the  fact  that  substances  react  much  more  quickly  in
homogeneous,  gaseous,  or  liquid  systems,  the  higher  the  temperature
rises,  because  the  activity  of  the  heat  movement,  and  therefore  also
the  relative  number  of  the  collisions  of  the  reacting  substances,
increases  with  the  temperature.  But  when  we  consider  that  the
velocity  of  the  molecular  movement  in  gases — and  in  all  probability
in  liquids  also — is  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  absolute
temperature,  and  also  that  at  the  temperature  of  a  dwelling-room  it
increases  by  only  about  J  of  one  per  cent  per  degree,  and  that  the
number  of  collisions  must  increase  in  proportion  to  the  velocity  of
the  molecule — when  all  this  is  considered,  one  would  suppose  that  the
increase  of  reaction  velocity  actually  observed  (and  which  usually
amounts  to  10  to  12  per  cent  per  degree),  would  be  impossible,
provided  that  one  had  regard  to  calculation  only,  in  considering  the
increased  heat  movement.  Regarding  the  explanation  of  this,  only
conjectures  have  been  expressed  hitherto.2

When  we  consider  various  systems  at  the  same  temperature  we
find  the  greatest  conceivable  divergences  of  reaction  velocity.

Thus,  e.g.,  while  in  neutralising  an  acid  by  a  base,  the  reacting
ingredients  unite  so  quickly  with  each  other  as  to  evade  all  estimation
of  the  reaction  velocity,  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  hydrogen  and  oxygen
unite  with  each  other  at  ordinary  temperatures,  so  slowly  that  it  has
thus  far  been  impossible  to  measure  the  velocity.  It  is  only  by  a
depression  of  the  temperature  in  the  former  case,  and  an  elevation
of  temperature  in  the  latter  case,  that  it  is  sometimes  possible  to  adapt
the  experiment  to  conditions  favourable  for  observation.

Non-reversible  Decomposition. — The  relations  prevailing  here
are  of  the  greatest  importance  for  the  problem  of  the  determination  of
chemical  equilibrium.  Such  a  problem  can  of  course  be  studied  only

1  A  rise  of  10°  usually  doubles  or  trebles  the  velocity 'of  reaction  ;  see  the  collection
of  data  in  van't  Hoff,  Ohem.  Dynamik,  p.  225.

2  See  Arrhenius,  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  4.  232  (1889).

672  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

when  the  progress  of  the  reaction  in  question  is  sufficiently  rapid  to
allow  the  equilibrium  to  be  established  in  observable  time.  When
this  is  not  the  case,  then  one  must  work  at  higher  temperatures ;  and
when  one  shall  have  accomplished  the  measurement  at  two  different
temperatures,  then,  by  means  of  the  thermodynamic  principle  given  in
the  two  preceding  chapters,  he  can  calculate  the  equilibrium  for  those
lower  temperatures  for  which  a  direct  observation  is  impossible.

Sometimes  even  this  method  is  debarred  ;  as,  e.g.)  when  the  reaction
velocity  does  not  become  sufficiently  great  until  such  temperatures  are
reached  that  the  equilibrium  has  already  been  so  displaced  on  one  side
or  the  other,  that  a  measurement  is  impossible  for  this  very  reason.

It  is  possible  that  this  is  the  case  in  the  direct  formation  of  ammonia
from  nitrogen  and  hydrogen.  At  lower  temperatures  neither  do  hydrogen
and  nitrogen  react  upon  each  other,  nor  does  ammonia  decompose  into
nitrogen  and  hydrogen,  at  least  in  observable  time  intervals.  At  high
temperatures,  such  as  those  produced  by  the  electric  spark,  ammonia
decomposes  with  practical  completeness  ;  and  therefore  the  determina-
tion of  the  real  equilibrium  between  ammonia  and  its  decomposition
products  cannot  be  made.

The  fact  that  the  reaction  velocity  in  chemical  systems  is  usually
extraordinarily  small,  no  matter  how  far  removed  from  the  point  of
equilibrium,  is  of  the  very  greatest  importance  for  our  knowledge
of  chemical  compounds.  Probably  nine-tenths,  or  rather  ninety-nine
hundredths,  of  all  organic  compounds  would  never  have  seen  the  light
of  day,  if  they  had  proceeded  to  their  stable  conditions  with  a  greater
velocity.  The  many  polymeric  hydrocarbons  of  the  formula  CnHn
could  not  all  exist  at  the  same  time  if  they  all  tended  to  go  at  once
to  the  system  of  greatest  stability  corresponding  to  the  formula  CnHn.
Thus  the  fact  that,  in  the  sense  of  the  preceding,  organic  chemistry  is
peculiarly  the  region  of  unstable  compounds,  and  that  they  either  go  over
to  a  more  stable  form,  very  slowly  in  measurable  time,  or  else  not  at
all — all  this  finds  its  explanation  in  the  inertia  of  the  carbon  union
(p.  287).

Those  chemical  systems  which  are  far  removed  from  the  stable
form  usually  change  with  an  increase  of  temperature,  when  this  gives
a  sufficient  value  to  the  velocity  with  which  they  strive  for  the  state
of  equilibrium.  Thus  consider  the  innumerable  decompositions,  char-
rings,  decrepitations,  etc.,  of  organic  compounds  on  heating,  or  consider
the  combustibility  of  many  compounds  in  oxygen.  In  most  of  these
cases  heat  only  accelerates  a  reaction — whether  a  decomposition  or  a
union — which  would  take  place  spontaneously,  though,  to  be  sure,
perhaps  only  during  the  lapse  of,  say,  a  thousand  years.

If  the  decomposition  shall  have  once  taken  place,  then,  of  course,
it  cannot  be  made  reversible  by  cooling,  because  now  the  system  is  in
a  more  stable  condition  than  before  the  cooling.

In  this  way  we  can  explain  the  existence  of  the  many  non- reversible

CHAP,  iv  TEMPERATURE  AND  THE  REACTION  VELOCITY  673

reactions:  these  are  essentially  different  from  the  dissociation  phenomena
proper  ;  and  also  many  of  the  reactions  which  progress  in  only  one  sense  are
similarly  explained.

This  fact  brought  it  about  that  until  very  recently  the  real  nature
of  chemical  equilibria  escaped  the  attention  of  the  chemist  ;  and  in  his
estimation  of  nature  he  too  largely  regarded  chemical  processes  as
belonging  to  the  phenomena  of  non-reversible  processes.  Just  as  the
physicist  could  not  study  successfully  the  laws  of  the  so-called  "  physical
reactions  "  of  the  changes  of  aggregation  by  means  of  under-cooled
vapours  or  liquids,  so  the  chemist  could  not  study  the  laws  of  chemical
processes  by  starting  out  with  the  investigation  of  the  non-reversible
decompositions,  as,  e.g.,  the  dissociation  phenomena  of  explosives.

The  Application  of  Thermodynamics.  —  Strictly  speaking,  the
doctrines  of  thermodynamics  have  nothing  to  teach  regarding  the
velocity  of  a  process  ;  because  the  velocity  always  depends,  not  only
upon  the  driving  force,  but  also  upon  the  magnitude  and  the  nature  of
the  friction,  and  these  lie  wholly  beyond  the  domain  of  thermodynamics.
Nevertheless,  we  will  venture  some  theoretical  conclusions  regarding
the  much-discussed  formula  which  has  already  done  so  much  good
service,  viz.  —

d  In  K

which  represents  the  dependence of  the  reaction  velocity  upon  the
temperature.

Let  us  recall  the  meaning  of  K  in  the  sense  of  the  theory  of
Guldberg  and  Waage  (p.  431),  according  to  which  this  quantity  is  the
ratio  of  the  velocities  of  the  mutually  opposed  reactions,  the  difference
between  which  conditions  the  total  reaction  velocity,

Thus,  in  the  first  place,  we  arrive  at  the  result  that  when  q  =  0,  then
K  is  independent  of  the  temperature,  and  k  and  k'  represent  the  same
temperature  function.  Thus,  e.g.,  the  velocity  with  which  alcohol  and
acetic  acid  unite  to  form  water  and  an  ester,  increases  in  exactly  the
same  way  as  the  velocity  with  which  the  -ester  and  water  unite  to
form  acetic  acid  and  an  alcohol.
The  equation

k

dlnc,

k _JL
dT  KT2'

2x

674  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

can  be  decomposed  into  the  two  more  general  forms

d  Ink  _  A T>
"  dT T2
and

dink'  _  A;

Here

and  B  may  be  an  arbitrary  temperature  function. But  van't  Hoff1
finds  that  in  many  cases

because  usually  the  coefficient  k  of  the reaction velocity  from the
equation

d  In  k  _  A

~dT~  ~  f*'
by  integration,  becomes

lnk=  -£  +  C.

Here  C  denotes  a  constant  (not  a  temperature  function),  which  can
be  calculated  with  excellent  results  from  observation,  by  a  suitable
choice  of  the  values  for  A  and  C.  The  expression  resembles  the
interpolation  formula,  which  was  used  to  represent  the  vapour  pressure
curve,  and  the  enormous  increase  of  the  reaction  velocity  reminds  us
of  the  increase  of  the  vapour  pressure  with  the  temperature.

Since  chemical  equilibrium  is  established  aperiodically,  it  is  a
process  of  the  same  kind  as  the  movement  of  a  material  point  under
great  friction  (p.  14),  the  displacement  of  ions  in  a  solvent  (p.  360),
or  the  diffusion  of  dissolved  substances  (p.  365).  In  all  these  cases
the  velocity  of  the  process  is  at  each  instant  proportional  directly  to
the  deriving  forces,  and  inversely  to  the  frictional  resistance  ;  so  that
we  conclude  that  an  equation  of  the  form

chemical  force
velocity  of  reaction  =

chemical  resistance

similar  to  Ohm's  law  must  hold.  The  "chemical  force"  at  any
moment  may  be  derived  from  the  change  in  free  energy  (pp.  26  and  27) ;
of  the  chemical  resistance  we  know  little,  but  it  is  not  impossible  that
it  may  be  measured  directly.  In  that  case  the  problem  of  calculating
chemical  velocities  of  reaction  would  be  similar  to  that  of  calculating
the  rate  of  diffusion  of  electrolytes  in  absolute  measure  (p.  369).  The

1  Etudes,  p.  114.

CHAP.  IV  TEMPERATURE  AND  THE  REACTION  VELOCITY  675

attempt  of  Helm  in  his  Grundzugen  der  mathematischen  Chemie  (Leipsic,
1894)  is  wrong  in  principle  and  leads  to  results  incompatible  with
experience.

According  to  all  experience  the  chemical  resistance  increases
rapidly  with  fall  of  temperature,  and  becomes  infinitely  great  at  the
absolute  zero  (in  accordance  with  kinetic  views).  At  the  absolute
zero,  therefore,  all  chemical  reaction  would  cease,  since  the  denominator
of  the  above  fraction  is  infinite.

The  velocity  of  reaction  in  heterogeneous  systems  is  zero  at  the
transition  point,  because  then  the  chemical  force  is  nil.  With  fall  of
temperature  it  must  first  increase  on  account  of  the  increase  in  the
numerator  (chemical  force)  on  departure  from  the  temperature  of
equilibrium.  When  the  temperature  is  sufficiently  lowered,  however,
it  decreases  on  account  of  the  enormous  increase  in  the  denominator
of  the  above  fraction.  Examples  of  such  behaviour  are  to  be  found
in  the  researches  on  velocity  of  crystallisation  (p.  582)  and  those  of
E.  Cohen  on  velocity  of  transition.1

Explosions  and  Combustions. — The  degree  of  the  influence  of
temperature  upon  the  velocity  of  a  chemical  change,  in  the  first  place,
gives  us  this  practical  rule — viz.  that  care  must  be  taken  in  measuring
the  course  of  a  reaction  to  maintain  the  system  at  a  constant  tem-
perature, which  can  be  accurately  measured.  This  can  be  most  easily
accomplished  by  putting  the  system  in  a  thermostat.

But  it  is  not  usually  possible  to  avoid  a  slight  excess  or  insufficiency
of  the  proper  temperature,  on  account  of  the  heat  of  reaction  associated
with  the  chemical  change  ;  as  when  the  change  takes  place  with  a
velocity  which  is  greater  than  the  equalisation  of  the  temperature  of
its  surroundings  can  follow.  The  tracing  and  measuring  of  such  a
process  offers  very  considerable  difficulties.

Reactions  with  Development  of  Heat. — Let  us  first  consider
the  case  where  the  reaction  progresses  in  the  sense  which  is  associated
with  the  development  of  heat.  As  a  result  of  the  progress  of  the
reaction,  there  ensues  an  elevation  of  temperature,  which  in  turn
accelerates  the  velocity.  But  this  accelerated  velocity  means  a
quicker  decomposition,  and  therefore  in  turn  occasions  an  increased
development  of  heat,  which  again  reacts  to  hasten  the  decomposition.
Thus  it  is  evident  how  a  very  extraordinary  acceleration  of  the
reaction  velocity  may  take  place  under  favourable  circumstances.  In
this  way  we  can  explain  the  "stormy  reactions."  It  will  be  found
invariably  that  these  are  associated  with  a  development  of  heat.

The  reaction  velocity  in  many  systems  at  the  ordinary  temperature
is  very  slight,  and  perhaps  may  have  no  appreciable  value.  In  such
-cases  the  mutual  action  of  the  acceleration  of  the  reaction  velocity
1  Zeitschr.  /.  Elektrvchemie,  6.  85  (1899).

676  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

upon  the  development  of  heat  and  the  converse,  as  in  the  phenomenon
just  described — this  does  not  exhibit  its  full  value,  because  the  slight
amount  of  heat  developed  is  conducted  away  by  the  environment
before  a  very  marked  elevation  of  temperature  follows.

Thus,  e.g.,  this  is  the  case  with  electrolytic  gas ;  doubtless  a  mutual
reaction  with  the  corresponding  development  of  heat  takes  place
between  oxygen  and  hydrogen  at  all  times ;  but  as  this  occurs  at
ordinary  temperatures,  with  most  extreme  slowness,  it  reaches  no
appreciable  amount ;  and  therefore  the  elevation  of  the  temperature
of  the  electrolytic  gas  mixture  above  its  surroundings  is  too  small  to
be  measured.  But  it  is  quite  otherwise  at  530°  to  600° ;  here  the
reaction  velocity  reaches  a  magnitude  sufficient  to  occasion  such  a
lively  development  of  heat  as  to  accelerate  the  union  of  the  two  gases
enormously,  and  this  results  in  a  combustion  or  explosion  of  the
system.

Moreover,  it  is  by  no  means  necessary  to  bring  the  whole  system  to
that  temperature  at  which  the  reaction'  velocity  shall  reach  an  amount
sufficient  for  the  ignition ;  but  it  is  sufficient  if  there  occurs  a  local
heating  to  a  sufficient  degree,  as  can  be  done  by  means  of  the  electric
spark.

Let  us  consider  again  a  simple  case  of  a  homogeneous  system  as  an
electrolytic  gas  mixture ;  then  in  every  case,  at  that  point  where  the
temperature  reaches  a  sufficient  limit,  the  reaction  between  the  two
gases  will  progress  more  quickly,  and  therefore  the  temperature  of  the
point  will  rise.  But  now  this  may  result  in  either  one  of  two  ways  :
thus —

Firstly,  the  heat  developed  at  the  point  may  be  taken  away  into
the  environment  by  radiation  and  conduction  more  quickly  than  it
can  be  generated  anew,  and  therefore  after  a  short  time  there  will
occur  a  sinking  of  the  temperature,  so  that  the  reaction  velocity  will
quickly  return  to  a  minimal  value  :  or —

Secondly,  the  heat  developed  at  the  point  considered  may  be
sufficiently  great  to  heat  the  surroundings  to  a  temperature  of  lively
activity  ;  thus  with  the  higher  temperature,  the  rapid  reaction  between
the  gases  spreads  over  the  whole  system ;  then  a  combustion  takes
place,  resulting  in  the  almost  complete  union  of  all  the  gases  in  the
system,  which  are  capable  of  reaction.

That  temperature,  to  which  a  point  of  the  system  must  be  heated
in  order  to  cause  combustion,  is  called  the  "  ignition  temperature."
The  degree  of  this  temperature,  as  is  obvious  from  the  preceding,  is
conditioned  by  a  large  number  of  factors,  such  as  the  heat  of  the
reaction,  the  thermal  conductivity,  the  capacity  for  diffusion  possessed
by  the  gas,  and  the  dependence  of  the  reaction  velocity  upon  the
temperature ;  and  it  will  also  vary,  especially  with  the  temperature  of
the  surroundings,  and  with  the  pressure  of  the  system.1

1  Actually  v.  Meyer  and  Freyer  found  that  an  exact  determination  of  the  tempera-

CHAP.  IV  TEMPERATURE  AND THE  REACTION  VELOCITY  677

Thus,  the  ignition  temperature  has  quite  a  secondary  nature  ;  as  is
clear  from  what  precedes,  it  cannot  claim  to  be  the  point  where  the
mutual  action  of  the  gases  begins.  That  would  be  as  contrary  to  fact,
as  though  one  should  regard  the  boiling  temperature  as  the  point
where  vaporisation  takes  its  beginning.

All  of  these  considerations  may  be  applied  to  explosions  in  hetero-
geneous systems,  as  the  ignition  of  gunpowder  and  the  like.

Reactions  with  Absorption  of  Heat. — But  the  relations  are
entirely  different  in  those  cases  where  the  progress  of  the  reaction  is
associated  with  an  absorption  of  heat,  i.e.  with  a  cooling  down.  Here
the  temperature  sinks  during  the  course  of  the  reaction,  and  the
chemical  change  will  be  retarded  the  more  quickly  the  temperature
sinks.

The  phenomenon  of  a  retardation  occasioned  by  the  chemical
change  itself  may  be  observed  in  the  process  of  evaporation,  which
process  is  associated  with  a  strong  absorption  of  heat ;  as  a  result  of
the  cooling  occasioned  thereby,  the  vapour  pressure  falls  very  rapidly.

The  fact  that  gunpowder  is  an  explosive  substance,  while  solid
carbon  dioxide  is  not,  and  this  in  spite  of  the  further  fact  that  both
are  capable  of  the  same  reaction,  viz.  conversion  into  gaseous  pro-
ducts ;  this  is  all  explained  by  observing  that  in  the  first  case  [gun-
powder], when  the  reaction  has  once  been  started,  it  spreads  and
gains  acceleration  from  the  lively  development  of  heat;  but  in  the
second  case  [solid  CO2],  on  the  other  hand,  the  action  is  reduced  to  a
standstill  almost  immediately  by  the  cooling  down.

The  Reaction  Capacity  of  Gases. — The  considerations  advanced
in  the  preceding  section  will  be  applied  to  gaseous  systems  in  some
further  respects.  It  is  a  striking  fact  that  many  gases  which  are  able
to  combine  with  each  other  with  a  lively  development  of  heat — as
oxygen  and  hydrogen,  carbon  monoxide  and  chlorine — do  neverthe-
less approach  so  slowly  to  that  state  of  equilibrium  (which  involves
almost  complete  combination),  that  these  gases  may  be  regarded  as
chemically  indifferent  towards  each  other  at  ordinary  temperatures.
Yet,  as  has  been  repeatedly  emphasised,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  a
reaction  does  take  place  at  ordinary  temperatures ;  but  here  the
reaction  velocity  is  so  extremely  slow  that  the  amount  changed  in  the
lapse  of  years  would  be  smaller  than  that  produced  in  a  fraction  of  a
second  by  an  elevation  of  a  few  hundred  degrees.  We  can  regard
this  as  only  another  example  of  the  enormous  influence  of  temperature
upon  the  reaction  velocity.

The  tracing  of  the  course  of  a  reaction  in  a  gaseous  system  by

ture  of  ignition  is  not  possible  (Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  25.  622, 1892). See  also
Bodenstein's  work  on  combination  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen  referred  to  on  p.  561.

678  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK IV

accurate  measurement  has  unfortunately  been  accomplished  thus  far
in  only  a  few  cases.

The  determination  of  the  ignition  temperature,  and  the  investiga-
tion of  the  dependence  of  the  explosion  capacity  of  gases  upon  foreign
intermixtures,  as  explained  above,  are  very  interesting  and  important
in  many  respects,  and  they  bring  surprising  facts  to  light ;  yet  the
phenomena  of  the  subject  are  too  complicated  to  be  accessible  by  a
simple  theoretical  treatment.

A  similar  thing  is  true  of  the  numerous  investigations  l  which  have
been  conducted  regarding  the  distribution  of  oxygen  between  hydrogen
and  carbon  monoxide,  or  of  hydrogen  between  oxygen  and  chlorine,
when  the  latter  gases  respectively  are  in  excess,  and  the  gas  mixture
is  caused  to  ignite.  An  application  of  the  law  of  mass-action  to  such
observations  as  these  is  directly  invalid  •  because,  in  the  first  place,  we
have  no  certain  guaranty  that  an  equilibrium  is  established  at  the
moment  of  ignition ;  and  ^condly,  if  such  were  the  case,  one  would
even  then  be  ignorant  of  the  relations  of  the  equilibrium  to  the  varia-
tions of  the  temperature.

It  is  a  fact  that  the  mutual  action  of  gases  can  be  brought  to  an
almost  complete  standstill  by  cooling ;  this  fact  can  be  employed  to
give  an  insight  into  the  condition  of  equilibrium  at  higher  temperatures.

This  fact  was  first  applied  by  Deville  (1863)  in  the  construction
of  his  "  cold-hot  tube  "  (kalt-warmen  Rohre) ;  by  means  of  this  apparatus
he  succeeded  in  showing  the  decomposition  of  C02,  of  SO2,  and  of
HC1.  The  gases  were  conducted  through  an  incandescent  porcelain
tube,  through  the  axis  of  which  passed  a  silver  tube  conducting  a
stream  of  cold  water.  As  soon  as  the  decomposition  products
produced  at  high  temperatures  diffused  from  the  hot  wall  of  the
porcelain  tube  towards  the  cold  wall  of  the  silver  tube,  they  were
suddenly  cooled,  and  thus  a  reunion  to  form  the  original  compound
was  hindered,  at  least  to  a  partial  extent.

It  is  possible,  in  a  similar  way,  to  detect  the  dissociating  action  of
strong  electric  sparks.  A  part  of  the  gas  is  raised  to  a  very  high
temperature,  and  thus  is  decomposed  to  a  greater  or  less  extent ;  then
the  decomposed  products  are  partially  separated  from  each  other  by
diffusion,  and  are  cooled  before  they  can  reunite  with  each  other
completely.

Thus  it  is  possible,  as  found  by  A.  W.  Hofmann,2  to  demonstrate
the  dissociation  of  C02,  or  of  water  vapour,  in  this  way  :  the  gases  are
led  through  a  glass-tube  in  which  are  developed  the  sparks  from  a
strong  induction  apparatus,  intensified  by  being  in  connection  with  the

1  See, e.g.,  Bunsen,  Lieb. Ann.,  85.  137 (1853)  ; Horstmaim, ibid., 19O.  228
(1878) ;  Bcitsch,  ibid.,  21O.  207  (1881) ;  Schlegel,  ibid.,  226.  133  (1884) ;  Hautefeuille
and  Margottet,  Ann.  chim.  phys.  [6],  2O.  416  (1890),  etc.

2  Sitzungsber.  der  Berl.  Akad., 1889,  p. 183  ;  Ber.  deutsch.  chem. Ges..  23.  3303
(1890).

CHAP,  iv  TEMPERATURE  AND  THE  REACTION  VELOCITY  679

poles  of  a  Leyden  jar.  Of  course  the  decomposition  cannot  pass
beyond  a  certain  limit,  for  there  would  then  occur  the  explosive
reunion  of  the  gaseous  products  of  decomposition.  Thus  Hofmann
and  Buff  (1860)  observed  that  by  means  of  a  constant  spark  stream,
and  at  suitably  chosen  proportions,  carbon  dioxide,  which  was  enclosed
in  a  eudiometer,  could  be  alternately  converted  partially  into  carbon
monoxide  and  oxygen,  which  again  united  with  a  weak  explosion.
Here  the  decomposition  only  goes  so  far  as  to  be  [partially]  capable  of
explosion,  and  thus  by  the  ignition  the  decomposition  products  again
unite,  only  to  begin  the  cycle  anew.

Deville's  method  can,  with  suitable  alteration,  give  valuable  service
in  investigating  qualitatively  equilibrium  in  gaseous  systems  at  high
temperatures.  If  the  gaseous  mixture  to  be  studied  is  led  into  a  bulb
heated  to  a  steady  temperature,  equilibrium  will  be  established  in
accordance  with  the  dimensions  of  the  apparatus  ;  if  the  gas  is  allowed
to  flow  out  quickly  through  a  narrow  Jpillary,  so  as  to  be  rapidly
cooled,  the  change  in  equilibrium  during  cooling  may  be  negligible  ;
and  if,  further,  the  equilibrium  changes  only  slowly  at  atmospheric
temperature,  an  analysis  of  the  outflowing  gas  will  show  what  is  the
state  of  equilibrium  at  the  temperature  of  the  bulb.

Equilibrium  may  be  hastened  by  suitable  catalysors,  such  as
platin-asbestos  :  by  this  artifice  Knietsch  l  followed  the  equilibrium  of
the  system

2S03  -  2S02  +  02

at  comparatively  low  temperature.

Reactivity  of  Oxygen. — Oxygen,  at  high  temperatures  a  highly
reactive  element,  is  strikingly  inert  at  ordinary  temperature,  not  because
its  affinity,  but  because  its  reactivity,  is  small.  Only  a  few  bodies —
the  spontaneously  oxidisable  or  "  autoxidisable  "  bodies — are  capable
of  combining  more  or  less  energetically  with  oxygen  at  ordinary
temperature.  To  this  class  belong  the  alkaline  metals,  especially
those  of  high  atomic  weight,  rubidium,  caesium,  the  compounds  of
sulphurous  acid  and  sulphuretted  hydrogen,  finely  divided  metals,
such  metallic  oxides  as  are  capable  of  higher  stages  of  oxidation ;  but
most  of  all,  certain  organic  bodies,  alkyl  compounds  of  phosphorus,
arsenic,  antimony,  zinc,  the  aldehydes,  many  ethereal  oils  like  turpen-
tine, etc.2

In  the  spontaneous  oxidation  of  these  substances  it  is  observed
that  they  induce  oxidation  of  others  not  spontaneously  oxidisable.
We  may  therefore  attribute  to  them  the  power  of  putting  oxygen  into
a  more  active  state.  This  fact  has  received  practical  applications,  e.g.
the  bleaching  of  textiles  and  paper  by  turpentine.

1  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  34.  4069  (1901).
2  See  Bodlander,  Langsame  Verbrennung,  Stuttgart,  1899.

680  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

These  processes  have  been  specially  studied  by  Schonbein,1  Brodie,'2
Clausius,3  Low,4  Hoppe-Seyler,5  Baumann,6  M.  Traube,7  and  in
more  recent  times  by  van't  Hoff,8  Jorissen,9  and  especially  by  Engler
and  Wild.10  Most  early  writers  thought  the  activation  was  due  to
conversion  of  the  oxygen  molecule  into  ozone  and  a  hypothetical
"autozone,"  or  decomposition  into  free  atoms.  M.  Traube  showed
that  in  such  processes  of  oxidation,  especially  of  finely  divided  metals,
in  presence  of  water,  hydrogen  peroxide  is  formed,  and  this  causes
further  oxidation.  Van't  Hoff  and  Jorissen  investigated  the  facts
quantitatively  and  found,  as  Schonbein n  and  Traube 12  had  partly
before,  that  the  autoxidisable  substances  activates  as  much  oxygen  as  it
requires  for  its  own  oxidation ;  in  other  words,  that  the  autoxidisable
and  the  other  substance  take  up  equal  amounts  of  oxygen.  They
tried  to  explain  this  by  a  decomposition  of  oxygen  into  opposite
electrically  charged  atoms.  According  to  the  important  investiga-
tions of  Engler  and  Wild,  the  phenomena  attending  autoxidation  are
to  be  explained  by  combination  not  with  single  atoms  but  with
half-broken  oxygen  molecules  — 0 — 0 — ,  forming  peroxides  of  the
type  of  hydrogen  peroxide,  i.e.  of  constitution

R— 0  ,0

.  i «-; X

R— 0  X0.

These  peroxides  like  hydrogen  peroxide  can  give  up  an  atom  of  oxygen
to  other  oxidisable  substances,  being  converted  themselves  into  the

simple  oxides  R20  and  RO.  The  active  oxygen  is  therefore  not  in  the
form  of  free  atoms,  but  combined  to  form  easily  decomposable  sub-
stances. The  stability  of  the  peroxides  varies  according  to  the  nature
of  the  radicle  R.  Some  are  easily  isolated  (peroxides  of  alkali  metals,
sodium,  rubidium,  etc.,  of  hydrogen — in  palladium-hydride — of  alde-
hydes, acetyl  peroxide,  propionyl  peroxide,  benzoyl  peroxide),  others
are  less  stable.  Probably  too  the  autoxidation  of  phosphorus  yields
a  very  easily  decomposed  peroxide,  which  gives  off  spontaneously  an
atom  of  oxygen,  which  combines  with  a  molecule  of  oxygen  to  form
ozone.

The  action  of  light  on  autoxidation  is  marked,  causing  an  extra-

1 Verh.  Bos.  naturw.  Ges.,  .V.  F.,  1.  467  ;  2.  113.

'2  Phil.  Trans.,  1850,  p.  759  ;  Jahresber.  f.  Chem.,  1850,  p.  248.

3  Fogg.  Ann.,  1O3.  644  (1858)  ; 121.  256  (1864).

4  Zeits.f.  Chem.,  N.  F.,  6.  610.

5  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  2.  24  ;  Ber.  deutsch.  chem,  Ges.,  12.  1551  (1879).

6  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  5.  244.

7  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  15.  644  (1888).

8  Zeits.phys.  Chem.,  16.  411  (1895)  ;  Chem.  Ztg.,  1896,  807.

9  Zeits.  phy.  Chem.,  22.  34-59  (1897).

1(1  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  30.  1669  (1897)  ;  see  also  Engler,  ibid.,  33.  1109  (1900).

11  Journ.  prakt.  Chem.,  93.  25  (1864).

12  Ber.. deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  26.  1471  (1893).

CHAP.  IV  TEMPERATURE  AND THE  REACTION  VELOCITY  681

ordinary  acceleration,  as  may  be  observed  especially  in  the  oxidation  of
organic  bodies  such  as  aldehyde,,  turpentine,  etc.  The  bleaching  of  dyes
may  very  probably  be  due  to  the  action  of  peroxides,  accelerated  by
illumination.  It  may  be  imagined  that  light  dissociates  the  closed
oxygen  molecules  0=0  into  reactive  complexes  — 0 — 0 — ,  an
hypothesis  however  that  has  not  yet  been  verified.

Van't  Hoff  and  Jorissen's  rule  as  to  the  quantities  of  oxygen  taken
up  by  the  autoxidisable  and  other  substance  holds  only  when  the  lower
oxide  formed  from  the  peroxide  is  itself  stable,  and  does  not  oxidise
further  itself.  If  the  lower  oxide  can  give  up  its  oxygen  the  original
autoxidisable  body  is  reformed,  and  by  a  kind  of  catalytic  action  is
capable  of  oxidising  an  indefinite  quantity  of  the  other  substance.
Oxidation  in  the  animal  body  very  likely  takes  place  in  this  way.
Hemoglobin  has  two  stages  of  oxidation,  oxyhsemoglobin  and
metoxyhsemoglobin,  and  the  investigations  of  Schiitzenberger  and  others
show  that  in  oxy hemoglobin  half  the  oxygen  is  more  easily  split  off
than  the  other  half.  The  first  is  to  be  regarded  as  peroxide  oxygen,
the  second  as  oxide  oxygen.

According  to  Haber,1  autoxidation  occurring  in  aqueous  solution
may  most  clearly  be  conceived  as  the  process  in  a  voltaic  cell ;  at  the
anode  a  mol.  of  oxide  of  the  substance  in  question ;  simultaneously,
but  in  this  case  at  a  separate  place,  a  mol.  of  hydrogen  peroxide  is
found  at  the  cathode,  which  must  be  covered  with  oxygen.

The  Catalytic  Action  of  Water  Vapour. — Another  very  strik-
ing phenomenon  is  this,  viz.  that  the  presence  of  the  very  slightest  traces
of  water  vapour  are  of  the  utmost  importance  for  the  ignition  capacity
of  certain  explosive  gas  mixtures.  Thus  Dixon 2  discovered  that  a
completely  dry  mixture  of  carbon  monoxide  and  oxygen  cannot  be  made
to  explode  by  means  of  the  electric  spark,  or  at  most  only  with
the  greatest  difficulty;  but  that  the  mixture  is  made  capable  of
explosion  by  the  introduction  of  the  very  slightest  traces  of  water
vapour.

Quantitative  data  are  at  hand  regarding  the  increase  of  the  velocity
of  the  explosions,  etc.,  which  show  the  perfectly  enormous  influence  of
traces  of  water-vapour.  Thus  "  carbon  monoxide  electrolytic-gas  "
[i.e.  2CO  +  02],  when  dried  with  P205  or  with  H2S04,  and  then  when
saturated  with  water- vapour  at  the  temperature  of  10°,  35°,  and  60°,
showed  for  the  velocity  of  explosion  in  these  five  cases  the  respective
results  of  36,  119,  175,  244,  and  317  m.  per  sec.

In  the  cases  where  other  foreign  gases  besides  water  were  mixed
with  the  carbon  monoxide  mixture  [2CO  +  0.2],  the  following  results
were  obtained : —

1. Explosion  occurred  on  passing  the  electric  spark  with  traces  of

1  ZeiLphys.  Chem.,  35.  81  (1900).
'2  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.,  175.  617  (1884)  ;  Jour.  Chem,  Soc.,  49.  94  and  384  (1886).

682  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  iv

H2S,  C2H4,  H2C02,  NHg,  C5H12,  or  HCl(all  of  which  contain  hydro-
gen), but—

2.  No  explosion  occurred  when  traces  of  S02,  CS2,  C02,  N20,
C9N2,  or  CC14  (none  of  which  contain  hydrogen)  were  introduced  into
the  carbon  monoxide  mixture.

It  is  the  view  both  of  Dixon  and  of  L.  Meyer  1  that  the  action  of
the  water-vapour,  requisite  for  the  combustion  of  the  carbon  monoxide
mixture  [2CO  +  O2],  is,  that  the  water-vapour  is  reduced  [to  hydrogen]
by  the  carbon  monoxide,  and  then  the  mixture  of  hydrogen  and
oxygen  burns  with  a  velocity  sufficient  for  explosion,  and  at  much
lower  temperatures  than  those  at  which  the  combustion  of  the  carbon
monoxide  occurs  ;  according  to  this,  the  water-vapour  acts  as  a  carrier
of  oxygen,  in  the  sense  of  the  two  following  equations,  viz.  : —

(1)  CO  +  H20  -  C02  +  H2,
and

(2)  2H2  +  02  =  2H20,

which  together  lead  to  the  result

(3)  2CO  +  02  =  2C0.2.

Thus,  in  reaction  (3)  it  only  requires  a  much  higher  elevation  of
temperature  than  in  (1)  and  (2),  for  the  course  of  the  reaction  to
advance  with  a  velocity  sufficient  to  cause  an  explosion.

In  other  cases  this  explanation  fails,  as  has  been  shown  by  Baker,2
in  numerous  examples ;  hydrochloric  acid  and  ammonia  form  no
ammonium  chloride,  and  vapour  of  ammonium  chloride  does  not
dissociate  when  they  are  made  very  thoroughly  dry.  The  peculiar
catalytic  action  of  water  in  these  instances  is  suggestive  of  the  high
dissociating  power  of  liquid  water.

The Velocity  of  the  Transmission  of  Explosions. — The

velocity  with  which  the  explosion  of  an  inflammable  gas  mixture  can
be  transmitted  has  for  a  decade  or  more  been  a  subject  of  investigation,
and  especially  by  Berthelot,  Vieille,  Mallard,  and  Le  Chatelier.

Berthelot  in  particular  showed  that  this  velocity  is  independent  of
the  pressure,  of  the  diameter  of  the  tubes  containing  the  explosive
gas  mixture,  and  also  of  the  material  composing  the  tubes,  but  that
every  gas  mixture  exhibits  a  characteristic  constant,  which  Berthelot  called
its  "  explosive  wave,"  the  determination  of  which  offers  great  interest.

In  the  following  table  are  arranged  some  of  the  figures  of  Berthelot,
as  well  as  some  of  the  more  recent  results  of  Dixon :  3 —

1  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  19.  1099  (1884).

2  Journ.  Chem.  Soc.,  1894,  p.  611  ;  Chem.  News,  69.  270  (1894).

3  Chem.  News,  64.  70  (1891).

CHAP. IV

TEMPERATURE  AND  THE  REACTION  VELOCITY

683

Berthelot.

Dixon.

Calc.

H2  +  0

2810

2821

2830

H2  +  N20

2284

2305

2250

CH4  +  40

2287

2322

2427

C2H4  +  60

2210

2364

2517

G"H2  +  50

2482

2391

2660

C2N2+40

2195

2321

2490

[The  figures  in  this  table  refer  to  metres  per  second. — TR.]

The  coincidence  of  the  values  of  Dixon  with  the  older  observations
of  Berthelot  is  very  satisfactory.  Moreover,  they  are  not  too  far
removed  from  Berthelot's  calculated  values,  which  identified  the  mean
molecular  velocity  of  the  combustion  products  with  the  velocity  of  the  trans-
mission of  the  explosion,  and  this  is  derived  from  the  temperature  at  the
instant  of  the  explosion ;  and  this  last  is  in  its  turn  obtained  from  the
heat  of  combustion,  and  the  heat  capacity  of  the  exploding  gas  mixture
— provided  that  one  disregards  the  small  quantity  of  heat  lost  during
the  explosion  and  some  slight  dissociation.

Although  it  has  been  completely  shown  by  the  investigations  thus
far  that  the  explosion  velocity  of  gaseous  systems  is  a  characteristic
magnitude  in  just  the  same  way  that  the  sound  velocity  is  for  a  gas,
yet  this  question  of  velocity  of  explosion  is  still  an  open  one  for  ex-
plosives in  other  states  of  aggregation.  Berthelot l  has  very  recently
attacked  the  question — whether  liquid  and  solid  explosives  show  similar
relations.  It  is  conceivable  that  the  quantitative  investigation  of  some
explosives  with  which  we  are  acquainted  might  not  be  entirely
attractive  even  for  a  bold  experimenter,  and  it  is  not  without
astonishment  that  we  learn  of  some  of  the  experiments  conducted
by  this  great  French  investigator.  Regarding  the  explosion,  two
of  its  special  characteristics  are  the  development  of  heat  and  the
change  of  volume.

The  following  table  gives  these  values  for  some  explosives ;
the  figures  in  the  "  volume "  column  denote  the  volume  occupied
by  the  decomposition  products  of  1  g.  of  the  respective  explosive
at  0°  ;  the  associated  development  of  heat  is  given  in  the  last
column.

Explosive.

Volume.

Heat  Devel.

Methyl  nitrate  ....
"  Nitre-glycerine  " . .
Nitro-mannite  ....
Gun-cotton

870  c.cm.
713 ,,
692 ,,

859 ,,

1431  Cal.
1459 ,,
1427 ,,
1010 „

Compt.  rend.,  112.  16  ;  thoroughly  in  Ann,  chim.  phys.  [6] ;  23.  485  (1891).

684  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

When  the  preceding  explosives  were  exploded  in  their  own  volume,
a  rough  estimate  of  the  pressure  showed  that  it  mounted  to  about
10,000  kilograms  per  sq.  cm.

The  measurement  of  the  velocity  with  which  the  explosion  is
transmitted  in  liquid  methyl  nitrate,  which  was  contained  in  long  tubes
of  1  mm.  in  diameter,  was  conducted  by  means  of  the  chronographic
method,  which  had  been  much  used  by  Berth  elot.  The  velocity  in
rubber  tubes  was  1616  m.  per  sec.  ;  in  glass  tubes,  1890-2482  m.  per
sec.  ;  in  tubes  made  of  Britannia-metal,  1230  m.  per  sec.  ;  and  in  steel
tubes,  2100  m.  per  sec.  In  all  cases  the  tubes  were  burst  by  the  ex-
plosion, and  usually  in  long  strips;  the  glass  tubes  of  course  were
ground  to  dust.  In  general,  the  stronger  the  tube,  the  more  rapid
the  explosion.  Whether  one  would  obtain  constant  numbers  if  the
tubes  had  not  burst,  could  not  be  decided,  because  such  tubes  could
not  be  prepared.  But  Berthelot  suspected  that  in  such  a  case  [i.e.
with  infinitely  strong  tubes]  the  velocity  of  the  explosion  of  liquid
substances  would  be  approximately  constant,  and  would  mount  to
about  5000  m.  per  sec.

The  velocity  for  nitro  -  glycerine  in  lead  tubes  amounted  to
1300  m.,  for  dynamite  2500  m. ;  thus  the  physical  nature  of  the
explosive  is  a  very  important  factor.  Parallel  with  these  results  may
be  given  the  great  velocities  of  solid  explosives;  nitro-mannite,  7700;
picric  acid,  6500  ;  gun-cotton  (by  heavy  loading),  up  to  5400  m.
per  sec.

CHAPTER V

THERMOCHEMISTRY  V

HEAT AND CHEMICAL ENERGY

The  "Principle  of  Maximal  Work,"  an  Erroneous  Interpre-
tation of  Heat  of  Reaction. — In  what  precedes  we  have  described
the  most  important  laws  which  have  been  developed  regarding  the

application  of  the  doctrine  of  energy  to  chemical  change.

Thus  the  law  of  the  constancy  of  the  heat  summation  (the  expression
of  the  first  law  of  thermodynamics),  and  the  equation  of  the  reaction
isochore  (the  simplest  expression  of  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics), —
these  must  be  regarded  as  results  of  investigation  which  rest  on  the
surest  foundation ;  for,  on  the  one  hand,  they  have  served  to  build  up
an  extensive  system  of  natural  science ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  they
have  received  confirmation  from  experiments  of  all  sorts,  and  thus
these  laws  may  be  regarded  as  among  the  safest  possessions  of  natural
science.

There  is  no  doubt  that  every  future  doctrine  of  affinity  in  connec-
tion with  the  law  of  mass-action  (the  reaction  isotherm)  must  recognise
these  two  preceding  inferences  from  the  doctrine  of  energy  as  guiding
principles.

In  fact — as  the  history  of  theoretical  chemistry  in  the  last  two
decades  shows — a  faulty  consideration  of  these  principles  has  led  to
persistent  error.

This  error  owes  its  origin  to  a  mistaken  notion  which  has  in  many
ways  invaded  the  most  different  regions,  and  which  has  been  conquered
at  the  cost  of  much  trouble ;  the  notion  is  this,  viz.  that  the  heat  of
reaction  (i.e.  the  development  of  heat  plus  the  external  work),  accoi'ding
to  which  a  process  occurring  in  nature  completes  itself,  must  be  regarded  as
the  measure  of  the  force  which  urges  the  system  in  question  into  its  new
condition.

In  the  sense  of  this  view  we  would  have  to  regard  the  heat  of

685

686  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  iv

reaction  associated  with  the  reaction  as  the  measure  of  the  mutual
affinity  which  exists  between  reacting  substances ;  and  therefore  we
would  have  to  conclude  that  "every  chemical  change  gives  rise  to  the
production  of  those  substances  which  occasion  the  greatest  development  of
heat."  This  theorem  (Satz)  was  advanced  in  1867  by  that  highly-
gifted  (genial1)  experimenter,  Berthelot,  although  Thomsen  had
previously,  1854,  expressed  an  opinion  similar  to  this.  Berthelot
later 2  claimed  that  this  was  not  only  the  guiding  principle  of  thermo-
chemistry, but  even  of  all  chemical  mechanics.

For  a  long  time  this  theorem  found  the  same  unquestioning
recognition  in  foreign  lands  [i.e.  in  countries  other  than  Germany. — TR.]
which  it  enjoyed  till  recently  in  the  school  of  Berthelot.  Then  it  was
shown  in  the  most  different  ways,  by  Horstmann,  Rathke,  Helmholtz,
Boltzmann,  and  others,  that  the  theorem  was  untenable,  both  from  a
theoretical  and  an  experimental  standpoint.

Since  the  "  after  pains "  which  resulted  from  the  birth  of  this
unhappy  child  of  theoretical  chemistry  have  not  been  controlled  even
in  Germany  until  recently,  we  will  subject  to  a  short  critique  the
theorem,  called  by  Berthelot  "  the  third  principle,"  or  "  the  principle  of
maximum  work  " ;  and  this  we  will  do  in  order  to  discuss  the  intimate
relations  between  affinity  and  heat  of  reaction,  to  which  the  modern
doctrine  of  energy  has  led  with  unquestionable  logic.

The  Standpoint  of  Thermodynamics. — In  the  first  place,
in  order  to  test  the  deductions  from  Berthelot's  theorem  by  the
standpoint  of  thermodj^namics— let  us  notice  that,  according  to
the  principle  stated  on  p.  16,  all  processes  which  occur  without
the  introduction  of  external  energy — such  as  all  spontaneously
occurring  chemical  reactions — such  reactions  can  advance  only  in
that  sense  which  is  associated  with  the  production  of  external
work.

If  in  every  case  the  sense  of  the  reaction  were  entirely
dependent  upon  the  heat  of  reaction  q,  then  the  measure  of  the
maximal  work  which  could  be  obtained  by  a  complete  change,  in  an
isothermal  and  reversible  way,  would  be  represented  by  A,  i.e.  it
must  follow  that

A  =  q.

Now  from  the  application  of  the  equation  on  p.  23,  viz.

A U-TdA
idf'

1  Why  can  we  not  recover  the  use  of  the  word  genial,  as  iised  by  Sir  T.  Browne,
Hare,  and  others,  in  the  sense  of  being  endowed  with  genius? The  word  genial  means
more  than  talented  or  gifted,  and  we  need  such  a  word. — TK.

2  Essai  de  mecanique  chimique,  Paris,  1878.

CHAP,  v  HEAT  AND  CHEMICAL  ENERGY  687

it  follows  that

<*q_0.

dT~

and  we  thus  arrive  at  the  necessary  (but  not  sufficient)  condition  for
the  validity  of  Berthelot's  theorem,  viz.  that  the  heat  of  reaction  should
be  independent  of  the  temperature.

Now  this  law  is  by  no  means  established  by  experiment ;  but,  on
the  contrary,  in  all  those  cases  where  liquids  and  gases  participate  in
the  reaction,  the  heat  developed  varies  very  noticeably  with  the
temperature  (p.  593) ;  this  is  on  account  of  the  difference  between  the
specific  heats  of  the  reacting  substances  and  of  those  produced,  a
difference  which  is  very  considerable.  And  thus  we  conclude  that
the  heat  of  reaction  which  is  associated  with  a  chemical  change  does
not  at  all  correspond  to  the  maximal  external  work  to  be  obtained  by
the  isothermal  progress  of  a  reaction.

The  case  is,  of  course,  different  where  solid  substances  unite  to  form
new  complexes  which  exist  in  the  solid  state  ;  here  the  heat  of  reaction
is  found  to  be  practically  independent  of  the  temperature ;  and  in
this  case,  although  it  is  by  no  means  necessary,  yet  by  what  precedes,
the  possibility  is  not  excluded  that  by  a  suitable  utilisation  of  the
reaction  process,  the  energy  changed  into  heat  under  ordinary
circumstances  might  be  obtained  entirely  in  the  form  of  mechanical
energy.

If  A,  the  maximal  work,  is  independent  of  the  temperature,  then
necessarily  must

A  =  q.

This  latter  condition  is  identical  with  the  principle  of  the  greatest
work,  and  is  itself  self-evident.  But  there  is  another  proposition
which  follows  as  a  necessary  conclusion  from  the  preceding  formula ;
and  this  is  that  there  can  be  an  identity  of  the  maximal  work  A,  and
the  heat  of  reaction  q,  only  when  the  temperature  coefficient  of  A,  i.e.

dA

— T,  is  equal  to  zero  ;  whereby  it  results  that  the  other  factor  T,  of  the

right-hand  number  of  the  equation,  vanishes.

At  absolute  zero,1  i.e.  at  -  273°,  the  maximal  work  and  the  heat  of
reaction  are  identical.  At  this  temperature  the  theorem  of  Berthelot
holds  good  absolutely,  because  here  only  complete  and  exothermic
reactions  are  possible.  It  is  to  be  expected  that  the  farther  we  are
removed  from  this  point,  the  greater  the  probability  that  we  will  meet
with  endothermic  reactions.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  and  on  the  whole,  the  preponderating  chemical
reactions  at  lower  temperatures  are  the  combinings  (associations)  which  take

1  That  q  should  become  equal  to  zero  (and  A  also)  at  about  the  same  limit  is  more
than  improbable.

688  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

place  with  a  development  of  heat;  while  the  reactions  preponderating  at
higher  temperatures  are  the  cleavings  (dissociations)  which  take  place  with  the
absorption  of

The  Standpoint  of  Kinetics.  —  As  viewed  from  the  standpoint
of  the  kinetic  molecular  theory,  the  question  assumes  in  brief  the
following  aspect.

Let  us  suppose,  firstly,  that  the  chemical  forces  which  are  active
between  the  atoms  in  the  molecule  and  also  between  molecules  of
different  kinds  do  not  vary  with  the  temperature  ;  this  is  the  case,
e.g.,  with  the  Newtonian  gravitation,  and  also  with  the  electrostatic
or  electro-dynamic  mutual  action.  And,  moreover,  let  us  suppose,
secondly,  that  the  storehouse  of  potential  energy  (which  conditions
the  very  existence  of  the  aforesaid  forces)  experiences  in  chemical
changes  that  diminution  which  we  measure  thermo-chemically  as  the
development  of  heat.  Then  in  that  case,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  heat
developed  would  be  equal  to  the  maximal  work  which  could  be
obtained  by  the  chemical  decomposition;  and,  moreover,  the  fulfil-
ment of  these  provisos  would,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  result  in  the
absolute  validity  of  Berthelot's  principle.

But  now  the  second  of  the  two  preceding  conditions  is  certainly  not
fulfilled.  For  in  all  probability  the  atoms  are  quite  complicated
structures,  and  certainly  the  atoms  in  the  molecule  possess  consider-
able quantities  of  kinetic  energy.  And  therefore  in  no  case  can  the
heat  developed  by  a  chemical  process  correspond  simply  to  the  work
performed  by  the  molecular  forces  ;  as  is  the  case  of  the  fall  of  a  stone
to  the  earth,  where  the  diminution  of  the  potential  energy  of  the
system  (i.e.  the  stone  and  the  earth)  appears  in  the  form  of  heat  which
is  developed  by  the  work  performed  by  the  mutual  attractive  forces.

Let  us  consider  the  union  of  two  molecules  to  form  a  new  and
larger  molecule  ;  here,  in  addition  to  the  quantity  of  heat  set  free  by
the  work  of  their  mutual  action,  in  general  there  will  occur  still  other
changes  of  energy  ;  these  latter  consist  of  changes  in  the  kinetic
energy  of  the  atoms,  and  nothing  can  be  predicted  regarding  the
amount  of  the  heat  of  reaction  to  be  observed.

The  Results  of  Experiments.  —  Now  as  a  matter  of  fact,  a
critical  comparison  of  the  thermo-chemical  data  with  the  course  of
the  reaction  —  a  comparison  which  must  be  conducted  with  sufficient
precaution,  this  shows  that  the  direction  of  the  chemical  change  does
not  necessarily  coincide  with  the  direction  in  which  the  reaction
progresses  exo  thermally.2

Thus, on the one hand, let  us bring equivalent quantities of

1  See  vau't  Hoff,  Etudes,  p.  174.

2  See especially Ratlike, Abhandl. der  naturforsclienden Gesellschaft  zu Halle,
15.  (1881)  ;  also  BeibL  z.  Wied.  Ann.,  5.  183.

CHAP.  V  HEAT  AND  CHEMICAL  ENERGY  689

gaseous  HC1  and  of  gaseous  NH3  into  a  given  space  :  then  a  part  of
the  gases  will  unite  to  form  solid  NH4C1,  and  the  production  of  this
salt  will  extend  to  the  point  corresponding  to  the  dissociation  pressure
at  the  temperature  in  question.  On  the  other  hand,  let  us  bring  the
NH3  and  HC1,  united  in  the  form  of  solid  NH4C1,  into  a  sufficiently
large  space  at  the  same  temperature ;  then  the  same  substance  which
was  formed  in  the  first  case  is  decomposed  in  the  second  case.  But
in  the  first  case  we  meet  with  an  exothermic  reaction ;  in  the  second
case  with  an  endothermic  one.

And  thus  in  general  we  may  say  that  every  single  one  of  the
numerous  examples  of  reversible  reactions  is  enough  to  disprove  the
universal  validity  of  Berthelot's  principle.  For  if  the  course  of  a
reaction  in  the  one  sense  is  exothermic,  then  the  reverse  direction
must  be  endothermic ;  and  if  only  the  former  were  possible,  then  the
reaction  would  be  one  of  those  which  advance  to  a  completion,  and
therefore  could  not  establish  a  chemical  equilibrium.  And  after  what
has  been  shown  in  Book  III.  regarding  this,  we  must  absolutely  agree
with  Ostwald  l  when  he  characterises  the  advancement  of  Berthelot's
principle  as  a  retreat  to  Bergmann's  doctrine  of  affinity.

Moreover,  Berthelot  himself  has  not  failed  to  notice  the  inadmissi-
bility  of  his  principle  in  the  illustration  described  above.  And  there-
fore he  has  added  this  limitation,  viz.,  that  a  chemical  system  strives
towards  the  final  condition  which  has  the  greatest  diminution  of  total
energy  as  contrasted  with  the  original  state,  only  in  those  cases  where
the  interference  of  foreign  energy  does  not  tend  to  disturb  things.
We  will  spend  no  more  time  here  in  considering  the  failure  of  the
attempt  to  ascribe  every  process  which  occurs  with  an  absorption  of
heat,  to  the  interference  of  some  foreign  (not  chemical)  force, — a  force
which  in  Berthelot's  reasoning  usually  plays  the  part  of  a  deus  ex
machina.

Regarding  the  energetic  defence  of  the  universality  of  the  principle
of  Berthelot,  we  should  not  neglect  to  call  attention  to  the  fact  that,
on  the  whole,  the  occurrence  of  those  reactions  which  develop  heat,
would  seem  more  probable  than  endothermic  reactions ;  and  also  that
very  frequently  the  sense  of  the  chemical  foi'ces  coincides  with  that  in  which  a
chemical  process  occurs  with  a  development  of  heat.

Therefore  the  claim  of  this  rule  to  be  an  absolute  law  of  nature
must  be  rejected  ;  and  yet  the  rule  does  hold  too  often  for  us  to  ignore
it  entirely.  It  would  be  as  absurd  to  give  it  complete  neglect,  as  to
give  it  absolute  recognition.

Now  it  is  never  to  be  doubted  in  the  investigation  of  nature,  that
a  rule  which  holds  good  in  many  cases,  but  which  fails  in  a  few  cases,
contains  a  genuine  kernel  of  truth, — a  kernel  which  has  not  as  yet
been  "  shelled  "  from  its  enclosing  hull.  And  so  in  this  case  it  is  quite
possible  that,  in  a  clarified  form,  Berthelot's  principle  may  some  time
1  Allg.  Chem.,  II.  614  (1887).

2  Y

690  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

come  to  have  some  value.  Inasmuch  as  we  are  dealing  here  with  a
question  of  great  significance — a  significance  which  is  rarely  met  in
chemical  investigation — we  will  try  to  specialise  the  somewhat  too
general  form  of  Berthelot's  rule,  and  apply  it  in  some  simple  cases.

And,  in  the  first  place,  we  must  be  on  our  guard  against  a  confusion
which  is  liable  to  arise  in  this  kind  of  reasoning.  Since,  on  the  one
hand,  the  development  of  heat  resulting  from  the  associated  elevation
of  temperature  always  increases  the  reaction  velocity,  and  since,
conversely,  heat  absorption  decreases  it,  then  exothermic  reactions
must  exert  a  stimulating  influence,  and  endothermic  reactions  must,
conversely,  exert  a  restraining  action,  unless  the  reaction  is  artificially
maintained  at  constant  temperature.  The  phenomenon  already  de-
scribed on  p.  677  has  obviously  an  entirely  secondary  nature  for  the
question  regarding  the  relations  between  heat  and  chemical  energy.

Both  in  chemical  work  which  is  analytical,  and  also  in  that  which
is  preparative,  those  reactions  which  progress  smoothly  and  completely
are  to  be  preferred.  These  complete  reactions  are  usually  explained
by  the  fact  that  some  substances  escape  from  the  reaction  mixture,
whether  gaseous  or  liquid,  and  thus  by  leaving  the  battle-ground  give
their  victorious  opponents  complete  possession  of  the  field.  And  it  is
this  kind  of  reactions  which  usually  speaks  in  favour  of  Berthelot's
principle.  If  the  proper  chemical  equilibrium  should  be  applied  to
such  reactions,  and  if  the  reacting  ingredients  should  adjust  themselves
without  allowing  the  escape  of  any,  then  the  rule  of  Berthelot  would
be  repudiated  still  more  frequently.

But  now,  those  substances,  the  vapour  pressures  or  the  solubilities  of
which  have  the  lowest  values,  are  most  liable  to  escape  from  the  reaction
mixture.  The  rule  mentioned  on  p.  327  can  now  be  formulated  thus,
viz.,  that  on  the  whole,  the  vapour  pressure  will  be  smaller,1  the  greater
the  heat  of  condensation.  And  we  also  learned  (p.  607)  that  the  heat
of  precipitation  is  greater  the  smaller  the  solubility.  These  two  rules
may  be  combined  in  the  statement,  that,  other  things  being  equal,  there  is
the  more  chance  that  a  substance  can  be  formed,  the  greater  its  heat  of  con-
densation. It  appears  to  the  writer  that  the  essential  reason  for  the
customary  value  of  Berthelot's  rule  lies  in  the  preceding  statement.

Thus  let  us  convert  silver  chloride  to  silver  bromide  by  pouring  a
solution  of  a  bromide  over  the  former ;  then,  according  to  Berthelot,
it  would  be  explained  by  the  greater  heat  of  precipitation  of  the  latter
substance  (20,300)  as  compared  with  that  of  the  former  (15,800).  But,
on  the  other  hand,  we  have  already  seen  (p.  653),  that  the  necessity
of  this  reaction  is  derived,  independently  of  all  thermo-chemical  data,
from  the  equilibrium  in  the  solution  and  the  slighter  solubility  of  the
bromide.

To  be  sure,  the  application  of  Berthelot's  theorem  is  usually  much

1  According  to  Le  Chatelier,  Compt.  rend.,  102.  1243  (1886),  a  similar  law  holds
good  for  the  dissociation  pressure  and  the  dissociation  heat  of  solids.

CHAP.  V  HEAT  AND  CHEMICAL  ENERGY  691

simpler,  because  the  data  available  for  calculation  are  much  more  com-
plete ;  but  it  usually  gives  unreliable  results,  and  it  can  never  predict
anything  as  to  the  relative  quantity  of  the  products  of  the  reaction  in
question.  Thus  it  cannot  explain  why,  in  the  preceding  example,  the
silver  chloride  is  not  completely  changed  to  silver  bromide ;  for  this  is
known  to  be  true,  not  only  from  the  requirements  of  theory,  but  this
residue  can  also  be  determined  quantitatively.  There  can  be  no  doubt
as  to  which  of  the  methods  has  the  greater  scientific  value.1

As  the  final  statement  of  our  argument,  let  us  advance  the
following.  A  law  of  nature  lies  hidden  in  this  "  principle  of  maximal
work,"  the  further  development  of  which  is  very  important.  In  its
form  as  thus  far  applied,  it  sometimes  undoubtedly  gives  very  false
results ;  but  more  often,  and  especially  so  in  the  case  of  the  so-called
"non-reversible  reactions,"  the  chemical  processes  advance  in  accord-
ance with  its  requirements.

No  objections  can  be  raised  against  the  careful  use  of  Berthelot's
theorem  as  a  rule  which  usually  agrees  with  experiment;  one  may  put
about  the  same  confidence  in  it  that  he  does  when  he  expects  bad
weather  because  the  barometer  falls.  But  it  was  an  entire  mistake  to
elevate  this  theorem  to  be  the  guiding  principle  of  thermo-chemistry.

The  Measure  of  Affinity. — Proof  has  been  given  in  the  pre-
ceding section  that  the  heat  of  a  reaction  will  not  serve  at  all
as  a  measure  of  the  force  which  occasions  the  reaction,  nor  as  a
measure  of  the  affinity  which  the  reacting  substances  have  for  each
other.  The  excessive  estimation  which  has  been  ascribed  to  the  heat
developed  in  chemical  processes  in  its  significance  for  chemical
mechanics,  is  responsible  for  this  in  particular,  viz.,  that  neither  the
experimental  study  of  thermo-chemistry  nor  its  theoretical  valuation
has  produced  results  for  the  doctrine  of  affinity  which  are  at  all  worthy
of  the  industry  and  sagacity  which  have  been  given  to  this  field  of
work.

But  it  appears  from  all  the  futile  attempts  made  thus  far,  that  we
have  at  least  one  certain  result,  in  that  we  are  no  longer  in  doubt  as
to  the  right  pathway  to  follow  in  order  to  arrive  the  sooner  at  a  deeper
knowledge  of  the  relations  between  material  changes  and  the  associated
changes  of  energy.

No  special  proof,  in  addition  to  what  has  been  given,  is  needed  to
show  that  the  velocity  of  the  course  of  a  reaction  is  no  measure  of  the
chemical  affinity.  For  the  velocity  depends,  so  to  speak,  on  the
accidental  resistant  friction  which  opposes  the  course  of  the  reaction.
Then  the  supposition  that  iodine  has  a  greater  affinity  for  hydrogen
than  oxygen  has  at  400°,  because  the  former  substance  reacts  much

1  It  is  noteworthy  that  hi  concentrated  solutions  (p.  166),  the  thermal  phenomena
commonly  coincide  with  the  change  in  free  energy,  and  consequently  follow  Berthelot's
rule.

692  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

more  quickly  than  the  latter, — this  supposition  is  just  as  inadmissible
as  though  one  should  measure  the  capacity  of  two  motors  for  work  by
the  relative  number  of  revolutions.

Or,  consider  the  interesting  experiment  of  Raoul  Pictet,1  in  which
metallic  sodium  had  no  action  on  dilute  alcohol  at  -  80° ;  we  are
not  to  consider  from  this  that  the  [real]  chemical  affinity  of  sodium
for  water  is  less  than  at  ordinary  temperatures.  Such  a  conclusion
would  not  be  admissible  until  it  could  be  shown  that  hydrogen  when
conducted  into  a  solution  of  sodium  in  dilute  alcohol  would  pre-
cipitate metallic  sodium  (which  certainly  is  not  the  case).  The  most
obvious  meaning  of  this  experiment  is  that  the  reaction  velocity  is
correspondingly  depressed  by  the  enormous  depression  of  the  tempera-
ture ;  and  that  water  and  sodium  at  -  80°  only  show  an  (apparent)
indifference,  similar  to  that  shown  by  oxygen  and  hydrogen  at
ordinary  temperatures.2

§ince  every  chemical  process,  like  every  process  of  nature  (p.  16),
can  advance  without  the  introduction  of  external  energy  only  in  that
sense  in  which  it  can  perform  work ;  and  since  also  for  a  measure  of
the  chemical  affinity,  we  must  presuppose  the  absolute  condition,  that
every  process  must  complete  itself  in  the  sense  of  the  affinity  ; — then  on
this  basis  we  may  without  suspicion  regard  the  maximal  external  work  of
a  chemical  pi'ocess  (i.e.  "  the  change  of  free  energy") ,  as  the  measure  of  affinity.

Therefore  the  clearly  denned  problem  of  thermo-chemistry  is  to
measure  the  amounts  of  the  changes  of  free  energy  associated  with
chemical  processes,  with  the  greatest  accuracy  possible,  and  as  far  as
possible  in  the  same  limits  within  which  the  changes  of  the  total
energy  3  have  been  studied  by  means  of  the  measurement  of  the  heat
of  reaction.  When  this  problem  shall  have  been  solved,  it  will  be
possible  to  predict  whether  or  not  a  reaction  can  complete  itself  under
the  conditions.  All  reactions  advance  only  in  the  sense  of  a  diminu-
tion of  free  energy ;  i.e.  only  in  the  sense  of  affinity,  as  denned  above.

In  order  to  ascertain  the  change  of  free  energy  which  is  associated
with  a  chemical  reaction,  we  must  cause  the  reaction  to  occur  iso-
thermally  and  reversibly  ;  and  thereby  we  can  obtain  directly  the
desired  information  respecting  the  maximal  amount  of  external  work
which  can  be  obtained  from  the  chemical  change.  Let  us  suppose
that,  under  the  conditions  described,  the  change  may  occur  in  any
one  of  several  ways ;  even  then  the  change  of  free  energy  would
always  be  the  same.  For  otherwise  we  could  complete  the  change  in
one  way  and  then  reverse  it  in  another ;  and  thus  we  could  establish  a
reversible,  isothermal,  cyclic  process  by  means  of  which  any  arbitrary

1  Chem.  Zentralbl,  1893,  I.  p.  458.

2  This  explanation,  given  by  me  immediately  after  the  publication  of  Pictet's  experi-
ments (Jahrb.  d.  Chem.,  II.  41,  1893),  is  confirmed  by  Dorn  and  Vollmer  (Wied.  Ann.
60.  468,  1897).

3  See  van't  Hoff,  Kongl.  Svenska  Akad.  Hand.,  1886,  p.  50.

CHAP.  V  HEAT  AND  CHEMICAL  ENERGY

amount  of  external  work  could  be  performed  at  the  cost  of  the  h\
the  environment.  But  this  is  contrary  to  the  second  law  of  thi
dynamics.  And  thus  we  obtain  the  theorem,  that —

The  change  of  the  free  energy  of  a  chemical  process  is  independent  of  the
way  in  which  the  change  is  completed,  and  is  determined  solely  by  the  initial
and  final  states  of  the  system.

This  theorem  is  analogous  to  the  law  of  the  "constancy  of  the
heat  summation"  (p.  591).

It  follows  directly  from  this  that  one  may  employ  the  changes  of
free  energy  in  calculation  exactly  as  the  total  energy  is  used.  Thus,
e.g.,  the  change  of  the  free  energy  of  a  chemical  process  is  equal  to
the  sum  of  the  "  free  energies  of  formation "  of  the  newly  formed
molecules,  minus  the  "  free  energies  of  formation "  of  the  molecular
species  decomposed.  By  the  "free  energy  of  formation  "  (freie  Bildungs-
energie)  of  a  compound,  we  mean  the  maximal  work  capable  of  being
obtained  by  the  union  of  the  respective  elements  to  form  the  com-
pound in  question.  This  magnitude  [i.e.  "  the  free  energy  of  formation  "]
plays  a  role  in  the  chemistry  of  the  changes  of  free  energy,  which  is
similar  to  that  which  belongs  to  "the  heat  of  formation"  in  thermo-
chemistry, and  particular  importance  must  be  attached  to  ascertaining
its  dimensions.

Methods  for  the  Determination  of  Affinity. — We  have  already

found,  in  the  determination  of  the  equilibrium  between  the  reacting  sub-
stances, a  method  of  very  universal  applicability  for  the  determination
of  the  affinity  of  reactions ;  this  refers  to  the  change  of  free  energy
A  (p.  648) ;  i.e.

A  =  RTlnK.

If  this  refers  to  a  dissociation,  then  K  denotes  the  dissociation
constant,  and  the  negative  value  of  A  denotes  the  "free  energy  of
formation  "  of  the  compound.  If  all  the  dissociation  constants  of  all
of  the  reacting  compounds  are  known,  then  we  know  the  affinities  of
all  the  reactions ;  this  theorem  finds  an  excellent  illustration  x  in  the
treatment  of  the  reactions  between  electrolytes,  as  given  in  Chap.  IV.
of  Book  III.

Another  method  for  the  measurement  of  affinity,  which  is  very
simple  and  exact,  will  be  given  in  the  following  chapter :  it  depends
on  the  determination  of  the  electromotive  force  of  galvanic  combinations.  A
noticeable  application  is  given  by  St.  Bugarszky.2

Whatever  importance  is  possessed  by  such  affinity  determinations
as  those  just  described,  may  be  illustrated  by  the  single  following
example  instead  of  many.

As  is  well  known,  the  combustion  of  carbon  is  the  reaction  which
furnishes  the  work  capacity  of  the  driving  power  of  most  of  our

1  Compare  van't  Hoff,  Zeits.  phys.  Chem.,  3.  608  (1889)
a  Z.  S.  anorg.  Chem.,  14.  145  (1897).

694  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

motors.  Now  we  do  not  know  the  affinity  of  this  reaction,  i.e.  the
maximal  external  work  which  1  g.  atom  of  carbon  (  =  12  g.)  can
furnish  in  its  combustion  to  carbon  dioxide ;  and  therefore  we  do  not
know  the  work  capacity  (Leistungs-fahigkeit)  of  an  ideal  machine  work-
ing at  its  maximum  efficiency,  when  it  is  fed  with  coal.

The  following  method  may  be  suited  for  the  solution  of  this
problem.  We  know  the  equilibrium  between  carbon  dioxide,  carbon
monoxide,  and  oxygen  (pp.  444  and  661),  i.e.  we  know  the  affinity

A1,  of  the  reaction

2CO  +  O2  -  2C02  +  A15

and,  moreover,  at  all  temperatures.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  Rathke
(p.  688)  states  that,  according  to  his  observation,  in  subjecting  carbon
dioxide  to  glowing  coal,  it  is  not  possible  to  effect  the  complete  reduction  to
carbon  monoxide.  Thus  a  single  quantitative  investigation  of  the
equilibrium  between  carbon  monoxide,  carbon  dioxide,  and  carbon,
would  give  us  for  all  temperatures,  exactly  as  in  the  preceding  case,
the  affinity  A2,  of  the  reaction

C  +  C02  -  2CO  +  A2.

Then  the  addition  of  these  two  energy  equations  would  give  us,
indirectly,

C  +  02  -  C02  +  Aj  +  A2 ;

that  is,  we  would  obtain  the  affinity  sought  for  the  combustion  of
carbon :  this  evades  a  direct  determination  on  account  of  the  very
limited  extent  to  which  carbon  dioxide  is  dissociated  into  oxygen  and
carbon.

In  a  recent  work  Boudouard x  has  found  that  at  1000°  atmospheric
pressure  99*3%  CO  and  0*7%  C02  can  exist  in  presence  of  solid
(amorphous)  carbon ;  this  allows  of  determining  the  affinity  of  carbon
and  oxygen  in  accordance  with  the  theory  put  forward  above.  We
may  content  ourselves  here  with  an  approximate  calculation.  Accord-
ing to  p,  445  at  1000°  carbon  dioxide  is  at  atmospheric  pressure  dis-
sociated to  the  extent  of  0*Q6y£.  The  quantity  of  oxygen  x  which  co-
exists with  carbon  monoxide  at  0'993  and  carbon  dioxide  at  O'OOT
atmospheres  is  therefore  according  to  the  law  of  mass  action

K.  (I)2  =  (0-0006)2.  (0-0003)
K.(0'007)2  =  (0-993)2.x,

and  therefore  x  =  5'4 .  10~15  atmospheres.  In  order  to  combine  carbon
and  oxygen  at  atmospheric  pressure  we  may  suppose,  according  to  the
cyclic  process  on  p.  643,  oxygen  introduced  into  the  system  described

1  Gompt.  rend.,  128.  842  ;  Bull.  soc.  chim.,  from  5th  August  1899  and  5th  March
1900.

CHAP.  V  HEAT  AND  CHEMICAL  ENERGY  695

by  Boudouard  and  carbon  dioxide  removed. This  gives  as  the  affinity
in  question

or  (p.  647)

A  =  4-58.  1273.  log-  —  =  70,625  cal.

X

The  heat  of  reaction  at  atmospheric  temperature  is,  according  to  p.  593
97,650  ;  but  as  the  system  C  +  02  on  the  one  hand,  and  that  of  C02  on
the  other,  have  nearly  the  same  thermal  capacity,  the  heat  of  com-
bustion at  the  absolute  zero  must  differ  very  little  from  97,650,  hence
we  obtain  a  second  value  for  A,  for  that  quantity  is  equal  to  the  heat
of  combustion  at  the  absolute  zero.  By  interpolation  we]  find  at
atmospheric  temperature

A  -  97,650  _  (97,650  -70  625)29!^  9M70>

1  Zi  (  O

that  is,  the  heat  of  combustion  of  coal  at  atmospheric  temperature  is  almost
completely  convertible  into  external  work.  Further  calculations  and  con-
siderations of  the  same  kind  are  to  be  found  in  Bodlander.1

1  Zeits.  f.  mektrochemie,  8.  833  (1902).

CHAPTER VI

ELECTKO-CHEMISTRY I

GENERAL FACTS

The  Conveyance  of  Electrical  Energy. — A  chemical  system  may
absorb  or  give  up  energy  in  the  form  of  the.  kinetic  energy  of  moving
matter ;  viz.  in  the  form  of  heat  (i.e.  the  irregular  movement  of  the
molecules),  or  in  the  form  of  external  work  (i.e.  the  orderly  movement
of  the  molecules) ;  the  action  of  these  forms  of  energy  upon  chemical
change  makes  up  the  principal  contents  of  the  preceding  chapter.
But  a  chemical  system  may  also  absorb  or  give  up  energy  in  two  other
forms,  viz.,  on  the  one  hand,  in  the  form  of  vibrations  of  a  hypothetical
medium,  which  we  call  the  luminiferous  ether  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,
in  the  form  of  electrical  energy,  the  conveyance  of  which  is  apparently
effected  by  means  of  the  same  medium.  The  consideration  of  the
influence  exerted  upon  the  condition  of  a  chemical  system,  by  the
absorption  or  the  surrender  of  electrical  energy,  constitutes  the  subject
of  electro-chemistry  ;  the  similar  influence  exerted  by  the  [luminiferous]
vibrations  of  the  ether  constitutes  the  subject  of  "plwto- chemistry"
This  and  the  following  chapter  will,  respectively,  be  devoted  to  these
two  branches  of  theoretical  chemistry.

For  complete  expositions  of  electro-chemistry  in  recent  times  we
refer  to  Le  Blanc,  Lehrbuch  der  Elektrochemie  (Leipzig,  3rd  edit.,  1903),
and  H.  Jahn,  Grundriss  der  Elektrochemie  (Wien,  1895) ;  in  the  first  of
these  two  excellent  works  electro-chemistry  is  treated  more  from  the
chemical,  in  the  second  from  the  mathematical-physical  standpoint.
A  short  but  full  account  of  electro-chemistry  is  that  of  W.  Loeb,
Grundziige  der  Elektrochemie  (Leipzig,  1897).  Whilst  for  more  complete
information  we  may  refer  to  the  second  volume  of  Ostwald's  Lehrbuch
der  Allqemeinen  Chemie,  2nd  edit.  We  may  further  note  the  striking
work  of  R.  Liipke,  Grundziige  der  Elektrochemie,  4th  edit.  (Berlin,  1903),
which  contains  a  series  of  instructive  electrical  experiments.

The  conveyance  of  electrical  energy  may  be  effected  in  two  essentially
different  ways.

696

CHAP.  VI  GENERAL  FACTS  697

Firstly,  let  us  bring  a  body  having  an  electrostatic  charge  into  the
neighbourhood  of  a  system  which  does  not  conduct  the  galvanic
current.  Then  the  system  will  be  changed  into  a  certain  state  of
tension  which  is  called  dielectric  polarisation.  The  influence  of  such
a  tension  upon  the  state  of  chemical  equilibrium,  should  certainly
occur,  but  it  is  probably  very  slight.1

Thus  far  at  least  there  are  no  researches  known  which  give
positive  results.  But  some  phenomena  have  long  been  known  which
are  to  be  regarded  as  rapidly  alternating  dielectric  polarisations ;  and  in
particular,  the  transformation  of  oxygen  into  ozone,  thus

302=203.

This  change  is  effected  in  the  ozoniser  under  the  influence  of  the  so-
called  silent  discharge.

Secondly,  much  more  exact  research  has  been  devoted  to  the  material
changes  effected  by  the  conveyance  of  the  galvanic  current  from  some
source  of  electricity  (as  a  galvanic  element,  a  thermo-pile,  or  a  dynamo
machine),  through  a  material  aggregate.

While  the  former  mode  of  conveyance  of  electrical  energy  [electro-
static], presupposed  a  non-conducting  system,  here  of  course  the
system  must  be  a  conductor  of  electricity.

This  change,  which  is  effected  by  the  passage  of  an  electric  current,
is  called  electrolysis,  in  so  far  as  the  electricity  exhibits  its  action,  as  such.

The  changes  which  are  occasioned  by  simple  heat,  and  which  are
always  associated  with  the  transport  of  electricity,  cannot  of  course  be
designated  as  electrolysis.  Such,  e.g.,  is  the  decomposition  of  carbon
dioxide  or  of  other  gases,  under  the  influence  of  the  hot  electric
spark.

Electrolytic  Conduction.  —  The  conveyance  of  electricity  in
conducting  substances  may^  happen  in  two  different  ways,  viz.  with  or
without  the  associated  transportation  of  matter.  The  latter  happens
in  the  case  of  metallic  conductors  [first  class]  ;  the  former  in  electrolytic
conductors  [second  class] ;  hence  these  are  called  conductors  of  the
"first "  and  "  second  "  classes,  respectively.

The  nature  of  metallic  conduction  is  little  known.

On  the  other  hand,  we  have  very  thorough  conceptions  regarding
the  nature  of  electrolysis,  which,  in  the  history  of  physical  and
chemical  discipline,  has  so  often  played  the  rdle  of  a  linking  band.  It
consists  in  a  chemical  decomposition  which  overcomes  the  strongest
affinities,  by  means  of  the  electric  force,  the  study  of  which  has  long
been  the  favourite  occupation  of  students  of  physics.

In  considering  the  theory  of  electrolytic  dissociation  (p.  353),  we

1  This  should  hold  good  for  the  action  of  magnetisation  upon  a  chemical  system  ;
but  thus  far  no  certain  action  has  been  observed,  either  upon  the  equilibrium  or  upon
the  reaction  velocity  ;  see,  e.g.,  M.  Loeb,  Am.  Chem.  Journ.,  13.  145  (1891).  A.
Bucherer,  Wied.  Ann.  58.  568  (1896)  ;  Hemptinne,  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.  34.  669  (1900).

698  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

saw  how  the  process  of  the  conduction  of  the  current,  as  a  result  of
the  electric  forces,  consisted  in  the  displacement  of  the  free  ions  in  the
solution ;  by  free  ions  we  mean  those  which  are  not  united  with  each
other  to  form  electrically  neutral  molecules ;  the  positive  ions  migrate
in  a  direction,  from  anode  to  cathode ;  the  negative  ions,  in  the
opposite  direction.

A  solution  conducts  electricity  the  better,  the  more  numerous  the
ions,  and  the  smaller  the  friction  which  the  ions  encounter  in  their
migration.

This  conception  may  now  be  applied,  unchanged,  to  every  sub-
stance which  conducts  electrolytically, — whether  gaseous,  liquid,  or
solid, — whether  simple  or  a  mixture.

The  electrolytic  charges  of  the  ions  are  equally  great  and
equivalent,  whether  they  occur  in  solution,  or  in  a  substance  having  a
simple  composition ;  this  would  be  anticipated,  because  the  funda-
mental electrolytic  laws  of  Faraday  hold  good  both  for  water  solutions,
and  also  for  fused  salts.

All  that  is  most  important  for  electrolytic  conductivity  in  water
solution,  has  been  already  treated  in  discussing  the  theory  of  electro-
lytic dissociation,  and  in  the  doctrine  of  affinity  (p.  497).

The  conductivities  of  simple  substances,  as  e.g.  of  fused  salts,  as  is
the  case  with  solutions,  vary  directly  with  the  degree  of  dissociation,
and  inversely  with  the  friction  of  the  ions.  But  it  has  not  been
possible  as  yet  to  reduce  the  observed  conductivities  to  these  two
factors ;  because  here  of  course  there  can  be  no  occurrence  of  the
phenomenon,  analogous  to  the  changes  of  concentration  near  the
electrodes,  as  a  result  of  the  Hittorf  transportation  in  the  solutions.
And  thus  we  cannot  state  how  large  a  fraction  of  the  total  molecules
present  in  a  fused  salt  is  decomposed  into  ions,  and  the  solution  of
this  question  seems  to  be  dependent  upon  circuitous  means.1

Electrolysis. — When  a  system  composed  of  conductors  of  the
first  class  is  traversed  by  a  galvanic  current,  thermal  action  (Peltier's
effect)  is  developed  on  the  surface  between  different  conductors ;  and
also  heat  (Joule's  heat)  is  developed  in  the  whole  circuit ;  but  there  is
no  migration  of  matter  associated  with  the  passage  of  the  electricity.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  when  the  galvanic  current  passes  through
conductors  of  the  second  class,  then,  in  addition  to  the  phenomena
enumerated  above,  there  occurs  a  transportation  of  matter  (migration  of  the
ions) ;  and  also  on  the  limiting  surfaces  between  the  conductors  of  the
first  and  second  classes,  there  occur  peculiar  chemical  processes  ;  these
latter  consist  primarily,  in  the  solution  of  the  electrodes  or  in  the
separation  of  the  ions  from  the  electrolytes ;  but  they  are  usually

1  For  water,  which  is  at  ordinary  temperature  an  electrolyte,  though  a  very  poor  one,
the  problem  has  actually  been  solved  indirectly ;  see  p.  508.

CHAP.  VI  GENERAL  FACTS  699

complicated  by  secondary  reactions  between  the  electrolyte  and  the
separated  products.

Let  us  consider  two  similar  metallic  electrodes  to  be  dipped  into  an
electrolyte  (a  solution,  or  a  fused,  or  a  solid,  salt) ;  then  if  the  current
is  J,  in  an  electrolytic  cell  the  resistance  of  which  is  W ;  and  from  a
source  of  electricity  the  electromotive  force  of  which  is  E,  and  the
[internal]  resistance  of  which  is  w ;  then  the  strength  of  the  current,
according  to  Ohm's  law,  is

W  +  w'

This  assumes  that  there  are  no  changes,  produced  by  the  current  in
the  electrolytic  cell,  of  such  a  nature  as  to  affect  it  as  regards  the
electromotive  forces.  But  it  usually  happens  in  the  process  of
electrolysis,  that  either  the  nature  of  the  surface  of  one  electrode
is  changed,  whether  by  having  another  metal  precipitated  upon  it
or  by  dissolving  (occluding)  the  separated  gases,  or  else  the  composi-
tion of  the  electrolyte  bathing  the  electrode  is  changed  in  some  way.

In  all  such  cases,  one  can  observe  the  occurrence  of  a  resistant
electromotive  force  in  the  cell,  the  so-called  galvanic  polarisation  ;  if  we
denote  the  value  of  this  by  e,  then  the  strength  of  the  current  at
once  falls  to

T_  E-e
W  +  w'

We  may  obtain  information  respecting  the  quantity  of  ions
separated  by  the  current,  from  the  law  discovered  by  Faraday  in
1833 ;  according  to  this,  the  quantity  of  the  ion  separated  in  unit  of
time,  upon  the  electrode,  is  proportional  to  the  intensity  [strength]  of
the  current ;  and  the  same  quantity  of  electricity  will,  in  the  most
various  electrolytes,  electrolyse  chemically  equivalent  quantities
of  ions.

In  those  cases  where  the  chemical  value  of  the  ions  is  capable  of
changing,  of  course  the  meaning  of  chemical  equivalence  changes ;  thus
the  same  current  which  separates  200  g.  of  mercury  from  a  solution  of
HgN03,  will  separate  100  g.  of  mercury  from  a  solution  of  Hg(CN)2.

The  quantity  of  electricity  that  suffices  to  deposit  one  electro-chemical
gram  equivalent  is

.  105  =  96,540  coulombs  (ampere  seconds)

1*035

and  will  be  expressed  by  F  (Faraday).

The  Development  of  Electrical  Energy  by  Chemical
Systems. — Several  different  forms  of  apparatus  are  known  which  are
capable  of  developing  the  galvanic  current.  Among  these  are  those

700  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

for  the  application  of  heat,  to  develop  electrical  energy  (thermo-piles) ;
those  for  the  application  of  mechanical  energy  (dynamo  machines) ;
and  those  for  the  application  of  chemical  energy  (galvanic  elements).
Only  the  current-producing  apparatus  of  the  last  category  will  be  con-
sidered here.

A  chemical  system  in  which  the  changes  of  energy,  associated  with
the  changes  of  matter,  succeed  in  producing  electromotive  activity,  is
called  a  galvanic  element.  Inasmuch  as  the  galvanic  current  is  associ-
ated with  changes  of  matter  only  in  the  case  of  electrolytes — conductors
of  the  second  class,  and  moreover,  since  conversely  changes  of  matter
tend  to  produce  galvanic  currents  only  in  these  electrolytes,  therefore
the  galvanic  elements  must  contain  electrolytic  conductors.  Hitherto
these  have  been  almost  exclusively  water  solutions  (hydro-elements  =
hydro-ketten),  and  molten  salts,1  which  have  found  application.

Galvanic  elements  can  be  constructed  either  by  means  of  substances
which  conduct  electrolytically,  or  else  by  the  use  of  conductors  of  the
first  class  (i.e.  electrodes  of  metal  or  carbon).  In  the  first  category  are
included  the  so-called  "  liquid  cells "  (Fliissigkeits-ketten),  which  are
formed  by  arranging  in  series,  water  solutions  of  electrolytes  (acids,
bases,  and  salts) ;  in  this  sort  of  galvanic  circuit,  the  electromotive
forces  developed  on  the  contact  surfaces  between  the  metals  and
liquids,  are  completely  eliminated ;  these  liquid  circuits  have  been  the
subject  of  repeated  investigation,  by  du  Bois-Reymond  (1867),  Worm-
Miiller  (1870),  Paalzow  (1874),  and  others.

These  circuits  have  recently  excited  great  interest  because,  by
means  of  the  newer  theory  of  solution,  they  have  afforded  an  insight
into  the  mechanism  of  the  development  of  the  current  (see  below)  ;
here  the  active  electromotive  process  consists  simply  in  the  mingling
of  the  various  solutions.

But  in  the  case  of  other  galvanic  elements,  in  most  instances  the
nature  of  the  process  producing  the  current  is  simple  and  clear.  The
current  occasions  certain  changes  in  the  element  producing  it,  which
changes  can  almost  always  be  predicted  from  a  knowledge  of  the
nature  of  the  electrode,  and  of  the  liquid  which  bathes  it.

Thus  in  the  cell  of  Volta,  e.g.,

Zn H2S04aq.  |  Cu,

the metal of the negative electrode, zinc, goes into solution and
hydrogen  is  developed  on  the  positive  copper  pole.
In  the  Daniell  element,  thus,

Zn  |  ZnS04aq.  |  CuSo4aq. Cu,

the  process  which  develops  the  current  can  be  expressed  by  the
equation,

Zn  +  CuS04  -  Cu  +  ZnS04.

1  See,  e.g., Fabinyi  and  Farkas, Compt.  rend., 106.  1597  (1888)  ;  also  Poincare
Ann.  chim.  phys.  [6],  21.  289  (1890).

CHAP.  VI

GENERAL  FACTS  701

The  Clark  element,

Zn  |  ZnS04aq. Hg2S04  |  Hg,  .

consists  of  mercury  covered  with  [solid]  mercurous  sulphate,  a  saturated
solution  of  zinc  sulphate,  and  metallic  zinc  ;  here  zinc  from  the  negative
pole  goes  into  solution,  and  is  then  separated  primarily  on  the  positive
pole  ;  but  instead  of  forming  an  amalgam  with  the  mercury,  the  solid
mercurous  sulphate  is  reduced  according  to  the  equation

Zn  +  Hg2S04  =  ZnS04  +  2Hg.

All  of  these  chemical  processes  occur  in  accordance  with  Faraday's  law.

If  the  same  quantity  of  electricity  passes  through  the  most  various
galvanic  elements,  the  decompositions  are  all  in  the  ratios  of  (electrical)
equivalents.

The  experimental  determination  of  electromotive  forces  is  most
easily  carried  out  by  comparison  with  a  standard  cell;  as  such  the
Clark  cell  suffices  ;  it  can  be  easily  constructed  for  one's  self,  and  it
has  a  potential  which  is  reliable  to  within  one  in  a  thousand  ;  its
value  in  international  volts  according  to  Jager  and  Kahle  is  l

Et=  1-4292  -0-0012  (t  -  18).

Recently  the  Weston  cell  has  been  preferred  ;  this  is  constructed
in  the  same  way  as  the  Clark  cell,  but  instead  of  zinc  and  zinc
sulphate  cadmium  and  cadmium  sulphate  are  used.  The  electro-
motive force  of  this  cell  (see  the  preceding  references)  is

Et=  1-0187  -0-000035  (t  -  18),

that  is,  for  most  purposes  may  be  regarded  as  independent  of
temperature.  For  very  exact  measurements  of  electromotive  force
it  is  desirable  to  use  both  cells,  as  they  can  be  constructed  without
difficulty.  For  details  of  the  measurements  see  Kohlrausch,  Leitf.  d.
Phys.,  9th  edit.,  and  especially  W.  Jager,  Normalelemente,  Halle,  1902.

Special  Electrochemical  Reactions.  —  In  the  electrolysis  of
hydrochloric  acid  the  ions  are  directly  deposited  as  gaseous  hydrogen
and  gaseous  chlorine,  but  more  often  this  is  not  the  case,  but  com-
plications occur  from  the  action  of  the  ions  on  each  other,  on  the
metal  of  the  electrode,  or  on  the  solvent,  or,  finally,  on  other  dissolved
substances.  The  following  reactions  which  are  intelligible  without
further  explanations  may  be  taken  as  examples  :—

2CH7COO  +  2©  =  CJEL  +  2CO

1  Zeitschr.  f.  Instrumentenkunde, 1898,  Heft  6,  p. 161  ; Wied. Ann.,  65. 926

(1898).

702  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  iv

Cl  +  ©  +  Ag  =  AgCl
Zn  +  20  +  2H20  =  Zn(OH)2  +  H2

Cl  +  ©  +  FeCl2  =  FeCl3
2H  +  20  +  H202=2H20.

All  these  reactions  may  be  regarded  as  due  to  the  action  of
positive  and  negative  electrons  on  the  electrolyte ;  the  introduction  of
negative  electrons  into  the  reaction  indicates  that  the  reaction  takes
place  at  the  cathode,  where  the  positive  ions  (cations)  are  deposited,
and  similarly  the  occurrence  of  positive  electrons  indicates  that  the
reaction  takes  place  at  the  anode.  The  number  of  electrons  occurring
in  the  reaction  gives  at  the  same  time  the  number  of  F's  which  are
required  for  the  electrochemical  reaction  in  question.

For  more  precise  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  electrochemical
principles  it  is  indispensable  to  know  the  most  important  electro-
chemical reactions ;  for  this  we  may  refer  to  the  excellent  work  of
W.  Borchers,  Elektrometallurgie,  3rd  edit.,  Leipzig,  1903,  Hirzel,
F.  Haber,  Grundriss  der  technischen  Eleldrocliemie  auf  theoretischer
Grundlage,  R.  Oldenbourg,  Miinchen,  Leipzig,  1904,  and  B.  Neumann,
Theorie  und  Praxis  der  analytischen  Eleldrolyse  der  Metalle,  W.  Knapp,
Halle,  1897.  For  the  experimental  study  we  may  note  as  intro-
ductions to  practical  electrochemical  work  the  writings  of  W.  Loeb
(Leipzig,  1899),  E.  Lorenz  (Gottingen,  1901),  and  K.  Elbs  (Halle,
1902).

CHAPTEK VII

ELECTRO-CHEMISTRY II

THERMODYNAMIC THEORY

Electrical  Work.  —  Electrical  work  is  given  by  the  product  of  the
potential  (volts)  and  the  quantity  of  electricity  (coulombs)  ;  the  unit
of  electric  work  is  the  volt-ampere-second,  or,  more  briefly,  the  watt
second,  and  is  performed  when  a  current  of  one  ampere  flows  under  a
difference  of  potential  of  one  volt.  In  absolute  measurement  th  e  volt
is  108,  the  ampere  10"1,  so  that  the  watt  second  is

107  absolute  units  (cm2  g  sec"2),
or  according  to  p.  12.

This  amount  of  heat  is  evolved,  for  example,  when  a  current  of
1  ampere  flows  for  one  second  through  a  resistance  of  1  ohm.

To  deposit  one  electrochemical  gram  equivalent  is  needed  96,540
coulombs,  which  number  we  have  already  designated  F.  When  a
galvanic  cell  of  electromotive  force  E  yields  so  much  current  as
suffices  for  the  chemical  conversion  of  one  gram  equivalent  the  work
done  is

EF  Watt  seconds  =  9  G,  5  40  x  0'2394  x  E=  23,110  E  cal.

If  an  electrolytic  cell  has  an  electromotive  force  e  the  work  needed  to
decompose  one  gram  equivalent  of  an  electrolyte  is  eF.

Application  of  the  First  Law  of  Thermodynamics.  —  If  a

galvanic  cell  of  electromotive  force  E  and  internal resistance  W  is
closed  by  a  resistance  w,  then,  according  to  Ohm's  law,  the  current  is

E

~wT^

and  the  heat  evolved  in  the  external  circuit  is

w

i2Wt  =  E2^  -  r^t.

(W  +  w)2

704  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

If  W  is  very  small compared  with  w  all the electrical energy
given  out  by  the  cell  is  spent  on  the  external  circuit  and  we  have

where  the  number  of  F's  yielded  by  the  element  is  given  by

it  =  vF.

If  q  is  the  heat  of  reaction  of  the  process  that  yields  the  current
per  gram  equivalent  of  chemical  conversion,  a  cell  which  is  short
circuited  and  enclosed  in  a  calorimeter  will  give  the  thermal  effect
vq,  whilst  v  gram  equivalents  are  converted  ;  for,  according  to  the
law  of  conservation  of  energy,  the  thermal  effect  is  the  same  in  what-
ever way  the  chemical  transformation  may  take  place.  But  if  the
electrical  circuit  is  placed  outside  the  calorimeter,  the  heat  developed
in  the  calorimeter  will  be  less  by  the  amount  i2wt,  and  if  w  is  great
compared  with  W  the  conversion  of  v  equivalents  will  yield  in  the
calorimeter  the  quantity  of  heat

vq  -  i2wt  =  v  (q  -  FE)

or  per  gram  equivalent  in  the  cell  the  heat

H  -  FE  -  q

will  be  absorbed. H  may  conveniently  be  described  as  the  latent  heat
of  the  cell.

If  we  may  make  the  supposition  that  H  is  negligible,  it  follows
that

that  is,  the  electromotive  force  of  the  cell  can  be  directly  calculated
from  the  heat  of  reaction.  Experience  shows  that  in  many  cases,
especially  in  those  in  which  q  is  a  large  value,  this  assumption  holds  ;
it  is  not  permissible,  however,  to  make  the  assumption  tacitly.

In  the  following  we  will  describe  the  heat  of  reaction  in  electrochemical
processes  by  q,  bearing  in  mind  that  in  practical  applications  the
systems  of  units  in  which  E  and  q  are  respectively  expressed,  must
be  taken  into  consideration.

It  was  long  believed  and  is  still  occasionally  stated  that  in  a
galvanic  cell  the  decrease  in  total  energy  which  is  associated  with  the
chemical  change,  that  is  the  heat  of  reaction,  is  the  direct  measure  of
the  electro-motive  force,  -or,  in  other  words,  that  the  chemical  energy
is  simply  converted  into  electrical  ;  this  assumption  would  involve
the  equation

CHAP.  VII  THERMODYNAMIC  THEORY  705

if  q  is  measured  in  calories  and  E  in  volts  we  should  have,  according
to  p.  703  —

E  =  -.-^L  -  0-00004327  q  volt.

This  relation  was  put  forward  by  v.  Helmholtz  (1847)  and  W.
Thomson  (1851),  and  is  commonly  known  as  Thomson's  law;  it  would
follow  from  the  law  of  conservation  of  energy  if  a  galvanic  cell  neither  rose
nor  fell  in  temperature  when  yielding  current,  that  is,  if  it  neither  gave
heat  to  its  surroundings  nor  withdrew  heat  from  them,  but  though
this  is  often  approximately  the  case  it  is  not  accurately  true.  It
was  long  considered  that  the  difference  between  calculation  and
observation  was  due  to  errors  of  experiment,  this  view  was  com-
pletely disproved  by  the  experimental  investigations  of  Thomson,1
and  especially  Braun,2  and  by  the  thermodynamic  treatment  of  v.
Helmholtz  as  given  below,  which  led  to  new  and  very  careful
measurements,  and  finally  controverted  Thomson's  rule  both  experi-
mentally and  theoretically.

The  unqualified  recognition  which  this  rule  long  enjoyed  was
largely  due  to  the  circumstance  that  in  the  first  case  to  which  it
was  applied  it  very  approximately  holds;  in  the  Daniell  cell  the
electromotive  force  has  almost  precisely  the  value  which  was  calculated
from  the  heat  of  reaction.  The  heat  of  formation  of  one  equivalent
of  zinc  sulphate  from  metal,  oxygen  and  very  dilute  sulphuric  acid  is

l(Zn,  0,  S03,  aq.)  =  53,045,

and  for  copper  sulphate  the  corresponding  amount  is
|(Cu,0,  S03,aq.)  =  27,980.

The  difference  between  these  two  values,

53,045-27,980  =  25,065,

gives  the  change  of  energy  associated  with  the  transport  of  one  F  of
electricity  from  the  cell  and  consequently  the  deposition  of  1  gramme
equivalent  of  copper  from  the  solution  of  its  sulphate  by  zinc  ;  accord-
ing to  Thomson's  rule  therefore  the  electromotive  force  of  the  Daniell
cell  should  be

E  =  0-00004327  x  25,065  =  1-085  volt,

whilst  the  direct  measurement  gives  1'09  to  MO.  Similarly  good
agreement  is  found  for  combinations  of  the  type  of  the  Daniell  cell

1 Wied.  Ann.  11.  246  (1880).  - Wied.  Ann.  17.593  (1882).

2z

706  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  iv

in  which  silver  replaces  copper  and  cadmium  replaces  zinc  in  the
solutions  of  their  salts.

Thomson's  rule,  however,  fails  altogether  in  liquid  cells  and  con-
centration cells ;  here  the  current  yielding  process  consists  simply  in
the  mixing  of  solutions  of  different  concentrations,  and  if  the  solu-
tions are  sufficiently  dilute  the  heat  of  reaction  is  nothing,  whilst  the
electromotive  force  can  reach  a  considerable  amount.  We  shall
subsequently  make  calculations  with  a  whole  series  of  galvanic  com-
binations in  which  there  are  large  differences  between  the  measured
and  calculated  electromotive  force.

Just  the  same  considerations  are  attributable  to  electrolytic  pro-
cesses, since  instead  of  electromotive  force  E  of  the  galvanic  combination
we  have  the  opposing  electromotive  force  of  polarisation  e  (p.  699).
Here  also  onry  approximate  agreement  is  to  be  found  ;  for  example,  to
electrolyse  dilute  hydrochloric  acid  requires  about  1*3  volt,  whilst  the
heat  of  reaction  is,  according  to  the  equation

*  (H2,  C12)  =  22,000
(HC1,  aq.)- 17,310

Total -39,310
and  therefore  yields

39,310

it  must  be  remarked,  however,  that  q  is  independent  of  the  concentra-
tion of  the  hydrochloric  acid,  whereas  e  is  not  so  (see  Chap.  VIII.).
The  galvanic  polarisation  of  a  common  salt  solution  calculated  from
the  thermodynamic  equation

I  (H2,C12)^  22,000

(HCJ,  aq.)  =  17,310
(HC1  aq.,  NaOH  aq.)  =  13,700

Total  =  5  3,0 10
gives

53,010
~23,110~

whereas  experiment  shows  it  to  be  2*0  volt.

Reversible  Elements. — When  we  send  the  same  quantity  of
electricity  through  a  galvanic  cell,  now  in  one  direction,  and  then  in
the  opposite,  we  must  distinguish  between  two  cases.  The  element

CHAP.  VII  THERMODYNAMIC  THEORY  707

may  return  to  the  original  state  or  not.  An  example  of  the  first  case
[i.e.  where  the  cell  may  be  reversed  to  the  original  state]  is  given  by
the  Daniell  cell,

Zn  |  ZnS04  |  CuS04  |  Cu.

Here,  if  we  conceive  the  quantity  of  electricity  1  (measured  electro-
chemically)  to  be  sent  through  the  cell  in  the  direction  from  left  to
right,  then,  firstly,  an  equivalent  of  zinc  goes  into  solution  at  one
pole ;  and  secondly,  an  equivalent  of  copper  is  precipitated  upon  the
other  pole.  Then  if  we  conceive  the  same  quantity  of  electricity  to
be  sent  through  the  cell  from  right  to  left,  conversely,  firstly,  an
equivalent  of  copper  is  dissolved  by  the  solution  ;  and  secondly,  an
equivalent  of  zinc  is  precipitated  from  the  solution.  Thus  the  system
returns  again  to  its  original  condition.

An  example  of  the  second  case  is  given  by  the  cell  of  Volta,
combined  according  to  the  scheme,

Zn H2S04 Cu.

Here,  let  the  quantity  1  of  electricity  pass  through  the  cell  from
left  to  right ;  at  the  zinc  pole  an  equivalent  of  zinc  passes  into
solution,  and  an  equivalent  of  hydrogen  is  set  free  at  the  copper  pole.
Then  when  the  same  quantity  of  electricity  passes  back  from  right  to
left,  at  the  copper  pole  an  equivalent  of  copper  passes  into  solution ;
and  at  the  zinc  pole  an  equivalent  of  hydrogen  is  set  free.  Thus,  at
the  end  of  the  experiment,  an  equivalent  of  copper  and  an  equivalent
of  zinc  have  passed  into  the  solution,  and  two  equivalents  of  hydrogen
have  been  set  free  from  the  system.

In  the  first  case,  the  heat  developed  during  the  cyclic  process,  and
also  the  external  work  performed,  are  both  equal  to  zero.  Therefore
the  element  must  possess  the  same  electromotive  force,  when  the
current  flows  in  one  direction  as  when  in  the  opposite.

But,  in  the  second  case,  there  must  be  a  compensation  for  the
chemical  changes  produced  in  the  course  of  the  experiment;  this
consists  simply  in  the  fact  that  the  sum  of  the  work  (expended  in  the
passage  of  the  quantity  of  electricity  1,  now  in  one  direction  and  then
in  the  other,  through  the  cell)  has  a  finite  amount :  i.e.  that  the
current  in  the  two  respective  directions  has  a  different  electromotive  force.
This  is  possible  only  when  an  opposite  electromotive  force  is  developed
by  the  passage  of  electricity,  that  is  when  the  element  is  polarised.

We  therefore  call  these  two  classes  of  cells  respectively,  polarisable
and  non-poliirisable ,  or  non-reversible  and  reversible.  A  kind  of  inter-
mediate link  between  these  two  groups  is  found  in  such  elements  as
Grove's  cell  (platinum,  nitric  acid,  sulphuric  acid,  and  zinc) ;  these  are
non-polari sable  in  one  direction,  viz.,  that  direction  in  which  a  current
is  afforded ;  but  they  become  polarised  by  leading  the  current  through
in  the  opposite  direction.

708  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

Strictly  speaking,  all  reversible  batteries  can  be  used  as  accumu-
lators, and,  conversely,  all  good  accumulators  can  act  reversibly.  Only
the  reversible  elements  work  rationally,  i.e.  with  the  maximum  effi-
ciency ;  the  cells  which  are  non-reversible  are  comparable  to  badly
built  steam  engines,  which  work  with  leaky  pistons  and  valves.  This
fact  explains  why  here  we  deal  only  with  cells  which  work  ideally,  i.e.
with  those  which  are  reversible.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  indispensable,  for  the  reversibility,  that  the
processes  taking  place  at  the  electrodes  shall  be  reversible.  A  metal  plate
which  dips  into  a  solution  of  one  of  its  salts  is  a  "  reversible  electrode  "
of  this  sort ;  because,  by  the  passage  of  the  current  from  the  electrode
into  the  solution,  metal  only  passes  into  the  solution,  and  when  the
current  passes  in  the  opposite  direction  the  metal  passes  back  from
the  solution  to  the  metal  plate.  Thus  the  change  is  reversible.  Such
electrodes  may  be  called  "reversible  electrodes  of  the  first  class"

Moreover,  the  electrodes  just  described  can  also  be  suitably  called
" electrodes  which  are  reversible  as  regards  the  cation"  because  the  transfer
of  electricity  is  limited  exclusively  to  the  cation.

And,  moreover,  similarly,  we  may  call  the  variety,  to  be  described
presently,  "reversible  electrodes  of  the  second  sort"  or  "electrodes  which  are
reversible  with  reference  to  the  anion."

Thus,  e.g.,  if  we  cover  a  piece  of  silver  with  a  layer  of  AgCl,  and
then  dip  the  electrode  so  prepared  into  a  solution  of  a  chloride,  as
KC1,  then  the  required  conditions  are  fulfilled.  The  passage  of
electricity  from  the  electrode  to  the  electrolyte  can  only  take  place  in
such  a  way,  that  either  chlorine  ions  go  into  the  solution,  being  set
free  from  the  AgCl  by  the  precipitated  potassium ;  or  else,  when  the
current  is  in  the  opposite  direction,  the  chlorine  ions  will  be  pre-'
cipitated  upon  the  electrode,  uniting  with  the  silver  to  form  AgCl.
In  both  cases  the  electro-negative  ions  are  the  ones  which  accomplish
the  transport  of  the  electricity  from  the  electrode  to  the  solution.
Therefore  the  electropositive  silver  cannot  participate  in  the  transport
of  the  electricity,  at  least  not  to  any  considerable  extent,  because  silver
ions  are  not  capable  of  existence  in  a  solution  of  a  chloride  on  account
of  the  extreme  insolubility  of  AgCl.

Thus  the  electrode  described  behaves  as  though  it  were  a  modifica-
tion of  chlorine,  which  conducts  like  a  metal ;  and,  therefore,  it  com-
pletely satisfies  the  condition  of  reversibility.

In  general,  every  metal  when  covered  with  one  of  its  insoluble  salts,
in  which  it  forms  the  basic  ingredient,  and  when  placed  in  a  solution
of  another  salt  containing  the  same  electro-negative  ingredient  as  the
first  salt,  represents  an  "  electrode  which  is  reversible  as  regards  the  onion."

For  this  purpose,  it  is  preferable  to  use  mercury  as  the  metal,
because,  on  the  one  hand,  being  a  liquid,  it  presents  a  surface  which
behaves  in  a  constant  way ;  and  also,  on  the  other  hand,  mercury
forms  a  large  number  of  insoluble  compounds  with  negative  radicals.

CHAP.  VII  THERMODYNAMIC  THEORY  709

Since  the  latter  render  the  electrode  unpolarisable  they  are  called
depolarisators.

Therefore  the  reversible  galvanic  elements  may  be  divided  into  the
three  following  classes —

1.  Those  composed  of  two  reversible  electrodes  of  the  first  class,
as,  e.g.,  the  Daniell  element.

2.  Those  composed  of  one  reversible  electrode  of  the  first  class,
and  of  one  reversible  electrode  of  the  second  class,  as,  e.g.,  the  Clark
"  normal "  element.

3.  Those  composed  of  two  reversible  electrodes  of  the  second  sort ;
no  use  has  thus  far  been  made  of  any  element  of  this  last  type.

The  Law  of  the  Conversion  of  Chemical  Energy  into
Electrical  Energy. — We  will  make  use  of  a  cyclic  process  in  order
to  arrive  at  the  relations  between  the  heat  development  of  the  current-
generating  process  of  a  reversible  galvanic  cell,  and  the  external  work
performed  by  this  element,  i.e.  Us  electromotive  force.

We  will  allow  the  galvanic  element  having  the  electromotive  force
E  to  perform  the  work  E,  at  the  temperature  T,  whereby  an  equiva-
lent of  the  positive  metal  is  precipitated  upon  the  positive  pole,  and
an  equivalent  of  the  metal  of  the  negative  pole  goes  into  solution.
Let  q  denote  the  heat  of  reaction  associated  with  these  chemical  pro-
cesses ;  this  can  be  calculated  from  the  thermo-chemical  data.  In  the
Daniell  element,  e.g.,  it  corresponds  to  the  difference  between  the
heats  of  formation,  thus

(Zn,  S04,  aq.)  -  (Cu,  S04,  aq.).

Therefore  the  heat  developed  in  the  element  is  equal  to  the  heat  of
reaction  minus  the  external  work,  i.e.

q  -  E  =  -  H.

We  will  now  bring  the  element  from  the  temperature  T  to  T  +  dT,
whereby  the  electromotive  force  will  change  from  E  to  E  +  dE ;  and
we  will  make  the  chemical  change  in  the  element  reversible  in  this
way,  viz.,  that  by  sending  in  the  quantity  of  electricity  1  in  the
opposite  direction,  there  is  required  the  expenditure  of  the  work
E  +  dE,  and  there  occurs  an  absorption  of  heat  amounting  to

q  -f  dq  -  E  -  dE.

After  cooling  to  T  the  system  comes  again  to  its  original  condition.

Now,  during  this  reversible  cyclic  process,  the  work  dE  is
performed  from  without ;  and  at  the  same  time  the  quantity  of  heat,
E  -  q,  is  taken  from  T  +  dT  to  T.

710  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

But  now,  according  to  the  law  regarding  the  conversion  of  heat
into  external  work,  it  follows  that

or

According  as  the  electromotive  force  of  the  element  increases  or
decreases  with  the  temperature,

E>q, or  else  E<q.

That  is,  the  electromotive  force  will,  respectively,  be  greater  or  smaller
than  the  heat  of  reaction  of  the  chemical  processes  which  produce  the
galvanic  current.

The  preceding  equation  may  be  obtained  directly  from  the
fundamental  equation  on  p.  23,  if  we  make  the  change  of  the  free
energy  A  equal  to  E,  and  the  change  of  the  total  energy  U  equal  to  q  ;
it  was  first  derived  by  H.  v.  Helmholtz,1  arid  was  soon  after  subjected
to  an  experimental  test  by  Czapski  ;  2  its  correctness  was  thus  shown
by  these  experimental  results,  together  with  those  of  Jahn.3

Now  experience  shows  that  there  are  both  reversible  galvanic
elements  with  positive  temperature  coefficients,  and  also  those  with
negative  ;  and  therefore  in  these  cases  there  may  be  obtained,  from
the  chemical  processes  producing  the  current,  sometimes  a  greater  and
sometimes  a  smaller  amount  of  external  work  than  is  equivalent  to
their  respective  heat  of  reaction.

In  the  recent  and  very  exact  researches  of  Jahn  (I.e.)  the  heat
values  were  measured  directly  by  means  of  the  Bunsen  ice  calorimeter.
These  heat  values,  developed  in  the  total  closed  circuit  of  a  galvanic
element  and  corresponding  to  q,  show  that  the  difference  E  -  q  is  by
no  means  always  equal  to  zero,  and  that  at  most  it  can  hardly  be
neglected  in  comparison  with  the  total  change  of  energy.

In  the  following  table  there  are  grouped  the  values  of  the  electro-
motive force  E,  for  a  number  of  combinations,  expressed  both  in  volts
and  also  in  g.-cal.  ;  there  are  given  also  the  heat  of  reaction  q,  of  the
chemical  changes  referred  to  1  g.  equivalent.

It  was  found  for  the  Daniell  cell  at  0°

E-  25,263, q  =  25,055, E  -  q  =  208  ;
on  the  other  hand,  its  temperature  coefficient  is

<j|  =  -+0-00034,

1  Sitzungsber.  der  Berl.  Akad.  for  Feb.  2  and  July  7,  1882.
2 Wied.  Ann.,  21.  209  (1884)  ;  see  also  Gockel,  ibid.,  24.  618  (1885).
3  Ibid.,  28.  21  and  491  (1886). See  also  Jahn,  Elektrochemie. Wien,  1895.

CHAP.  VII

THERMODYNAM1C  THEORY

711

from  which,  according  to  Helmholtz's  formula,

E-q- 0-00034.  23,110.273  =  213  cal.

The  agreement  is  amply  sufficient,  considering  the  uncertainty  of  the
slight  difference  between  E  -  q.

E  expressed  in

q

E-q

Volts.

g.-cal.

Obs.

Cal.

Cu,  Cu(C2H802)a  aq.
Pb,  Pb(C2H302)2+100H20

0-470

10,842

.

8,766

+  2076

+  2392

Ag,  AgCl
Zn,  ZnCl2  +  100H20

1-015

23,453

26,023

-  2570

-2541

Ag,  AgCl
Zn,  ZuCI2  +  50H20

1-001

23,146

24,456

-1310

-1305

Ag,  AgCl
Zn,  ZnClo  +  25H20

0-960

22,166

23,493

-  1327

-1255

Ag,  AgBr
Zn,  ZnBr2  +  25H20

0-828

19,138

19,882

-644

- 663

A  combination  found  by  Bugarszky,1

Hg  |  UgCl  -  KC1  -  KOH  -  Hg20  |  Hg,

is  especially  interesting.  This  cell  yields  an  electromotive  force  of
7566  cal.,  and  the  current  given  by  it  is  from  right  to  left,  so  that
the  current  producing  process  is —

Hgci  +  KOH  -  ^Hg.p  +  in2o  +  KCI.

This  process,  however,  occurs  with  absorption  of  heat  (q  =  -  3280),  that  is

dF
an  endothermic  reaction  is  here  electromotively  active. T—  according

to  Bugarszky  -  +11276,  it  is  therefore  very  considerable,  and  accord-
ing to  Helmholtz's  theory  yields  the  value  q  =  E  -  T—  =  -  3710.

Finally,  we  may  note  the  application  of  thermodynamics to the
Grove  gas  battery  (see  Smale) ; 2  here  at  20°  E  -  1-062  volt,  q  =  34,200

1 P1
cal.  =  1-480, and therefore E-q-  -0'418 volt, whilst T^  -

-293.0-00142=  -0'416. The  remarkable  agreement shows  that

1  Zeitschr.  Anorg.  Chem.,  14.  145  (1897).
2  Jahrb.  d.  Elektrochemie,  1894,  p.  36.

712  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  iv

the  decomposition  or  formation  of  water  is  a  reversible  process  with  voltage
0/1-66.

Another  remarkable  application  of  the  Helmholtz  equation  is
due  to  van  't  Hoff,  Cohen  and  Bredig.1  If  there  is  a  point  at  which

rJTT

E  =  0,  it  follows  that  -  q  =  T-™;,  that  is  the  temperature  -coefficient
can  be  calculated  from  the  electromotive  force  itself,  and  that
ET  +  AT  -  AT  —  .  Hence  if  the  variation  of  q  with  temperature  is

known  it  is  possible  to  determine  E  at  all  temperatures  by  means  of
the  heat  of  reaction.

Since  the  electromotive  force  E,  of  a  reversible  galvanic  element,
is  the  measure  of  the  external  work  which  the  current-developing
process  is  capable  of  performing  in  maximo,  therefore  it  gives  directly
the  "degree  of  affinity"  (p.  693)  of  the  reaction  in  question.  If,  as
required  by  the  "  principle  of  Berthelot,"  the  change  of  the  free  energy
of  a  chemical  reaction  were  identical  with  the  total  change  of  energy
q,  then  would

i.e.  in  that  case  the  "rule  of  Thomson"  would  be  fulfilled.

The  formulation  both  of  "Thomson's  rule"  and  of  "Berthelot's
principle  "  sprang  from  views  which  are  similar,  and  which  lay  very
near  the  truth,  but  which  are  now  shown  to  be  inadmissible.  The
fact  that  we  may  find

E>q,
as  well  as

E<q,

again  shows  that  the  heat  of  reaction  is  no  [accurate]  measure  of  the
work  which  the  chemical  forces  are  able  to  perform  at  their  maximal
efficiency,  i.e.  in  a  reversible  reaction.

Moreover,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  the  fact  that  "  Thomson's
rule,"  i.e.  that  the  electromotive  force  and  the  heat  of  reaction  are  not
very  different  from  each  other;  this  rule  usually  is  in  the  best  of
coincidence  with  the  result  to  which  one  is  led  by  a  consideration
of  the  spontaneously  occurring  processes.  That  is,  in  many  cases  the
heat  of  reaction  is  at  least  an  approximate  measure  of  the  affinity.

We  have  already  found  (p.  687),  that  it  is  an  indispensable  proviso
for  this,  that  the  heat  of  reaction  shall  be  independent  of  the  tempera-
ture. As  a  matter  of  fact,  from  the  equality  of  E  and  q,  viz.,

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  16.  453  (1895).

CHAP.  VII  THERMODYNAMIC  THEORY  713

it  also  follows  that

dE_dq_
dT  ~  dT  ~

That  is,  the  heat  of reaction  of  a  current-developing  process  is  in-
dependent of  the  temperature,  if  it  coincides  with  the  maximal  work.

Galvanic  Polarisation.  —  If  we  electrolyse  a  system  which  is
standing  in  equilibrium,  there  occurs  a  deformation  of  the  equilibrium
as  a  result  of  the  electrolytic  disturbance.  This  of  course  needs  the
application  of  a  certain  amount  of  external  work  wThich  is  performed
by  the  galvanic  current.  It  follows  necessarily  from  this,  that  the
current  which  is  transmitted  through  the  system  has  to  overcome  an  opposing
electromotive  force.  And  from  this  there  follows  this  theorem ;  viz.,  if
ice  electrolyse  a  chemical  system,  which  is  kept  at  constant  temperature,  one
observes  a  reaction  in  that  sense  which  is  opposed,  in  an  electromotive  way,  to
the  current  conducted  through  the  system.  This  principle  is  included  under
the  more  general  one  of  action  and  reaction,  stated  on  p.  667.

As  remarked  on  p.  699,  the  current  in  a  circuit  which  contains  the
electromotive  force  E  and  an  electrolytic  cell  is  given  by  the  expression

if  the  polarising  force  is  equal  to  the  back  electric  force  we  shall  get
equilibrium,  that  is  the  electrolytic  cell  forms  a  galvanic  element  of
electromotive  force  E  =  e.  Hence  the  formula

will,  according  to  p.  710,  apply  to  it.  It  is  to  be  remarked  however
that  q,  the  heat  of  reaction  of  the  process  yielding  the  current,  can
rarely  be  determined  with  certainty,  because  polarisation  is  commonly
due  to  extremely  small  quantities  of  substances  occluded  by  the
electrodes  or  by  changes  of  concentration  in  the  immediate  neighbour-
hood of  the  electrodes,  which  are  difficult  to  define.  For  these  reasons
the  above  formula  has  only  been  applied  in  a  few  cases.

Moreover,  e  is  usually  considerably  less  than  E  on  account  of  certain
irreversible  processes,  such  as  convection,  diffusion,  and  the  like  ;  see
especially  von  Helmholtz  (Sitzungsberichte  der  Berliner  Akademie,  1883,
p.  660;  ges.  Abh.  vol.  in.).

The  thermal  accompaniments  of  polarisation  have  been  very
thoroughly  studied  by  H.  Jahn.1

Thermodynamic  Calculation of  Electromotive  Forces.—

Since  the  electromotive  force  of  a  reversible  galvanic  cell  measures  the

1  Zeitschr.  physik,  Chem,,  18.  399  (1895)  ;  26.  385  (1898)  ;  29.  77  (1899).

714  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

maximal  work  which  the  current  yielding  process  can  give,  and  'since
at  any  given  temperature  this  amount  of  work  is  perfectly  defined,  we
can  calculate  the  electromotive  force  of  any  combination  if  we  know  the
affinity  of  the  current  yielding  reaction.  This  has  been  done,  in  the
tirst  'place,  with  so  called  concentration  cells  in  which  the,  (current
yielding  process  consists  simply  in  the  mixing  of  solutions  of  different
concentrations.  The  calculation  was  first  carried  out  in  1877  by
Helmholtz ; x  if  two  copper  electrodes  are  dipped  into  two  communi-
cating cells  of  a  copper  salt,  copper  is  dissolved  in  the  dilute  solution
and  precipitated  from  the  more  concentrated ;  as  current  yielding
process  we  have  the  equalisation  of  concentration  of  the  solutions
round  the  two  electrodes.  The  maximal  work  to  be  obtained  in  this
case  can  be  calculated  in  various  ways,  most  simply  by  means  of
isothermal  distillation,  as  shown  on  p.  115,  and  it  follows  that  this
work  must  be  equal  to  the  electromotive  force,  as  is  confirmed  by
experiment.2  Later  the  author  3  considerably  simplified  the  theory  of
Helmholtz  for  dilute  solutions  by  application  of  van  't  Hoff's  law,  and
by  making  use  of  reversible  electrodes  of  the  second  kind  (see  the
following  chapter)  was  enabled  to  apply  it  to  the  relatively  exact
experiments.

A  different  kind  of  concentration  cell  was  subsequently  studied  by
G.  Meyer,4  after  Tiirin r>  had  given  a  theoretical  discussion  of  it.  In
an  clement  which  follows  the  scheme

Concentrated  amalgam Solution  of  a  salt  of  the  Dilute  amalgam

metal dissolved in the
amalgam

the  current  which  it  yields  transfers  metal  from  the  more  concentrated
to  the  dilute  amalgam ;  the  electromotive  force  of  the  cell  is,  however,
since  the  process  is  reversible,  again  the  measure  of  the  maximal  work
which  can  be  obtained  from  the  current  yielding  process.  On  the
other  hand,  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the  metal  dissolved  in  the  mercury
measures  the  same  quantity,  hence  by  determining  the  electromotive
force  of  cells  constructed  according  to  the  above  type  the  osmotic
pressure  of  the  dissolved  metal  may  be  obtained.  In  all  the  cases
experimented  on  (Zn,  Cd,  Pb,  Sn,  Cu,  Na)  it  appeared  that  (1)  the
osmotic  pressure  is  proportional  to  the  concentration  of  the  metal
dissolved  in  mercury,  and  (2)  that  its  value  (to  within  a  small  per-
centage) is  that  calculated  from  the  temperature  (mostly  18-20°)  and
concentration  of  the  amalgam  on  the  assumption  that  the  molecular
weight  of  the  dissolved  metal  is  identical  with  its  atomic  weight ;  the  latter
result  is  in  complete  agreement  with  other  determinations  of  the
osmotic  pressure  of  metals  dissolved  in  mercury  (see  p.  402).

1  Wied.  Ann.,  3.  201  (1877)  ;  Ges.  AbhandL,  1.  p.  840.

2  J.  Moser, Wied.  Ann.,  14.  61  (1881).

3  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  4.  129  (1889).

4  Ibid.,  7.  477  (1891).  5  Ibid.,  5.  340  (1890).

CHAP,  vil  THERMODYNAMIC  THEORY  715

The  preceding  considerations  show  that  at  the  melting  point  of  a
metal,  electrodes  in  the  solid  and  liquid  states  must  possess  the  same,
electromotive  activity  ;  the  force  of  such  an  element  therefore  suffers  no
change  when  the  electrode  melts,  which  is  in  agreement  with  the
experiments  of  Miller.1

If  we  were  able  to  determine  the  equilibrium  of  the  reaction

Zn  +  CuS04  =  Cu  +  ZnS0

in  any  way,  we  could  determine  the  electromotive  force  of  a  Daniell
cell  ;  conversely,  from  the  known  electromotive  force  of  this  cell  we
could  arrive  at  the  equilibrium  which  exists  between  the  vapour  of  the
above  four  reacting  substances.

Application  of  Thermodynamics  to  the  Lead  Accumulator.

—The  thermodynamic  treatment  given  above  has  been  applied  to  the
lead  accumulator  in  a  very  interesting  paper  by  F.  Dolezalek.2  If  we
assume  that  the  current  yielding  process  is,  as  suggested  by  Plante,
expressed  by  the  equation

PbO2  +  Pb  +  2H2S04  -  2PbS04  +  2H20,

the  electromotive  force  must  clearly  increase  when  the  concentration
of  the  sulphuric  acid  is  increased  and  that  of  the  water  decreased.  If
two  lead  accumulators  filled  with  acid  of  different  concentrations  are
opposed  to  one  another  the  current  yielding  process  of  the  combination
is  simply  that  for  two  Fs  two  mols.  of  sulphuric  acid  are  transported
from  the  first  accumulator  to  the  second,  and  at  the  same  time  two
mols.  of  water  from  the  second  accumulator  to  the  first.  If  px  and  p2
are  the  vapour  pressures  of  the  sulphuric  acid,  Px  and  P2  those  of  the
water  in  the  two  accumulators,  the  work  done  per  F,  which  is  accord-
ingly the  electromotive  force  AE  of  the  combined  cell,  is

(1)

The  vapour  pressures  of  water  over  aqueous  sulphuric  acid  are  known
(p.  167)  ;  those  of  sulphuric  acid  are  impossible  to  measure  on  account
of  their  smallness.  According  to  the  considerations  on  p.  1  1  7  we  can
calculate  the  vapour  pressure  of  one  of  the  components  of  a  mixture
when  we  know  that  of  the  other  as  a  function  of  the  composition.  We

may  therefore  express  ln^  in  equation  (1)  by  means  of  the  vapour
pressure  P  of  water  ;  we  found  (p.  117)

1  Zettschr.  physik.  Chem.,  1O.  459  (1892).

2  Zeitschr.f.  Elektrochemie,  4.  349  (1898)  ; Weid.  Ann.,  65.  894  (1898)  ;  see  also
especially  the  monograph  by  the  same  author,  Theorie  des  Bleiakkumulators,  Halle,  1901,
Knapp.

716  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

ln^  +  xln|p=  jln^dx

<r

and  this  may  be  applied  to  the  two  solutions,  of  which  one  contains  xl
and  the  other  x9  mols.  of  water  for  one  mol.  of  sulphuric  acid,  and
yields

In =  Xo  In  P2  -  xx  In  Px  - In  P  dx,

P2
hence

AE  =  RTx2  In  P2  -  xx  In  Pl  - in  P  dx  +  In

J
xi

In  order  to  obtain  AE  in  volts  we  must  set
R  =  0-861.  10-4.

Dolezalek  calculated  the  electromotive  force  of  two  accumulators
opposed  to  one  another  also  from  the  formula

where  q  can  be  calculated  from  the  heat  of  dilution  of  sulphuric  acid,
and  -r—  j-  is  given  by  the  measurements  of  Streintz  l  on  the  variation
of  the  temperature  coefficient  of  the  accumulator  with  the  concentra-

<-\  .  y-^

tion  of  the  acid. Moreover  T ^ is  very  small  (0*02  volt  as  the

maximum),  which  is  in  complete  agreement  with  the  considerations  on
p.  167,  according  to  which  the  heat  of  dilution  of  a  sulphuric  acid
mixture  is  almost  the  same  as  the  maximal  work  done  in  dilution.
The  following  table  contains  the  results  of  calculation,  and  shows  the
striking  agreement  between  the  electromotive  force  calculated  in
different  ways  and  measured  by  different  observers.

1 Weid.  Ann.,  46.  454  (1892).

[TABLE.

CHAP.  VII

THERMODYNAMIC  THEORY

717

ELECTROMOTIVE  FORCE  OF  ACCUMULATORS  OF  DIFFERENT
DENSITIES  OF  ACID

Electromotive  force  E  in  volts  (0').

No.

Density
of  acid.

%
H2S04

X

Vapour
pressure
P

calculated

measured

from  P.

from  q.

Dolezalek. Streintz.

1

1  553

6-45

3 0-431

2-383

2-39

2-355

2

1-420 52-15

5 1-297

2-257

2-25 2-253 2  '268

3

1-266  : 35*26 10 2'975

(2-103)

(2-10) 2-103 (2-103)

4

1-154

21-40

20 4-027

2-000

2-06 2-008 1-992

5

1-035 5-16

100

4-540

1-892

1-85 1-887 1-891

During  the  charge  of  an  accumulator  the  acid  becomes,  according
to,  the  above  equation,  more  concentrated,  during  discharge  more
dilute  ;  accordingly  during  charge  the  electromotive  force  of  the
accumulator  must  rise,  during  discharge  it  must  fall.  If  the  charge
and  discharge  are  carried  out  with  considerable  current  density,
relatively  large  changes  of  concentration  will  occur  at  the  plates,  and
accordingly  the  accumulator  will  show  a  noticeably  higher  electro-
motive force  during  charge  and  a  noticeably  smaller  during  discharge
than  corresponds  to  the  normal  value  of  1'95  volt;  this  is  confirmed
by  experiment.  Accordingly  we  have  in  the  accumulator  a  polarisa-
tion of  a  peculiar  kind,  namely  a  change  in  the  concentration  of  acid
which  takes  place  in  the  same  sense  at  both  the  positive  and  negative
plates,  although  to  a  greater  extent  at  the  positive.  The  accumulator,
which  of  all  galvanic  cells  is  by  far  the  most  important,  is  also,  as
Dolezalek  has  shown  in  the  monograph  mentioned  above,  one  of  the
most  interesting  combinations  from  the  thermodynamic  point  of  view;
the  thermodynamic  treatment  has  yielded  the  important  result  that
the  accumulator  works  reversibly  in  the  sense  of  the  above  reaction.

Electromotive Force and Chemical Equilibrium.  —  The

maximal  work  that  a  chemical  process  can  yield  is,  according  to  p.  64  7,

ETlnK

(1)

if  E  is  the  electromotive  force  of  a  galvanic  combination,  in  which  the
current  yielding  process  is  given  by  a  reaction  to  which  equation  (1)
refers,  we  have

E  =  A.  .  (2)

To  express  E  in  volts  it  is  necessary,  according  to  p.  703,  to  put

718  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

This  reaction  has  recently  been  confirmed  experimentally  by
C.  Kniipffer  l  for  the  reaction

T1C1  +  KSCN  aq.  =  T1SCN  +  KC1  aq,

who,  at  the  suggestion  of  Bredig,  measured  both  the  chemical
equilibrium  in  the  above  reaction  and  the  electromotive  force  of  the
combination

Tl-amalg. T1C1  -  KC1  -  KSCN  -  T1SCN  |  Tl-amalg.

again,  G.  Preuner2  has  succeeded  in  calculating  the  electromotive  force
of  a  gas  battery  from  the  dissociation  of  water  vapour  ;  and  Danneel  8
has  investigated  electrically  and  chemically  the  equilibrium  between
silver  and  hydroiodic  acid.

The  Galvanic  Element  considered  as  a  Chemical  System.—-

A  galvanic  element  represents  a  heterogeneous  chemical  system,  and
has  certain  peculiarities  ;  but,  on  the  whole,  as  regards  the  relations
of  the  equilibrium,  both  to  the  relative  proportions  of  the  ingredients
and  also  to  the  temperature,  it  is  subject  to  the  same  laws  which  have
been  already  developed  for  ordinary  heterogeneous  chemical  systems.

The  different  complexes,  which  are  both  physically  and  chemically
homogeneous,  and  which,  by  their  interpenetration,  form  heterogeneous
systems,  —  these  are  called  "  the  phases  of  the  system  "  ;  we  have
already  seen  (p.  609)  that  complete  equilibrium  can  be  established
only  when  the  number  of  phases  is  one  greater  than  the  number  of
the  reacting  molecular  species.  We  can  easily  convince  ourselves,  by
an  example,  that  the  same  rule  holds  good  for  a  galvanic  element.

Thus,  e.g.,  let  us  consider  the  Clark  element  —

Hg Hg2S04  |  H2O  +  xHg2SO4  +  yZnS04 ZnS04  |  Zn  ;

Solid  Liquid  Solid

thus  we  distinguish  five  different  phases  ;  these  include  the  two  metals,
their  two  solid  sulphates,  and  the  saturated  solution  of  these  sulphates
at  the  respective  concentrations  of  x  and  y.  In  order  to  construct
all  of  these  five  phases,  we  must  bring  together  at  least  four  different
molecular  species,  viz.  :  —

Hg,  Zn,  H20,  S04;

and  we  thus  conclude  that  here  we  have  a  complete  chemical  equi-
librium.

Now  we  know,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  that  (at  constant  pressure)
for  every  definite  temperature  there  corresponds  a  certain  definite

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  26.  255  (1898).
'2  Ibid.,  42.  50  (1903).
8  Ibid.,  33.  415  (1900).

CHAP.  VII  THERMODYNAMIC  THEORY  719

electromotive  force  of  the  cell ;  and  that  the  phases  are  in  equilibrium
only  when  we  oppose  the  element  with  an  electromotive  force  of  the
same  magnitude.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  if  the  opposed  electromotive
force  is  greater  or  smaller  than  that  of  the  element,  at  the  temperature
in  question,  then  the  chemical  change  advances  in  the  sense  of  the
equation,

Zn  +  Hg2S04^±2Hg  +  ZnS04,

and  completely,  i.e.  until  the  exhaustion  of  one  of  the  phases,  in  one
direction  or  the  other ;  and  it  also  advances  in  such  a  way  that  none
of  the  phases  changes  its  composition  during  the  reaction.

AVe  thus  find  here  all  the  criteria  which  were  characteristic  of  a
complete  equilibrium. l

But  the  case  is  quite  otherwise  when  there  are  only  four  phases
in  the  cell  in  question,  i.e.  as  soon  as  one  of  the  two  solid  salts  dis-
appear. In  that  case,  although  the  element  continues  to  furnish  a
current,  yet  the  composition  of  the  solution,  and  the  electromotive
force  of  the  element  also,  changes.  Thus  the  occurrence  of  phases  of
variable  composition  is  characteristic  of  an  incomplete  equilibrium.

One  peculiarity  which  characterises  galvanic  batteries  above  other
chemical  systems  is  this,  that  a  conducting  [outside]  union  is  needed
between  the  two  metals  in  order  to  make  the  reaction  possible.  We
may  have  a  Clark  cell  in  open  circuit  for  an  indefinite  length  of
time  without  observing  a  chemical  change ;  but  we  cannot  conclude
from  this  that  the  system  is  in  equilibrium,  any  more  than  we
were  at  liberty  to  draw  a  similar  conclusion  regarding  a  "  knall-gas  "
mixture  (p.  677).

The  reaction  velocity  in  an  "  open  "  element,  if  not  absolutely  nil,
is  at  least  practically  so,  and  it  does  not  attain  a  measurable  value
until  a  conducting  [outside]  union  is  established  between  the  two
poles.  This  reaction  velocity  can  be  made  to  vary  as  desired,  by
changing  the  resistance  in  the  circuit,  and  corresponds  directly  to  the
intensity  of  the  current ;  for  according  to  Faraday's  law,  the  intensity
of  the  current  and  the  chemical  change  are  directly  proportional  to
each  other.

Thus  we  can  speak  of  having  an  equilibrium,  only  when  the  two
poles  are  connected  by  a  conducting  union,  and  when  also  we  com-
pensate the  potential  difference  in  some  way  by  means  of  an  opposing
electromotive 'force.  This  opposing  electromotive  force  is  completely
analogous  to  the  opposing  pressure  which  we  found  necessary  to  apply
in  the  case  of  solid  NH4C1,  e.g.,  in  order  to  guard  against  its  complete
sublimation  and  the  attendant  separation  into  its  two  dissociation
products.

1  For  standard  cells  evidently  those  with  n  + 1  phases  are  the  best ;  it  is  also
desirable  that  E  and  q  shall  differ  as  little  as  possible  in  order  that  the  temperature  may
le  of  small  influence.

CHAPTER  VIII

ELECTRO-CHEMISTRY III

OSMOTIC THEORY

The  Mechanism  of Current -Production  in  Solutions.— The

considerations  thus  far  advanced  rest  essentially  upon  a  thermo-
dynamic  basis.  It  is  inherent  in  the  nature  of  this  method  of
investigation,  they  are  undoubtedly  correct  when  applied  with  pre-
caution ;  but  they  do  not  give  obvious  results.  In  particular,  the
mechanism  of  galvanic -current  production  has  remained,  for  the
present,  entirely  beyond  the  domain  of  our  consideration.  But  it
now  appears  that  the  more  recent  views  of  the  ion  theory  enable  us  to
take  an  important  step  forward.  Therefore  the  last  section  of  this
chapter  will  be  devoted  to  the  presentation  of  a  special  theory  regarding
the  electromotive  activity  of  ions  ;  this  was  developed  in  1888  and  1889,
and  is  now  generally  accepted.

We  have  already  developed  the  view,  p.  366,  that  in  the  contact
between  two  solutions  of  an  electrolyte  of  different  concentrations,
there  is  developed  an  electromotive  force  which  so  acts  between  them,
that  the  one  ion  strives  to  pass  by  the  other.  In  this  way  there  was
obtained  for  the  first  time  a  mechanical  explanation  of  the  potential
difference  between  any  two  substances ;  and  it  also  became  possible  to
calculate  this  value  in  absolute  measure.

If  we  solve  the  differential  equation  on  p.  367.

TT /dp dP\  /dp dP\

dS  =  -  Uqdz TL  +  77-7- = -  Vqdz —--  -  w-r- ,
\dx 'dx/  \dx 'dx/'

f  fl A

ior  -=—  we  nnd
dx

dP_ U  -  V  1  dp
dx  ~ U  +  V  r  dx

or,  bearing  in  mind  equation  (2)  p.  368,

720

CHAP.  VIII  OSMOTIC  THEORY  721

dP_  _u-vldp
dx u  +  v  T?  dx

Inserting  the  value  of  the  osmotic  pressure,

p

and  integrating,  we  have

v

KT  ln^  (1)

where  P1  -  P2  is  the  potential  difference  between  two  solutions  of  the
same  kind,  consisting  of  two  univalent  ions  and  assumed  to  be  com-
pletely dissociated  ;  TJI  and  rj9  are  the  concentrations  of  the  two
solutions.

The  preceding  formula  may  also  be  deduced  thermodynamically  in
the  following  way,  as  was  shown  by  the  author.1  Suppose  the  quantity
of  electricity  F  to  pass  across  the  surface  of  contact  of  the  two
solutions  in  the  direction  from  the  concentrated  to  the  dilute  solution,

—  —  equivalents  of  cations  Avill  migrate  in  the  same  direction,

u  +  v  u  +  v

anions  in  the  opposite.  Since  the  cations  pass  from  the  concentration
>/!  to  the  concentration  r/2,  they  are  capable,  according  to  p.  52,  of

doing  the  work  of  expansion  - -  RT  In  —  , whilst  conversely the

v  77

anions  need  an  amount  of  work  - -  RT  In  —  ;  the  total  work  per-

U  +  V  7/2

formed  by  the  process  is,  therefore,

U  +  V  7/2

and  thus  the  expression  is  equal  to  the  electromotive  force  P2  -  Pr
If  T?!  >  7/2  and  u  >  v,  we  have  A  >0,  there  is  an  electromotive  force
tending  to  produce  a  current  from  the  concentrated  to  the  dilute
solution.  In  the  case  of  incompletely  dissociated  solutions  the  ionic
concentrations  must  be  used  instead  of  7;.

We  can  explain  in  an  entirely  similar  mechanical  way,2  the
potential  difference  occasioned  by  the  contact  of  the  solutions  of  any  two
different  electrolytes,

Thus  let  us  bring  into  contact  with  each  other  a  solution  of  HC1
and  of  Li  Br  ;  then,  on  the  one  hand,  more  hydrogen  ions  than
chlorine  ions  will  diffuse  from  the  first  solution  into  the  second,  and
therefore  the  second  solution  [Li  Br]  will  receive  a  positive  charge  ;
and  on  the  other  hand,,  more  bromine  ions  than  lithium  ions  will
diffuse  from  the  second  solution  into  the  first,  because  of  the  greater

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  4.  129  (1889).
2  Nernst,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  2.  613  ;  4.  129  (1889)  ;  Wied.  Ann.,  45.  360  (1892.)

3A

722  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

mobility  of  the  bromine  ions  ;  and  thus  the  positive  charge  of  the
second  solution  will  be  increased.

Moreover,  these  electromotive  forces  can  be  calculated  in  absolute
units  of  measurement,  from  the  gas  laws  and  the  ion  mobilities,  for
which  purpose  Planck,1  by  integration,  has  developed  the  general
equations  given  by  the  writer.

In  this  way  the  general  problem  has  been  solved  regarding  the
calculation  of  the  electromotive  forces  of  any  liquid  cells,  provided
that  only  dilute  solutions  are  used  ;  and  this  has  been  done  theoreti-
cally by  means  of  the  gas  laws  and  the  ion  mobilities  ;  and,  moreover,
the  mechanism,  according  to  which  these  batteries  produce  the  current,
has  been  searched  out,  even  to  all  the  details.

The  electromotive  forces  between  different  solutions  are  nearly
always  small  and  usually  counted  only  by  hundredths  or  thousandths
of  a  volt,  but  of  course  in  exact  calculations  must  be  taken  into  account,
the  more  so  as  in  most  cases  they  can  be  estimated  with  sufficient
accuracy.  In  dealing  with  dilute  solutions  there  is  a  very  simple
means  to  reduce  them  almost  to  the  vanishing  point  ;  this  is  to  use  as
solvent,  not  pure  water,  but  a  solution  of  a  suitable  indifferent
electrolyte  (see  p.  728).  Under  these  circumstances  the  current  flows
almost  entirely  through  the  indifferent  electrolyte  and  consequently  no
appreciable  osmotic  work  is  done,  and  there  is  no  appreciable  potential
difference  between  the  solutions.

The  gas  constant  K  may  be  expressed  in  the  electrochemical  system
of  units  as  follows.  We  have

where  p0  is  the  osmotic  pressure  in  a  space  of unit concentration.
Expressing  the  concentration  in  mols.  per  c.cm.  we  have

p0=  22420  atm.  -22420.  1033'3  .  981  abs.  units.

Now  the  unit  quantity  of  electricity  in  absolute  measure  is
associated  with  1'035.10~4  mols.  of  a  univalent  ion;  accordingly
if  we  take  as  the  unit  of  concentration  the  corresponding  number
1-035.  10~4,

Po  =  22420.  1033-3.  981  .  1-035  ,  10~4,

we  find,  as  on  p.  716,

R  =  0-861  .  104  abs.  units  ;

but  in  order  to  express  potential  differences  in  volts  the  preceding
number  must  be  multiplied  by  10~8.
Hence

R  =  0-861.  10-4.

1 Wied.  Ann.,  40.  561  (1890).

CHAP,  vin  OSMOTIC  THEORY  723

We  have  therefore

KT  In  -1  =  0-861  .  10~4  T  In  ^  =  0-0001983  T  log10  -1  volt.
c2  c2  c2

Or,  putting  T  =  273  +  18,  we  get

ET  In  ^  =  0-0577  log10  -1  volt.
c2  c2

The  Dissolving  of  Metals. — In  order  to  account  for  the  activity
of  galvanic  elements,  we  will  subject  the  current-producing  process  to
a  closer  examination  ;  now,  in  this  process,  nothing  is  obviously  of
more  importance  than  the  respective  dissolving  and  precipitating  of
the  metals  of  the  electrode.  And  this  at  once  leads  us  to  the  follow-
ing observation.

The  metals  throughout  are  characterised  in  that  they  receive  only  positive
charges  ;  i.e.  they  are  able  to  go  into  solution  only  in  the  form  of  positive  ions.

Thus,  whether,  in  the  electrolysis  of  a  solution  of  a  nitrate,  we
convert  the  silver  serving  as  the  anode  into  silver  nitrate,  or  whether
we  change  zinc  into  zinc  sulphate  by  simply  dipping  it  into  sulphuric
acid,  under  all  such  circumstances  the  ions  of  the  metals  appear  in
solution  in  such  a  way  that  they  either  remain  free,  or  else  unite  with
the  negative  ion  of  the  salt  contained  in  the  solution,  to  form  electric-
ally neutral  molecules.

Thus  the  process  of  the  dissolving  of  metals  appears  in  a  very
peculiar  light.  We  see  that  forces  of  an  electrical  nature  play  a  very
prominent  part  in  these  chemical  processes.  And,  in  fact,  if  we  accept
the  aid  of  the  conceptions  which  we  have  already  developed  (pp.  147
and  475)  regarding  the  process  of  dissolving,  we  can,  by  means  of  the
views  advanced  above,  explain  the  electromotive  activity  of  the  metals,
simply  and  without  constraint.

Let  us,  therefore,  ascribe  to  each  metal  a  certain  solution  pressure
regarding  the  water  ;  for  every  substance  must  have  such  a  pressure,  as
regards  the  selected  solvent ;  and,  as  before,  we  imply  the  expansive
force,  which  tends  to  drive  the  molecule  of  the  substance  into  the
solution.  In  the  case  of  electrically  neutral  molecules,  this  expansive
force  will  be  reduced  to  an  equilibrium  by  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the
saturated  solution.

But  now  this  circumstance  is  a  very  characteristic  mark  of  the
metals,  viz.  that  those  molecules  which  they  strive  to  bring  into  solution,  by
dint  of  their  solution  pressure,  are  charged  in  an  electro-positive  way.  There-
fore their  solution  pressure  is  suitably  called  "electrolytic."

It  is  now  easy  to  examine  the  processes  which  will  take  place  on
dipping  a  metal  fnto  pure  water  or  into  any  solution.

We  will first  consider  the  case  where  the  ions  of  the  metal  in

724  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  iv

question,  are  either  not  at  all  present  in  the  solution,  or,  at  most,
to  only  a  very  slight  extent.  It  will  happen  that  a  number  of  ions,
driven  by  the  solution  pressure  of  the  metal,  will  pass  into  solution.
And  the  immediate  result  of  this  will  be  that  the  solution  becomes
positively  charged  and  the  metal  negatively.  But,  just  as  appeared
in  the  diffusion  of  electrolytes  (p.  366),  so  here  these  electrical  charges
occasion  a  force  component,  which,  on  the  one  hand,  opposes  the
further  passage  of  the  metallic  ions  into  the  solution ;  and,  on  the
other  hand,  seeks  to  drive  the  metallic  ions  already  in  the  solution
back  on  to  the  metal.

On  account  of  the  enormous  electrostatic  capacities  of  the  ions,
this  force  attains  an  extremely  high  value  long  before  a  weighable
quantity  has  passed  into  solution.  Now  this  may  result  in  one  of
two  ways.

1.  Either  the  action  of  the  solution  pressure  of  the  metal  will  be
exactly compensated by the electrostatic charges, and a state of
equilibrium  will be  established  ;  in  this  case  no  more  of  the  metal
will pass  into  the  solution,  neither  will any  more positive  ions  be
driven  out  of  the  solution. This  happens,  e.g.,  when  silver  is  dipped
into  a  solution  of  NaCl. We  should  not  conclude  that  the  solution
pressure  of  this  metal  has  no  marked  value,  just  because  the  silver  is
not  dissolved  under  these  circumstances. It  is  much  more  conceivable
that  it  is  to  be  estimated  in  thousands  of  atmospheres,  and  that  it  is
compensated  in  its  action  by  the  electrostatic  charge  of  the  solution
as  it  comes  into  contact  with  the  metal.

2.  Or  the  electrostatic  charges  may  reach  such  an  amount,  as  a
result  of  the  magnitude  of  the  solution  pressure,  that  the  positive  ions
which  are  contained  in  solution  are  driven  out  on  to  the  metal. We
observe  an  illustration  of  this  case,  in  the  precipitation  of  one  metal  by
another  ;  thus,  e.g.,  when  iron  is  dipped  into  a  solution  of  a  copper
salt,  the  iron  ions  go  into  the  solution  and  the  electrically  equivalent
quantity  of  copper  ions  is  driven  out  of  the  solution,  by  electrostatic
repulsion  of  the  solution,  and  by  the  electrostatic  attraction  of  the
metal ;  and  thus  the  copper  ions  are  precipitated  upon  the  iron.

The  case  is  similar  in  the  development  of  hydrogen.

The  foregoing  considerations  have  lately  received  a  striking  con-
firmation by  the  researches  of  W.  Palmaer.1  If,  as  shown  by  Fig.  35,
mercury  is  dropped  into  a  solution  which  contains  only  a  few  mercury
ions,  some  of  these  ions  will  be  deposited  on  each  drop,  because  mercury,
being  a  noble  metal,  possesses  an  extremely  small  solution  pressure.
If  the  drops  fall  into  a  mass  of  mercury  below,  their  charge  disappears,
that  is,  they  give  the  mercury  ions  back  to  the  solution.  We  see  then
that  the  point  where  the  new  mercury  surface  is  formed,  that  is,  at  the
opening  of  the  mercury  funnel,  the  solution  becomes  poorer  in  mercury
salt,  whilst  where  the  drops  unite  and  there  is  a  diminution  of  surface
1  ZeUschr.  physik.  Chem.,  25.  265  (1898).

CHAT. VIII

OSMOTIC  THEORY

725

between  mercury  and  electrolyte  the  solution  must  become  richer  in

salt. It has long been noticed that a  potential difference arises

between  dropping  mercury  and  still  mercury ;  it  was  pointed  out  by

the  author  (see  my  note  on  contact  electricity)1  that

this  arrangement  may  be  regarded  as  a  concentration \  mil /

cell,  and  Palmaer  proved  experimentally  that  changes

of  concentration  do  occur  in  the  sense  expected ;  this

was  demonstrated  first  by  measurements  of  potential

difference  as  compared  with  small  inserted  mercury

electrodes, and afterwards2 by purely chemical

means.

The  Theory  of  the  Production  of  the  Gal-
vanic Current. — The  considerations  advanced  in
the  preceding  section,  led  directly  to  an  insight
into  the  production  of  galvanic  currents  from
systems  possessed  of  electromotive  activity,  in  so  far
as  these  systems  are  dependent  on  the  use  of  metals.
Here  we  will  limit  ourselves  to  reversible  galvanic  Fig.  35.

elements, and in order  to fix the idea, we will
consider  one  particular  example, namely  the  Daniell  element.

Let  a  zinc  rod  be  dipped  in  a  solution  of  zinc  salt  (for  example,
ZnS04),  as  in  Fig.  36,  and  a  copper  rod  in  a  solution  of  copper  salt
(CuS04) ;  then  the  zinc,  in  consequence  of  its  greater  solution  pressure,
will  send  out  a  quantity  of  positive  ions  into  the  solution,  whilst  con-
versely, if  the  osmotic  pressure  p9  of  the  copper  ions  is  sufficiently  great,
copper  ions  will  be  deposited  on  the  copper  rod  and  the  copper  will
thus  receive  a  positive  charge.

As  long  as  the  circuit  is  open,  neither  zinc  ions  nor  copper  ions

will go over  into  the  solution,
because  the  electrolytic  solution
Cu  pressures of these metals are

held  in  equilibrium  by  the  op-
posing charges,  which  both  the
metals  and  the  solutions  have
received  from  the  inappreciable
passage  of  ions ;  and  therefore
chemical  change  is  excluded  from
the  element.

But  the  case  is  changed  as

So4 H 'Cn-.—So^- —-J soon  as  the  circuit  between  the
Fig.  36.  two  poles  of  the  element  is  dosed

by  a  conducting  union  ;  then  the
reaction  can  advance,  because  it  is possible to  equalise the  electric

Zn

1  Supplement  to  Wied.  Ann.  1896,  Heft,  Nr.
2  Ibid.,  28.  257  (1899).

726  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  iv

charges  associated  with  the  solution  and  the  precipitation  respectively,
of  the  two  metals  ;  and  thus  the  reaction  takes  place  in  such  a  way,
that  that  metal  having  the  greater  solution  pressure  drives  its  ions
into  the  solution  ;  and  conversely,  that  metal  having  the  smaller
solution  pressure  is  precipitated  from  the  solution.

In  the  Daniell  element  the  zinc  is  dissolved,  and  the  correspond-
ingly equivalent  quantity  of  copper  is  driven  out  of  the  solution,
because  the  force  tending  to  bring  the  zinc  ions  into  solution  is  greater
than  that  tending  to  bring  the  copper  ions  into  solution.

The  passage  of  the  zinc  into  the  solution  and  of  the  copper  out  of
the  solution,  necessarily  results  in  a  movement  of  positive  electricity
in  the  external  circuit,  from  copper  to  zinc  ;  i.e.  the  production  of  a
galvanic  current  ensues  in  the  direction  indicated.

We  have  already  seen  that  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the  ions  of  a
metal  tends  to  oppose  its  solution  pressure.  Thus  the  force  which
brings  the  zinc  ions  into  solution  will  be  the  smaller,  the  greater  the
concentration  of  the  zinc  sulphate  solution  ;  and  likewise  the  force
tending  to  separate  the  copper  ions  will  be  the  greater,  the  stronger
the  concentration  of  the  copper  sulphate.  Thus  the  electromotive
force  of  the  Daniell  element  will  increase  by  diluting  the  zinc  sulphate
solution  ;  and  it  will  diminish  by  diluting  the  copper  sulphate  solution  ;
and  both  of  these  statements  are  completely  verified  by  experiment.

The  electromotive  force  of  a  Daniell  cell  may  be  expressed  by
means  of  the  formula  given  below  —

Pi

here  the  small  potential  difference  at  the  contact  of  the  two  electrolytes
is  neglected.

Concentration  Cells.  —  The  above  considerations  lead  at  once  to
a  very  simple  expression  for  the  potential  difference  between  the  metal
and  the  solution  which  contains  a  larger  or  a  smaller  amount  of  ions
in  question.  If  A  is  the  work  that  can  be  performed  by  the  solution
of  one  electro-chemical  gramme  equivalent  of  the  electrode  metal  in  the
electrolyte  considered,  then  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the  univalent  ions
of  the  metal  amounts  to  p  ;  thus,  clearly,

A  =  E,  (I.)

where  E  is  the  potential  difference  required.  If  p  becomes  p  +  dp,  A
becomes  A  +  dA,  and  accordingly  E  becomes  E  +  dE.  Let  us  now  dis-
solve one  electro-chemical  gramme  equivalent  ;  then  dA  is  equal  to  the
work  that  must  be  spent  if  the  electro-chemical  equivalent  is  to  be
brought  from  pressure  p  +  dp  to  pressure  p.  This  amounts,  therefore,

CHAP.  VIII  OSMOTIC  THEORY  727

to  p  .  dv  (where  v  is  the  volume  which  one  electro-chemical  equivalent
assumes  in  the  solution),  hence  we  have

P

or,  integrating,

E  =  -  RT  In  p  +  const.
that  is

In  this  equation  clearly  E  =  0,  when  P  =  p,  hence  P  indicates  the
electrolytic  solution  pressure  of  the  metal  in  question.  Instead  of
using  the  pressure  p  we  may  use  the  ionic  concentration  c,  which  is
proportional  to  it,  and  obtain

E  =  ETln-  (II.)

c

where  c  is  the  concentration  corresponding  to  the  osmotic  pressure  p.
In  what  follows  we  shall  describe  P  simply,  as  the  solution  pressure.
The  equation

A  -  E  =  const.  -  ET  In  c

may  also be  derived immediately  from the theory  of  the  thermo-
dynamic  potential  given  on  p.  668.

If  the  ion  whose  solution  is  considered  is  n-valent,  we  have

n L>'

and  accordingly

,, ET C

E  =  —  •  In  -.
n  c

This  equation,  given  by  the  author  in  the  year  1889,  contains  both
the  theory  of  galvanic  current  production  and  that  of  galvanic
polarisation.

We  will  first  consider  the  case  of  two  electrodes  of  a  univalent
metal  dipping  in  two  solutions  of  a  salt  of  that  metal  in  different  con-
centrations ;  we  then  have  a  concentration  cell,  for  example

AgN03  I  A

\  3 1  A&

In  these  galvanic  combinations  we  have  three  contacts  of  dissimilar
conductors,  and  accordingly  three  potential  differences,  which  may  be
separately  calculated  and  whose  sum  gives  the  electromotive  force  of
the  combination.  At  one  of  the  metal-electrolyte  contacts  we  have

728  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

C1

the  force  RT  In-,  at  the  contact  of  the  two  solutions,  according  to

ci

n 721 ] —  RT  In  —  ,  at  the  other  contact  between  metal  and  electro-
'  u  +  v  c2

C

lyte  the  force  RT  In  —  ;  hence  the  total  electromotive  force  of  the  cell

will  be  C2

RT  In  \

cl u  +  v  c.2  c2 u  +  v  c2

Assuming,  for  example,  Cj  =  O'l,  c2  =  O'Ol  mol.  per  litre,  we  get,  at
atmospheric  temperature,  according  to  p.  723,

E  =  2  .  0-522  .  0-0577  «  0'0604  volt
/  v

=  0'522,  according  to  p.  364)  ; experiment gave 0'055 volt,

i-e.  a  somewhat  smaller  value.  Bearing  in  mind,  however,  that  the
electrolytic  dissociation  in  the  solutions  used  was  incomplete,  the  theory
gives  0'057,  which  is  in  complete  agreement  with  the  experiment.  If
two  metal  electrodes  dip  into  the  same  solution  of  an  indifferent
electrolyte,  and  a  small  quantity  of  the  ions  of  the  electrode  metal  are
added  to  produce  concentration  cx  in  the  first  solution  and  c2  in  the
second,  where  Cj  and  c2  are  small  in  comparison  with  the  concentration
of  the  indifferent  electrolyte,  the  electromotive  force  of  contact  between
the  two  electrolytes  vanishes  ;  then  under  these  circumstances  the
current  is  conducted  almost  entirely  by  the  indifferent  electrolyte,  so
that  practically  no  osmotic  work  is  spent  in  the  electrolyte,  and  for
concentration  cells  of  this  type  we  have  the  simple  formula

The  electromotive  force  of  such  cells  can  occasionally  become  very
large,  viz.  when  one  of  the  concentrations  (Cj  or  c9)  becomes  extra-
ordinarily small  ;  thus  the  electromotive  force  of  the  cell

Ag  |  0-1  AgN08 1-0  KC1  |  AgCl  |  Ag

has  been  found  O'Slof  a  volt  ;  this  relatively  large  electromotive  force
of  a  cell  with  two  identical  electrodes  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the
osmotic  pressure  of  the  silver  ions  in  the  solution  of  silver  nitrate  is
considerable,  but  in  the  potassium  chloride  solution  surrounding  the
silver  chloride  is  excessively  small  ;  not  only  on  account  of  the  very
small  solubility  of  silver  chloride  but  because  it  is  further  reduced  by
the  presence  of  chlorine  ions.  This  conception  can  be  carried  out
quantitatively  ;  cx  is  about  O'l  gramme  ion  per  litre,  since  the  solution
of  silver  nitrate  was  deci-normal  ;  c2,  according  to  p.  654,  at  20°  would

CHAP. VIII

OSMOTIC  THEORY

729

be  I'l  x  10  5,  if  there  were  no  potassium  chloride  present,  and,  as
the  latter  forms  a  normal  solution,  the  solubility  sinks,  according  to
p.  530,  to  (1-1  x  10-  5)'2  =  1-21  x  lO'10.  Hence  the  electromotive  force

of  the  cell  becomes

10
0-058  (9  -log  1-21)  -0-52  volt,

which  is  in  very  good  agreement  with  the  direct  measurements  (0'51)  ;
bearing  in  mind  that  the  electrolytic  dissociation  of  the  KC1  and
AgNOg  is  not  complete,  the  calculated  value  should  be  a  trifle  reduced.1
In  the  case  of  negative  ions,  such  for  example  as  a  platinum
electrode  charged  with  chlorine,  the  potential  difference  is  of  the
opposite  sign,  and  in  this  case

E-  -RTlnl^

(III.)

If  mercury  is  covered  with  the  very  slightly  soluble  mercurous
chloride  the  passage  of  a  current  through  the  electrode  either  forms  or
reduces  calomel  according  to  its  direction,  in  other  words,  ions  either
come  out  from  the  solution  or  enter  it.  Such  an  electrode  behaves
therefore  electrolytically,  as  if  it  were  made  of  a  metallically  conducting
modification  of  chlorine,  and  equation  III.  is  applicable  to  it.  Such
electrodes,  which  consist  of  a  metal  covered  with  one  of  its  insoluble
salts  and  a  solution  which  contains  the  same  anion,  are  known  as
reversible  electrodes  of  the  second  kind  (p.  708),  where  electrodes  to  which
equation  II.  is  applicable  are  called  reversible  electrodes  of  the  first  kind.
Electrodes  of  the  second  kind  may  be  reduced  to  the  first  kind,  as  may
be  seen  from  the  foregoing  calculation,  with  the  electrode  Ag(AgCl).

In  a  concentration  cell  such  as

Hg  |  HgCl  |  chloride  c,  |  chloride  c2  |  HgCl  |  Hg,

the  electromotive  force  may  be  determined  by  means  of  equations  I.
and  III.  exactly  in  the  same  way  as  on  p.  727  for  concentration  cells
with  electrodes  of  the  first  kind.  We  find  in  this  \vay

2u

ET  In  ^.

For  example  the  author  found  : — 5

E

Chloride ci

Obs.

Cal.

HC1 0-1

o-oi

0-0926

0-0939

KC1 0-1

o-oi

00532

0-0542

LiCl 0-1

o-oi

0-0354

0-0336

1  See  also  Goodwin,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  13.  577  (1894).
2  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  4.  161  (1889).

730  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  iv

In  the  first  of  these  three  combinations  the  electromotive  force  at
the  contact  of  the  two  electrolytes  adds  to  the  total  effect,  in  the
third  it  reduces  it,  in  the  second  it  is  almost  nothing.

Normal  and  Abnormal  Potentials.  —  According  to  the
equation

RT. C

E  = In  -
n c

the  potential  difference  between  the  metal  and  electrolyte  varies  at
atmospheric  temperature  by  -  -  volt  when  the  concentration  of  the

n-valent  ions  of  the  metal  is  altered  tenfold ;  the  change  of  electro-
motive force  is  consequently  small  when  dealing  with  moderate  con-
centrations, and  even  if  the  ionic  concentration  is  changed  several  fold
the  electromotive  force  of  the  combination  suffers,  as  a  rule,  only  a
small  percentage  modification.  It  is  otherwise  of  course  when  the
ionic  concentration  is  reduced  by  several  times  tenfold  •  then  there
are  very  considerable  alterations  in  electromotive  force.

Thus  for  example  silver  in  solutions  of  a  silver  salt  of  moderate
concentration  has  always  approximately  the  same  potential ;  if  by  any
means  silver  ions  are  very  completely  removed  from  the  solution  the
potential  is  considerably  altered.  This  can  be  done  in  two  different
ways  ;  either  by  adding  a  reagent  (for  example  a  chloride)  to  precipitate
the  silver  ions,  or  by  adding  a  reagent  such  as  potassium  cyanide,  which
forms  a  complex  salt  with  the  silver  ions  and  so  equally  removes  them
from  the  solution.  By  these  two  ways  it  is  possible  to  reduce  the
concentration  of  the  silver  ions  enormously,  accordingly  it  is  found
that  metals  in  such  solutions  give  quite  different  so  called  "  anomalous  "
potentials  in  opposition  to  the  "  normal "  potentials  observed  in  solu-
tions containing  larger  quantities  of  their  ions.

If  a  metal  is  dipped  in  a  solution  which  originally  contains  no
ions  of  it,  the  potential  observed  is,  unlike  that  in  the  preceding  cases,
variable  and  uncertain ;  traces  of  the  metal  in  larger  or  smaller
quantity,  according  to  the  circumstances  (for  example  under  the  action
of  the  atmospheric  oxygen),  pass  into  solution,  and  these  accidental
quantities  of  course  give  accidental  potential  differences.

As  an  example  of  the  great  change  in  potential  of  a  metal  against
an  electrolyte  that  can  be  produced  by  precipitation,  we  have  already
mentioned  the  concentration  cell  with  silver  electrodes,  which  has  an
unusually  large  electromotive  force  (p.  537).  If  to  the  copper  of  a
Daniell  cell  a  sufficiently  concentrated  potassium  cyanide  solution  is
added,  the  copper  ions  are  so  completely  taken  up  by  it  that  the
electromotive  force  of  the  combination  even  changes  its  sign,  i.e.  in
such  combinations  copper  goes  into  solution  and  reduces  the  zinc.  A

CHAP.  VIII  OSMOTIC  THEORY  731

series  of  further  examples  were  found  by  Hittorf,1  who  first  carefully
studied  cases  of  this  kind,  and  by  Ostwald,2  who  gave  an  explanation
of  these  anomalous  electromotive  forces  by  means  of  the  author's
formula.

Gas  Batteries.  —  Platinum  charged  with  hydrogen  behaves
electrolytically  like  the  electrode  of  a  conducting  variety  of  hydrogen,
charged  with  oxygen  as  if  it  were  a  metallically  conducting  form  of
oxygen.  If  these  electrodes  are  immersed  in  a  solution  of  an  electrolyte
we  have  a  galvanic  combination  of  the  electromotive  force

, C RT. C, RT. C2.C,
E  =  RT  In  -  + —  In  -1  =  —  In  -= — l :

c2.  c

1

here  C  and  C1  are  the  solution  pressures  of  the  two  electrodes,  c  and
cx  the  concentrations  of  the  hydrogen  ions  and  the  doubly  charged
oxygen  ions.  Since  in  dilute  aqueous  solutions

c2 .  cx  =  const.

it  follows  that  E  is  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  dissolved  sub-
stances;  at  atmospheric  temperature  it  amounts  to  1'08  volt,  a  value
which  is  of  much  importance  in  electro-chemical  calculations.

The  potential  of  a  hydrogen  electrode  is  very  different  in  acid  and
alkaline  solutions  (about  0*8  volt),  because  the  concentration  of  the
hydrogen  ions  in  the  two  cases  is,  according  to  p.  508,  enormously
different,  and  the  same  is  of  course  true  of  the  oxygen  electrode.

In  a  similar  way  the  theory  of  all  gas  batteries  which  contain
dilute  solutions  of  an  electrolyte  may  be  studied  by  means  of  the
osmotic  theory.  It  must  be  noted  however  that  the  solution  pressure
of  an  electrode  charged  with  gas  depends  on  the  degree  of  saturation
of  the  gas  in  the  electrode,  and  naturally  increases  with  the  concentra-
tion of  the  dissolved  gas.

Oxidation  and  Reduction  Cells. — Chemically  an  oxidising
material  is  characterised  by  its  power  of  giving  off  oxygen,  a
reducing  material  by  its  power  of  giving  off  hydrogen.  In  some
cases  this  power  extends  to  the  visible  evolution  of  gas ;  thus
hydrogen  peroxide  gives  off  oxygen  violently  on  a  platinum  surface,
chromous  solutions  give  off  hydrogen,  etc.  Clearly  the  oxidising  or
reducing  power  is  the  greater  the  higher  the  pressure  the  evolution  of
gas  can  reach.  If  thus  we  bring  platinum  electrodes  into  solutions
which  contain  an  oxidising  or  reducing  agent  they  will  be  charged
with  oxygen  or  hydrogen ;  by  combination  we  get  a  cell  according  to
the  scheme

Pt  |  oxidising  medium  |  indifferent  solution  |  reducing  medium  |  Pt,

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  10.  593  (1892).

2  Lehrbuch  der  cdlg.  Chem.,  2nd  edit.,  vol.  ii.

732  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

we  have,  therefore,  an  oxy hydrogen  cell,  but  with  this  difference,  that
the  oxygen  or  hydrogen  charge  can  be,  according  to  the  nature  of  the
oxidising  or  reducing  medium,  greater  or  smaller  than  if  the  charge
were  immediately  produced  by  oxygen  or  hydrogen  at  atmospheric
pressure,  as  in  the  ordinary  gas  cell.  In  other  words,  the  values  Cj
and  C  in  the  formula  of  the  previous  section  depend  upon  the  nature
of  the  reagent  used.

Hence  it  follows  that  (for  constant  charge  of  the  platinum)  the
potential  difference  of  each  electrode  against  the  solution  depends  on
the  concentration  of  the  hydrogen  or  hj^droxyl  ions,  and  that  if
several  oxidising  agents  are  present  at  once  in  the  solution  the
strongest  determines  the  potential  difference,  that  is  the  one  which
charges  the  electrode  with  oxygen  most  strongly.  The  same  of
course  is  true  for  the  reducing  materials.

If  an  oxidising  and  a  reducing  material  are  present  simultaneously
in  the  solution  it  often,  but  not  always,  happens  that  chemical  action
will  take  place  ;  this  must,  however,  happen  as  soon  as  platinum  is
brought  into  the  solution  and  the  charge  of  gas  reaches  sufficient
magnitude,  because  oxygen  and  hydrogen  occluded  by  platinum
react  violently.

In  order  to  calculate  the  dependence  of  the  potential  difference
on  the  concentration  of  the  various  reagents  we  must  write  the
reaction  for  the  evolution  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen  in  each  case.
Thus,  ferrous  sulphate  charges  platinum  according  to  the  equation

++ + +++ i
Fe  +  H  =  Fe  +  ^H2  ;

hence  the  hydrogen  charge  is  proportional  to  the  concentration  of  the
ferrous  and  hydrogen  ions  directly,  and  inversely  to  that  of  the  ferric
ions.  See  on  this  point  the  work  by  Peters,1  which  is  full  of  interest-
ing observations.  The  numbers  of  Bancroft 2  must  be  received  Avith
caution,  as  later  measurements  have  shown.3  See  further  the  original
study,  Oxydations  und  lleduktionsketten,  by  K.  Ochs,  Dissertation,  Basle,
1895.  Ostwald  has  pointed  out  that  measurements  of  electromotive
force  determine  the  oxidising  or  reducing  action  of  a  reagent.4

Theory  of  Electrolysis. — If  we  consider  an  electrolytic  cell  with
two  unalterable  electrodes,  on  electrolysis  the  cations  must  be  deposited
at  the  cathode,  the  anions  at  the  anode ;  if  the  electromotive  force
necessary  for  the  first  of  these  processes  be  called  e1}  for  the  second  e.2,
we  have  for  the  back  electromotive  force  of  polarisation

B  -.^ .+  e,.

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  26.  193  (1898).
3  Ibid.,  1O.  387  (1892).

3  See  the  same  author,  ibid.,  26.  215.

4  See  Allg.  Chem.,  2nd  edit.,  p.  883,  etc.,  Leipzig,  1893.

CHAP,  vin  OSMOTIC  THEORY  733

Now  the  cation  is  the  more  easily  deposited  at  the  cathode  the
higher  its  concentration  and  the  more  difficultly  the  more  dilute  it  is  ;
by  considerations  exactly  similar  to  this  on  p.  727  we  find  that

RT. G!

Cl  =  -  -  In  -
n Cj

RT. C,

€?  =  - hi-
ll c.2

If  we  have  now  several  kinds  of  cations  and  anions  present
together  in  the  solution,  a  case  which  always  happens  when  we  are
dealing  with  aqueous  solutions,  in  which  besides  the  ions  of  the  dis-
solved substance  there  is  water  present,  the  electrolysis  will  begin  when
the  electromotive  force  E,  conveniently  known  as  the  decomposition  potential,
is  large  enough  to  discharge  one  of  the  cations  present  and  one  of  the  anions.

The  great  service  involved'  in  bringing  out  clearly  this  point,
following  on  the  later  researches  of  Helmholtz,  Berthelot,  and  others,
is  due  to  Le  Blanc,1  who  investigated  electrolytic  decomposition  in  a
very  thorough  manner.  Le  Blanc  showed  further  that  the  conceptions
and  formulae  given  by  the  author  for  galvanic  production  of  current
can  be  applied  without  change  to  electrolysis,  and  so  laid  the  founda-
tion for  the  osmotic  theory  of  electrolysis.  This  experimentalist  has
also  made  many  important  applications  of  his  law.

Thus  it  became  possible,'2  by  applying  different  potentials,  to  arrive
at  a  method  for  separating  electrolytically  the  various  metals ;  it  is
clearly  not  the  current  density  which  primarily  determines  the
electrolytic  process,  but  the  potential  difference  between  the  electrodes.

In  the  following  table  Wflsmore*  has  determined  the  potential
differences  of  the  most  important  electrodes  from  a  critical  summary
of  the  measurements  so  far  obtained  : —

DECOMPOSITION  POTENTIALS

For  Normal  Concentrations

e]  (Cations)  eg  (Anions)

Mg+ 1-482  J- 0-520

Al  +1-276  H  =  ±0  Br- 0-993
Mn  -f  1  -075  0  -  1  -08*

Zn  +0-770  Cl- 1-353

Cd  +  0:420  OH -1-68*

Fe  +0-344  S04-l-9

Co +0-232  HS04-2-6

$i -+0-228

Pb  +  0-151

Cu-  0-329

Hg- 0-753

Ag- 0-771

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  8.  299  (1891) ;  12.  333  (1892).

-  This  was  first  shown  by  M.  Kiliaui  (1883)  ;  the  further  working  out  of  it  is  due  to
H.  Freudenberg,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  12.  97  (1893),  on  the  suggestion  of  Le  Blanc.
3  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  35.  291  (1900).

734  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  IV

These  numbers,  in  accordance  with  the  preceding  formulae,  refer
to  normal  concentrations  of  the  ions  ;  a  reduction  of  tenfold  in  the

concentration increases the numbers bv  - -  volt  (where  n  =  the

n

number  of  charges  or  the  chemical  valency  of  the  ion).  The  potential
of  hydrogen  is  taken  as  zero  ;  for  there  is  always  both  anode  and
cathode,  and  therefore  an  arbitrary  term  to  be  added  to  all  the  above
numbers,  that  is,  it  is  necessary  to  make  an  arbitrary  standard  of  some
one  of  them.  The  value  of  0  and  OH  (distinguished  by  an*)  refer  to  a
concentration  which  is  normal  with  respect  to  the  hydrogen  ions.  In  order
to  discharge  O  or  OH  from  normal  concentration  of  OH  the  voltage
needed  is  less  by  0'8,  in  order  to  set  free  hydrogen  from  the  same
solution  0*8  volt  more  is  required  than  in  acid  solution,  as  may  be
calculated  from  the  concentration  of  the  ions  of  water.

A  number  of  important  conclusions  may  be  drawn  from  the  above
numbers.  In  the  first  place,  they  yield  the  decomposition  potentials  of
all  ionic  combinations.  For  example,  zinc  bromide  requires  for  decom-
position 0'99  +  077  =  1-76  volt,  if  its  ions  are  present  in  normal
solution.  The  decomposition  of  hydrochloric  acid  requires  1'353  +
0  =  1*353  volt,  and  so  on.  We  saw  that  it  is  easy  to  separate  silver
from  copper  electrolytically,  because  the  difference  between  their
solution  pressures  is  almost  half  a  volt  •  but  similarly  the  electrolytic
separation  of  iodine  from  bromine  and  bromine  from  chlorine  can  be
carried  out  satisfactorily.1  The  electrolytic  decomposition  of  silver
iodide  in  normal  solution  would,  according  to  the  above  figures,  not
only  require  no  force  but  should,  on  the  contrary,  yield  0'26  of  a
volt  (0*52  -  0*78  —  -  0'26).  Silver  iodide  itself,  however,  cannot  be
obtained  in  such  concentrations  on  account  of  its  extreme  insolubility
in  water,  and  indeed  we  may  conclude  from  the  above  numbers  that
at  usual  temperatures  silver  iodide  to  be  stable  must  be  very  insoluble,
a  conclusion  which  of  course  can  very  easily  be  generalised.

Naturally  also  the  above  numbers  give  at  the  same  time  the
electromotive  force  of  cells  combined  with  the  electrodes  in  question  ;
thus  the  Daniell  cell  gives  0*770  +  0*329  =  1*099  volt.

An  important  step  in  this  direction  has  been  taken  by  G.
Bodlander.2  The  decomposition  potential  of  a  saturated  solution  of
an  electrolyte  is

where  nx  and  n2  are  the  valencies  of  the  anions  and  cations  and  c0  the
concentration  of  the  saturated  solution.  Now  E  is  the  free  energy  of
formation  of  the  solid  salt  which,  according  to  Chap.  V.  of  this  book,

1  See  Specketer,  Zeitschr.  f.  Mektrochem.  ,  4.  539  (1898).
2  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  27.  55  (1898).

CHAP.  VIII  OSMOTIC  THEORY  735

is  mostly  not  very  different  from  the  heat  of  formation. If  then  we
put,  according  to  p.  705,

q  .'?"»:':»

the  value  of  c0  can  be  calculated  from  the  decomposition  potentials  in
the  above  table  and  from  thermo-chemical  data.  Bodlander  found,  in
fact,  in  many  cases  an  agreement,  at  least  as  to  order  of  magnitude
with  the  solubility  of  salts,  a  very  noticeable  result,  for  it  is  the  first
means  that  has  been  found  to  calculate  solubilities  even  approximately.

As  a  further  example  which  gives  rise  to  interesting  speculations
we  may  take  the  electrolysis  of  sulphuric  acid.  It  is  well  known  that
in  this  case  we  get  hydrogen  at  the  cathode  arid  oxygen  at  the  anode,
assuming  of  course  that  the  electrodes  are  unalterable.  We  concluded
from  the  above  table  that  electrolysis  will  only  take  place  if  the
potential  difference  is  greater  than  1  '08  volt ;  with  this  potential
difference  hydrogen  ions  can  be  discharged  at  the  cathode  and  doubly
charged  oxygen  ions  at  the  anode ;  it  is  actually  found  that  if  a  small
platinum  point  be  used  as  cathode  and  a  large  platinised  plate  as
anode  with  I'l  volt,  hydrogen  is  evolved  violently  at  the  point,  and
the  electrolysis  can  be  kept  up  indefinitely  by  means  of  this  electro-
motive force.  We  have  here  the  reverse  of  the  gas  battery  on  p.  711.
But  if  a  large  platinum  plate  charged  with  hydrogen  is  used  as  cathode
and  opposite  it  a  small  platinum  point  as  anode,  oxygen  bubbles  do  not
form  until  the  potential  has  reached  1*66  volt,  that  is  when  the
decomposition  potential  of  hydroxyl  ions  is  exceeded  and  the  electro-
lysis only  takes  place  freely  with  still  higher  electromotive  force,  by
means  of  which  the  S04  ions  are  discharged.  The  doubly  charged
oxygen  atoms  are  present  in  such  small  quantity  that  it  is  not  possible
to  keep  up  any  considerable  electrolysis  by  their  means,  whereas
hydrogen  ions  are  abundant  and  consequently  can  be  discharged  in
large  quantities  as  soon  as  the  potential  rises  sufficiently  high.  The
circumstances  are  more  favourable  in  the  case  of  the  hydroxyl  ions,
whose  concentration  is  much  greater  than  that  of  the  doubly  charged
oxygen  ions,  but  in  order  to  electrolyse  freely  the  potential  must  be
raised  till  both  at  the  cathode  and  anode  ions  present  in  large
quantities  can  be  discharged.

In  electrolysing  lead  salts  it  was  observed  that  at  the  cathode  lead
is  precipitated,  at  the  anode  lead  peroxide.  According  to  the  views  of
Liebenow  l  this  is  a  case  of  primary  electrolysis,  since  he  supposes  lead
salt  to  be  hydrelytically  dissociated  according  to  the  equation

Pb  +  2H20  =  Pb02  +  4H.

As  a  matter  of  fact  compounds  like  Pb00Na2,  Pb02Ca,  and  so  on,  are

1  Zeitschr.f.  Elektrochem. ,  2.  420  (1895-96).

736  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  iv

known.  If  a  solution  of  lead  salt  is  electrolysed  in  presence  of  a
copper  salt,  copper  comes  down  on  the  cathode  instead  of  lead,  because
copper  has  a  much  smaller  decomposition  potential ;  all  lead  finally
appears  at  the  anode  in  the  form  of  peroxide  (Luckow's  process  for  the
electrolytic  determination  of  lead).  If,  on  the  other  hand,  oxalic  acid
is  added  to  lead  salt,  its  negative  ions  are  more  easily  discharged  at
the  anode  than  the  lead  peroxide  ions,  so  that  all  the  lead  appears
in  metalic  form  on  the  cathode.

In  the  accumulator  on  charge,  according  to  Liebenow's  view,  lead

ions  are  deposited  primarily  on  the  cathode,  Pb0.2  ions  on  the  anode.
Although  on  account  of  the  small  solubility  of  lead  sulphate  very  little
of  these  ionic  species  are  present  in  solution,  they  are  continuously
replaced  by  means  of  the  lead  sulphate  on  the  electrode.  It  is  only
when  the  lead  sulphate  is  used  up  that  the  sulphuric  acid  is  electro-
lysed, and  hydrogen  appears  at  the  cathode  and  oxygen  at  the  anode.
A  very  noticeable  phenomenon  was  investigated  by  Caspar!,1  who
found  that  visible  electrolytic  separation  of  hydrogen  at  a  platinised
plate  takes  place  at  a  potential  of  practically  zero  (O'OOo  volt),  but
with  other  metals  requires  a  special  excess-potential.  He  thus  found
the  values

Au  0'02,  Pt  (blank)  0'09,  Ag  0-15,  Cu  0-23,  Pd  0'48,  Sn  S'53,  Pb  0'46,
Zn  0-70,  Hg  0-78  volts.

In  consequence  of  this  excess-potential,  hydrogen  does  not  appear
on  the  cathode  of  an  accumulator  during  charge,  but  lead  is  separated,
and  it  is  only  when  the  lead  sulphate  is  reduced  and  the  potential  conse-
quently raised  that  gaseous  hydrogen  is  evolved.  It  can  therefore
be  shown 2  that  with  small  currents  lead  sulphate  is  much  more  easily
reduced  at  a  lead  electrode  than  at  a  platinum  electrode,  and  also  that
by  means  of  electrodes  with  high  excess-potentials  (especially  mercury
and  zinc)  it  is  possible  to  obtain  reduction  products  that  would  other-
wise be  very  difficult  to  prepare.3  Apparently  hydrogen  can  only  give
off  bubbles  when  the  electrodes  have  occluded  an  appreciable  amount ;
in  metals  which  occlude  very  little  hydrogen,  considerable  quantities
of  gas  must  first  be  generated  by  the  potential  before  any  formation
of  bubbles  can  take  place.  A  similar  phenomenon  may  be  expected
in  the  case  of  other  gases  which  can  be  produced  electrolytically  ;
oxygen  has  been  investigated  by  Coehn  and  Osaka4  in  this  respect.
Nickel  behaves  in  a  remarkable  manner  in  this  respect,  since  oxygen
can  be  evolved  from  alkaline  solution  in  gaseous  form  at  about  1  "3
volt  against  hydrogen,  whilst  on  platinum  1-7  is  required.

1  Zeitschr.  physik.  C'hem.,  30.  89  (1899).

2  Nernst  and  Dolezalek,  Zeitschr.  f.  Elektrochem.ie,  6.  549  (3899-1900).

3  See  Tafel,  Ber.  deutsch.  chem.  Ges.,  33.  2209  (1900).

4  Zeitschr.  anoragan.  Chem.,  34.  68  (1903).

CHAP.  VIII  OSMOTIC  THEORY  737

Chemical  Application  of  the  Osmotic  Theory.  —  It  has  long
been  customary  to  draw  chemical  deductions  from  the  galvanic
potential  series  of  the  metals,  which  is  given  in  the  table  (p.  733),  and
which  is  now  seen  to  find  quantitative  expression  in  the  solution
pressures  or  the  decomposition  pressure  so  determined  ;  it  must  not,
however,  be  assumed  that  copper  is  always  precipitated  by  zinc.  On
the  contrary,  the  ionic  concentration  is  a  second  important  factor,  and
we  have  indeed  already  mentioned  (p.  730)  the  experiment  with  the
Daniell  cell  in  which,  under  suitable  conditions,  zinc  is  reduced  by
copper.

Similar  conclusions  may  be  drawn  as  to  the  decomposition  potential
of  the  anions  ;  thus  it  is  known  that  bromine  throws  out  iodine  from
solution  of  iodide,  and  the  chlorine  similarly  precipitates  bromine
quickly  and  very  completely  (how  complete  the  precipitation  is  may
be  easily  calculated  from  the  solution  pressure  according  to  principles
already  given).  We  have,  in  fact,  the  well-known  simple  reactions  —

Cl2  +  2Br  =  Br2+2Cl.

We  saw,  further,  that  chlorine  must  be  capable  of  evolving  oxygen
from  acid  solution,  but  not  so  bromine  or  iodine.  It  is  known,  how-
ever, that  the  evolution  of  oxygen  by  chlorine  takes  place  very
slowly,  unlike  the  rapid  deposition  of  bromine  by  chlorine.  This  need
not  surprise  us  in  view  of  what  has  gone  before  ;  for  the  chlorine,  in

order  to  pass  to  the  ionic  state,  must  replace  the  0  ions  that  are
present  in  excessively  small  quantities,  since  the  OH  ions,  which  are
more  abundant,  do  not  give  up  their  negative  charge  except  by  means
of  a  potential  0'3  volt  higher  than  that  of  chlorine.  So  far,  it  has
not  been  possible  to  obtain  oxygen  from  it.

One  of  the  most  interesting  reactions  is  the  decomposition  of  water
l>y  metals  with  foi'ination  of  hydrogen  ;  the  conditions  for  this  process
can  easily  be  deduced  from  the  foregoing  considerations  (p.  732).  The
electrical  forces  in  question  act  not  only  on  the  ions  of  the  metals  in
question,  but  also  on  all  the  positive  ions  present  ;  for  example,  on
the  hydrogen  ions  which  always  exist  in  aqueous  solution.  The
separation  of  hydrogen  ions  must  occur  as  soon  as  the  osmotic  pressure
of  the  hydrogen  ions  and  the  electrostatic  attraction  are  sufficient  to  overcome
the  electrolytic,  solution  pressure  of  hydrogen  at  atmospheric  pressure,  that  is,

ni /7T Q

we  must  have  ei>e2  or /.  i>_2}  where  the  index  1  refers  to  the

V C]L c2

metal  and  2  to  the  hydrogen,  and  nx  is  the  chemical  valency  of  the
metal  in  question.

We  see,  therefore,  that  the  favourable  conditions  for  decomposition
of  water  are  :  —

3B

738  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

1.  Large  osmotic  pressure  of  the  hydrogen  ions.

2.  Large  electrostatic  force,  that  is  great  solution  pressure  of  the
metal  and  small  opposition  pressure  of  the  ions  of  this  metal.

Potassium  decomposes  water  violently  under  all  circumstances  on
account  of  its  enormously  great  electrolytic  solution  pressure,  for  we
can  neither  make  the  osmotic  pressure  of  the  hydrogen  ions  small
enough,  nor  that  of  the  potassium  ions  large  enough  to  hinder  the
solution.  Zinc  possesses  large  enough  solution  pressure  to  decompose
water  in  acid  solution,  but  it  is  incapable  of  doing  so  when  the  con-
centration of  the  zinc  ions  is  sufficiently  great,  or  that  of  the  hydrogen
ions  sufficiently  small  ;  for  example,  when  zinc  is  dipped  into  a  neutral
solution  of  zinc  sulphate.  In  strongly  alkaline  solutions  it  is  again
capable  of  decomposing  water  rapidly,  although  the  concentration  of
the  hydrogen  ions  is  exceedingly  small,  because  in  this  case,  through
formation  of  zincates,  the  concentration  of  the  zinc  ions  is  very
greatly  reduced.  Mercury,  in  spite  of  its  small  solution  pressure,
evolves  hydrogen  from  strong  hydrochloric  acid  because  the  concen-
tration of  the  hydrogen  ions  is  large,  and  that  of  the  mercury  ions
very  small,  owing  to  the  insolubility  of  mercurous  chloride  and  the
presence  of  considerable  quantities  of  chlor  ions.  Copper,  whose  ions,
as  we  have  already  seen,  are  very  strongly  dissolved  by  platinum
cyanide,  gives  off  hydrogen  violently  in  such  solution,  despite  its
alkalinity.

The  preceding  considerations  apply,  of  course,  only  to  reversible
formation  of  hydrogen,  which,  however,  we  can  always  produce  when
the  metal  in  question  is  surrounded  with  platinum  wire  (best  platin-
ised); otherwise  formation  of  hydrogen  only  takes  place  when

where  ?j  is  the  gas  potential  given  on  p.  736.  The  sponge-like  elec-
trode of  an  accumulator  in  moderately  concentrated  sulphuric  acid
gives  off  no  hydrogen,  although  here  e1>e.7,  it  does  so  as  soon  as  it  is
touched  with  a  platinum  wire.  In  very  concentrated  acid  it  boils
spontaneously,  because  the  above  inequality  is  satisfied.

These  considerations  for the formation of hydrogen by  metals
can be  at  once  applied  to the  electrolytic  separation  of metals. If

M! /

A/

v

—  <—  ,  the  metal  will be  deposited,  if A —  >  ->—  ,  hydrogen  is
Cj c2  v c3 c2

more  easily  evolved  electrolytically.  Hence  for  galvanic  separation
of  metals  it  is  necessary  to  make  first  the  concentration  of  the  metallic
ions  as  large  as  possible,  second,  that  of  the  hydrogen  ions  as  small  as
possible.  Now  in  aqueous  solution  the  concentration  of  the  hydrogen
ions  is  inversely  proportional  to  that  of  the  hydroxyl  ions  ;  hence
the  product  of  the  concentration  of  the  metallic  and  hydroxyl  ions
must  be  lessened  as  much  as  possible.  But,  according  to  the  laws

CHAP.  VIII  OSMOTIC  THEORY  739

of  solubility,  a  limit  is  set  to  it  by  the  solubility  of  the  hydroxide  of
the  metal;  hence  the  impossibility  of  separating  aluminium  or
magnesium  from  aqueous  solution  is  due,  not  only  to  the  great  solution
pressures  of  those  metals,  but  to  the  insolubility  of  their  hydroxides}

At  the  electrodes  the  elements  or  radicals  appear  deprived  of  their
electric  charges,  and  their  affinities,  which  in  the  ionic  state  are
saturated  by  the  electric  charges,  and  in  neutral  dissolved  molecules
by  those  of  the  other  constituent,  are  now  unsatisfied.  This  leads
most  frequently  to  the  combination  of.  two  similar  ions  :  2C1  gives
C12,  2H  gives  H2,  2HS04  gives  per  sulphuric  acid  H2S208  (according
to  F.  W.  Krister's  views),  a  case  which  has  recently  been  investigated
very  thoroughly  by  Elbs,  2KC03  gives,  according  to  Hansen  and
Constam,2  potassium  per  carbonate  K9C2O6.  Many  other  so-called
secondary  reactions,  that  is,  chemical  actions  between  ions  deprived  of
their  electrical  charges,  are  known.  The  application  of  electrolysis  to
oxidation,  reduction,  chlorination,  and  so  on,  belongs  here ;  the
methods  for  this  have  recently  been  carried  out  with  many  important
results  by  Gattermann,  Elbs,  Loeb,  and  others.3

The  pressure  under  which  the  ion  is  given  off  in  the  gaseous  form,
or  the  concentration  in  which  it  dissolves,  depend  essentially  on  the
potential  with  which  it  is  electrolysed ;  in  other  words,  the  active  mass
can  be  varied  arbitrarily  by  applying  varying  electromotive  force  of  polarisa-
tion. We  can  thus  cause  chlorine  to  appear  at  the  anode  in  a  state  of
more  than  homoeopathic  dilution,  or  under  pressures  which  are  to
be  reckoned  by  millions  of  atmospheres,  and  employ  it  chemically.  It
cannot  be  doubted,  therefore,  that  all  possible  stages  of  chlorination
may  be  reached ;  for  example,  in  organic  preparations,  by  changes  of
potential.  It  is  true  that  the  current  density,  to  which  attention  was
formerly  paid,  changes  with  the  potential,  and  is  closely  related  to
that  quantity,  but  it  depends  also  upon  the  form  of  the  electrodes  and
the  specific  resistance  of  the  electrolyte,  and  can  therefore  not  be
regarded  as  a  measure  of  the  capacity  of  a  current  to  chlorinate,
oxidise,  reduce,  etc.

The  principles  given  above  are  found  in  important  application  in
the  work  of  Haber ; 4  he  showed  that  the  reducing  action  of  electro-
lytic hydrogen  on  nitro-benzene  depends  solely  on  the  potential  at  the
cathode.  Thus  he  was  able  to  stop  the  reduction  at  the  stage  of  azo-
oxy-benzene  by  keeping  the  cathode  potential  constantly  under  a
certain  fixed  value.  Another  application  is  to  be  found  in  a  paper  by
Dony-H6nault,5  who  oxidised  quantitatively  alcohol  to  aldehyde,  that
is,  according  to  Faraday's  law,*by  keeping  the  anode  potential  during

1  See  also  Glaser,  Zeitschr.f.  Elektrochemie,  4.  355  (1898).

-  Zeitschr.f.  Elektrochemie,  3.  137,  445  (1897).

;}  See  also  especially  the  collection  of  Loeb,  Zeitschr.  f.  Elektrochemie,  2.  29*3.
4  Zeitschr.f.  Elektrochemie,  4.  506  (1898).
5  Ibid.,  6.  533  (1900).

740  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

electrolysis  under  a  certain  critical  value  ;  otherwise  acetic  acid  and
higher  products  of  oxidation  of  alcohol  appear.

Theory  of  Galvanic  Polarisation.  —  A  quantity  of  electricity
passed  through  a  voltameter  gives  changes  of  concentration  in  all
cases  ;  the  theory  of  galvanic  polarisation  is  therefore  simply  that  of
concentration  cells.1

The  changes  of  concentration  producing  electromotive  force  can
consist  either  in  a  change  in  the  concentration  of  the  ions  of  the
electrode  metal  or  in  a  change  in  the  substance  occluded  by  the
electrodes.  We  have  an  instance  of  the  former  in  the  electrolysis  of
sulphuric  acid  with  mercury  electrodes.  If  a  quantity  of  electricity  is
passed  through  this  voltameter  the  concentration  of  the  mercuro-ions
at  the  cathode  is  reduced,  at  the  anode  increased,  hence  we  have  a
potential  difference  amounting  to  (p.  730)

Since  —  can  be  made  extremely  large,  considerable  back  electro-

^2

motive  force  may  be  produced  in  such  cases,  and  for  a  given  quantity
of  electricity  the  change  of  concentration  produced  will  be  greater
the  smaller  the  concentration  of  the  ions  of  the  electrode  metal  in  the
first  place.  We  have  an  instance  of  the  second  case  in  the  electrolysis
of  sulphuric  acid  between  platinum  plates;  since  these  are  charged
with  oxygen  through  the  air  they  may  be  regarded  as  reversible  with
respect  to  oxygen  ;  and  since  the  concentration  of  the  oxygen  ions  in
the  electrode  is  not  appreciably  altered  by  small  quantities  of  electricity,
the  most  important  concentration  change  is  that  in  the  occluded  oxygen.
The  back  electromotive  force  is  therefore

4 c.2

where  cx  and  c.2  are  the  concentrations  (active  masses)  of  oxygen  in  the
electrodes  ;  the  factor  -  depends  upon  the  fact  that  the  oxygen  mole-

cule is  electrochemically  quadri-valent.

Further  details  on  this  subject  belong  to  the  region  of  pure  physics.

For  further  literature  on  the  subject  of  the  osmotic  electro-
chemical theory  see  the  Jahrbuch  der  Elektrochemie,  edited  by
Danneel,  published  by  Knapp,  from  1895  onwards.

General  Theory  of  Contact  Electricity.2  —  The  general  prin-

1  See  also  Warburg,  Wied.  Ann.,  38.  321  (1889).

-  See  my  report,  "  Ueber  Beriihrungselektrizitat,"  supplement  to Wied.  Ami.,  1896,
Heft  8,  where  a  collection  of  literature  is  to  be  found.

CHAP,  vni  OSMOTIC  THEORY  741

ciple  by  means  of  which,  as  we  have  shown  in  this  chapter,  we  have
calculated  the  potential  differences  between  substances  may  be
formulated  as  follows.  We  attribute  to  the  ions  the  same  properties
as  to  electrically  neutral  molecules  ;  if  we  now  consider  any  phenomenon
which  involves  a  change  of  place  of  molecules  (molecular  phenomenon),
then  the  same  process  applied  to  free  ions  will  usually  have  the  con-
sequence of  separating  anions  and  cations  ;  this  causes  a  potential
difference.  We  may  of  course  calculate  the  latter  if  we  know  the
laws  of  the  molecular  phenomenon  in  question.  On  account  of  the
enormous  electrostatic  capacity  of  the  ions  the  quantities  that  are
actually  separated  are  too  small  to  weigh.

Thus,  for  example,  the  theory  of  non-electrolytes  (molecular
phenomena)  leads  to  the  theory  of  potential  difference  between  dilute
solutions,  since  the  general  laws  of  diffusion  are  applicable  to  the
diffusion  of  electrolytes  (ionic  phenomena).  The  comparison  of  the
solubility  of  ordinary  substances  with  the  solubility  of  metals  leads  to
the  much  used  formula  for  the  potential  difference  between  metal  and
electrolyte.

A  further  example  may  be  briefly  noted.  If  a  solution  has
different  temperature  in  different  parts  the  dissolved  substance  will
travel  along  the  temperature  gradient,  a  phenomenon  observed  by
Soret.1  If  this  molecular  phenomenon  be  applied  to  the  solution  of
electrolytes,  and  we  suppose  that  Soret's  formula  is  different  for  the
different  ions  as  it  is  for  the  different  species  of  molecules,  we  arive  at
the  result  that  there  must  be  potential  differences  in  a  solution  of
varying  temperature.

It  may  easily  be  shown,  as  on  p.  367,  that  in  order  that  equal
masses  of  positive  and  negative  ions  should  move  along  the  temperature
gradient  the  equation

TT/dp dP  dT\ v/dp dP _,,dT\

Ul  ^  +  c +  ck  —  ]  =  V(  -=£  -  c  -y-  +  ck"  ,  -  I

\dx dx dx/ \dx dx dx/

must  be  satisfied,  where  T  is  the  variable  temperature  and  k'  and  k"
the  forces  which,  apart  from  osmotic  action,  drive  the  ions  along  the
temperature  gradient.  The  theory  which  van't  Hoff 2  gave  for  Soret's
phenomenon  puts  k'  =  k"  =  0,  which  however  is  not  always  true.  The
above  equation  can  of  course  be  utilised  for  the  case  of  any  number  of
dissolved  substances.  (See  the  thorough  investigation  of  electrolytic
thermo-elements,  by  W.  Duane.3)

If  we  consider  further  the  division  of  a  substance  between  two
solvents  (p.  485),  and  attribute,  as  we  may  according  to  all  analogies,
to  each  of  the  ions  a  specific  coefficient  of  distribution  between  two  sol

1  This  was  observed  before  Soret  (1881)  by  Ludwig,  as  early  as  1856.
2  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,  1.  487  (1887).
3 Wied.  Ann.,  65.  374  (1898).

742  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK IV

it  follows  that  the  ions  will  not  be  divided  between  the  phases  in
electrically  equivalent  quantities,  if  no  other  force  is  added  to  that
arising  from  the  existence  of  coefficients  of  distribution.  But  ions  in
the  interior  of  a  homogeneous  phase  must  be  present  in  electrically
equivalent  quantities ;  if  this  is  to  be  so  some  other  force  must  exist,
and  it  is  easily  seen  that  it  is  again  of  an  electrostatic  character,  that
is,  there  must  be  in  general  a  potential  difference  between  two  homo-
geneous phases.  Such  phenomena  must  be  found  in  the  occlusion  of
gases  by  electrodes,  and  in  the  precipitation  of  one  metal  on  another,  and
may  help  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  polarisation  as  well  as  the
behaviour  of  inconstant  cells.

The  above  theory  of  contact  electricity  may  be  applied  without
change  to  non-conductors  (for  example,  to  the  frictional  electricity
between  glass  and  silk  and  the  like),  since,  according  to  our  present
knowledge,  these  substances  are  merely  bad  electrolytes ;  there  is,
however,  the  difficulty  that  we  know  nothing  of  the  ions  in  such  cases.
From  the  observations  so  far  given,  however,  Coehn x  has  arrived  at  an
important  conclusion,  that  substances  of  high  dielectric  constant  become
positive  by  contact  with  substances  of  lower  dielectric  constant.

It  is  only  a  short  step  to  apply  the  same  treatment  to  the  electrons
which  we  assume  on  p.  407  in  the  explanation  of  metallic  conduc-
tion. If  the  metals  are  regarded  as  solvents  containing  positive  and
negative  electrons  in  varying  concentration,  then  a  consideration  of  the
changes  of  position  which  they  undergo  in  various  circumstances  would,
like  the  ionic  theories  already  developed,  lead  to  a  theory  of  potential
difference  in  different  metals  or  metals  of  differing  temperature.
1  Wied.  Ann.,  64.  217  (1898).

CHAPTER IX

PHOTO-CHEMISTRY

The  Action  of  Light. — When  the  ether  vibrations  pass  by  a
material  system,  they  occasion  two  results  which  are  essentially
different.  Thus,  on  the  one  hand,  they  raise  the  temperature  of  the
system,  their  energy  being  partially  converted  into  heat ;  and,  on  the
other  hand,  they  occasion  chemical  changes,  which  of  course  occur  at
the  expense  of  a  certain  amount  of  the  energy  of  the  vibration.

We  have  already  considered  the  first  class  of  phenomena  (p.  336),
under  the  subject  of  the  absorption  of  light.

The  description  of  the  second  class  of  phenomena,  which  may  be
called  the  photo-chemical  absolution  of  light,  will  form  the  subject  of  this
chapter.

The  ordinary  absorption  of  light  is  a  very  general  phenomenon.
Every  substance,  in  a  way  which  varies  largely  with  its  own  particular
nature,  and  with  the  wave-length  of  light,  can  change  the  energy  of
the  ether  vibrations  partially  into  heat ;  and  this  can  be  done  com-
pletely if  the  layer  permeated  has  a  sufficient  thickness.

But  the  chemical  action  of  light,  so-called,  takes  place  only  in
exceptional  cases,  since  it  is  rather  rare  that  illumination  is  able  to
exert  an  influence  on  the  reaction  velocity  of  a  system  which  is  in
process  of  change,  or  on  the  state  of  equilibrium  of  a  system  which  is
in  chemical  repose.

Of  course  it  is  not  impossible  that  the  photo-chemical  action  may
be  very  general ;  and  that  it  may  usually  be  too  slight  to  be  noticed
under  the  ordinary  conditions  of  research.

The  chemical  action  of  sunlight,  such,  e.g.,  as  that  shown  in  the
bleaching  process,  in  the  production  of  the  green  colour  of  plants,  in
its  destructive  effect  on  certain  colours  of  the  artist, — all  this  has  been
known  since  antiquity.  But  only  recent  investigation  has  taught  us
that  numerous  compounds  are  sensitive  to  light,  and  has  convinced  us
that  here  we  are  dealing  with  a  mutual  action  between  ether  vibrations
and  chemical  forces,  which  is  deserving  of  the  greatest  interest.

It  would  take  too  much  space  to  enter  into  the  detailed  enumera-

743

744  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

tion  and  description  of  the  particular  phenomena  belonging  here,
and  therefore  we  will  only  refer  to  the  very  complete  bibliography
prepared  by  Eder.1  But  it  should  be  emphasised  that  gases  (as,  e.g.,
the  explosive  mixture  of  hydrogen  and  chlorine),  and  liquids  (as,  e.g.,
chlorine  water,  which  gives  up  oxygen,  under  the  influence  of  light),
and  solids  (as,  e.g.,  white  phosphorus,  which  changes  to  the  red
modification  in  the  light ;  or  cinnabar,  which  turns  black), — all  these
gases,  liquids,  and  solids  respond  to  the  ether  vibrations.

Also  the  photo-chemical  process  may  consist  either  in  the  production
of  a  compound,  as  is  the  case  with  "  chlorine  knall-gas  " ;  or  it  may
consist  in  the  decomposition  of  a  compound,  as  is  seen  in  the  decom-
position of  hydrogen  phosphide,  with  the  separation  of  phosphorus.

.  Although,  on  the  one  hand,  this  kind  of  light  action  exhibits  the
greatest  variety  in  the  photo -chemical  processes,  according  to  the
nature  of  the  system  illuminated,  —  and  in  contrast  to  ordinary
absorption  which  always  develops  heat, — yet  like  ordinary  absorption
is  highly  dependent  upon  the  wave-length  of  the  light  used.  Thus
we  know  photo-chemical  reactions  which  are,  on  the  whole,  occasioned
by  ultra-violet  rays,  or  by  the  visible  rays,  or  by  the  ultra-red  rays
of  the  spectrum,  respectively ;  and  in  all  cases  the  intensity  of  the
photo-chemical  action  depends  in  the  highest  degree  upon  the  wave-
length of  light,  a  fact  which  should  be  given  proper  attention  in
researches  of  this  sort.

After  a  discussion  of  all  the  material  up  to  date,  Eder'2  comes  to
some  general  empirical  laws,  the  essentials  of  which  will  be  given  in
the  following  statements.

1.  Light  of  every  wave-length,  from  the  infra-red  to  the  ultra-
violet, is  capable  of  some  sort  of  photo-chemical  action.

2.  Only those rays are effective which are absorbed by the
system ;  so  that  the  chemical  action  of  the  light  is  closely  associated
with  the  optical  absorption  ;  but  conversely,  optical  absorption  does
not  always  necessitate  chemical  action.

3.  According  to  the  nature  of  the  substance  absorbing  the  light,
every  kind  of  light  may  act  in  an  oxidising  or  in  a  reducing  way  ;
indeed  it  may  be  said,  in  general,  that  red  light  has  usually  an  oxidising
effect,  and  violet  light  a  reducing  effect,  on  the  metals. The  case  where
red  light  may  also  exert  a  reducing  effect,  occurs  in  the  latent  light
action^  of  silver  salts. Thus  far  no  oxidising  action  of  violet  rays  on
metallic  compounds  has  been  observed  with  certainty,

Violet  and  blue  light  usually  act  most  strongly  on  the  compounds

1  Handbuch der Photographic, Halle, 1884, p. 10  ; Fehling's ffanchvorterbuch,
under  Chemische  Wirkungen  des  Lichtes. See  further  M.  Roloff,  Zeitschr.  physik.  Chem.,
26.  337  (1898).

2  I.e.  p.  28  ;  and  Beibl.  zu  Wied.  Ann.,  4.  472  (1880).

3  For  the  various  applications  of  the  sensitiveness  of  silver  salts,  see  especially  the
text-books  of  photography,  by  Eder  (Halle,  1884  and  1885),  and  by  H.  W.  Vogel  (Berlin,
1878,  Supp.  1883.

CHAP.  IX  PHOTO-CHEMISTRY  745

of  the  metalloids  with  each  other  :  as,  e.g.,  on  "  chlorine  knall-gas,"  on
nitrous  acid,  on  sulphurous  acid,  and  on  hydriodic  acid l ;  yet  hydrogen
sulphide  solution  is  decomposed  more  quickly  by  red  light.

The  light  action  is  partly  oxidising  and  partly  reducing,2  according
to  the  nature  of  the  substance.  In  most  cases,  violet  light  exerts
the  strongest  oxidising  action  on  organic  compounds,  especially  the
colourless  ones.  Colourless  substances  are  oxidised  most  strongly  by
those  light  rays  which  they  absorb.

4.  Not  only  does  the  absorption  of  the  light  rays,  by  the  illumin-
ated substance  itself,  play  an  important  part ;  but  also  the  absorption
of  light  by  foreign  substances  mixed  with  the  principal  substance,  is
important ;  for  the  sensitiveness  of  the  main  substance  can  be  stimu-
lated for  those  rays  which  are  absorbed by  the  admixed  substance
(optical  sensitisation).

5.  A  substance  sensitive  to  light,  admixed  with  the  main  substance,
and  which  unites  with  one  of  the  products  resulting  from  the  photo-
chemical reaction  (as  oxygen,  bromine,  and  iodine),  tends  to  accelerate
the  reaction  velocity  to  such  an  extent  that  a  reversal  is  impossible.
This  may  be  also  regarded  as  a  consequence  from  the  law  of  mass-
action  (chemical  sensibilisation).

In  many  cases,  as  Roloff  observed  (Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  13.  327,  1894),
the  action  of  light  consists  in  the  transport  of  ionic  charges :  see  the
paper  of  the  same  author  quoted  on  p,  744.

Actinometry. — The  action  of  the  light  upon  a  chemical  system  is
the  greater,  the  more  intensive  the  ether  vibrations  underlying  this
influence.  In  the  quantitative  prosecution  of  any  selected  photo-
chemical process,  we  possess  a  means  for  measuring  the  intensity  of
the  chemically  active  rays.

All  those  pieces  of  apparatus  which  are  designed  to  measure  the
photo-chemical  intensity  of  light,  and  all  of  which,  collectively,  depend
upon  the  observed  changes  which  are  experienced  by  substances  which
are  sensitive  to  light,  and  when  under  the  influence  of  the  ether
vibrations, — all  such  pieces  of  apparatus  are  called  actinometers.  Inas-
much as  all  the  empirical  laws  of  photo-chemistry  thus  far  discovered,
have  been  ascertained  by  the  aid  of  actinometers,  therefore  the  most
important  of  these  will  be  enumerated  in  the  pages  immediately
following.

But  first  let  us  preface  a  general  remark  regarding  the  estimation
to  be  put  upon  the  figures  of  the  actinometer  for  the  intensity  of  the
light  action.

1  Not  all  of  the  illustrations  are  good,  as  hydrogen  is  certainly  a  gaseous  metal,  both
physically  and  chemically. — TR.

2  As oxidation  and reduction  are  relative  terms,  both occur where either  does  ;
and  when  we  say  that  a  substance  is  oxidised  or  reduced,  we  only  mean  that  we  are
ignoring  the  other  substances  present. — TR.

746  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

The  data  obtained  from  all  kinds  of  actinometers  are  to  be  considered,
respectively,  as  having  a  purely  individual  nature.

Thus  it  may  be  shown  in  two  ways  that  they  serve  to  give  only  a
relative  measurement  of  the  intensity  of  light.

For,  on  the  one  hand,  even  when  using  the  same  kind  of  light,  the
nature  and  reaction  velocity  of  the  chemical  process  occasioned  in  each
particular  case,  will  vary  according  to  the  varying  behaviour  of  the
system  which  is  subjected  to  the  action  of  light.

And,  on  the  other  hand,  when  light  is  used  which  consists  of  rays  of
very  different  wave-lengths,  the  data  of  the  same  actinometer  will,  by
no  means,  be  proportional  to  the  intensity  of  light ;  because  the  action
of  different  kinds  of  light  varies  greatly  according  to  the  wave-length.

And,  moreover,  the  eye  is  an  actinometer,  having  an  individual
nature  ;  because  apparently  its  sensitiveness  to  the  ether  vibrations
depends  upon  certain  photo-chemical  processes  which  are  occasioned
thereby.

The  results  of  the  [visual]  photometric  measurement  of  light  are
not  parallel  with  the  results  measured  by  means  of  the  actinometer  to
be  described  below ;  and  neither  of  these  are  parallel  with  the  results
of  the  thermometric  measurement  of  the  intensity  of  light,  and  the  latter
method  is  usually  regarded  as  the  absolute  measure  of  radiation.  It
would  perhaps  be  more  correct  to  regard  the  diminution  of  free  energy
— which,  to  be  sure,  is  unknown, — associated  with  the  change  of
radiant  energy  into  heat,  as  the  measure  of  the  intensity  of  light.

It  has  been  proved  that  the  results  obtained  by  several  actin-
ometers are  at  least  approximately  proportional  to  each  other.
Although  one  is  not  justified  in  drawing  even  an  approximate  con-
clusion regarding  the  photo -chemical  activity  of  two  light  sources
which  have  been  studied  only  in  an  optical-physiological  [visual]  way,
yet,  on  the  whole,  the  "  chlorine  knall-gas "  actinometer  and  the
"  silver  chloride "  actinometer  give  results  which  correspond  with
each  other.

The  Chlorine  "  Knall-gas  "  Actinometer. — This  depends  upon  a  dis-
covery of  Gay-Lussac  and  The"nard  in  1809,  regarding  the  action  of
light  on  the  combining  of  chlorine  and  hydrogen ;  in  strong  light  this
action  advances  with  a  velocity  which  results  in  an  explosion,  but  in
weak  light  it  progresses  gradually  and  steadily.  This  actinometer  was
first  constructed  by  Draper  in  1843,  but  it  was  brought  by  Bunsen
and  Koscoe  J  to  an  improved  form  suited  for  exact  measurement.  The
method  consists  in  measuring  the  diminution  of  a  volume  of  "  chlorine
knall-gas  "  (standing  over  water  and  kept  at  constant  pressure),  as  a
result  of  the  formation  of  hydrochloric  acid  which  is  absorbed  by  the
water.

Inasmuch  as  the  manipulation  of  this  apparatus  makes  unusually

1  Fogg. Ann.,  96.  96  and  373  :  100.  43  and  481  ;  1O1.  255  ;  108.  193  (1855-
1859).

CHAP.  IX  PHOTO-CHEMISTRY  747

large  requirements  on  the  patience  and  skill  of  the  observer,  therefore
Bunsen  and  Roscoe  later  turned  their  attention  to —

The  Silver -Chloride  Actino?neter.1 — In  this  the  time  required  to
darken  photographic  paper  until  a  definite  "  normal  "  shade  is  reached,
serves  as  a  measure  of  the  light  intensity.

The  Mercury- Oxidate  Adinometer. — A  solution  of  mercuric  chloride
and  ammonium  oxalate  will  remain  unchanged  an  indefinitely  long
time  in  the  dark ;  but  in  the  light,  C02  and  mercurous  chloride  are
developed  in  the  sense  of  the  equation,

2HgCl2  +  C204(NH4)2  =  Hg2012  +  2C02  +  2NH4C1.

Either  the  quantity  of  C02  set  free,  or  else  the  amount  of  mercurous
chloride  precipitated,  may  serve  as  a  measure  of  the  intensity  of  light ;
the  latter  gives  much  more  exact  results.

According  to  Eder,2  it  is  best  to  mix  two  litres  of  water  containing
80  g.  of  ammonium  oxalate,  with  1  litre  of  water  containing  50  g.  of
mercuric  chloride ;  some  of  this  is  then  poured  into  a  beaker  glass  of
about  100  c.c.  capacity,  which  is  "light  tight"  on  all  sides,  but  which
has  an  opening  in  its  cover.

Inasmuch  as  the  concentration  of  the  sensitive  solution  changes
during  the  illumination,  therefore  the  separation  of  the  mercurous
chloride  takes  place  with  an  increasing  slowness,  and  thus  does  not
directly  correspond  to  the  light  energy  introduced ;  and  therefore  it  is
necessary  to  apply  a  correction,  the  amount  of  which  can  be  taken
from  the  table  furnished  by  Eder.

Moreover,  elevation  of  the  temperature  is  favourable  to  the  action
of  light,  and  this  must  be  considered  in  quantitative  research.

This  apparatus  is  chiefly  sensitive  to  the  ultra-violet  rays.

Instead  of  mercuric  chloride  and  ammonium  carbonate,  in  a  similar
way,  we  may  make  use  of  the  oxalate  of  iron  or  uranium.

The  Electro-Chemical  Adinometer, — Let  two  silver  electrodes  which
have  been  chlorinised  or  iodised,  be  dipped  into  dilute  sulphuric  acid ;
then,  as  observed  by  Becquerel  in  1839,  an  electromotive  force  will  be
established  between  them,  as  long  as  one  electrode,  is  illuminated ;  the
current  will  fl.ow  in  the  solution  from  the  unlighted  to  the  lighted  pole.

The  strength  of  a  current,  as  read  by  means  of  a  sensitive  galvan-
ometer, will  serve  to  determine  the  intensity  of  light.  The  results
obtained  by  this  actinometer  are  approximately  parallel  with  those
obtained  in  photometric  ways.  The  most  useful  form  is  that  of
Kigollet,3  which  consists  simply  of  two  copper  plates,  slightly  oxidised
in  the  Bunsen  flame,  and  immersed  in  1  per  cent  solution  of  an
alkaline  haloid,  only  one  plate  being  exposed  to  the  light.

1  Pogg.  Ann.,  117.  529  ;  124.  353  ;  132.  404. Regarding  the  numerous  modi-
fications which  this  has  experienced  in  order  to  adapt  it  to  the  needs  of  practical
photography,  see  Eder,  Handbuch  der  P'hotographie,  1.  174  and/".

2  Wiener  Sitzungsber.,  80.  1879  ;  Handbuch,  1.  169.

3  Journ.  de  Phys.  [3],  6.  520  (1897).

748

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  IV

Photo-Chemical  Extinction. — Now  the  light  which  is  chemically
active,  performs  a  certain  amount  of  work  ;  and  therefore  it  is  to  be
expected — other  conditions  being  the  same — that  the  light  will  be
absorbed  to  a  greater  degree  when  it  occasions  or  accelerates  a  chemical
process,  than  when  such  is  not  the  case.

In  fact,  Bunsen  and  Roscoe  l  found  that  light  which  had  passed
through  a  layer  of  chlorine  knall-gas,  was  much  more  weakened  in  its
chemical  activity  (as  measured  by  the  chlorine  knall-gas  photometer)
than  when  it  had  only  passed  through  a  layer  of  pure  chlorine  of  the
same  thickness,  and  thus  had  had  no  opportunity  to  form  hydrochloric
acid.

In  both  cases  the  light  is  weakened  by  absorption  by  the  chlorine  ;
the  absorption  occasioned  by  the  hydrogen  can  be  neglected.  But  in
the  first  case  the  absorption  is  due  purely  to  optical  activity  ;  and
therefore  the  loss  of  energy  of  the  light  reappears  in  the  heat  which  is
developed.  But  in  the  second  case,  an  additional  fraction  of  the  light-
energy  is  consumed  in  performing  chemical  work,  which  thus  occasions
a  stronger  absorption.

This  phenomenon  was  called  by  Bunsen  and  Roscoe,  "photo-chemical
extinction  "  •  it  is  apparently  a  very  common  phenomenon,  and  it  has
surpassing  interest  for  our  conceptions  regarding  the  mechanism  of  the
chemical  action  of  light.

Photo-Chemical  Induction. — Another  very  remarkable  fact,  for
the  discovery  of  which  we  are  likewise  indebted  to  the  classical  in-
vestigations of  Bunsen  and  Roscoe,  is  the  so-called  "photo-chemical
induction  "  ;  by  this  is  meant  the  phenomenon  where  light  usually  acts
very  slowly  at  first,  and  attains  its  full  activity  only  after  a  lapse  of
some  time.

Thus,  with  the  illumination  of  a  constant  kerosene  lamp,  the
quantities  (S)  of  hydrochloric  acid  produced  in  single  minutes  (and  as
measured  by  the  displacement  of  the  water  filament  in  the  scale  tube
of  the  chlorine  knall-gas  actinometer),  are  given  in  the  following  table  ;
the  time  t  denotes  the  minutes  in  order.

t

s

1

t

8

1

o-o

7

14-6

2

1-6

8

29-2

3

0-5

9

31-1

4

o-o

10

30-4

5

0-5

11

32-4

6

2-1

As  is  obvious,  the  action  [which  at  first  is  very  slow]  begins  to  be
constant  only  after  about  nine  minutes ;  after  this  the  hydrochloric
1  Fogg.  Ann.,  101.  254  (1857).

CHAP.  IX  PHOTO-CHEMISTRY  749

acid  produced  is  proportional  to  the  product  of  the  time  and  the  light
intensity  ;  and  only  then  does  the  actinometer  become  suitable  for
measurements.  But  if  one  afterwards  allows  the  actinometer  to
remain  some  time  in  the  dark,  then  it  requires  a  renewed  illumination,
although  a  shorter  one,  in  order  to  bring  it  again  to  the  condition
where  it  gives  [constant]  results  which  are  proportional  to  the  product
of  the  intensity  of  the  light  and  the  duration  of  the  illumination.
But  if  the  apparatus  stands  as  long  as  half  an  hour  in  the  dark,  then
the  influence  of  the  preceding  illumination  vanishes  completely.1

Pringsheim  has  recently  succeeded  in  showing  the  probability  of
the  view,  that  the  phenomenon  of  induction  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the
formation  of  intermediate  compounds.2  Thus  the  fact  that  chlorine  knall-
gas  is  very  much  more  sensitive  to  light  when  moist  than  when  dry ;
and  also  that  it  is  extremely  difficult,  even  by  the  action  of  intense
light,  to  explode  the  mixture  when  it  is  very  carefully  dried, — these
facts  make  it  appear  probable  that  the  union  of  chlorine  and  hydrogen,
under  the  influence  of  light,  does  not  take  place  according  to  the
equation,

H2  +  C12=2HC1;

but  rather  that  the  union  of  the  reacting  substances  with  water  to
form  intermediate  compounds,  plays  an  important  part  in  the  process.

Although  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  obtain  any  exact  information
regarding  the  nature  of  these  intermediate  compounds  (which,  at  all
events,  are  only  produced  in  the  slightest  quantities),  yet  by  means  of
the  mere  assumption  that  such  compounds  are  produced  by  the  action
of  light,  and  that  they  take  part  in  the  reaction,  it  is  possible  to
account  for  the  phenomenon  of  induction.

Thus  let  us  suppose,  for  illustration,  that  the  chlorine,  under  the
action  of  light,  first  acts  upon  the  water  vapour,  according  to  the
equation

I. H20  +  C12  =  C120  hH2;

and  then,  in  the  second  phase  of  the  reaction,  that  the  resulting
compound  of  chlorine  and  oxygen  in  turn  decomposes  in  the  sense  of
the  equation

II. 2H2  +  C120  -  H20  +  2HC1.

In  this  way  we  can  explain,  on  the  one  hand,  the  catalytic  action
of  the  water;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  phenomenon  of  induction.
Thus  the  production  of  hydrochloric  acid  at  first  should  be  small ;  and
not  until  the  hypothetical  intermediate  compound  shall  have  been
found  in  sufficient  quantity,  can  the  second  phase  of  the  reaction
leading  to  the  production  of  hydrochloric  acid  become  prominent.

1  Marked  induction  is found in this photo-chemical reaction, CL,  +  CO  =  COCU
(Wildermann,  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  42.  257,  1903).

2  Wied.  Ann.,  32.  384  (1887).

750  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  IV

Moreover,  the  state  of  the  chlorine  knall-gas,  after  the  action  of
the  light  has  passed  by  the  preliminary  stage  of  induction,  is
characterised  by  the  stationary  concentration  of  the  hypothetical
intermediate  substance  ;  for  at  every  moment  it  would  be  produced,
according  to  equation  I.,  with  the  same  velocity  at  which  it  would  be
decomposed  according  to  equation  II.

Dixon  x  has  put  forward  the  very  suggestive  hypothesis  that  free
oxygen  atoms  are  the  intermediate  body,  according  to  the  equations

I. C12  +  H20  -  2HC1  +  O  ;
II. 0  +  H2  =  H20.

Moreover,  there  is  the  well-known  fact,  that  a  very  slight  pre-
liminary exposure  of  photographic  plates  makes  their  sensitiveness
much  greater  ;  and  also,  in  harmony  with  this,  that  "  under-exposed  "
plates  can  be  strengthened  by  a  slight  subsequent  exposure.  It  is
highly  probable  that  these  facts  must  be  regarded  as  analogous  to  the
photo-chemical  induction  of  chlorine  knall-gas.  Both  of  the  facts  just
mentioned  indicate  that  the  photographic  action  of  light  is  relatively
slow  in  the  first  moments  of  exposure  ;  and  that  it  is  some  time  before
the  state  of  maximum  sensitiveness  is  reached.2

The  precipitation  of*  calomel  in  Eder's  photometer  also  suffers  an
initial  retardation  ;  the  cause  of  this  photo-chemical  induction  is,  how-
ever, of  a  secondary  nature,  as  Eder  snowed ;  enough  calomel  must  be
formed  for  saturation  before  any  is  precipitated.

The  Latent  Light- Action  of  Silver  Salts.3  — The  so-called
"latent  light  action"  of  silver  salts  (p.  744)  has  both  great  theoretical
and  also  great  practical  interest ;  it  offers,  in  particular,  much  that  is
puzzling,  but  it  has  long  found  practical  application  in  photography.

All  of  the  photographic  methods,  from  the  "positives"  of  Daguerre
to  the  "collodion  emulsion"  and  the  "  dry-plate "  methods  (Avhich
latter  find  almost  universal  application  at  present) — all  of  these  depend
on  this  principle,  viz.,  the  light  is  not  allowed  to  act  upon  the  plate
until  a  visible  picture  is  formed,  but  the  light  action  is  interrupted  long
before  this  ;  the  image  is  then  "developed  "  or  called  forth,  by  suitable
treatment  of  the  plate  in  the  dark.

The  photographic  action  of  the  light  does  not  consist  in  a  marked
material  change  of  the  exposed  plate,  but  only  to  such  an  extent  that
the  different  parts  of  the  plate,  having  met  more  or  less  light  respec-
tively, react  with  correspondingly  greater  or  lesser  velocity  in  the
subsequent  treatment.

1  Z.  S.  phys.  Chem.,  42.  313  (1903).

2  See  the  researches  of  Abney,  Eder's  Jahrbuch,  1895,  pp.  123  and  149  ; Englisch,
Arch.  wiss.  Phot.,  1.  117  (1899).

3  See,  in  connection  with  this  section,  the  attractively  written  monograph,  "Chein.
Vorgiinge  in  der  Photographic,"  by  R.  Lnther,  Halle  (Knapp)  1899.

CHAP.  IX  PHOTO-CHEMISTRY  751

The  action  of  the  developer  produces  visible  changes ;  a  picture
appears,  and  the  chief  art  of  the  photographer  consists  in  the  proper
choice  of  the  time  of  "  exposure,"  and  in  interrupting  the  process  of
"  development "  at  the  right  moment.

In  order  to  preserve  the  picture,  the  remaining  substance,  which  is
sensitive  to  light,  and  which  has  not  been  fixed  by  the  developer,  must
be  removed  ("fixing").  For  this  purpose  use  is  commonly  made  of
some  suitable  solvent  which  removes  the  undecomposed  silver  salt.

A  distinction  must  be  made  between  physical  and  chemical  develop-
ment.

The  first  found  application,  e.g.  in  the  daguerreotype  ;  this  physical
development  consists  in  the  fact  that  mercury  vapour  is  most  quickly
precipitated  upon  those  portions  of  a  silver  plate  which  have  been
exposed  to  the  light,  the  plate  having  been  previously  slightly  iodised
on  the  surface.

The  image  is  formed  in  the  same  way  in  the  collodion  process,  as
silver  is  separated  from  a  solution  of  a  silver  salt  with  addition  of
reducing  agents,  where  illumination  occurs.  The  chemical  development
is  applied  in  the  modern  negative  process,  in  which  a  gelatine  film
impregnated  with  silver  bromide  is  illuminated  and  is  then  treated
with  reducing  agents  (aqueous  solution  of  potassium  ferro-oxalate,
alkaline  salts  of  amido-  or  polyphenols,  hydroquinone,  pyrogallol,
p-amidophenol,  etc.) ;  the  silver  haloid  in  the  plate  is  then  reduced  to
silver  most  quickly  at  the  illuminated  spots.  The  distinction  between
the  two  methods  is  a  purely  external  one,  for  in  all  cases  the  precipita-
tion of  the  solid  produced  by  developing  (mercury,  silver)  takes  place
more  rapidly  in  the  places  where  the  product  of  reaction  of  light
exists,  and  about  proportionally  to  the  amount  of  this  product.1  Only
the  material  for  depositing  silver  is  taken  from  the  photographic  layer
in  the  "  chemical "  process,  and  is  added  from  outside  in  the  "  physical."

Many  views  have  been  put  forward  as  to  the  chemical  nature  of
the  latent  action  of  light.  There  is  no  doubt  .that  the  changes  that
silver  haloids  undergo  on  illumination  is  a  reduction  with  formation
of  free  halogen;  but  the  nature  of  the  reduction  product  is  not  in
all  cases  known.  Direct  chemical  investigation  and  isolation  of  the
reduced  substance  has  not  been  accomplished,  and  is  not  promising,
on  account  of  the  minimal  quantity.  Further,  the  nature  of  the
binding  material — collodion,  gelatine,  albumen,  etc. — in  which  the
silver  haloid  is  embedded,  seems  to  affect  the  reduction.  It  has
recently  been  shown  by  Luther,2  for  films  of  silver  chloride  and
bromide  without  any  binding  material,  that  the  products  of  reduction
are  the  subchloride  Ag2Cl  and  subbromide  Ag2Br.

Under  ordinary  conditions  of  illumination  of  silver  halide  the
photo-chemical  reaction  is  indefinite,  inasmuch  as  the  halogen  set  free

1  Abegg,  Arch.  wiss.  Phot.,  1.  109  (1899).
2  Z.  S.phys.  Ckem.,  30.  628  (1899)  ;  and  Arch.  wiss.  Phot.,  2.  35,  59  (1900).

752  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

BOOK  IV

is  at  an  arbitrary  potential,  on  account  of  thickness,  resistance  to
diffusion,  moisture,  and  especially  the  chemical  nature  of  the  film.
Luther  showed  first  that  sufficient  exposure,  with  any  intensity  of
illumination,  produces  a  definite  equilibrium,  that  can  be  reached  from
either  side,  involving,  besides  the  solid  phases  of  unchanged  and
reduced  silver  salt,  a  definite  halogen  potential,  increasing  with  the
illumination.  This  shows  that  the  action  of  light  on  the  silver  haloids
is  reversible.  Further,  Luther  showed  that  the  latent  developable
image  produced  by  short  illumination  and  the  visible  image  that  takes
longer  to  produce  are  permanent  in  solutions  of  a  certain  halogen
potential,  and  are  destroyed  in  one  of  a  higher  potential,  so  that  they
apparently  consist  of  the  same  substance.  Finally,  this  halogen
potential  of  the  reduction  product  agrees  nearly  with  that  which  exists
over  silver  subchloride  and  subbromide,  so  that  these  substances
must  be  regarded  as  the  latent  and  visible  products  of  reaction  of  light
when  no  binding  material  is  used.

The  following  view  has  long  been  taken  of  the  process  of  develop-
ment. On  the  illuminated  spots  of  the  plates  small  particles  of
metallic  silver  are  deposited  by  reduction,  and  with  density  increasing
with  the  intensity  of  the  light ;  but  always  in  such  small  quantity
that  no  visible  change  occurs  in  the  substance  of  the  plate.  When  the
plate  is  put  in  the  developer  .those  invisible  silver  particles  act  as
nuclei  for  precipitation  of  silver,  just  as  a  small  crystal  brings  about
crystallisation  in  a  supersaturated  solution.  The  denser  the  silver
particles  at  any  spot  the  denser  will  be  the  deposit  of  silver  during
development.

This  theory  requires  slight  modification,  on  the  view  that  the
latent  image  does  not  consist  of  metallic  silver.  It  may  be  supposed
that  the  silver  sub-halide  is  easily  reduced  by  the  developer,  and  the
silver  nuclei  thus  produced  serve  for  further  deposit.

There  is  much  uncertainty  in  the  chemical  theory  of  ordinary
photographic  preparations,  which  contain  the  silver  haloid  in  various
binding  materials,  although  steps  towards  an  explanation  have  been
made  by  Luggin.1

Moreover,  a  further  very  remarkable  discovery  was  made  by  H.
W.  Yogel  (1878).  According  to  this,  photographic  plates  may  be
made  much  more  sensitive  by  intermixture  with  slight  traces  of
organic  colouring  substances,  and  the  plates  are  usually  especially
sensitive  for  the  kinds  of  light  absorbed  by  the  particular  colouring
substances  (optical  sensitisatian).  And  thus,  as  desired,  plates  may  be
prepared  sensitive  to  yellow  or  red  light,  etc.

Thus  far,  no  theoretical  explanation  has  been  given  for  this
phenomenon.  A  thorough  investigation  of  this  subject  by  E.  Yogel 2
has  led  to  the  result  that,  of  the  eosin  colours,  erythrosin  and  di-iodo-

1  Zeits.phys.  GJiem.,  14.  385  (1894)  ;  23.  577  (1897).
2 Wied.  Ann.,  43.  449  (1891).

CHAP.  IX  PHOTO-CHEMISTRY  753

fluorescein  work  best ;  and  that,  in  general,  those  substances  "  sensitise  "
best  which  are  themselves  most  sensitive  to  light.  The  sensitising
action  increases  in  a  striking  way  with  the  diminution  of  fluorescence.

The  Laws  of  Photo-Chemical  Action.  — Apparently  there  is
no  difference  between  the  visible  rays,  and  those  which  are  chemically
active,  and  probably  also  the  rays  of  great  wave-length  (such  as
those  produced  by  electrical  agitation  of  the  ether,  Maxwell  and  Hertz),
except  the  differences  of  wave-length  ;  all  of  these  must  be  regarded  as
occasioned  by  the  transmission  of  disturbances  developed  in  the
luminiferous  ether.  And  therefore  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
chemically  active  rays  should  be  refracted,  reflected,  and  polarised,  like
all  other  rays  ;  that  their  intensity  should  diminish  as  the  reciprocal
of  the  square  of  the  distance  from  the  point  of  origin  (i.e.  origin  of  the
light) ;  and  that  if  an  absorbing  substance  should  be  placed  in  the  path
of  these  rays,  their  photographic  action  should  be  weakened  according
to  the  same  laws  as  those  for  optical  rays,  etc.,  etc.  And,  as  a  fact,
the  test  of  these  laws  has  given  the  anticipated  results.1

Moreover,  abundant  research  has  led  to  the  result,  that  the  action
in  the  illumination  of  a  photographic  system,  is  conditioned  solely  by
the  amount  of  the  impinging  light ;  and  it  is  immaterial  whether  the
time,  in  which  the  same  number  of  similar  vibrations  are  introduced
to  the  system,  is  the  same  or  not.  This  law  is  usually  formulated
thus.

When  light  of  the  same  kind  is  used,  the  photo-chemical  action
depends  solely  upon  the  product  of  the  intensity  and  the  duration  of
exposure.

Thus  Bunsen  and  Roscoe  2  proved  in  the  very  sharpest  way  that
the  time  required  for  the  development  of  the  normal  colour  on  their
sensitive  paper  was  proportional  to  the  number  of  light  waves  which
struck  the  paper  in  a  second ;  by  changing  the  cross-section  of  the
aperture  through  which  the  sunlight  entered,  it  varied  precisely
according  to  the  way  indicated.  A  corresponding  proof  was  given  by
Goldberg  3  for  the  oxidation  of  quinine  by  chromic  acid.

The  Theory  of  Photo-Chemical  Action. — Thus  far,  only  vague
surmises  have  been  expressed  regarding  that  mechanism,  by  dint  of
which  the  energy  of  the  vibrations  of  the  luminiferous  ether  is  applied
to  the  performance  of  chemical  work.  But,  in  consideration  of  the
fact  that,  in  the  sense  of  the  later  views,  the  light  vibrations  are  pro-
duced by  electric  agitations,  therefore  it  is  an  immediate  inference  to
suppose  that  in  the  chemical  action  of  light  we  are  dealing  with
phenomena  which  are  not  far  removed  from  the  formation  and  decom-
position of  chemical  compounds  under  the  influence  of  the  galvanic

1  See  especially  the  investigations  of  Bunsen  and  Roscoe.

2  Pogg.  Ann.,  117.  536  (1862).
3  Z.  S.  physik.  Chem.,  41.  1  (190'2;.

3c

754  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  iv

current.  But  it  is  possible  that  the  time  to  advance  from  this  stand-
point to  hypotheses  of  a  special  nature,  will  not  arrive  until  our  views
regarding  the  mechanics  of  the  light  process  shall  have  become
clearer  themselves,  and  also  shall  have  been  worked  out  with  more
completeness.

But  the  principles  which  the  formal  mathematical  description  of  the
course  of  the  reaction  taking  place  under  the  influence  of  light,  must
follow, — these  principles  may  be  ascertained.

Let  us  consider  any  homogeneous  system,  whether  liquid  or
gaseous,  in  which  a  reaction  occurs  according  to  the  general  scheme,
p.  430,  and  where  the  corresponding  reaction  velocity  is  given  by  the
expression

V  -  kClnic2n2  ...  -  k'c/  I'cg'V  .  .  .

Thus  the  action  of  light  simply  reduces  to  this,  viz.,  that  the  velocity
coefficients  k  and  k'  depend  upon  the  intensity  of  light;  and  it  is  an
immediate  inference  to  suppose,  as  some  experimental  facts  indicate,1
that,  for  the  same  kind  of  light,  the  changes  of  these  coefficients  follow  in
proportion  to  the  intensity  of  the  light.

This,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  is  the  mathematical  description  of  the
photo-chemical  process.  But  it  must  be  observed  in  applying  this
calculation,  that  the  light  intensity  of  the  system  varies  from  point  to
point,  on  account  of  the  [local]  optical  and  photo-chemical  absorption
of  the  light  rays  ;  and  therefore  k  and  k'  become  functions  of  place.

But  this  requires,  as  a  still  further  complication,  that,  as  a  result
of  the  varying  reaction  velocities,  there  must  also  result  differences  of
concentration  in  the  system,  which  will  be  equalised  by  diffusion — a
point  which  should  be  particularly  observed  in  the  theory  of  liquid
actinometers.

The  relations  are  very  simple,  if  the  light  intensity  of  the  system
is  regarded  as  constant ;  and  also  if  the  reaction  advances  almost  to
a  completion,  so  that  k'  =  0.  These  conditions  were  fulfilled  in  Witt-
wer's  2  researches,  who  investigated  the  velocity  of  the  action  of  dissolved
chlorine  upon  water,  under  the  influence  of  light.  In  this  special  case,  the
preceding  general  equation  reduced  simply  to

TT dc i
V=  -  ji  =  kc,

dt

Here  c  denotes  the  concentration  of  the  chlorine ;  and  in  fact  it
coincided  very  well  with  the  values  observed.3

According  to  the  change  experienced  by  the  velocity  coefficients  of
the  two  opposed  reactions,  the  action  will  take  place  either  with  or
against  the  sense  of  the  chemical  forces  which  occasion  the  reaction.

1  See  Wilderrnann's  measurements  (p.  748).

2  Pogg.  Ann.,  94.  598  (1855).
3  See  also  Lemoine,  Cotn.pt.  rend.,  112.  936,  992,  1124  (1891).

CHAP.  IX  PHOTO-CHEMISTRY  755

In  the  former  case,  the  light  will  have  a  decisive  tendency  ;  i.e.  it  will
tend  to  accelerate  the  velocity  with  which  the  system  strives  to  reach
the  state  of  equilibrium.  In  the  second  case,  the  state  of  equilibrium
will  be  displaced,  and  therefore  a  certain  amount  of  work  will  be  performed
against  the  chemical  forces.

An  important  step  has  been  taken  by  Luther  (p.  751)  in  the
experimental  study  of  the  latter  case,  which  is  also  of  great  theoretical
importance.1

The  foregoing  considerations  do  not,  of  course,  exclude  the  supposi-
tion that  the  mechanism  of  light  action  may  be  something  quite
different  to  a  spontaneous  chemical  process.  M.  Bodenstein2  has
given  a  good  example  of  this.  The  decomposition  of  hydriodic  acid  in
the  light  is  a  unimolecular  reaction,  whereas  its  spontaneous  decom-
position is  birnolecular.  In  the  first  case  the  reaction  is

HJ  =  H  +  J,
in  the  second

2HJ  =  H2  +  J2.

Another  important  difference  between  photo-chemical  and  ordinary
reactions  is  that  the  velocity  of  the  former  increases  but  little  with  rise
of  temperature,  while  that  of  the  latter  increases  enormously.3  We
must  therefore  riot  regard  the  light  action  as  a  direct  loosening  of  the
atoms  in  the  molecule,  like  that  effected  by  heating ;  rather  the
primary  effect  must  be  some  action  on  the  luminiferous  ether,  and
suggests  that  ionisation,  as  mentioned  in  Book  III.  Chap.  IX.,  plays  a
part  in  photo-chemical  processes.

That  chemical  equilibrium  must  be  affected  by  illumination  follows
from  the  change  in  the  thermodynamic  potential  of  the  components  by
illumination,  as  may  be  most  clearly  deduced  from  the  electromagnetic
theory  of  light;  it  was  shown  on  p.  697  that  electrification  and
magnetism  alter  the  thermodynamic  potential  and  the  action  of  light
waves  is,  according  to  the  theory,  that  of  rapidly  alternating  electric
(or  magnetic)  fields.  These  actions  are,  however  (on  account  of  the
smallness  of  the  pressure  of  radiation),  too  minute  to  affect  equilibrium,
or  accelerate  reaction,  sensibly.  This  seems  to  exclude  the  possibility
of  referring  photo-chemical  action  to  them,  as  Luther 4  attempted ;
other  experiences  also  contradict  this  view.  Clearly  in  photo-chemical
reaction  we  have  to  do  with  phenomena  of  resonance,  possibly  similar
to  those  of  optical  absorption.

The  question  regarding  the  amounts  of  the  light  which  are  effective
in  each  particular  case,  in  one  sense  or  the  other,  these,  for  the  most

1 Work  is,  of  course,  always  done  against  chemical  forces  when  the  light-action  is
reversed  in  the  dark  ;  see  examples  by  Marckwald  (Z.  S.  physik.  Ckem.,  30.  140,  1899).
*  Z.  $.  physik.  Ckem.,  22.  23  (1897).

3  See  the  work  of  Goldberg,  mentioned  on  p.  753.

4  Z.  8.  physik.  Ckem.,  30.  628  (1899).

756  THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY  BOOK  iv

part,  still  await  their  solution.  The  great  importance  of  all  this  may
perhaps  best  be  made  clear  by  the  hint  that  perhaps  the  only  processes
by  means  of  which  the  energy  of  the  sun's  rays  can  be  stored  up  as
utilisable  work  (the  product  of  which  constitutes  the  object  of  strife
on  the  part  of  the  animal  world)  are  the  photo-chemical  processes.

And  therefore,  as  emphasised  by  Boltzmann,1  the  strife  is  not
for  the  component  substances,  for  these  component  substances  of  all
organisms,  as  air,  water,  and  earth,  are  abundant ;  neither  is  the  strife
for  energy  as  such,  for  this  occurs  in  abundance,  as  the  heat  content  of
the  matter  of  our  environment ;  but  the  strife  is  for  the  free  energy
available  for  the  performance  of  work.  This  is  accumulated  in  the  pro-
ducts of  the  plant  world  from  the  sunlight,  just  as  electrical  energy  is
stored  in  an  accumulator.

The  problem  of  the  relations  between  heat,  and  electrical  and
chemical  energy,  has  been  treated  in  the  two  preceding  chapters  of
this  book ;  and  now  it  may  be  ventured,  as  a  final  remark  regarding
the  capacity  of  radiant  energy  for  transformation  into  chemical  energy,  that
this  doubtless  has  great  significance,  and  its  accomplishment  will  mean
a  long  step  forward.  And  when  this  shall  have  once  been  accomplished
by  theoretical  chemistry,  then  side  by  side  with  the  doctrine  of  the
material  changes  of  nature  (which  has  for  the  most  part  claimed  the
interest  and  research  of  chemists)  will  be  recognised,  in  complete
equality,  the  doctrine  of  the  transformations  of  energy.

1  Der  zweite  Hauptsatz  der  mech. Warmeth.  (the  second  law  of  thermodynamics).
Vortrag.,  Wien,  bei  Gerold,  1886,  p.  21.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS

Abnormal  reactions,  536
Absolute  temperature,  41

units,  4

zero,  204

zero,  reaction  at,  687
Absorbed  gas,  catalytic  action  of,  579
Absorption  of  gases,  480

of  light,  336

law  of,  153

Accumulator,  lead,  715,  736
Acetic  acid,  conductivity  of,  498

freezing  point,  71

and  sodium  acetate,  505

solutions  in,  269

solution  in  benzene,  482
Acid-alkali  cell,  508
Acids  and  bases,  strength  of,  516

effect  of  pressure  on,  666
Actinometry,  745
Action  and  reaction,  667
Active  mass  of  bases,  555

of  solvent,  460
Additive  properties  of  salt  solutions,  380

property,  105,  342
Adiabatic  expansion,  50

process,  27
Adsorption,  129
Affinity,  129,  278,  423,  432,  689,  691,  713

of  acids  and  bases,  501,  519
After  e fleets  in  solids,  461
Alcohol  and  acetic  acid,  447
Alkaloids,  relative  strength  of,  452
Allotropic  transformation,  633
Allotropy,  273

Alloys,  molecular  weight  in,  402
Ammonia  compounds,  dissociation,  469

dissociation  of,  364,  672

saponification  by,  556
Ammonium  carbamate,  472

chloride,  652

cyanate,  572

hydrosulphate  dissociation,  471

nitrite,  decomposition  of,  538
Amorphous  body,  75

state,  98

Analogous  reactions,  287
Anthracene  picrate,  478,  494
Aqueous  solutions,  dissociation,  352
Areometric  method,  301
Arsine  decomposition,  562
Associated  liquids,  271,  324,  459
Atom,  32
Atomic  heat,  175

refraction,  309

volume,  189,  302

weight,  33,  173

weight,  calculated  from  gas  density,  255

weights,  regularity  of,  182,  189
Atomistic  theory  of  electricity,  390
Autocatalysis,  567
Autoxidation,  679

Avogadro's  law,  39,  174,  205,  247,  256
Axis,  crystallographic,  81

of  symmetry,  80

Band  spectrum,  194,  198
Baroscope  gas,  255
Bases,  saponifying  power  of,  552
Basicity  of  acids,  500
Batho-chromic  groups,  338
Benzene,  curve  of  fusion,  72

heat  of  vaporisation,  59

theory,  288

vapour  pressure  of,  61,  74
Benzoic  acid,  in  water  and  benzene,  486
Benzophenone,  transition  of,  97
Beryllium,  atomic  weight  of,  193
Bi-molecular  reactions,  550
Binary  dissociation,  498,  657
Blast  furnace,  process  of,  662
Boiling  point,  65

as  corresponding  temperature,  303

curves,  325

elevation  of,  262

regularities  of,  321

relations  of,  63

of  solutions,  139
Boyle's  law,  38

Cadmium  cell,  701

757

758

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

Calcium  carbide  formation,  470

carbonate,  652

dissociation,  463,  465,  467,  610
Calomel  electrode,  729
Calorie,  10,  595

Calorimeter,  thermo-chemical,  596
Calorimetric  bombs,  593
Cane  sugar,  inversion  of,  543
Carbon  compounds,  283

dioxide,  dissociation,  444,  661,  679

dioxide,  isotherms  of,  218

free  energy  of  oxidation  of,  694

heat  of  combustion,  593
Carbonyl  sulphide  and  water,  579
Catalysis,  566
Cathode  rays,  392
Centre  of  symmetry,  80
Change  of  state,  598
Characteristic  equation,  240

(Van  der  Waals'),  212
Chemical  energy,  689

forces,  275

kinetics,  law  of,  430

resistance,  674
Chloral  hydrate,  351
Chlorhydrines,  velocity  of  reaction,  565
Chlorides,  dissociation  of  divalent,  529
Chromophore,  340
Clark  cell,  701,  720
Cleavage,  93

Coexistence  of  liquid  and  vapour,  227
Cold-hot  tube,  678
Colligative  properties,  343
Colloidal  solutions  of  metals,  567
Colloids,  408,
Colour  and  dissociation,  347

of  salt  solutions,  384
Combining  weight,  172
Common  ions,  effect  of,  504,  527
Complete  equilibrium,  thermodynamics  of,

630

Complex  ions,  531,  536
Compound,  chemical,  29
Compressibility  of  gases,  54

laws  of,  55

of  liquids,  226
Concentration  cell,  714,  726

effect  on  potential,  734
Condensed  system,  631
Conduction,  electrolytic,  697
Conductivity  of  alloys,  405

electric,  358

maxima  of,  660

and  temperature,  658

thermal,  348
Configuration,  294
Conservation  of  energy,  8,  587
Constant  boiling  point  of  mixtures,  113

heat  summation,  law  of,  591

and  multiple  proportions,  law  of,  30
Constitution  of  molecule,  274

Constitution  and  reaction  velocity,  565
Constitutive  properties,  342
Contact,  potential,  721,  740
Continuity  of  state,  67
Continuous  spectrum,  194
Convergence  temperature,  260
Copper  sulphate,  hydrates  of,  469
Corresponding  states,  224,  230
Critical  coefficient,  326

data,  231,  326

density,  272

phenomena,  66

point,  221

point  of  mixtures,  119,  484
Cryohydrate,  126,  490
Cryohydrates,  use  of,  259
Crystal  form,  340
Crystalline  indices,  77

state,  74

structure  of  alloys,  405

systems,  83
Crystallisation,  and  molecular  theory,  241

separation  by,  145

velocity  of,  99,  582
Crystallography,  75
Crystals,  liquid',  97

physical  properties,  88

properties  of  mixed,  122
Current,  production  of,  725
Cyclic  process,  21

Daniell  cell,  700,  705,  710,  725
Density  of  gases,  248

of  molecules,  419

of  salt  solutions,  380

of  solids,  301

of  vapours,  248
Depolariser,  709
Dialysis,  414

Diamond  and  graphite,  634
Dielectric  constant, 307,  [313, 419, 459,
742

constant  and  dissociation,  373
Diffusion,  156

coefficient,  157

of  electrolytes,  365

of  gases,  103

of  gas  ions,  397

in  jellies,  413

of  liquids,  244

in  solids,  169

and  viscosity,  210
Dilution,  maximal  work  of,  131
Dispersion,  atomic,  310
Displacement,  vapour  density  by,  249,  253
Dissociating  force  of  water,  268

substance,  vapour  density  of,  251
Dissociation,  277,  345

constant,  438,  503

degree  of,  357

by  dissolving,  653

INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS

759

Dissociation,  heat  of,  651

of  solids,  467

in  solution,  350,  455,  477

in  stages,  500
Distillation,  fractional,  112
Distribution  of  a  base  between  acids,  511

between  two  solvents,  267

of  electrolyte  between  water  and  a  second
phase,  539

law  of,  481,  485,  494,  741
Double  bond,  289,  295,  302

decomposition,  533

decomposition  of  solid  salts,  637

salts,  120,  537

salt,  formation  of,  636
Draper's  law,  194
Dropping  electrode,  724
Duallstic  and  unitary  view,  279
Dyeing,  theory  of,  338,  492
Dystectic  mixture,  127

Effusion,  346
Elastic  forces,  69

molecules,  201
Elasticity,  92
Electro-affinity,  377

chemical  equivalent,  699

chemistry,  696
Electrode,  reversible,  708
Electrolysis,  laws  of,  356

theory  of,  732

Electrolytes  with  a  common  ion,  503
Electrolytic  conduction,  353

dissociation,  496

dissociation,  character  of,  365

gas,  616
Electromotive  force,  705,  709,  713

force  and  free  energy,  693
Electron,  391,  702
Electrostriction,  382,  407
Elements,  6,  33
Ellipsoid  of  dilation,  89
Enantiomorphic,  80
Endothermic  cell,  711

reaction,  589

reactions  at  high  temperature,  687
Energy  of  a  gas,  42

indestructibility  of,  6

internal,  7
Entropy,  27

Equations  of  motion,  12
Equilibrium,  chemical,  425

and  electromotive  force,  71 7

condition  of,  28

and  dissociation  constants,  455
Erg,  10

Esterification, 426, 447, 450, 494, 570,
585

in  benzene,  456
Esters,  catalysis  of,  547

dissociation  of,  450

Esters,  reduced  co-ordinates  of,  235
Etched  figures,  88

Ether  and  water,  mutual  solubility,  267
Ethyl  acetate,  heat  of  formation,  603

iodide,  velocity  of  reaction  of,  578
Ethylene,  pressure  and  volume  of,  213
Eutectic  mixture,  126,  627
Evaporation,  216,  677

separation  of  dissolved  substance  by,

separation  of  solvent  by,  136
Excess  of  dissociation  products,  442

potential,  736
Expansion  of  a  gas,  19
Explosions,  446,  675,  683

Faraday,  699

Ferments,  inorganic,  567

Ferric  chloride  and  water,  622

Ferrocyanide  membrane,  132

Flame,  446

conductivity  of,  378

Fluor-benzene  and  ether,  225

Fluorescence,  340,  387,  753

Free  energy,  26,  691

Freezing  mixture,  126
point,  depression,  257
point  of  dilute  solutions,  489
point  of  solutions,  142,  152,  170

Friction,  13

Frictional  resistance  to  diffusion,  ]  58

Fusible  alloys,  124

Galvanic  cells,  700
Gas  battery,  711,  731

constant,  40

constant,  exact  value  of,  215
Gaseous  laws,  deviation  from,  210
Gases,  37

density  of,  41

dissociation  of,  655

equilibrium  in,  434

evolution  from  solids,  470

expansion  of,  38

heat  of  solution,  654

kinetic  theory  of,  201

and  solids,  reaction  between,  473

specific  heat  of,  177

thermodynamics  of,  46,  52
Gas  ions,  394

ions,  condensation  by,  399

ions,  number  of  molecules  in,  399

mixtures,  100

pressure  on  kinetic  theory,  203
Gay-Lussac's  law,  38
Gelatination,  412
Geometrical  isornerism,  295
Glass-,  99
Gold,  diffusion  in  lead,  169

leaf,  thinness  of,  416
Graphical  method,  21

760

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

Haemoglobin,  681
Heat  capacity,  44

of  combustion,  317

of  dilution,  597

of  dissociation  of  acids,  605

of  dissociation  of  gases,  656

of  dissociation  in  solution,  658

of  evaporation,  326

of  explosion,  683

of  formation,  600

of  hydration,  652,  413

of  mixture,  118

of  neutralisation,  603

of  reaction,  587,  645,  650,  687,  704

of  reaction  and  thermal  capacity,  594

of  solution,  598,  653

of  sublimation,  73

of  transition,  97

production  in  galvanic  cell,  710
Heating  baths,  251
Hemihedral,  82
Hemimorphic,  82
Heterogeneity,  462
Heterogeneous  equilibrium,  464

system,  kinetics,  579
Hexachlor-keto-R-pentene,  572
Holohedral,  82
Homogeneity,  75
Homogeneous  equilibrium,  510

system,  427
Hydrate,  460,  469

theory,  525

Hydrated  salts,  meltiug  of,  635
Hydrates  of  chromium  chloride,  376

solubility  of,  477
Hydriodic  acid,  action  of  light  on,  755

acid,  formation  of,  276,  435

acid,  heat  of  formation,  593
Hydrocarbons,  heat  of  combustion,  318
Hydrochloric  acid,  vapour  pressure  of,  165

energy  of  formation,  706
Hydrocyanic  acid,  volatility,  540
Hydrogen,  deviation  from  Boyle's  law,  213

electrode,  731

first  spectrum  of,  195

ions,  acid  property,  517

ions,  catalytic  effect  of,  544

limiting  density,  214

permeability  of  iron  for,  169

production  of,  724
Hydrolysis,  352,  508,  519,  524,  543
Hydroxides,  insolubility  of,  739
Hydroxyl,  anomalous  dispersion  of,  315

ions,  basic,  518

Ice,  effect  of  pressure,  71
Iceland  spar,  velocity  of  reaction,  581
Ideal  concentrated  solutions,  166
Ignition  temperature,  676
Incomplete  equilibrium,  466

equilibrium,  thermodynamics  of,  642

Incomplete  reactions,  568
Indestructibility  of  matter,  5
Index-ellipsoid,  91
Indicators,  theory  of,  521
Indifferent  gas,  influence  of,  442
Indium,  chlorides  of,  281
Inertia  of  carbon  compounds,  285,  672
Intermolecular  action,  287
Internal  friction  {viscosity),  331

pressure^liquids,  216,  223

salt,  377

Inversion  of  cane  sugars,  velocity  of,  671
lodic  acid  and  sulphur  dioxide,  576
Ion,  355,  391,  698

absolute  charge  of,  421
Ionic  conductivity,  364

friction,  371
lonisation,  353
Ionising  agents,  395
Ions,  diffusion  of,  720

reactivity  of,  496

Iridium  vessel  for  vapour  density,  254
Iron  and  water,  reaction  between,  473
Isochore  of  reaction,  643,  649
Isochores,  linear,  237
Iso-dimorphism,  121,  123,  180
Iso-hydric  solutions,  505
Isomeric  ions,  387
Isomerism,  96,  273
Isomers,  boiling  point  of,  323

heat  of  formation,  602

number  of,  287
Isomorphism,  177
Isomorphous  mixtures,  120,  171,  470,  490

mixtures,  thermodynamics  of,  128
Isosmotic  solutions,  133,  156
Isotherm  of  a  condensing  vapour,  218

of  dissociation,  439

of  reaction,  643,  645
Isothermal  distillation,  115,  158

process,  18,  23

Isothermals,  projection  of  reduced,  226
Isotropy,  8,  90

Kilogrammeter,  10

Kinetic  energy  of  molecules,  202

equilibrium,  583

theory,  200
Kinetics,  chemical,  541

Lactone,  formation  of,  571
Latent  heat,  23,  598,  630

heat  of  evaporation,  238

light  action,  744

Law  of  distribution,  Maxwell's,  209
Lead  salts,  electrolysis  of,  736
Limiting  curves,  614
Line  spectra,  194
Liquid  cells,  700,  706

mixtures,  105

mixtures,  thermodynamics  of,  114

INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS

761

Liquids,  56

kinetic  theory  of,  215

molecular  weight  of,  270
Litre-atmosphere,  12,  587
Luminescence,  194

Magnetic  rotation  of  polarised  light,  316
Magnetism,  atomic,  317
Manocryometer,  71

Mass action, application  of  law  of,  468,
471

action,  law  of,  395,  423,  428,  432,  644,
647

of  electrons,  393
Maximal  work,  24,  647,  692

work,  principle  of,  685
Mean  free  path,  202,  208,  244

square  velocity,  209
Mechanical  equivalent  of  heat,  7
Medium,  influence  on  velocity  of  reaction,

577

Melting  curves,  detection  of  compounds  by,
628

point,  69,  328,  632

point  of  alloys,  404

point,  effect  of  pressure  on,  70

point  of  elements,  190

point  of  mixtures,  124
Mercury,  conductivity  of,  358

salts,  action  of  copper  on,  475

vapour  pressure  of,  64

vapour,  specific  heats  of,  207
Metal-ammonia  compounds,  375
Metallic  conduction,  401
Metals,  decomposition  of  water  by,  738

diffusion  of,  403

solution  of,  723

and  metalloids,  186
Metamerism,  275

Methyl  ether  hydrochloride,  dissociation,
441

iodide,  559

orange,  522

Migration  of  ions,  354,  360
Milk  sugar,  rotation  of,  572
Miscibility  of  crystals,  180
Mixed  acids,  dissociation  of,  506
Mixture,  100

of  constant  boiling  point,  484

kinetic  theory  of,  242

refraction  of,  109

thermodynamics  of,  243

vapour  pressure  of,  272
Mobile  equilibrium,  principle  of,  665
Mobility  of  ions,  361,  387

of  gas  ions,  396

of  ions  and  periodic  system,  387
Modulus  of  density  for  ions,  383

of  refractive  power  for  ions,  384
Molecular  attraction,  211

compounds,  282

Molecular  compounds,  Werner's  theory  of,
374

conductivity,  363

fractional  composition,  262

heat,  42

heat  of  solids,  176

hypothesis,  31

refraction,  306

state  of  dissolved  bodies,  155

surface  energy,  270

volume,  300,  302

volume  of  fluids,  222,  234

weight,  41,  247

weight  of  colloids,  409,  411

weight  determination,  258

weight  from  osmotic  pressure,  256

weight  in  mercury  solutions,  714
Molecules,  absolute  size  of,  416,  420

space  occupied  by,  418

volume  of,  211,  303,  306,  312
Multimolecular  reactions,  560
Multiple  point,  615,  619,  622
Mutual  solubility  of  liquids,  111,  484

Neutral  elements,  187
Neutralisation,  507,  518
heat  of,  590,  592,  603
Neutrality  of  carbon,  284
Neutral  salts,  effect  on  action  of  acids,  545
Neutron,  392
Nitril  and  isonitril,  290
Nitrogen  dioxide,  dissociation,  440,  656
Non-aqueous  solutions,  372
Non -reversible  processes,  673
Notation,  thermo-chemical,  588
Nuclei  of  crystallisation,  242,  582
Number  of  reacting  molecules,  564

Occluded  oxygen,  740

Ogdohedral,  82

Ohm's  law,  360,  674,  699

One-sided  property,  109

Optical  isomerism,  293,  334

Optically  active  crystals,  90

Optic  axis,  91

Organic  compounds, heat  of  combustion

601

Organisms,  action  on  optic  isomers,  335
Osmometer,  131
Osmotic  pressure,  131

pressure  and  chemical  action,  458

pressure  at  high  concentration,  159

pressure,  kinetic  explanation,  244

pressure,  laws  of,  146

pressure  of  colloids,  409

pressure  of  mixture,  159

pressure  of  strong  solutions,  246

theory,  720

theory,  application  of,  737

work,  162,  245
Oxides,  composition  of,  185

762

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

Oxygen,  reactivity  of,  679
refractive  power  of,  310
Ozone,  formed  by  silent  discharge,  697

Palladium,  possessability  of,  103

Paranitrophenol,  522

Partial  pressure,  58,  110

Periodic  system,  182,  191

Permanganates,  absorption  spectra,  385

Perpetuuni  mobile,  15

Phase,  influence  of  the  extent  of.  663

rule,  609
Phases,  chemical,  462

in  galvanic  cell,  718

law  of  equilibrium  between,  662
Phenol  and  water,  mutual  solubility,  267
Phenolphthalein,  522
Phosphine  decomposition,  562
Photo-chemical  absorption,  743

action  and  temperature,  755

extinction,  748

induction,  748
Photography,  750

Physical  methods  in  analysis,  use  of.  452
Picric  acid,  in  water  and  benzene,  540
Piezo- electricity,  93
Plane  of  symmetry,  80
Plasrnolysis,  134  "
Platin-ammonia  compounds,  376
Point  system,  86

Poisons  to  colloidal  platinum,  567
Polarisation,  galvanic,  699,  706,  707,  713,
740

of  light,  90,  92
Polari-strobometer,  331
Polymerisation,  170,  275

of  solvent,  374
Polymorphism,  95
Positive  and  negative,  280

and  negative  elements,  399
Potassium  chloride,  conductivity,  359

chloride,  osmotic  pressure  of,  164
Potential,  13

anomalous,  7.30

decomposition,  733

thermodynamic,  668
Precipitates,  carrying  down  of  salts  by,  493

formation  and  solution  of,  538
Precipitation  of  silver  chloride,  530
Preparation  of  carbon  compounds,  286
Pressure,  effect  on  equilibrium,  436,  665

effect  of  non-uniform,  667
Prout's  hypothesis,  187
Pseudo-symmetric,  87
Pycnometer,  300
Pyro-electricity,  93

Racemates,  formation  of,  636
Racemic  acid,  334
Radicals,  atomic,  279
Radio-active  substances,  393

Radium,  393

Ratio  of  specific  heats,  49

Rationality,  law  of,  78

of  compound  ratios,  78

of  indices,  law  of,  77
Reaction,  constant,  542,  644,  648

constant  and  co-efficient  of  distribution,
648

practically  irreversible,  542

reversible,  426

subsidiary,  575

Rectilinear  diameter,  law  of,  232
Reduced  characteristic  equation,  223,  228
Reduction,  electrolytic,  739
Refractive  power  of  salt  solutions,  383

power,  specific,  107
Refractometer,  305
Retrogression  of  acid  dissociation,  504
Reversible  cell,  707

electrode,  729

process,  17
Rings,  atomic,  281

Rotation  of  polarised  light,  331,  338,  386
Rotatory  power  of  alkaloids,  453
Ruby  gold  glass,  size  of  particles  in,  417

Salammoniac,  action  of  lime  on,  474
Saponificatiou  of  esters,  548,  550,  554
Saturated  layer  round  solid,  581
Second  law  of  thermodynamics,  205,  608,

643

Semi-permeable  partition,  101
Sensitisation,  745,  752
Separation,  electrolytic,  738
Silver  bromate  solubility,  528

bromide  precipitation,  690

chloride,  heat  of  precipitation,  607,  654

chloride  solubility,  728

nitrate  and  mercury,  equilibrium,  540

nitrate  concentration  cell,  727

salts,  actions  of  light  on,  750
Smelting  furnace,  process  in,  445
Sodium,  action  at  low  temperatures,  692

monochloracetate,  558

sulphate,  transition  of,  635,  641
Solids,  69

density  of,  304

equilibrium  in,  461

kinetic  theory  of,  240

molecular  weight,  272

refractive  index  of,  306

vapour  pressure  of,  72
Solid  solutions,  168,  171,  272,  490
Solubility,  535

calculation  of,  735

in  compressed  gas,  476

influence  of  size  of  crystals  on,  664

lowering  of,  266

mutual  influence  of  salts,  526

product,  531

selective,  133,  141,  145

INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS

763

Solubility  and  temperature,  652

at  transition  point,  639
Solution,  30

of  metals  in  acid,  580

pressure,  475,  723,  737
Solutions,  electromotive  force  between,  722

equilibrium  in,  451

freezing  of,  488

kinetic  theory  of,  243
Solvent,  influence  of,  244,  458,  476,  648

molecular  constitution  of,  268

nature  of,  154
Sound,  velocity  of,  50
Space-grating,  87
Spatial  arrangement  of  atoms,  287
Specific  heat  and  dissociation,  347

heat  of  gases,  42,  47

heat  of  liquids,  236

heats,  ratio  of,  206

volume,  300

Spectra  of  elements,  193
Spectral  series,  197

Sphere  of  action  of  molecular  forces,  416
Sphero-crystals,  98
Standard  cell,  719
Steam,  specific  volume  of,  60
Stereochemistry,  291

of  nitrogen,  296
Strong  electrolytes,  dissociation  of,  499

electrolytes,  law  of  mass  action  applied

to,  532

Structural  chemistry,  201
Sublimation 172,  467

and  dissociation,  474

heat  of,  651

Substitution,  effect  on  boiling  point,  322
Sulphur  dioxide,  catalytic  oxidation,  566

dioxide,  critical  point,  68
.dioxide  and  water,  616

dissociation,  444

transition  of,  97,  633

trioxide,  dissociation,  679
Sulphuretted  hydrogen,  formation  of,  549
Sulphuric  acid  solutions,  167
Supersaturation,  627
Surface  energy,  88

tension,  57

tension  and  chemical  equilibrium,  664
Symmetry,  75,  79

Tartaric  acids,  rotation  of,  333

Tautornerism,  572

Temperature,  effect  on  heat  of  reaction,  594

variation  of  specific  heat,  207
Tetartohedral,  82
Thallous  chloride  solubility,  528
Thermal  conductivity,  209
Thermodynamic  classification,  35

functions,  22

Thermodynamics,  application  to  reactions,
673

Thermodynamics,  laws  of,  16,  22

Thermo-electric  effects  in  alloys,  406

Therrno- element,  electrolytic,  743

Thermometer,  differential,  259

Thermo-neutrality,  law  of,  603

Thomson's  rule,  705

Three  components,  system  of,  629

Tin,  transition  of,  635

Total  energy  of  chemical  system,  587

Transition  point,  96,  612,  675
temperature,  632

temperature,  determination  of,  640
temperature,  effect  of  pressure,  633

Translation,  kinetic  energy  of,  204,  591

Tri-molecular  reactions,  559

Triple  point,  615

Turbid  solutions  due  to  hydrolysis,  534 *

Twin  elements,  189

Twinning,  87

Ultra  violet,  methods  of  study  of,  337

Undercooled  water,  615

Undercooling,  74,  98,  127

Unilateral  absorption,  337

Unimolecular  reactions,  549

Unstable  compounds  in  organic  chemistry,

672

fluid  state,  220
Unsymmetrical  carbon  compounds,  292,332

Valency,  277,  280
Vaporisation,  heat  of,  58,  650
Vapour  densities,  abnormal,  344

density  at  reduced  pressure,  254

density  at  very  high  temperature,  251

pressure,  58

pressure  of  concentrated  solutions,  164

pressure  curve,  61,  615

pressure  of  dilute  sulphuric  acid,  716

pressure,  lowering,  261

pressure  of  mixtures,  110

pressure  of  solutions,  137,  479,  481,  487

pressure  of  solvent,  649

pressure  at  transition  point,  638
Velocity  of  explosion,  681,  682

of  reaction,  429,  542

of  reaction  and  equilibrium,  584

of  reaction  and  temperature,  435, 670, 674
Very  dilute  solutions,  259
Viscosity,  209

Volatile  substances,  boiling  point  of  solu-
tions of,  266
Volume,  specific,  105

Water,  conductivity  of,  509,  660
electrolysis  of,  735,  737
of  crystallisation,  121
heat  of  formation,  588
heat  of  vaporisation  of,  59
infra-red  dispersion,  315
ionisation  of,  507,  521,  558

764

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

Water,  phases  of,  613
saponification  by,  557
specific  heat  of,  11,  236
vapour,  catalytic  action  of,  567,  681,  749
vapour,  decomposition  of,  446
vapour,  formation  of,  646,  676
velocity  of  formation,  561

Weight,  41

Work  done  in  chemical  reaction,  588
electrical,  703

Zeeman  phenomenon,  theory  of,  393
Zinc  sulphide,  solubility  in  acids,  531
Zone  76

INDEX OF AUTHOHS

Abbot,  532

Abegg,  144,  246,  260,  261,  371,  377,  432,

751

Abney,  750
Abraham,  393
Adie,  133
Adrian!,  628
Alexandrow,  410
Alexejew,  484

Amagat,  54,  55,  212,  226,  227
Ames,  196
Auderlini,  310
Andrese,  469

Andrews,  54,  66,  67,  218,  219,  221,  596
Augeli,  538
Appleyard,  129
Arago,  331
Arons,  314
Arrhenius,  136,  354,  359,  363,  371,  378,

496, 504, 506, 508,  515,  517,  519,

521,  543,  545,  547,  551, 554,  658,

660,  671
Arzruni,  179
Askenasy,  158
Aston,  271,  374
Aubel,  van  (see  van  Aubel)
Austen,  169
Auwers,  257,  274
Avogadro,  30,  39,  174,  352

Babo,  147
Bader,  501

Baeyer,  296,  321,  329
Baker,  566,  682
Bakker,  238
Balmer,  195,  197
Bancroft,  629,  732
Barnes,  11
Barrell,  114
Earth,  394
Bartoli,  11
Batelli,  71,  152
Batschiuski,  327
Baud,  271
Baumann,  680

Baynes,  213

Beckmann,  138,  152,  170,  258,  262,  263

265,  351,  458,  482,  595
Becquerel,  393,  400,  747
Bedson,  175
Behn,  U.,  371
Behrend,  E.,  478
Beilstein,  330
Bel,  Le  (see  Le  Bel)
Bellati,  169
Bemmelen,  129
Bender,  382,  384
Berai-d,  43
Bergman,  423,  432
Bernoulli,  Daniel,  201
Berthelot,  D.,  44,  152,  154,  255,  319,  347,

447, 449, 485,  569,  596,  653 656

682,  686,  687,  690,  712,  733
Berthollet,  157,  423,  432
Berzelius,  33,  274,  279,  374,  424,  566
Bethmann,  501
Bigelow,  566

Bijlert,  van  (see  van  Bijlert)
Biltz,  H.,  187,  251,  444,  476
Biot,  331
Blagden,  150,  489
Blanc,  Le  (see  Le  Blanc)
Bleier,  254

Bodenstein,  M.,  436,  549,  561,  677,  755
Bodlander,  81,  123, 171,  255,  377, 402,

404,  476,  536,  679,  734
Boeris,  538
Bogojawlensky,  583
Boguski,  580
Bohl,  416

Boisbaudran  (see  Lecoq  de  B. )
Bois-Reymond,  du  (see  du  Bois-R.)
Boltzrnann,  102,  104,  201,  203,  205,  210,

239, 243, 244, 419,  431,  609,  656,

686,  756
Borchers,  702
Borelli,  423
Bornstein,  41
Bose,  371
Botsch,  678

765

766

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

Boudouard,  446

Bourdon,  43

Boyle,  38,  52,  214

Braun,  705

Bravais,  A.,  81,  86

Bredig, 191, 262, 315, 387, 513, 712,

718

Bremer,  641
Brigg,  544,  551
Brillouiu,  227
Brodie,  680
Brown,  F.  D.,  114
Browne,  Sir  T.,  686
Bruckner,  565
Briihl,  268,  309,  311,  313
Bruner,  152
Brunner,  E.,  581
Buchbocks,  579
Buehkremer,  108
Buchner,  296
Buckingham,  387
Buff,  679
Bugarszky,  711
Bunsen,  71,  194,  305,  347,  480,  595,  654,

678,  746,  747,  748,  753
Biirckle,  565
Buys-Ballot,  341

Caguiard  de  la  Tour,  66,  67

Cailletet,  54,  232,  270

Cain,  449

Callendar,  11

Cannizzaro,  344

Carnegie,  685

Carnot,  15,  16,  22

Carrara,  310,  374,  382,  580

Caspari,  736

Cauchy,  308,  315

Celsius,  42,  218,  620

Chaperon,  136

Chapin,  539

Chappuis,  129

Chatelier,  Le  (see  Le  Chatdicr)

Chiminello,  V.,  559

Ciamician,  171

Claiseu,  573

Clapeyron,  21

Clark,  718,  719

Clausius,  15,  16,  17,  22,  27,  60,  62,  65,
140  145,  201,  209,  217,  228,  238,
309,  316,  327,  379,  419,  420,  430,
680

Clement,  49

Coehn,  736,  742

Cohen,  E.,  547,  577,  635,  675,  712

Cohn,  254,  314

Coll  an,  :>t>7

Conrad,  565

Conrady,  309

Constam,  739

Cooke,  J.  P.,  417

Coppet,  151
Coruu,  196
Cottle,  560
Couper,  283
Crafts,  65,  248,  253
Curie,  81,  88,  393
I'zapski,  710

Daguerre,  750

Dale,  107,  307

Dalton,  30,  31,  32,  63,  153,  173

Dnmmer,  303

Daniel  368

Dauiell,  18,  730,  734

Danneel,  718,  740

Davy,  279

De  Boisbaudrau  (see  Lecoq  de  B.}

Debray,  467,  469

De  la  Rive,  580

Delaroche,  43

Demerliac,  71

Deniuth,  254

Deslandres,  198

Desormes,  49

Deventer,  van  (see  van  /><•/•«•/< /»r)

Devillc,  251,  345,  347,  444,  473,  678

De  Visser,  71

De  Vries,  134,  257

Dewar,  67

nu-u-riei,  11,  164,  167

Dixon,  566,  681,  682,  750

Dol.l.ie,  338

Doebereiner,  183

Dolezalek,  119,  166,  715,  716,  717.  736

Donuau,  560,  565

Dony-Henault,  739

Draper,  746

Drude,  P.  90,  314,  382.  417

Duane,  W.,  741

Du  Bois-Reymond,  700

Dufet,  123

Duhem,  119

Diihring,  63

Dulong,  50,  175,  313

Dumas,  248,  251,  254,  411

Dutoit,  374

Earp,  324

Eder,  744,  747,  750

Elbs,  702,  739

Engler,  680

Enke,  F.,  289

Eotvos,  270

Esson,  433,  550

Evans,  565

Kwan,  Th.,  164,  385

Exner,  olo

Kykmau,  152,  254,  257,  310,  351

Fabinyi,  257,  700
Fanjung,  667

INDEX  OF  AUTHORS

767

Faraday, 274, 316, 353, 356, 391,  416,

698,  719
Farkas,  700
Favre,  596
Fedorow,  86
Fehling,  322,  329,  744
Ferche,  74
Ferrantini,  171
Fick,  157
Fischer,  W.,  74
Fittig,  536
Fleury,  543
Fock,  123
Forster,  F.,  402
Fourier,  156
Fournier,  50
Frankenheim,  86
Frankland,  195,  283
Fresnel,  91
Freudeuberg,  H.,  733
Freyer,  676
Friedel,  441
Friedliinder,  582
Friedrich,  21 5,  222,  362
Frowein,  641,  652
Fuchs,  G.,  258,  263

Gadoliu,  A.,  81

Galitzine,  416

Garelli,  171

Gattermann,  739

Gauss,  4,  78

Gautier,  175

Gay-Lussac,  38,  42,  174,  249,  746

Geissler,  393

Georgewics,  129

Gernez,  332,  582

Gernhardt,  265

Gibbs,  W.,  26, 433,  462,  483,  608,  610,

617,  658,  668

Gladstone,  107,  307,  383,  412,  521
Glaser,  739
Glauber,  635,  637
Gockell,  710
Goldberg,  753,  755
Goldschmidt,  274,  348,  477,  565
Gomberg,  281
Goodwin,  729
Gouy,  136

Graham,  156,  408,  411,  413,  415,  596
Grebe,  G.,  338
Griiiiths,  12,  59
Groshans,  63
Groth,  340
Grotrian,  60
Grove;  99,  711
Gubser,  376
Guldberg, 143,  303,  395,  430, 432, 449,

453,  468, 473,  493, 496,  533,  548,

569,  644,  673
Gussler,  195

Guthrie,  126

Guye,  215,  222,  270,  271,  272,  326,  336

Haber,  681,  702,  739

Habermanu,  254

Hahn,  446

Hall,  548

Hallock,  128

Hallwachs,  301,  381

Hamburger,  134

Hausen,  739

Hantzsch,  A.,  291,  297,  565,  573

Harcourt,  433,  550

Harden,  173

Hare,  686

Hartley,  338

Hartmann,  W.,  386

Hausrath,  261

Hautefeuille,  435,  662,  678

Hauy,  77,  79

Hediu,  134

Heilborn,  67,  326

Heiiitz,  124

Helm,  675

Helmholtz,  H.  von,  4,  9,  15.  26,  28,  115,
118,  315,  379,  391,  446,  566,  686,
705,  710,  711,  712,  713,  714,  733

Hemmelmayer,  v.,  418

Hemptinne,  553

Hendrixson,  486

Henrichsen,  317

Henry,  L.,  291,  322

Henry,  P.,  153,  559,  567,  571

Heraeus,  254

Hertz,  63,  390,  753

Hess,  592,  596

Hesse,  322

Hessel,  J.  F.  C.,  81

Heycock,  402,  404

Heydweiller,  509,  660

Hibbert,  412

Hirzel,  702

Hittorf,  360,  362,  392,  698,  731

Hjelt,  567

Hotf,  van't  (see  van't  Ho/}

Hofmann,  249,  251,  254,  678,  679

Hohmanu,  450,  564

Hoitsema,  C.,  272,  530

Holborn,  358

Hollemann,  257,  470,  574

Hoppe-Seyler,  680

Horstmann, 302, 433, 468, 469, 599,
608,  652,  678,  686

Hudson,  C.  S.,  572

Hulett,  G.  A.,  664

Huyghens,  90

Isambert,  469,  471

Jager,  317,  701

Jahu,  315,  386,  597,  696,  710,  713

768

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

Jakowkin,  A.  A. ,  488

Jamiu,  313

Jellet,  433,  453,  503,  516

Jolly,  41

Jones,  H.  C.,  458

Jordan,  Camille,  86

Jorissen,  80

Joule,  9,  11,  42,  211,  214,  237

Judson,  W.,  560

Jungfleisch,  154,  485

Kahlbauni,  61,  63,  326

Kahle,  701

Kajander,  580

Kaunonikoff,  309

Kaufler,  492

Kaufmann,  W.,  392

Kawalki,  373

Kay,  572

Kayser,  194,  196,  337

Kekule,  283,  289,  319,  344

Kellas,  565

Kelvin,  Lord  (see  Thomson,  Sir  W.)

Kiliani,  M.,  733

Kirchhoff,  74,  92,  115,  118,  194,  643

Kistiakowsky,  W.,  570

Kleber,  321

Klemencic,  419

Klobukow,  257

Knapp,  702

Knietsch,  679

Knoblauch,  0.,  560,  570

Knorr,  573

Knupffer,  C.,  718

Koch,  E.  338

Koch,  R.,  414

Koelichen,  E.,  557

Kohlrausch,  5, 301,  304,  358, 362,  363,

368, 374,  381,  499,  509, 654,  660,

701

Kohr,  534

Konowalow,  112,  450,  484
Kopp,  176,  179,  302,  304,  331,  344
Koppe,  134
Krapiwin,  374
Krause,  254
Kroenig,  201
Kriiss,  338
Kuenen,  120
Kundt,  50,  207
Kuntze,  492
Kuriloff,  494,  540
Kiister,  125,  171,  242,  267,  272,  377,  522,

572,  739

Laar,  573
Ladenburg,  387
Lagergren,  129
Landauer,  194

Landolt,  H.,  5,  41,  107,  110,  307,  309,  315,
328,  331,  334,  336,  386,  547,  576

Langer,  44,  253,  443

Langevin,  394,  396,  399

Laplace,  50

Laszczynska,  St.  v.,  374

Lea,  C.,  191

Lebedew,  419

Le  Bel,  291,  296

Le  Blanc,  306,  383,  531,  696,  733

Le  Chatelier,  43,  46,  445, 467,  609, 652,

661,  667,  682,  690
Lecoq  de  Boisbaudran,  196
Leduc,  41,  215,  248
Lehfeldt,  119

Lehmann,  0.,  98,  120,  181,  634
Lellmann,  516,  521
Lemery,  423
Lemoine,  435,  754
Lenssen,  543
Lenz,  330
Levi,  382
Levy,  547
Lidbury,  F.  A.,  583
Liebenow,  C.,  405,  407,  735,  736
Liebermann,  C.,  340
Liebig,  274

Liebisch,  T.,  81,  88,  92
Linder,  493

Linebarger,  272,  315,  410,  413,  663
Ljubavin,  412

Loeb,  M.,  134,  363,  697,  702,  739
Loewel,  641
Longinine,  327
Lorentz,  H.  A.,  109,  241,  243, 244,  307.

393

Lorenz,  L.,  109
Lorenz,  R.,  189,  702
Loschmidt,  421
Lotternioser,  415
Loven,  J.  M.,  539
Low,  680

Lowenherz,  538,  548,  553,  629
Lowenthal,  543
Lowy,  129
Luckow,  736
Liideking,  413
Liidin,  11
Ludwig,  741
Luggin,  752
Lunge,  255
Liipke,  R.,  696
Lussaua,  43,  169
Luther,  751,  752,  755

Mach,  9
Maey,  E.,  405
Magnanini,  348,  521
Magnus,  158
Malagnini,  348
Malfatti,  254
Mallard,  43,  682
Maneuvrier,  50

INDEX  OF  AUTHORS

Marbach,  80

Marckwald,  289,  322,  334,  755

Margottet,  678

Margules,  M.,  55,  119

Marignac,  106,  596

Mariotte,  38,  52

Markownikoff,  329

Marshall,  59,  327

Mathias,  232,  238,  270  '

Maxart,  313

Maxwell, 201, 208, 209,  228,  390,  398,

420,  563,  753
Mayer,  J.  R.,  9,  15,  49
Mazotto,  127
M'Clelland,  395
M'Kenzie,  334
Meier,  Fr.,  253

Mendelejeff,  67,  183,  185,  186,  197,  525
Meusching,  253
Menschutkin,  450,  503,  577
Merz,  565
Meslin,  227
Meyer,  C.,  251
Meyer,  G.,  404,  714
Meyer,  K.,  240

Meyer,  L.,  175, 182,  185, 187, 191,  331,  682
Meyer,  0.  E.,  201,  209
Meyer,  R.,  340
Meyer,  St.,  317
Meyer,  V.,  44, 249,  251,  253, 254,  274,

443,  561,  676
Meyerhoffer,  W.,  629,  637
Miculescu,  11
Miller,  715

Minnegerode,  B.,  81,  92
Miolati,  124,  375

Mitscherlich,  E.,  96,  177,  179,  182,  469
Mohr,  300,  345
Moissan,  175,  339,  634
Moore,  582
Morley,  41,  248
Moser,  J.,  714
Mossotti,  307,  316,  419
Muir,  M.  M.  P.,  175,  521,  597
Miiller,  P.  Th.,  547
Miiller-Erzbach,  469
Muthmaim,  492

Naccari,  654,  659

Nasini,  310

Natanson,  E.  and  L.,  440

Natterer/54

Naumann,  80,  280,  596

Nernst,  60,  133,  141,  150,  154,  160,  166,
253,  260,  314,  354,  363,  365,  373,
382,  392,  477,  481,  486,  564,  568,
601,  714,  721,  729,  736

Neuberg,  255,  443

Neumann,  B.,  702

Neumann,  F.  E.,  76,  176

Neville,  402,  404

Newlands,  187

Newton,  423

Nicol,  331

Nietzki,  339

Nilson,  175,  193,  251,  281

Nobel,  A.,  414

Norremberg,  94

Noyes, A. A., 516,  527,  529,  531,  532,

534,  539,  548, 559,  560,  564,  576,

581

Ober,  493

Ochs,  K,  732

Oeconomides,  338

Oeholm,  W.,  370

Ogier,  347,  656

Oldenbourg,  R.,  702

Onnes,  Kammerlingh,  239

Ortloff,  191

Osaka,  547,  736

Ostwald,  9,  16,  26,  33,  97,  105,  112,  127,
172,  178,  259,  287,  301,  316,  331,
342,  358,  362,  365,  385,  387,  432,
497,  500,  502,  508,  514,  516,  518,
519,  521,  536,  543,  545,  551,  553,
566,  569,  575,  592,  595,  597,  608,
629,  689,  696,  731,  732

Otto,  G.,  178,  302

Oudeman,  386

Overbeck,  A.,  417

Paalzow,  700

Pagliani,  654,  659

Palmaer,  W.,  547,  724,  725

Pareau,  469

Parrot,  156

Pasteur,  92,  384

Pawlewski,  67,  119

Pean  de  St.  Gilles,  447,  449,  569

Pebal,  346

Pekar,  272

Peltier,  406,  698

Perkin,  W.  H.,  316

Fernet,  11

Perrot,  251

Peters,  732

Petersen,  329,  598,  606

Petit,  175

Pettersson,  152,  175,  193,  251,  281

Pfaundler,  430

Pfeffer,  132,  134,  144,  146

Philip,  J.,  315

Pickering,  526

Pictet,  Raoul,  692

Picton,  493

Piloty,  281

Planck,  22,  422,  497,  609,  666,  722"

Plants,  715

Pockels,  F.,  69,  123

Poincare,  700

Ponsot,  144

770

THEORETICAL  CHEMISTRY

Poynting,  J.  H.,  245
Premier,  G.,  444,  446,  718
Pringsheim,  50,  749
Front,  187
Pulfrich,  108,  304

Kabe,  574

Kamsay,  63,  65,  67,  68,  74,  152,  185,  187,

231,  237,  270,  271,  325,  327
Raoult,  144 148,  150,  153,  160,  169,257,
261,  262,  266,  269,  351,  402,  459,
460,  489
Kathke,  686,  688
Ratz,  F.,  315
Raveau,  C.,  226,  227
Eayleigh,  Lord,  41,  102,  201,  208,  248
Recoura,  269
Reformatzky,  413
Regnault,  41,  5-1,  59,  60,  61,  118,  140, 167,

176,  213,  218,  248,  405,  620,  650
Reicher, 256, 359, 497, 552, 634, 637,

638

Reinders,  565
Reiuganum,  159,  240,  407
Reinitzer,  98
Remold,  417
Remsen,  175,  287
Retgers,  121,  180,  301,  340
Riccard,  329
Richardson,  441
Riecke, 199, 236, 243, 392, 609, 611,

631,  667
Rigollet,  747

Rive,  De  la  (see  J)e  la  Rive)
Roberts,  169
Rodger,  331

Roloff,  160,  164,  259,  488,  490,  744,  745
Rontgen,  50,  353,  396,  404,  416,  422
Roozeboom,  127,  464,  491,  614,  616,  620,

623,  627,  629

Roscoe,  173,  746,  747,  748,  753
Rose,  F.,  654
Rossignol,  560  '
Roth,  476

Rothmnnd,  470,  476
Rowland,  11,  197
Riicker,  417
Rudolphi,  M.,  498
Riidorff,  150
Riihlmann,  308
Rnnge,  196
Rutherford,  395
Rydberg,  189,  191,  197

Sabanejeff,  410,  412
Salet,  347,  521
Sarreau,  43
Savoisier,  5
Schall,  255
Schaum,  K.,  97
Scheffer,  157,  370

| Schenk,  K,  98,  271
Schiff,  141
Schlegel,  678
Schliemann,  516
Schmidt,  G.  C.,  119,  129,  321
Schoenfliess,  A.,  60,  81,  86,  568,  601
Schonbein,  680
Schoop,  254
Schreinemakers,  629
Schumann,  63
Schlitt,  108
Schiitze,  M.,  338,  340
Schwarz,  W.,  97
Seubert,  K.,  187
Shields,  270,  524,  557
Siedentopf,  417
Siemens,  23
Silbermanu,  596
Silliman,  410
Silow,  314
Skraup,  455
Smale,  711
Sohncke,  86
Sommerfeldt,  E.,  128
Soret,  741
Soxhlet,  263
Specketer,  734
Spohr,  543,  546,  551
Sprengel,  259,  300
Spring,  128,  169,  404,  461,  580,  581
Stadt,  van  der  (see  van  der  Stadt)
Staigmiiller,  187
Stark,  J.,  394
Stefan,  209
Steinwehr,  596,  606
Steno,  76
Steudel,  331
Stillman,  152
Stock,  170

Stohmann,  319, '321,  597
Strauss,  346
Streintz,  F.,  402,  716
Stronger,  P.,  110
Summer,  50
Swain,  152
Swart,  657

Tafel,  736

Tairimann,  G.,  72,  98,  118,  134,  241,  402.

410,  582,  631
Thenard,  746
Thiele,  J.,  289,  321
Thomas,  114,  235
Thomsen,  J.,  106,  114,  168,  186,  189,  317,

319,  513, 516, 596,  600, 607, 654,

659,  686

Thomson,  James,  70
Thomson,  J,  J.,  395,  399,  422
Thomson,  Sir  W., 42, 69, 71, 74, 173

211,  214,  237,  418,  632,  664, 705

712

INDEX  OF  AUTHORS

771

Thorpe,  333
Tolloczko,  267
Topler,  M.,  189,  191
Townsend,  395,  398
Traube,  H.,  92
Traube,  J.,  381
Traube,  M.,  132,  134,  680
Trevor,  543,  546
Trey,  547
Troost,  251,  662
Trouton,  327
Tiirin,  714

Urech,  543

Valson,  382,  384

van  Aubel,  580

van  Bemmelen,  493

van  Bijlert,  124,  170

van  der  Heide,  629

van  der  Stadt,  146,  643

van  der  Waals,  63,  115,  200,  201,  210,
212,  217,  219,  221,  227,  236,  239,
245,  255,  269,  271,  303,  325,  417,
419,  421,  609

van  Deventer,  146,  636,  643

van  Kuenen,  243

van't  Hoff,  115,  124,  131,  138,  146,  148,
151,  153,  156,  160,  168,  169,  256,
262,  266.  268,  284,  286,  291,  294,
334,  350,  352,  364,  402,  428,  433,
460,  461,  481,  489,  498,  509,  517,
550,  558,  560,  561,  564,  629,  631,
634,  636,  638,  652,  656,  664,  671,
680,  688,  692,  712,  741

Vernon,  324

Vieille,  43,  44,  682

Vieweg,  630

Viguon,  124

Villard,  68,  476

Visser,  de  (see  de  Visser)

Vogel,  B.,  338,  752

Vogel,  H.  W.,  337,  744,  752

Voigt,  W.,  93,  239

Voigtlander,  413

Vries,  de  (see  de  Vries)

Waage,  395,  430,  432,  449,  453,  468,  473,

493,  496,  533,  548,  569,  644,  673
Waals,  van  der  (see  van  der  Waals)
Wachs,  565
Wagner,  J.,  191,  523
Wakemann,  A.,  500
Walden,  501

Walker, 129, 172, 186, 316, 387, 503,

523,  525,  548,  560,  572,  576
Wallach,  340
Warburg,  207,  740
Warder,  551
Wason,  R.  S.,  560
Waterston,  J.  J.,  201
Watt,  23,  27
Weber,  H.  F.,  175

Werner,  A.,  283,  297,  374,  375,  376
Wheatstone,  314,  358
Whitney,  493,  531,  581
Wiebe,  'lO,  60

Wiedemaun,  E.,  43,  46,  413
Wiedemann,  G.,  387,  469
Wijs,  509,  557
Wild,  680

Wildermann,  565,  749,  754
Wilhelmy,  433,  543,  544
Will,  262

Williams,  G.  H.,  81,  86
Williams,  175
Williamson,  430
Wilsmore,  733
Wilson,  395
Winck,  G.,  191
Winkelblech,  377
Winkelmann,  194,  196
Wiukler,  175
Wirkner,  V.,  61,  63
Wislicenus,  274,  291,  294,  573
Witt,  O.  N.,  340,  492
Wittwer,  754
Wladimiroft',  135
Wohler,  274
Wollaston,  31
Wood,  254
Worm-Muller,  700
Wroblewski,  213
Wiillner,  60
Wiirfel,  272
Wiirtz,  443

Young,  57

Young, S., 61, 63, 65,  67,
235,  237,  248,  325

Zacharias,  492
Zaitschek,  449
Zanninovitch-Tessarin,  374
Zawidzki,  119
Zeemann,  393
Zeleny,  395,  399
Zunino,  348
Zsigmondy,  417

J,  74,  230,

THE  END
