Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 1, Vol. 10: St. Chrysostom: Homilies on the Gospel of Saint Matthew
Philip Schaff (ed.), various translators (1886)
Source: Internet Archive
https://archive.org/details/selectlibraryofn10auguuoft
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

iiiwMiiiiMiti


»>>OTi),ii-ii'i^^"-^--


M


KS0aBHStiS«03.-'


IBlWIWI4WMB!aiMt'iir»"""*v»»*-


MMMMINIWNMIHMMMMIMllBHnBV''


MHHM


•'*


■Kg:. .


1W


t^


',/,i-

w


Presented to the

LIBRARY of the

UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO


The Estate of the late

PROFESSOR A. S. P. WOODHOUSE

Head of the

Department of English

University College

1944-1964


■■.■;'r<":'^;:;^'f''V(,<:f.:t


.-^v'-;''


if^-'


A SELECT LIBRARY


OF THE


NICENE AND POST-NICENE FATHERS


OF


THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.


EDITED BY

PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D., LL.D.,

PROFESSOR OF CHURCH HISTORY IN THE UNION THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY, NEW YORK.


IN CONNECTION WITH A NUMBER OF PATRISTIC SCHOLARS OF EUROPE

AND AMERICA.


VOLUME X.


SAINT CHRYSOSTOM:
HOMILIES ON THE GOSPEL OF SAINT AL\TTlIi:\V


NEW YORK
THE riTRI.STLAN LITERATURE COMI^\^■^'

1888


bo


.'J-JM


97466<


Copyright, 1888, by
THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY.


electrotyped and printed by

The Publishers' Printing Company,

157 & 159 William St.,

Nev. York.


PREFACE TO THE AMERICAN EDITION.


This volume, according to the previous announcement of the publishers, contains a
reprint of the Oxford edition of the Homilies of St= Chrysostom on the Gospel of St. Mat-
thew.

The Homilies on this Gospel formed three volumes of the Oxford edition, published
respectively in 1843, ^^44 and 1851. The dedication appears in the third volume, as a
memorial of Archbishop Howley, who died in 1848. The preface is from the pen of
Charles Marriott of Oriel College.

As regards the present volume, it may be remarked that the archaic style of the
English translation has been preserved without material alteration. Even when obscure
and involved, the form seemed to be a fitting dress for the original. Occasionally an
emendation, or rather suggestion, has been made in a foot-note by the American editor.
The spelling has been altered throughout by the printer, to accord with the usage more
common among us. Some obvious typographical errors have been corrected, and these
have usually been indicated. Instead of the brackets, used in the Oxford edition, to mark
words or phrases supplied by the translator. Italics have been substituted. The same re-
mark applies to passages where the Greek text is in doubt. The editor has felt at liberty to
indicate more fully than the translator the jiortions supplied by the latter. In a few cases
an emphatic word is printed in Italics, but these instances can be readily distinguished from
the passages above referred to.

The English translator of these Homilies was fortunate in having the Greek text of
Mr. Frederick Field as the basis of his renderings. This text is also accessible in tlie edi-
tion of Migne, and has been compared throughout in the preparation of this volume. At
the time when the Oxford edition appeared textual criticism had received but slight atten-
tion in England; hence the translator seems to have occasionally failed to estimate ariglit
the value of the authorities for various readings. V>\\\. in few patristic works do we have
better security for the accuracy of the text than in the case of these Homilies on Matthew.
The labor of the American editor has been, of course, supplementary. .Attention has been
called quite frecjuently to the Greek phrase useil in the Homily, with a view to marking the
usage in Ecclesiastical Greek. Many foot-notes have hcen added, lo indicate the readings
of the New Testament text appearing in the Homilies. The constant use of the Authorized


IV PREFACE TO THE AMERICAN EDITION.

Version by the translator made this necessary. The Greek phrase has frequently been
given; still more frequently the rendermg (and reading) of the Revised version. Where
these agree with the text of the Homily, they are cited, without comment, in brackets.
Differences between readings are carefully indicated.

Occasionally the editor has noted his dissent from the renderings or annotations of the
translator, but he has not felt warranted in expressing every difference of judgment. All
additions made in this volume are enclosed in brackets, and except in the cases where the
Revised Version is cited without comment, the letter R. has been appended.

Much time and care have been bestowed upon the Indexes.

M. B. R.
Allegheny, Pa., Sept. 24, 1888.


CONTENTS.


PAGE

Preface to the American Edition iii

Preface to the Oxford Edition ......... Jx

Homily Contents . xi

Introductory Essay on St. Chrysostom, as an Exegete .... xv
By Prof. M. B. Riddle, D.D.

St. Chrysostom's Homilies on the Gospel of St. Matthew ... i

Alphabetical Index ......•.••• 537


THE HOMILIES


OF


ST. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM,

ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTINOPLE,


ON THE


GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


TRANSLATED BY

REV. SIR GEORGE PREVOST, BARONET. M.A.,

OF ORIEL COLLEGE, OXFORD.


REVISED, WITH NOTES, BY

REV. M. B. RIDDLE. D.D.,

PROFESSOR OF NEW TESTAMENT EXEGESIS IN THE WESTERN THEOLOGICAL

SEMINARY AT ALLEGHENY, PA.


PREFACE TO THE OXFORD EDFITON.


The Homilies of St. Chrysostom on St. Matthew were undoubtedly delivered at Antioch (see Horn. vii.
p. 43; and probably in the latter part of the time during which he preached as a Presbyter. Montfaucon con-
siders his little mention of the sin of swearing a sign of his having accomplished some reformation on that point
by his previous exertions. In the Homilies delivered from 3S6 to 388, it is a constant topic; and the Homilies
known to belong to that date are so numerous, as scarcely to leave room for such a series as the present. These,
however, contain very little to mark the period to which they belong. The argument from his reference to
dissensions some time gone by, possibly those between St. Meletiusand Paulinus and Evagrius, in commenting
on St. Matt, xxiii. 6. is not very conclusive.

A modern reader must sometimes be struck with finding in St. Chrysostom a kind of criticism, which we
are apt to think belongs only to later times. His main object, however, is moral, and he searches out with
diligence both the meaning and the applications of particular passages, usually concluding with an eloquent ex-
hortation to some special virtue. Some of the most remarkable of these exhortations are on the subject of Alms-
giving, which he seems to have pressed with success at last. His calculation in Horn. Ixvi. as to what might be
done, is somewhat curious. In the end of Hom. lxx:(viii. he demands a reformation as the condition of his
entering on the controversy with Infidels. In the next Homily he discusses the evidence of the Resurrection
with nearly the same arguments as would still be used against an objector.

The Theatres are the theme of his frequent reprobation, and the Monks of the mountains near .'Kntioch of his
praise. In Hom. Ixix. and Ixx. he describes their mode of life as an edifying example to all. He frequently attacks
the Anomoean or extreme Arian Heresy, and sometimes also the Manichean. It is perhaps worth while to
recollect the nearly contemporaneous prevalence of Manicheism in the West, as it appears in the early history of
St. Augustine. In Hom. Ixxxvi. there are some remarks on the device of Satan by which evil is introduced by
little and kittle, which are worthy of consideration as applicable to the growth of erroneous doctrine and practice
within the Church.

For all information with respect to the Text and Manuscripts of these Homilies, the learned reader is re-
ferred to the Greek F^dition of Mr. Field, which has been of great service, as affording a safe basis for the
Translation. The paucity of materials possessed by Savile, and the carelessness of the Benedictine Editor, hail
left much room for improvement by a judicious and faithful use of the existing copies. It may now at last be
hoped, that we have a Text very closely approximating to the genuine work of the Author.

For the Translation, the Editors are indebted to the Rev. Sir Georgk Prevost, M..\. of Oriel College,
and for the Index to the Rev. J. K. Tweed, M.A. of Christ Church, Oxford. [t will be their endeavour to
complete the Commentaries of .St. Chrysostom on the New Testament, by bringing out the remainder of the
Homilies on the Acts of the .Apostles, and those on the Epistle lu the llcbrews, as soon as they are able. In
both instances, however, the corrupt state of the Text has occasioned some difticuity and delay.

C. .Markiui r.

Oxford, Advent, 185 1.


CONTEXTS OF THE HOMILIES.


PACE

Homily I i

Homily II. — Matt. i. i. The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son of Abraham 8
Homily III. — Matt. i. i. The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of Uavid, the .^on of

Abraham 14

Homily IV. — Matt. i. 17. So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations, and
from David until the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen generations, and from the carrying :.\vay
into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations 20

Ho.mily V. — Matt. i. 22, 23. Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the
Lord by the Prophet, saying. Behold, a Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a Son, and thev
shall call his name Emmanuel 31

Homily VI. — Matt. ii. i, 2. When Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judaea in the days of Herod the king,
behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem, saying, Where is he that is born King of the
Jews? for we have seen His star in the east, and are come to worship Him 36

Homily VII. — Matt, ii 4, 5. And when he had gathered all the Chief Priests and Scribes of the peojile
together, he demanded of them where Christ should be born. .\nd they said unto him. In Bethlehem
of Juda;a 43

Homily VHI. — Matt. ii. 11. .\nd when they were come into the house, they s.iw the young Child with

Mary His Mother 50

Homily IX. — Matt. ii. 16. Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was exceed-
ing wroth 55

Homily X. — Matt. iii. i, 2. In those days cometh John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Juda>a,

and saying, Repent ye : for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand 61

Homily XI. — Matt. iii. 7. But when he saw many of the Pharisees ami Saiklucees come to his baptism,

he said unto them, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come? . . 67

Homily XII. — Matt. iii. 13. Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan 75

Homily XHI. — Matt. iv. 1. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of

the devil 80

Homily XIV. — .Matt. iv. 12. .Now wht.11 Jesus had lieard that John was ilelivered up, lit- departeil into

Galilee sr.

Homily .\V. — .Matt. v. i, 2. .\nd Jesus seeing the multitudes went up into the mountain, anil when Ik-
was set. His disciples came unto Him. And He opened His mouth, and taught them, saying . . . iji

Homily .W'l. — Matt. v. 17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets .... 103

Homily XVII. — Matt. v. 27, 28. Vc have heard that it was said to them of old time, Thou shalt not com-
mit adultery ; but I s.iy unto you, th;it every one who looketh upon a woman to hist .ifter her. hath
committed adultery with her already in his heart 115

Homily XVIII. — Matt. v. 38, 39, 40. Ye have heard that it hath been said. An eye for an eye, and a


xii CONTENTS OF THE HOMILIES.

PAGE

tooth for a tooth. But I say unto you, that ye resist not the evil : but whosoever shall smite thee on
the right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away
thy coat, let him have thy cloak also 123

Homily XIX. — Matt. vi. i. — -Take heed that ye do not your alms before men, to be seen of them . . . 130

Homily XX. — Matt. vi. 16. And when ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance. For

they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. 140

Homily XXI. — Matt. vi. 24. No man can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the

other, or else he will hold to one and despise the other 146

Homily XXII. — Matt. vi. 28, 29. Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow ; they toil not, neither
do they spin. And yet I say unto you. That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of
these 150

Homily XXIII. — Matt. vii. i. Judge not, that ye be not judged 157,

Homily XXIV. — Matt. vii. 21. Not every one that saith unto me. Lord, Lord, shall enter into the

kingdom of Heaven, but he that doeth the will of My Father which is in Heaven 167

Homily XXV. — Matt. vii. 28. And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people

were astonished at His doctrine. 171

Homily XXVI. — Matt. viii. 5. And when He was entered into Capernaum, there came unto Him a cen-
turion, beseeching Him, and saying, Lord, my servant lieth at home sick of the palsy, grievously tor-
mented 176

Homily XXVII. — Matt. viii. 14, 15. And when Jesus was come into Peters house, He saw his wife's
mother laid and sick of a fever : and He touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she arose and
ministered unto Him 184

Homily XXVIII. — Matt. viii. 23, 24. And when He was entered into a ship. His disciples followed Him.
And, behold, there arose a gieat tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship was covered with the
waves, but He was asleep l8g

Homily XXIX. — Matt. ix. i, 2. And He entered into a ship, and passed over, and cam^e into His own
city. And, behold, they brought to Him a man sick of the palsy, lying on a bed : and Jesus seeing
their faith said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, be of good cheer ; thy sins be forgiven thee .... 195

Homily XXX. — Matt. i.x. g. And as Jesus passed forth from thence, He saw a man sitting at the receipt

of custom, named Matthew ; and He saith unto him. Follow Me . ' 198

Homily XXXI. — Matt. ix. 18. While He spake these things unto them, behold, there came in a ruler,
and worshipped Him, saying. My daughter is even now dead, but come and lay Thy hand upon her,
and she shall live 205

Homily XXXII. — Matt. ix. 27 — 30. And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed Him, cry-
ing, and saying. Thou Son of David, have mercy on us. And when he was come into the house, the
blind men came to Him : and Jesus saith unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this ? They say
unto Him, Yea, Lord. Then touched He their eyes, saying, According to your faith be it unto you.
And their eyes were opened 210

Homily XXXIII. — Matt. x. 16. Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves ; be ye there-
fore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves 219

Homily XXXIV. — Matt. x. 23. But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into the other ; for

verily I say unto you, ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of Man be come . 226

Homily XXXV. — Matt. x. 34. Think not that I am come to send peace on earth ; I am not come to send

peace, but a sword 231

Homily XXXVI. — Matt. xi. i. And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding His

twelve disciples. He departed thence to teach and to preach in their cities 238

Homily XXXVII. — Matt. xi. 7, 8, 9. And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes con-
cerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see ? A reed shaken with the wind ? But
what went ye out for to see ? A man clothed in soft raiment ? behold, they that wear soft clothing are
in kings' houses. But what went ye out for to see ? A prophet ? yea, I say unto you, and more than
a prophet 243

Homily XXXVIII. — Matt. xi. 25, 26. At that time Jesus answered and said, I make acknowledgment
unto Thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and earth ; because Thou hast hid these things from the wise


■ CONTENTS OF THE HOMILIES. Xiil

PAGE

and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in Thy

sight 250

Homily XXXIX. — Matt. .\ii. i. At that time Jesus went on the Sabbath day through the corn ; and His

disciples were an hungered, and began to pluck the ears of corn, and to eat 255

Homily XL. — Matt. xii. 9, 10. And when He was departed thence, He went into their synagogue :

and, behold, a man which had his hand withered 259

Homily XLI. — Matt. xii. 25, 26. And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them, Every kingdom
divided against itself shall be brought to desolation ; and every city or house divided against itself,
shall not stand : and if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself ; how shall then his kingdom
stand ? 264

Homily XLH. — Matt. xii. 33. Either make the tree good, and his fruit good, or else make the tree

corrupt, and his fruit corrupt ; for the tree is known by his fruit 268

Homily XLIII. — Matt. xii. 3S, 39. Then certain of the Scribes and Pharisees answered Him, saying,
Master, we would see a sign from Thee. But He answered and said, An evil and adulterous generation
seeketh after a sign, and there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas . . . 272

Homily XLIV. — Matt. xii. 46 — 49. While He yet talked to the people, behold His mother and His
brethren stood without, desiring to speak with Him. Then one said unto Him, Behold Thy mother
and Thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with Thee. But He answered and said unto him
that told Him, Who is My mother and My brethren ? And He stretched forth His hand towards His
disciples, and said, Behold My mother and My brethren 27S

Homily XLV. — Matt. xiii. 10, 11. .And the disciples came and said unto Him, Why speakest Thou unto
them in parables ? He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to know the
mysteries of the kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given 2S4

Ho.MiLY XLVL — Matt. xiii. 24 — 30. Another parable put He forth unto them, saying. The kingdom of
Heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field. But while men slept, his enemy
came and sowed tares among the wheat and went his way. But when the blade was sprung up, and
brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares. So the servants of the householder came and said unto
him. Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in the field? whence then hath it tares? He said unto them,
.-\n enemy hath done this. The servants said unto him. Wilt thou then that we go and gather them
up? But he said. Nay, lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them. Let
both therefore grow together until the harvest 2S7

HoMlLY XLVn. — ^latt. xiii. 34, 35. All these thin.t;s spake Jesus unto the multitudes in parables, and
without a parable spake He not unto them ; th.it it might be fultilled which was spoken by the
Prophet, saying. I will open My mouth in parables ; I will utter things that have been kept secret
from the foundation of the world 292

HOMILY XLVnL — ALatt. xiii. 53. .\nd it came to pass, that, when Jesus had finished these parables. He

departed thence 296

Homily XLI.\. — Matt xiv. 13. But when Jesus heard of it, He departed thence by ship into a desert
place apart ; and when the multitudes had heard thereof, they followed Him on foot out of all the
cities ■ • • 303

Homily L. — Matt. xiv. 23, 24. -\nd when He had sent the mullitiules away, lie went up into the moun-
tain apart to pray : and when the evening was come. He was there alone. But the ship was now in
the midst of the sea, tossed with waves : fur the wind was contrary 310

IImmii.Y LL — Matt. XV. i — 6. Then came to Jesus. Scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, say-
ing. Why do Thy disciples, etc 314

Homily LH. — Matt. xv. 21, 22. And Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tyre ant! Sidon.
And, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto Him, saying. Have
mercy on me, O Lord, Thou Son of David ; my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil . . . . 321

Homily LIH. — NLitt. xv. 32. But Jesus called His disciples unto 1 liin, ami said, I have compassion on
the multitude, because they continue with Me now three days, and have nothing to eat • and I will not
send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way 3^^'

Homily LIV. — Matt. xvi. 13. Now when Jesus had gone forth into the coasts of Casarea Philij^pi. He

asked his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the Son of Man am ? 332


xiv CONTENTS OF THE HOMILIES.

PAGE

Homily LV. — Matt. xvi. 24. Then said Jesus unto His disciples, If any man will come after Me, let him

renounce himself, and take up his cross, and follow Me ... 338

Homily LVl. — Matt. xvi. 28. Verily, verily, I say unto you, There are some of them that stand here,

which shall not taste of death, until they see the Son of Man coming in His kingdom 345

Homily LVII. — Matt. xvii. 10. And His disciples asked Him, saying, Why then say the Scribes that

Elias must first come? 352

Homily LVHI. — Matt. xvii. 22, 23. And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said unto them. The Son of
Man shall be betrayed into the hands of men, and they shall kill Him, and the third day He shall be
raised again. And they were exceeding sorry 358

Homily LIX. — Matt, xviii. 7. Woe unto the world because of offenses ; for it must needs be that

offenses come ; but woe to that man by whom the offense cometh 364

Homily LX. — Matt, xviii. 15. If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between

thee and him alone. If he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother 372

Homily LXI. — Matt, xviii. 21. Then came Peter to Him, and said. Lord, how oft shall my brother sin
against me, and I forgive him? till seven times? Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, Until
seven times, but, Until seventy times seven 375

Homily LXII. — Matt. xix. i. And it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these sayings. He de-
parted from Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judaea beyond Jordan . 381

Homily LXIII. — Matt. xix. 16. And, behold, one came and said unto Him, Good Master, by doing

what, shall I inherit eternal life ? 3S7

Homily LXIV. — Matt. xix. 27. Then answered Peter, and said unto Him, Behold, we have forsaken all,

and followed Thee : what shall we have therefore ? • . 3gi

Homily LXV. — Matt. xx. 17 — 19. And Jesus going up to Jerusalem took the twelve disciples apart in the
way, and said unto them. Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man shall be betrayed unto
the chief priests and unto the Scribes, and they shall condemn Him to death, and shall deliver Him to
the Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify Him, and the third day He shall be raised . . . 397

Homily LXVI. — Matt. xx. ?g, 30. And as they departed from Jericho, great multitudes followed Him.
And, behold, two blind men sitting by the wayside, when they heard that Jesus passed by, cried out,
saying. Have mercy on us, O Lord, Thou Son of David ... 404

Homily LXVII. — Matt. xxi. 12, 13. And Jesus went into the Temple, and cast out all them that sold
and bought in the Temple, and overthrew the tables of the money-changers, and the seats of them that
sold doves, and saith unto them, It is written. My house shall be called a house of prayer, but ye have
made it a den of thieves 409

Homily LXVIII. — Matt. xxi. 33 — 44. Hear another parable. There was a certain householder, which
planted a vineyard, and hedged it round about, and digged a winepress, and built a tower, and let it
out to husbandmen, and went into a far country. And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent
his servants to receive the fruits. And the husbandmen took the servants, and beat some, and killed
some, and stoned some. Again he sent other servants more than the first : and they did unto them
likewise. But last he sent unto them his son, saying, It may be they will reverence my son. But
when the husbandmen saw the son, they said among themselves. This is the heir, come, let us kill him,
and let us seize on his inheritance. And they cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him. W^hen the
Lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what will he do to those husbandmen ? They say unto Him,
He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard to other husbandmen, which
shall render him the fruits in their seasons. Jesus saith unto them. Did ye never read in the Scriptures,
The Stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the Head of the corner? etc 414

Homily LXIX. — Matt. xxii. i — 14. And Jesus answered and spake again in parables. The kingdom
of Heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a marriage for his son ; and sent forth his servants
to call them which were bidden to the wedding ; and they would not come. Again, he sent forth
other servants, saying. Tell them which are bidden, I have prepared my dinner ; my oxen and my fat-
lings are killed, and all things are ready ; come unto the marriage. But they made light of it, and
went their ways one to his farm, another to his merchandise : and the remnant took his servants, and
entreated them spitefully, and slew them, etc 420

Homily LXX. — Matt. xxii. 15. Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might entangle Him

in His talk 426


CONTENTS OF THE HOMILIES. XV


PAGE

Homily LXXI. — Matt. .\xii. 34 — 36. But when the Pharisees had heard that He had put the Sadducees
to silence, they were gathered together ; and one of them, which was a lawyer, asked Him a question,
tempting Him, and saying, Master, which is the great commandment in the Law? 431

Homily LXXII. — Matt, xxiii. i — 3. Then spake Jesus to the multitudes and to His disciples, saying, The
Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses' seat, all therefore whatsoever they bid you do that do ; but do
not after their works 435

Homily LXXIH. — Matt. x.xiii. 14. Woe unto you. Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites ! for ye devour

widows' houses, and for a pretense make long prayers : therefore ye shall receive greater damnation , 440

Homily LXXIV. — Matt, .xxiii. 29, 30. Woe unto you, because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and
garnish their sepulchres, and say, If we had been in the days of our fathers we would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the prophets 445

Homily LXXV. — Matt. x.xiv. i, 2. And Jesus went out from the Temple, and departed. And His dis-
ciples came to Him to show Him the buildings of the Temple. And He answered and said unto them.
See ye not all these things ? Verily I say unto you, there shall not be left here one stone upon another,
that shall not be thrown down 450

Homily LXXVI. — Matt. xxiv. 16 — 18. Then let them which be in Judaea flee into the mountains. And
let him that is on the housetop not come down to take anything out of his house. Neither let him
which is in his field return back to take his clothes 456

Homily LXXVII. — Matt xxiv. 32, 33. Now learn a parable of the fig tree ; when his branch is yet
tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh : so likewise ye, when ye shall see all
these things, know that it is near, even at the doors 462

Homily LXXVIII. — Matt. xxv. i — 30. Then shall the kingdom of Heaven, He sa-ith, be likened unto
ten virgins, which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the Bridegroom. But five of them were
wise, and the other five foolish, which took not. He saith, oil.

Then while the Bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. And at midnight there was a cry made,
Behold, the Bridegroom cometh ; go ye out to meet Him. And the five arose, and being in perplexity,
said to the wise. Give us of your oil. But they consented not, saying, Not so, lest there be not enough
for us and you ; go to them that sell, and buy.

And while they were gone for this, the Bridegroom came, and those went in ; but these came afterwards,
saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. But he answered and said. Verily I say unto you, 1 know you not.
Watch therefore, for ye know not the day nor the hour.

Then He spake again another parable. A man travelling into a far country, called his own servants, and
delivered unto them his goods ; to one five talents, to another two, to another one, to every man
according to his several ability, and took his journey. Then, when the two had brought him the
double, he that had been entrusted with the one talent brought it alone, and being blamed saith, I
knew that thou art a hard man, reaping where thou hast not sown, and gathering where thou hast not
strawed ; and I was afraid, and hid thy talent ; lo ! there thou hast that is thine. His Lord answered
and said. Thou wicked servant, thou knewest that I reap where I have not sown, and gather where I
have not strawed: thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to the exchangers, and then at my com-
ing I might have received mine own with usury. Take therefore the talent from him, and give it to
him that hath ten talents. For to him that hath shall be given, and he shall have more abundantly ;
but from him that hath not, shall be taken away even that which he hath. And cast ye the unprofita-
ble servant into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth ... 469

Homily LXXIX. — Matt. xxv. 31 — 41. When the Son of Man shall come in the glory of His Father, and
all the holy angels with Him, then shall He sit, saith He, upon the throne of His glory, and He shall
divide the sheep from the kids ; "and the one he will accept, because they fed Him, when an luiiigcrcd,
and gave Him drink when thirsty, and took Him in when a stranger, and clothed Him when naked,
and visited Him when sick, and came to see Him when in prison : and He will give the kingdom to
them. But the others, accusing them for the opposite things," he will send into the eternal fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels ... 474

Homily LX.XX. — Matt. xxvi. 6, 7. Now when Jesus was in Hethany, in the house of .Simon the leper,
there came unto Ilima woman having an alabaster box of very precious ointment, and poured it on His
Head, as He sat at meat . . 4S0

Homily LX.XXL — Matt. xxvi. 17, iS. Now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples
came to Jesus, saying, Where wilt Thou that we prepare for Thee to cat the Passover? And He said,


xvi CONTENTS OF THE HOMILIES.

PAGE

Go into the city to such a man, and say unto him, The Master saith, My time is at hand ; I will keep
the Passover at thy house with My disciples . 485

Homily LXXXII. — Matt. xxvi. 26 — 28. And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and gave thanks,
and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat ; This is My Body.

And He took a cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it ; This is My Blood of

the New Testament, which is shed for many, for the remission of sins 491

Homily LXXXIII. — Matt. xxvi. 36 — 38. Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane,
and saith unto the disciples Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder. And He took with Him Peter
and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be very sorrowful and very heavy : and He saith unto them,
My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death ; tarry ye here, and watch with Me 497

Homily LXXXIV. — Matt. xxvi. 51 — 54. And, behold, one of them which were with Jesus stretched
forth his hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant of the high priest's, and smote off his ear.

Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword unto his place, for all they that take the sword, shall
perish by the sword. Thihkest thou that I cannot pray to My Father, and He shall presently give me
more than twelve legions of angels ? How then should the Scriptures be fulfilled that thus it must be ? 501

Homily LXXXV. — Matt. xxvi. 67, 68. Then did they spit in His face, and buffeted Him, and others
smote Him with the palms of their hands, saying, Prophesy unto us, Thou Christ, who is he that smote
Thee ■ 506

Homily LXXXVI. — Matt, xxvii. 11, 12. And Jesus stood before the governor ; and the governor asked
Him, saying. Art Thou the King of the Jews? And Jesus said unto him, Thou sayest. And when
He was accused of the chief priests and elders, He answered nothing 511

Homily LXXXVH. — Matt, xxvii. 27 — 29. Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common
hall, and gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers ; and they stripped Him, and put on Him a
purple robe ; and when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it on His Head, and a reed in His
Right Hand; and they bowed the knee before Him, and mocked Him, saying. Hail, King of the Jews ! 515

Homily LXXXVHI. — Matt, xxvii. 45 — 48. Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the
earth until the ninth hour. And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, and said, Eli, Eli,
lama sabachthani ? that is to say, My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me ? Some of them
that stood there, when they head that, said, This Man calleth for Elias. And straightway one of them
ran, and took a sponge, and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave Him to drink . . . 520

Homily LXXXIX. — Matt, xxvii. 62 — 64. Now the next day, that followed the day of the preparation,
the chief priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate, saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver
said, while He was yet alive, After three days I will rise again. Command therefore that the sepulchre
be made sure until the third day, lest His disciples come and steal Him away, and say to the
people. He is risen from the dead : so the last error should be worse than the first 525

Homily XC. — Matt, xxviii. 11 — 14. Now when they were going, behold, some of the watch came into the
city, and declared unto the chief priests all the things that were done. And when they had assembled
with the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave large money unto the soldiers, saying, Say ye. His
disciples came by night, and stole Him away while we slept, and if this come to the governor's ears,
we will persuade him, and secure you 530


INTRODUCTORY ESSAY.

ST. CHRYSOSTOM AS AN EXEGETE.
BY M. B. RIDDLE, D.D.


The pre-eminence of Chrysostom as a preacher remains undisputed, despite the many
reversals of judgment that have resulted from modern historical investigations; no voice has
been raised against the popular verdict, repeated in every age, that awards to him the first
place among pulpit orators in the Eastern Church.

Nor has there been any serious difference of opinion in regard to his personal char-
acter. His intense moral earnestness has always been recognized, and the man has been
honored because it was distinctly felt that the man gave power to the oration. "Golden
mouth " avails little, unless it belongs to a golden man. The rhetorical training of his
earlier years doubtless contributed much to his skill as a preacher, but his e.xegetical
method was perhaps a still more important factor.

I. The Place of Chrysostom in the Hisiorv of Exegesis.

The position held by Chrysostom in the history of exegesis is remarkable. Owing to
a peculiar combination of circumstances he, more than any of the Fathers, was enabled to
avoid the errors alike of the allegorizing and dogmatic tendencies. The former tendency
was the prevalent one in the Christian Church in the Ante-Nicene period; the latter, espec-
ially in the West, became dominant during the Post-Nicene period, using for its own ends
the earlier erroneous theory. Chrysostom represents the Antiochian reaction against the
allegorizing method, while he ante-dates by a generation, at least, the time when the eccle-
siastical or dogmatic tlieory became overpowering in its influence. This historical position
must be recognized in estimating his character as an exegete, as well as in accounting for
his eminence as an interpreter of Scripture, ^[odern scholarsliip with comparative unan-
imity accords to him tiiis eminence. It is true that one is disposed to dissent from this
judgment on first reading the Homilies of Chrysostom. Trained in our modern exegetical
methods the reader may unconsciously compare the expositions of the Greek Father with
those of Luther and Calvin, if not with those of Meyer and Weiss. Such a comparison is
of course an anachronism. A study of other patristic exegetes must lead to an ciulorsement
of the prevalent opinion as to the merits of Chrysostom as an expositor. \\\ inunense mass
of homiletical literature of which he was tlie author has been preserveil, and of course
reveals very unetiual results. Marks of carelessness, especially in citation, abound; tlie
habits of tlie " practical j^reacher " often leads to long digressions, to elaboration of matters
that at best hold only the relation of a tangent to the truth of the text. Yet less than most


xviu THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.

pulpit orators does Chrysostom warp the interpretation itself to suit liis homiletical purpose.
Occasionally vehement invective occurs when an exegetical difficulty is encountered, and
it is easy to suppose that unconsciously the former has been used to cover up the latter.
But there are few evidences of lack of candor in the treatment of such difficulties. It must
be confessed that Chrysostom is not always true to his own principles of interpretation, yet
these instances of inconsistency are usually due to a desire to enforce an ethical lesson per-
tinent to the occasion, even though the application was scarcely pertinent to the text.
Owing to his ignorance of Hebrew, Chrysostom was not properly equipped for the work of
expounding the Old Testament. He treats the LXX. as though it were of final authority,
save in a few instances where the variations of other Greek versions have occasioned discus-
sion. Frequently he makes use of verbal suggestions of the Greek that have no warrant in
the Hebrew text. Yet, where he is not thus misled, his comments on the Old Testament
present the same characteristics as those on the New.

The most marked peculiarity of Chrysostom as an exegete is his comparative freedom
from the allegorizing tendency that prevailed in the early Christian centuries. In contend-
ing with the Jews, the Christian apologists, from Justin Martyr onward, had inevitably
followed to some extent the methods of their opponents. The Jewish schools of interpreters,
both at Alexandria and in Palestine, while somewhat antagonistic to each other, had in
common this allegorizing habit. Argument about the meaning of the Old Testament nec-
essarily fostered a similar tendency among Christian writers. Moreover, the Christian
authors of the second and third centuries were not men of pre-eminent talent or acquire-
ments. The victory won by the church was ethical rather than intellectual. Then, as
now, profound piety, when not combined with accurate knowledge and mental acumen,
delighted in mystical fancies. Types could be invented far more easily than texts could be
investigated. At length this tendency found in Origen an advocate who had the ability to
formulate its principles, and also the learning and industry necessary to illustrate the
method by copious comments of his own. Facile princeps as a mystical interpreter, Origen's
influence is still felt, and in his own age it was dominant in exegesis. It is true the dog-
matic principle was already gaining the mastery, yet both the Orthodox and their opponents
made use of allegory: the former combined the two tendencies, the latter placed them in
antagonism. Curiously enough the doctrinal controversy that arose in consequence of
some of Origen's views was made the occasion of an attack upon Chrysostom, and the
kindness he showed to certain Egyptian monks, who were followers of Origen, became the
pretext for those harsh measures which resulted in his banishment and death.' Yet Chry-
sostom, in his writings, shows no sympathy with the philosophic speculations of Origen. and
his method as an exegete is far removed from that implied in the principles laid down by
the latter. The great preacher never dishonors the literal, or historical, sense of Scripture,
and though he occasionally refers to interpretations zara avaYwyT^v, using the phrase applied
by Origen to the mystical sense of passages, these are never exalted above the plain mean-
ing of the words of the text. No one living in the age of Chrysostom could be a diligent
student of the Bible and ignore the labors of Origen. Despite his advocacy of the mystical
theory and his excessive speculative tendency he had done more for exegetical theology
than any of his predecessors. In these days we owe him too much to forget these serv-
ices. The wonder is that Chrysostom, familiar with his writings, was so little influenced by
the erroneous hermeneutical principles he advocated and exemplified. The earnest prac-
tical purpose of Chrysostom did much in preserving him from allegorizing, but his training
of Antioch under Diodorus, afterwards bishop of Tarsus, was probably still more influential
for good. Diodorus is reckoned the leader of the so-called Antiochian school of exegetes.

I See Stephens, Li/e of St. Chrysosiojii, pp. 286-326 ; Schaff, History of the Christian Church, vol. III., pp. 702 et seq.


INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. xix


He was the first to oppose directly the false methods of Origen. It is true " the three
Cappadocians," Basil the Great, his brother Gregory of Nyssa, and his friend Gregory
Nazianzen, had but a qualified admiration for the exegetical results attained by Origen,
though diligent in their use of his writings. The conflicts of the period interfered, how-
ever, with any decided hermeneutical advance; the dogmatic interest of the Arian contro-
versy still overshadowing all other theological movements. Diodorus (f 394) was president
of a monastery in the vicinity of Antioch. Under his guidance Chrysostom and his friend
Basil pursued a semi-monastic life of seclusion and study for nearly six years (ending in a.
D. 381). Theodore, who was afterwards bishop of Mopsuestia, and the father of the
Nestorian theology, was also his friend and fellow-student. While Diodorus was not free
from rationalizing tendencies, he undoubtedly represents a healthy re-action toward the
historico-exegetical theory of interpretation. His writings and his influence on his two
most distinguished pupils, Chrysostom and Theodore, plainly prove this. "The practical
element in Diodorus, his method of literal and common-sense interpretation of Holy Scrip-
ture, was inherited chiefly by Chrysostom; the intellectual vein, his conceptions of the
relation between the Godhead and Manhood in Christ, his opinions respecting the final
restoration of mankind, which were almost equivalent to a denial of eternal punishment,
were reproduced mainly by Theodore." '

While the influence of the Antiochian school seems transient, it has achieved much in
stating more clearly the correct principles of interpretation; it has achieved still more in
preparing for his work the greatest preacher of the Greek church. Avoiding to a great
extent the extremes of both Origen and Diodorus, Chrysostom as an interpreter is probably
nearer to us than any Father of the Eastern Church. A careful study of his Homilies
must lead to that conviction. " He set forth the verbal meaning with constant attention to
the course of thought, and connected therewith, in harmony with the form which he had
chosen, the religious and moral observations which were founded directly on the text. Dog-
matic and polemic digressions were not necessarily excluded, but were never made the
principal thing, and the more or less frequently inserted allegorical additions appear rather
as rhetorical ornament and deference to custom than as something necessary to the exposi-
tor."'

The doctrinal views of Chrysostom were positive and usually well defined. He does
not fail to oppose heretical opinions. So great a preacher could hot be without a theology.
Yet, as already intimated, the dogmatic principle of interpretation does not dominate his
exegesis to any great extent.

It thus appears that, whatever may be defects in his expositions, however faulty his
comments may seem to us, Chrysostom stands as the representative of more correct prin-
ciples than any of the early Fathers. That his eminence as a preacher is due to this fact
can scarcely be doubted. A new interest in his writings wouM serve to emphasize the im-
portance of adherence to the historico-exegetical method of interpretation. Great pulpit
orators do not need to indulge in mystical fancies, nor does their true power arise from
dogmatic warping of the sense of Scripture.

n. Extent and Charactkr of Chrysostom's Exkcktical Labors.

I. The exegetical labors of Chrysostom are embodied in his Homilies, of which more
than six hundred have been preserved. These are for the most part exjiository in tiicir
character, usually forming a continuous series upon some book of Scripture. The parts of

' Stephens St. Chrysostom, p. 31; comp. pp. a.7-32, on Diodorus. On the Antiochian School, see Sciiaff, Church Histoiy, 111.
pp. 935-7; Reuss History o/tlie New Tfstamenty II., pp. 543-6, American edition.
!> Reuss, History New Testament, p. 544, .\mfricun odttion. ■


XX thp: works of st. chrysostom.

the Bible thus treated are: in the Old Testament, Genesis and tiie Book of Psalms; in the
New Testament, all the books except the gospels of Mark and Luke, the Catholic Epistles
and Revelation. " Commentaries, properly so-called, he wrote only on the first eight
chapters of Isaiah and on the Epistle to the Galatians" (Schaff'). Most of the Homilies
were preserved by short-hand reports, but some were published by Chrysostom himself.^
There are internal evidences that in many cases the spoken discourse had not been previ-
ously written, <?. g., the rebuke of applause and of inattention on account of some dis-
tracting incident. Previous study is equally manifest in the expository portions; but the
method of delivery as well as the method of preservation must modify our judgment of the
preacher's exegetical accuracy. Probably many of the inconsistencies and inexact citations,
noticeable in the Homilies, are due to one or the other of these causes.

From an exegetical point of view the Homilies on the Old Testament rank lowest,
those on the Pauline Epistles highest. The reasons for this are easily discovered. For
the exposition of the Old Testament Chrysostom did not have the necessary equipment,
being ignorant of Hebrew. In explaining the Gospels he fails to discuss the historical ques-
tions with fullness. This was owing no doubt to his distinct homiletical purpose. For the
same reason he passes over most of the harmonistic questions, or answers them indefinitely.
But in expounding our Lord's longer discourses the same qualities as an interpreter which
fitted him so well for explaining the Pauline Epistles enable him to rise to his full eminence.

2. In all the Homilies there is apparent a proper conception of the relation of the Old
Testament and the New. Chrysostom' s treatment of the two parts of revelation agrees in
many respects with the methods now generally accepted in the subdivision of Exegetical
Theology technically termed Biblical Theology. He recognizes the progressive movement;
thus holding to the essential unity of Scripture, but also admitting the incompleteness of
the Old Testament and the superiority of the New. The distinction between the two is
never regarded as an antagonism. Indeed some of the severest utterances in the Homilies
is in opposition to the error that denies the authority of the Old Testament as a revela-
tion from the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. But the unity of the two parts of Scripture
are not maintained at the expense of the historical sense of the Old Testament. While
Chrysostom finds in the older revelation a prophecy of Christ who was to come, " he fails
not also to point out the moral aspect of prophecy as a system of teaching rather than pre-
diction, as preparatory to the advent of Jesus Christ in the flesh, not only by informing
men's minds, but disciplining their hearts to receive Him. "^ Probably the absence of any
polemical purpose against the Jews aided him in attaining a position more correct than most of
some of the earlier Fathers. His view of the relation of Christ to the law is set forth in
Homily XVI. on Matthew." In his view of inspiration Chrysostom recognized the Divine-
human character of the Scriptures. While he does not formally state his theory, the
method he adopts implies the value of each and every part of the Bible, the importance of
marking the sense of every word. But the mechanical theory is nowhere suggested: it is in
fact opposed by his statements regarding the variations in the Gospels.^ Indeed no one
could be such an expositor as Chrysostom was without an acceptance alike of the Divine
authority and human authorship of the Scriptures. These not in antithesis, but in syn-
thesis. Denying the former, there could have been no such power in preaching; ignoring
the latter, there would have been no such care in his comments. This view of the Bible
was the result of his profound and constant study of it. The same study gave him the

1 History of the Christian Churchy III., p. 939.

2 Stephens, St. Chrysostom, p. 427. He refers to Tillemont, Memoircs, vol. xi.. p. 37. •

3 Stephens, pp. 423-4.

4 See pp. 103, etc., in tliis volume.
0 See p. 3, in this volume.


INTRODUCTORY ESSAY. xxi

wealth of Scriptural illustration and suggestion so noticeable in his Homilies. Knowledge
of the whole Bible and love of the whole Bible are manifest everywhere.

3. In textual criticism Chrysostom does not afford us the help that might be expected
from the extent of his labors. Origen is incomparably more useful to the textual critic.
Even in citing the LXX. many inaccuracies occur, and the Hebrew text is ignored, except
in a few cases where doctrinal discussion had arisen.'

As Westcott and Hort have shown, ^ the Syrian text of the New Testament had become
dominant in the Eastern church about A. D. 350, It held in the time of Chrysostom very
much the same position afterwards allowed to the received text during the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries. Accordingly we find few indications of any critical investigations of
the text, and the variations from the Syrian text in the Homilies are neither numerous nor
important. Yet the differences from the received text of our day are worth noticing.^ In
all such matters, however, there enter several elements of uncertainty, combining to sub-
tract from the value of the Homilies for critical purposes.'' In the case of Chrysostom we
know that the Homilies were taken down by others. Hence we are not sure how accurately
the preacher made his citations, how correctly they were reported, nor how much of change
has been made by copyists in the interest of conformity to the text prevalent at the time of
transcription. Quite frequently the same passage occurs in two forms within the limits of
the same Homily. The labors of Mr. Field on the Greek text of Chrysostom show how
much remains to be done before we can cite this Father as a trustworthy witness in regard
to the minor variations of the New Testament text. Fortunately Tischendorf, who had
access to a very ancient codex of the Homilies on Matthew, ^ has given the results of his
collation in his painstaking way. As this codex was not included in the apparatus criticus
of Mr. Field, the supplementary value of Tischendorf's citations is increasec'.

Some peculiar readings occur in the Homilies on Matthew; the most remarkable is,
however, a reading of Luke ix. 31. In Homily LVI. 3 (p. 346 of this volume), Chrysostom
expressly reads ^w^av for I'I^kJov, commenting upon the word. It seems altogether probable
that there was no such reading prevalent in his day, but that the word W?)j, which stands
immediately before in Luke ix. 31, was accidentally substituted for £^<>Si». This might
happen from a slip of the memory on the part of Chrysostom, or some scribe might have
made the blunder in an isolated copy used by the preacher. In other respects Chrysostom
is a witness for the prevalence of the Antiochian or Syrian text, from which our receiveil
text has descended. He ignores the pericope of the woman taken in adultery (John vii. 53,
viii. 11), as do all the Greek Fathers before the eighth century.

The minor variations do not fully appear in the Oxford translation, owing to tlie habit
of using the text of the Authorized Version, even when its differences from the text of
Chrysostom were quite obvious. Accordingly the emendations of the Revised Version have
been given, without comment, in the additional foot-notes to this volume, wherever that
Version represents more accurately the readings in the Homilies.

4. As already intimated, Chrysostom's ignorance of Hebrew detracts from his trust-
worthiness as an Old Testament expositor. In the New Testament he is much superior.
Yet even here he is open to criticism. Besides an occasional allegorizing C(Miiment, he
shows much inaccuracy, sometimes inconsistency, in dealing witii the historical questions
that arise in connection with tlie Gospel History. He seems to have no taste for the dis-

• See, for example, on p. 32, where the pre-eminence of the LXX. version in asserted, in the disciisaiun of Isa. viii. 3.

2 Wk.stcott and HoKr, (irffA- TetlamenI, vol. ii. pp. 135-143.

3 In this volume most of the variations from the received text are indicated in the addititmal foot-notes.

4 On the untruslworthinrs.H of patristic citations, sec S( kuknku, /ntriutuitii'n to Critiiism 0/ Ne^u Tfstttinrnt, 3d ed, pp.
416-7. The labor bestowed on the present volume enables the editor to endorse, lOn amorf, the jiidKtnent of Mr. .Scrivener.

5 The codex is of the sixth century (Wolfenbuttel), designated in Tischendorf's notes us Chr^"*'. See Sckivunbk, /HtroJuilion,
etc., p. 419.


xxii THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.

cussion of such questions. Augustin shows far more judgment in his treatment of these
problems. But the ethical purpose probably debarred Chrysostom from such investiga-
tions. As regards the length of our Lord's ministry, the vexed question of our Lord's
brethren, the identity of Mary Magdalene and the woman who was a sinner, etc., we derive
little satisfaction from these Homilies. Occasionally topographical and archaeological topics
are referred to in terms that are misleading or positively erroneous. Hence the Homilies
on the Gospels are usually estimated as less valuable than those on the Epistles.

But where the exegesis deals with the human heart, its motives, its weakness, or with
the grace and love of Jesus Christ, there Chrysostom rises, and remains " the Master in
Israel.'' Few have made advances beyond him in commenting upon the parables, the mir-
acles of healing, the great discourses of our Lord. His sturdy common sense enabled
him to expound the great eschatological discourse (Mat. xxiv., xxv.) in a manner so free
from chiliastic extravagance, that to-day his exposition can be used with little alteration.

These characteristics of his exegesis fitted Chrysostom to excel in his exposition of the
Epistles. Here there is more of continuated and logical method than in the Homilies on
the Gospels. Each Epistle he is careful to consider "as a connected whole; and, in order
to impress this on his hearers, he frequently recapitulates at the beginning of a Homily all
the steps by which the part under consideration has been reached. In his introduction to
each letter he generally makes useful observations on the author, the time, place, and style
of composition, the readers for whom it was intended, the general character and arrange-
ment of its contents." ' The Pauline authorship of the Epistle to the Hebrews is accepted
in all the references to that book which occur in the Homilies or other portions of Scripture.

The doctrinal positions of Chrysostom naturally influence his explanations of certain
portions of the Epistle, but these are to be judged by the stage of development attained by.
the theology of the Eastern Church in the Post-Nicene period.

The minute attention necessary in editing this volume has compelled the writer to note
the excellence of the great Greek Father as an exegete. Beginning the task with some
prejudice, mainly due to a knowledge of the inaccuracy of Chrysostom's citations, he now
gladly pays his humble tribute to the genius of the author, hoping that students of the
volume will be enabled to echo the praises that for so many centuries have been bestowed
upon John of the Golden Mouth.

' Stephens, .S"^. Chrysostom^ p. 425.


HOMILIES OF ST. JOHN CHRVSOSTOM,


ARCHBISHOP OF CONSTANTLNQPLE,


ON TIIK


GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MATTHEW.


HOMILY I.


It were indeed meet for us not at all to
require ' the aid of the written Word, but to
exhibit a life so pure, that the grace of the
Spirit should be instead of books to our
souls, and that as these are inscribed with
ink, even so should our hearts be with the
Spirit, But, since we have utterly put away
from us this grace, come, let us at any rate
embrace the second best course.

For that the former was better, God hath
made manifest,- both by His words, and by
His doings. Since unto Noah, and unto
Abraham, and unto his offsi)ring, and unto
Job, and unto Moses too. He discoursed not
by writings, but Himself by Himself, finding
their mind pure. But after the whole people
of the Hebrews had fallen into the very pit of
wickedness, then and thereafter was a written
word, and tables, and the admonition which
is given by these.

And this one may perceive was the case,
not of the saints in the Old Testament onlv,
but also of those in the New. For neither to
the apostles did Ciod give anything in writ-
ing, but insteatl of written words He promised
that He would give them tlie grace of the
Spirit: for " He," saith our Lord, " sha
bring all things to your remembrance."' And
that thou mayest learn that this was far bet-

■ [livSi SfttrOat, " not even to need," as below in lec. a.--R.]

2 [tSijAiuaf f, "made fvidnit, showed. " Tl><- trnnHlator very
frequently nnders the aorist liy llie Kii^lish i)erfctt. Altenlion
will be c.iUcd to some insiuiiics, where the Sense is iifletlcil by
such rencbrinvrs. K.]

3 John xiv. 26.


ter, hear what He saith by the Prophet: " I
will make a new covenant with you, putting
my laws into their mind, and in their heart I
will write them," anil, "they shall be all
taught of God.''-' And Paul too, pointing
out the same superiority, said, that they had
received a law " not in tables of stone, but in
I fleshy tables of the heart." ^

But since in process of time they made

I shipwreck, some witli regard to doctrines,

j others as to life and manners, there was again

! need that they should be put in remembrance

by the written word.

2. Reflect then how great an evil it is for
us, who ought to live so purely as not even
to need written words, but to yield up our
hearts, as books, to tlie Sjiirit; now that we
have lost that honor, and are come to have
need of these, to fail again in duly employ-
ing even tliis second remedy. For if it be a
blame to stanti in neeil of written words, and
not to have brought tlowii on ourselves tlie
grace of the Spirit; consitler how heavy the
charge of not choosing to profit even after
this assistance, but ratiier treating wliat is
written with neglect, as if it were cast forth
11 without purpose, ami at random, and so
bringing tlown upon ourselves our punisiiment
with increase.'

But that no such effect may ensue, let us

4 Jerem.xxxi. 3i-ri ; In. liv. 13 ; Heb. viii. 8-ii ; John vi. 45.

5 a Cor. iii. j. ['I nr trxt here a^'rccs with the Rcc, not with
the oldest MKs., folliiwrd in the K. \'.- K.)

<> I Literally, "iIm- punlsliiiw m .'.'/.,.' /, i;reiitcr." — K.]


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily I.


give strict lieed unto the things that are writ-
ten; and let us learn how the Old Law was
given on the one hand, how on the other the
New Covenant.

3. How then was that law given in time
past, and when, and where ? After the de-
struction of the Egyptians, in the wilderness,
on Mount Sinai, when smoke and fire were
rising up out of the mountain, a trumpet
sounding, thunders and lightnings, and Moses
entering into the very depth of the cloud.'
But in the new covenant not so, — neither in
a wilderness, nor in a mountain, nor with
smoke and darkness and cloud and tempest;
but at the beginning of the day, in a house,
while all were sitting together, with great
quietness, all took place. For to those, being
more unreasonable, and hard to guide, there
was need of outward pomp,- as of a wilder-
ness, a mountain, a smoke, a sound of trum-
pet, and the other like things: but they who
were of a higher character, and submissive,
and who had risen above mere corporeal im-
aginations,^ required none of these. And if
even in their case there was a sound, it was
not for the sake of the apostles, but for the
Jews, who were present, on whose account
also the tongues of fire appeared. For if,
even after this, some said, " they are filled
with new wine,"'' much more would they have
said so, had they seen none of these things.

And in the Old Testament, it was upon
Moses' going up, that God came down; but
here, when our nature hath been carried up
into Heaven, or rather unto the royal
throne, then the Spirit makes His descent.

Now had the Spirit been an inferior being, =
the results would not have been greater and
more wonderful. For indeed these tables
are far better, and the achievements more
illustrious. Since the apostles came not
down from a mountain, as Moses, bearing
monuments of stone in their hands, but car-
rying about the Spirit in their mind, and
pouring forth a kind of treasure and fountain
of doctrines and of gifts and of all things that
are good, so they went everywhere around,
and became, through that grace, living books
and laws. Thus they won over "the three
thousand," thus "the five thousand," * thus
the nations of the world; God, by their
tongue, discoursing with all that approached
them.

4. By whom Matthew also, being filled with
the Spirit, wrote, what he did write: — Matthew


I [Literally, " the very cloud.'" — R.]

4 Acts ii. 13.

5 Alluding to the blasphemy of the Macedonians, so often
referred to by St. Chrysostom.

6 Acts ii. 41 ; and iv. 4.


the Publican, for I am not ashamed to name
him by his trade, neither him nor the others.
For this in a very special way indicates both
the grace of the Spirit, and their virtue.

And He hath properly called His work by
a name (which signifies) good tidings. ^
Yea, for it was removal of punishment, and
remission of sins, and " righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption,'' ^ and adop-
tion, and an inheritance of Heaven, and a re-
lationship unto the Son of God, which he
came declaring unto all; to enemies, to the
perverse, to them that were sitting in dark-
ness. What then could ever be equal to
these good tidings? God on earth, man in
Heaven; and all became mingled together,
angels joined the choirs of men, men had
fellowship with the angels, and with the other
powers above: and one might see the long
war brought to an end, and reconciliation
made between God and our nature,' the devil
brought to shame, demons in flight, death
destroyed. Paradise opened, the curse blotted
out, sin put out of the way, error driven off,
truth returning, the word of godliness every-
where sown, and flourishing in its growth,
the polity of those above planted on the
earth, those powers in secure intercourse with
us, and on earth angels continually haunt-
ing, and hope abundant touching things to
come.

Therefore he hath called the history good
tidings, forasmuch as all other things surely
are words only without substance; as, for in-
stance, plenty of wealth, greatness of power,
kingdoms, and glories, and honors, and what-
ever other things among men are accounted
to be good: but those which are published by
the fishermen would be legitimately and prop-
erly called good tidings: not only as being
sure and immoveable blessings, and beyond
our deserts, but also as being given to us with
all facility.

For not by laboring and sweating, not by
fatigue and suffering, but merely as being be-
loved of God, we received what we have
received.

5. And why can it have been, that when
there were so many disciples, two write only
from among the apostles, and two from
among their followers ? (For one that was a
disciple of Paul, and another of Peter, to-
gether with Matthew and John, wrote the
Gospels.) It was because they did nothing
for vainglory, but all things for use.

7 [I.iterally, " And he properly called his work good tidings"
(evayyeAtov). — R.]

8 [A reminiscence of i Cor. i. 30. — R.]

9 [Literally, " reconciliations of God to our nature." The doc-
trinal point of view is Pauline : God is reconciled, His anger re-
moved.— R.]


Homily I.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


"What then? Was not one evangelist
sufificient to tell all ?" One indeed was suffi-
cient; but if there be four that write, not at
the same times, nor in the same places, !
neither after having met together, and con- 1
versed one with another, and then they speak i
all things as it were out of one mouth, this I
becomes a very great demonstration of the
truth/

6. " But the contrary," it may be said,
" hath come to pass, for in many places they
are convicted of discordance." Nay, this
very thing is a very great evidence of their
truth. For if they had agreed in all things
exactly even to time, and place, and to the
very words, none of our enemies would have
believed but that they had met together, and
had written what they wrote by some human
compact; because such entire agreement as
this Cometh not of simplicity. But now even
that discordance which seems to e.xist in little
matters delivers them from all suspicion, and
speaks clearly in behalf of the character of
the writers.

But if there be anything touching times or
places, which they have related differently,
this nothing =^ injures the truth of what they
have said. And these things too, so far as
God shall enable us, we will endeavor, as we
proceed, to point out; requiring you, to-
gether with what we have mentioned, to
observe, that in the chief heads, those which
constitute our life and furnish out^ our doc-
trine, nowhere is any of them found to have
disagreed, no not ever so little.

But what are these points ? Such as fol-
low: That God became man, that He wrought
miracles, that He was crucified, that He
was buried, that He rose again, that He as-
cended, that He will judge, that He hath
given commandments tending to salvation,
that He hath brought in a law not contrary
to the Old Testament, that He is a Son, tliat
He is only-begotten, that He is a true Son,
that He is of the same sul)stance with the
Fattier, and as many tilings as are like these;
for touching these we shall find that there is
in them a full agreement.

And if amongst the miracles they have not
all of them mentioned all, but one these, the
other those, let not this trouble thee. For if
on the one hand one had spoken of all, the
number of the rest would liave been superflu-
ous; and if again all had written fresh things,
and different one from another, the proof of


■ [The independence of the CiosprU in thim emphaiiixed hy the
most ci<n>prtent exci;ctc (if the Niccnc pcricid. His treatment of
the apiiiirent discrepancies is suKjjestive. — RJ

■-' I (hat is, "in nothing," in nn respect. -R.]

1 ffi/YitpoTouffii'. ( Literally, " weld logclhcr," used of organizing;
a hoily iif soldiers. — R.J


their agreement would not have been mani-
fest. For this cause they have both treated
of many in common, and each of them hath
also received and declared something of his
own; that, on the one hand, he might not
seem superfluous, and cast on the heap* to
no purpose; on the other, he might make our
test of the truth of their affirmations perfect. =

7. Now Luke tells us also the cause where-
fore he proceeds to write: "that thou may-
est hold," saith he, " the certainty of the
words wherein thou hast been instructed; " ^
that is, that being continually reminded thou
mayest hold to the certainty,^ and abide in
certainty.

But as to John, he hath himself kept silence
touching the cause; yet,* (as a tradition'
saith, which hath come down to us from the
first, even from the Fathers,) neither did he
come to write without purpose; but foras-
much as it had been the care of the three to
dwell upon the account of the dispensation,'"
and the doctrines of the Godhead were near
being left in silence, he, moved by Christ,
then and not till then set himself to compose
his Gospel." And this is manifest both from
the history itself, and from the opening of
his Gospel. For he doth not begin like the
rest from beneath, but from rliove, from the
same point, at which he was aiming, and it
was with a view to this that " he composed the
whole book. And not in the beginning only,
but throughout all the Gospel, he is more
lofty than the rest.

Of ALatthew again it is said," that when
those who from amongst the Jews had be-
lieved came to him, and besought him to
leave to them in writing those same things,
which he had spoken to them by word, he
also composed his Gospel in the language of
the Hebrews. And ^Iark too, in Egypt,'* is


4 Trpo<Tti}p'i(t>6ai airAuit. 5 [" accurate." — R.]

* I. like I. 4.

7 ".\<T<^(iAtia, " certainly," seems to be used here first ohjtct-
iT<-ly\ as when we siiv, "a thin){ is certain," then suhjeclivriy, us
" I am certain of it.'

** [I'he tran'ihiii'r, with the Latin, follows the readme ii ; most
Mss. nave yap, which is the more dilTu ult reading. ^R.l

9 So St. Iren.cus, iii. 11, 1. " John, the disciple of the Lord,
piirposinK by the publication of a (Sospel to take awny the error
which C'erinthus had H<iwn amuOK mrnt and lonn before him those
who are ciilUd Nicolailans .... thus bej,;an the iustriution of
his Gospel : In thr l-fi^hmiHg, Sr'c" .Sec also St. flem. of Alex,
in Kuseb. K. H. vi. 14 ; Si. |erou\e, I'ref. lo I'oiu. on St. Matth.

"^ oixoro^ia, /'.<-., our Lord'* assumption of the .MuuIuhhI. The
word is so used continually by the F.illicrs.

" (1 his paraithrase fairly brings out the sense, but is n very
free ren<lrrin>{ ol the text. — R.l

i'.f \tca'i £id toDto.I

«J KiiHcb. E. H. iii. 34 ; St. Jer. de Vir. III. 3: Ori^. in Matth.
t. iii. 440; St. Iren. iii. 1 Hut St. fhrysostom seems to l>e quot-
inK the words of some other writer |iesi<les these.

'< < >r in Knmr. before the death of .St. I'etrr, who approved the
(iospcl. So St. Clem. Alex, in Kuseb. K. H. ii, 11; ; St. Jer. de Vir.
niuRtr. c. 8. .St. Iren. iii. i, seems rather to ayree with .St. ("hrys-
ostom. I'erhapn they may tic reconciled by supixisinK St. Mark's
(!ospel written at Rome and •iiproved by St. 1 eler, but not piit>-
lished until after his death, when .St. Mark was in Kfjypt. See
Muuuct's note on the place in St. Irciixusi uud Kuitcb. li, 16.


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily I.


said to have done this self-same thing at the
entreaty of the disciples.

For this cause then Matthew, as writing to
Hebrews, sought to shew nothing more, than
that He was from Abraham, and David; but
Luke, as discoursing to all in. general, traces
up the account higher, going on even to
Adam. And the one begins with His genera-
tion, because nothing was so soothing to the
Jew as to be told that Christ was the offspring
of Abraham and David: the other doth not
so, but mentions many other things, and then
proceeds to the genealogy.

8. But the harmony between them we will
establish, both by the whole world, which
hath received their statements, and by the
very enemies of the truth. For many sects
have had birth, since their time, holding
opinions opposed to their words; whereof
some have received all that they have said,
while some have cut off from the rest certain
portions of their statements, and so retain
them for themselves.' But if there were any
hostility^ in their statements, neither would
the sects, who maintain the contrary part,
have received all, but only so much as seemed
to harmonize with themselves; nor would
those, which have parted off a portion, be
utterly refuted by that portion; so that the
very fragments ^ cannot be hid, but declare
aloud their connexion ^ with the whole body.
And like as if thou shouldest take any part
from the side of an animal, even in that part
thou wouldest find all the things out of which
the whole is composed; — nerves and veins,
bones, arteries, and blood, and a sample, as
one might say, of the whole lump; — so like-
wise with regard to the Scriptures; in each
portion of what is there stated, one may see
the connexion with the whole clearly appear-
ing. Whereas, if they were in discord,
neither could this have been pointed out, and
the doctrine itself had long since been
brought to nought: "for every kingdom,"
saith He, " divided against itself shall not
stand."'* But now even in this shines forth
the might of the Spirit, namely, in that it
prevailed on these men, engaged as they were
in those things which are more necessary and
very urgent, to take no hurt at all from these
little matters.


' The Arians, e.^. and kindred sects, received all the Scrip-
tures ; the Marcionites, besides rejecting the Old Testament re-
ceived only the Gospel of St. Luke, and ten of St. Paul's epistles :
out of which, Tertullian refutes them at large. The Manichaeans
rejected the Old Testament and the Acts of the Apostles . in
which latter the Montanists agreed with them. This was besides
numerous interpolations whicli they all alleged in the books which
they did receive. See St. Aug. Ep. 237.

2 [fioxn, the technical term for " contradiction " when applied
to statements. See Sophocles' Greek Lexicon o/the Roman and
Byzantine periods; sub voce. — R.]

3 Konnara, Gr. 4 Matt. xii. 25 ; Mark lii. 24 ; Luke xi. 17.


Now, where each one was abiding, when he
wrote, it is not right for us to affirm very
positively.

But that they are not opposed to each
other, this we will endeavor to prove, through-
out the whole work. And thou, in accusing
them of disagreement, art doing just the
same as if thou wert to insist upon their
using the same words and forms of speech.

9. And I do not yet say, that those like-
wise who glory greatly in rhetoric and phil-
osophy, having many of them written many
books touching the same matters, have not
merely expressed themselves differently, but
have even spoken in opposition to one an-
other (for it is one thing to speak differently
and another to speak at variance); none of
these things do I say. Far be it from me to
frame our defense from the frenzy of those
men, neither am I willing out of falsehood to
make recommendations for the truth.

But this I would be glad to inquire: how
were the differing accounts believed ? how
did they prevail ? how was it that, while say-
ing opposite things, they were admired, were
believed, were celebrated everywhere in the
world ?

And yet the witnesses of what they said were
many, and many too were the adversaries and
enemies thereof. For they did not write
these things in one corner and bury them,
but everywhere, by sea and by land, they
unfolded them in the ears of all, and these
things were read in the presence of enemies,
even as they are now, and none of the things
which they said offended any one. And very
naturally, for it was a divine power that per-
vaded all, and made it to prosper with all
men.

10. For if it had not been so, how could
the publican, and the fisherman, and the un-
learned, have attained to such philosophy?^
For things, which they that are without have
never been able to imagine, no not in a
dream, are by these men with great certainty
both published and made convincing, and not
in their lives only, but even after death:
neither to two men, nor twenty men, nor an
hundred, nor a thousand, nor ten thousand,
but to cities, nations, and people, both to land
and sea, in the land both of Greeks and bar-
barians, both inhabited and desert; and all
concerning things far beyond our nature. For
leaving the earth, all their discourse is con-
cerning the things in heaven, while they bring
in unto us another principle of life, another

5 [I>iterally, " philosophize such things." Chrysostom, in com-
mon with other and earlier Fathers, uses the terms, 0iAocro</)ia and
<()iAoo-o</>eri', in a wide sense. As tlie translator varies his render-
ing of these words to suit the context, it seems proper to indicate
wlien Chrysostom uses ".hem. — R ]


Homily I.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


manner of living: both wealth and poverty,
freedom and slavery, life and death, our
world and our polity, all changed.

Not like Plato, who composed that ridicu-
lous Republic,' or Zeno, or if there be any
one else that hath written a polity, or hath
framed laws. For indeed, touching all these,
it hath been made manifest by themselves,
that an evil spirit, and some cruel demon at
war with our race, a foe to modesty, and an
enemy to good order, oversetting all things,
hath made his voice be heard in their soul.
When, for example, they make their women
common to all, and stripping virgins naked
in the Palaestra, bring them into the gaze of
men; and when they establish secret mar-
riages, mingling all things together and con-
founding them, and overturning the limits of
nature, what else is there to say? For that
these their sayings are all inventions of
devils, and contrary to nature, even nature
herself would testify, not tolerating what we
have mentioned; and this, though they write
not amidst persecutions, nor dangers, nor
fightings, but in all security and freedom, and
deck it out with many ornaments from many
sources. But these doctrines of the fisher-
men, chased as they were, scourged and in
jeopardy, both learned and unlearned, both
bond and free, both kings and private sol-
diers, both barbarians and Greeks, have re-
ceived with all good will.

II. And thou canst not say, that it was
because these things were trifling and low,
that they were easily to be received by all
men: nay, for these doctrines are far higher
than those. For as to virginity, they never
imagined even the name thereof so much as
in a dream, nor yet of voluntary poverty, nor
of fasting, nor of any other of those things
that are high.

But they that are of our part not only ex-
terminate lust, they chastise not only the act,
but even an unchaste look, and insulting lan-
guage, and disorderly laughter, and dress,
and gait, and clamor, and they carry on
their exactness even to the smallest things,
and have filled the whole earth with the plant
of virginity. And touching God too, and the
things in heaven, they persuade men to be
wise"" with such knowledge as no one of those
hath at any time been able so much as to con-
ceive in his mind. For how could they, wlio
made for gods images of beasts, and of mon-

■ [TToAiTfiaf, as in the latter part of the sentence. This term
also is v.iriiiiisly rcndi-nd by th<- tr;insl;il(ir, to suit the cDntixl.
Hut in this Homily there is always a reference to I'liito's Republic,
when the word iroAiTda is usetl. Hence attention is called to the
instances where it occurs. — K.]

■ [•t>i\o(roit>tiv. literally: "to philosophize what no one of
them was at any time able even to," <•!<■. The negatives urc
repeated in the oriKinal for greater emphasis. — R.J


sters that crawl on the earth, and of other
things still more vile ?

Yet these high doctrines were both ac-
cepted and believed, and they flourish every
day and increase; but the others have passed
away, and perished, having disappeared more
easily than spiders' webs.

And very naturally, for they were demons
that published these things; wherefore be-
sides their uncleanness, their obscurity is
great, and the labor they require greater.
For what could be more ridiculous than that
" republic," ^ in which, besides what I have
mentioned, the philosopher, when he hath
spent lines without number, that he may be
able to shew what justice is, hath over and
above this prolixity filled his discourse with
much indistinctness? This, even if it did
contain anything profitable, must needs be
very useless for the life of man. For if the
husbandman and the smith, the builder and
the pilot, and every one who subsists by the
labor of his hands, is to leave his trade, and
his honest toils, and is to spend such and
such a number of years in order to learn what
justice is; before he has learnt he will often
times be absolutely destroyed by hunger, and
perish because of this justice, not having
learnt anything else useful to be known, and
having ended his life by a cruel death.

12. But our lessons are not such; rather
Christ hath taught* us what is just, and what
is seemly, and what is expetlient, and all
virtue in general, comprising it in few and
plain words: at one time saying that, " on
two commandments hang the Law and the
Prophets; s that is to say, on the love of God
and on the love of our neighbor: at another
time, " Whatsoever ye would that men should
do to you, do ye also to them; for this is the
Law and the Prophets.'

And these things even to a laborer, and to
a servant, and to a widow woman, and to a
very child, and to him that appeareth to be
exceedingly slow of understantiing, are all
plain to comprcliend and easy to learn. For
the lessons of the truth are like this; and tiie
actual result bears witness thereto. .Ml at
least have learncil wliat things they are to do,
and nut learned only, but been emulous also
of tiiem; and not in the cities alone nor in
the midst of the market places, but also in
the summits of tlie mountains.

Yea, for tiiere wilt tiiou see true wisdom'
abounding, and choirs of angels stiining forth
in a human boiiy, and tiie commonwealth" of
Heaven manifested here on earth. For a


4 Uitia(tf.'\ i Matt. XXII. 40.

7 [•hi\


3 firoAiTdat.]

' Slalt. vii. 13. 7 [itiiAoamjiiav a true wisduin. — K.]

" (iroAiTfia, in its proper ease.]


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily i.


commonwealth ' did these fishermen too write
for us, not with commands that it should be
embraced from childhood, like those others,
nor making it a law that the virtuous man
must be so many years old, but addressing
their discourse generally to every age. For
those lessons are children's toys, but these
are the truth of things.

And as a place for this their commonwealth '
they have assigned Heaven, and God they
have brought in as the framer thereof, and
as lawgiver of the statutes there set; as in-
deed was their duty. And the rewards in
their commonwealth ' are not leaves of bay
nor olive, nor an allowance of meat in the
public hall, nor statues of brass, these cold
and ordmary things, but a life which hath no
end, and to become children of God, to join
the angels' choir, and to stand by the royal
throne, and to be always with Christ. And
the popular guides of this commonwealth '
are publicans, and fishermen, and tent-makers,
not such as have lived for a short time, but
such as are now living for ever. Therefore
even after their death they may possibly do
the greatest good to the governed.

This republic' is at war not with men, but
with devils, and those incorporeal powers.
Wherefore also their captain is no one of men,
nor of angels, but God Himself. And the
armor too of these warriors suits the nature
of the warfare, for it is not formed of hides
and steel, but of truth and of righteousness,
and faith, and all true love of wisdom.^

13. Since then the aforesaid republic ' is both
the subject on which this book was written, and
it is now proposed for us to speak thereof, let
us give careful heed to Matthew, discoursing
plainly concerning this: for what he saith is
not his own, but all Christ's, who hath made
the laws of this city.' Let us give heed, I
say, that we may be capable of enrolment
therein, and of shining forth among those
that have already become citizens thereof,
and are awaiting those incorruptible crowns.
To many, however, this discourse seems to be
easy, wiiile the prophetic writings are diffi-
cult. But this again is the view of men who
know not the depth of the thoughts laid up
therein. Wherefore I entreat you to follow
us with much diligence, so as to enter into
the very ocean of the things written, with
Christ for our guide at this our entering in.
• But in order that the word may be the more
easy to learn, we pray and entreat you, as we
have done also with respect to the other
Scriptures, to take up beforehand that portion
of the Scripture which we may be going to


1 [7roAiT€ta, in its proper case.]


2 [</)iAocro(/)ias.]


explain, that your reading may prepare the
way for your understandmg (as also was the
case with the eunuch 3), and so may greatly
facilitate our task.

14. And this because" the questions are
many and frequent. See, for instance, at
once in the beginning of his Gospel, how many
difficulties might be raised one after the
other. As first, wherefore the genealogy of
Joseph is traced, who was not father of
Christ. Secondly, whence may it be made
manifest that He derives His origin from
David, while the forefathers of Mary, who
bare Him, are not known, for the Virgin's
genealogy is not traced ? Thirdly, on what
account Joseph's genealogy is traced, when
he had nothing to do with the birth; while
with regard to the Virgin, who was the very
mother, it is not shown of what fathers, or
grandfathers, or ancestors, she is sprung.

And along with these things, this is also
worth inquiry, wherefore it can be, that,
when tracing the genealogy through the men,
he hath mentioned women also; and why
since he determined upon doing this, he yet
did not mention them all, but passing over
the more eminent, such as Sarah, Rebecca,
and as many as are like them, he hath
brought forward only them that are famed for
some bad thing; as, for instance, if any was
a harlot, or an adulteress, or a mother by an
unlawful marriage, if any was a stranger or
barbarian. For he hath made mention of the
wife of Uriah, and of Thamar, and of Rahab,
and of Ruth, of whom one was of a strange
race, another an harlot, another was defiled
by her near kinsman, and with him not in
the form of marriage, but by a stolen inter-
course, when she had put on herself the mask
of an harlot; and touching the wife of Uriah
no one is ignorant, by reason of the notoriety
of the crime. And yet the evangelist hath
passed by all the rest, and inserted in the
genealogy these alone. Whereas, if women
were to be mentioned, all ought to be so; if
not all but some, then those famed in the way
of virtue, not for evil deeds.

See you how much care is required of us
straightway in the first beginning ? and yet
the beginning seems to be plainer than the
rest; to many perhaps even superfluous, as
being a mere numbering of names.

After this, another point again is worth
inquiry; wherefore he hath omitted three
kings. For if, because they were exceeding
ungodly, he therefore passed by their names
in silence, neither should he have mentioned
the others, that were like them.


3 Acts viii. 28.


4 [Kai yap.]


Homily I.J


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


And this again' is another question; why,
after having spoken of fourteen generations,
he hath not in the third division maintained
the number.^

And wherefore Luke hath made mention
of other names, and not only not all of them
the same, but also many more of them, while
Matthew hath both fewer and different,
though he too hath ended witli Joseph, with
whom Luke likewise concluded.

Ye see how much wakeful attention is
needed on our part, not only for explanation,
but even that we may learn vvhat things we
have to explain. For neither is this a little
matter, to be able to find out the difficulties;
there being also this other hard point, how
Elizabeth, who was of the Levitical tribe, was
kinswoman to Mary.

15. But that we may not overload your
memory, by stringing many things together,
here let us stay our discourse for a time.
For it is enough for you in order that ye be
thoroughly roused, that you learn ^ the ques-
tions only. But if ye long for'' their solution
also, this again depends on yourselves, be-
fore we speak. For if I see you thoroughly
awakened, and longing to learn, I will en-
deavor to add the solution also; but if gap-
ing and not attending, I will conceal both
the difficulties, and their solution, in obedi-
ence to a divine law. For, saith He,
" Give not the holy things to the dogs,
neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest
they trample them under their feet." s

But who is he that tramples them under
foot ? He that doth not account these things
precious, and venerable. And who, it may
be asked, is so wretched as not to esteem
these things venerable, and more precious
than all ? He who doth not bestow on them
so much leisure as on the harlot women in
the theatres of Satan. For there the multi-
tude pass the whole day, and give up not a
few of their domestic concerns for the sake of
this unseasonable employment, and they re-
tain with exactness whatever they have
heard, and this though it be to the injury of
their souls, that they keep it. But here,
where God is speaking, they will not bear to
tarry even a little time.

Therefore, let me warn you, we have noth-
ing in common with Heaven, but our citizen-
ship^'goesno further than words. And yet
because of this, God hath threatened even
hell, not in order to cast us therein, but that


' Kai yapxat toCto.]

' See Homily iv., wnerc this question is discussed. — R.]
3 Literally, " and learn." — R.J * ipart.

5 Niatt. vii. 0. [The citation is not, however, verbally accu-
rate.—R.j

' [»roAiT«to.]


He might persuade us to flee this grievous
tyranny. But we do the opposite, and run
each day the way that leads thither, and while
God is commanding us not only to hear, but
also to do what He saith, we do not submit
so much as to hearken.

When then, I pray thee, are we to do what
is commanded, and to put our hand to the
works, if we do not endure so much as to
hear the words that relate to them, but are
impatient and restless about the time we slay
here, although it be exceedingly short ?

16. And besides, when we are talking of in-
different matters, if we see those that are in
company do not attend, we call what they do
an insult; but do we consider that we are
provoking God, if, while He is discoursing of
such things as these, we despise what i& said,
and look another way ?

Why, he that is grown old, and hath trav-
elled over much country, reports to us with
all exactness the number of stadia, and the
situations of cities, their plans, and their har-
bors and markets; but we ourselves know not
even how far we are from the city that is in
Heaven. For surely we should have endeav-
ored to shorten the space, had we known the
distance. That city being not only as far
from us as Heaven is from the earth, init
even much farther, if we be negligent; like
as, on the other hand, if we do our best,'
even in one instant we shall come to the gates
thereof. For not by local space, but by
moral disposition, are these distances defined.

But thou knowest exactly tlie affairs of the
world, as well new as old, and such too as are
quite ancient; thou canst number the princes
under whom thou hast served in time past,
and the ruler of the games, and them that
gained tiie prize, and the leaders of armies,
matters that are of no concern to thee; but
who hath become ruler in ttiis city, the first
or the secoiu'. or tiie third, aiul for how long,
each of them; and wnat each hath accom-
plislied, and brought to pass, thou hast not
imagined even as in a dream. And the laws
that are set in this city thou wilt not endure
to hear, nor attend to them, even when others
tell thee of them. How then, I pray thee,
dost thou expect to obtain tiie blessings that
are promised, when thou dost not even attend
to what is snid ?

17. But though never before, now, at any
rate, let us do this. Yea, for we® are on the
point of entering into a city (if God permit)
of gold, and more precious than any gold.

Let us then mark her foundations, her

7 [(rirovJa^uMtf : the verb U rendered " cndeuvur " in the pre-
ccdinK senlcnce. — R..]
" [Kcii yip.]


8


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily II.


gates consisting of sapphires and pearls; for
indeed we have in Matthew an excellent
guide. For through his gate we shall now
enter in, and much diligence is required on
our part. For should He see any one not
attentive, He casts him out of the city.

Yes, for the city is most kingly and glori-
ous; not as the cities with us, divided into a
market-place, and the royal courts; for there
all is the court of the King. Let us open
therefore the gates of our mind, let us open
our ears, and with great trembling, when on
the point of setting foot on the threshold, let
us worship the King that is therein. For in-
deed the first approach hath power straight-
way to confound the beholder.

For the present we find the gates closed;
but when we see them thrown open (for this
is the solution of the difficulties), then we
shall perceive the greatness of the splendor
within. For there also, leading thee with the
eyes of the Spirit, is one who offers to show
thee all, even this Publican; where the King
sitteth, and who of His host stand by Him;
where are the angels, where the archangels;
and what place is set apart for the new citi-


zens in this city, and what kind of way it is
that leads thither, and what manner of por-
tion they have received, who first were citi-
zens therein, and those next after them, and
such as followed these. And how many are
the orders of these tribes, how many those
of the senate, how many the distinctions of
dignity.

Let us not therefore with noise or tumult
enter in, but with a mystical silence.

For if in a theatre, when a great silence
hath been made, then the letters of the king
are read, much more in this city must all be
composed, and stand with soul and ear erect.
For it is not the letters of any earthly mas-
ter, but of the Lord of angels, which are on
the point of being read.

If we would order ourselves on this wise,
the grace itself of the Spirit will lead us in
great perfection, and we shall arrive at the
very royal throne, and attain to all the good
things, by the grace and love towards man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
and might, together with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, now and always, even for
ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY 11.


Matt. I. i.


"The book of the generation oi Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son of Abraham."


Do ye indeed remember the charge, which
we lately made you, entreating you to hearken
unto all the things that are said with all
silence, and mystical quietness ? For ' we are
to-day to set foot within the holy vestibule,
wherefore I have also put you in mind of the
charge.

Since, if the Jews, when they were to ap-
proach "a mountain that burned, and fire,
and blackness, and darkness, and tempest; "-
— or rather when they were not so much as to
approach, but both to see and to hear these
things from afar; — were commanded for three
days before to abstain from their wives, and
to wash their garments, and were in tremb-

1 [Kal -yap ; but there is some variation in the readings. — R.]

2 Heb. xii. i8. [Here the Greek text agrees more closely with
that of the received text in Hebrews than with that of the earliest
MSS. — R.]


ling and fear, both themselves and Moses
with them; much more we, when we are to
hearken to such words, and are not to stand
far from a smoking mountain, but to enter
into Heaven itself, ought to show forth a
greater self-denial ;3 not washing our gar-
ments, but wiping clean the robe of our soul,
and ridding ourselves of all mixture with
worldly things. For it is not blackness that
ye shall see, nor smoke, nor tempest, but the
King Himself sitting on the throne of that
unspeakable glory, and angels, and arch-
angels standing by Him, and the tribes of
the saints, with those interminable myriads.

For such is the city of God, having "the
Church of the first-born, the spirits of the
just, the general assembly of the angels, the

3 [(^tAo<ro<^iai'.] •


Homily IT.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


blood of sprinkling," ' whereby all are knit
into one, and Heaven hath received the things
of earth, and earth the things of Heaven, and
that peace hath come which was of old longed
far both by angels and by saints.

Herein standeth the trophy of the cross,
glorious, and conspicuous, the spoils won by
Christ, the first-fruits ' of our nature, the
booty of our King; all these, I say, we shall
out of the Gospels know perfectly. If thou
follow in becoming quietness, we shall be
able to lead thee about every\vhere, and to
show where death is set forth crucified, and
where sin is hanged up, and where are the
many and wondrous offerings from this war,
from this battle.

Thou shalt see likewise the tyrant here
bound, and the multitude of the captives fol-
lowing, and the citadel from which that un-
holy demon overran all things in time past.
Thou wilt see the hiding places, and the dens
of the robber, broken up now, and laid open,
for even there also was our King present.^

But be not thou weary, beloved, for if any
one were describing a visible war, and tro-
phies, and victories, wouldest thou feel no
satiety at all; nay, thou wouldest not prefer
eitlier drink or meat to this history. But if
that kind of narrative be welcome, much
more this. For consider what a thing it is to
hear, how on the one side God from Heaven,
arising " out of the royal thrones, leaped
down''^' unto the earth, and even unto hell
itself, and stood in the battle array; and
how the devil on the other hand set him-
self in array against Him; or rather not
agamst God unveiled, but God hidden in
man's nature.

And what is marvellous, thou wilt see
death destroyed by death, and curse extin-
guished by curse, and the dominion of the
devil put down by those very things whereby
he did prevail. Let us therefore rouse our-
selves thoroughly, and let us not sleep, for
lo, I see the gates opening to us; but let us
enter in with all seemly order, and with
trembling, setting foot straightway within the
vestibule itself.

2. But what is this vestibule ? " The l)ook
of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of
David, Son of Abraham."

" What saycst thou ? Didst thou not prom-
ise to discourse of the Only-begotten Son of

' Heb xii 2a, 2i. 44. [The citation is free ; but it is evident
that Chrysostdin accepts the view indicated in the R. V. mart;in :
" the general assembly of anKcls." — K.|

» fra dxporfii'taj " the chief spoils," sec Heb. vii. 4. — R.]

3 See I I'ct. lii. 19, 20; iv. 6 ; St. Iren. iv. 45; iii. 33; iv.
39, 56, 66; V. 31 ; Orij;. in Joan, t. ii. 30; contr. C els. ii. 43; in
Rom. hh. 5, I. t. iv. ssi. 1! ; 'I'ert. de Anim. 7 ; St. CircK. Na/.
Or. 42 p 6<)3. Kd. NIorell ; and others cited by Cotclchiis on St.
Hernias, iii. 16,

4 Wisd. xviii. 15.


God, and dost thou make mention of David,
a man born after a thousand generations, and
say that he is both father and ancestor ? "
Stay, seek not to learn all at once, but gently
and by little and little. Why, it is in the
vestibule that thou art standing, by the very
porch; why then dost thou hasten towards
the inner shrine ? As yet thou hast not well
marked all without. For neither for a while
do I declare unto thee that other generation:
or rather not even this which cometh after,
for it is unutterable, and unspeakable. And
before me the Prophet Esaias hath told thee
this; where=when proclaiming His passion,
and His great care for the world, and admir-
ing who He was, and what He became, and
whither He descended, he cried out loud and
clear, saying thus, '' Who shall declare His
generation ? "^

It is not then of that we are now to speak,
but of this beneath, this which took place on
earth, which was amongst ten thousand wit-
nesses. And concerning this again we will
relate in such wise as it may be possible for
us, having received the grace of the Spirit
For not even this may any one set forth alto-
gether plainly, forasmuch as this too is most
awful. Think not, therefore, it is of small
things thou art hearing, when thou hearest
of this birth, but rouse up thy mind, and
straightway tremble, being told that God hath
come upon earth. For so marvellous was
this, and beyond expectation, that because
of these things the very angels formed a
choir, and in behalf of the world offered up
their praise for them, and the propliets from
the first were amazed at this, that " He was
seen upon earth, and conversed with men'.''
Yea, for it is far beyond all thought to hear
that God the Unspeakable,* the Unutterable,
the Incomprehensible, and He tiiat is e(]ual
to the Father, hatli passetl through a virgin's
womb, and hath vouchsafed to be born of a
woman, and to have Abraham and David for
forefathers. But why do I say Abraham and
David? For what is even more aina/.ing.
there are those women, whom we have lately
mentioned.

3. Hearing these things, arise, and sur-
mise nothing low: but even because of this
very thing most of all shouldest thou man'el,'
that being Son of tlie Unoriginate Goil, and
His true Son, Me suffered Himself to be
called also Son of David, t'.iat He might make

5 n.itprnlly, " for."]

f- Isjiiah hii. 8. [Here 'yti'tiii' occurs; not the term used by
Matthew, hut in the phrase "that other generation," ytVnjjrir
occurs, — k.|

7 llaruch iii. 37.

" Or I'napproachnble airpoatroc, accordinK to ■«jinc Mss. Savd.

0 [Chrysosioni uses the inipcrntive : "because of this very
thint; cspeiiallv marvel," rxr. R,]


lO


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily 1 1.


thee Son of God. He suffered a slave to be
father to Him, that He might make the Lord
Father to thee a slave.

Seest thou at once from the beginning of
what nature are the Gospels? If thou doubt
concerning the things that pertain to thee,
^ from what belongs to Him believe these also.
For it is far more difficult, judging by human
reason, for God to become man, than for a
man to be declared a Son of God. When
therefore thou art told that the Son of God is
Son of David and of Abraham, doubt not
any more that thou too, the son of Adam,
shalt be son of God. For not at random, nor
in vain did He abase Himself so greatly,
only He was minded to exalt us. Thus He
was born after the flesh, that thou mightest
be born after the Spirit; He was born of a
woman, that thou mightest cease to be the
son of a woman.

Wherefore the birth was twofold, both
made like unto us, and also surpassing ours.
For to be born of a woman indeed was our
lot, but " to be born not of blood, nor of the
will of flesh, nor of man," but of the Holy
Ghost,' was to proclaim beforehand the birth
surpassing us, the birth to come, which He
was about freely to give us of the Spirit.
And everything else too was like this. Thus
His baptism also was of the same kind, for it
partook of the old. and it partook also of the
new. To be baptized by the prophet marked
the old, but the coming down of the Spirit
shadowed out the new. And like as though
any one were to place himself in the space
between any two persons that were standing
apart, and stretching forth both his hands
were to lay hold on either side, and tie them
together; even so hath He done, joining the
old covenant with the new, God's nature
with man's, the things that are His with ours.

Seest thou the flashing brightness ^ of the
city, with how great a splendor it hath daz-
zled thee from the very beginning ? how it
hath straightway shown the King in thine own
form; as though in a camp? For neither
there doth the king always appear bearing his
proper dignity, but laying aside the purple
and the diadem, he often disguises himself in
the garb of a common soldier. But there it
is, lest by being known he should draw the
enemy upon himself; but here on the con-
trary, lest, if He were known. He should
cause the enemy to fly from the conflict
with Him, and lest He should confound all
His own people: for His purpose was to save,
not to dismay.

1 John i. 13.

2 aaTpamiji'. [Used of a flash of Hghtning, or dazzling bright-
ness.— R.]


4. For this reason he hath also straightway
called Him by this title, naming Him Jesus.
For this name, Jesus, is not Greek, but in the
Hebrew language it is thus called Jesus;
which is, when interpreted into the Gre^k
tongue, "A Saviour." And He is called a
Saviour, from His saving His people,

Seest thou how he hath given wings to the
hearer, at once speaking things familiar, and
at the same time by these indicating to us
things beyond all hope? I mean that^ both
these names were well known to the Jews.
For, because the things that were to happen
were beyond expectation, the types even of
the names went before, in order that from the
very first all the unsettling power of novelty
might be taken away. Thus he is called
Jesus, who after Moses brought the people
into the land of promise. Hast thou seen the
type ? Behold the truth. That led into the
land of promise, this into heaven, and to
the good things in the heavens; that, after
Moses was dead, this after the law had
ceased; that as a leader, this as a King.

However, lest having heard the word Jesus,
thou shouldest by reason of the identity of
the name be perplexed, le hath added,
"Jesus Christ, Son of David." But that
other was not of David, but of another tribe.

5. But wherefore doth he call it a "book
of the generation of Jesus Christ," while
yet this book hath not the birth only, but
the whole dispensation ? Because this is the
sum of the whole dispensation, and is made
an origin and root of all our blessings. As
then Moses calleth it the book of heaven and
earth,'* although he hath not discoursed of
heaven and earth only, but also of all things
that are in the midst thereof; so also this
man hath named his book from that which is
the sum of all the great things done. For
that which teems with astonishment, and is
beyond hope and all expectation, is that God
should become man. But this having come
to pass, all afterwards follows in reasonable
consequence

6. But wherefore did he not say, " the Son
of Abraham," and then " the Son of David ? '*
It is not, as some suppose, that he means to
proceed upward from the lower point, since
then he would have done the same as Luke,
but now he doth the contrary. Why then
hath he made mention of David ? The man
was in the mouths of all, both from his dis-
tinction, and from the time, for he had not
been so very long since dead, like Abraham.
And though God made promises to both, yet
the one, as old, was passed over in silence.


I [Kal yap.]


4 Gen.


Homily II.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


1 1


while the other, as fresh and recent, was re-
peated of all. Themselves, for instance, say,
" Doth not Christ come of the seed of David,
and out of Bethlehem, the town where David
was?"' And no man called Him Son of
Abraham, but all Son of David; and that be-
cause this last was more in the recollection of
all, both on account of the time, as I have
already said, and because of his royalty. On
this principle again all the kings whom they
had in honor after his time were named from
him, both by the people themselves and by
God. For both Ezekiel^ and other prophets
besides speak of David as coming and rising
again; not meaning him tliat was dead, but
them who were emulating his virtue. And
to Hezekiah He saith, "I will defend this
city, for mine own sake and for my servant
David's sake. "^ And to Solomon too He
said, that for David's sake He rent not the
kingdom during his lifetime.* For great was
the glory of the man, both with God and with
men.

On account of this he makes the beginning
at once from him who was more known, and
then runs up to his father; accounting it su-
perfluous, as far as regards the Jews, to carry
the genealogy higher up. For these were
principally the persons held in admiration;
the one as a prophet and a king,^ the other
as a patriarch and a prophet.

7. " But 5 whence is it manifest that He is
of David?" one may say. For if He was
not sprung of a man, but from a woman only,
and the Virgin hath not her genealogy traced,
how shall we know that He was of David's
race? Thus, there are two things inquired;
both why His mother's genealogy is not re-
cited, and wherefore it can be that Joseph is
mentioned by them, who hath no part in the
birth: since the latter seems to be superfluous,
and the former a defect.

Of which then is it necessary to sj^eak first ?
How the Virgin is of David. How then shall
we know that she is of David? Hearken
unto God, telling Gabriel to go unto " a vir-
gin betrothed to a man (whose name was
Joseph), of the house and lineage of David." '
What now wouidest tliou have jilainer than
this, when thou hast heard that the Virgin
was of the house and lineage of David ?

Hence it is evident th.it Joseph also was of
the same. Yes, for there was a law, which
bade that it should not be lawful to take a
wife from any other stock, but from the same


' John vii. ^2.

' l'".zok. xxxiv. jj, 24 ; xxxvii. 74, 25 ; Jcr. xxx. 9 ; H<>«. iii. 5.

3 2 Kinffs xix. u. * i Kin^H ii. ii, 12, 13, 5 [Kai.]

* I.uke I. v>7. [ I'tir words " iiiid linc;i);c " occur in some M-s.
of the New 'I rstiiincnt. Hut the citatiun here is pruUibly made
with freedom.— K.]


tribe. And the patriarch Jacob also foretold
that He should arise out of the tribe of
Judah, saying on this wise: " there shall not
fail a ruler out of Judah, nor a governor out
of his loins, until He come for whom it is ap-
pointed, and He is tlie expectation of the
Gentiles."'

" Well; this prophecy doth indeed make
it clear that He was of the tribe of Judah, but
not also that He was of the family of David.
Was there then in the tribe of Judah one
family only, even that of David, or were there
not also many others ? And might it not
happen for one to be of the tribe of Judah,
but not also of the family of David ?"

Nay, lest thou shouldest say this, the
evangelist hath removed this suspicion of
thine, by saying, that He was " of the house
and lineage of David."

And if thou wish to learn this from another
reason besides, neither shall we be at a loss
for another proof. For not only was it not
allowed to take a wife out of another tribe,
but not even from another lineage, that is,
from another kindred. So that if either we
connect with the Virgin the words, " ot the
house and lineage of David," what hath been
said stands good; or if with Joseph, by that
fact this also is proved. For if Joseph was
of the house and lineage of I)avid, he would
not have taken his wife from another than
that whence he himself was sprung,

" What then," one may say, "if he trans-
gressed the law?" Why, for this cause he
hath by anticipation testified tliat Joseph was
righteous, on purpose that thou mightest not
say this, but iiaving been tokl his virtue,
misrhtest be sure also that he would not have
transgressed the law. For he who was so
benevolent, and free from passion, as not to
wish, even when urged by suspicion, to at-
tempt inflicting jKinishmcnt on the Virgin,
how shouUi lie have transgressed the law for
lust? lie tiiat showed wisdom and self-
restraint beyond the law (for to put her aw.iy,
and that jirivily, was to act with self-restraint
beyond the law), how should he have done
anything contrary to the law; and this when
there was no cause to urge liim?"

8. Now tli.'it the \'irgin was of the race of
David is indeed from these things evident;
but wherefore he gave not her genealogy, but
Joseph's, retjiures exj^lanation. For wliat
cause was it then ? It was not the law among
the Jews that the genealogy of women should

7(".rn. xlix. to, from LXX. Our translation nrescrvmu the
Hebrew word renders it, " until Shiloh come." [Coinp. the mar-
ginal rendrriinjs of the R. V. in Avn. — R]

^ [The laliorrd arnumcnt lirrc sun^rsts that Chrysostom was
not sure of his rxrurtical position. In l.ukc i. =7, the piir.i>c " of
the houtr of I lavid ' is most naturally joined with " Joseph," and
so fhrysostom himself implies. — R.]


12


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily II.


be traced. In order then that he might keep
the custom, and not seem to be making alter-
ations' from the beginning, and yet might
make the Virgin known to us, for this cause
he hath passed over her ancestors in silence,
\ and traced the genealogy of Joseph. For if
he had done this with respect to the Virgin,
he would have seemed to be introducing
novelties; and if he had passed over Joseph
in silence, we should not have known the
Virgin's forefathers. In order therefore that
we might learn, touching Mary, who she was,
and of what origin, and that the laws might
remain undisturbed, he hath traced the gen-
ealogy of her espoused husband, and shown
him to be of the house of David. For when
this hath been clearly proved, that other fact
is demonstrated with it, namely, that the
Virgin likewise is sprung from thence, by rea-
son that this righteous man, even as I have
already said, would not have endured to take
a wife from another race.

There is also another reason, which one
might mention, of a more mystical nature, be-
cause of which the Virgin's forefathers were
passed over in silence; but this it were not
seasonable now to declare, because so much
has been already said.^

9. Wherefore let us stay at this point our
discourse concerning the questions, and in
the meanwhile let us retain with accuracy
what hath been revealed to us; as, for in-
stance, why he mentioned David first; where-
fore he called the book, " a book of the gen-
eration; " on what account he said, " of Jesus
Christ;" how the birth is common and not
common; whence it was that Mary was shown
to be from David; and wherefore Joseph's
genealogy is traced, while her ancestors are
passed over in silence.

For if ye retain these things, ye will the
more encourage us with respect to what is to
come; but if ye reject and cast them from
your mind, we shall be the more backward as
to the rest Just as no husbandman would
care to pay attention to a soil which had de-
stroyed the former seed.

Wherefore I entreat you to revolve these
things. For from taking thought concerning
such matters, there springs in the soul some
great good, tending unto salvation. For by
these meditations we shall be able to please
God Himself; and our mouths will be pure
from insults, and filthy talking, and reviling,
while they are exercising themselves in spirit-
ual sayings; and we shall be formidable to
the devils, while arming our tongue with such


1 wapaxo-poiTTeiv. [This word is the technical one for counter-
feitincj or forgin?. — R.]

2 See Horn. iii. sec. i.


words; and we shall draw unto ourselves
God's grace the more, and it will render our
eye more piercing. For indeed both eyes
and mouth and hearing He set in us to this
intent, that all our members may serve Him,
that we may speak His words, and do His
deeds, that we may sing unto Him continual
hymns, that we may offer up sacrifices of
thanksgiving,- and by these may thoroughly
purify our consciences.

For as a body will be more in health when
enjoying the benefits of a pure air, even so
will a soul be more endued with practical wis-
dom" when nourished in such exercises as
these. Seest thou not even the eyes of the
body, that when they abide in smoke they
are always weeping; but when they are in
clear air, and in a meadow, and in fountains
and gardens, they become more quicksighted
and more healthy ? Like this is the soul's
eye also, for should it feed in the meadow of
spiritual oracles, it will be clear and piercing,
and quick of sight; but should it depart into
the smoke of the things of this life, it will
weep without end, and wail both now and
hereafter. For indeed the things of this life
are like smoke. On this account also one
hath said, " My days have failed like
smoke. "5 He indeed was referring to their
shortness of duration, and to their unsubstan-
tial nature, but I would say that we should
take what is said, not in this sense alone,
but also as to their turbid character.

For nothing doth so hurt and dim the eye
of the soul as the crowd of worldly anxieties
and the swarm of desires. For these are the
wood that feedeth this smoke. And as fire,
when it lays hold of any damp and saturated
fuel, kindles much smoke; so likewise this
desire, so vehement and burning, when it
lays hold of a soul that is (so to speak) damp
and dissolute, produces also in its way abun-
dance of smoke. For this cause there is
need of the dew of the Spirit, and of that air,
that it may extinguish the fire, and scatter
the smoke, and give wings to our thoughts.
For it cannot, it cannot be that one weighed
down with so great evils should soar up to
heaven; it is well if being without impedi-
ment* we can cleave our way thither; or
rather it is not possible even so, unless we
obtain the wing of the Spirit.

Now if there be need both of an unencum-

3 ev\api<TTia<;.

4 [(J)iAocro</)UTcpa is rendered, " more endued with practical wis-
dom."—K.]

5 Ps. cii. 3, Lxx. [R. v., " My days consume away like smoke."
The i.xx. has the aorist, hence, " have failed " is the rendering
here adopted. Some editions of Chrysostom read the imperfect
here. The Oxford edition has a second note, the meaning of
which is not clear : " Rather /!a7re failed^ lxx." -R.]

6 [euCi'aii'ous, "well-girded," then figuratively, " unencum-
bered."—R.]


Homily II.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


13


bered mind, and of spiritual grace, that we
may mount up to that height: ivhat if there
be none of these things, but we draw to our-
selves whatever is opposite to them, even a
satanical weight? how shall we be able to
soar upwards, when dragged down by so great
a load ? For indeed, should any one attempt
to weigh our words as it were in just balances;
in ten thousand talents of worldly talk he will
scarcely find an hundred pence of spiritual
words, or rather, I should say, not even ten
farthings. Is it not then a disgrace, and an
extreme mockery, that if we have a servant,
we make use of him for the most part in
things necessary, but being possessed of a
tongue, we do not deal with our member so
well even as with a slave, but on the contrary
make use of it for things unprofitable, and
mere makeweights ? ' And would it were only
for makeweights:' but now it is for what are
contrary and hurtful and in no respect ad-
vantageous to us. For if the things that we
spoke were profitable to us, they would assur-
edly be also pleasing to God. But as it is,
whatever the devil may suggest, we speak it
all, now laughing, and now speaking wittily;
now cursing and insulting, and now swearing,
lymg, and taking false oaths; now murmur-
ing, and now m'aking vain babblings, and
talking trifles more than old wives; uttering
all things that are of no concern to us.

For, tell me, who of you that stand here, if
he were required, could repeat one Psalm,
or any other portion of the divine Scriptures ?
There is not one.

And it is not tliis only that is the grievous
thing, but that while ye are become so back-
ward with respect to things spiritual, yet in
regard of what belongs to Satan ye are more
vehement than fire. Thus should any one be
minded to ask of you songs of devils and
impure effeminate melodies, he will find many
that know these perfectly, and repeat them
with mucli pleasure.

10. But what is tlie answer to these
charges? "I am not," you will say, "one
of the monks, but I have both a wife and
children, and the care of a household. " Why,
this is wliat liath ruined all, your supposing
that the reading of tiie divine Scriptures ap-
pertains to tliose only, when ye need it much
more than they. For tliey that dwell in tlie
world," and each day receive wounds, these
have most need of medicines. So that it is
far worse than not reading, to account the
thing even " supertliious: " for tliese are the
words of diabolical invention. Hear ye not
Paul saying, "that all these things are writ-
ten for our admonition " ? '


« [napil^Kovra.] a [iv iiiaif tr-rfu<f,otiivot^.] 3 i Cor. X. 11. ' * x Cor. x


And thou, if thou hadst to take up a Gos-
pel, wouldest not choose to do so with hands
unwashed; but the things that are laid up
within it, dost thou not think to be highly
necessary? It is because of this, that all
things are turned upside down.

For if thou wouldest learn how great is the
profit of the Scriptures, examine thyself,
what thou becomest by hearing Psalms, and
what by listening to a song of Satan; and
how thou art disposed when staying in a
Church, and how when sitting in a theatre;
and thou wilt see that great is the difference
between this soul and that, although both be
one. Therefore Paul said, " Evil communi-
cations corrupt good manners. "■• For this
cause we have need continually of those
songs, which serve as charms from the Spirit.
Yes, for this it is whereby we excel the irra-
tional creatures, since with respect to all
other things, we are even exceedingly inferior
to them.

This is a soul's food, this its ornament,
this its security; even as not to hear is famine
and wasting; for "I will give them," saith
He, " not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of
water, but a famine of hearing the word of
the Lord. "5

What then can be more wretched ? when
the very evil, which God threatens in the way
of punishment, this thou art drawing upon
thine head of thine own accord, bringing into
thy soul a sort of grievous famine, and mak-
ing it the feeblest thing in the world ? For it
is its nature both to be wasted and to be
saved by words. Yea, this leads it on to
anger; and the same kind of thing again
makes it meek: a filthy expression is wont
to kindle it to lust, and it is trained to tem-
perance by speech full of gravity.

But if a word merely have such great
power, tell me, liovv is it thou dost desjnse the
Scriptures? And if an admonition can tlo
such great things, far more when the admo-
nitions are witli tlie Spirit. Yes, for a wonl
from the divine Scriptures, made to sound
in the ear, doth more than fire soften the
hardened soul, and renders it fit for all good
things.

II. In this way too did Paul, when he had
found the Corintliians puffed up and infiamed,
compose them, and make them more consid-
erate. For they were j^riding themselves on
tliose very things, touching which they ought
to liave been asiianied, and to liave hid their
face. lUit after tliey had received the letter,
hear the change in tlieni, Of which the
Teacher himself hath borne witness for tliem,
saying on this wise: for "this very thing,

5 Amoii viii. 11.


33.


H


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily III.


that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what
carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what
clearing of yourselves, yea, what indignation,
yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge." ' In this
way do we bring to order servants and chil-
dren, wives, and friends, and make our ene-
mies friends.

In this way the great men too, they that
were dear to God, became better. David, for
instance, after his sin, when he had had the
benefit of certain words, then it was that he
came unto that most excellent repentance;
and the apostles also by this mean became
what they did become, and drew after them
the whole world.

"And what is the profit," one may say,
"when any one hears, but doeth not what is
said ?'' No little will the profit be even from


I [2 Cor. vii. II is here cited, but in abridged form. All the
Mss. and editions of Chrysostom, except the Benedictine, give the
briefer reading, but in Wigne's edition, aAAa ({to^of, aAAd tTriTrd-
6r\(nv (" yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire ")are supplied
in brackets. In the New Testament passage there is no variation
in text, so far as these phrases are concerned. Like most patristic
authors, this great Homilist was quite free in his method of citing
Scripture. — R.]


hearing. For he will go on to condemn him-
self,'' and to groan inwardly, and will come in
time also to do the things that are spoken of.
But he that doth not even know that he hath
sinned, when will he cease from his negli-
gence ? when will he condemn himself?

Let us not therefore despise the hearing
of the divine Scriptures. For this is of
Satan's devising; not suffering us to see the
treasure, lest we should gain the riches.
Therefore he saith that the hearing the divine
laws is nothing, lest he should see us from
the hearing acquiring the practice also.

Knowing then this his evil art, let us fortify
ourselves against him on all sides, that being
fenced with this armor, we may both abide
unconquered ourselves, and smite him on the
head: and thus, having crowned ourselves
with the glorious wreaths of victory, we may
attain unto the good things to come, by the
grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might
for ever and ever. Amen.

2 [Literally, " will condemn himself." — R.]


HOMILY III.


Matt. I. i.
" The book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David, the Son of Abraham."


Behold a third discourse, and we have not
yet made an end of the prefatory matter. It
was not then for nought that I said, It is the
nature of these thoughts to have a great
depth.

Come, then, let us speak to-day what re-
mains. What is it then that is now required ?
Why Joseph's genealogy is traced, who had
no part in the birth. And one cause we have
mentioned already; but it is necessary to
mention likewise the other, that which is
more mystical and secret than the first.
What then is this ? He would not that it
should be manifest to the Jews, at the tim.e
of the birth, that Christ was born of a vir-
gin.

Nay, be not troubled at the strangeness of
the saying. For it is no statement of mine,
but of our fathers, wonderful and illustrious
men.' For if He disguised many things from

' St. Ignatius ad Ephes. xix. init. Kai eAaSfcToi' o.ft\Qvza.7o\i ai-
oivos TOUToO 17 Trao^ei'ta Mapt'a?, kol 6 TOKerb? avTri<;^ 6/xoiu»9 Kal o
06.vaTO^ Toi) Kvpt'ou rpt'a iJ.V(TTrjpta Kpavyr)<; artva iv r]<Tv\La 0eou


the first, calling Himself Son of Man, and
hath not everywhere clearly unfolded to us

enpax^r]. " Now the virginity of Mary, and her delivery, was
kept in secret from the prince of this world, as was also the Lord's
death ; three most notable mysteries, yet done in secret of God."
[See Ante-Nicene Fathers, \o\. I., p. 57 The Greek given in
this note is from the " briefer" form of the Ignatian Epistles. But
the " longer" form differs very little, and the Syriac version, brief
as it is, contains this sentence. — R.] And Origen, 6th Homily on
St. Luke, says, " It has been well written in one of the epistles
of a certain martyr, I mean Ignatius, the next Bishop of Antioch
after the blessed Peter, him who fough.t with wild beasts in the
persecution at Rome, ' Now the \'irginity of Mary was kept in se-
cret from the prince of th:s world.' It was concealed because of
Joseph, because of her espousals, because she was supposed to
have a husband. For, had she had no spo'use or supposed hus-
band, it could not have been concealed from the prince of this
world. For presently the thought would have silently occurred
to the evil one, ' How is she with child, who knoweth not a man ?
This conception must be divine, it must be something higher than
human nature.' On the contrary, our Saviour had purposed that
the devil should be ignorant of His (Economy and Incarnation:
for which cause He both in His birth concealed the same, and
commanded His disciples afterwards that they should not make
Him known. Also when tempted by the devil in per.son. He no
where owned Himself Son of God." Origen then quotes i Cor.
ii. 6-8, to the same effect. And in answer to the objection, How
the devils which were from time to time cast out knew Him to be
the Son of God, he suggests that it might be owing to their inferi-
ority in malice and mischief ; according to the rule among men,
that the worse they are, the less they can know of Christ. [The
lloiitiliesoi Grigen are not included in the A nie-Nicene Fathers.'\
See also a supposed Homily of St. Basil's, De Christi genera-
tione, Ed. Ben. ii. 598, c; and St. Jerome on St. Matt. i. 18.


Homily III.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


even His equality with the Father; why dost
thou wonder at His having for a time dis-
guised this also, taking order as He was for a
certain great and marvellous purpose ? '

But what kind of marvel ? it may be asked.
That the Virgin should be preserved, and
delivered from evil suspicion. For if this
had been discovered by the Jews from the
beginning, they would have stoned the Vir-
gin, making the report a handle for mischief,^
and would have condemned her for adultery.
For if in regard to the other matters, for
which they had frequent precedents likewise
in the old dispensation, they were quite
shameless in their obstinacy ' (for so, because
He had cast out devils, they called Him
possessed; and because He healed on the
Sabbath day, they supposed Him to be an
adversary of God; and yet oftentimes even
before this had the Sabbath been broken),
what would they not have said, if this had
been told them ? Especially as" they had all
time before this on their side, in that it never
had produced any such thing. For if after
so many miracles they still called Him son
of Joseph, how before the miracles would
they have believed that He was born of a
virgin ?

It is then for this reason that both Joseph
has his genealogy traced, and the Virgin be-
trothed to him. For if even he, who w^as
both a just and wondrous man, required many
things, in order that he should receive that
which had come to pass; an angel, and the
vision in dreams, and the testimony from the
prophets; how could the Jews, being both
dull and depraved, and of so unfriendly
spirit towards Him, have admitted this idea
into their minds ? For the strangeness and
novelty thereof would be sure greatly to dis-
turb them, and the fact that they had never
so much as heard of such a thing having hap-
pened in the times of their forefathers. For
as the man who was once persuaded that He
is Son of God, would after that have no cause
to doubt concerning this too; so he who was
accounting Him to be a deceiver and an ad-
versary of God, how could he but have 1)een
yet more offended by this, and have been led
on unto the opposite ^ notion? For this
cause neither do the apostles at the first
directly say this, but while of His resurrec-
tion they discourse much and often (foras-
much as of this there were examples in the
times before, although not such as this); that
He was born of a virgin they do not say
always: nay, not even His mother herself
ventured to utter this. See, for instance,


what saith the Virgin even to Himself: " Be-
hold, Thy father and I have sought Thee."*
For if this suspicion had been entertained,
neither would He any longer have been ac-
counted to be a Son of David, and this opin-
ion not being held, many other evils besides
would have arisen. For this cause neither do
the angels say these things to all. but to
Mary only, and Joseph; but when showing to
the shepherds the glad tidings of that which
was come to pass, they no longer added this.

2. But why is it, that having mentioned
Abraham, and having said that "he begat
Isaac, and Isaac, Jacob;" and not having
made any mention of his brother; when he is
come to Jacob, he remembers both " Judah,
and his brethren " ? Now there are some
that say, it was because of the perverseness
of Esau, and of the rest that came before.
But I should not say this; for if it were so,
how is it that he a little after mentions such
women ? It being out cf contraries, in this
place, that His glory is manifestel; not by
having great forefathers, but low and of little
account. For to the lofty One it is a great
glory to be able to abase Himself e.xceed-
ingly. Wherefore then did He not mention
them ? Because Saracens, and Ishmaelites,
and Arabians, and as many as are sprung
from those ancestors, have nothing in com-
mon with the race of the Israelites. For this
cause then he passes over those in silence,
and hastens on to His forefathers, and those
of the Jewish people. Wherefore he saith,
"And Jacob begat Judas and his brethren."
For at this point the race of the Jews begins
to have its peculiar mark.

3. "And Judas begat Phares and Zara of
Thamar." ' " What doest thou, O man, put-
ting us in remembrance of a history that con-
tains an unlawful intercourse?" But why is
this said?* Smce, if we were recounting the
race of a mere man, one might naturally have
been silent touching these things; but if of
God Incarnate, so far from being silent, one
ought to make a glory of tiiem, showing forth
His tender care, and His power. Yea, it was
for this cause He came, not to escape our
disgraces, but to bear them away. 'I'here-
fore as He is the more admireil, in that He
not only died, but was even crucified (though
the thing be opprobrious, yet the more op-
probrious the more doth it show Him full of
love to man), so likewise may we speak
touching His !)irtli; it is not only bcc.iuse He
took tlesh upon Him, and i)ecame man, ^that
we justly stand amazed at Him, but because
He vouchsafed to have also such kinsfolk,


3 ^avtpuif ijt^at.trxvuTovf.']


' icajtovfiyovfTtv.
4 ( Kat yap.] 5 [•itcu'Tji'.]


' I.ukc ii. 48. 7 Mute. i. \.

" [.More accurately, " Uut why is this? one may »4iy."— k.J


i6


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMTLY III.


being in no respect asliamed of our evils.
And this He was proclaiming from tlie very
beginnings of His birth, that He is ashamed
of none of those things that belong to us;
while He teaches us also hereby^ never to
hide our face at our forefathers' wickedness,
^ but to seek after one thing alone, even vir-
tue. For such a man, though he have an
alien for his ancestor, though he have a
mother who is a prostitute, or what you will,
can take no hurt thereby. For if the whore-
monger himself, being changed, is nothing
disgraced by his former life, much more will
the wickedness of his ancestry have no power
to bring to shame him that is sprung of an
harlot or an adulteress, if he be virtuous.

But he did these things not only to instruct
us, but also to bring down the haughtiness
. of the Jews. For since they, negligent about
virtue in their own souls, were parading the
name of Abraham,' thinking they had for a
plea their forefathers' virtue; he shows from
the very beginning that it is not in these
things men ought to glory, but in their own
good deeds.

Besides this, he is establishing another
point also, to show that all are under sin, even
their forefathers themselves. At least their
patriarch and namesake is shown to have
committed no small sin, for Thamar stands
against him, to accuse his whoredom. And
David too had Solomon by the wife whom
he corrupted. But if by the great ones the
law was not fulfilled, much more by the less.
And if it was not fulfilled, all have sinned,
and Christ's coming is become necessary.

For this cause he made mention also of the
twelve patriarchs, by this again bringing
down their pride at the noble birth of their
fathers. Because many of these also were
born of women that were slaves; but never-
theless the difference of the parents did not
make a difference in the children. For all
were equally both patriarchs and heads of
tribes. For this is the precedence of the
Church, this the prerogative of the nobility
that is among us, taking its type from the
beginning. So that whether thou be bond
or free, thou hast from thence nothing more
nor less; but the question is all about one
thing only, namely, the mind, and the dispo-
sition of the soul.

4. But besides what we have said, there is
another cause also, wherefore he hath men-
tioned even this history; for to be sure,
Zara's name was not cast at random on that
of Phares. (For indeed it was irrelevant,
and superfluous, when he had mentioned


^ [^Tou *A^paafX avio Ka'i koltoj 7rape'(f>epoi'.


Phares, from whom he was to trace Christ's
genealogy, to mention Zara also.) Where-
fore then did he mention him ? When
Thamar was on the point of giving birth to
them, the pangs having come upon her, Zara
put forth his hand first.^ Then the midwife,
when she saw this, in order that the first
should be known, bound his hand with scar-
let; but the child, when he was bound, drew
in his hand, and when he had drawn it in,
Phares cam„e forth first, and then Zara. The
midwife when she saw this said, "Why was
the hedge broken up for thee ? " ^

Seest thou the dark expression of myster-
ies ? For it was not without purpose that
these things were recorded for us: since
neither was it worth our study to learn, what
it might be that the midwife said; nor worth
a narrative to know, that he who came out
second, put forth his hand first. What then
is the mysterious lesson?'* First, from the
name of the child ^ we learn what is inquired,
for Phares is " a division,'' and "a breach."
And moreover from the thing itself, which
took place; for it was not in the order of
nature that, having thrust out his hand, he
should draw it in again when bound; these
thing neither belonged to a movement directed
by reason, nor did they take place in the way
of natural consequence. For after the hand
had found its way out, that another child
should come forth before was perhaps not
unnatural; but that he should draw it back,
and give a passage for another, was no longer
after the manner of children at the birth, but
the grace of God was present with the chil-
dren, ordering these things, and sketching
out for us by them a sort of image of the
things that were to come.

What then ? Some of those who have
examined these things accurately say, that
these children are a type of the two nations.*


2 Gen. xxxviii. 27.

3 Our marginal translation is, " Wherefore hast thou made this
breach against thee?" Gen. xxxviii. 29. [R. V. text: " W'here-
fore hast thou made abreach for thyself," with the margin : " Or,
How hast thou made a breach ! A breach be upon thee !" 'Jhe
i.xx. rendering, which Chrysostom cites, misses the suggestion of
the original Hebrew. — R.]

4 TO airfyjLca.

5 [t^s TTposTjyoTrias ToC TraiSiou. The terms seem to be chosen
to suggest that the name of the child came from the greeting given
it by the midwife. — R.]

° I.e., The Jewish and the Christian. Compare the 62d Homily
on Genesis, t. i. 478, ed. Sav. " Zara, being interpreted, is ' the
East.' And that these things did not take place at random, but
were a type of what was to come, the facts themselves indicate.
For that which happened was not in the order of nature. For how-
was it possible, when the hand had been bound with the scarlet
thread, for it to be again drawn back to afford passage to him who
came after, had there not been some divine power which before
ordained these things, and as in a kind of shadow drew out this
figure ; that at first and from the beginning Zara (that is, the
East, which is the type of the Church) began to increase, and after
it had made a little progress and then retired, the observance of
the I,aw, represented by Phares, came in : and after prevailing a
long time, on a second advance of Zara, who had before retired,
made room on the contrary for the Church ; I mean, the whole
Jewish polity did so.

" Perhaps, however, it is necessary now to state the matter


HOMII.Y III.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


And so in order that thou mightest learn that
the poUty of the latter people shone forth
previously to the origin of the former, the
child that hath the hand stretched forth doth
not show itself entire, but draws even it in
again; and after his brother had glided forth
whole, then he too appears entire. And this
took place also with regard to the two na-
tions. I mean, that after the polity of the
Church had been manifested in the times of
Abraham, and then had been withdrawn in
the midst of its course, the Jewish people
came, and the legal polity, and then the new
people appeared entire with their own laws.
Wherefore also the midwife saith, " Why was
the hedge broken up for thee ? '' because the
law coming in had broken in upon the free-
dom of the polity. For indeed the Scripture
is ever wont to call the law a hedg-e: as
the prophet saith: "Thou hast broken down
her hedge, so that all they which pass by the
way do pluck off her grapes: '' ' and, " I have
set a hedge about it: "^ and Paul, " Having
broken down the middle wall of the hedge." ^
But others say, that the saying, "Why was
the hedge broken up for thee?" was spoken
touching the new people: for this at its com-
ing put down the law.''

5. Seest thou that it was not for few nor
small causes that he brought to our remem-
brance the whole history concerning Judah ?
For this end he hath mentioned Ruth also
and Rahab, the one an alien, the other an
harlot, that thou mayest learn that He came
to do away with all our ills. For He hath
come as a Physician, not as a Judge. There-
fore in like manner as those of old took har-
lots for wives, even so God too espoused unto
Himself the nature which had played the har-


more briefly and clearly. There was a beffinninpr, like the puttint;
forth of 7ara's hand, in Abel, Enoch, N'oah, Nlelchisedek, Abra-
ham, making extreme account of what mi),'ht please flod. After-
wards, when they had grown into a multitude, and had heaped on
themselves heavy burdens of sin, and needed the benefit of some
sli«ht consolation, the Law was given as a kind of shadow, not as
taking away sins, but as declaring and making them manifest :
that as imperfect children living on milk they might be capable of
attaining full age. Hut when even thus they failed of profiting.
ye.a, kept mingling themselves up again with their sins, all the
while that the Law was pointing out the greatness of the s;ime.
He came who is our common Lord, and freely bestowetl on man-
kind this present spiritual polity, full of all virtue, whereof Xara
was to sl.ind as a type. I'or this cause the evangelist also li.illi
mentioned i'liamarand her children, saying, 'Judas begat I'hare/.
and Zarah of 'I'hamar.' " Compare also St. Cyr. of Alex. 6 lib.
in Clen. t. i. coi, ed. Aubert ; 'I'heod. in C.en. qu. 06 ; St. Aug. in
Ps. 61, t, iv. 442, D. [A good specimen of the allegori/.iiig exege-
sis which even such an expositor as Chrysostoin could indulge
in. The detailed account of the birth of I'hare;; is justified by tlic
importance attached to the position of first-born. — K.]

' I's. Ixxx. 12.

* Is. V. 2, where the marginal translation is, //«• mat/t- a tvitll
about it : the word hedge occurs verse s. [R. V. vrrsr 2. " Me
made a trench about it," with margin, Or, digged it." In the
LXX. 4>pay^di' occurs, however. — K.]

3 Kl^h. ii. 14, where this word is translated "partition." [Re-
tained in the R. v.]

4 [The entire paragraph is based on the i.xx. rendering, which
by introducing 4>pay^uf suggerKs an idea foreign to the original
Hebrew. — K.J


lot: and tiiis also prophets ^ from the begin-
ning declare to have taken place with respect
to the Synagogue. But that spouse was un-
grateful towards Him who had been an hus-
band to her, whereas, the Church, when once
delivered from the evils received from our
fathers, contmued to embrace the Bride-


groom.


See, for instance, what oefell Ruth, how like
it is to the things which belong to us. For
she was both of a strange race, and reduced
to the utmost poverty, yet Boaz when he sa^v
her neither despised her poverty nor ab-
horred her mean birth, as Christ having re-
ceived the Church, being both an alien and in
much poverty, took her to be partaker of the
great blessings. But even as Ruth, if she
had not before left her father, and renounced
household and race, country and kindred,
would not have attained unto this alliance;
so the Church too, having forsaken the cus-
toms which men had received from their
fathers, then, and not before,* became lovely
to the Bridegroom. Of this therefore the
prophet discourses unto her, and saith, " For-
get thy people, and thy father's house, so
shall the king have pleasure in thy beauty."'
This Ruth did too, and because of this she
became a mother of kings, even as the
Church did likewise. For of her David him-
self sprung. So then to shame them by all
these things, and to prevail on them not to
be higlj-minded, he hath both composed the
genealogy, and brought forward these women.
Yes, for this last, through those who inter-
vened, was parent to the great king, and of
these David is not ashamed. For it cannot,
nay, it cannot be that a man should be good
or bad, obscure or glorious, eitiier by the
virtue or by the vice of his forefathers; but if
one must say somewhat even parado.xical, he
shines forth the more, who not being of
worthy ancestors, has yet become excellent.

6. Let no one therefore be high-mindeil on
account of these matters, but let him con-
sider the forefathers of the Lord, and put
away all his haughtiness, and let good
actions be his pride; or rather, not even
these. For thus it was that tiie Pharisee
came to be inferior to tlie PublicaiL Thus,
if thou wouldest show the good work to be
great, have no high tliought,*" and tliou hast
proved it so much the greater. Make account
that thou hast done notiiing, and tlien thou
hast done all. Yox if, being sinners, when
we account ourselves to be what we are, we


S Hos. i.^a ; ler. iii.; F.xek, xxiii. 4, 5. n.

* [The Cirrck text has simply tot«, a term that is usually parn-
phraxrd bv the iransliiior. — K.)

r I's. xiv. II, ij. " [That is, no proud thought. — R.]


i8


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily III.


become righteous, as indeed the Publican did;
how much more, when being righteous we
account ourselves to be sinners. Since if out
of sinners men are made righteous by a lowly
mind (although this were not to be lowly-
minded but to be right-minded); if then to
be right-minded avails so much in the case
of sinners, consider what will not lowliness of
m.ind do with respect to righteous men.

Do not then mar thy labors, nor cast away
from thee the fruits of thy toils, neither run
thou in vain, making frustrate all thy labor
after the many courses thou hast run. Nay,
for thy Lord knows thy good works better
than thou dost. Though thou give but a cup
of cold water, not even this doth He over-
look; though thou contribute but a farthing,
though thou shouldest utter a sigh only, He
receives it all with great favor and is mindful
thereof, and assigns for it great rewards.

But wherefore dost thou search out thine
own doings, and bring them out before us
continually ? Knowest thou not, that if thou
praise thyself, God will no more praise thee ?
even as if thoii bewail thyself,'' He will not
cease proclaiming thee before all. For it is
not at all His will that thy labors should be
disparaged. Why do I say, disparaged ?
Nay, He is doing and contriving all things,
so that even for little He may crown thee;
and He goes about seeking excuses, whereby
thou mayest be delivered from hell. For this
cause, though thou shouldest work but the
eleventh hour of the day, He gives thy wages
entire; and though thou afford no ground of
salvation, He saith, "I do it for mine own
sake, that my name be not profaned:" =
though thou shouldest sigh only, though
thou shouldest only weep, all these things
He quickly catches hold of^ for an occasion
of saving thee.

Let us not therefore lift up ourselves, but
let us declare ourselves unprofitable, that we
may become profitable. For if thou call thy-
self approved, thou art become unprofitable,
though thou wert approved; but if useless,
thou art become profitable, even though thou
wert reprobate.

7. Wherefore it is necessary to forget our
good actions. "Yet how is it possible," one
may say, " not to know these things with
which we are well acquainted ? '' How say est
thou ? Offending thy Lord perpetually, thou
livest delicately, and laughest, and dost not
so much as know that thou hast sinned, but
hast consigned all to oblivion; and of thy
good actions canst thou not put away the
memory? And yet fear is a stronger kind of

I [" Thyself " is supplied by the translator. — R.")
- Ezek. xx.wi. 22.


thing. But we do the very contrary; on the
one hand, whilst each day we are offending,
we do not so much as put it before our mind;
on the other, if we give a little money to a
poor person, this we are ever revolving.
This kind of conduct comes of utter madness,
and it is a very great loss to him who so
makes his reckoning.- For the secure store-
house of good works is to forget our good
works. And as with regard to raiment and
gold, when we expose them in a market-place,
we attract many ill-meaning persons; but if
we put them by at home and hide them, we
shall deposit them all in security, even so
with respect to our good deeds; if we are
continually keeping them in memory, we pro-
voke the Lord, we arm the enemy, we invite
him to steal them away; but if no one know
of them, besides Him who alone ought to
know, they will lie in safety.

Be not therefore for ever parading them,
lest some one should take them away. As
was the case with the Pharisee, for bearing
them about upon his lips; whence also the
devil caught them away. And yet it was
with thanksgiving he made mention of them,
and referred the whole to God. But not even
did this suffice Him. For it is not thanks-
giving to revile others, to be vainglorious
before many, to exalt one's self against them
that have offended. Rather, if thou art giv-
ing thanks to God, be content with Him only,
and publish it not unto men, neither con-
demn thy neighbor; for this is not thanks-
giving. Wouldest thou learn words of
thanksgiving? hearken unto the Three Chil-
dren, saying, "We have sinned, we have
transgressed. Thou art righteous, O Lord,
in all that thou hast done unto us, because
thou hast brought all things upon us by a
true judgment. "+ For to confess ^ one's own
sins, this is to give thanks with confession =
unto God: a kind of thing which implies one
to be guilty of numberless offenses, yet not
to have the due penalty exacted. This man
most of all is the giver of thanks.

8. Let us beware therefore of saying any-
thing about ourselves, for this renders us
both odious with men and abominable to
God. For this reason, the greater the good
works we do, the less let us say of ourselves;
this being the way to reap the greatest glory
both with men and with God. Or rather,
not only glory from God, but a reward, yea,
a great recompense. Demand not therefore
a reward that thou mayest receive a reward.


3 Tou (TfAAe-yoi'TO?.

4 Song of the Three Children, vers. 6, 8, 4.

5 onoAoyeiv — ofio^oyoiivTa. There seems an allusion to the
two meanings of coiifitcoy and the kindred words.


Homily III.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


19


Confess thyself to be saved by grace, that
He may profess Himself a debtor to thee;
and not for thy good works only, but also for
such Tightness of mind. For when we do
good works, we have Him debtor for our
good works only; but when we do not so
much as think we have done any good work,
then also for this disposition itself; and more
for this, than for the other things: so that this
is equivalent to our good works. For should
this be absent, neither will they appear great.
For in the same way, we too, when we have
servants,' do then most approve them when,
after having performed all their service with
good will, they do not think they have done
anything great. Wherefore, if thou wouldest
make thy good deeds great, do not think
them to be great, and then they will be great.

It was in this way that the centurion also
said, " I am not fit that thou shouldest enter
under my roof; " because of this, he became
worthy, and was "marvelled at"- above all
Jews, On this wise again Paul saith, " I am
not meet to be called an apostle;" ^ because
of this he became even first of all. So like-
wise John: "I am not meet to loose the
latchet of His shoe; " ■* because of this he was
the "friend of the Bridegroom," and the
hand which he affirmed to be unworthy to
touch His shoes, this did Christ draw unto
His own head. 5 So Peter too said, " Depart
from me, for I am a sinful man; " * because [
of this he became a foundation of the Church.

For nothing is so acceptable to God as to
number one's self with the last. This is a
first principle of all practical wisdom.' For
he that is humbled, and bruised in heart, will
not be vainglorious, will not be wrathful,
will not envy his neighbor, will not harbor
any other passion. For neither when a hand
is bruised, though we strive ten thousand
times, shall we be able to lift it up on high.
If therefore we were thus to bruise our heart''
likewise, though it were stirred by ten thou-
sand swelling passions, it could not be lifted
up, no, not ever so little. For if a man, by
mourning for things pertaining to this life,
drives out all the diseases of his soul, much
more will he, who mourns for sins, enjoy the
blessing of self-restraint.'*


' I.iike xvii. 10. ^ Matt. viii. 8.

1 I Cor. XV. 9. 4 Mark i. 7 ; l.uke iii. t6 ; Johni. 17, iii. aq

5 AUuilinji ti) Matthew iii. i.|, 15 ; and to the custom of the
ancient Church of adding imposition of hands for the «ift of the
strenxthcninn S|)irit immediately on l>a|>ti.sM\, if the hishop were
present. See Hinnham, xii. i, i, and the writers quoted l)y him,
especially 'I'ertidlian, d<t I'.apt. 7. " As soon as we iire come out
of the water, we are anointed with the consecrated oil. . . 'I'hen
we receive imposition of hands, summonini; and inviting the Holy
Spirit in the way of solemn benediction. (.f «/f-AV< c//.- luith-
eis, vol. iii. p. 672. '.'he second sentence is the be>;inninguf chap.
8 in 'rertulli:in's treatise. — K.]

*> I.uke V. 8. 7 [i/>iAo<ro</iia(.]


9. " But who," one may say, " will be able
thus to bruise his own heart?" Listen to
David, who became illustrious chiefly because
of this, and see the contrition of his soul.
How after ten thousand good works, and
when he was on the point of being deprived
of country, and home, and life itself, at the
very season of his calamity, seeing a vile and
outcast common soldier trample on the turn
of his fortunes" and revile him; so far from
reviling him again, he utterly forbad one of
his captains, who was desirous to have slain
him, saying, " Let him alone, for the Lord
hath bidden him."" And again, when the
priests desired tQ carry about the ark 0/
God" with him, he did not permit it; but
what doth he say ?'3 " Let me set it down in
the temple, and if God deliver me from the
dangers that are before me, I shall see the
beauty thereof; but if He say to me, I have
no delight in thee, behold, here am I, let
Him do to me as seemeth good unto Him."
And that which was done with regard to Saul,
again and again, even oftentimes, what excel-
lence of self-restraint doth it not show?
Yea, for he even surpassed the old law, and
came near to the apostolic injunctions. For
this cause he bore with contentedness all that
came from the Lord's hands; rot contending
against what befell him, but aiming at one
object alone, namely, in everything to obey,
and follow the laws set by Him. And when
after so. many noble deeds on his part, he
saw the tyrant, the parricide, the murderer of
his own brother, that injurious, that frenzied
one, i:)ossessing in his stead his own kingdom,
not even so was he offended. But " if this
please God," saith he, "that I should be
chased, and wander, and flee, and that he
should be in honor, I acquiesce, and accept
it, and do thank God for His many afflic-
tions." Not like many of the shameless and
impudent ones, who when they have not
done, no not the least part of his good works,
yet if they see any in i^rosperity, ami them-
selves enduring a little discouragement, ruin
their own souls by ten thousand blasphemies.
But David was not such an one; rather he
showed forth all modesty,'* Wherefore also
Ciod said, " I have found David, the son of
Jesse, a man after mine own heart." '^

Such a s|)irit as this let us too acquire, and
whatever we may suffer we shall bear it
easily, and before the Kingdom, we shall
reap here the gain accruing from lowliness of

'o intfifiaivot^a aiirov Til icaipy. " a Sam. xvi. lo.

<= n'hc Word* "of i'«>i\ ' are supplied hv the translator. — R.]

'3 Or, " Carry Uick the ark of t lod into the city, and put it in
its place : if I shall find favor in the eycH of the Lord," &c. IScii-
cdiit. and Savil. 3 bom. xv. 35, a('>.

>* f iriciK(ia»'. >S Acts xiii. 33 ; i Sam. xiii. 14.


20


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily IV.


mind. Thus " learn," saith He, " of me,
for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye
shall find rest unto your souls."' Therefore
in order that we may enjoy rest both here
and hereafter, let us with great diligence im
plant in our souls the mother of all


things


I Matt. xi. 29.


that are good, I mean humility. For thus
we shall be enabled both to pass over the sea
of this life without waves, and to end our
voyage in that calm harbor; by the grace and
love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to whom be glory and might for ever and
ever. Amen.


HOMILY IV.


Matt, I.


17-


"So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations, and from David
until the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen generations, and from the carrying
away into Babylon unto Christ are fourteen generations."


He hath divided all the generations into
three portions, to indicate that not even when
their form of government was changed did
they become better, but alike under an aris-
tocracy, and under a king, and under an
oligarchy, they were in the same evil ways,
and whether popular leaders, or priests, or
kings controlled them, it was no advantage to
them in the way of virtue.

But wherefore hath he in the middle por-
tion passed over three kings, and in the last,
having set down twelve generations, affirmed
them to be fourteen ? The former question
I leave for you to examine; ' for neither is it
needful for me to explain all things to you,
lest ye should grow indolent: but the second
we will explain.^ To me then he seems in
this place to be putting in the place of a
generation, both the time of the captivity,
and Christ Himself, by every means connect-
ing Him with us. And full well doth he put
us in mind of that captivity, making it mani-
fest that not even when they went down
thither, did they become more sober-minded;
in order that from everything His coming
may be shown to be necessary.

*'Why then," one may say, "doth not
Mark do this, nor trace Christ's genealogy,
but utter everything briefly?" It seems to
me that Matthew was before the rest in enter-
ing on the subject (wherefore he both sets
down the genealogy with exactness, and stops

' See St. Jerome in loc.

2 [See Augustin's Harmony 0/ the Gospels^ ii. 4 ; Nicene
Fathers, vol. vi. pp. 105, 106, where the sum of the names (forty)
is given a symbolical significance. — R.]


at those things which require it): but that
Mark came after him, which is why he took
a short course, as putting his hand to what
had been already spoken and made manifest. ^

How is it then that Luke not only traces
the genealogy, but doth it through a greater
number ? As was natural, Matthew having
led the way, he seeks to teach us somewhat
in addition to former statements. And each
too in like manner imitated his master; the
one Paul, who flows fuller than any river;
the other Peter, who studies brevity.

2, And what may be the reason that Mat-
thew said not at the beginning, in the same
way as the prophet, "the vision which I
saw," and " the word which came unto me " ?
Because he was writing unto men well dis-
posed, and exceedingly attentive to him.
For both the miracles that were done cried
aloud, and they who received the word were
exceeding faithful. But in the case of the
prophets, there were neither so many mira-
cles to proclaim them; and besides, tiie tribe
of the false prophets, no small one, was riot-
ously breaking in upon them: to whom the
people of the Jews gave even more heed.
This kind of opening therefore was necessary
in their case.

And if ever miracles were done, they were
done for the aliens' sake, to increase the num-
ber of the proselytes; and for manifestation
of God's power, if haply their enemies having
taken them captives, fancied they prevailed,

3 [But see Homily I. 5, 6, where the independence of the evan-
gelists is emphasized. — R.]


Homily IV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


21


because their own gods were mighty: like as
in Egypt, out of which no small "mixed
multitude"' went up; and, after that, in
Babylon, what befell touching the furnace and
the dreams. And miracles were wrought
also, when they were by themselves in tne
wilderness; as also in our case: for among
us too, when we had just come out of error,
many wonderful works were shown forth; but
afterwards they stayed, when in all countries
true religion had taken root.

And what took place at a later period^
were few and at intervals; for example, when
the sun stood still in its course, and started
back in the opposite direction. And this
one may see to have occurred in our case
also. For so even in our generation, in the
instance of him who surpassed all in ungod-
liness, I mean Julian, many strange things
happened. Thus when the Jews were at-
tempting to raise up again the temple at Jeru-
salem, fire burst out from the foundations,
and utterly hindered them all; and when
both his treasurer, 3 and his uncle and name-
sake, made the sacred vessels the subject of
their open insolence, the one was " eaten with
worms, and gave up the ghost," "* the other
"burst asunder in the midst." Moreover,
the fountains failing, ^ when sacrifices were
made there, and the entrance of the famine
into the cities together with the emperor
himself, was a very great sign. For it is
usual with God to do such things; when evils
are multiplied, and He sees His own people
afflicted, and their adversaries greatly intoxi-
cated with their dominion over them, then to
display His own power; which he did also in
Persia with respect to the Jews.

3. Wherefore, that he was not acting with-
out an object, or by chance, when he distrib-
uted Christ's forefathers into three ])ortions,
is plain from what hatii been said. And mark,
too, whence he begins, and where he ends.
From Abraham to David; from David to tlie
captivity of Babylon; from this unto Christ

• Exod. xii. 38 ; Jer. 1. 37. - [Et hi itai fieri toOto yi-^ovtv.^

3 " The tyrant commanded the siicrcd vessels to be delivered
up to the imperi.il treasury. . . . Into the Temple of (lodthcn,"
at Anti<x:h, •'there entered, alon;.; with Julian the Prefect of the
East, Kelix the Steward of the Imperial Treasures. . . And they
say that Julian grievously insulted the sacred table, and when
Euzoiiis " (the Arian bishop) "endeavored to prevent him, he
Kave him a blow on the temple. . . Julian, however, presently fell
into a grievous disea.se, and had his bowels wasted with a kind of
mortification , . . and so came to an end <if his life. Kclix also
for his part being aflliited with a scourge from ( !od, had lo vomit
blood night and day from his mouth . . . until he also wasted
away." Thcodoret. E. H. iii. 8, o, ed. Schulzc. See al.so Sozom.
K. H.v. 8. St. t hrys. Oral, in Habylam. t. v. p. 246, j«^ //«.
where he says that Kelix " burst asunder."

4 Acts xii. 23, I. 18.

5 Me mentions this miracle too with the former ones, Horn, in
I's. ex. t. I, 738 ; and in his lirst llom. on St. I'aul, t. 8, J4. " The
fount.iins among us, whose current is stronger than llic rivers,
shrank suddenly and started back (a thing which never had i«-
currcd to them before), upon the ICiniJcror's attcmptint; to defile
the place with sacrifices and libations.


Himself. For both at the beginning he put
the two in close succession, David and Abra-
ham, and also in summing up he mentions
both in the same way. And this, because, as
I have already said, it was to them that the
promises were made.

But why can it be, that as he mentioned the
captivity of Babylon, he did not mention also
the descent into Egypt ? Because they had
ceased to be any longer afraid of the Egypt-
ians, but the Babylonians they dreaded still.
And the one thing was ancient, but the other
fresh, and had taken place of late. And to
tlie one they were carried down for no sins,
but to the other, transgressions were the cause
of their being removed.

And also with regard to the very names, if
any one were to attempt to translate their
etvmologies, even thence would he derive
great matter of divine speculation,^ and such
as is of great importance with regard to the
New Testament: as, for instance, from Abra-
ham's name, from Jacob's, from Solomon's,
from Zorobabel's. For it was not without
purpose that these names were given them.
But lest we should seem to be wearisome by
running out a great length, let us pass these
things by, and proceed to what is urgent.

4. Having then mentioned all His fore-
fatiiers, and ending with Joseph, he did not
scop at this, but added, " Joseph the husband
of Mary; '' intimating that it was for her sake
he traced his genealogy also. Then, lest
when thou hast heard of the " husliand of
Mary," thou shouldest suppose that Christ
was born after the common law of nature,
mark, how he sets it right by that which fol-
lows. *' Thou hast heard," saith he, " of an
husband, thou hast heard of a mother, thou
hast heard a name assigned to the child,
therefore hear the manner too of tlie birth.
" The birth of Jesus Christ was on this
wise."' "Of what kind of birth art thou
telling me, I pray tliee, since thou hast al-
ready mentioned His ancestors?" "I still
wish to tell thee the manner also of His
birth." Seest thou, how he wakens up the
hearer ? For as though he were about to
speak of something unusual,'* he promises to
tell also the manner thereof.

.'\n(l observe a most admirable order in the
things he liatli inciitioncil. For lie did not
proceed directly to the Iiirth, but puts us in
mind first, how many generations he was
from Abraham, how many from David, and
from the captivity of Babylon; and tiuis he


*> 0tw(tian : the allegorical or mystical tense. See Suicer on the
word; and Si. Inst. Mart. Cohort, ud (Irice. p. -ji;. A. Kd. Morcll.
See .il.v) in the ( utcna Aurea, from .St. Jcruinc, the interprrtution


of (he nameii in our Lord'* gencalugy.
7 .Malt. i. iS.


* ^xaifOTtpov.^


22


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily IV


sets the careful hearer upon considering the
times, to show that this is the Christ who was
preached by the prophets. For when thou
hast numbered the generations, and hast
learnt by the time that this is He, thou wilt
readily receive likewise the miracle which
\ took place in His birth. Thus, being about
to tell of a certain great thing, His birth of a
virgin, he first shadows over the statement,
until he hath numbered the generations, by
speaking of "an husband of Mary;" or
rather he doth even put in short space ' the
narration of the birth itself, and then proceeds
to number also the years, reminding the
hearer, that this is He, of whom the patri-
arch Jacob had said. He should then at
length come, when the Jewish rulers had
come to an end; of whom the prophet
Daniel had proclaimed beforehand, that He
should come after those man}' weeks. And
if any one, counting the years spoken of to
Daniel by the angel in a number of weeks,
would trace down the time from the building
of the city to His birth, by reckoning he will
perceive the one to agree with the other.""

5. How then was He born, I pray thee ?
" When as His mother Mary was es-
poused: " 3 He saith not "virgin," but merely
" mother; " so that his account is easy to be
received. And so having beforehand pre-
pared the hearer to look for some ordinary
piece of information, and by this laying hold
of him, after all he amazes him by addmg
the marvellous fact, saying, "Before they
came together, she was found with child of
the Holy Ghost.'' He saith not, "before
she was brought to the bridegroom's house; "
for indeed she was therein. It being the way
of the ancients for the most part to keep
their espoused wives in their house: •* in those
parts, at least, where one may see the same
practised even now. Thus also Lot's sons-
in-law were in his house with him. Mary
then herself likewise was in the house with
Joseph.

And wherefore did she not conceive before
her espousal ? It was, as I said at first, that
what had been done might be concealed
awhile, and that the Virgin might escape
every evil suspicion. For when he, who had
most right of all to feel jealousy, so far from
making her a show, or degrading her, is
found even receiving and cherishing her after
her conception; it was quite clear that, unless
he had fully persuaded himself that what was
done was of the operation of the Holy Spirit,


2 See the different opinions of the Fathers on these dates, in
St. Jerome on Daniel ix.

3 Matt. i. 18. 4 Gen. xix. 8, 14.


he would not have kept her with him, and
ministered to her in all other things. And
most properly hath he said, that "she was
' found ' with child,'' the sort of expression
that is wont to be used with respect to things
strange, and such as happen beyond all ex-
pectation, and are unlooked for.

Proceed therefore no further, neither re-
quire anything more than what hath been
said; neither say thou, " But how was it that
the Spirit wrought this of a virgin?" For
if, when nature is at work, it is impossible
to explain the manner of the formation; how,
when the Spirit is working miracles, shall we
be able to express these? And lest thou
shouldest weary the evangelist, or disturb
him by continually asking these things, he
hath said who it was that wrought the mira-
cle, and so withdrawn himself. "For I
know," saith he, "nothing more, but that
what was done was the work of the Holy
Ghost."

6. Shame on them who busy themselves
touching the generation on high. For if this
birth, which hath witnesses without number,
and had been proclaimed so long a time be-
fore, and was manifested and handled with
hands, can by no man be explained; of what
excess of madness do they come short who
make themselves busy and curious touching
that unutterable generation? For neither
Gabriel nor Matthew was able to say anything
more, but only that it was of the Spirit; but
how, of the Spirit, or in what manner, neither
of them hath explained; for neither was it
possible.

Nor think that thou hast learnt all, by
hearing "of the Spirit;" nay, for we are
ignorant of many things, even when we have
learnt this; as, for instance, how the Infinite
is in a womb, how He that contains all things
is carried, as unborn, by a woman; how the
Virgin bears, and continues a virgin. How,
I pray thee, did the Spirit frame that Tem-
ple ? how did He take not all the flesh from
the womb, but a part thereof, and increased
it, and fashioned it ? For that He did come
forth of the Virgin's flesh. He hath declared
by speaking of " that which was conceived in
her; "5 and Paul, by saying, "made of a
woman;" whereby he stops the mouths of
them* that say, Christ came among us as


■; Gal. iv. 4.
;'. <-'., the Valentinians and some other Gnostics. Theodoret,
Ep. 145. " Valentinus, and Basilides, and Bardesanes, and Har-
monius, and those of their company, allow indeed the Virgin's
conception and the birth, but affirm that God the Word took
nothing of the Virgin, but in a manner made Himself a passage
through her as through a conduit, and that in manifesting Him-
self to men He was employing a mere phantom, and only seeming
to be a man ; as He appeared to Abraham and certain other of the
ancients." S. Epiph. Hasr. xxxi. 7. " rhey affirm that He
brought down His body from Heaven, and that as water through


Homily IV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


23


through some conduit. For, if this were so,
what need of the womb ? If this were so, He
hath nothing in common with us, but that
flesh is of some other kind, and not of the
mass which belongs to us. How then was
He of the root of Jesse ? How was He a
rod ? how Son of man ? how was Mary His
mother? how was He of David's seed? how
did he " take the form of a ser^'ant?" ' how
" was the Word made flesh ? " = and how saith
Paul to the Romans, " Of whom as concern-
ing the flesh Christ came, who is God over
all ' " 3 Therefore that He was of us, and
of our substance,'* and of the Virgin's womb,
is manifest from these things, and from
others beside; but how, is not also manifest.
Do not either thou then inquire; but receive
what is revealed, and be not curious about
what is kept secret.

7. "And Joseph her husband, being,"
saith he, "a just man, and not willing to
make her a public example, was minded to
put her away privily. " ^

Having said that it was of the Holy Ghost,
and without cohabitation, he establishes his
statement in another way again. ^ Lest any
one should say, "Whence doth this appear?
Who hath heard, who hath seen any such
thing ever come to pass?'' — or lest you
should suspect the disciple as inventing
these things to favor his Master; — he in-
troduces Joseph as contributing, by what
he underwent, to the proof of the things
mentioned; and by his narrative all but says,
"If thou doubt, me, and if thou suspect
my testimony, l^elieve her husband." For
"Joseph," saith he, "her husband, being a
just man." By "a just man " in this place
he means him that is virtuous in all things.
For both freedom from covetousness is just-
ice, and universal virtue is also justice;' and
it is mostly in this latter sense that the Scrip-
ture uses the name of justice; as when it
saith, " a man that was just and true;"* and
again, "they were both just."'^ Being then
" just," that is good and considerate, " lie
was minded to put her away privily." For
this intent he tells what took place before
Joseph's being fully informed, that thou j
mightest not mistrust what was done after he 1
knew. j

However, such a one was not liable to be

a conduit, so He passed throuKh the VirKin Mary taking; nnthinK
of His mother's womb, but having His body from Hiaveii, iis 1
said before '' Comp. Massiiet's 1st Dissert prefixed to the liene
dictine lrena;us, sec. 7;. [Coinp. the recovered work of Hnipo-
lytiis (unknown when the O.vfonl translation was made), Ke/iita-
lion 0/ all llcrestii. Hook \'l., VII., A iilc-Nittiit- hathen. Vol.
V. pp. 81 et sqq.— V..^

' t Phil. ii. 7. ^ John i. 14. 3 Rom. ix. 5.

4 (J)upa^aTov. 5 Matt. i. 19.

"^ [The punctuation of tlir translation has here been conformed
to that of the (Irrik text.— K.]

7 See Anst. Eth. Nicom. v. 1,2. " Job 1. i. 9 I.uke i. 6.


made a public example only, but that she
should also be punished was the command of
the law. Whereas Joseph remitted not only
that greater punishment, but the less like-
wise, namely, the disgrace. For so far from
punishing, he was not minded even to make
an example of her. Seest thou a man under
self-restraint, and freed from the most tyran-
nical of passions. For ye know how great a
thing jealousy is: and therefore He said, to
whom these things are clearly known, "' For
full of jealousy is the rage of a husband; " "'
" he will not spare in the day of vengeance: "
and " jealousy is cruel as the grave." " And
we too know of many that have chosen to
give up their lives rather than fall under
the suspicion of jealousy. But in this case
it was not so little as suspicion, the burden
of the womb entirely convicting her. But
nevertheless he was so free from passion as
to be unwilling to grieve the Virgin even in
the least matters. Thus, whereas to keep
her in his house seemed like a transs:ression
of the law, but to expose and bring her to
trial would constrain him to deliver her to die;
he doth none of these things, but conducts
himself now by a higher rule than the law.
For grace being come, there must needs
henceforth be -many tokens of that exalted
citizenship. For as the sun, though as yet
he show not his beams, doth from afar by his
light illumine more than half'- the world; so
likewise Christ, when about to rise from that
womb, even before He came fortli, shone
over all the world. Wherefore, even before
her travail, prophets danced for joy, and
women foretold what was to come, antl John,
when he had not yet come fortii from tlie
belly, leaped from the very womb. Hence
also this man exhibited great self-command,
in that he neither accused nor upbraided,
but only set about putting her away.

8. The matter then being in this state, and
all at their wits' end,'' the angel comes to
solve all their difticulties. But it is worth
inquiring, why the angel did not sjicak
sooner, before the husband had such thoughts:
hut, "when lie tiiouglit on it,'' not until tlien,
he came; for it is said, " While he thouglit
on these things, the angel " comes. And
yet to her he declares the good tidings even
l)efore slie conceived. And this again con-
tains another difliculty; for even tiiough the
angel had not sjioken, wherefore was tlie Vir-
gin silent, who had been informetl by the
angel; and wliy, when she saw her betrothed
husband in trouble, did she not put an end
to his perplexity ?


"J I'rov. VI. 34.
'-• [to TrAtof.j


" Cnnt. viii. 6.

'3 \lt6.VTmv er (i^T^yal'ta itaOfirTuiTuji'. ]


24


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily IV.


Wherefore then did not the angel speak
before Joseph became troubled. For we
must needs explain the former difficulty first.
For what reason then did he not speak ?
Lest Joseph should be unbelieving, and the
same happen to him as to Zacharias. For
^ when the thing was visible, belief was thence-
forth easy; but when it had not yet a begin-
ning, it was not equally easy to receive his
saying. For this reason the angel spake
not at the first, and through the same cause
the Virgin too held her peace. For she did
not think to obtain credit with her betrothed
husband, in declaring to him a thing unheard
of, but rather that she should provoke him
the more, as though she were cloking a sin
that had been committed. Since if she her-
self, who was to receive so great a favor, is
affected somewhat after the manner of man,
and saith, " How shall this be, seeing I know
not a man?"' much more would he have
doubted; and especially when hearing it from
the woman who was under suspicion. Where-
fore the Virgin saith nothing to him, but the
angel, the time demanding it, presents him-
self to him.

9. Why then, it may be asked, did he not
so in the Virgin's case also, and declare the
good tidings to her after the conception ?
Lest she should be in agitation and great
trouble. For it were likely that she, not
knowing the certainty, might have even de-
vised something amiss touching' herself, and
have gone on to strangle or to stab herself,
not enduring the disgrace. For wondrous
indeed was that Virgin, and Luke points out
her excellency, saying, that when she heard
the salutation, she did not straightway pour
herself out,- neither did she accept the say-
ing, but "was troubled," seeking "what
manner of salutation this might be." ^ Now
she who was of such perfect delicacy would
even have been distracted with dismay at the
thought of her shame, not expecting, by
whatever she might say, to convince any one
who should hear of it, but that what had hap-
pened was adultery. Tlierefore to prevent
these things, the angel came before the con-
ception. Besides that, it was meet that womb
should be free from trouble wliich the Maker
of all things entered; and the soul rid of all
perturbation, which was thought worthy to
become the minister of such mysteries. For
these reasons He speaks to the Virgin before
the conception, but to Joseph at the time of
travail.


1 I-uke i. 34.

2 (That IS, did not give way to her feeling, with loud cry,
whether of joy or grief. — R.]

3 Luke 1. 29.


And this many of the simpler sort, not
understanding, have said there is a discord-
ance; because Luke saith it was Mary to
whom he declared the good tidings, but Mat-
thew, that it was Joseph; not knowing that
both took place. And this sort of thing it is
necessary to bear in mind throughout the
whole history; for in this way we shall solve
many seeming discordances.

10. The angel then comes, when Joseph
is troubled. For in addition to the causes
mentioned, with a view also to the manifesta-
tion of his self-command, he defers his com-
ing. But when the thing was on the point of
taking place, then at last he presents himself.
" While he thought on these things, an angel
appeareth to Joseph in a dream."''

Seest thou the mildness of the husband ?
So far from punishing, he did not even
declare it to any one, no not even to her
whom he suspected, but was thinking it over
with himself, as aiming to conceal the cause
even from the Virgin herself. For neither is
it said that he was minded to " cast her out,"
but to "put her away,'' so very mild and
gentle was the man. " But while he is think-
ing on these things, the angel appeareth in
a dream."

And why not openly, as to the shepherds,
and to Zacharias, and to the Virgin ? The
man was exceedingly full of faith, and needed
not this vision. Whereas the Virgin, as hav-
ing declared to her very exceeding good tid-
ings, greater than to Zacharias. and this be-
fore the event, needed also a marvellous
vision; and the shepherds, as being by dis-
position rather dull and clownish. s But this
man, after the conception,* when his soul
was actually possessed with that evil suspicion,
and ready to exchange it for good hopes, if
there appeared any one to guide that way,
readily receives the revelation. Wherefore
he hath the good tidings declared to him after
his suspicion, that this selfsame thing might
be to him a convincing proof of the things
spoken. I mean, that the fact of his having
mentioned it to no one, and his hearing the
angel say the very things which he thought
in his mind, this afforded him an unquestion-
able sign that one had come from God to say
it. For to Him alone it belongs to know the
secrets of the heart.

Mark only, what a number of results are
here. The man's self-command is thoroughly
shown; the word spoken in season contributes
to his faith, and the history is freed from
suspicion, in that it shows him to have felt
what it was likely a husband would feel.


4 Matt. i. 20.

^ TOJ' TOKOt".


3 laypoiKiKuiTfpov, " more boorish." — R.]


Homily IV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


25


11. How then doth the angel assure him?
Hear and marvel at the wisdom of his words.
For being come he saith, " Joseph, thou son
of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary
thy wife." He straightway puts him in mind
of David, of whom the Christ was to spring,
and he doth not suffer him to be greatly per-
turbed, by the title of his forefathers, remind-
ing him of the promise made to the whole
race. Else wherefore doth he call him " Son
of David " ?

" Fear not: " and yet in another case God
doeth not so, but when one was devising
about a certain woman what he ought not,
He spake the word more in a way of rebuke,
and with a threat.' And yet there too, the
act was of ignorance, for not with knowledge
did that person take Sarah; yet nevertheless
He rebuked him: but here mildly. For ex-
ceeding great were the mysteries He was dis-
pensing,- and wide the interval between the
two men; wherefore neither was there need of
rebuke.

But by saying, "fear not," he signifies
him to have been afraid, lest he should give
offense to God, as retaining an adulteress;
since, if it had not been for this, he would
not have even thought of casting her out.
In all ways then he points out that the angel
came from God, bringing forward and setting
before him all, both what he thought to do,
and what he felt in his mind.

Now having mentioned her name, he stayed
not at this, but added also, "thy wife;"
whereas he would not have called her so, if
she had been corrupted. And here he calls
her that is espoused "a wife; " as indeed the
Scripture is wont to call betrothed husbands
sons-in-law even before marriage.

But what means, "to take unto thee?"
To retain her in his house, for in intention
she had been now put away by him. " Her,
being put away, do thou retain," saith he,
" as committed unto thee by God, not by her
parents. And He commits her not for mar-
riage; but to dwell with thee; and by my
voice doth He commit her." Much as Christ
Himself afterwards committed her to His
disciple, so even now unto Joseph.

12. Then having obscurely signified tlie
matter in hand, he mentioned not the evil
suspicion; but, in a manner more reverent
and seemly, by telling the cause of travail he
removed this also; implying that tlie very
thing which had made him afraid, and for
whicli he would have cast her out, — this very
thing, 1 say, was a just cause why he should
take her and retain her in his house. Tims


» Gen. XX. 3.


' OlKOyOIJLOVfl9l'a ,


more than entirely ^ doing away with his dis-
tress. " For she is not only free," saith he,
" from unlawful intercourse, but even above
all nature is her conception. Not only there-
fore put away thy fear, but even rejoice more
exceedingly, ' for that which is conceived
in her is of the Holy Ghost.' "

A strange thing it was which he spake of,
surpassing man's reason, and above all the
laws of nature. How then is he to believe,
to whom such tidings are altogether new ?
" By the things that are past," saith he, " by
the revelations.'' For with this intent he laid
open all things that were in his mind, wiiat
he felt, what he feared, what he was resolved
to do; — that by these he might assure him-
self of this point.

Or rather, not by things past only, but
like wise by things to come, he wins him
over. "And she shall bring forth," saith
he, "a Son, and thou shall call His name
Jesus." ■• "For do not thou, because He
is of the Holy Ghost, imagine that thou art
an alien to the ministry of this dispensation.
Since although in the birth thou hast no part,
but the Virgin abode untouched, neverthe-
less, what pertains to a father, not injuring
the honor of virginity, that do I give thee, to
set a Name on that which is born: for " thou
shalt call Him." For though the offspring
be not thine, yet shalt thou exhibit a father's
care towards Him. Wherefore 1 do straight-
way, even from the giving of the name, con-
nect thee with Him that is born."

Then lest on the other hand any one
should from this suspect him to be the father,
hear what follows, with what exact care he
states it. "She shall bring fortli," he saith,
"a Son:" he doth not say, "bring fortii to
thee," but merely "she shall bring forth,"
putting it indefinitely:' since not to him did
she bring forth, but to the whole world.

13. For this cause too the angel came
bringing His name from Heaven, liereby
again intimating th.'it this is a wondrous birth:
it being God Himself who sends tlie name
from al)ove by the angel to Joseph. For
neitlier was this without an object, but a
treasure of ten thousand blessings. Where-
fore the angel also interprets it, and suggests
good hopes, in ttiis way again leading him to
belief. For to tiiese tilings we are wont to
be more incliiutd, and therefore are .also
fonder of believing them.

So having establislied his faith by »ill, by
the past things, by tlie future, by the preseuL,
by tlie lioiuir given to himself, he rings in
the prophet also in good time, to give his


1 r<K ir<pt
* Nlmi. i.


ircpiowtat, " lupcrabundantly."-
I.


R.]


S ^«T*U*pOV.


26


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily IV.


suffrage in support of all these. But before
introducing him, he proclaims beforehand the
good things which were to befall the world
through Him. And what are these? Sins
removed and done away.' "For He shall
save His people from their sins/'
^ Here again the thing is signified to be
beyond all expectation. For not from visible
wars, neither from barbarians, but what was
far greater than these, from sins, he declares
the glad tidings of deliverance; a work which
had never been possible to any one before.

But wherefore, one ma}'^ ask, did he say,
" His people," and not add the Gentiles also ?
That he might not startle the hearer yet a
while. For to him that listens with under-
standing he darkly signified the Gentiles too.
For " His people '' are not the Jews only, but
also all that draw nigh and receive the knowl-
edge that is from Him.

And mark how he hath by the way discov-
ered to us also His dignity, by calling the
Jewish nation " His people." For this is the
word of one implying nought else, but that
He who is born is God's child, and that the
King of those on high is the subject of his
discourse. As neither doth forgiving sins
belong to any other power, i)ut only to that
single essence.

14. Forasmuch then as we have partaken
of so great a gift, let us -do everything not
to dishonor such a benefit. For if even be-
fore this honor, what was done was w'orthy of
punishment, much more now, after this un-
speakable benefit. And this I say not now
for no cause. "" Imt because I see many after
their baptism living more carelessly than the
uninitiated, and having nothing peculiar to
distinguish them in their way of life. It is,
you see, for this cause, that neither in the
market nor in the Church is it possible to
know quickly who is a believer and who an
unbeliever; unless one be present at the time
of the mysteries, and see the one sort put
out, the others remaining within. Whereas
they ought to be distinguished not by their
place, but by their way of life. For as men's
outward- dignities are naturally to be discov-
ered by the outward signs with which they are
invested, so ours ought to be discernible by
the soul. That is, the believer ought to be
manifest not by the gift onlj'-, but also by the
new life. The believer ought to be the light
and salt of the world. But when thou dost
not give light even to thyself, neither bind up
thine own gangrene, what remains, whereby


' [More literally, " Removal and destruction of sins." — R.]

2 \ovx d7rAu)s, here in the sense, " not generally, not at ran-
dom.;'—R.]

3 i^uiBev. I Cor. v. 13.


we are to know thee ? Because thou hast en-
tered the holy waters ? Nay, this to thee
becomes a store ^ of punishment. For great-
ness of honor is, to them who do not choose
to live worthy of the honor, an increase of
vengeance. Yea, the believer ought to shine
forth not only by what he hath received from
God, but also by what he himself hath contrib-
uted; and should be discernible by every-
thing, by his gait, by his look, by his garb,
by his voice. And this I have said, not that
display, but that the profit of beholders, may
be the rule by which we frame ourselves.

15. But now, what things soever I might
seek to recognize thee by, I find thee in all
points distinguished by the contraries of the
same. For whether by thy place I would
fain discern thee, I see thee spending thy
day in horse races, and theatres, and scenes
of lawlessness, in the wicked assemblies in
the market places, and in companies of de-
praved men; or by the fashion of thy counte-
nance, I see thee continually laughing to
excess, and dissolute as a grinning ^ and aban-
doned harlot; or by thy clothes, I see thee in
no better trim than the people on the stage;
or by thy followers, thou art leading about
parasites and flatterers; or by thy words, I
hear thee say nothing wholesome, nothing
necessary, nothing of moment to our life; or
by thy table, yet heavier from thence will
the charge against thee appear.

By what then, tell me, am I to recognize
the believer* in thee, while all the things I
have mentioned give the contrary sentence ?
And why do I say, the believer ? since I can
not clearly make out whether thou art a man.
For when thou art like an ass, kicking, and
like a bull, wantoning, and like a horse
neighing after women; when thou dost play
the glutton like the bear, and pamper thy
flesh as the mule, and bear malice like the
camel; ^ when thou dost raven as a wolf, art
wrathful as a serpent, stingest like a scor-
pion, and art crafty as a fox, treasurest the
poison of wickedness like an asp or a viper,
and warrest against thy brethren like that evil
demon; — how shall I be able to number thee
with men, not seeing in thee the marks of
man's nature. Why, whilst I am seeking the
difference of catechumen and believer, I come
near not to find even the difference between
a man and a wild beast. For what shall I

4 l(f>68iov. 5 ireaiqpvlav,

6 [nia-rov. The translator sometimes, as in this instance, ren-
dered the word " Christian." For the sake of uniformity, " be-
liever" has been substituted several times in this paragraph. — R.]

7 The Hebrew name "^^^ is borrowed according to Bochart

T T

from "5)231 retribnit^ " because it is an animal retaining anger
long, and returning evil for evil." Simon. Lex. in verb.


Homily IV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


27


call thee ? a wild beast ? Nay, the wild beasts
are possessed by some one of these defects,
but thou heapest all together, and far sur-
passest their brutishness. Saall I then call
thee a devil ?' Nay, a devil is not a slave to
the dominion of the belly, neither doth he
set his love on riches. When therefore thou
hast more faults than either wild beasts or
devils, how, I pray thee, shall we call thee a
man ? And if thou art not to be styled a
man, how shall we address thee as a believer ?

16. And what is yet more grievous is this,
that being in such evil case, we have no idea
whatever of the deformity of our own soul,
nor discern the hideousness thereof. And
yet when thou art sitting at a hairdresser's,
and having thine hair cut, thou takest the
mirror, and dost examine with care the ar-
rangement of thy locks, and askest them that
stand by, and the haircutter himself, if he
hath well disposed what is on the forehead;
and being old, for so it often happens, art
not ashamed of going wild with the fancies of
youth: while of our own soul, not only de-
formed, but transformed into a wild beast,
and made a sort of Scylla or Chima;ra, ac-
cording to the heathen fable, we have not
even a slight perception. And yet in this
case too there is a mirror, spiritual, and far
more excellent, and more serviceable than
that other one; for it not only shows our own
deformity, but transforms it too, if we be will-
ing, into surpassing beauty. This mirror is
the memory of good men, and the history of
their blessed lives; the reading of the Scrip-
tures; the laws given by God. If thou be
willing once only to look upon the portrait-
ures of those holy men, thou will both see
the foulness of thine own mind, and having
seen this, wilt need nothing else to be set free
from that deformity. Because the mirror is
useful for this purpose also, and makes the
change easy.

Let no man therefore continue in the form
of the irrational creatures. For if the slave
doth not enter into the father's house, how
wilt thou, having become even a wild beast,
be able to set thy foot within those vesti-
bules ? And why say I, a wild beast? Nay,
such a one is more unmanageable than any
wild beast. For they, although by nature
savage, yet when they have iiad the advantage
of man's art, oftentimes grow tame; but thou
who hast changed their natural wildness into
this unnatural gentleness, what sort of plea
wilt thou have, when thou hast trained tliine
own natural meekness into tlie savageness
that IS contrary to nature ? wiicii tiiat which

■ [drcclc, " df mon," and so in the followinc sentences.- R.]


is wild by nature thou exhibitest in gentle
mood, but presentest thyself, by nature so
gentle, unnaturally savage ? and the lion -
thou tamest and rnakest tractable, but thine
own wrath thou renderest wilder than any
lion. And yet in that case there are two
hindrances, first that the beast is deprived
of reason, and then that it is the most wrath-
ful of all things; nevertheless by the excel-
lency of the wisdom given to thee of God,
thou dost overcome even nature. Thou
therefore, who in wild beasts art victorious
over nature herself, how is it that in thine
own case together with nature thou givest up
thine admirable quality of free wilP also?

Further, if I were bidding thee make an-
other man gentle, not even so ought I to seem
as one enjoining impossible things; however,
thou mightest then object that thou hast not
the control of another's disposition, and that
it doth not altogether rest with thee. But
now it is thine own wild beast, and a thing
which absolutely depends on thee. What
plea then hast thou ? or what fair excuse wilt
thou be able to put forth, turning as thou art
a lion into a man, and regardless tliat thou
thyself art of a man becoming a lion; upon
the beast bestowing what is above nature, but
for thyself not even prest^rving wliat is
natural? Yea, while the wild beasts are by
thine earnest endeavors advanced into our
noble estate, thou. art by thyself cast down
from the throne of the kingdom, and thrust
out into their madness. Thus, imagine, if
thou wilt, thy wrath to be a kind of wild beast,
and as much zeal as others have tlisplayed
about lions, so much do thou in regard of
thyself, and cause that way of taking things*
to become gentle and meek. Because this
too hath grievous teeth and talons, and if
thou tame it not, it will lay wnste all tilings.
For not even lion n(jr seri">ent hatli such power
to rend tiie vitals as wrath, with its iron
talons continually doing so. Since it mars,
we see, not the body only, but the very healtli
likewise of the soul is corrupted by it, de-
vouring, rending, tearing to pieces all its
strengtii, and making it useless for every-
thing. For if a man nourishing worms in his
entrails, shall not be able so much as to
breathe, iiis inward parts all wasting away;
how shall we, having so large a serpc-nt cit-
ing ii|i all within us (it is wrath 1 mean),
how, I say, shall we be able to produce any-
tiiing noble ?

17. How then are we to be freed from this

> Thii illtixlriition alxuit tuminK tlic lion niii:ht ionic with pr-
ctiliiir forrr lo tlir proplr of AntiiK-h, who were cspcciully attached
to the fjiiiiK-H of ihr cirrtiH. Src I oblMin, c. 34.

J [irpoaipriTfux, drlilMTUtc choice. — k.]

4 Tut' roiovTov Aoyttf^oi',


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily IV.


pest? If we can drink a potion that is able
to kill the worms within us and the serpents.
"And of what nature," it will be asked,
** may this potion be, that hath such power ? "
The precious Blood of Christ, if it be received
with full assurance,' (for this will have power
to extinguish every disease); and together
with this the divine Scriptures carefull}^
heard, and almsgiving added to our hearing;
for by means of all these things we shall be
enabled to mortify the affections that mar our
soul. And then only shall we live; for now
surely we are in no better state than the dead:
forasmuch as it cannot be, that while those
passions live, we should live too, but we must
necessarily perish. And unless we first kill
them here, they will be sure to kill us in the
other life; or rather before that death they
will exact of us, even here, the utmost pen-
alty. Yes, for every such passion is both
cruel and tyrannical and insatiable, and never
ceases to devour us every day. For " their
teeth are the teeth of a lion," ^ or rather even
far more fierce. For the lion, as soon as ever
he is satisfied, is wont to leave the carcass
that hath fallen in his way; but these passions
neither are satisfied, nor do they leave the
man whom they have seized, until they have
set him nigh the devil. For so great is their
power, that the very service which Paul
showed forth to Christ,^ despising both hell
and the kingdom for His sake, even this
same do they require of them whom they
have seized. For whether it be with the love
of women, or of riches, or of glory, that any
one is entangled, he laughs at hell thence-
forth, and despises the kingdom, that he
may work the will of these. Let us not then
doubt Paul when he saith that he so loved
Christ. For when some are found so doing
service to their passions, how should that
other afterwards seem incredible ? Yea, and
this is the reason why our longing for Christ
is feebler, because all our strength is con-
sumed on this love, and we rob, and defraud,
and are slaves to vainglory; than which
what can be more worthless ?

For though thou shouldest become infi-
nitely conspicuous, thou wilt be nothing bet-
ter than the base: rather for this selfsame
cause thou wilt even be baser. For when
they who are willing to give thee glory, and
make thee illustrious, do for this very cause
ridicule thee, that thou desirest the glory
which comes of them, how can such instances
fail to turn the contrary way in regard of
thee. For indeed this thing is among those
which attract censure. So that even as in the


I 7rapp7)(n'a5. [" Boldness " or " confidence " would better
express the meaning.— R.] 2 Joel i.6. 3 Rom. viii. 38.


case of one desiring to commit adultery or
fornication, should any one praise or flatter
him, by this very act he becomes an accuser
rather than a commender of the person indulg-
ing such desires: so with regard to him who
is desirous of glory; when we all praise, it is
accusation rather than praise which we be-
stow on those who wish to be made glorious.

18. Why then bring upon thyself that, from
which the very opposite is wont to befall thee.
Yea, if thou wilt be glorified, despise glory;
so shalt thou be more illustrious than any.
Why feel as Nebuchadnezzar felt ? For he
too set up an image, thinking from wood and
from a senseless figure to procure to himself
an increase of fame, and the living would fain
appear more glorious by the help of that
which hath no life. Seest thou the excess
of his madness; how, thinking to do honor,
he rather offered insult, to himself? For
when it appears that he is relying rather on
the lifeless thing, than on himself and the
soul that lives in him, and when for this cause
he advances the stock unto such high pre-
cedence, how can he be other than ridiculous",
endeavoring as he doth to adorn himself, not
by his way of living, but by planks of wood ?
Just as if a man should think proper to give
himself airs, because of the pavement of his
house, and his beautiful staircase, rather
than because he is a man. Him do many too
amongst us imitate now. For as he for his
image, so some men claim to be admired for
their clothes, others for their house; or for
their mules and chariots, and for the columns
in their house. For inasmuch as they have
lost their being as men, they go about gather-
ing to themselves from other quarters such
glory as is full of exceeding ridicule.

But as to the noble and great servants of
God, not by these means, but by such as best
became them, even by such did they shine
forth. For captives as they were, and slaves,
and youths, and strangers, and stripped of
all resources of their own, they proved at
that time far more awful than he who was
invested with all these things. And while
Nebuchadnezzar found neither so great an
image, nor satraps, nor captains of the host,
nor endless legions, nor abundance of gold,
nor other pomp, enough to meet his desire,
and to show him great; to these, on the other
hand, stripped of all this, their high self-
restraint alone was sufficient, and showed him
that wore the diadem and the purple, as
much inferior in glory to those who had no
such thing, as the sun is more glorious than
a pearl.'* For they were led forth in the
midst of the whole world, being at once

4 fxapydpov.


Homily IV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


29


youths, and captives, and slaves, and straight-
way on their appearance the Icing darted fire
from his eyes, and captains, and deputies,
and governors, and the whole amphitheatre of
the devil, stood around; and a voice of pipes
from all sides, and of trumpets, and of all
music, borne up to Heaven, was sounding in
their ears, and the furnace burned up to a
boundless height, and the flame reached the
very clouds, and all was full of terror and
dismay. But none of these things dismayed
them, but they laughed it all to scorn, as
they would children mocking them, and ex-
hibited their courage and meekness, and ut-
tering a voice clearer than those trumpets,
they said, " Be it known unto thee, O king.'''
For they did not wish to affront tlie king, no
not so much as by a word, but to declare
their religion ^ only. For which cause,
neither did they extend their speech to any
great length, but set forth all briefly; " For
there is," say they, "a God in Heaven, who
is able to deliver us,"^ "why showest thou
me the multitude ? why the furnace ? why the
sharpened swords ? why the terrible guards ?
our Lord is higher and more mighty than all
these."

Then when they considered that it was pos-
sible that God might be willing even to per-
mit them to be burnt; lest, if this should
come to pass, they might seem to be speak-
ing falsehoods; they add this also and say,
" If this happen not, be it known unto thee,
O king, that we serve not thy gods."'* P'or
had they said, " Sins are the cause of His not
delivering us, should He fail to deliver,''
they would not have been believed. Where-
fore in this place they are silent on that sub-
ject, tliough they speak of it in the furnace,
again and again alleging their sins. But be-
fore the king they say no such thing; only,
that though they were to be burnt, they
would not give up their religion.

For it was not for rewards and recom-
penses that they did what they did, but out
of love alone; and yet they were in captivity
too, and in slavery, and had enjoyed no good
thing. Yea, they liad lost their country, and
their freedom, and all their possessions. For
tell me not of their honors in the king's
courts, for holy and righteous as they were,
they would have cliosen ten thousand times
rather to have been beggars at home, and to
have been partakers of the blessings in the
temple. " For I had rather," it is said,
"be an outcast^ in the house of my God,

• Dan. iii. 18. ■' [ti/ai^ti.av.'l

3 Dan. iii. 17. * \ini\. iii. 18.

5 iropappnTTcccrflat, /. <■., lie 11 worslii|i|)<T i>iit>i<lc the courts.
Our marginal Iransliition is, " I would choose rather to nit iit ihr

i.H, " I hud rather .hiuiuI at the


threshold." [ I'hc R. V. margin
threshold. "-R.]


than to dwell in the tents of sinners." And
" one day in thy courts is better tlian thou-
sands."* They would have chosen then ten
thousand times rather to be outcasts at home,
than kings in Babylon. And this is manifest,
from what they declare even in the furnace,
grieving at their continuance in that country.
For although themselves enjoyed great
honors, yet seeing the calamities of the rest
they were exceedingly vexed; and this kind
of thing is most especially characteristic of
saints, that no glory, nor honor, nor any-
thing else should be more precious to them
than their neighbor's welfare. See, for ex-
ample, how even when they were in a fur-
nace, they made their supplication for all the
people. But we not even when at large bear
our brethren in mind. And again, when
the}^ were inquiring about the dreams,' they
were looking " not to their own, but the com-
mon good,"^ for that they despised death
they showed by many things afterwards.
But everywhere they put themselves forward,
as wishing to prevail' with God by importu-
nity. Next, as not accounting themselves
either to be sufficient, they flee to the
Fathers; but of themseves they said that
they offer nothing more than "a contrite
spirit." '"

19. These men then let as also imitate.
Because now too there is set up a golden
image, even the tyranny of ALammon. But
let us not give heed to the timbrels, nor to
the flutes, nor to the harps, nor to the rest of
the pomp of riches; yea, though we must
needs fall into a furnace of poverty, kt us
choose it, rather than worship that idol, anil
there will be " in the midst a moist whistling
wind.'' " Let us not then sluukler at hearing
of "a furnace of poverty." For so too at
that time they that fell into the furnace were
shewn the more glorious, but they that wor-
shipped were destroyed. Only then all took
place at once, but in this case some part will
be accomplished here, some there, some both
here and in the day that is to come. For
they that have chosen poverty, in order that
they might not worship mammon, will be
more glorious both here and then, but they
that have been rich unjustly here, shall then
pay the utmost penalty.

I'Yoin this furn.ioe La/arus too went forth,
not less glorious than tliose chiklren; but the
rich man who was in the place of tliem that
worshipped the image, was condemned to


7 I>i(n. ii. 17, 18.
9 iifirwirqaai.


* I'*. Ixxxiv. 10, i-xx.

" I'hil. li. 4 ; I Cor. x. i^.

'" SonK of the Three Children, v. 16.

" Sonif of the Three Children, v. 36. [The (Ireek phrase,
SpnircK Jiairfpt^ofira, literally ineann, " i» dew lontinuiillv whisl-
lini;." llirynoHtoni relers several times in what follows ti> the
" drw," having; this citation in mind.— R.]


30


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily IV.


hell.' For indeed what we have now men-
tioned was a type of this. Wherefore as in
this instance they who fell into the furnace
suffered no hurt, but they who sat without
were laid hold of with great fierceness, so
likewise shall it be then. The saints walk-
^ ing through the river of fire shall suffer no
pain, nay they will even appear joyous; but
they that have worshipped the image, snail
see the fire rest upon them fiercer than any
wild beast, and draw them in. So that if any
one disbelieves hell, when he sees this fur-
nace, let him from the things present believe
things to come, and fear not the furnace of
poverty, but the furnace of sin. For this is
flame and torment, but that, dew^ and re-
freshment; and by this stands the devil, by
that, angels wafting aside the flame.

20. These things let them hear that are
rich, that are kindling the furnace of poverty.
For though they shall not hurt those others,
"the dew""" coming to their aid; yet them-
selves they will render an easy prey to the
flame, which they have kindled with their
own hands.

Then, an angel went down with those chil-
dren; now, let us go down with ^ them that
are in the furnace of poverty, and by alms-
deeds let us make a " dewy air," ^ and waft
the flame quite aside, that we may be partak-
ers of their crowns also; that the flames of
hell may likewise be scattered by the voice of
Christ saying, " Ye saw me an hungered, and
fed me." "* For that voice shall then be with
us instead of a "moist wind whistling"-
throwgh the midst of the flame. Let us then
go down with alms-giving, unto the furnace
of poverty; let us behold them that in self-
restraint walk therein, and trample on the
burning coals; let us behold the marvel,
strange and beyond thought, a man singing
praise in a furnace, a man giving thanks in
fire, chained unto extreme poverty, yet offer-
ing much praise to Christ. Since they, who
bear poverty with thankfulness, really become
equal to those children. For no flame is so
terrible as poverty, nor so apt to set us on
fire. But those children were not set on
fire; rather, on their giving thanks to the
Lord, their bonds too were at once loosed.
So likewise now, if when thou hast fallen into


1 Gehenna. [But in Luke xvi. 23, "Hades" occurs. The
context in the Gospel, however, justifies the interpretation of the
passage given here. — R.]

2 [See note 11, (p. 29).— R.] 3 avyKara^iaixev, "condescend."
4 Matt. XXV. 35.


poverty, thou art thankful, both the bonds
are loosened, and the flame extinguished; or
though it be not extinguished (what is much
more marvellous), it becomes a fountain in-
stead of a flame: which then likewise came
to pass, and in t''e midst of a furnace they
enjoyed a pure dew. For the fire indeed it
quenched not, but the burning of those cast
in it altogether hindered. This one may see
in their case also who live by the rules of
wisdom, 5 for they, even in poverty, feel more
secure than the rich.

Let us not therefore sit down without the
furnace, feeling no pity towards the poor;
lest the same befall us as then befell those
executioners. For if thou shouldest go
down to them, and take thy stand with the
children, the fire will no longer work thee
any harm; but if thou shouldest sit above
and neglect them in the flame of their pov-
erty, the flame will burn thee up. Go down
therefore into the fire, that thou mayest not
be burnt up by the fire; sit not down without
the fire, lest the flame catch hold of thee.
For if it should find thee amongst the poor,
it will depart from thee; but if alienated from
them, it will run upon thee quickly, and
catch thee. Do not therefore stand off from
them that are cast in, but when the devil
gives command to cast them that have not
worshipped gold into the furnace of poverty,
be not thou of them that cast others in, but
of them that are cast in; that thou mayest be
of the number of the saved, and not of the
burned. For indeed it is a most effectual
daa, to be held in no subjection by desire of
wealth, to be associate with poor persons.
These are wealthier than all, who have tram-
pled under foot the desire of riches. Foras-
much as those children too, by despising the
king at that time, became more glorious than
the king. And thou therefore, if thou de-
spise the things of the world, shalt become
more honorable than all the world; like those
holy men, " of whom the world was not
worthy.''^

In order then to become worthy of the
things in Heaven, I bid thee laugh to scorn
things present. For in this way thou shalt
both be more glorious here, and enjoy the
good things to come, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ; to
whom be glory and might for ever and ever.
Amen.


5 [to)!' (/)lA0(70l^0UV'TMl'.]


6 Heb. xi. 38.


Homily V.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


HOMILY V.


Matt. I. 22,


23-


Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the
Prophet, saying, Behold, a Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a Son, and
they shall call His name Emmanuel."


I HEAR many say, " While we are here, and
enjoying the privilege of hearing, we are
awed, but when we are gone out, we become
altered men again, and the flame of zeal is
quenched." What then may be done, that
this may not come to pass ? Let us obsc-rve
whence it arises. Whence then doth so great
a change in us arise ? From the unbecoming
employment of our time, and from the com-
pany of evil men. For we ought not as soon
as we retire from the Communion,' to plunge
into business unsuited to the Communion,
but as soon as ever we get home, to take our
Bible into our hands, and call our wife and
children to join us in putting together what
we have heard, and then, not before, engage
in the business of life.^

For if after the bath you would not choose
to hurry into the market place, lest by the
business in the market you should destroy
the refreshment thence derived; much more
ought we to act on this principle after the
Communion. But as it is, we do the con-
trary, and in this very way throw away all.
For while the profitable effect of what hath
been said to us is not yet well fixed, the
great force of the things that press upon us
from without sweeps all entirely away.
. That this then may not be the case, when
you retire from the Communion, you must
account nothing more necessary than that
you should put together the things that have
been said to you. Yes, for it were the
utmost folly for us, while we give up five and
even si.x days to the business of tins life,
not to bestow on things spiritual so much as
one day, or rather not so much as a small
part of one day. See ye not our own chil-
dren, tliat wliatever lessons are given them,
those tiicy study throug'nout the whole day ?
This then let us do likewise, since otlierwise
-f—

• fji)? (ri/fcif (wf , the technical term for a religious service nniony
Christians. It docs iidI of itself imply a Kiuharistii: service, as
the above rendering; sii-ms to silveriest. Indeed, the exordium of
this Momdy p<iinls dir<( lly to a service in which the sermon was
prominent, makiiik; noalhisiim Ir) the Lord's Supper. For a wider
use, see the close of Momily l.XX X VII I -K.]

- Comp. Herbert's Country I'arson, c. lo. "lie himself, or
his wife, takes account of termons, and how every one profits,
comparing this year with the last."


we shall derive no profit from coming here,
drawing water daily into a vessel with holes,
and not bestowing on the retaining of what
we have heard even so much earnestness as
we plainly show with respect to gold and
silver. For any one who has received a few
pence both puts them into a bag and sets a
seal thereon; but we, having given us oracles
more precious than either gold or costly
stones, and receiving the treasures of the
Spirit, do not put them away in the store-
houses of our soul, but thoughtlessly and at
random suffer them to escape from our minds.
Who then will pity us after all this, plotting
against our own interests, and casting our-
selves into so deep poverty ? Therefore,
that this may not be so, let us write it
down an unalterable law for ourselves, for
our wives, and for our children, to give up
this one day of the week entire to hearing,
and to the recollection of the things we have
heard. For thus with greater aptness for
learning shall we approach what is next to be
said; and to us the labor will be less, and to
you the profit greater, when, bearing in
memory what hath been lately spoken, ye
hearken accordingly to what comes after-
wards. For no little doth this also contrib-
ute towards the understaikling of what is
said, when ye know accurately the connexion
of the thoughts, which we are busy in weav-
ing together for you. For since it is not
possible to set down all in one (.lay, you must
by continued rememl)r:nice make the things
laid before you on many days into a kind of
chain, and so wrap it al)Out your soul: that
the body of the Scriptures may appear entire.

Therefore let us not eitiier to-day go on to
the subjects set before us, without first re-
calling what was lately said to our memory.'

2. But what are tiie things set before us
to-day? "Now all this was done, that it
might be fulfilled which was spoken of the
Lord by the propliet, saying." In a tone
worthy of the wonder, with all his might he

1 [" I.ct us therefore remember n>;a!n what was lately said, and
thus go i>n to what i.s set before us to-day. "—K.]


o^


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily V.


hath uttered his voice, saying, " Now all this
was done." For when he saw the sea and
the abyss of the love of God towards man,
and that actually come to pass which never
had been looked for, and nature's laws broken,
and reconciliations made, Him who is above
all come down to him that is lower than all,
and " the middle walls of partition broken/' '
and the impediments removed, and many
more things than these done besides; in one
word he hath put before us the miracle, say-
ing, " Now all this was done that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord."
For, "think not," saith he, "that these
things are now determined upon; they were
prefigured of old." Which same thing, Paul
also everywhere labors to prove.

And the angel proceeds to refer Joseph to
Isaiah; in order that even if he should, when
awakened, forget his own words, as newly
spoken, he might by being reminded of those
of the prophet, with which he had been nour-
ished up continually, retain likewise the sub-
stance of what he had said.^ And to the
woman he mentioned none of these things,
as being a damsel and unskilled in them, but
to the husband, as being a righteous man,
and one who studied the prophets, from them
he reasons. And before this he saith,
" Mary, thy wife; " but now, when he hath
brought the prophet before him, he then
trusts him with the name of virginity; for
Joseph would not have continued thus un-
shaken, when he heard from him of a virgin,
unless 3 he had first heard it also from Isaiah.
For indeed it was nothing novel that he was
to hear out of the prophets,'' but what was
famihar to him, and had been for a long time
the subject of his meditations. For this
cause the angel, to make what he said easy
to be received, brings in Isaiah. And neither
here doth he stop, but connects the discourse
with God. For he doth not call the saying
Isaiah's, but that of the God of all things.
For this cause he said not, " that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken of Isaiah," but
" which was spoken of the Lord." For the
mouth indeed was Isaiah's, but the oracle
was wafted from above.

3. What then saith this oracle? " Behold,
a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring
forth a son, and they shall call His name
Emmanuel."


1 Ephes. ii. 14.

2 [The view here indicated, that this citation was part of the
angelic message, is not generally held (but see J. A. Alexander /«
ioco). It seems to me inconsistent with the last clause of verse 23 :
"which is, being interpreted," etc. — R."]

3 [" Unless," is not found in the Mss., but inserted by the edi-
tors as necessary to the sense. — R.]

4 [" Prophet " is the correct rendering ; the plural lU the Ox-
ford version is probably due to a typographical error. —R.]


How was it then, one may say, that His
name was not called Emmanuel, but Jesus
Christ? Because he said not, "thou shalt
call," but "they shall call," that is, the mul-
titude, and the issue of events. For here he
puts the event as a name: and this is cus-
tomary in Scripture, to substitute the events
that take place for names.

Therefore, to say, "they shall call" Him
" Emmanuel," means nothing else than that
they shall see God amongst men. For He
hath indeed always been amongst men, but
never so manifestly.

But if Jews are obstinate, we will ask them,
when was the child called, " Make speed to
the spoil, hasten the prey?" Why, they
could not say. How is it then that the pro-
phet said, " Call his name Maher-shalal-hash-
haz?''s Because, when he was born, there
was a taking and dividing of spoils, therefore
the event that took place in his time is put
as his name. And the city, too, it is said,
shall be called "the city of righteousness,
the faithful city Sion."^ And yet we no-
where find that the city was called " righteous-
ness," but it continued to be called Jerusa-
lem. However, inasmuch as this came to
pass in fact, when the city underwent a
change for the better, on that account he
saith it is so called. For when any event
happens which marks out him who brings it
to pass, or who is benefited by it, more
clearly than his name, the Scripture ^ speaks
of the truth of the event as being a name to
him.

4. But if, when their mouths are stopped
on this point, they should seek another,
namely, what is said touching Mary's virgin-
ity, and should object to us other translators,®
saying, that they used not the term "vir-
gin," but "young woman;'' in the first
place we will say this, that the Seventy were
justly entitled to confidence above all the
others. For these made their translation
after Christ's coming, continuing to be Jews,
and may justly be suspected as having spoken
rather in enmity, and as darkening the pro-
phecies on purpose; but the Seventy, as hav-
ing entered upon this work an hundred years
or more before the coming of Christ, stand
clear from all such suspicion, and on account


3 Isa. viii. 3. [Chrysostom does not use the Hebrew name
here, but simply repeats a part of the Greek phrase used to trans-
late " Maher-shalai-hash-baz " in the LXX., which he had already
given in the previous sentence : Ta^eios aKv^evaov, ofeios npovofj.-
evcrov. The R. V. z« /«<; does not accept the imperative render-
ing, but gives this marginal explanation: "That is, T/ie spoil
speedfik, the prey hasteth.''' — R.J

6 Isa. i. 26, 27.

7 [Supplied by translator ; literally, " it speaks." — R.]
»/.£'., Aquila who flourished a.d. 728, Theodotion, a.d. 175,

Symmachus, A.u. 201; who were all of them Jews or Judaizing
heretics. Cave, Hist, Lit. i. 32, 48, 64.


HO.MILV \ .J


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


33


of the date, and of their number, and of their |
agreement,' would have a better right to be '
trusted.

But even if they bring in the testimony of
those others, yet so the tokens of victory j
would be with us. Because the Scripture is
wont to put the word " youth," for " virgin-
ity;" and this with respect not to women
only, but also to men. For it is said,
"young men and maidens, old men with
younger ones." ^ And again, speaking of the i
damsel who is attacked, it saith, "if the
young woman cry out,"^ meaning the virgin, j

And what goes before also establishes this
interpretation. For he doth not merely say, \
"Behold, the Virgin shall be with child,"!
but having first said, "Behold, the Lord
Himself shall give you a sign," then he sub-
joins, " Behold, the Virgin shall be with ^
child."'* Whereas, if she that was to give,
birth was not a virgin, but this happened in [
the way of marriage, what sort of sign would j
the event be ? For that which is a sign must
of course be beyond the course of common
events, it must be strange and extraordi-
nary; else how could it be a sign ?

5. " Then Joseph, being raised from sleep,
did as the angel of the Lord had bidden
him." Seest tliou obedience, and a submis-
sive mind ? Seest thou a soul truly wakened,
and in all things incorruptible?. For neither
when he suspected something painful or
amiss could he endure to keep the Virgin
with him; nor yet, after he was freed from
this euspicion, could he bear to cast her out,
but he rather keeps her with him, and minis-
ters to the whole Dispensation. 1

"And took unto him Mary his wife."
Seest thou how continually the evangelist
uses this word, not willing that that mystery
should be disclosed as yet, and annihilating I
that evil suspicion ? |

And when he had taken her, " he knew her [
not, till she had brought forth her first-born
Son. "5 He hath here used the word "till,"
not that tiiou shoiildest susjiect that after-
wards he did know her, but to inform thee
that before tiie birth the Virgin was wholly
untouched by man. But why then, it may
be said, hath he used the word, "till"?
Because it is usual in Scripture often to do
this, and to use this expression without refer-

» [This reference to the " aKrecment " of the LXX. seems to
indicate an acceptance of the current tradition in regard to the
supernatural exactnes.s of that version. — K.l

=" I's. cxlviii. I-.'.

1 Deut. xxii. 27. In our translation, "the betrothed damsel
cried." This place is cited by St. Jerome on .Mail. with r>fcr-
cncc to the kimic argument.

* Isji. vii. 14.

5 (There Is no indication here of any knowledge of the rending

found in the oldest authorities of every class (iinciiils, cursives and

versions); iTtKiif uioi', insteatl of fTtKtt' toi* vioi- qut^c tov nputro-

TOKoi/. I'he latter is the reading of all authorities in I.ulce li. 7. — K.]

3


ence to limited times. For so with respect to
the ark likewise, it is said, " The raven re-
turned not till the earth was dried up."*
And yet it did not return even after that
time. And when discoursing also of God,
the Scripture saith, " From age until age
Thou art,''" not as fixing limits in this case.
And again when it is preaching the Gospel
beforehand, and saying, " In his days shall
righteousness flourish, and abundance of
peace, till the moon be taken away,"^ it doth
not set a limit to this fair part of creation.
So then here likewise, it uses the word
"till,"' to make certain what was before the
birth, but as to what follows, it leaves thee
to make the inference. Thus, what it was
necessarv for thee to learn of Him, this He
Himself hath said; that the Virgin was un-
touched by man until the birth; but that
which both was seen to be a consequence of
the former statement, and was acknowledged,
this in its turn he leaves for thee to perceive;
namely, that not even after this, she having
so become a mother, and having been
counted worthy of a new sort of travail, and
a child-bearing so strange, could that right-
eous man ever have endured to know her.
For if he had known her, and had kept her in
the place of a wife, how is it that our Lord ^
commits her, as unprotected, and having no
one, to His disciple, and commands him to
take her to his own home ?

How then, one may say, are James and
the others called His brethren ? In the same
kind of way as Joseph himself was supposed
to be husband of ^Lary. For many were the
veils provided, that the birth, being such as
it was, might be for a time screened. AN'here-
fore even John so calletl them, saying, " For
neither did His brethren believe in Him." '°

6 Nevertheless they, who diil not believe
at first, became aftcrAards admirable, and
illustrious. At least when Paul and they that
were of his company were come up to Jeru-
salem about decrees," they went in straight-
way unto James. I'or he was so admired
as even to be the first to be entrusted with
the bisliop's office. And they say he gave
himself up to sucli great austerity, that oven
his members became all of them as dead, and
that from his contiiuial praying, and his per-
petual intercourse with the ground, his fore-
lieail became so callous as to be in no better
state than a camel's knees, sunply by reason

* Gen. viii. 7. 7 Ps. xc. i.

8 Ps. Ixxii. 7. 0 John xix. 17.

»o John vii. 5. [In resnird to the "brethren of our lord," there
seems to be sonw confusion in the sljilements of C'hrvsostoin :
t oiiip. Ilmn I.XXWT 1 1, on chap, xxvii us;, 5ft. The digrrssmn
here to the I li.ira< icr of jaines seems intended tu divert from the
hisioncjil disciivsion. K. j

• > Acts XV. 4, xvi. 4, xxi. 18.


34


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily V.


of his striking it so against the earth.' This
man gives directions to Paul himself, when
he was after this come up again to Jerusa-
lem, saying,^ "Thou seest, brother, how
many thousands there are of them that are
come together, '^ So great was his under-
^ standing and his zeal, or rather so great the
power of Christ. For they that mock Him
when living, after His death are so filled with
awe, as even to die for Him with exceeding
readiness. Such things most of all show the
power of His resurrection. For this, you
see, was the reason of the more glorious
things being kept till afterwards, viz. that
this proof might become indisputable. For
seeing that even those who are admired
amongst us in their life, when they are gone,
are apt to be forgotten by us; how was it that
they, who made light of this Man living,
afterwards thought Him to be God, if He was
but one of the many ? How was it that they
consented even to be slain for His sake, un-
less they received His resurrection on clear
proof ?

7. And these things we tell you, that ye
may not hear only, but imitate also his manly
severity,^ his plainness of speech, his right-
eousness in all things; that no one may
despair of himself, though hitherto he have
been careless, that he may set his hopes on
nothing else, after God's mercy, but on his
own virtue. For if these were nothing the
better for such a kindred, though they were
of the same house and lineage with Christ,
until they gave proof of virtue; what favor
can we possibly receive, when we plead right-
eous kinsmen and brethren, unless we be ex-
ceeding dutiful,"* and have lived in virtue?
As the prophet too said, intimating the self-
same thing, "A brother redeemeth not, shall
a man redeem ? " = No, not although it were *
Moses, Samuel, Jeremiah. Hear, for exam-
ple, what God saith unto this last, " Pray not
thou for this people, for I will not hear
thee."' And why marvellest thou if I hear
not thee? "Though Moses himself and
Samuel stood before me,"* I would not re-
ceive their supplication for these men.^'
Yea, if it be Ezekiel who entreats, he will
be told, " Though Noah stand forth, and Job,
and Daniel, they shall deliver neither sons
nor daughters."' Though the patriarch
Abraham be supplicating for them that are
most incurably diseased, and change not,
God will leave him and go His way,'° that he

1 See Hegesippus in St. Jerome de Viris Illustr., c. 2.

2 Acts xxi. 20 ; see also verse 22.

3 [ii'Speiav, " manliness." — R.] 4 en-ietKei?.
S Ps. xlix. 7. [This is the rendering of the lxx. — R.]
* [kov r\y " even if it were." — R.] 7 Jer. xi. 14.

8 Jer. XV. I. 9 Ezek. xiv. 14, 16. "> Gen. xviii. 33.


may not receive his cry in their behalf.
Though again it be Samuel who is doing this.
He saith unto him, " Mourn not thou for
Saul." " Though for his own sister one en-
treat, when it is not fitting, he again shall
have the same sort of answer as Moses, " If
her father had but spit in her face.""

Let us not then be looking open-mouthed
towards others. For it is true, the prayers
of the saints have the greatest power; on
condition however of our repentance and
amendment. Since even Moses, who had
rescued his own brother and six hundred
thousand men from the wrath that was then
coming upon them from God, had no power
to deliver his sister; '^ and yet the sin was not
equal; for whereas she had done despite but
to Moses, in that other case it was plain im-
piety, what they ventured on. But this dif-
ficulty I leave for you; while that which is
yet harder, I will try to explain.

For why should we speak of his sister?
since he who stood forth the advocate of so
great a people had not power to prevail for
himself, but after his countless toils, and
sufferings, and his assiduity for forty years,
was prohibited from setting foot on that
land, touching which there had been so
many declarations and promises. What then
was the cause ? To grant this favor would
not be profitable, but would, on the contrary,
bring with it much harm, and would be sure
to prove a stumbling-block to many of the
Jews. For if when they were merely deliv-
ered from Egypt, they forsook God,- and
sought after Moses, and imputed all to him;
had they seen him also lead them into the
land of promise, to what extent of impiety
might they not have been cast away ? And
for this reason also, let me add, neither was
his tomb made known.

And Samuel again was not able to save
Saul from the wrath from above, yet he
oftentimes preserved the Israelites. And
Jeremiah prevailed not for the Jews, but
some one else he did haply cover from evil
by his prophecy."* And Daniel saved the
barbarians from slaughter, 's but he did not
deliver the Jews from their captivity.

And in the Gospels too we shall see both
these events come to pass, not in the case of
different persons, but of the same; and the
same man now prevailing for himself and now
given up. For he who owed the ten thou-
sand talents, though he had delivered himself
from the danger by entreaty, yet again he
prevailed not,'* and another on the contrary,

I' I Sam. xvi. i. '= Num. xii. 14. '3 Ex. xxxii.; Num. xii.

14 Alluding, perhaps, to 2 Maccab. xv. 13-16.

15 Dan. ii. 24. '* Matt, xviii. 26-34.


Homily V.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


who had before thrown himself away, after-
wards had power to help himself in the
greatest degree.' But who is this ? He that
devoured his Father's substance.

So that on the one hand, if we be careless,
we shall not be able to obtain salvation, no
not even by the help of others; if, on the
other hand, we be watchful, we shall be able
to do this by ourselves, and by ourselves
rather than by others. Yes; for God is more
willing to give His grace to us, than to others
for us; that we by endeavoring ourselves to
do away His wrath, may both enjoy confi-
dence towards Him, and become better men.
Thus He had pity on the Canaanitish woman,
thus He saved the harlot, thus the thief,
when there was none to be mediator nor
advocate.

8. And this I say, not that we may omit
supplicating the saints, but to hinder our
being careless, and entrusting our concerns i
to others only, while we fall back and slum-
ber ourselves. For so when He said, " make \
to yourselves friends,"^ he did not stop at
this only, but He added, " of the unrighteous
mammon; " that so again the good work
may be thine own; for it is nothing else but
almsgiving which He hath here signified.
And, what is marvellous, neither doth He
make a strict account with us, if we withdraw
ourselves from injustice. For what He saith
is like this: "Hast thou gained ill? spend
well. Hast thou gathered by unrighteous-
ness ? scatter abroad in righteousness. "
And yet, what manner of virtue is this, to
give out of such gains ? God, however, being
full of love to man, condescends even to this,
and if we thus do, promises us many good
things. But we are so past all feeling, as not
to give even of our unjust gain, but while
plundering without end, if we contribute the
smallest part, we think we have fulfilled all.
Hast thou not heard Paul saying, " He which
soweth sparingly, shall reap also sparingly " ?^
Wherefore then dost thou spare ? What, is
the act an outlay? is it an expense? Nay, it
is gain and good merchandise. Where there
is merchandise, there is also increase; where
there is sowing, there is also reaping. But
thou, if thou hadst to till a rich and deep
soil, and capable of receiving much seed,
wouldest 1)Oth spend what thou hadst, and
wouldest borrow of other men, accounting
parsimony in such cases to be loss; but, when
it is Heaven which thou art to cultivate,

• Luke XV. 13-10.

» I.uke xvi. (). It would sei-m fmni this that the sjiints whiim
we arc to siip|>li<.atc for ihrir lulp an- those on rartli, whom wc
may as-sist by our alms. And the cxuinolcs before tend to confirm
this view.

i a Cur. XIX. 6.


I which is exposed to no variation of weather,
I and will surely repay thine outlay with abun-
dant increase, thou art slow and backward,
and considerest not that it is possibly by
I sparing to lose, and by not sparing to gain.
' 9. Disperse therefore, that thou mayest
i not lose; keep not, that thou mayest keep;
I lay out, that thou mayest save; spend, that
j thou mayest gain. If thy treasures are to be
' hoarded, do not thou hoard them, for than
wilt surely cast them away; but entrust them
to God, for thence no man makes spoil of
them. Do not thou traffic, for thou knowest
not at all how to gain; but lend unto Him
who gives an interest greater than the princi-
pal. Lend, where is no envy, no accusation,
nor evil design, nor fear. Lend unto Him
who wants nothing, yet hath need for thy
sake; who feeds all men, yet is an hungered,
that thou mayest not suffer famine; who is
poor, that thou mayest be rich. Lend there,
where thy return cannot be death, but life
instead of death. For this usury is the har-
binger of a kingdom, that, of hell; the one
coming of covetousness, the other of self-
denial; the one of cruelty, the other of
humanity. What excuse then will be ours,
when having the power to receive more, and
that with security, and in due season, and in
great freedom, without either reproaches, or
fears, or dangers, we let go these gains, and
follow after that otiier sort, base and vile as
they are, insecure and perishable, and greatly
aggravating the furnace for us ? For noth-
ing, nothing is baser than the usury of this
world, nothing more cruel. Why, other per-
sons' calamities are such a man's traffic; he
makes himself gain of the distress of another,
and demands wages for kindness, as though
he were afraid to seem merciful, and under
the cloak of kindness he digs the pitfall
deeper, by the act of help galling a man's
poverty, and in the act of stretching out the
hand thrusting him down, and when receiving
him as in harl)or, involving him in shipwreck,
as on a rock, or shoal, or reef.

" But what dost thou require ? " saith one;
"that I should give another for his use that
money which I have got together, and which
is to me useful, and demand no recom-
jiense ? " Far from it: I say not this: yea,
I earnestly desire that thou shouldest have a
recomiK'iisc; not however a mean nor small
one, but far greater; for in return for gold,
I would tliai thou shouldest receive Heaven
for usury. W'liy then shut thyself up in jjov-
erty, crawling about the earth, and tlenianding
little for great ? Nay, this is the part of one
wlio knows not how to be rich. For when God
in return for a little money is promising thee


36


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily VI.


the good things that are in Heaven, and thou
sayest, "Give me not Heaven, but instead
of Heaven the gold that perisheth," this is
for one who wishes to continue in poverty.
Even as he surely who desires wealth and
abundance will choose things abiding rather
than things perishing; the inexhaustible,
rather than such as waste away; much rather
than little, the incorruptible rather than the
corruptible. For so the other sort too will


follow. For as he who seeks earth before
Heaven, will surely lose earth also, so he that
prefers Heaven to earth, shall enjoy both in
great excellency. And that this may be the
case with us, let us despise all things here,
and choose the good things to come. For
thus shall we obtain both the one and the
other, by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom be glory
and might for ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY VI.

Matt. II. i, 2.


When Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judtea in the days of Herod the king, behold,,
there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem, saying, Where is He that is born
King of the Jews ? for we have seen His star in the east, and are come to worship Him. '


We have need of much wakefulness, and
many prayers, that we may arrive at the in-
terpretation of the passage now before us,
and that we may learn who. these wise men
were, and whence they came, and how; and
at whose persuasion, and what was the star.
Or rather, if ye will, let us first bring forward
what the enemies of the truth say. Because
the devil hath blown upon them with so
violent a blast, as even from this passage to
try to arm them against the words of truth.

What then do they allege? "Behold,"
say they, " even when Christ was born a star
appeared; which is a sign that astrology may
be depended on.'^ How then, if He had His
birth according to that law, did He put down
astrology, and take away fate, and stop the
mouths of demons, and cast out error, and
overthrow all such sorcery ?

And wUat moreover do the wise men learn
from the star of itself? That He was 'King
of the Jews? And yet He was not king of
this kingdom; even as Jle said also to Pilate,
"My kingdom is not of this world." At
any rate He made, no display of this kind,
for He had neither guards armed with spear
or shield, nor horses, nor chariots of mules,
nor any other such thing around Him; but
He followed this life of meanness and pov-
erty, carrying about with Him twelve men of
mean estate.

And even if they knew Him to be a king,
for what intent are they come ? For surely


this is not the business of astrology, to know
from the stars who are born, but from the
hour when men are born to predict what shall
befall them: so it is said. But these were
neither present with the mother in her pangs,
nor did they know the time when He was
born, neither did they, beginning at that
moment, from the motion of the stars com-
pute what was to happen: but conversely,
having a long time before seen a star appear
in their own country, they come to see Him
that was born.

Which circumstance in itself would afford
a still greater difficulty even than the former.
For what reason induced them, or the hope,
of what benefits, to worship one who was.
king so far off? Why, had He been to reign
over themselves, most assuredly not even so-
would the circumstance be capable of a rea-
sonable account. To be sure, if He had
been born in royal courts, and with His
father, himself a king, present by Him, any
one would naturally say, that they, from a
wish to pay court to the father, had wor-
shipped the child that was born, and in this
way were laying up for themselves before-
hand much ground of patronage. But now
when they did not so much as expect Him to
be their own king, but of a strange nation,
far distant from their country, neither seeing
Him as yet grown to manhood; wherefore do
they set forth on so long a journey, and offer
gifts, and this when dangers were sure to


Homily VI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


c>7


beset their whole proceeding ? For both
Herod, when he heard it, was exceedingly
troubled, and the whole people was con-
founded on being told of t'aese tilings by
them.

" But these men did not foresee this."
Nay, this is not reasonable. For let them
have been ever so foolish, of this they could
not be ignorant, that when they came to a
city under a king, and proclaimed such things
as these, and set forth another king besides
him who then reigned, they must needs be
bringing down on themselves a thousand
deaths.

2. And why did they at all worship one
who was in swaddling clothes ? For if He
had been a grown man, one might say, that
in expectation of the succor they should re-
ceive from Him, they cast themselves into a
danger which they foresaw; a thing however
to the utmost degree unreasonable, that the
Persian, the barbarian, and one that had
nothing in common with the nation of the
Jews, should be willing to depart from his
home, to give up country, and kindred, and
friends, and that they should subject them-
selves to another kingdom.

But if this be foolish, what follows is much
more foolish. Of what nature then is tliis ?
That after they had entered on so long a
journey, and worshipped, and thrown all into
confusion, they went away immediately.
And what sign at all of royalty did they be-
hold, when they saw a shed, and a jnanger,
and a cliild in swaddling clothes, and a poor
mother? And to wliom moreover did they
offer their gifts, and for what intent? Was
it then usual and customary, thus to pay
court to the kings that were born in every
place? and did they always keep going about
the whole world, worshipping tiiem who they
knew should become kings out of a low and
mean estate, before tliey ascended the royal
throne ? Nay, this no one can say.

And for what puroose did tliey worship
Him at all? If for the sake of things jires-
ent, then what did they expect to receive
from an infant, and a mother of mean condi-
tion? If for things future, tlien whence did
tliey know tliat the cliild whom they had
worshipped in swaddling clothes would re-
member what was then done? But if His
mother was to remind Him, not even so were
they worthy of honor, but of punishment, as
bringing Him into danger which they must
have foreseen. Thence at any rate it was
tliat Herod was troubled, and sought, and
pried, and took in hand to slay Him. And
indeed everywiiere, he who makes known the
future king, supposing him in his earliest


age in a private condition, doth nothing else
than betray him to slaughter, and kindle
against him endless warfare.
[ Seest thou how manifold tiie absurdities
appear, if we examine these transactions ac-
cording to the course of human things and
ordinary custom ? For not these topics only,
but more than these might be mentioned,
containing more matter for questions than
what we have spoken of. But lest, stringing
questions ui^on questions, we should bewilder
you, come let us now enter upon tiie solution
of the matters inquired of, making a begin-
ning of our solution with the star itself.

3. For if ye can learn what the star was,
and of what kind, and whether it were one
of tne common stars, or new and unlike the
rest, and whether it was a star by nature or
a star in appearance only, we shall easily
know the other things also. Whence then
will these points be manifest? From the
very tilings that are written. Thus, that tliis
star was not of the common sort, or rather
not a star at all, as it seems at least to me,
but some invisible power transformed into
this appearance, is in the first place evident
from its very course. For there is not, there
is not any star that moves by this way, but
whether it be the sun you mention, or the
moon, or all the other stais, we see them
going from east to west; but this was wafted
from north to soutli; for so is Palestine sit-
uated with respect to Persia.

In the second place, one may see this from
the time also. For it appears not in the
niglit, but in mid-day, while tlie sun is shin-
ing; and this is not within the power of a
star, nay not of the moon; for the moon that
so much surpasses all, when the beams of the
sun appear, straigiitway hides herself, and
vanishes away. But this by tiie excess of its
own splendor overcame even the beams of
the sun, appearing brigliter than tliey, and in
so much ligiit shining out more illustriously.

In the third place, from its ap|-)earing, and
hiding itself again. For on their way as far
as Palestine it appeared leading them, Init
after they set foot within Jerusalem, it hiil
itself: then again, when tliey had left Herod,
iiaving told .him on what account they came,
and were on the point of departing, it shows
itself; all whicli is not like tlie motion of a
star, but of some power highly endued with
reason. For it had not even any course at
all of its own, but when they were to move, it
moved; when to stand, it stood, disiieiising'
all as need refjuired: in the same kind of
way as the pillar of the cloud, now iialting


1 UtXOt-O^u


38


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily VI.


and now rousing up the camp of the Jews,
when it was needful.

In the fourth place, one may perceive this
clearly, from its mode of pointing Him out.
For it did not, remaining on high, point out
the place; it not being possible for them so
to ascertain it, but it came down and per-
formed this ofifice. For ye know that a spot
of so small dimensions, being only as much
as a shed would occupy, or rather as much
as the body of a little infant would take up,
could not possibly be marked out by a star.
For by reason of its immense height, it could
not sufficiently distinguish so confined a spot,
and discover it to them that were desiring to
see it. And this any one may see by the
moon, which being so far superior to the
stars, seems to all that dwell in the world, and
are scattered over so great aa extent of earth,
— seems, I say, near to them every one.
How tlien, tell me, did the star point out a
spot so confined, just the space of a manger
and shed, unless it left that height and came
down, and stood over the very head of the
young child ? And at this the evangelist was
hinting when he said, " Lo, the star went be-
fore them, till it came and stood over where
the young Child was."

4. Seest thou, by vvhat store of proofs this
star is shown not to be one of the many, nor
to have shown itself according to the order
of the outward creation ? And for what in-
tent did it appear? To reprove the Jews for
their insensibility, and to cut off from them
all occasion of excuse for their willful igno-
rance. For, since He who came was to put
an end to the ancient polity, and to call the
world to the worship of Himself, and to be
worshipped in all land and sea, straightway,
from the beginning. He opens the door to
the Gentiles, willing through strangers to
admonish His own people. Thus, because
the prophets were continually heard speaking
of His advent, and they gave no great heed,
He made even barbarians come from a far
country, to seek after the king that was
among them. And they learn from a Persian
tongue first of all, what they would not sub-
mit to learn from the prophets; that, if on
the one hand they were disposed to be candid,
they might have the strongest motive for
obedience; if, on the other hand, they were
contentious, they might henceforth be de-
prived of all excuse. For what could they
have to say, who did not receive Christ after
so many prophets, when they saw that wise
men, at the sight of a single star, had re-
ceived this same, and had worshipped Him
who was made manifest. Much in the same
way then as He acted in the case of the


Ninevites, when He sent Jonas, and as in the
case of the Samaritan and the Canaanitish
women; so He did likewise in the instance
of the magi. For this cause He also said,
" The men of Nineveh shall rise up, and
shall condemn:" and, "the Queen of the
South shall rise up, and shall condemn this
generation:"' because these believed the
lesser things, but the Jews not even the
greater.

"And wherefore," one may say, "did He
attract them by such a vision ? '' Why, how
should He have done? Sent prophets ? But
the magi would not have submitted to pro-
phets. Uttered a voice from above ? Nay,
they would not have attended. Sent an
angel ? But even him they would have hur-
ried by. And so for this cause dismissing all
those means, God calleth them by the things
that are familiar, in exceeding condescension;
and He shows a large and extraordinary star,
so as to astonish them, both at the greatness
and beauty of its appearance, and the man-
ner of its course.

In imitation of this, Paul also reasons with
the Greeks from an heathen altar, and brings
forward testimonies from the poets. ^ And
not without circumcision doth he harangue
the Jews. Sacrifices he makes the beginning
of his instruction to them that are living un-
der the law. For, since to every one what
is familiar is dear, both God, and the men
that are sent by Him, manage things on this
principle with a view to the salvation of the
world. Think it not therefore unworthy of
Him to have called them by a star; since by
the same rule thou wilt find fault with all the
Jewish rites also, the sacrifices, and the puri-
fications, and the new moons, and the ark,
and the temple too itself. For even these
derived their origin from Gentile grossness.^
Yet for all that, God, for the salvation of
them that were in error, endured to be served
by these things, whereby those without were
used to serve devils; only He slightly altered
them; that He might draw them off by de-
grees from their customs, and lead them
towards the highest wisdom. Just so He
did in the case of the wise men also, not dis-
daining to call them by sight of a star, that
He might lift them higher ever after. There
fore after He hath brought them, leading
them by the hand, and hath set them by the
manger, it is no longer by a star, but by an
angel that He now discourses unto them.
Thus did they by little and little become bet-
ter men.


1 Matt. xii. 41, 42.

2 Acts xvii. 23, 28 ; i Cor. xv. 33 ; Titus i. 12.

3 See St. Iren. iv. 28, 29 ; TertuU. adv. ^larc. i. 18, 22 ; St.
Chrys. adv. Jud. Horn. i. t. 6, 318.


HOMILV VI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


39


This did He also witii respect to tliem (jf
Ascalon, and of Gaza. For those five cities
too (when at the coming of the ark they
had been smitten with a deadly plague, and
found no deliverance from the ills under
which they lay) — the men of them called
their prophets, and gathered an assembly,
and sought to discover an escape from this
divine scourge. Then, when their prophets
said that they should yoke to the ark heifers i
untamed, and having their first calves, and
let them go their way, with no man to guide
them, for so it would be evident whether the
plague was from God or whether it was any
accident which brought the disease; — ("for
if," it is said, " they break the yoke in pieces
for want of practice, or turn where their
calves are lowing, ' it is a chance that hath
happened;'' but if they go on right, and
err not from the way, and neither the lowing
of their young, nor their ignorance of the
way, have any effect on them, it is quite
plain that it is the hand of God that hath vis-
ited those cities: ") — when, I say, on these
words of their prophets the inhabitants of
those cities obeyed and did as they were com-
manded, God also followed up the counsel of
the prophets, showing condescension in that
instance also, and counted it not unworthy
of Himself to bring to effect the prediction of
the prophets, and to make them seem trust-
worthy in what they had then said. For so
the good achieved was greater, in that Hjs
very enemies themselves bore witness to the
power of God; yea, their own teachers gave
their voice concerning Him. And one may
see many other such things brought about by
God. For what took place with respect to
the witch, = is again like this sort of dispensa-
tion; which circumstance also you will now
be able to explain from what hath been said.

With respect to tiie star, we have said these
things, and yet more i)erhaps may be said by
you; for, it is said, " Give occasion to a wise
man, and he will be yet wiser: "^ but we
must now come to the beginning of what hath
been read.

5. And what is the beginning? ''When
Jesus was born in Bethleiicm of Juda,'a, in
the days of Herod the king, behold, there
came wise men from the east to Jerusalem."
While wise men followed under the auspices
of a star, these believed not, with prophets
even sounding in their ears. But whereifc^re
doth he mention to us both the time and the
place, saying, "in Bethlehem," and "in the
days of Herod the king.'" And for what
rertson doth he add his rank also? His


• I Sam. vi. 9.


' I Sam. x.xviii.


3 Prov. ix. 9.


rank, because there was also another Herod,
he who slew John: but that was a tetrarch,
this a king. And the place likewise, and the
time, he puts down, to bring to our remem-
brance ancient prophecies; whereof one was
uttered by Micah, saying, "And thou, Beth-
lehem, in the land of Judah, art b}' no means
the least among the princes of Judah; " •» and
the other by the patriarch Jacob, distinctly
marking out to us the time, and setting forth
the great sign of His coming. For, "A
ruler," saith he, " shall not fail out of Judah,
nor a leader out of his loins, until He come
for whom it is appointed, and He is the e.\-
pectation of the Gentiles." ^

And this again is worth inquiry, whence it
was that they came to entertain such a
thought, and who it was that stirred them up
to this. For it doth not seem to me to be
the work of the star only, but also of God,
who moved their soul; which same kind of
thing He did also in tlie case of Cyrus, dis-
posing him to let the Jews go. He did not
however so do this as to destroy their free
will, since even when He called Paul from
above by a voice. He manifested both His
own grace and Paul's obedience.

And wherefore, one may ask, did He not
reveal this to all the wise men of the East ?
Because all would not have believed, but
these were better jirepnred than the rest;
since also there were countless nations that
perished, but it was to the Ninevites only
that the prophet was sent; and there were
two thieves on the cross, but one only was
saved. See at least the virtue of these men,
not only by their coming, but also by their
boldness of speech. For so that they may
not seem to be a sort of imi)ostors,* they tell
who showed them the way, and the length of
their journey; and being come, they had
boldness of speech: '* for we are come.'' tliat
is tiTeir statement, " to worship Him:" ami
they were afraid neither of the peojile's
anger, nor of the tyranny of the king.
Whence to me at least they seem to have
been at home also teachers of tlieir country-
men.' For they who here did not shrink
from saying this, mucli more would they
speak boldly in their own country, as having
received both the oracle from the angel, and
the testimony from the proi)liet.

6. But " when Herod," saith the Scripture,
" had heard, he was troubleil, and all Jerusa-

4 Micnh V. a. S Ccn. xlix. 10. ' vvo/SoAi^aiot t«m«.

7 S<> ill <)|). Iin|>rrf. ill Malt. Horn. 3. "After thrir rctiirii,
they cmiliiiiird srrviin; Coil inorr thiiii lirforr, iiiiil iii>.triiitfil
Miiiiiy l>y thrir prruihinK And iil iant, whrii 'rhoiiiiit had K^me
iiilD thill |iriivinir, ihry joiiiril llirmHrlvr-. t<i hint iiiid wrrr lwt|>-
ti/rd, and l>r< uiiic ili«-r» <if liin word.' This work has brni at-
trihiiii-d III St. ChryMMtom, unii >ceiiui ccrluinly •>( the xuinc date
with him.


40


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily VI,


lem with him." Herod naturally, as being
king, and afraid both for himself and for his
children; but why Jerusalem? Surely the
prophets had foretold Him a Saviour, and
Benefactor, and a Deliverer from above.
Wherefore then was Jerusalem ' troubled ?
From the same feeling which caused them
before also to turn away from God when
pouring His benefits on them, and to be
mindful of the flesh-pots of Egypt, while in
the enjoyment of great freedom.

But mark, I pray thee, the accuracy of the
prophets. For this selfsame thing also had
the prophet foretold from the first,'' saying,
" They would be glad, if they had been burnt
with fire; for unto us a Child is born, unto
us a Son is given." ^

But nevertheless, although troubled, they
seek not to see. what hath happened, neither
do they follow the wise men, nor make any
particular inquiry; to such a degree were
they at once both contentious and careless
above all men. For when they had reason
rather to pride themselves that the king was
born amongst them, and had attracted to
Him the land of the Persians, and they were
on the point of having all subject to them, as
though their affairs had advanced towards
improvement, and from the very outset His
empire had become so glorious; nevertheless,
they do not even for this become better.
And yet they were but just delivered from
their captivity there; and it was natural for
them to think (even if they knew none of
those things that are high and mysterious,
but formed their judgment from what is
present only), " If they thus tremble before
our king at His birth, much more when
grown up will they fear and obey Him, and
our estate will be more glorious than that of
the barbarians."

7. But none of these things thoroughly
awakens them, so great was their dullness,
and with this their envy also: both which we
must with exact care root out of our mind;
and he must be more fervent than fire who
is to stand in such an array. Wherefore also
Christ said, " I am come to send fire on
earth, and I would it were already kindled."^


1 [Literally, "were they.'' — R.]

2 [dvw9ev, " from above." The word occurs in the previous par-
agraph, and is probably used here in the same sense. -R.]

3 Is. i,\. 5, 6, i.xx. /. c. " They (the enemies of Christ) would
rather have been burned, than for this to happen." The Lxx.,
reading differently from the present Hebrew, seem to construe the
passage thus. [The R. V. renders Is. ix. 5 thus: " For all the
armor of the armed man in the tumult, and the garments rolled in
blood, shall even be for burning, for fuel of fire.' Tfiis opposes
entirely the interpretation given above (and possibly implied in
the LXX.). The rendering of the A. V. is quite obscure, in spite
of its verbal splendor. —R.]

4 r)6e\ov for tl 6e\ta. I.uke xii. 49. [The American appendix
to the R.V. gives as a marginal rendering : " How I would that
it were already kindled," thus accepting the mterpretation given
above. It seems on the whole the most natural view of this diffi-
cult passage. — R.]


And the Spirit on this account appears in
fire.

But we are grown more cold than a cinder,
and more lifeless than the dead; and this,
when we see Paul soaring above the Heaven,
and the Heaven of Heaven, and more fervent
than any flame, conquering and overpassing
all things, the things beneath, and the things
above; the things present, and the things to
come; the things that are, and the things
that are not.

But if that example be too great for thee,
in the first place, this saying itself cometh of
sloth; for what had Paul more than thou,
that thou shouldest say emulation of him is
to thee impossible? However, not to be
contentious, let us leave Paul, and consider
the first believers, who cast away both goods
and gains, together with all worldly care and
worldly leisure, and devoted themselves to
God entire, every night and day giving at-
tendance on the teaching of the word. For
such is the fire of the Spirit, it suffers us not
to have any desire for the things that are
here, but removes us to another love. For
this cause, he who hath set his love on such
things as these, though what he hath must be
given away, or luxury or glory laughed to
scorn, or his very soul yielded up, he doeth
all these things with perfect ease. For the
warmth of that fire entering into the soul
casts out all sluggishness, and makes him
whom it hath seized more light than any-
thing that soars; and thenceforth overlooking
the things that are seen, such a one abides in
continual compunction, pouring forth never-
ceasing fountains of tears, and thence reap-
ing fruit of great delight. For nothing so
binds and unites unto God as do such tears.
Such a one, though he be dwelling in the
midst of cities, spends his time as in a desert,
and in mountains and woods; »one of them
that are present doth he see, neither feel any
satiety of such lamentations; whether it be
for himself, or for the negligences of others,
that he is weeping. For this cause God
blessed these above all the rest of men, say-
ing, " Blessed are they that mourn."

8. And how saith Paul, "Rejoice in the
Lord alway ? " 5 The joy he is speaking of
is what springs from those tears. For as
men's joy for the world's sake hath a sorrow*
in the same lot with it, even so godly tears
areie germ of perpetual and unfading joy.
In this way the very harlot became more
honorable than virgins when seized by this
fire. That is, being thoroughly warmed by
repentance, she was thenceforth carried out


5 Phil. iv. 4.


6 <TvyKeK?^rjpuifJi€vr)v,


Homily VI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


4T


of herself by her longing desire toward
Christ; loosing her hair, and drenching with
her tears His holy feet, and wiping them
with her own tresses, and exhausting the
ointment." And all these were outward re-
sults, but those wrought in her mind were far
more fervent than these; which things God
Himself alone beheld. And therefore, every
one, when he hears, rejoices with her and
takes delight in her good works, and acquits
her of every blame. But if we that are evil
pass this judgment, consider what sentence
she obtained from that God who is a lover
of mankind; and how much, even before
God's gifts, her repentance caused her to
reap in the way of blessing.

For much as after a violent burst of rain,
there is a clear open sky; so likewise when
tears are pouring down, a calm arises, and
serenity, and the darkness that ensues on our
sins quite disappears. And like as by water
and the spirit, so by tears and confession
are we cleansed the second tiipe; unless we
be acting thus for display and vanity: for as
to a woman whose tears were of that sort, I
should call her justly condemnable, more
than if she decked herself out with- lines and
coloring. For I seek those tears which ar^
shed not for display, but in compunction;
those which trickle down secretly and in
closets, and in sight of no man, softly and
noiselessly; those which arise from a certain
depth of mind, those shed in anguish and in
sorrow, those which are for God alone; such
as were Hannah's, for "her lips moved," it
is said, "but her voice was not heard; ''^
however, her tears alone uttered a cry more
clear than any trumpet. And because of
this, God also opened her womb, and made
the hard rock a fruitful field.

If thou also weep thus, thou art l^ecome a
follower of thy Lord. Yea, for He also
wept, both over Lazarus, and over the city;
and touching Judas He was greatly troubled.
And this indeed one may often see Him do,
but nowhere laugh, nay, nor smile but a lit-
tle; no one at least of the evangelists hath
mentioned this. Therefore also with regard
to Paul, that he wept, that he did so tiiree
years night and day,* I:)Oth he hath said of
himself, and others say this of him; but that
he laughed, neither hath he said himself any-

' [In Homily I.XXX. the woman who was " a sinner " is ident-
ified with the woman who anointed our Lord at Htlhany. The
confusiim of the persons is wide-spread, and the name of Mary
Maxdalene has heen unwarrantably connected with iine or both
occasions. K.]


"[The Mss. read xai, for which some editorssubstitute (i-. The
bettcrsupported reading must be rendered " with 'joth hues and
colorings. —R.]

3 I Sam. i. n. [The i.xx.. followed m the text, reads «ai
"and her voice,'' etc. K.|

* Acts XX. ji , comp V. 37.


where, neither hath so much as one other of
the saints, either concerning him, or any
other like him; but this is said of Sarah
only,s when she is blamed, and of the son of
Noe, when for a freeman he became a slave.*

9. And these things I say, not to suppress ^
all laughter, but to take away dissipation of
mind. For wherefore, I pray thee, art thou
luxurious and dissolute, while thou art still
liable to such heavv charges, and are to stand
at a fearful judgment-seat, and to give a
strict account of all that hath been done
here? Yes: for we are to give an account
both of what we have sinned willingly, and
what against our will: — for " whosoever shall
deny me," saith He, "before men, him will
I also deny before my Father: " ^ — and
surely such a denial is against our will; but
nevertheless it doth not escape punishment,
but of it too we have to give account: — both
of what we know, and of what we do not
know; " For I know nothing by myself,''
saith one, "yet am I not hereby justified: "'
— both for what we have done in ignorance,
and wiiat in knowledge; " For I bear them
record," it is said, " that they have a zeal of
God, but not according to knowledge; ''" but
yet this doth not suffice for an excuse for
them. And when writing to the Corinthians
also he saith, " For I fear, lest by any means,
as the serpent beguiled Eve through his sub-
tlety, so your minds should be corrupted
from the simplicity that is in Christ.'"'

The things then being so great, for which
thou art to give account, dost thou sit laugh-
ing and talking wittily, and giving thyself up
to luxury? " Why," one may say, " if I did
not so, but mourned, what would be the pro-
fit?'' Very great indeed; even so great, as
it is not possible so much as to set it forth by
word. For while, before the temporal tribu-
nals, be thy weeping ever so abundant, thou
canst not escape punishment after the sen-
tence; here, on the contrary, shouldest thou
only sigh, tiiou hast annulled tiie sentence,
and hast obtained pariion. Therefore it is
that Christ discourses to us much of mourn-
ing, and blesses them that mourn, and pro-
noimces tliem tiiat laugli wretciied. For this
is not the theatre for lauglUcr, ncitiier did we
come together for this intent, that \»e may
give way to imniodcrnte mirth, but tliat we
may groan, and by this groaning inherit a
kingdom. lUil thou, when standing by a

S Gen. xviii. ia-is« 'Gcn.ix. 35. 7 «««6irTwi'.

* Mott. X. ^3. ' I Cor. iv. 4. ''^ Kom. x. j.

" a Cor. xii. i. [It is intereslinK to note that this cilalum has
three readings, followrd in the received text, but rejected by recent
critics on the milhorily of the most ancieni Ms.s. In one re.idinv!
the order is llial o( the ancient Mss. against the received text.
Still the text of these Homilirs may have been edited to conform
lo ihr l.iirr Syrian N. 'I', text. K.^


42


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMILT VI,


king, dost not endure so much as merely to
smile; having then the Lord of the angels
dwelling in thee, dost thou not stand with
trembling, and all due self-restraint, but
rather laughest, oftentimes when He is dis-
pleased ? And dost thou not consider that
^ thou provokest Him in this way more than by
thy sins ? For God is not wont to turn Him-
self away so much from them that sin, as
from those that are not awestruck after their
sin.

But for all this, some are of so senseless a
disposition, as even after these words to say,
" Nay, far be it from me to weep at any time,
but may God grant me to laugh and to play
all my days." And what can be more child-
ish than this mind ? For it is not God that
grants to play, but the devil. At least hear,
what was the portion of them that played.
"The people," it is said, "sat down to eat
and drink, and rose up to play.''' Such
were they at Sodom, such were they at the
time of the deluge. For touching them of
Sodom likewise it is said, that " in pride, and
in plenty, and in fullness of bread, they
waxed wanton."^ And they who were in
Noah's time, seeing the ark a preparing for
so many years, lived on in senseless mirth,
forseeing nought of what was coming. For
this cause also the flood came and swept
them all away, and wrought in that instant
the common shipwreck of the world.

Ask not then of God these things, which
thou receivest of the devil. For it is God's
part to give a contrite and humbled heart,
sober, self-possessed, and awestruck, full of
repentance and compunction. These are His
gifts, forasmuch as it is also of these things
that we are most in need. Yes, for a griev-
ous conflict is at hand, and against the
powers unseen is our wrestling; against " the
spiritual wickednesses '' ^ our fight, "against
principalities, against powers^' our warfare:
and it is well for us, if when we are earnest
and sober and thoroughly awakened, we can
be able to sustain that savage phalanx. But
if we are laughing and sporting, and always
taking things easily, even before the conflict,
we shall be overthrown by our own remiss-
ness.

ID. It becometh not us then to be contin-
ually laughing, and to be dissolute, and lux-
urious, but it belongs to those upon the stage,
the harlot women, the men that are trimmed
for this intent, parasites, and flatterers; not
them that are called unto heaven, not them
that are enrolled into the city above, not
them that bear spiritual arms, but them that


' I Cor. X. 7 ; Exod. xxxii. 6.
3Eph. vi. 12.


Ezek.


xv:. 49.


are enlisted on the devil's side. For it is he,
yea, it is he, that even made the thing an art,
that he might weaken Christ's soldiers, and
soften the nerves of their zeal. For this
cause he also built theatres in the cities, and
having trained those buffoons, by their perni-
cious influence he causes that kind of pesti-
lence to light upon the whole city, persuad-
ing men to follow those things which Paul
bade us flee, " foolish talking and jesting." *
And what is yet more grievous than these
things is the subject of the laughter. For
when they that act those absurd things utter
any word of blasphemy or filthiness, then
many among the more thoughtless laugh and
are pleased, applauding in them what they
ought to stone them for; and drawing down
on their own heads by this amusement the
furnace of fire. For they who praise the
utterers of such words, it is these above all
who induce men so to speak: wherefore they
must be more justly accountable for the pen-
alty allotted to these things. For were there
no one to be a spectator in such cases, neither
would there be one to act; but when they
see you forsaking your workshops, and your
crafts, and your income from these, and in
»hort everything, for the sake of continuing
there, they derive hence a greater forward-
ness, and exert a greater diligence about
these things.

And this I say, not freeing them from re-
proof, but that ye may learn that it is you
chiefly who supply the principle and root of
such lawlessness; ye who consume your
whole day on these matters, and profanely
exhibit the sacred things of marriage, and
make an open mock of the great mystery.
For not even he who acts these things is so
much the offender, as thou art before him;
thou who biddest him make a play on these
things, or rather who not only biddest him,
but art even zealous about it, taking delight,
and laughing, and praising what is done, and.
in every way gaining strength for such work-
shops of the devil.

Tell me then, with what eyes wilt thou
after this look upon thy wife at home, having
seen her insulted there ? Or how dost thou
not blush being put in mind of the partner of
thy home, when thou seest nature herself
put to an open shame ? Nay, tell me not,
that what is done is acting; for this acting
hath made many adulterers, and subverted
many families. And it is for this most es-
pecially that I grieve, that what is done doth
not so much as seem evil, but there is even
applause and clamor, and much laughter, at


1
I


4 Eph. V. 4.


Homily VII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


43


commission of so foul adulter}-. What say-
est thou ? that what is done is acting? Why,
for this selfsame reason they must be worthy
of ten thousand deaths, that what things all
laws command men to flee, they have taken
pains to imitate. For if the thing itself be
bad, the imitation thereof also is bad. And
I do not yet say how many adulterers they
make who act these scenes of adultery, how
they render the spectators of such things
bold and shameless; for nothing is more full
of whoredom and boldness than an eye that
endures to look at such tilings.

And thou in a market-place wouldest not
choose to see a woman stripped naked, or
rather not even in a house, but callest such
a thing an outrage. And goest thou up into
the theatre, to insult the common nature of
men and women, and disgrace thine own
eyes ? For say not this, that she that is
stripped is an harlot; but that the nature is
the same, and they are bodies alike, both
that of the harlot, and that of the free-
woman. For if this be nothing amiss, what
is the cause that if thou were to see this done
in a market place, thou wouldest both
hasten away thyself, and drive thence her
who was behaving herself unseemly? Or is
it that when we are apart, then such a thing
is outrageous, but when we are assembled
and all sitting together, it is no longer equally
shameful? Nay, this is absurdity and a dis-
grace, and words of the utmost madness;
and it were better to besmear the eyes all
over with mud and mire than to be a specta-
tor of such a transgression. For surely mire
is not so much an hurt to an eye, as an un-
chaste sight, and the spectacle of a woman
stripped naked.

Hear, for example, what it was that caused


nakedness at the beginning, and read the oc-
casion of such disgrace. What then did
cause nakedness ? Our disobedience,' and the
devil's counsel. Thus, from the first, even
from the very beginning, this was his contriv-
ance. Yet they were at least ashamed when
they were naked, but ye take a pride in it;
" having," according to that saying of the
apostle, "your glory in your shame." ^

How then will thy wife thenceforward look
upon thee, when thou art returned from such
wickedness ? how receive thee ? how speak to
thee, after thou hast so publicly put to
shame the common nature of woman, and art
made by such a sight the harlots' captive and
slave ? 3

Now if ye grieve at hearing these things, I
thank you much, for "who is he that maketh
me glad, but he which is made sorry by
me ? " •* Do not then ever cease to grieve
and be vexed for them, for tJie sorrow that
comes of such things will be to you a begin-
ning of a change for the better. For this
cause I also have made my language the
stronger, that by cutting deeper I might free
you from the venom of them that intoxicate
you; that I might bring you back to a jnire
health of soul; which Ood grant we may all
enjoy by all means, and attain unto the re-
wards laid up for these good deeds; by the
grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory and dominion for-
ever and ever. Amen.


■ ['H napaKOjj, " the disobedience," recorded in Genesis. — R.]
- Pliil. ill. 19.

3 [It is a long step from the troubled mind of Jerusalem to the
denunciation of libidinous play-actin>;. Hut the protrst hiis nut
lost its force, since the modern theatre, .ind tuo nften the modern
novel, is open to the same severe criticism. See Homily \'!l. 7, S,
for another instance ofthe same method of appliutuoo. — R.]

4 2 Cor. ii. 2.


HOMILY VII.

Matt. II. 4, 5.


'*And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people together, he
demanded of tiieni wiiere Christ should lie 1)orn. .\iid they said unto him, In licthlc-
heni of |uda:a."


Seest thou how all things are done to con- I ing spirit possessed them, and thenceforth
vict the Jews ? how, as long as He was out they betrayed tlie truth,
of their sight, the envy had not yet laid hokl However, tlie truth was exalted by all


of them, and they rehearsed the testimonies
0/ Jlivi with truth; but when tiiey sawi the


things, and strength was the more gathered
for it even by its enemies. See for e.\:uni)Ie


glory that arose from the miracles, a grndg- in this very case, how wonderful and beyond


44


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily VII.


expectation are the results secretly provided
for/ For both the barbarians and the Jews
do the same time alike learn something more
of one another, and teach one another.
Thus the Jews, for their part, heard from the
wise men, that a star also had proclaimed
Him in the land of the Persians; the wise
men, in their turn, were informed by the
Jews that this Man, whom the star pro-
claimed, prophets also had made known from
a long time of old. And the ground "" of their
inquiry was made to both an occasion of set-
ting forth clearer and more perfect instruc-
tion; and the enemies of the truth are com-
pelled even against their will to read the
writings in favor of the truth, and to interpret
the prophecy; although not all of it. For
having spoken of Bethlehem, and how that
out of it He shall come that should rule
Israel, they proceed not afterwards to add
what follows, out of flattery to the king.
And what was this ? That " His goings forth
are from of old, from everlasting.''

2. " But why," one may say, " if He was to
come from thence, did He live in Nazareth
after the birth, and obscure the prophecy ? '^
Nay, He did not obscure it, but unfolded it
the more. For the' fact, that while His
mother had her constant residence in the one
place, He was born in the other, shows the
thing to have been done by a Divine dispen-
sation/

And for this cause, let me add, neither did
He remove from thence straightway after
His birth, but abode forty days, giving op-
portunity to them that were disposed to be
inquisitive to examine all things accurtitely.
Because there were in truth many things to
move them to such an inquiry, at least if
they had been disposed to give heed to them.
Thus at the coming of the wise men the
whole city was in a flutter,^ and together with
the city the king, and the prophet was
brought forward, and a court of high author-
ity was summoned; and many other things
too were done there, all which Luke relates
minutely. Such were what concerns Anna,
and Simeon, and Zacharias, and the angels,
and the shepherds; all which things were to
the attentive sufficient to give hints for ascer-
taining what had taken place. For if the
wise men, who came from Persia, were not
ignorant of the place, much more might they,
whose abode it was, acquaint themselves with
these things.

He manifested Himself then from the be-


* otKOVOjuetTat,

2 i. e. Their assuming that the Christ should be born at that
time.

3 6| o\.KOVO[J.!b.<i, 4 afeTrTepiudi)


ginning by many miracles, but when they
would not see. He hid Himself for a while,
to be again revealed from another more glori-
ous beginning. For it was no longer the
wise men, nor the star, but the Father from
above that proclaimed Him at the streams of
Jordan; and the Spirit likewise came upon
Him, guiding that voice to the head of Him
just baptized; and John, with all plainness of
speech, cried out everywhere in Judaea, till
inhabited and waste country alike were filled
with that kind of doctrine; and the witness
too of the miracles, and earth, and sea, and
the whole creation, uttered in His behalf a
distinct voice. But at the time of the birth,
just so many things happened as were fitted
quietly to mark out Him that was come.
Thus, in order that the Jews might not say,
" We know not when He was born, nor where-
abouts,'^ both all these events in which the
wise men were concerned were brought about
by God's providence, and the rest of the
things which we have mentioned; so that
they would have no excuse to plead, for not
having inquired into that which had come to
pass.

But mark also the exactness of the pro-
phecy. For it does not say, " He will abide "
in Bethlehem," but "He will come out''
thence." So that this too was a subject of
prophecy, His being simply born there.

Some of them, however, being past shame,
say that these things were spoken of Zerub-
babel. But how can they be right? For
surely '* his goings forth " were not " from of
old, from everlasting. '' 5 And how can that
suit him which is said at the beginning,
" Out of thee shall He come forth:" Zoro-
babel not having been born in Judaea, but in
Babylon, whence also he was called Zoro-
babel,* because he had his origin there ?
And as many as know the Syrians' language
know what I say.

And together with what hath been said,
all the time also since these things is suffi-
cient to establish the testimony. For what
saithhe? "Thou art not the least among
the princes of Judah," and he adds the
cause of the pre-eminence, saying, '* out of
thee shall He come." But no one else hath
made that place illustrious or eminent, ex-
cepting Him alone. For example: since
that birth, men come from the ends of the
earth to see the manger, and the site of the
shed. And this the prophet foretold aloud
from the first, saying, " Thou art not the


5 Micah V. 2.

6 St. Jerome, de Nom. Hebr. t. 3, 77, ed. Venet. 1767. " Zoro-
haliel,^ />rince/>s vel tnagister Bcibylonis,'' sive '' aliena transla-
tion vel ' ortus in Babyiofie.' "


Homily VII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


45


least among the princes of Judali;"' tliat is,
among the heads of tribes. Bv which ex-
pression he comprehended even Jerusalem.'
But not even so have they given heed, al-
though the advantage passes on to them-
selves. Yea, and because of this tlie pro-
phets at the beginning discourse nowhere so
much of His dis/nitv, as touching the benefit
which accrued to them by Him. For so,
when the Virgin was bearing the child, he
saith, "Thou shalt call His name Jesus; ''-
and he gives the reason saying, " for He
shall save His people from their sins." And
the wise men too said not, " Where is the
Son of God ? " but " He that is born King
of the Jews." And here again it is not
afifirmed, " Out of thee shall come forth " the
Son of God, but " a Governor, that shall feed
my people Israel. "^ For it was needful to
converse with them at first, setting out in a
tone of very e.xceeding condescension, lest
they should be offended; and to preach what
related to their salvation in particular, that
hereby they might be the rather won over.
At any rate, all the testimonies that are first
cited, and for which it was the season imme-
diately at the time of the birth, say nothing
great, nor lofty concerning Him, nor such as
those subsequent to the manifestation of the
miracles; for these discourse more distinctly
concerning His dignity. For instance, when
after many miracles children were singing
hymns unto Him, hear what saith the pro-
phet, " Out of the mouth of babes and suck-
lings Thou hast perfected praise." ■• And
again, "I will consider the Heavens, the
works of Thy fingers;" which' signifies Him
to be Maker of the universe. And the testi-
mony too, which was produced after the
ascension, manifests His equality with the
Father; thus saying, " The Lord said unto
my Lord, Sit Thou on my right hand."5
And Isaiah too saith, " He that riseth up to
rule over the Gentiles, in Him shall the
Gentiles trust." *

But how saith he that Bethlehem is " not
the least among the princes of Judah?" for
not in Palestine alone, but in the whole
world, the village hath become conspicuous.
Why, so far he was speaking to Jews; where-
fore also he added, " He siiall feed my peo-
ple Israel." And yet He fa] the whole world;
but as I have said. He is fain not to offend


'/.<•. He made Hcthlrhi-m so fnr Krcatcr than Jcriisalcm :
because " not the Ica.st " seems here equivalent lo " tlic greatest."

' Matt. 1. 21.

3 (The R. V. renders more accurately ; " Which shall be shep-
herd ol my people Israel."— K.|

■♦ M.Ttt. x,\i. 1^1 ; I's. viu. :■. S I's. ex. i ; Ads ii. j^.

* Isa. XI. lo ; kom. xv. i.'. [The latlrr {WfuUKe also follows
the Lxx. The word " trust " should be clianKcd to " hope," us in
R.V., Rom. XV. I2.-R.1 ■


as yet, by revealing what He hath to say
touching the Gentiles.

But how was it, one may say, that He did
not feed the Jewish people ? I answer, first,
this too is accomplished: for by the term
Israel in this place, he figuratively meant
such as believed on Him from among tlie
Jews. And Paul interpreting this, saith,
"For they are not all Israel, which are of
Israel,"' but as many as have been born by
faith and promise. And if He did not feed
them all, this is their own fault and blame.
For when they ought to have worshipped with
the wise men, and have glorified God tiiat
such a time was come, doing away all their
sins (for not a word was spoken to them of
judgments set, or of accounts to be given,
but of a mild and meek Shepherd); they for
their part do just the contrary, and are
troubled, and make disturbance, and go on
continually framing plots without end.

3. " Then Herod, when he had privily
called the wise men, inquired of them dili-
gently* what time the star appeared: " '

Attempting to slay that waich was born,
— an act of extreme idiotcy '" not of madness
only; since what had been said and done was
enough to have withholden him from any
such attempt. For those occurrences were
not after the manner of mrm. A star, 1
mean, calling the wise men from on higli;
and barbarians making so long a pilgrimage,
to worship Him that lay in swaddling clothes
and a manger; and prophets too from of old,
proclaiming beforehand all this; — these antl
all the rest were more than human events:
but nevertheless, none of these things re-
strained him. For such a tiling is wicked-
ness. It falls foul of itself, ami is ever at-
tempting impossibilities. And mark his utter
folly. If on the one hand he believed the
prophecy, and accounted it to be uiichangea-
l)le, it was quite clear that he was attempting
impos!fibilities; if again he disbelieved, and
di(l not expect that those sayings would
come to pass, he need not have been in fear
and alarm, nor have formed any plot on that
beiialf. So that in either way his craft was
superfluous.

And this too came of the utmost folly, to
tiiink that the wise men would make more
account of him than of the C'hild that was
born, for the sake of which they had come so
long a journey. I'Or if, before they saw,
they were so inflamed with longing for Him;


7 Rom. ix. 6.

•• I R. v., •• Icurned of thenj ntrefully " (i)*(nlii^(ni> nap avTwi>).
" Uilijjentlj' " IS from the \'ul>;ate. — R.)

1 .Matt, II. 7.

■" afoiaf . [Rendered "folly," " extreme folly," etc., below.
— R.J


46


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily VII.


after they had seen with their eyes, and been
confirmed by the prophecy, how hoped he to
persuade them to betray tlie young Child to
him ?

Nevertheless, many as were the reasons to
withhold him, he made the attempt; and
having " privily called the wise men, he in-
quired of them.''' Because ke thought that
Jews would be concerned in favor of the
Child, and he never could expect that they
would fall away unto such madness as to be
willing to give up to His enemies their Pro-
tector and Saviour, and Him who was come
for the deliverance of their nation. On ac-
count of this he both calls them privily, and
seeks the time not of the Child, but of the
star; thereby marking out the object of his
chase so as to include far more than it.'' For
the star, I think, must have appeared a long
time before. It was a long time which the
wise men had to spend on their journey. In
order, therefore, that they might present
themselves just after His birth (it being
meet for Him to be worshipped in His very
swaddling clothes, that the marvellous and
strange nature of the thing might appear),
the star, a long time before, makes itself vis-
ible. Whereas if at the moment of His birth
in Palestine, and not before, it had been seen
by them in the East, they, consuming a long
time in their journey, would not have seen
Him in swaddling clothes on their arrival.
As to his slaying the children "from two
years old and under," let us not marvel; for
his wrath and dread, for the sake of a fuller
security, added very much to the time, so
that not one might escape.

Having therefore called them, he saith,
"Go and search diligently ^ for the young
Child; and when ye have found Him, bring
me word again, that I may come and worship
Him also.' "

Seest thou his extreme folly ? Why, if
thou sayest these things in sincerity,*where-
fore dost thou inquire privily? But if in-
tending to plot against Him, how is it thou
dost not perceive, that from the fact of their
being asked secretly the wise men will be
able to perceive thy craft ? But as I have
already said, a soul taken captive by any
wickedness becomes more utterly senseless
than any thing.


' [eTrvv6a.veTo nap' avrijiv, a paraphrase of the New Testament
passaije, a trace of which appears in the A. V. — R.]

2 £K TToAAjj? T^s Treptouata? TiSei? to Sjjpaiaa. Comp. Viger. de
Idiotism. Gra;c. ix. 3, 3. [" Marking his prey out of great super-
fluity," is the more Hteral rendering. The sense seems to be,
" including more than was necessary that he might certainly in-
clude his prey." — R.]

3 [" Search out carefully," R. V. The Greek text of the New
Testament is accurately cited. — R.]

4 Matt. ii. 8.


And he said not, "go and learn concern-
ing the King,'' but "concerning the young
Child;" for he could not even endure to call
Him by the name of His dominion.

4. But the wise men perceive nothing of
this, by reason of their exceeding reverence
(for they never could have expected that he
could have gone on to so great v/ickedness,
and would have attempted to form plots
against a dispensation so marvellous): and
they depart suspecting none of these things,
but from what was in themselves auguring
all that would be in the rest of mankind.

"And, lo ! the star, which they saw in the
east, went before them." ^

For therefore only was it hidden, that hav-
ing lost their guide, they might come to be
obliged to make inquiry of the Jews, and so
the matter might be made evident to all.
Since after they have made inquiries, and
have had His enemies^ for informants, it ap-
pears to them again. And mark how excel-
lent was the order; how in the first place
after the star the people of the Jews receives
them, and the king, and these bring in the
prophecy to explain what had appeared: how
next, after the prophet, an angel again took
them up and taught them all things; but for
a time they journey from Jerusalem to Beth-
lehem by the guidance of the star, the star
again journeying with them from that place
also; that hence too thou mightest learn,
that this was not one of the ordinary stars,
for there is not so much as one star that hath
this nature. And it not merely moved, but
"went before them," drawing and guiding
them on in mid-day.

" But what need of this star any more,"
one may ask, "when the place was ascer-
tained?" In order that the Child also
might be seen. For there was not anything
to make Him manifest, since the house was
not conspicuous, neither was His mother glori-
ous, or distinguished. There was need then
of the star, to set them by the place. Where-
fore it re-appears on their coming out of
Jerusalem, and stays not, before it hath
reached the manger.

And marvel was linked on to marvel; for
both were strange things, as well the magi
worshipping, as the star going before them;
and enough to attract even such as were made
all of stone. For if the wise men had said,
they had heard prophets say these things, or
that angels had discoursed with them in pri-
vate, they might have been disbelieved; but
now, when the vision of the star appeared on

5 Matt. ii. 9. 6 Some Mss. read " the Jews."

7 [6^/aos. The translation is somewhat obscure, throughout the
entire sentence. — R.]


Homily VII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


47


high, even they that were exceeding shameless
had their mouths stopped.

Moreover, the star, when it stood over the
young Child, stayed its course again: which
thing itself also was of a greater power than
belongs to a star, now to hide itself, now to
appear, and having appeared to stand still.
Hence they too received an increase of faith.
For this cause they rejoiced also, that they
had found what they were seeking, that they
had proved messengers of truth, that not with-
out fruit had they come so great a journey;
so great a longing (so to speak) had they for
Christ. For first it came and stood over His
very head, showing that what is born is
Divine; ne.xt standing there) it leads them
to worship Him; being not simply barbar-
ians, but the wiser sort amongst them.

Seest thou, with how great fitness the star
appeared ? Why; because even after the
prophecy, and after the interpretation of the
chief priests and scribes, they still had their
minds turned towards it.

5. Shame upon Marcion, shame upon Paul
of Samosata,' for refusing to see what those
wise men saw, — the forefathers of the
Church; for I am not ashamed so to call
them. Let Marcion be ashamed, beholding
God worshipped in the flesh. Let Paul be
ashamed, beholding Him worshipped as not
being merely a man. As to His being in the
flesh, that first is signified by the swaddling
clothes and the manger; as to their not wor-
shipping Him as a mere man, they declare it,
by offering Him, at that unripe age, such
gifts as were meet to be offered to God.
And together with them let the Jews also be
ashamed, seeing themselves anticipated by
barbarians and magi, whilst they submit not
so much as to come after them. For indeed
what happened then was a type of the things
to come, and from the very beginning it was
shown that the Gentiles would anticipate
their nation.

" But how was it," one may ask, " that not
at the beginning, l:)ut afterwards, He said,
' Go ye, and make discii)les of all nations ' " ?
Because the occurrence was a type, as I said,
of the future, and a sort of declaration of it
beforehand. For the natural order was that
Jews should come unto Him first; but foras-
much as they of their own clioice gave up
their proper benefit, the order of tilings was
inverted. Since not even in this instance
should the wise men have come before the
Jews, nor should persons from so great a dis-
tance have anticipated those who were settled
about the very city, nor should those who had


■ Because Marcion denied Clirist's litiiiian nature,
Divinity. Sec St. Kpiph. Hxr. it ami (15.


I'aul Hi*


heard nothing have pre /ented - them that
were nurtured in so many prophecies. But
because they were exceedingly ignorant of
their own blessings, those from Persia antici-
pate those at Jerusalem. And this indeed is
what Paul also saith: " It was necessary that
the word of the Lord should first have been
spoken to you, but seeing ye have judged
yourselves unworthy, lo, we turn to the Gen-
tiles." 3 For even though before they did not
obey, at any rate when they heard it from
the wise men, they ought to have made all
haste; but they would not. Therefore, while
those are slumbering, these run before.

6. l>et us then also follow the magi, let us
separate ourselves from our barbarian cus-
toms, and make our distance therefrom great,
that we may see Christ, since they too, had
they not been far from their own country,
would have missed seeing Him. Let us de-
part from the things of earth. For so the
wise men, while they v/ere in Persia, saw
but the star, but after they had departed
from Persia, they beheld the Sun of Right-
eousness. Or rather, they would not have
seen so much as the star, unless they had
readily risen up from thence. Let us then
also rise up; though all men be troubled, let
us run to the house of the young Child;
though kings, though nations, though tyrants
interrupt this our path, let not our desire
pass away. For so shall we thoroughly repel
all the dangers that beset us. Since these
too, except they had seen the young Child,
would not have escaped their danger from
the king. Before seeing the young Child,
fears and dangers and troubles pressed upon
them from every side; but after the adora-
tion, it is calm and security; and no longer a
star but an angel receives them, having be-
come priests from the act of adoration; for
we see that they offered gifts also.

Do thou therefore likewise leave the Jew-
isli people, the troublei! city, the blood-tliirsty
tyrant, the pomp of the world, and iiasten to
Bethlehem, where is tlie^ house of the spirit-
ual Bread. •• For thougli thou be a shepherd,
and come iiither, thou wilt liehold the young
Child in an inn: though tlu)ii be a king, and
ajiproach not here, thy purple robe will
profit tiiee nothing; though thou be one of
the wise men, this will be no hindrance to
thee; only let thy coming be to honor and
adore, not to spurn tlie Son of God; only do
tliis with trembling and joy: for it is [xissible
for both of these to concur in one.


» [That i», " preceded ;'' comp. j Thcss. iv. 15 (R. V.) where
the same ( Ircck word occurs, which is rendered "prevent " in the
A.V. R.l

1 Acts xm. 46.

4 licthlehcm kiKnifics, III Hebrew, " the house of bread."


48


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily VII.


But take heed that thou be not like Herod,
and say, "that I may come and worship
Him," and when thou art come, be minded
to slay Him. For him do they resemble,
who partake of the mysteries unworthily: it
being said, that such a one " shall be guilty
of the Body and Blood of the Lord." ' Yes;
for tney have in themselves the tyrant who is
grieved at Christ's kingdom, him that is
more wicked than Herod of old, even Mam-
mon. For he would fain have the dominion,
and sends them that are his own to worship
in appearance, but slaying while they wor-
ship. Let us fear then, lest at any time,
while we have the appearance of suppliants
and worshippers, we should in deed show
forth the contrary.

And let us cast everything out of our
hands when we are to worship; though it be
gold that we have, let us offer it unto him,
and not bury it. For if those barbarians
then offered it for honor, what will become
of thee, not giving even to Him that hath
need ? If those men journeyed so far to see
Him newly born, what sort of excuse wilt
thou have, not going out of thy way one
alley's length, that thou mayest visit Him
sick or in bonds ? And yet when they are
sick or in bonds, even our enemies have our
pity; thine is denied even to thy Benefactor
and Lord. And they offered gold, thou
hardly givest bread. They saw the star and
were glad, thou, seeing Christ Himself a
stranger and naked, art not moved.

For which of you, for Christ's sake, hath
made so long a pilgrimage, you that have
received countless benefits, as these barbar-
ians, or rather, these wiser than the wisest
philosophers ? And why say I, so long a
journey ? Nay, many of our women are so
delicate, that tney go not over so much as
one crossing of the streets to behold Him on
the spiritual manger,= unless they can have
mules to draw them. And others being able
to walk, yet prefer to their attendance here,
some a crowd of worldly business, some the
theatres. Whereas the barbarians accom-
plished so great a journey for .His sake, be-
fore seeing Him; thou not even after thou
hast seen Him dost emulate them, but for-
sakest Him after seeing Him, and runnest
to see the stage player. (For I touch again
on the same subjects, as I did also of late. 3)
And seeing Christ lying in the manger, thou
leavest Him, that thou mayest see women
on the stage.

7. What thunderbolts do not these things
deserve? For tell me, if any one were to


' I Cor. XI. 27.
3 See Horn. vi. lo.


2 Or, " Spiritual Table." Savile.


lead ■* thee into a palace, and show thee the
king on his throne, wouldest thou indeed
choose to see the theatre instead of those
things ? And yet even in the palace there is
nothing to gain; but here a spiritual well of
fire gushes up out of this table. And thou
leavest this, and runnest down to the theatre,
to see women swimming, and nature put to
open dishonor, leaving Christ sitting by the
well ? Yes: for now, as of old. He sits down
by the well, not discoursing to a Samaritan
woman, but to a whole city. Or perchance
now too with a Samaritan woman only. For
neither now is any one with Him; but some
with their bodies only, and some not even
with these. But nevertheless. He retires not,
but remains, and asks of us to drink, not
water, but holiness, for " His holy things
He gives unto the holy.''^ For it is not
water that He gives us from this fountain,
but living blood; and it is indeed a symbol
of death, but it is become the cause of life.

But thou, leaving the fountain of blood,
the awful cup, goest thy way unto the foun-
tain of the devil, to see a harlot swim, and to
suffer shipwreck of the soul. For that water
is a sea of lasciviousness, not drowning bodies,
but working shipwreck of souls. And where-
as she swims with naked body, thou behold-
ing, art sunk into the deep of lasciviousness.
For such is the devil's net; it sinks, not them
that go down into the water itself, but them
that sit above more than such as wallow
therein; and it chokes them more grievously
than Pharaoh, who was of old sunk in the
sea with his horses and his chariots. And
if souls could but be seen, I could show you
many floating on these waters, like the bodies
of the Egyptians at that time. But what is
still more grievous is this, that they even call
such utter destruction a delight, and they
term the sea of perdition a channel for a
pleasure voyage.^ Yet surely one might
easier pass over in safety the ^gean or the
Tuscan sea, than this spectacle. For in the
first place, through a whole night the devil
preoccupies their souls with the expectation
of it; then having shown them the expected
object, he binds them at once, and makes
them captives. For think not, because thou
hast not been joined unto the harlot, thou
art clean from the sin; for in the purpose of
thine heart thou hast done it all. Since if
thou be taken by lust, thou hast kindled the
flame up higher; if thou feel nothing at what


i {^eUayayelv cn-7)-yye\AeTo, "were promising to introduce."

— R-]

5 This expression, Ta ayia Tois ayc'oi?, " Holy Things for Hoh'
Persons," is used in the litur.gies of St. Clement, St. James, St.
Mark, St. Chrysostom, the Ethiopian liturgy, and that of Severus.

6 rjSovrj^ fvpLTvov,


Homily VII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


49


thou seest, thou deservest a heavier charge,
for being a scandal to others, by encouraging
them in these spectacles, and for polluting
thine own eye-sight, and together with thine
eye- sight, thy soul.

However, not merely to find fault, come let
us devise a mode of correction too. What
then will the mode be ? I would commit you
to your own wives, that they may instruct
you. It is true, according to Paul's law/
you ought to be the teachers. But since that
order is reversed by sin, and the body has
come to be above, and the head beneath, let
us even take this way.

But if thou art ashamed to. have a woman
for thy teacher, fly from sin, and thou wilt
quickly be able to mount up on the throne
which God hath given thee. Since so long
as thou sinnest the Scripture sends thee not
to a woman only, but even to things irra-
tional, and those of the viler sort; yea, it is
not ashamed to send thee who art honored
with reason, as a disciple to the ant.- Plainly
this is no charge against the Scripture, but
against them that so betray their own nobility
of race. This then we will do likewise; and
for the present we will commit thee to thy
wife; but if thou despise her, we will send
thee away to the school of the very brutes,
and will point out to thee how many birds,
fishes, four-footed beasts, and creeping things
are found more honorable, and chaster than
thou.

If now thou art ashamed, and dost blush
at the comparison, mount up to thine own
nobility, and fly the sea of hell, and the flood
of fire, I mean the pool in the theatre. For
this pool introduces to that sea, and kindles
that abyss of flame. Since if " he that look-
eth on a woman to lust after her hath already
committed adultery," ^ he who is forced even
to see her naked, how doth he not become
ten thousandfold a captive? The flood in
the days of Noah did not so utterly destroy
the race of men as these swimming women
drown all that are there with great disgrace.
For as to that rain, though it wrought indeed
a death of the body, yet did it repress the
wickedness of tlie soul; but this hath the
contrary effect; while tlie bodies remain, it
destroys the soul. .\ik1 ye, when there is a
question of precedence, claim to take place
of the whole world, forasmuch as our city
first crowned itself with the name of Chris-
tian;* but in tlie competition of chastity,
ye are not asliamcd to be Iiehind the rudest
cities.

■ I Cor. xiv. 34, 35. ' Prov. vi. 6.

1 Matt. V. 28.

4 Arts xi. 26. [More literally. " the nnme of the ChriHtian*,"
indicating more directly the reference to the pa?i«jiKe in Actn. K.]
4


j 8. "Well," saith one, "and what dost
thou require us to do ? to occupy the moun-
tains, and become monks?" AVhy it is this
which makes me sigh, that ye think tliem alone
to be properly concerned with decency and
chastity; and yet assuredly Christ made His
laws common to all. Thus, when He saith,
" if any one look on a woman to lust after
her," He speaks not to the solitary, but to
him also that hath a wife; since in fact that
mount was at that time filled with all kinds
'of persons of that description. Form then
{ in thy mind an image of that amphitheatre,
' and hate thou this, which is the devil's.
Neither do thou condemn the severity of my
speech. For I neither " forbid to marry," ^
nor hinder thy taking pleasure; but I would
have this be done in chastity, not with
shame, and reproach, and imputations with-
out end. I do not make it a law that you
are to occupy the mountains and the deserts,
but to be good and considerate and chaste,
dwelling in the midst of the city. For in
fact all our laws are common to the monks
also, except marriage; yea rather, even witti
respect to this, Paul commands us to put
j ourselves altogether on a level with them;
saying, " For the fashion of this world pass-
eth away: " that " they that have wives be as
tnough they had none."*

" Wherefore " (so he speaks) "I do not
bid you take possession of the summits of
1 the mountains; it is true I could wish it,
: since the cities imitate the things that were
done in Sodom; nevertheless, I do not en-
force this. Abide, having house and chil-
dren and wife; only do not insult thy wife, nor
put thy chiUlren to shame, neither bring into
thine house the infection from the theatre."
Hearest thou not Paul saying, "The hus-
band hath not power of his own body, but
the wife," ^ and setting down laws common
to both? But thou, if thy wife lie contiii-
. ually thrusting herself into a pul)lic assembly,
art severe in blaming her; but thyself, spend-
ing whole days on pul)lic shows, thou dost
not account worthy of blame. Yea, touching
thy wife's modesty thou art so strict as even
to go beyond necessity or measure, and not
to allow her s(i much as indispensal)!c
absences; Init to thyself thou deemest all
I tilings lawful. Vet Paul allows thee not, wiio
gives the wife likewise the same authority, ft>r
thus lie speaks: "Let tlie hnsbanti render
unto the wife due honor.''" Wliat sort of


5 I Tim. iy. a. * 1 Cor. vii. 31, ao. 7 t Cor. vii. 4.

* I Cor. vii. 3. In our copies of the Oreck Tentainent, nnil in
the Mss. of St. Chry»<isi<iin, here, it is, tvvotav, not ri^i)r. Hut
Mr. Kirld writrn TtM>l^. '. from inlrrnul rvidrncrj j, from cmn-

1)ari>Miii of Si C'hrvHo>tiiin'!i own Cnininrnlary on this place of St.
'nil! ; and uicniinlo (or it liy !iiip|>i>sin>; that heqiiotnl from mem-


50


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily VIII.


honor then is this, when thou insultest her in
the chiefest things, and givest up her body to
harlots (for thy body is hers); when thou
bringest tumults and wars into thine house,
when thou doest in the market place such
things, as being related by thyself to thy wife
at home, overwhelm her with shame, and put
to shame also thy daughter if present, and
more than them, surely, thyself? For thou
must necessarily either be silent, or behave
thyself so unseemly, that it would be just for
thy very servants to be scourged for it.


ory, as often, and confused the verse with, i Peter iii. 7. [The
text in I Cor. vii. 3, according to most of the best Greek and Latin
MSS., is TTfi' 6(t)fi.Kriv (R. v., " her due"). The text and argument
of Chrysostom indicate careless citation. The translator's note
was written before New Testament textual criticism had received
any attention from more modern English divines. — R.]


What plea then wilt thou have, I pray thee,
beholding, as thou dost, with great eagerness,
things which even to name is disgraceful;
preferring to all sights these, which even to
recount is intolerable ?

Now then for a season, in order not to be
too burdensome, I will here bring my dis-
course to an end. But if ye continue in the
same courses, I will make the knife sharper,
and the cut deeper; and I will not cease, till
I have scattered the theatre of the devil, and
so purified the assembly of the Church. For
in this way we shall both be delivered from
the present disgrace, and shall reap the fruit
of the life to come, by the grace and love to-
ivards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom
be glory and might for ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY VIII.

Matt. II. 2. • _

"And when they were come into the house, they saw the young Child with Mary His
mother." '


How then saith Luke, that He was lying in
the manger ? Because at the birth indeed she
presently laid Him there (for, as was not un-
likely, in that large assemblage for the tax-
ing, they could find no h^use; which Luke
also signifies, by saying, " Because there was
no room, she laid Him^' there); but after-
wards she took Him up, and held Him on
her knees. For no sooner was she arrived
at Bethlehem than she brought her pangs to
an end,^ that thou mayest thence also learn
the whole dispensation, and that these things
were not done at random, or by chance, but
that they all were in course of accomplish-
ment, according to some Divine foreknow-
ledge, and propnetic order.

But what was it that induced them to
worship? For neither was the Virgin con-
spicuous, nor the house distinguished, nor
was any other of the things which they saw
apt to amaze or attract them. Yet they not
only worship, but also '* open their treas-
ures," and " offer gifts; " and gifts, not as
to a man, but as to God. For the frankin-


' [The entire verse is given in Field's Greek text ; the Homily
covers verses 11-15. — K.)

2 oiSiva^ (Kv(Tev. Comp. Acts. ii. 24.


cense and the myrrh were a symbol of this.
What then was their inducement? That
which wrought upon them to set out from
home and to come so long a journey; and
this was both the star, and the illumination
wrought of God in their mind, guiding them
by little and little to the more perfect knowl-
edge. For, surely, had it not been so, all
that was in sight being ordinary, they would
not have shown so great honor. Therefore
none of the outward circumstances was great
in that instance, but it was a manger, and a
shed, and a mother in poor estate; to set be-
fore thine eyes, naked and bare, those
wise men's love of wisdom, ^ and to prove to
thee, that not as mere man they approached
Him, but as a God, and Benefactor. Where-
fore neither were they offended by ought of
what they saw outwardly, but even wor-
shipped, and brought gifts; gifts not only free
from Judaical grossness, in that they sacri-
ficed not sheep and calves, but also coming
nigh to the self-devotion of the Church, for it
was knowledge and obedience and love that
they offered unto Him.


3 <^\.\o<jo^i,a.v ,


HOMII.Y VIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


"And being warned of God in a dream
that they should not return unto Herod, the)'
departed into their own country another
way.'' '

See from this also their faith, how they
were not offended, but are docde, and consid-
erate; neither are they troubled, nor reason
with themselves, saying, "And yet, if tins
Child be great, and hath any might, what
need of flight, and of a clandestine retreat ''
and wherefore can it be, that when we have
come openly and with boldness, and have
stood against so great a people, and against a
king's madness, the angel sends us out of the
city as runaways and fugitives?" But none
of these things did they either say or think.
For this most especially belongs to faith, not
to seek an account of what is enjoined, but
merely to obey the commandments laid upon
us.

2. "And when they were departed, behold,
an angel appeareth to Joseph in a dream,
saying, Arise, and take the young Child and
His mother, and flee into Egypt." -

There is something here worth inquiring
into, both touching the magi, and louciiing
the Child; for if even they were not troubled,
but received all with faith, it is worthy of
e.xamination on our part, why they and the
young Child are not preserved, continuing
there, but they as fugitives go into Persia, He
with His mother into Egypt. But what?
should He have fallen into the hands of
Herod, and having fallen, not have been cut
off? Nay, He would not have been thought
to have taken flesii upon Him; the greatness
of the Economy would not have been be-
lieved.

For if, while these things are taking place,
and many circumstances are being ordered
mysteriously after the manner of men, some
have dared to say that His assumption of
our flesh ^ is a fable; in what degree of impiety
would they not liave been wrecked, iiad He
done all in a manner becoming His Ciodhead,
and according to His own power?

As to the wise men, He sentls them off
quickly, at once both coniniissioning them as
teachers to the land of the Persians, and at
the same time intercepting the madness of
the king, tliat he might learn that he was at-
tempting things impossible, and might quench
his wrath, and tiesist from this his vain lalior.
For not alone openly to subdue His enemies,
i)Ut also to deceive tliem with ease, is worthy
of His power. Thus, for e.vani|)le. He de-
ceived the Egyptians also in the case of the
Jews, and having power to transfer tlieir


wealth openly into the hands of the Hebrews,
He bids them do tnis secretly and with craft;
and this surely, not less than the other mira-
cles, made Him an object of terror to His
enemies. At least, they of Ascalon, and all
, the rest, when they had taken the ark, and
being smitten, did after that devise their
countrymen not to fight, nor to set them-
selves against Him, with the other miracles
brought this also forward, saying, " Where-
fore harden ye your hearts, as Egypt and
Pharaoh hardened ? when He had mocked
them, did He not after tiiat send forth His
people, and they departed ? " * Now this they
said, as accounting this fresh one not infe-
rior to those other signs that had been done
openly, towards the demonstration of His
power, and of His greatness. And the like
ensued on this occasion too; a thing suffi-
cient to astonish the tyrant. For consider
what it was natural for Herod to feel, and
how his very breath would be stopped, de-
ceived as he was liy the wise men, and thus
laughed to scorn. For what, if he did not
become better? It is not His fault, who
I marvellously ordered all this, but it is the
excess of Herod's madness, not yielding even
to those things which had virtue ' to have
persuaded him, and deterred him from his
wickedness, but going on still further, to re-
ceive a yet sharper punishment for folly so
great.

3. But wherefore, it may be said, is the
young Child sent into Egypt? In the first
place, tile evangelist himself hath mentioned
the cause, saying," That it might be fulfilled,
Out of Egypt have I called my Son." .And
at the same tim^ beginnings of fair hopes
were thenceforth proclaiineil lie fore to the
world. That is, since Babylon and Egypt,
most in the whole earth, were burnt up with
the flame of ungodliness, He, signifying from
the first that He means to correct and amend
both, anil inducing men hercl>y to e.xjiect His
bounties in regard of the wliole world like-
wise, sent to the one the wise men, the other
He Himself visited witii His mother.

.\nd besides what I have said, there is an-
other lesson also, which we are hereby taught,
tending not sliglitly to true self-command in
us. Of what kind then is it? To look from
the beginning for tenqnations and plots.
See, for instance, lunv this was the case even
at once from His swaddling clothes. Thus
you sec at His birth, first a tj-rant raging,
then flight ensuing, and tleparture beyonti the
border; and for no crime His motlier is
c.vilcd into the land of the barl)arians: that


Malt. ii. la.


■' Matt. li. 13.


1 [tiJv ffapudt.]


4 I Sam. VI. 6, i.xx.


S [roit ivra^<Vot«.]


52


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily VIII.


thou, hearing these thnigs (supposing thee
thought worthy to minister to any spiritual
matter, and then to see thyself suffering in-
curable ills, and enduring countless dangers),
shouldest not be greatly troubled, nor say,
" What can this be ? yet surely I ought to be
crowned and celebrated, and be glorious and
illustrious for fulfilling the Lord's command-
ment: " but that having this example, thou
mightest bear all things nobly, knowing that
this especially is the order of all things spirit-
ual, to have everywhere temptations in the
same lot with them. See at least how this is
the case not only with regard to the mother
of the young Child, but also of those barba-
rians; since they for their part retire secretly
in the condition of fugitives; and she again,
who had never passed over the threshold of
her house, is commanded to undergo so long
a journey of affliction, on account of this
wonderful birth, and her spiritual travail.

And behold a wonder again. Palestine
plots, and Egypt receives and preserves Him
that is the object of the plots. For, as it
appears, not only in the instance of the sons
of the patriarch ' did t3^pes take place, but
also in our Lord's own case. In many in-
stances, we are sure, His doings at that time
were prophetic declarations of what was to
happen afterwards; as, for example, in the
matter of the ass and the colt.°

4 Now the angel having thus appeared,
talks not with Mary, but with Joseph; and
what saith he? "Arise, and take the young
Child and His mother." Here, he saith not
any more, "thy wife,'' but " His mother."
For after that the birth had taken place, and
the suspicion was done away, and the hus-
band appeased, thenceforth the angel talks
openly, calling neither child nor wife his, but
"take the young Child and His mother, and
flee into Egypt; " and he mentions the cause
of the flight: " For Herod," saith he, " will
seek the young Child's life."

Joseph, when he had heard these things,
was not offended, neither did he say, "The
thing is hard to understand: Didst thou not

• /. e., of Jacob.

2 The received mystical interpretation of our Lord's final entry
into Jerusalem represented tlie ass as the type of the Jewish con-
verts, and the colt, of the (lentile Church. See hereafter, Horn.
LXVI.,and comp. Origenon St.Matt. t. i6, 15; St.Anib. in Luc. lib.
9, 4-14 ; St. Just. .Mart. Dial. cum. 'I'ryph. c. S'}- '-I'he interpreta-
tion to which St. Chrysostom points of the fliirht into Egypt, is
probably the same with that of St. Hilary on this place. " Joseph
is admonished by the angel to take the young child into Egypt :
Egypt full of idols, and given to the worship of all kinds of por-
tents for gods. Accordingly, after the persecution by the Jews,
and the assent of that profane multitude to His murder, Christ
passes over to the nations, sold as they were to the vainest super-
stitions. He leaves Jewry, and is carried into the world which
knows Him not: while llethlehem, i.e., Juda;a, overflows with
the blood of martyrs. As to Herod's rage and his murdering the
infants, it is the type of the Jewish people raging against the
Christians, under the notion that by the slaughter of the blessed
martyrs they may blot out Christ's name from the faitii and pro-
fession of all men." p. 613, ed. Hen. Paris, 1693.


say just now, that He should ' save His peo-
ple ? ' and now He saves not even Himself:
but we must fly, and go far from home, and
be a long time away: the facts are contrary
to the promise." Nay, none of these things
doth he say (for the man was faithful):
neither is he curious about the time of his
return; and this though the angel had put it
indefinitely thus: " Be thou there until I tell
thee/' But nevertheless, not even at this
did he shudder, but submits and obeys, un-
dergoing all the trials with joy.

And this because God, who is full of love
to man, did with these hardships mingle
things pleasant also; which indeed is His
way with regard to all the saints, making
neither their dangers nor their refreshment
continual, but weaving the life of all right-
eous men, out of both the one and the other.
This very thing He did here also: for con-
sider, Joseph saw the Virgin with child; this
cast him into agitation and the utmost
trouble, for he was suspecting the damsel of
adultery. But straightway the angel was' at
hand to do away his suspicion, and remove
his fears; and seeing the young child born,
he reaped the greatest joy. Again, this joy
no trifling danger succeeds, the city being
troubled, and the king in his madness seek-
ing after Him that was born. But this
trouble was again succeeded by another joy;
the star, and the adoration of the wise men.
Again, after this pleasure, fear and danger;
" For Herod," saith he, " is seeking the
young Child's life," and He must needs fly
and withdraw Himself as any mortal might:
the working of miracles not being seasonable
as yet. For if from His earliest infancy He
had shown forth wonders. He would not have
been accounted a Man.

Because of this, let me add, neither is a
temple framed at once; but a regular con-
ception takes place, and a time of nine
months, and pangs, and a delivery, and giv-
ing suck, and silence for so long a space,
and He awaits the age proper to manhood;
that by all means acceptance might be won
for the mystery of His Economy.

"But w^herefore then," one may say,
" were even these signs wrought at the begin-
ning?" For His mother's sake; for the
sake of Joseph and of Simeon, who was pres-
ently to depart; for the sake of the shep-
herds and of the wise men; for the sake of
the Jews. Since they, had they been willing
to mind diligently what was taking place,
would from this event also have reaped no
small advant.-ige in regard of what was to
come.

But if the prophets do not mention what


Homily VIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


53


relates to the wise men, be not troubled; for
they neither foretold all tilings, nor were they
silent touching all. For as without any warn-
ing to see those things coming to pass, would
naturally occasion much astonishment and
trouble; so also to have been informed of all
would dispose the hearer to sleep, and would
have left nothing for the evangelists to add.

5. And if the Jews should raise a question
touching the prophecy, and say, that the
words, "Out of Egypt have I called my
Son/' were uttered concerning themselves;
we would tell them, This is a law of prophecy,
that in many cases much that is spoken of
one set of persons is fulfilled in another; of
which kind is that which is said touching
Simeon and Levi, " I will divide them,"
saith He, " in Jacob, and scatter them in
Israel." ' And yet not in themselves did this
come to pass, but in their descendants; and
Noah's saying again about Canaan, came to
pass in the Gibeonites, Canaan's descend-
ants.^ And that concerning Jacob one may
see to have so come to pass; for those bless-
ings which say, "Be lord over thy brother,
and let thy father's sons worship thee, '^^ \^^^
no accomplishment in himself (how could
they, he being in fear and trembling, and
worshipping his brother over and over
again?''), but in his offspring they had.
The very same may be said in this case also.
P'or which may' be called the truer son of
God, he that worships a calf, and is joined to
Baalpeor,5 and sacrifices his sons to devils?
or He that is a Son by nature, and honors
Him that begat Him? So that, except this
man had come, the prophecy would not have
received, its due fulfillment. It is worth
observing, too, that the evangelist intimates
the same by the phrase, "that it might be
fulfilled;" implying that it would not have
been fulfilled, unless He had come.

And this makes the Virgin also in no com-
mon degree glorious and tlistinguished; that
the very thing which was the whole people's
special endowment in the way of praise, she
also might thenceforth have for her o^vn. I
mean, that whereas they were proud of their
coming up from Egyjit, and used to boast of
it (wliich indeed the prophet also was iiint-
ing at, when he said, " Have I not I)rought
up the strangers from ('.-ipi)adocia, and the
.Assyrians from the pit"''), He makes this
pre-eminence belong to the Virgin likewise.

« Cen. xlix. 7. => (icn. ix. 25 ; Juah. ix. 97 ; a Chron. viii. 7-9.

ICic-n. xxvii. 3i>. 4(!rii. xxxiii. {.

■i [Tin- rcfirencc in to Niimh. xxv. 3. Hut ax usual, the LXTC.
fiirin (if thr name is <il<-d : ^nAtfrtyujp.— R.]

' AiniiH IX. 7. " 'I'lic I'hilistinrx from t iiphlor,iiii<l the Syrians
from Kir," lleb. | The 1 xx. Iijis tou? oAAix/>uAoi»t (here rrmlrml
" thcstranKTs ") thr jsual trrni for dcsiKualint; " the l'hih»tilie>."
Cump. 1 and a iriumucl, /•issim (in i.xx.J. K.J


Rather, however, both the people and the
patriarch, going down thither, and coming up
thence, were together completing the type of
this His return. Thus, as they went down
to avoid death by famine, so He death by
conspiracy. But whereas they on their ar-
rival were for the time delivered from the
famine, this man, when He had gone down,
sanctified the whole land, by setting His foot
thereon.

At least it is observable how, in the midst
of His humiliations, the tokens of His God-
head are disclosed. Thus, first of all, the
angel saying, " Flee into Egypt,'' did not
promise to journey with them, either in their
descent or return; intimating that they have
a great fellow-traveller, the Child that had
been born; such an one as actually changed
all things immediately on His appearing, antl
wrought so that His enemies should minister
in many ways to this Economy. Thus magi
and barbarians, leaving the superstition of
their fathers, are come to worship: thus
Augustus ministers to the birth at Bethlehem
by the decree for the taxing; Egypt receives
and preserv'es Him, driven from His home,
and plotted against, and obtains a sort of first
impulse towards her union unto Him; so that
when in after-time she should hear Him
preached by the apostles, she might have this
at least to glory of, as having received Him
first. And yet this privilege did lielong unto
Palestine alone; but the second proved more
fervent than the first.

6. And now, shouldest thou come unto the
desert of Egypt, thou wilt see this desert
become better than any paradise, ami ten
thousand choirs of angels in human forms,
and nations of martyrs, and companies of
virgins, and all the devil's tyranny put down,
while Christ's kingdom shines forth in its
brightness. And the mother of jioets, and
wise men, antl magicians,' the inventor of
every kind of sorcery, ami projiagator thereof
among all others, her tliou wilt sec now tak-
ing pride in the fishermen, and treating all
[ those with contempt, but carrying about
' everywhere the publican, and the tentmaker,
anil protecting herself with the cross; and
these good things not in the cities only, but
also in the deserts more than in the cities;
: since in truth everywhere in that lantl may be
seen the camp of Christ, and the royal flock,
and the polity of tiie powers a!)ove. .\nil
thes'j rules one may find in force, not among
men only, but also in woman's nature. Yea,
they, not less than men, practise that search

7 [ffo^f *at fiaymv. The iranaUtor hns rcndrrcd m'YO' loine-
tinics liy " wise men," «nd »4in>rtimcs by " ma>:i" l'rob«bly the
I term here refer* more exactly to " maj;iiian«." k.]


54


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily VIII,


of wisdom, not taking shield, and mounting
horse, as the Grecians' grave lawgivers and
philosophers direct, but another and far
severer fight are they undertaking. For the
war against the devil and his powers is com-
mon to them and to the men, and in no re-
spect doth the delicacy of their nature be-
come an impediment in such conflicts, for not
by bodily constitution, but by mental choice,
are these struggles decided. Wherefore
women in many cases have actually been
more forward in the contest than men, and
have set up more brilliant trophies. Heaven
is not so irlorious with the varied choir of the
stars, as the wilderness of Egypt, exhibiting
to us all around the tents of the monks.

Whoever knows that ancient Egypt, her
that fought against God in frenzy, her that
was the slave of cats, that feared and dreaded
onions; this man will know well the power of
Christ. Or rather, we have no need of an-
cient histories; for even yet there remain
relics of that senseless race, for a specimen
of their former madness. Nevertheless, these
who of old broke out all of them into so
great madness, now seek to be wise touching
heaven, and the things above heaven, and
laugh to scorn the customs of their fathers,
and acknowledge the wretchedness of their
ancestors, and hold the philosophers in no
estimation: having learnt by the real facts,
that all that was theirs ' were but inventions
of sottish old women, but the real philoso-
phy, and worthy of heaven, is this, which was
declared unto them by the fishermen. And
for this very cause, together with their so
great exactness in doctrine, they exhibit also
by their life that extreme seriousness. For
when they have stripped themselves of all that
they have, and are crucified to the whole
world, they urge their course on again yet
farther, using the labor of their body for the
nourishment of them that be in need. For
neither, because they fast and watch, do they
think It meet to be idle by day; but their
nights they spend in the holy hymns and in
vigils, and their days in prayers, and at the
same time in laboring with their own hands;
imitating the zeal of the apostle. For if he,
when the whole world was looking unto him.
for ihe sake of nourishing them that were in
need, both occupied a workshop, and prac-
tised a craft, and being thus employed did
not so much as sleep by night; how much
more, say they, is it meet that we, who have
taken up our abode in the wilderness, and
have nothing to do with the turmoils in the

' fra jLtev (Kfivuiv, i. e., those things taught by the heathen
philosophers of Egj-pt. — R.I
2 Acts XX. 34 ; I Thess. ii. g.


cities, should use the leisure of our quiet for
spiritual labors !

Let us then be ashamed all of us, both they
that are rich, and they that are poor, when
those having nothing at all but a body only
and hands, force their way on and strive
eagerly to find thence a supply for the poor;
while we, having endless stores within, touch
not even our superfluities for these objects.
What kind of plea shall we have then, I pray
thee ? and what sort of excuse ?

Yet further consider, how of old these
Egyptians were both avaricious, and glutton-
ous, together with their other vices. For
there were the flesh-pots ^ which the Jews
remember; there, the great tyranny of the
belly. Nevertheless, having a willing mind,
they changed: and having caught fire from
Christ, they set off at once on their voyage
towards heaven; and though more ardent
than the rest of mankind, and more head-
strong, both in anger, and in bodily pleas-
ures, they imitate the incorporeal powers in
meekness, and in the rest of that freedom
from passions which pertains unto self-denial.

7. Now if any man hath been in the coun-
try, he knows what I say. But if he have
never entered those tabernacles, let him call
to mind him who even until now is in the
mouths of all men, — him whom, after the
apostles, Egypt brought forth, — the blessed
and great Antony; and let hiin put it to him-
self, "This^man, too, was born in the same
country with Pharaoh; nevertheless he was
not thereby damaged, but both had a divine
vision vouchsafed him, and showed forth
such a life as the laws of Christ require."
And this any man shall know perfectly, when
he hath read the book that contains the his-
tory of that man's life;" in which also he will
perceive much prophecy. I allude to his
prediction about those infected with the
errors of Arius, and his statement of the
mischief that would arise from them; God
even then having shown them to him. and
sketched out before his eyes all that was
coming. A thing which most especially
(among the rest) serves to demonstrate the
truth, that no person, belonging to the here-
sies without, hath such a man to mention.
But, not to depend on us for this informa-
tion, look earnestly into what is written in
that book, and ye will learn all exactly, and
thence be instructed in much self-denial.

And this advice I give, that we not merely
peruse what is written there, but that v/e also
emulate it, and make neither place, nor edu-
cation, nor forefathers' wickedness an excuse.


3 Ex. xvi.


4 In the works of St. Athanasius.


Homily IX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


55


For if we will take heed to ourselves, none
of these things shall be an hindrance to us,
since even Abraham had an ungodly father/
but he inherited not his wickedness; and
Hezekiah, Ahaz: yet nevertheless he became
dear to God. And Joseph too when in the
midst of Egypt, adorned himself with the
crowns of temperance; and the Three Chil-
dren no less in the midst of Babylon, and of
the palace, when a table like those at Sybaris
was set before them, showed the highest self-
denial; and Moses also in Egypt, and Paul in

« Josh. xxiv. 2,


the whole world; but nothing was to any one
of these an hindrance in the race of virtue.

Let us then, bearing in mind all these
things, put out of the way these our super-
fluous pleas and excuses, and apply ourselves
to those toils which the cause of virtue re-
quires. For thus shall we both attract to
ourselves more favor from God, and persuade
Him to assist us in our struggles, and we
shall obtain the eternal blessings; unto which
God grant that we may all attain, by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory and victory for
ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY IX.


Matt. II. i6.


ei


Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was exceeding wroth.''


Yet surely it was a case not for anger, but
for fear and awe: he ought to have perceived
that he was attempting impossible things.
But he is not refrained. For when a soul is
insensible and incurable, it yields to none of
the medicines given by God. See for ex-
ample this man following up his former
efforts," and adding many murders to one,
and hurried down the steep any whither.
For driven wild by this anger, and envy, as
by some demon, he takes account of nothing,
but rages even against nature herself, and his
anger against the wise men who had mocked
him he vents upon tlie children that had
done no wrong: venturing then in Palestine
upon a deed akin to the things that had been
done in Egypt. For he "sent forth," it is
said, "and slew all the children that were in
Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof,
from two years old and under, according to
the time which he had diligently incjuircd of
the wise men."

Here attend to me carefully. Because
many things are uttered by many very idly
touching these children, and the course of
events is charged with injustice, and some
of these express their perplexity about it in
a more moderate way, others with more of •
audaciousness and frenzy. In order then I
that we may free these of tluir madness and '


- I


those of th.eir perplexity, suffer us to dis-
course a little upon this topic. Plainly, then,
if this be their charge, tlint the children were
left to be slain, they should find fault like-
wise with the slaugliter of the soldiers that
kept Peter.'' For as here, when the young
Child had fled, other children are massacred
in the place ol Him wiio was sougiU; even so
then, too, Peter having been delivered from
his prison and ciiains by the angel, one of
like name with this tyrant, and like temper
too, when he had sought him, and found him
not, slew instead of him the soldiers liiat
ke|)t him.

" But what is this ? " it may be said; " Why
this is not a solution, but an enhancement of
our dirticulty." I know it too, and for this
intent I bring forward all such cases, that to
all I may adduce one and the same solution.
What then is the solution of these things ?
or wiiat fair account of them can we give?
'I'hat Christ was not tiie cause of their slaugh-
ter, but the king's cruelty; as indeed neither
was Peter to those others, but the madness
of Herod. I-Or if he had seen the wall
broken through, or the doors overthrown, he
might, perhajis, have had groimd to accuse
the soldiers that kept the apostle, of neglect;
but now when all things contnuicd in due
form,' and tin- doors were tlirown wi<lf ojien,


' Toif irpoTt'poif inayiovi(6ntvoy. Comp. Jude 3.


Attn Xli. 19.


3 iw\ 9j(i(fiaro«.


56


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily IX.


and the chains fastened to the hands of them
that kept him (for in fact they were bound
unto him), he might have inferred from these
things (that is, if he had been strictly doing
a judge's office on the matters before him),
that the event was not of human power or
craft, but of some divine and wonder-working
power; he might have adored the doer of
these things, instead of waging war with the
sentinels. For God had so done all that He
did, that so far from exposing the keepers,
He was by their means leading the king unto
the truth. But if he proved senseless, what
signifies to' the skillful Physician of Souls,
managing all things to do good, the insubor-
dination of him that is diseased ?

And just this one may say in the present
case likewise. For, wherefore art thou wroth,
O Herod, at being mocked of the wise men ?
didst thou not know that the birth was divine ?
didst thou not summon the chief priests ?
didst thou not gather together the scribes?
did not they, being called, bring the prophet
also with them into thy court of judgment,
proclaiming these things beforehand from of
old ? Didst thou not see how the old things
agreed with the new ? Didst thou not hear
that a star also ministered to these men ?
Didst thou not reverence the zeal of the bar-
barians? Didst thou not -marvel at their
boldness ? Wast thou not horror-struck at
the truth of the prophet ? Didst thou not
from the former things perceive the very last
also? Wherefore didst thou not reason with
thyself from all these things, that this event
was not of the craft of the wise men, but of a
Divine Power, duly dispensing all things ?
And even if thou wert deceived by the wise
men, what is that to^ the young children, who
have done no wrong ?

2. "Yea," saith one, "Herod thou hast
full well deprived of excuse, and proved him
blood-thirsty; but thou hast not yet solved
the question about the injustice of what took
place. For if he did unjustly, wherefore did
God permit it?" Now, what should we say
to this? That which I do not cense to say
continually, in church, in the market-place,
and everywhere; that which I also wish you
carefully to keep in mind, for it is a sort of
rule for us, suited to every such perplexity.
What then is our rule, and what our saying?
That although there be many that injure, yet
is there not so much as one that is injured.
And in order that the riddle may not disturb
you too much, I add the solution too with all
speed. I mean, that what we may suffer
unjustly from any one, it tells either to the

• [ti jrpo?, " what is that to," as in following paragraph. — R.]
- [ti jrpd?.]


doing away of our sins, God so putting that
wrong to our account; or unto the recom-
pense of rewards.

And that what I may say may be clearer,
let us conduct our argument in the way of
illustration. As thus: suppose a certain serv-
ant who owes much money to his master,
and then that this servant has been despite-
fully used by unjust men, and robbed of some
of his goods. If then the master, in whose
power it was to stay the plunderer and wrong
doer, should not indeed restore that same
property, but should reckon what was taken
away towards what was owed him by his serv-
ant, is the servant then injured ? By no
means. But what if he should repay him
even more ? Has he not then even gained
more than he has lost ? Every one, I suppose,
perceives it.

Now this same reckoning we are to make
in regard of our own sufferings. For as to
the fact, that in consideration of what we may
suffer wrongfully, we either have sins done
away, or receive more glorious crowns, if the
amount of our sins be not so great: hear what
Paul says concerning him that had com-
mitted fornication, " Deliver ye such a one
to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that
the spirit may be saved." ^ "But what is
this ?" you may say, " for the discourse was
about them that were injured by others, not
about them that are corrected by their teach-
ers." I might answer, that there is no differ-
ence;" for the question was, whether to suf-
fer evil be not an indignity to the sufferer.
But, to bring my argument nearer the very
point inquired of; remember David, how,
when he saw Shimei at a certain time assail-
ing him, and trampling on his affliction, and
pouring on him revilings without end, his
captains desiring to slay him, he utterly for-
bade them, saying, " Let him curse, that the
Lord may look upon mine abasement, and
that he may requite me good for this cursing
this day. "5 And in the Psalms too in his
chanting, he said, " Consider mine enemies,
that they are multiplied, and they hate me
with unjust hatred," and "forgive all my
sins."^ And Lazarus again for the same
cause enjoyed remission, having in this life
suffered innumerable evils. They therefore
who are wronged, are not wronged if they
bear nobly all that they suffer, yea, rather
they gain even more abundantly, whether
they be smitten of God, or scourged by the
devil.


3 1 Cor. V. 5. 4 [MaAio-Ta /u.ei' oiiSiv to fxecrov.]

5 2 Sam XVI. 11, 12. [The citation varies from the lxx., and
the latter from the Hebrew : comp. R. V. /« Uco, where the lxx.
IS represented in the marginal note.— R 1

6 Ps. XXV. 18, 17.


Homily IX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


0/


3. " But what kind of sin had these chil-
dren," it may be said, " that they should do it
away ? for touching those who are of full age,
and have been guilty of many negligences,
one might with show of reason speak thus:
but they who so underwent premature death,
what sort ofvsins did they by their sufferings
put away ? '** Didst thou not hear me say,
that though there were no sins, there is a
recompense of rewards hereafter for them
that suffer ill here ? Wherein then were the
young children hurt in being slain for such
a cause, and borne away speedily into that
waveless harbor? "Because," sayest thou,
*' they would in many instances have achieved,
had they lived, many and great deeds of
goodness." Why, for this cause He lays up
for them beforehand no small reward, the
ending their lives for such a cause. Besides,
if the children were to have been any great
persons. He would not have suffered them to
be snatched away beforehand. For if they
that eventually will live in continual wicked-
ness are endured by Him with so great long-
sufferings, much more would He not have
suffered these to be so taken off had He
foreknown they would accomplish any great
things.

And these are the reasons we have to give;
yet these are not all; but there are also
others more mysterious than these, which He
knoweth perfectly, who Himself ordereth
these things. Let us then give up unto Him
the more perfect understanding of this mat-
ter, and apply ourselves to what follows, and
in the calamities of others let us learn to bear
all things nobly. Yea, for it was no little
scene of woe, which then befell Betlilehem,
the children were snatched from their mother's
breast, and dragged unto this unjust slaugh-
ter.

And if thou art yet faint-hearted, and not
equal to controlling thyself in these things,
learn the end of him who dared all this, and
recover tiiyself a little. For very quickly
was he overtaken by punishment for these
things; and he paid the due penalty of such
an abominable act, ending liis life by a griev-
ous death, and more pitialjJe than that which
he now dared inflict;' suffering also countless
additional ills, which ye may know of by
perusing Joseplius' account of tliese events.
But, lest we sliould make our discourse long,
and ir.terrupt its continuity, we have not
thouglit it necessary to insert that account in
wliat we are saying.

4. "Then was fidfillcd that wliich was
spoken by Jeremy the prophet,' saying, In


• See JosephuH, A. J. xvii. 6, 5.


■■ Jcr. xxxi. 15.


Rama was there a voice heard, Rachel weep-
ing for her children, and would not be com-
forted, because they are not." ^

Thus having filled the hearer with horror
by relating these things; the slaughter so
violent and unjust, so extremely cruel and
lawless; he comforts him again, by saying.
Not from God's wanting power to prevent it
did all this take place, nor from any igno-
rance of His, but when He both knew it, and
foretold it,* and that loudly by His prophet.
Be not troubled then, neither despond, look-
ing unto His unspeakable providence, which
one may most clearly see, alike by what He
works, and by what He permits. And this
He intimated in another place also, when dis-
coursing to His disciples. I mean wliere,
having forewarned them of the judgment
seats, and executions, and of the wars of the
world, and of the battle that knows no truce,
to uphold their spirit and to comfort them He
saith, "Are not two sparrows sold for a far-
thing? and one of them shall not fall on the
ground without your Father wliich is in
Heaven." ^ These things He said, signifying
that nothing is done without His knowledge,
but while He knows all. yet not in all doth
, He act. " Be not then troubled," He saith,
["neither be disturbed." For if He know
I what ye suffer, and hatli power to hiniler it,
it is quite clear that it is in His providence
and care for you that He doth not hinder it.
And this we ought to bear in mind in our own
temptations also, and great will be the conso-
lation we shall thence receive.

But what, it may be said, hath Rachel to
do with Bethlehem? For it saitli, "Rachel
weeping for her cliildren." .\nd wiiat hath
Rama to do with Rachel ? Rachel was the
mother of Benjamin, and on his deatli, they
buried her in the horse-course that was near
this jilace.'' The tomb then being near, and
the portion j^ertnining unto Benjamin her
infant (for Rama was of tlie tribe of Bc-nja-
min), from the head of the tribe first, and
next from the i)lace of her sepulture. He
naturally denominates her young chiklren
who were massacreil.' Then to sliow tiiat
tlie wound that befell her was incurable anil
cruel, He saith, " she would not l)e comforted
because they are not."

I Hence again we are taught this, wliich I

[ mentioned l)ef()re, never to be confounded

I when what is happening is contrary to the

promise of God. Behold, for instance, when


3 Matt. ii. 17, i«.

4 [witoava»r)(ivTyo)no%, " prticlaiinini; beforehand," u irchnicul
tenii "( m lr«m»tic«l (ircck. — R.]

5 Mull. X -• J. * ''•'•n. XXXV. 10, i.xx., nnd xlviii. 7.

7 [" Mr iii!l« the younjf children who were miiHsaircil her*,"'
/.«•., KachclV --R.]


58


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily IX.


He was come for the salvation of .t'ne people,
or rather for the salvation of the world, of
what kind were His beginnings. His mother,
first, in flight; His birth-place is involved in
irremediable calamities, and a murder is per-
petrated of all murders the bitterest, and
there is lamentation and great mourning, and
wailings everywhere. But be not troubled;
for He is wont ever to accomplish His own
dispensations by their contraries, affording
us from thence a very great demonstration of
His power.

Thus did He lead on His own disciples
also, and prepared them to do all their duty,
bringing about things by their contraries, that
the marvel might be greater. They, at any
rate, being scourged and persecuted, and
suffering terrors without end, did in this way
get the better of them that were beating and
persecuting them.

5. "But when Herod was dead, behold,
an angel of the Lord appeareth in a dream
to Joseph, saying. Arise, and take the young
Child and His mother, and go into the land
of Israel."'

He no more saith " fly," but " go." Seest
thou again after the temptation refreshment ?
then after the refreshment danger again ? in
that he was freed indeed from his banish-
ment, and came back again to his own coun-
try; and beheld the murderer of the children
brought to the slaughter;'' but when he hath
set foot on his own country, he finds again a
remnant of the former perils, the son of the
tyrant living, and being king.

But how did Archelaus reign over Judaea,
when Pontius Pilate was governor? Herod's
death had recently taken place, and the king-
dom had not yet been divided into many
parts; but as he had only just ended his life,
the son for a while kept possession of the
kingdom " in the room of his father Herod; "
his brother also bearing this name, which is
the reason why the evangelist added, " in the
room of his father Herod."

It may be said, however, " if he was afraid
to settle in Judaea on account of Archelaus,
he had cause to fear Galilee also on account
of Herod." I answer. By his changing the
place, the whole matter was thenceforward
thrown into shade; for the whole assault was
upon " Bethlehem and the coasts thereof."
Therefore now that the slaughter had taken
place, the youth Archelaus had no other
thought, but that the whole was come to an
end, and iKiat amongst the many. He that
was sought had been destroyed. And be-
sides, his father having come to such an end


' Matt. ii. 19, 20.

2 (r<j>ayLa<T9ivTa. [" Massacred," a bold figure of speech. — R.]


of his life before his eyes, he became for the
future more cautious about farther proceed-
ings, and about urging on that course of in-
iquity.

Joseph therefore comes to Nazareth, partly
to avoid the danger, partly also delighting to
abide in his native place. To give him the
more courage, he receives also an oracle
from the angel touching this matter. Luke,
however, doth not say that he came there by
Divine warning, but that when they had ful-
filled all the purification, they returned to
Nazareth. 3 What then may one say ? That
Luke is ofivina; an account of the time before
the going down to Egypt, when he saith
these things. For He would not have brought
them down thither before the purification,
in order that nothing should be done contrary
to the law, but he waited for her to be puri-
fied, and to go to Nazareth, and that then
they should go down to Egypt. Then, after
their return. He bids them go to Nazareth.
But before this they were not warned of God
to go thither, but yearning after their native
place, they did so of their own accord. For
since they had gone up for no other cause
but on account of the taxing, and had not so
much as a place where to stay, when they
had fulfilled that for which they had come
up, they went down to Nazareth. ■♦

6. We see here the cause why the angel
also, putting them at ease for the future,
restores them to their home. And not even
this simply, but he adds to it a prophecy,
" That it might be fulfilled," saith he, " which
was spoken by the prophets. He shall be
called a Nazarene." ^

And what manner of prophet said this ?
Be not curious, nor overbusy. For many of
the prophetic writings have been lost; and
this one may see from the history of the
Chronicles.* For being negligent, and con-
tinually falling into ungodliness, some they
suffered to perish, others they themselves
burnt up 7 and cut to pieces. The latter fact
Jeremiah relates;^ the former, he who com-
posed the fourth book of Kings, saying, that
afters a long time the book of Deuteronomy
was hardly found, buried somewhere and
lost. But if, when there was no barbarian
there, they so betrayed their books, much


3 I, like ii. 39.

4 [Of this there is no hint in the narrative ; it is a harmonistic
conjecture, with little to recommend it. — R.]

5 Matt. ii. 23.

6 See 2 Chron. i.\. 29, where it is said that certain of the acts
of Solomon were lur/fieu in the hook 0/ Nathan the prophet ^
andin the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite : and in the visions
0/ Iddo the Seer against Jeroboam the son of Nebat. See also
ibid. ii\\. 15, and xiii. 22. [The explanation given above is as bold
as it is ingenious. — R."l

7 [The Oxford edition reads " brought up;'" evidently amis-
print for " burnt up " (Karcicaioi').— R.]


' Jer. xxxvi. 23.


9 2 Kings xxii. 8, etc.


Homily IX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


59


more when the barbarians had overrun them.
For as to the fact, that the prophet had fore-
told it, the apostles themselves in many
places call Him a Nazarene."

" Was not this then," one may say, " cast-
ing a shade over the prophecy touching Beth-
lehem?'' By no means: rather this very
fact was sure greatly to stir up men, and to
awaken them to the search of what was said
of Him. Thus, for example, Nathanael too
enters on the inquiry concerning Him, say-
ing, " Can there any good thing come out of
Nazareth ? " ■ For the place was of little
esteem; or rather not that place only, but
also the whole district of Galilee. Therefore
the Pharisees said, " Search and look, for
out of Galilee ariseth no prophet." ^ Never-
theless, He is not ashamed to be named even
from thence, signifying that He needs not
ought of the things of men; and His disciples
also He choses.out of Galilee; everywhere
cutting off the pretexts of them who are dis-
posed to be remiss, and giving tokens that
we have no need of outward things, if we
practise virtue. For this cause He doth not
choose for Himself so much as a house; for
"the Son of Man," saith He, " hath not
where to lay His head;"-* and when Herod
is plotting against Him, He fleeth, and at
His birth is laid in a manger, and abides in
an inn, and takes a mother of low estate;
teaching us to think no such thing a disgrace,
and from the first outset trampling under
foot the haughtiness of man, and bidding us
give ourselves up to virtue only.

7. For why dost thou pride thyself on thy
country, when I am commanding thee to be
a stranger to the whole world ? (so He
speaks); when thou hast leave to become
such as that all the universe shall not be
worthy of thee ? For these things are so
utterly contemptible, that they are not
thought worthy of any consideration even
amongst the philosophers of the Greeks, but
are called Exterjiab^ and occupy the lowest
place.

"But yet Paul,'' one may say, ''allows
them, saying on this wise, 'As touching the
election, tiiey are beloved for the fathers'
sake.' "5 liut tell me, when, and of what
things was he discoursing, and to whom ?
Wiiy, to those of Gentile origin, who were
l)ufting tliemselves up on their faitli, and ex-
alting themselves against tlic Jews, and so
breaking them off the more: to quell the

» See Acts iii. 11, iii. 6, iv. 10, vi. 14, etc.

■■' John i. 46.

1 John vii. 52. TR. V. text : " Search, .ind see that out fif ('>«l-
ilcc ariseth no prophet." K.)

■« Mult viii so.

5 koin. xi. i'i. [The Oxford edition reaiN : " for the I'athcra
•alec;" u niiiiprint, conveying an incorrect Knite. K.l


swelling pride of the one, and to win over
the others, and thorougiily excite them to the
same emulation. For when he is speaking
of those noble and great men, hear ho^v he
saith, " They that say these things, show
plainly that they seek a country; and truly if
they had been mindful of that from whence
they came out, tliey might have had oppor-
tunity to have returned: but now they desire
anotlier, a better country."* And again,
" These all died m faith, not having obtained
the promises, but having seen them afar off,
and embraced them."' And John too said
unto tliose that were coming to him, " Tliink
not to say, We have Abraham to our father.''*
And Paul again, " For they are not all Israel,
which are of Israel; neither they, which are
the children of the flesh, are they the chil-
dren of God. "9 For what were the sons of
Samuel advantaged, tell me, by their father's
nobleness, when they were not heirs of their
father's virtue? And what profit had Moses'
sons, not having emulated his perfection?"*
Therefore neitner did they inherit the domin-
ion; but whilst they enrolled him as their
father, the rule of the people passed away to
another, to him who had become his son in
the way of virtue. And what harm was it to
Timothy, that he was of a Greek father ? Or
what on the other hand again was Noah's son
profited by the virtue of his father, when he
became a slave instead of free ? Seest thou,
how little the nobleness of a father avails his
children in the way of advocacy ? " For the
wickedness of Ham's disjJosition overcame
the laws of nature, and cast him not only out
of the nobility which he had in respect of his
father, but also out of his free estate. And
what of Esau ? Was he not son of Isaac, and
had he not liis father to stand his friend ?
Yea, his father too endeavored and desired
that he should i)artake of the blessings, and
he himself for the sake of this did all that
was commanded him. Nevertheless, because
he was untoward,'- none of these things jirof-
ited him; but although he was by birth first,
and had his father on his side doing every-
thing for tliis object, yet not having God with
him, he lost all.

But why do I speak of men ' The Jews
were sons of God, antl gaineil nothing by tl»is
their high birth. Now if a man, having be-
come a son of God, but failing to show forth
an excellency meet for this noble i)irth, is
even |Minished the more abundantly; why

* Hcb. xi. 14, M.

7 Hell. xi. I |. [R v., more correctly ; ' huvinK »een thcni and
greeted them from «far."— K.)

" .Matt. iii. .). •> RoMi. ix. 6-8.

'" l.i<((»iflnaf, " iitriitne»«." — R.l

• ' [n^uraaiat', " advancement . ' — R.) " intaiot.


6o


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOIM.


[Homily IX.


dost thou bring me forward the nobleness of
ancestors remote or near? For not under
the old covenant' only, but even under the
new, one may find this rule to have held.
For "as many as received Him," it is said,
" to them gave He power to become the sons
of God."'' And yet many of these children
Paul hath affirmed to be nothing profited by
their father; " For if ye be circumcised,"
saith he, " Christ shall profit you nothing." ^
And if Christ be no help to those who will
not take heed to themselves, how shall a man
stand up in their behalf ?

8. Let us not therefore pride ourselves
either on high birth, or on wealth, but rather
despise them who are so minded: neither let
us be dejected at poverty. But let us seek
that wealth, which consists in good works; let
us flee that poverty, which causes men to be
in wickedness, by reason of which also that
rich man was poor;'* wherefore he had not at
his command so much as a drop of water,
and that, although he made much entreaty.
Whereas, who can be so poor amongst us,s as
to 7vant uatcr enougli even for comfort 1 There
is none such. For even they that are pining
with extreme hunger, may have the comfort
of a drop of water; and not of a drop only,
tut of refreshment too far more abundant.
Not so that rich man, but he was poor even
to this degree: and what was yet more griev-
ous, he could not so much as soothe his pov-
erty from any source. Why then do we gape
after riches, since they bring us not into
Heaven ?

For tell me, if any king among those upon
earth had said, It is impossible for him that
is rich to be distinguished at court, or to en-
joy any honor; would ye not have thrown
away every one his riches with contempt ? So
then, if they cast us out from such honor as
is in the palaces below, they shall be worthy
of all contempt: but, when the King of
Heaven is day by day crying aloud and say-
ing, "It is hard with them, to set foot on
that sacred threshold;" shall we not give up
all, and withdraw from our possessions, that
with boldness we may enter into the king-
dom ? And of what consideration are we
worthy, who are at great pains to encompass
ourselves with the things that obstruct our
way tliither; and to hide them not only in
chests, but even in the earth, when we might
entrust them to the guard of the very
Heavens ? Since now surely thou art doing

' [tS TTnAain, without a substantive, the technical term in
-ecclesiastical (Jreek for the Old Testament. — R.]

2 John i. 12. 3 Gal. v. 2. 4 Luke .xvi. 24.

5 The words in italics are omitted in several ,MSs. [In four mss.
and two versions the clause is wanting ; see note at close of this
Homily.— R.]


the same, as if any husbandman, having got-
ten wheat wherewith to sow a rich land, was
to leave the land alone, and bury all the
wheat in a pit, so as neither to enjoy it him-
self, nor for the wheat to come to ought, but
decay and waste.

But what is their common plea, when we
accuse them of these things ? It gives no lit-
tle comfort, say tney, to know that all is laid
up for us in safety at home. Nay, rather not
to know of its being laid up is a comfort.
For even if thou art not afraid of famine, yet
other more grievous things, on account ^of
this store, must needs be a terror to thee:
deaths, wars, plots laid against thee. And if
a famine should ever befall us, the people
again, constrained by the belly, takes weapon
in hand against thy house. Or rather, in so
doing, thou art first of all bringing famine
into our cities, and next thou art forming for
thine own house this gulf,- more grievous
than famine. For by stress of famine I
know not any who have come to a speedy
end; there being in fact many means in many
quarters which may be devised to assuage
that evil: but for possessions and riches, and
the pursuits connected with them, I can show
many to have come by their ruin, some in
secret, some openly. And with many such
instances the highways abound, with many
the courts of law, and the market-places,
But why speak I of the highways, the courts
of law and the market-places ? Why, the
very sea thou mayest behold filled with their
blood. For not over the land only, as it
seems, hath this tyranny prevailed, but over
the ocean also hath walked in festal procession
with great excess. And one makes a voyage
for gold, another, again, is stabbed for the
same; and the same tyrannical power hath
made one a merchant, the other a murderer.

What then can be less trustworthy than
Mammon, seeing that for his sake one
travels, and ventures, and is slain? "But
who," it is said, "will pity a charmer that is
bitten with a serpent?"^ For we ought,
knowing its cruel tyranny, to flee that slavery,
and destroy that grievous longing. " But
how," saith one, "is this possible?" By
introducing another longing, the longing for
Heaven. Since he that desires the kingdom
will laugh covetousness to scorn; he that is
become Christ's slave is no slave of mammon,
but rather his lord; for him that flieth from
him, he is wont to follow, and to fly from him
that pursues. He honors not so much his
pursuer as his despiser; no one doth he so
laugh to scorn, as them that desire him; nor


* Ecclus. xii. 13.


Homily X.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


61


doth he only laugh them to scorn, but wraps
round them also innumerable bonds.

Be it ours then, however late, to loose these
grievous chains. Why bring thy reasonable
soul into bondage to brute matter, to the
mother of those untold evils ? But, oh the
absurdity ! that while we are warring against
it in words, it makes war with us by deeds,
and leads and carries us everywhere about,
insulting us as purchased with money, and
meet for the lash; and what can be more dis-
graceful and dishonorable than this?

Again: if we do not get the better of sense-
less forms of matter, how shall we have the
advantage of the incorporeal powers? If we
despise not vile earth and abject stones, how
shall we bring into subjection the principali-
ties and authorities ? How shall we practise
temperance ? I mean, if silver dazzle and
overpower us, when shall we be able to hurry
by a fair face ? For, in fact, some are so
sold under this tyranny, as be moved some-
how even at the mere show of the gold, and
in playfulness to say, that the very eyes are
the better for a gold coin coming in sight.
But make not such jests, whoever thou art;'
for nothing so injures the eyes, both those of
the body and those of the soul, as the lust of
these things. For instance; it was this griev-
ous longing that put out the lamps of those
virgins, and cast them out of the bride
chamber. This sight, which (as thou saidst)
" doeth good to the eyes," suffered not the


' Lol'SpuJTI'C.]


wretched Judas to hearken unto the Lord's
voice, but led him even to the halter, made
him burst asunder in the midst; and, after
all that, conducted him on to hell.

What then can be more lawless than this ?
what more horrible ? I do not mean the sub-
stance of riches, but the unseasonable and
frantic desire of them ? Why, it even drops
human gore, and looks murder, and is fiercer
than any wild beast, tearing in pieces them
that fall in its way, and what is much worse,
it suffers them not even to have any sense of
being so mangled. For reason would that
those who are so treatetl should stretch forth
their liand to them that pass by, and call them
to their assistance, but these are even thank-
ful for such rendings of their fiesi, than
which what can be more wretched ?

Let us then, bearing in mind ali these
things, flee the incurable disease; let us
heal the wounds it hath made, and withdraw
ourselves from such a pest: in order that
both here we may live a secure and un-
troubled life, and attain to the future treas-
ure; unto which God grant that 7»v may all
attai?i,- by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom unto the
Father together with the Holy Ghost be
glory, might, honor, now and ever, and world
without end. Amen.


^ Cm. in one or two Mss. [The clause in brackets is wantint; in
four MSS. and in two versions ; the identical authorities which on-it
the clause in sec. 8. The Oxford editor estimates the facts diiler-
ently in the two instances, without any adequate reason. — R.]


HOMILY X.

M.vn. 111. I, 2.

"In those days cometh John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Jud;i;a, and say-
ing, Repent yc: for the kingdom ot Heaven is at hanil."


How "in those days"? For not then,
surely, when He was a child, and came to
Nazareth, but thirty years after, John com-
eth; as Luke also testifies. How then is it
said, "in those days'"? 'IMie Scripture is
always wont \.o use this manner of speech, not
only when it is mentioning what occurs in tiie
time immediately ufter, Imt also of things
which are to come to pass many years Liter.


Thus also, for example, when His disciples
came unto Him as He sat on the Mount of
Olives, and sought to learn about His t:om-
ing, and tiie taking of Jerusalem:' and yet
yc know how great is the interval between
tlujse several perioils. I mean, that having
spoken of the subversion of ilie niother city,

> Matt. siiv. 3.


62


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily X.


and completed His discourse on that subject,
and being about to pass to that on the con-
summation, he inserted, " Then shall these
things also come to pass; " ' not bringing to-
gether the times by the word thcn^ but indica-
ting that time only in which these things were
to happen. And this sort of thing he doth
now also, saying, " In those days." For this
is not put to signify the days that come im-
mediately after, but those in which these
things were to take place, which he was pre-
paring to relate.

"But why was it after thirty years," it
may be said, " that Jesus came unto His
baptism"? After this baptism He was
thenceforth to do away with the law: where-
fore even until this age, which admits of all
sins. He continues fulfilling it all; that no
one might say, that because He Himself
could not fulfill it, He did it away. For
neither do all passions assail us at all times;
but while in the first age of life there is much
thoughtlessness and timidity, in that which
comes after it, pleasure is more vehement,
and after this again the desire of wealth.
For this cause he awaits the fullness of His
adult age, and throughout it all fulfills the
law, and so comes to His baptism, adding it
as something which follows upon the com-
plete keeping of all the other commandments.

To prove that this was to Him the last
good work of those enjoined by the law, hear
His own words: " For thus it becometh us to
fulfill all righteousness.'' ^ Now what He
saith is like this: "We have performed all
the duties of the law, we have not trans-
gressed so much as one commandment.
Since therefore this only remains, this too
must be added, and so shall we " fulfill all
righteousness." For He here calls by the
name of "righteousness" the full perform-
ance of all the commandments.

2. Now that on this account Christ came
to His baptism, is from this evident. But
wherefore was this baptism devised for Him ?
For that not of himself did the son of Zacha-
rias proceed to this, but of God who moved
him, — this Luke also declares, when he saith,
"The word of the Lord came unto him,"^
that is. His commandment. .\nd he himself
too saith, " He that sent me to baptize with
water, the same said to me, upon whom
thou shalt see the Spirit descending like a
dove, and remaining on Him, the same is He
which l)aptizeth with the Holy Ghost.""
Wherefore then was he sent to bal^tize ? The
Baptist again makes this also plain to us, say-
ing, " I knew Him not, but that He should


I Matt. xxiv. 23.
3 Luke iii. 2.


- ALitt. iii. 15.
4 John 1. 33.


be made manifest to Israel, therefore am I
come baptizing with water." ^

And if this was the only cause, how saith
Luke, that " he came into the country about
Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance
for the remission of sins ? "* And yet it had
not remission, but this gift pertained unto
the baptism that was given afterwards; for
in this " we are buried with Him," ' and our
old man was then crucified with Him, and be-
fore the cross there doth not appear remission
anywhere; for everywhere this is imputed to
His blood. And Paul too saith, " But ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified," not by the
baptism of John, but "in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our
God." ^ And elsewhere too he saith, " John
verily preached a baptism of repentance,"
(he saith not "of remission,") "that they
should believe on Him that should come after
him. "9 For when the sacrifice was not yet
offered, neither had the spirit yet come down,
nor sin was put away, nor the enmity re-
moved, nor the curse destroyed; how was
remission to take place ?

What means then, "for the remission of
sins ?"

The Jews were senseless, and had never
any feeling of their own sins, but while they
were justly accountable for the worst evils,
they were justifying themiselves in every re-
spect; and this more than anything caused
their destruction, and led them away from
the faith. This, for example, Paul himself
was laying to their charge, when he said, that
" they being ignorant of God's righteousness,
and going about '° to establish their own, had
not submitted themselves unto the righteous-
ness of God."" And again: " What shall we
say then ? That the Gentiles, which followed
not after righteousness, have attained '^ to
righteousness; but Israel, which followed
after the law of righteousness, hath not at-
tained '3 unto the law of righteousness.
Wherefore ? Because they sought it not by
faith, but as it were by works."'*

Since therefore this was the cause of their
evils, John cometh, domg nothing else but
bringing them to a sense of their own sins.
This, among other things, his very garb de-
clared, being that of repentance and confes-
sion. This was indicated also by what he
preached, for nothing else did he say, but


7 Col. ii. 12 ; Rom. vi. 4.
9 Acts xix. 4.
II Rom. X. 3.


5 John i. 31. 6 Luke iii. 3.

8 I Cor. vi. II.

"o [^TiToOi-Tf?, " seeking," R. V.]

■' KareAa^e [R. V., " attained."]

13 f.jea(Te [R. v., "did not arrive."]

'4 Rom. ix. 30 32. [.See R. V. The text of Chrysostom follows
one of the readinjjs accepted by the Revisers, om'itting vofxov at
the close of the citation ; but it inserts 6tKaio<Tiivi)s (with Rec.) 4
second time m verse 31. — R.]


Homily X.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


63


"bring forth fruits meet for repentance.'"
Forasmuch then as their not condemning
their own sins, as Paul also hath explained,
made them start off from Christ, while their
coming to a sense thereof would set them
upon longing to seek after their Redeemer,
and to desire remission; this John came to
bring about, and to persuade them to repent,
not in order that they might be punished, j
but that having become by repentance more
humble, and condemning themselves, they
might hasten to receive remission.

But let us see how exactly he hath ex-
pressed it; how, having said, that he "came
preaching the baptism of repentance in the |
wilderness of Judaea," he adds, " for remis-
sion,"as though he said, For this end he ex-
horted them to confess and repent of their
sins; not that they should be punished, but
that they might more easily receive the sub-
sequent remission. For had they not con-
demned themselves, they could not have
sought after His grace; and not seeking,
they could not have obtained remission.

Thus that baptism led the way for this;
wherefore also he said, that " they should
believe on Him which should come after
him;"^ together with that which hath been
mentioned setting forth this other cause of
His baptism. For neither would it have
been as much for him to have gone about to
their houses, and to have led Christ around,
taking Him by the hand, and to have said,
" Believe in This Man; " as for that blessed
voice to be uttered, and all those other things
performed in the presence and sight of all.

On account of this He cometh to the bap-
tism. Since in fact both tlie credit of him
that was baptizing, and the purport of the
thing itself,' was attracting the whole city,
and calling it unto Jordan; and it became a
great spectacle."
I Therefore he humbles them also when they

are come, and persuades them to have no
high fancies about themselves; showing them
liable to the utmost evils, unless they would
repent, and leaving their forefathers, and all
vaunting in tiiem, would receive Him that
was coming.

Because in fact the things concerning
Christ had been up to tliat time veiled, and
many thought He was dead, owing to the
massacre which took place at Bethlehem.
For thougl\ at twelve years old He discovertd
Himself, yet did He also (juickly veil Him-
self again. .And for this cause tliere was
need of that splendid exordium and of a
loftier beginning. Wherefore also tlien for


' Matt. iii. 8.

I 1} Tov npayfi.aToK vir66ttTi^.


3 Acta xix. 4.

4 Starpov.


the first time he with clear voice proclaims
things which the Jews had never heard,
neither from prophets, nor from any besides;
making mention of Heaven, and of the king-
dom there, and no longer saying anything
touching the earth.

But by the kingdom in this place he means
His former and His last advent.

3. " But what is this to the Jews?" one
may say, " for they know not even what thou
sayest." "Why, for this cause," saith he,
" do I so speak, in order that being roused
by the obscurity of my words, they may pro-
ceed to seek Him, 'whom I preach." In
point of fact, he so excited them with good
hopes when they came near, that even many
publicans and soldiers inquired what they
should do, and how they should direct their
own life; which was a sign of being thence-
forth set free from all worldly things, and of
looking to other greater objects, and of fore-
boding = things to come. Yea, for all, both
the sights and the words of that time, led
them unto lofty thoughts.

Conceive, for example, how great a thing it
was to see a man after thirty years coming
down from the wilderness, being the son of a
chief priest, who had never known the com-
mon wants of men, and was on every account
venerable, and had Isaiah with him. For he
too was present, proclaiming him, and say-
ing, " This is he who I said should come cry-
ing, and preaching throughout the whole
wilderness with a clear voice. " For so great
was the earnestness of the prophets touching
these things, that not their own Lord only,
but him also wlio was to minister unto Him,
they proclaimed a long time beforehand, and
they not only mentioned him, but the place
too in which he was to abide, and the manner
of the doctrine which lie had to teach when
he came, and the good effect that was pro-
duced by him.

See, at least, how lioth the prophet and tiie
Baptist go upon the same ideas, although not
upon the same words.

Tims the prophet saitii that he shall come
saying, " Prepare ye the way of the Lonl,
make his paths straight.*" And he himself
when he was come said, " Bring forth fruits
meet for repentance,'"' whicij corresponds
with, " Prepare ye the way of ti)e Lord."
Seest thou that both l)y the words of the pro-
pliet, anil by his own jireaching, this one
thing is m;»nifeste(l alone; that lie was come,
making a way and preparing beforehand, not
bestowing the gift, which was the remission,
but ordering in good time tlie souls of such
as should receive the (iod of all ?


S Of«tpoiroA<)f.


« U. ll. 3.


1 Mall. iii. 8.


64


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily X.


But Luke expresses somewhat further: not
rejDeating the exordium, and so passing on,
but setting down likewise all the prophecy.
"For every valley," saith he, "shall be
filled; and every mountain and hill shall be
brought low; and the crooked shall be made
straight, and the rough ways smooth; and
all flesh shall see the salvation of God."'
Dost thou perceive how the prophet hath an-
ticipated all by his words; the concourse of
the people, the change of things for the bet-
ter, the easiness of that which was preached,
the first cause of all that was occurring, even
if he hath expressed it rather as in figure, it
being in truth a prophecy which he was utter-
ing ? Thus, when he saith, "Every valley
shall be filled, and every mountain and hill
shall be brought low, and the rough ways
shall be made smooth;" he is signifying the
exaltation of the lowly, the humiliation of the
self-willed, the hardness of the law changed
into easiness of faith. For it is no longer
toils and labors, saith he, but grace, and for-
giveness of sins, affording great facility of
salvation. Next he states the cause of these
things, saying, "All flesh shall see the salva-
tion of God; " no longer Jews and proselytes
only, but also all earth and sea, and the
whole race of men. Because bv " the
crooked things " he signified our whole cor-
rupt life, publicans, harlots, robbers, magi-
cians, as many as having been perverted be-
fore afterwards walked in the right way:
much as He Himself likewise said, "publi-
cans and harlots go into the kingdom of God
before you," = because they believed. And
in other words also again the prophet de-
clared the self-same thing, thus saying,
"Then wolves and lambs shall feed to-
gether." 3 For like as here by the hills and
valleys, he meant that incongruities of char-
acter^ are blended into one and the same
evenness of self-restraint, so also there, by
the characters of the brute animals indicating
the different dispositions of men, he again
spoke of their being linked in one and the
same harmony of godliness. Here also, as
before, stating the cause. That cause is,
" There shall be He that riseth to reign over
the Gentiles, in Him sliall the Gentiles
trust: " 5 much the same as here too he said,
"All flesh shall see the salvation of God,"
everywhere declaring that the power and
knowledge of these our Gospels would be
poured out to the ends of the world, convert-
ing the human race, from a brutish disposi-


■ Luke iii. 5, 6. 2 Matt. xxi. 31.

3 Isa. xi. 6. 4 TO avu)fjia\ov tov tJSov?.

5 Isa. xi. 10; see also Rom. xv. 12. ["Hope" instead of
trust ;" see foot-note on Horn. vii. 2, p. 45. — K.]


tion and a fierce temper to something very
gentle and mild.

4. "And the same John had his raiment
of camel's hair, and a leathern girdle about
his loins." *

Observe, how the prophets foretold some
things, others they left to the evangelists.
Wherefore also Matthew both sets down the
prophecies, and adds his own part, not ac-
counting even this superfluous, to speak of
the dress of the righteous man.

For indeed it was a marvellous and strange
thing to behold so great austerity in a human
frame: which thing also particularly attracted
the Jews, seeing in him the great Elijah, and
guided by what they then beheld, to the
memory of that blessed man; or rather, even
to a greater astonishment. For the one in-
deed was brought up in cities and in houses,
the other dwelt entirely in the wilderness
from his very swaddling clothes. For it be-
came the forerunner of Him who was to put
away all the ancient ills, the labor, for exam-
ple, the curse, the sorrow, the sweat; himself
also to have certain tokens of such a gift, and
to come at once to be above that condemna-
tion. Thus he neither ploughed land, nor
opened furrow, he ate not his bread by the
sweat of his face, but his table was hastily
supplied, and his clothing more easily fur-
nished than his table, and his lodging yet
less troublesome than his clothing:. For he
needed neither roof, nor bed, nor table, nor
any other of these things, but a kind of
angel's life in this our flesh did he exhibit.
For this cause his very garment was of hair,
that by his dress he might instruct men to
separate themselves from all things human,
and to have nothing in common with the
earth, but to hasten back to their earlier
nobleness, wherein Adam was before he
wanted garments or robe. Thus that garb
bore tokens of nothing less than a kingdom, §
and of repentance.

And do not say to me, " Whence had he a
garment of hair and a girdle, dwelling as he
did in the wilderness ? '' For if thou art to
make a difficulty of this, thou wilt also in-
quire into more things besides; how in the
winters, and how in the heats of summer, he
continued in the wilderness, and this with a
delicate body, and at an immature age ? how
the nature of his infant flesh endured such,
great inconstancy of weather, and a diet so
uncommon, and all the other hardships aris-
ing from the wilderness?

Where now are the philosophers of the
Greeks, who at random and for nought emu-


* Matt. iii. 4.


Homily X.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


65


lated the shamelessness of the Cynics (for
what is the profit of being shut up in a tub,
and afterwards running into such wanton-
ness)? they who encompassed themselves
with rings and cups, and men servants and
maid servants, and with much pomp besides,
falHng into either extreme. But this man was
not so; but he dwelt in the wilderness as in
Heaven, showing forth all strictness of self-
restraint. And from thence, like some angel
from Heaven, he went down unto the cities,
being a champion of godliness, and a crowned
victor over the world, and a j)hilosopher of
that philosophy which is worthy of the
heavens. And these things were, when sin
was not yet put away, when the law had not
yet ceased, when death was not yet bound,
when the brazen gates were not yet broken
up, but while the ancient polity still was in
force. i

Such is the nature of a noble and tho- 1
roughly vigilant soul, for it is everywhere |
springing forward, and passing beyond the ,
limits set to it; as Paul' also did with respect !
to the new polity. j

But why, it may be asked, did he use a
girdle with his raiment ? This was customary j
with them of old time, before men passed ,
into this soft and loose kind of dress. Thus, |
for instance, both Peter- appears to have!
been "girded," and Paul; for it saith, "the!
man that owneth this girdle." ^ And Elijah-*
too was thus arrayed, and every one of the
saints, because they were at work continually,
laboring, and busying themselves either in
journeyings, or about some other necessar}'
matter; and not for this cause only, but also
with a view of trampling under foot all orna-
ments, and practising all austerity. This
very kind of thing accordingly Christ de-
clares to be the greatest j^raise of virtue, thus
saying, "What went ye out for to see? a
man clothed in soft raiment ? behold, they
that wear soft clothing are in king's houses. "^

But if he, who was so pure, and more glori-
ous than the heaven, and above all prophets,
than whom none greater was born, and who
had such great l)oklness of speecli, thus exer-
cised himself in austerity, scorning so exceed-
ingly all dissolute delicacy, and training him-
self to this hard life; what excuse shall we |
have, who after so great a benefit, and tlie [
unnumliered burdens of our sins, do not
show forth sf) much as tlie least part of iiis
penance,'' but are drinking and surfeiting,
and smelling of perfumes, and in no belter

' A« in rrfusini; to be supptirtcd (in n-vcnil cj«»c<il by thuxe to
whom In- pn-ai tird the k'"*!"-'!- Srr his 111 rmint <i( hi» virwn in »o
doiPK, I t <ir. IX., especially towards the ciicl <>( the chapter.

' I'lhn xxi. 7. ) Act* xxi. 11. * 2 KinK* i. 8.

S Alatt. xi. 8. <> ffo^oAu-yiitrcwt.

5


trim than the harlot women on the stage, and
are by all means softening ourselves, and
making ourselves an easy prey to the devil ?'

5. "Then went out to him all Judea, and
Jerusalem, and all the region round about
Jordan, and were baptized of him, confessing
their sins." *

Seest thou how great power was in the
coming of the prophet ? how he stirred up all
the people; how he led them to a considera-
tion of tiieir own sins ? For it was indeed
worthy of wonder to behold him in human
form showing forth such things and using so
great freedom of speech, and rising up in
condemnation of all as children, and having
his great grace beaming out from his counte-
nance. And, moreover, the appearance of a
prophet after the great interval of time con-
tributed to their amazement, because the gift
had failed them, and returned to them after
a long time. And the nature of his preach-
ing too was strange and unusual. For they
heard of none of those things to which they
were accustomed; such as wars and battles
and victories below, and famine and j)esti-
lence, and Babylonians and Persians, and the
taking of the city, and the other things with
which they were familiar, but of Heaven and
of the kingdom there, and of the punishment
in hell. And it was for this cause, let me
add, that although they that committed revolt
in the wilderness, those in the company of
Judas, and of Theudas,' had been all of them
slain no great while before, yet they were not
the more backward to go out thither. For
neither was it for the same objects that he
summoned them, as for dominion, or revolt,
or revolution; but in order to lead them by
the hand to the kingilom on high. Where-
fore neither did he keep them in tlie wilder-
ness to take tliem about with him, but
baptizing them, and teaching them the rules
concerning self-denial, he dismissed them;
by all means instructing them to scorn what-
ever things are on eartli, anil to raise them-
selves up to the things to come, anil press on
every day.

6. This man tlien let us also emulate, and
forsaking lu.xury and drunkenness let us go
over unto the life of restraint. For tiiis
surely is the time of confession both, for tiie
uninitiated and for the baptizeil; for the one,
that upon their repentance they may p.irtake
of the sacred mysteries; for the others, tlint
having washed away their stain after baptism,
they may appruacli the tabic with a clean


7 [T<f> iiaHiAy. The OxfiirtI rdillciii luis " the drviU," hut this

i.,i«', ..111,. >incC it »U|{|{C*t* U refr'rlK r li i " clclllont." I'toUl-

II ini«priii(.— K.]
. 6. « Act« V, 36, 37.


66


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily X.


conscience. Let us then forsake this soft and
effeminate way of living. For it is not, it is
not possible at once both to do penance ' and
to live in luxlury. And this let John teach
you by his raiment, by his food, by his abode.
What then ? dost thou require us, you may-
say, to practise such self-restraint as this ?
I do not require it, but I advise and recom-
mend it. But if this be not possible to you,
let us at least, though in cities, show forth
repentance, for the judgment is surely at our
doors. But even if it were further off, we
ought not even so to be emboldened, for the
term of each man's life is the end of the
world virtually to him that is summoned.
But that it is even at the doors, hear Paul
saying, " The night is far spent, the day is
at hand; " ^ and again, "He that cometh will
come, and will not tarry." ^

For the signs too are now complete, which
announce that day. For " this Gospel of the
Kingdom," saith He, "shall be preached in
all the world for a witness unto all nations;
and then shall the end come."'* Attend with
care to what is said. He said not, " when it
hath been believed by all men," but "when
it hath been preached to^ all/' For this
cause he also said, " for a witness to the
nations," to show, that He doth not wait for
all men to believe, and then for Him to come.
Since the phrase, " for a witness,'' hath this
meaning, "for accusation,'' "for reproof,"
"for condemnation of them that have not
believed.''

But we, while hearing these things and
seeing them, slumber, and see dreams, sunk
in a lethargy, as in some very deepest night. ^
For the things present are nothing better
than dreams, whether they be prosperous, or
whether they be painful. Wherefore I entreat
you now at length to be awakened, and to
look another way, unto the Sun of Righteous-
ness. For no man while sleeping can see the
sun, nor delight his eyes with the beauty of
its beams; but whatever he may see, he
beholds all as in a dream. For this cause we
need much penance, and many tears; both
as being in a state of insensibility while we
err, and because our sins are great, and
beyond e.xcuse. And that I lie not, the more
part of them that hear me are witnesses.
Nevertheless, although they be beyond ex-
cuse, let us repent, and we shall receive
crowns.

7. But by repentance I mean, not only to


' cfofioAoyeiffSai. 2 Rom. xiii. 12. 3 Heb. x. 37.

4 Matt. xxiv. 14. [" All the nations," so R. V., and comp. what
follows here. — R.]

5 l^napa TTai'Tutf a.i'Pp(i}TTojv . . . Trapa TTaai, is the explanation
of Chrysostoni. p.iraphrasing the New Testament passage. — R ]

6 [ec PaBvTaTj) WKTi.'\


forsake our former evil deeds, but also to
show forth good deeds greater than those.
For, "bring forth," saith he, "fruits meet
for repentance." 7 But how shall we bring
them forth ? If we do the opposite things: as
for instance, hast thou seized by violence
the goods of others ? henceforth give away
even thine own. Hast thou been guilty of
fornication for a long time? abstain even
from thy wife for certain appointed days; ex-
ercise continence. Hast thou insulted and
stricken such as were passing by ? Hence-
forth bless them that insult thee, and do good
to them that smite thee. For it sufficeth not
for our health to have plucked out the dart
only, but we must also apply remedies to the
wound. Hast thou lived in self-indulgence,
and been drunken in time past ? Fast, and
take care to drink water, in order to destroy
the mischief that hath so grown up within
thee. Hast thou beheld with unchaste eyes
beauty that belonged to another ? Hence-
forth do not so much as look upon a woman
at all, that thou mayest stand in more safety.
For it is said, " Depart from evil, and do
good;"^ and again, "Make thy tongue to
cease from evil, and thy lips that they speak
no guile." 9 "But tell me the good too."
"Seek peace, and pursue it:" I mean not
peace with man only, but also peace with
God. And he hath well said, " pursue " her:
for she is driven awa)% and cast out; she
hath left the earth, and is gone to sojourn in
Heaven. Yet shall we be able to bring her
back again, if we will put away pride and
boasting, and whatsoever things stand in her
away, and will follow this temperate and
frugal life.'° For nothing is more grievous
than wrath and fierce anger. This renders
men botji puffed up and servile, by the form-
er making them ridiculous, by the other hate-
ful; and bringing in opposite vices, pride and
flattery, at the same time. But if we will cut
off the greediness of this passion, we shall be
both lowly with exactness, and exalted with
safety. For in our bodies too all distempers
arise from excess; and when the elements
thereof leave their proper limits, and go on
beyond moderation, then all these countless
diseases are generated, and grievous kinds of
death. Somewhat of the same kind one may
see take place with respect to the soul like-
wise.

8. Let us therefore cut away excess, and
drinking the salutary medicine of moderation,


7 Matt. 11;. 8. [R. v., more literally, "worthy of repentance,"
with margin, " Or, your repentance," the Greek being t^s
MCTttvoias ; so in the text of Chrysostom R.]

** I^S; 'Y'^'^'- '4: 9 Ps. xxxiv. 13 [lxx.].

'■•]' If we desire (^fleAw/iiei/), by putting away, etc. . . to pursue
this temperate and frugal life."— R.]


HoMii.v XL]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


6/


let us abide in our proper temperament, and
give careful iieed to our prayers. Though
we receive not, let us persevere that we may
receive; and if we do receive, then because
we have received. For it is not at all His
wish to defer giving, but by such delay He is
contriving for us to persevere. With this
intent He doth also lengthen out' our suppli-
cation, and at times permits a temptation to
come upon us, that we may continually flee
for refuge unto Him, and where we have fled
for refuace, mav there abide. Thus also do
affectionate fathers act, and mothers that love
their children; when they see their little
children forsake their society, and playing
witn those of their own age, they cause their
servants to enact many fearful things, that by
such fear they may be constrained to flee for
refuge to their mother's bosom. Even so
doth God oftentimes hold out some kind of
threat; not that He may bring it upon us,
but that He may draw us unto Himself. At
any rate, when we return, he doth away with
our fear at once; since assuredly, if we were
alike in temptations and at ease, there would
have been no need of temptations.

But why do I speak of us ? Since even to
those saints of old great was the lesson of
moderation hence derived. For this cause
the prophet too saith, "It is good for me
that Thou hast humbled me.'"' And He
Himself likewise said to the apostles, *' In
the world ye shall have tribulation." ^ And
Paul signifies this self-same thing, when he
saith, " There was given to me a thorn in the
flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me." ••
Wherefore also when he sought to be deliv-
ered from the temptation, he obtained it not,
bv reason of the great benefit thence ensuing.
And if we should go over the whole life of

' inrepTi'9«Tot, used as in the word U7r«p9«7i?, su/<erf>ositio^ whioh
was a kind of technical word in the Church for the prolongation of
a fast. See Routh, Reliq. Sacr. i. 397, <!tc.; St. Irenaeus, St. Di-
onys. Alex., and St. Epiphanius, as quoted by him.

2 Ps. cxix. 71. 3 John xvi. 33. 4 2 Cor. xii. 7.


David, we shall find him more glorious in his
dangers; both himself and all the others that
were like him. For so Job at that season
shone forth the more abundantly, and Joseph
too in this way became the more approved,
and Jacob also, and his father likewise, and
his father's father; and all as many as ever
put on crowns of peculiar glory, it was by
tribulations and temptations that they first
won their crowns, then had their names
recited.

Being conscious of all these things, accord-
ing to the wise saying, let us " not make
haste in time of trouble,'* ^ but let us teach
ourselves one thing only, how to bear all
nobly, and not to be curious or inquisitive
about any of the things that are coming to
pass. For to know when our tribulations
j should be done away, belongs to God who
permits them to befall us; but to bear them,
brought upon us, with all thankfulness, all
that is the work of a good disposition on our
part; and if this be so, then all our blessings
will follow. In order therefore that these
may follow, and that we may become better
approved here, and more glorious in that
world, let us submit to all, whatever may be
brought upon us, for all thanking Him who
knows '^ what is good for us better than we
do, and loves us more ardently than those
who gave us birth. And let both these con-
siderations be a charm for us to chant to our-
selves in every terror that occurs, that so we
may quell our despondency, and in all things
glorify Him, who on our behalf doeth and
ordereth all, even God.

For so we shall both easily repulse all hos-
tile devices, and attain unto the incorruptible
crowns: by the grace and love towards man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with wiiom be unto
the Father glory, might, and honor, together
with the Holy Ghost, now, and always, even
for ever and ever. Amen.


5 Ecclus. ii. 2.


^ Lx<*P^'' 'tSoT'C vn-cp it6.VT<av Tip <i5<>Ti.]


HOMILY XI.

Matt. III. 7.

" But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducces come to his oaptism, he said unto
them, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to come ? "

How then doth Christ say, that they tlid | i)rcached. For so they thought they re-
not believe John?' Hccause this was not gardcd their propiiets and their lawgiver,
t)elieving, to decline receiving Him wliom he nevertlieless He said they liad not regarded
tliem, forasmucli as they received not Him,

'i.ukcxx.s. j that was foretold by them. "For if ye had


68


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XI.


believed Moses,'' saith He, " ye would have
believed Me." ' And after this again, being
asked by Christ, " The baptism of John,
whence is it?"- they said, "If we shall
say, Of earth, we fear the people; if we shall
say, From heaven, He will say unto us, How
then did ye not believe him ? "

So that from all these things it is manifest
that they came indeed and were baptized, yet
they did not abide in the belief of that which
which was preached. For John also points
out their wickedness, by their sending ^ unto
the Baptist, and saying, "Art thou Elias ?
Art thou Christ ? " wherefore he also added,
"they which were sent were of the Phari-
sees." ''

" What then ? were not the multitudes also
of this same mind"? one may say. Nay,
the multitudes in simplicity of mind had this
suspicion, but the Pharisees, wishing to lay
hold of Him. For since it was acknowledged
that Christ comes out of the village of David,
and this man was of the tribe of Levi, they
laid a snare by the question, in order that if
he should say any such thing they might
quickly come upon him. This at any rate he
hath declared by what follows; for on his not
acknowledging any of the things which they
expected, even so they take hold of him, say-
ing, " Why baptizest thou then, if thou be
not the Christ ?"s

And to convince thee that the Pharisees
came with one mind, and the people with
another, hear how the evangelist hath de-
clared this too; saying of the people, "that
they came and were baptized of him, con-
fessing their sins;"*^ but concerning the
Pharisees, no longer like that, but that
"when he saw many of the Pharisees and
Sadducees coming, he said, O generation of
vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the
wrath to come?" O greatness of mind!
How doth he discourse unto men ever thirst-
ing after the blood of the prophets, and in
disposition no better than serpents ! how doth
he disparage both themselves and their pro-
genitors with all plainness !

2. "Yea," saith one; "bespeaks plainly
enough, but the question is if there be any
reason in this plainness. For be did not see
them sinning, but in the act of change;
wherefore they did not deserve blame, but
rather praise and approbation, for having left
city and houses, and making haste to hear
his preaching."

What then shall we say ? That he had not
things present, and even now doing, in his


' John V. 46.

3 [" When some of them were sending."


John i. 24.


S John i. 25.


2 Matt, xxi

R.]
6 Matt. HI. 6


25.


view, but he knew the secrets of their mind,
God having revealed this. Since then they
were priding themselves on their forefathers,
and this was like to prove the cause of their
destruction, and was casting them into a state
of carelessness, he cuts away the roots of
their pride. For this cause Isaiah also calls
them, "rulers of Sodom," and "people of
Gomorrah;"'' and another prophet saith,
"Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians; "^
and all withdraw them from this way of think-
ing, bringing down their pride, which had
caused them unnumbered evils.

" But the prophets," you will say, " natur-
ally did so; for they saw them sinning: but
in this case, with what view and for what
cause doeth he the same, seeing them obey
him.'' To make them yet more tender-
hearted.

But if one accurately mark his words, he
hath also tempered his rebuke with com-
mendation. For he spake these things, as
marvelling at them, that they were become
able, however late, to do what seemed almost
an impossibility for them. His rebuke, you
see, is rather that of one bringing them over,
and working upon them to arouse themselves.
For in that he appears amazed, he implies
both their former wickedness to be great,
and their conversion marvellous and beyond
expectation. Thus, "what hath come to
pass," saith he, "that being children of
those men, and brought up so badly, they
have repented ? Whence hath come so great
a change ? Who hath softened down the
harshness of their spirit? Who corrected
that which was incurable ? "

And see how straightway from the begin-
ning he alarmed them, by laying first, for a
foundation, his words concerning hell. For
he spake not of the usual topics: "Who hath
warned you to flee from wars, from the in-
roads of the barbarians, from captivities,
from famines, from pestilences?" but con-
cerning another sort of punishment, never
before made manifest to them, he was strik-
ing the first preparatory note, saying thus,
" Who hath warned you to flee from the
wrath to come ? ' '

And full well did he likewise call them,
" generation of vipers." For that animal too
is said to destroy the mother that is in travail
with her, and eating through her belly, thus
to come forth unto light; which kind of thing
these men also did. being " murderers of
fathers, and murderers of mothers,'' » and
destroying their instructors with their own
hands.


7 Is. i. 10.


^ Amos ix. 7.


9 I Tim. i. 9.


Homily XI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


69


3. However, he stops not at the rebuke,
but introduces advice also. For,

"Bring forth/' says he, "fruits meet for
repentance."'

For to flee from wickedness is not enough,
but you must show forth also great virtue.
For let me not have that contradictory yet
ordinary = case, that- refraining yourselves
for a little while, ye return unto the same |
wickedness. For we are not come for the
same objects as the prophets before. Nay,
the things that are now are changed, and are !
more exalted, forasmuch as the Judge hence-
forth is coming, His very self, the very Lord
of the kingdom, leading unto greater self-
restraint, calling us to heaven, and drawing
us upward to those abodes. For this cause
do I unfold the doctrine also touching hell,
because both the good things and the painful
are for ever. Do not therefore abide as ye
are, neither bring forward the accustomed
pleas, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the noble race
of your ancestors.''

And these things he said, not as forbidding
them to say that they were sprung from those
holy men, but as forbidding them to put con- [
fidence in this, while they were neglecting the
virtue of the soul; at once bringing forward
publicly what was in their minds, and fore-
telling things to come. Because after this
they are found to say, "We have Abraham
to our father, and were never in bondage to
any man."'* Since then it was this, which
most of all lifted them up with pride and ,
ruined them, he first puts it down.

And see how with his honor paid to the
patriarch he combines his correction touching
these things. Namely, having said, " Think
not to say. We have Abraham to our father,"
he said not, "for the patriarch shall not be I
able to profit you anything," but somehow in
a more gentle and acceptable manner he in-
timated the self-same thing, by saying,

" For God is able of these stones to raise
up children to Abraham." s

Now some say, tliat concerning tlie Gen-
tiles he saith these tilings, calling them sfones,
metaphorically; but I say, that the e.\i)res-
sion hath also another meaning. ]Uit of what
kind is this? Think not, saith he, that if
you should perish, you would make the patri-
arcli cliildless. This is not, this is not so.
For with God it is jiossible, both out of stones
to give him men, and to i)ring tliem to that
relationship; since at the beginning also it
was so done. For it was like the birth of


men out of stones, when a child came forth
from that hardened womb.

This accordingly the prophet also was inti-
mating, when he said, " Look unto the hard
rock, whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of
the pit, whence ye are digged: look unto
Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that
bare you." * Now of this prophecy, you see,
he reminds them, showing that if at the be-
ginning he made him a father, as marvel-
lously as if he had made him so out of stones,
it was possible for this now also to come to
pass. And see how he both alarms them,
and cuts them off: in that he said not, " He
had already raised up," lest they should de-
spair of themselves, but that He " is able to
raise up:" and he said not, ' 'He is able out
of stones to make men," but what was a much
greater thing, " kinsmen and children of
Abraham."

Seest thou how for the time he drew them
off from their vain imagination about things
of the body, and from their refuge in their
forefathers; in order that they might rest the
hope of their salvation in their own repentance
and continence ? Seest thou how by casting
out their carnal relationship, he is bringing
in that which is of faith ?

4. Mark then how by what follows also he
increases their alarm, and adds intensity to
their agonizing fear.

For having said that " God is able of these
stones to raise up children unto Abraham,"
he added, "And now also the axe is laid unto
the root of the trees," ^ by all means making
his speech alarming. For as he from his way
of life had much freedom of speech, so they
needed his severe rebuke, liaving been left
barren® now for a long time. For " why do
I say" (such are his words) " that ye are on
the point of falling away from your relation-
ship to the patriarch, and of seeing others,
even tliose that are of stones, brought in to
your pre-eminence ? Nay, not to this point
only will your penalty reacli, but your pun-
ishment will proceed further. " For now,"
saith he, *' the axe is laid unto the root of
the trees." There is nothing more terrible
than this turn of his discourse. For it is no
longer "a Hying sickle," » nor "the taking
down of a hedge," nor "the treading under
foot of tlie vineyard; " " l)ut an axe exceeding
sharp, and what is worse, it is even at the
doors. For inasmuch as they continually
disbelieved the prophets, anil used to say,
" Where is the day of the Lord: " " and " let


■ [R. v., " worthy of repentance," mari;., " your repentance."] ' I«. li. i, i.

3 avvr]6r\.'\ t 7 Matt. iii. 10. [R. v., " And even now is tlic uxc laul," etc.

3 [The correct readinx seems to be ort, " when," not on, — R.l
"that." -R.] » ;^«f»rw9<irr««. 9 Zcch. v. 1, 1 xx. '" Is. v. 5.

•• John vili. 33. 5 Matt. iii. ,. , -. . . ~ •


Sec Amos V. 18; Jer. xvii. is; Kxck. xii.


^J. »7-


70


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XI.


the counsel of the Holy One of Israel come,
that we may know it," ' by reason that it was
many years before what they said came to
pass; to lead them off from this encourage-
ment a'lso, he sets the terrors close to them
And this he declared by saying "now," and
by his putting it to "the root." " For the
space between is nothing now," saith he,
"but it is laid to the very root." And he
said not, "to the branches," nor "to the
fruits," but "to the root." Signifying,
that if they were negligent, they would have
incurable horrors to endure, and not have so
much as a hope of remedy. It being no serv-
ant who is now come, as those before Him
were, but the very Lord of all, bringing on
them His fierce and most effectual vengeance.

Yet, although he hath terrified them again,
he suffers them not to fall into despair; but
as before he said not " He hath raised up,"
but " He is able to raise up children to Abra-
ham '' (at once both alarming and comforting
them); even so here also he did not say that
" it hath touched the root," but " it is laid to
the root, and is now hard by it, and shows
signs of no delay." However, even though
He hath brought it so near, He makes its
cutting depend upon you. For if ye change
and become better men, this axe will depart
without doing anything; but if ye continue
in the same ways, He will tear up the tree by
the roots. And therefore, observe, it is
neither removed from the root, nor applied
as it is doth it cut at all: the one, that ye
may not grow supine, the other to let you
know that it is possible even in a short time
to be changed and saved. Wherefore he doth
also from all topics heighten their fear, thor-
oughly awakening and pressing them on to
repentance. Thus first their falling away
from their forefathers; next, others being in-
troduced instead; lastly, those terrors being
at their doors, the certainty of suffering in-
curable evils (both which he declared by the
root and the axe), was sufficient to rouse
thoroughly those even that were very supine,
and to make them full of anxiety. I may
add, that Paul too was setting forth the same.
when he said, "A short word ^ will the Lord
make upon the whole world." ^

But be not afraid; or rather, be afraid, but
despair not. For thou hast yet a hope of
change; the sentence is not quite absolute,'*
neither did the axe come to cut (else what
hindered it from cutting, close as it was to
the root?); but on purpose by this fear to
make thee a better man, and to prepare thee
to bring forth fruit. For this cause he


I Is. V. 19. - Aoyoi'.

4 oirTOTeAijs, self-executed.


3 Rom, i.x. 28


added, " Therefore every tree, which bring-
eth not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and
cast into the fire."^ Now by the word
" every," he rejects again the privilege which
they had from their noble descent; " Why, if
thou be Abraham's own descendant," saith
he, " if thou have thousands of patriarchs to
enumerate, thou wilt but undergo a double
punishment, abiding unfruitful.''

By these words he alarmed even publicans,
the soldiers' mind was startled by him, not
casting them into despair, yet ridding them
of all security. For along with the terror,
there is also much encouragement in what he
saith; since by the expression, " which bring-
eth not forth good fruit," he signified that
what bears fruit is delivered from all ven-


geance.


5. "And how,'' saith one, "shall we be
able to bring forth fruit, when the edge is
being applied, and the time so strait, and the
appointed season cut short." "Thou wilt
be able," saith he, " for this fruit is not of
the same kind as that of common trees, wait-
ing a long time, and in bondage to the neces-
sities * of seasons, and requiring much other
management; but it is enough to be willing,
and the tree at once hath put forth its fruit.
For not the nature of the root only, but also
the skill of the husbandman contributes the
most to that kind of fruit-bearing."

For (let me add) on account of this, — lest
they should say, " Thou art alarming and
pressing, and constraining us, applying an
axe, and threatening us with being cut down,
yet requiring produce in time of punish-
ment,"—he hath added, to signify the ease
of bearing that fruit, " I indeed baptize you
with water, but He that cometh after me is
mightier than I, the latchet of whose shoe I
am not worthy to unloose; He shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost and with fire:"^
implying hereby that consideration * only is
needed and faith, not labors and toils ; and
as it is easy to be baptized, so is it easy to
be converted, and to become better men. So
having stirred their mind by the fear of Goa's
judgment, and the expectation of His punish-
ment, and by the mention of the axe, and by
the loss of their ancestors, and by the bring-
ing in of those other children, and by the
double vengeance of cutting off and burning,
and having by all means softened their hard-
ness, and brought them to desire deliverance
from so great evils; then he brings in what


5 Matt. iii. 10. 6 ava.yKo.1%.

7 Matt. iii. 11. Comp. Luke iii. 16. [In neither passage is the
preposition repeated in the Greek text. Chrysostom (see sec. 6) in-
terprets " fire " ;is part of the blessing promised. So many modern
commentators. — R.]

'i [yruJiiiT;;.]


HOMII.Y XI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


71


he hath to say touching Christ; and not sim- Imagine onlj' what sort of men it was meet

ply, but with a declaration of His great for the hearers to become, when they consid-

superiority. Then in setting forth the differ- ered that they were at once to be like the

ence between himself and Him, lest he should prophets, and like those great ones. For it

seem to say this out of favor, he establishes was on this account, you see, that he made

the fact by comparison of the gifts bestowed mention at all of fire; that he might lead

by each of them. For he did not at once them to reflect on the memory of those men.

say, " I am not wortliy to unloose the latchet Because, of all tiie visions that appeared unto

of His shoe; " but when he had first set forth them, I had almost said, the more part ap-

the little value of his own baptism, and had peared in fire; thus God discoursed with

shown that it hath nothing more tiian to lead Moses in the bush, thus with all the people

them to repentance (for he did not say with | in the mount Sinai, thus with Ezekiel on the

water of remission, but of repentance), he ! cherubim.- t


sets forth Christ's also, which is full of the
unspeakable gift. Thus he seems to say,
" Lest, on being told that He cometh after


And mark again how he rouses the hearer,
by putting that first which was to take place
after all. For the Lamb was to be slain, and


me, thou shouldest despise Him as having sin to be blotted out, and the enmity to be
come later; learn thou the virtue ' of His gift, | destroyed, and the burial to take place, and
and thou wilt clearly know that I uttered [ the resurrection, and then the Spirit to come,
nothing worthy nor great, when I said, " I [ But none of these things doth he mention as
am not worthy to unloose the latchet of His yet, but that first which was last, and for
shoe." So too when thou art told, "He is the sake of which all the former were done,


mightier than I," do not think I said this in
the way of making a comparison. For I am


and which was fittest to proclaim His dignity;
so that when the hearer should be told that


not worthy to be ranked so much as among he was to receive so great a Spirit, he might
His servants, no, not even the lowest of His search with himself, how and in what manner
servants, nor to receive the least honored this shall be, while sin so prevails; that find-
portion of His ministry." Therefore He did ing him full of thought and prepared for that
not merely say, " His shoes," Init not even lesson, he might thereupon introduce what he


the latchet," which kind of office was


counted the last of all. Then to hinder thy being any more offended, under the expecta-


attributing what he had said to humility, he
adds also the proof from the facts: " For He
shall baptize you," saith he, " with the Holy
Ghost and with fire."

6. Seest thou liow great is the wisdom of
the Baptist? how, when He Himself is
preaching, He saith everything to alarm,


had to say touching the Passion, no man


tion of such a gift.

Wherefore he again cried out, saying,
" Behold the Lamb of God, which beareth
the sin of the world." ^ He did not say,
"which remitteth," but, that which implies a
more guardian care, " which beareth it." For
it is not all one, simply to remit, and to take
it upon Himself. ■• For the one was to be


as know yet how to conceive of Him as a
true Son): but by so great a gift of the Spirit
that also was established. Therefore the
Father also in sending John gave him, </.*•


and fill them with anxiety; but when He is

sending men to Him, whatever was mild and , done without peril, tlie other with death,
apt to recover them: not bringing forward the And again, he said, " He is Son of God." s
axe, nor the tree that is cut down and burnt, I But not even this declared His rank openly
and cast into the fire, nor the wrath to come, to the hearers (for they did not so much
but remission of sins, and removing of
punishment, and righteousness, and sanctifi-
cation, and redemption, and adoption, and
brotherliood, and a partaking of the inheri-
tance, and an abundant supply of the Holy j iw/ /.'//m\ this as a first token of the dignity
Ghost. For all these things he obscurely of Him that was come, saying. " llpon whom
denoted, when he said, " He shall baptize thou shalt see the Sjjirit descending and re-
you with the Holy Ghost; " at once, by the! maining, the same is He which baptizeth with
very figure of speech, declaring the abundance I the Holy Ghost."* Wherefore himself too
of the grace (for lie said not, '' He will give
you the Holy Ghost," but " He will baptize
you with the Holy Ghost"); and by tlie speci-
fication of fire on tlic other hand indicating
the vehement and uncontrollable quality of
His grace.


' [Auva^if,]


The


' F.zck. i. 37.

I lolin i. 2i> ; F.dkI. Vers, in m,i'x- [^" ^ ^- "">
Greek phfiise IS o a'lpuiv, " \\r that takith ii|i." K.]

4 [aurcii- (icaAa^Xf is the better supported rciuliiiL,', but viirioiis
conjectural ciiiemlHtiDns occur. " Himself to lUvsiiiiie //," i» the
most litertil rendering. — R.]

5 John i. 34.

6 John i. 33, 34. [ K. v., more correctly, " I hnve seen, iind
have borne wltncHs," etc. I'hc (Irerlc pcrfectH arc to be taken in
thrir ).:runimatical ncnac, as the comment of L'hrysontom implies.


72


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XI.


saith, " I saw and bare record that this is the
Son of God; *' as though the one were to all
time the clear evidence of the other.

7. Then, as having uttered the gentler part
of his message, and soothed and relaxed the
hearer, he again binds him up, that he may
not become remiss. For such was the nature
of the Jewish nation; by all encouraging
things they were easily puffed up, and cor-
rupted. Wherefore he again adduces his
terrors, saying,

" Whose fan is in His hand." '

Thus, as before he had spoken of the pun-
ishment, so here he points out the Judge like-
wise, and introduces the eternal vengeance.
For " He will burn the chaff," saith he,
"with unquenchable fire." Thou seest that
He is Lord of all things, and that He is
Himself the Husbandman; albeit in another
place He calls His Father the same. For
"My Father, "saith He, "is the Husband-
man.''^ Thus, inasmuch as He had spoken
of an a.xe, lest thou shouldest suppose that
the thing needed labor, and the separation
was hard to make; by another comparison he
suggest the easiness of it, implying that all
the world is His; since He could not punish
those who were not His own. For the pres-
ent, it is true, all are mingled together (for
though the wheat appears gleaming through,
yet it lies with the chaff, as on a threshing
floor, not as in a garner), but then, great will
be the separation.

Where now are they by whom hell-fire ^ is
disbelieved ? Since surely here are two points
laid down, one, that He will baptize with the
Holy Ghost, the other, that He will burn up
the disobedient. If then that is credible, so
is this too. assuredly. Yea, this is why the
two predictions are put by him in immediate
connection, that by that which hath taken
place already, he might accredit the other, as
yet unaccomplished. For Christ too Himself
in many places doth so, often of the same
things, and often of opposites, setting down
two prophecies; the one of which He per-
forms here, the other He promises in the
future; that such as are too contentious may,
from the one which has already come to pass,
believe the other also, which is not yet ac-
complished. For instance, to them that strip
themselves of all that they have for His sake ^
He promised to give an hundred fold in the
present world, and life eternal in that which
is to come; by the things already given mak-
ing the future also credible. Which, as we
see, John likewise hath done in this place;
laying down two things, that He shall both


I Matt. iii. 12.
3 [yeei't'n.]


- John XV. I.

4 Mark x. 30 ; Luke xviii. 30.


baptize witii the Holy Ghost, and burn up
with unquenchable fire. Now then, if He
had not baptized with the Spirit the apostles,
and all every day who are willing, thou
mightest have doubts concerning those other
things too; but if that which seems to be
greater and more difficult, and which trans-
cends all reason, hath been done, and is done
ev,ery day; how deniest thou that to be true,
which is easy, and comes to pass according
to reason? Thus having said, "He shall
baptize with the Holy Ghost and with fire,"
and having thence promised great blessings;
lest thou, released wholly from the former
things, grow supine, he hath added the fan,
and the judgment thereby declared. Thus,
" think not at all," saith he, " that your bap-
tism suffices, if ye become ordinary persons ^
hereafter:" for we need both virtue, and
plenty of that known self-restraint.* There-
fore as by the axe he urges them unto grace,
and unto the font, so after grace he terrifies
them by the fan, and the unquenchable fire.
And of the one sort, those yet unbaptized,
he makes no distinction, but saith in general,
" Every tree that bringeth not forth good
fruit is hewn down,"'' punishing all the unbe-
lievers. Whereas after baptism He works
out a kind of division, because many of them
that believed would exhibit a life unworthy
of their faith.

Let no man then become chaff, let no one
be tossed to and fro, nor lie exposed to
wicked desires, blown about by them easily
every way. For if thou continue wheat,
though temptation be brought on thee, thou
wilt suffer nothing dreadful; nay, for in the
threshing floor, the wheels of the car, that
are like saws,® do not cut in pieces the
wheat; but if thou fall away into the weak-
ness of chaff, thou wilt both here suffer incur-
able ills, being smitten of all men, and there
thou wilt undergo the eternal punishment.
For all such persons both before that furnace
become food for the irrational passions here,
as chaff is for the brute animals: and there
again they are material and food for the
flame.

Now to have said directly, that He will
judge men's doings, would not so effectually
procure acceptance for His doctrine: but to
blend with it the parable, and so to establish
it all, was apter to persuade the hearer, and
attract liim by a more ample encouragement.
Wlierefore also Christ Himself for the most
part so discourses with them; threshing floor,


5 [i/)aCAoi, " worthless." — R.] 6 (jiXocroc^t'a.

7 Matt. iii. 10. 8 TrptcrTTjpoeiSr)?, see Is. xl. 15.

9 [The better supported text seems to be aiiTos, without 6 xpi<r-
T09 ; the latter is an explanatory gloss. — R.]


Homily XI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


7^


and harvest, and vineyard, and wine- press,
and field, and net, and fishing, and all things
familiar, and among which they were busied.
He makes ingredients in His discourses.
This kind of thing then the Baptist likewise
did here, and offered an exceeding great
demonstration of his words, the giving of the
Spirit. For " He who hath so great power,
as both to forgive sins, and to give the Spirit,
much more will these things also be within
His power: " so he speaks.

Seest thou how now in due order the mys-
tery' came to be laid as a foundation, before
the resurrection and judgment ?-

"And wherefore," it maybe said, "did he
not mention the signs and wonders which
were straightway to be done by Him?"
Because this was greater than all, and for its
sake all those were done. Thus, in his men-
tion of the chief thing, he comprehended all;
death dissolved, sins abolished, the curse
blotted out, those long wars done away; our
entrance into paradise, ^ our ascent into
heaven, our citizenship with the angels, our
partaking of the good things to come: for in
truth this is the earnest of them all. So that
in mentioning this, he hath mentioned also
the resurrection of our bodies, and the mani-
festation of His miracles here, and our par-
taking of His kingdom, and the good things,
which " eye hath not seen, nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man."'* J
For all these things He bestowed on us by
that gift. It was therefore superfluous to
speak of the signs that were immediately to
ensue, and which sight can judge of; but
those were meet to be discoursed on, whereof
they doubted; as for instance, that He is the
Son of God; that He exceeds John beyond
comparison; that He " beareth s the sin of
the world;" that He will require an account
of all that we do; that our interests are not
limited to the present, but elsewhere every
one will undergo the due penalty. For these
things were not as yet proveable by sight.

8. Therefore, knowing these things, let us
use great diligence, wliile we are in the
threshing floor; for it is possible while we are
here, to change even out of chaff into wheat,
even as on the other hand many from wheat j
have become cliaff. Let us not then be
supine, nor be carried about witl; every wind; '
ncitlier let us sei)arate ourselves from our
brethren, tliough they seem to be stn.iil and |
mean; forasmuch as the wheat also compared

■ " The Mynltry :" ;. c, ("hrist's Kuptisni by Fire, Hisdwcllin;;
in our hearts by Ills Spirit. Coinj). C'ol. i. 26, 27; Kph. i. <;, m ;
'ii. 9. = Hrb. vi. I, 2.

1 [" The loosioK of (lenth, the abolition of sins," etc., "the
entrance into Paradise," etc. The cunstructiun is the same ihrouxh-
out the list. — k.]

4 1 Cor. ii. I). 5 [See note 3 on see. 6, p. 71. — R.]


with the chaff is less in measure, but better
in nature. Look not therefore to the forms
of outward pomp, for they are prepared for
the fire, but to this godly humility, so firm
and indissoluble, and which cannot be cut,
neither is burnt by the fire. It being for
their sake that He bears long with the very
chaff, that by their intercourse with them
they may become better. Therefore judg-
ment is not yet, that we may be all crowned
together, tha't from wickedness many may be
converted unto virtue.

Let us tremble then at hearing this para-
ble. For indeed that fire is unquenchable.
"And how,'' it may be said, " is it unquench-
able?" Seest thou not this sun ever burn-
ing, and never quenched? didst thou not
behold the bush burning, and not consumed ?
If then thou also desirest to escape the flame,
lay up alms beforehand, and so thou wilt not
even taste of that fire. For if, while here,
thou wilt believe what is told thee, thou shalt
not so much as see this furnace, after thy
departure into that region; but if thou disbe-
lieve it now, thou shalt know it there full well
by experience, when no sort of escape is pos-
sible. Since in truth no entreaty shall avert
the punishment from them who have not
shown forth an upright life. For believing
surely is not enough, since even the devils
tremble at God, but for all that they will be
punished.

G. Wherefore our care of our conduct hath
need to be great. Why, this is the very rea-
son of our continually assembling you here;
not simply that ye should enter- in, but that
ye should also reap some fruit from your con-
tinuance here. But if ye come indeed con-
stantly, but go away again reaping no fruit
from thence, ye will have no advantage from
your entering in and attendance in this jilace.

For if we, when sending children to teach-
ers, should we see them reaj^ing no benefit
thereby, begin to be severe in blaming the
teachers, and remove them often to others;
what excuse siinil we have for not bestowing
upon virtue even so much diligence as upon
these earthly things, but forever bringing our
tablets lionie empty? And yet our teachers
here are more in number and greater. For
no less than iirojiiiets and apostles and patri-
archs, and all rigliteous men, are by us set
over you as teachers in every Church. And
not even so is there any profit, but if you
have jouied in chanting two or three I'salms,
and making the accustometl prayers at ran-
dom and anyhow, are so dismissed, ye think
this cnougli for youj salvation. Have ye not
heard the projihct. saying (or rather God by
tiie i)rophet), " 'i'his peojile honoreth me


74


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XI.


with their lips, but their heart is far from
me?'"

Therefore, lest this be our case too, wipe
thou out the letters, or rather the impres-
sions, which the devil hath engraven in thy
soul; and bring me a heart set free from
worldly tumults, that without fear I may
write on it what I will. Since now at least
there is nothing else to discern, except his
letters; — rapines, covetmgs, enyy, jealousy.
Wherefore of course, when I receive your
tablets, I am not able so much as to read
them. For I find not the letters, which we
every Lord's day inscribe on you, and so let
you go; but others, instead of these, unintel-
ligible and misshapen. Then, when we have
blotted them out, and have written those
which are of the Spirit, ye departing, and
giving up your hearts to the works of the
devil, give Him again power to substitute his
own characters in you. What then will be
the end of all this, even v/ithout any words of
mine, each man's own conscience knoweth.
For I indeed will not cease to do my part,
and to write in you the right letters. But if
ye mar our diligence, for our part our reward
is unaltered; but your danger is not small.

Now, though I would fain say nothing to
disgust you, yet I beseech again and entreat
you,- imitate at least the little children's dili-
gence in these matters. For so they first
learn the form of the letters, after that they
practise themselves in distinguishing them
put out of shape, and then at last in their
reading they proceed orderly by means of
them. Just 'so let us also do; let us divide
virtue, and learn first not to swear, nor to
forswear ourselves, nor to speak evil; then
proceeding to another row,^ not to envy, not
to lust, not to be gluttonous, not to be
drunken, not fierce, not slothful, so that from
these we may pass on again to the things of
the Spirit, and practise continence, and
neglect of the belly, temperance, righteous-
ness, to be above glory, and gentle and con-
trite in mind; and let us join these one with
another, and write them upon our soul.

lo. And all these let us practise at home.
with our own friends, with our wife, with our
children. And, for the present, let us begin
with the things that come first, and are
easier; as for instance, vvith not swearing;
and let us practise this one letter continually
at home. For, in truth, there are many at
home to hinder this our practice; sometimes
a man's servant provoking him, sometimes

' Is. xxix. 13; comp. Mark vii. 6. ^

2 [The first clause stands independently in the Greek text,
forming the conclusion of the preceding paragraph. The new ex-
hortation begins " But I beseech again," etc. — R.]

3 (TTL^OV.


his wife annoying and angering him, some-
times an indocile and disorderly child urges
him on to threatening and swearing. If now
at home, when thus continually galled, thou
shouldest attain not to be tempted into
swearing, thou wilt in the market-place also
have power with ease to abide unconquered.

Yea, and in like sort, thou will attain to
keep thyself from insulting any, by not in-
sulting thy wife, nor thy servants, nor any one
else among those in thy house. For a man's
wife too not seldom, praising this or that
person, or bemoaning herself, stirs him up to
speak evil of that other. But do not thou
let thyself be constrained to speak evil of
him that is praised, but bear it all nobly.
And if thou shouldest perceive thy servants
praising other masters, be not perturbed, but
stand nobly. Let thy home be a sort of lists,
a place of exercise for virtue, that having
trained thyself well there, thou mayest with
entire skill encounter all abroad.

Do this with respect to vainglory also.
For if thou train thyself not to be vainglorious
in company of thy wife and thy servants, thou
wilt not ever afterwards be easily caught by
this passion with regard to any one else. For
though this malady be in every case grievous
and tyrannical, yet is it so especially when a
woman is present. If we therefore in that
instance put down its power, we shall easily
master it in the other cases also.

And with respect to the other passions too,
let us do this self-same thing, exercising our-
selves against them at home, and anointing
ourselves every day.

And that our exercise may be easier, let
us further enact a penalty for ourselves, upon
our transgressing any of our purposes. And
let the very penalty again be such as brings
with it not loss, but reward, — such as pro-
cures some very great gain. And this is so,
if we sentence ourselves to intenser fastings,
and to sleeping often on the bare ground, and
to other like austerity. For in this way will
much profit come unto us from every quar-
ter; we shall both live the sweet life of virtue
here, and we shall attain unto the good
things to come, and be perpetually friends of
God.

But in order that the same may not happen
again, — that ye may not, having here admired
what is said, go your way, and cast aside at
random, wherever it may chance, the tablet
of your mind, and so allow the devil to blot
out these things; — let each one, on returning
home, call his own wife, and tell her these
things, and take her to help him; and from
this day let him enter into that noble school
of exercise, using for oil the supply of the


Homily XII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


75


Spirit. And though thou fall once, twice,
many times in thy training, despair not, but
stand agam, and wrestle; and do not give up
until thou hast bound on thee the glorious
crown of triumph over the devil, and hast for
the time to come stored up the riches of vir-
tue in an inviolable treasure-house.

For if thou shouldest establish thyself in
the habits of this noble self-restraint, then,
not even when remiss, wilt thou be able to
transgress any of the commandments, habit
imitating the solidity of nature. Yea, as to


sleep is easy, and to eat, and to drink, and
to breathe, so also will the deeds of virtue be
easy,to us, and we shall reap to ourselves that
pure pleasure, resting in a harbor without a
wave, and enjoying continual calm, and with
a great freight bringing our vessel into haven,
in that City, on that day; and we shall at-
tain unto tiie undecaying crowns, unto which

I may we all attain, by the grace and love
towards man ol our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be all glory and might, now and

; always, and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY XII,


Matt. ITT. 13.


Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan," etc.


With the servants the Lord, with the crim-
inals the Judge, cometh to be baptized, 13ut
be not thou troubled; for in these humilia-
tions His exaltation doth most shine forth.
For He who vouchsafed to be liorne so long
in a Virgin's womb, and to come forth thence
with our nature, and to be smitten with rods,
and crucified, and to suffer nil the rest which
He suffered; — why marvellest thou if He
vouchsafed also to be baptized, and to come
with the rest to His servant. For the amaze-
ment lay in that one thing, that being God,
He would be made IVLan; but the rest after
this all follows in course of reason.

For this cause, let me add, John also by
way of anticipation said all that he had saitl
before, that he "was not worthy to unloose
the latchet of His shoe; " and all the rest, as
for instance, that He is Judge, and rewards
every man according to his desert, and that
He will bestow His Spirit abundantly on all;
in order that when thou shouldest see Him
coming to the bajnism, tiiou mightest not
suspect anything mcrm. Therefore he forbids
Him, even when He was come, saying,

'' I have need to be l)aptized of Thee, and
c(;mest Thou to me."' For, because the bap-
tism was "of repentance," and led men to
accuse themselves for their offenses, lest any
one should supjiose that He too *' cometh to
Jordan'' in this sort of mind, John sets it
right beforehand, by calling Him both Lamb,

« Mntt. iii. 14.


and Redeemer from all the sin that is in the
world. Since He that was able to take away
the sins of the whole race of men, much more
was He Himself without sin. For this cause
then he said not, " Behold, He that is with-
out sin,'" but what was much more. He " that
beareth the sin of the world," in order that
together with this truth thou mightest receive
that other with all assurance, and having re-
ceved it mightest perceive, that in the con-
duct of some further economy He cometh to
the baptism. \\'herefore also he said to Him
when He came, " I have need to be baptizetl
of Thee, and comest 'i'iiou to me? ''

And he said not, "And art Thou baptized
of me?" nay, for this he feared to say: but
what ? "And comest Tiiou to me ? " What
then doth Christ? What He did afterwards
with respect to Peter, this did He then also.
For so he too would have forbicklen TTim to
wash his feet, but when he hail heard,
" What I do thou knowest not now, but thou
shalt know hereifter, ''anil " thou hast u6
part with me,"^ he speeilily withdrew from
his determination, and went over to the con-
trary. And this man again in like maimer,
when he had heard, " Suffer it to l)e so now,
for thus it becometli us to fulfill all righteous-
ness," ' straightway obeyed. For they were
not unduly contentious, but they manifested


» John xiii. 7, 8.
1 \lmt. iii. M. [R. v.
■.•ciiiictli," rlc— K.')


Sulfcr /■/ (or »««•) nuw, fur lliiis il l>c-


76


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XII.


both love and obedience, and made it their
study to be ruled by their Lord in all things.

And mark how He urges him on that»very
ground which chiefly caused him to look
dgubtfuUy on what was taking place; in that
He did not say, " thus it is just," but " thus
it becometh. " For, inasmuch as the point
unworthy of Him was in his mind chiefly this,
His being baptized by His servant, He stated
this rather than anything else, which is
directly opposed to that impression: as
though He had said, "Is it not as unbecom-
ing that thou avoidest and forbiddest this ?
nay, for this self-same cause I bid thee sjafTer
it, that it is becoming, and that in the highest
degree."

And He did not merely say, " suffer,^' but
He added, "now." "For it will not be so
forever," saith He, "but thou shalt see me
such as thou desirest; for the present, how-
ever, endure this." Next He shows also
how this " becometh " Him. How then doth
it so? "In that we fulfill the whole law;''
and to express this He said, "all righteous-
ness." For righteousness is the fulfilling of
the. commandments. "Since then we have
performed all the rest of the command-
ments," saith He, "and this alone remains,
it also must be added: because I am come
to do away the curse that is appointed for
the transgression of the law. I must there-
fore first fulfill it all, and having delivered
you from its condemnation, in this way bring
it to an end. It becometh me therefore to
fulfill the whole law, by the same rule that it
becometh me to do away the curse that is
written against you in the law: this being the
very purpose o'f my assuming flesh, and com-
ing hither."

2. " Then he suffereth Him. And Jesus,
when He was baptized, went up straightway
out of the water; and, lo, the heavens were
opened unto Him, and he saw the Spirit of
God descending like a dove, and lighting
upon Him." '

For inasmuch as many supposed that John
was greater than He, because John had been
brought up all his time in the wilderness,
and was son of a chief priest, and was clothed
with such raiment, and was calling all men
unto his baptism, and had been born of a
barren mother; while Jesus, first of all, was
of a damsel of ordinary rank (for the virgin
birth was not yet manifest to all); and be-
sides, He had been brought up in an house,
and held converse with all men, and wore this
common raiment; they suspected Him to be
less than John, knowing as yet nothing of

I Matt. iii. 15, 16. [R. V., " from the water," and " coming"

for " lighting. "—R.]


those secret things; — and it fell out moreover
that He was baptized of John, which thing
added support to this surmise, even if none
of those mentioned before had existed; for
it would come into their mind that this man
was one of the many (for were He not one
of the many. He would not have come with
the many to the baptism), but that John was
greater than He and far more admirable: — in
order therefore that this opinion might not
prevail with the multitude, the very heavens
are opened, when He is baptized, and the
Spirit comes down, and a voice with the
Spirit, proclaiming the dignity of the Only
Begotten. For since the voice that said,
"This is my beloved Son," would seem to
the multitude rather to belong to John, for
It added not, "This that is baptized, '' but
simply This, and every hearer would con-
ceive it to be said concerning the baptizer,
rather than the baptized, partly on account
of the Baptist's own dignity, partly for all
that hath been mentioned; the Spirit came in
form of a dove, drawing the voice towards
Jesus, and making it evident to all, that This
was not spoken of John that baptized, but of
Jesus who was baptized.

And how was it, one may say, that they did
not believe, when these things came to pass?
Because in the days of Moses also many won-
derful works were done, albeit not such as
these; and after all those, the voices, and the
trumpets, and the lightnings, they both forged
a calf, and "were joined unto Baal-peor. "
And those very persons too, who were pres-
ent at the time, and saw Lazarus arise, so
far from believing in Him, who had wrought
these things, repeatedly attempted even to
slay Him. Now if seeing before their eyes
one rise from the dead, they were so wicked,
why marvel at their not receiving a voice
wafted from above ? Since when a soul is
uncandid and perverse, and possessed by the
disease of envy, it yields to none of these
things; even as when it is candid it receives
all with faith, and hath no great need of
these.

Speak not therefore thus, " They believed
not," but rather inquire, " Did not all things
take place which ought to have made them
believe ? " For by the prophet also God
frames this kind of defense of His own ways
in general. That is, the Jews being on the
point of ruin, and of being given over to ex-
treme punishment; lest any from their wicked-
ness should calumniate His providence. He
saith, "What ought I to have done to this
vineyard, that I have not done ? " ^ Just so

2 Is. V. 4. [Chrysostom varies from the Lxx., introducing m«
eSet, to strengthen his argument. — R.]


Homily XII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


n


here likewise do tliou reflect; " what ought
to have been done, and was not done?"
And indeed whensoever arguments arise on
God's Providence, do thou make use of this
kind of defense, against those who from the
wickedness of the many try to raise a preju-
dice against it. See, for instance, what as-
tonishing things are done, preludes of those
which were to come; for it is no more para-
dise, but Heaven that is opened.

But let our argument witn the Jews stand
over unto some other time; for the present,
God working with us, we would direct our
discourse to what is immediately before us.

3. "And Jesus, when He was l^aptized,
went up straightway out of the water; and lo !
the heavens were opened unto Him,"'

Wherefore were the heavens opened ? To
inform thee that at thy baptism also this is
done, God calling thee to thy country on
high, and persuading thee to have nothing to
do with earth. And if thou see not, yet
never doubt it. For so evermore at the be-
ginnings of all wonderful and spiritual trans-
actions, sensible visions appear, and such-like
signs, for the sake of them that are somewhat
dull in disposition, and who have need of
outward sight, and who cannot at all conceive
an incorporeal nature, but are e.xcited only
by the things that are seen: that so, though
afterward no such thing occur, what hath been
declared by them once for all at the first may
be received by thy faith.

P'or in the case of the apostles too, there
was a '' sound of a mighty wind," - and vis-
ions of fiery tongues ai-)peared, but not for
the apostles' sake, but because of the Jews
who were then present. Nevertheless, even
though no sensible signs take place, we re-
ceive the things that have been once mani-
fested by them. Since the dove itself at that
time therefore appeared, that as in place of a
finger (so to say) it might point out to them
that A'ere present, and to John, the Son of
God. Not however merely on this account,
but to teach thee also, that upon thee no less
at thy baptism the Spirit comes. But since
then we have no need of sensible vision, faith
snfticing instead of all. For signs are " not
for tliem tliat believe, but for them that
believe not." ^

But why in the fashion of a dove? Gentle
is that creature, and pure. Forasmuch then
as the Spirit too is "a Spirit of meekness,"*
He therefore appears in this sort. And be-
sides, He is reminding us of an ancient his-


' Mntt. iii. 16. a Actsii. 2. 3 i Cor. xiv. 32.

*'•'•'■ vi. I. [The immediate reference in Oiil. vi. 1 U ni>t to
the Holy Spirit, yet there i« a suKKc-tii.n of the influence of the
Holy Spinl,- k.]


tory. For so, when once a common shipwreck
had overtaken the whole world, and our race
was in danger of perishing, this creature
appeared, and indicated the deliverance from
the tempest, and bearing an olive branch, ^
published the good tidings of the common
calm of the whole world; all which was a type
of the things to come. For in fact the con-
dition of men was then much worse, and they
deserved a much sorer punishment. To pre-
vent thy despairing, therefore. He reminds
thee of that history. Because then also,
when things were desperate, there was a sort
of deliverance and reformation; but tlien by
punishment, now, on the contrary, by grace
and an unspeakable gift.^ Therefore the
dove also appears, not bearing an olive
branch, but pointing out to us our Deliverer
from all evils, and suggesting the gracious
hopes. For not from out of an ark doth she
lead one man only, but the whole world she
leads up into heaven at her appearing, and
instead of a branch of peace from an olive,
she conveys the adoption to all the world's
offspring in common.

Reflect now on the greatness of the gift,
and do not account His dignity the less for
His appearing in such a likeness. For I
actually hear some saying,' that " such as is
the difference between a man and a dove, so
great is that between Christ and the Spirit:
since the one appeared in our nature, the
other in the likeness of a dove." What
must we say then to these things ? That the
Son of God did indeed take upon Him tlie
nature of man, but the Spirit took not on
Him the nature of a dove. Therefore the
evangelist also said not, '' in the nature of a
dove,'' but " in the form of a dove." Ac-
cordingly, never after did He so much as
appear in this fashion, but at that moment
only. And if on this account thou affirmest
His dignity to be less, the cherubim too will
be made out by this reasoning much His
superior, even as much so as an eagle is to a
dove: because they too were figured into that
visible shape. Antl the angels too superior
again, for they no less have many times ap-
peared in the fashion of men. But these
tilings are not so, indeed they are not. For
the truth of an economy is one thing, and the
condescension of a temjiorary vision another.

Do not now, I jiray thee, become unthank-
ful towards thy Benefactor, nor with the verv
contraries" retjuite Him that hath bestowed


S Gen. viii. * 3 Cor. ix. 15.

7 /. «•., the Macedonians, who were ccnaureil at Constant iiiople,
A. [>. 381.

*• " The conlrarics :" f<ir wherrim the Spirit ciiinr to exult, und
muke 114 |>ari,ikrr<> of the l>ivine Suture, the heretics would de-
^•ruile lliiii to 'MinielhiiK like our oun.


78


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XII.


on thee the fountain of blessedness. For
where adoption is vouchsafed, there is also
the removing of evils, and the giving of all
good things.

4. On this very account the Jewish bap-
tism ceases, and ours takes its beginning.
And what was done with regard to the Pass-
over, the same ensues in the baptism also.
For as in that case too, He acting with a view
to both, brought the one to an -end, but to
the other He gave a beginning: so here, hav-
ing fulfilled the Jewish baptism, He at the
same time opens also the doors of that of the
Church; as on one table then, so in one river
now. He had both sketched out the shadow,
and now adds the truth. For this baptism
alone hath the grace of the Spirit, but that
of John was destitute of this gift. For this
very cause in the case of the others that were
baptized no such thing c^me to pass, but only
in the instance of Him who was to hand on '
this; in order that, besides what we have
said, thou mightest learn this also, that not
the purity of the baptizer, but the power of
the baptized, had this effect. Not until
then, assuredly, were either the heavens
opened, nor did the Spirit make His ap-
proach. "= Because henceforth He leads us
away from the old to the new polity, both
opening to us the gates on high, and sending
down His Spirit from thence to call us to our
country there; and not merely to call us, but
also with the greatest mark of dignity. For
He hath not made us angels and archangels,
but He hath caused us to become " sons of
God," and "beloved," and so He draws us
on towards that portion of ours.

Having then all this in thy mind, do thou
show forth a life worthy of the love of Him
who calls thee, and of thy citizenship in that
world, and of the honor that is given thee.
Crucified as thou art to the world, and having
crucified it to thyself, show thyself with all
strictness a citizen of the city of the heavens.
And do not, because thy body is not trans-
lated unto heaven, suppose that thou hast
anything to do with the earth; for thou hast
thy Head abiding above. Yea with this very
purpose the Lord, having first come here and
having brought His angels, did then, taking
thee with Him, depart thither; that even be-
fore thy going up to that place, thou mightest
understand that it is possible for thee to in-
habit earth as it were heaven.

Let us then keep watch over that noble
birth, which we received from the beginning;


1 [napaSiSovaL ; " hand down " would e::press the sense more
clearly. — R."|

2 [The sentence in the Greek is not negative but affirmative :
"Then assuredly" both these events occurred. — R.]


and let us every day seek more and more the
palaces there, and account all that is here to
be a shadow and a dream. For so, had any
king among those on earth, finding thee poor
and a beggar, made thee suddenly his son,
never wouldest thou have thought upon thy
cottage, and thy cottage's mean appointm.ents.
Yet surely in that case the difference is not
much. Do not then either in this case take
account of any of the former things, for thou
art called unto much greater. For both He
who calls is the Lord of the angels, and the
good things that are given surpass all both
word and thought. Since not from earth to
earth doth He remove thee, as the king doth,
but from earth to heaven, and from a mortal
nature to an immortal, and to glory unspeak-
able, then only possible to be properly mani-
fested, when we shall actually enjoy it.

Now then, having to partake of such bless-
ings, do I see thee minding money, and
clinging to the pomp which is here ? And
dost thou not esieem all that is seen to be
more vile than beggar's rags ? And how wilt
thou appear worthy of this honor ? And
what excuse wilt thou have to plead ? or
rather, what punishment wilt thou not have
to suffer, who after so great a gift art running
to thy former vomit ? For no longer art thou
punished merely as a man, but as a son of
God that hath sinned; and the greatness of
thy honor becomes a mean of bringing a
sorer punishment on thee. Since we too
punish not equally slaves that do wrong, and
sons committing the same offense; and most
of all when they have received some great
kindness from us.

For if he who had paradise for his portion,
for one disobedience underwent such dread-
ful things after his honor; we, who have
received Heaven, and are become joint heirs
with the Only Begotten, what excuse shall we
have, for running to the serpent after the
dove ? For it will be no longer, " Dust thou
art, and unto dust shalt thou return, "^ and
thou " tillest the ground,'''* and those former
words, that will be said to us;s but what is
far more grievous than these, the "outer
darkness," ^ the bonds that may not be burst,
the venomous worm, the "gnashing of
teeth;" and this with great reason. For he
that is not made better even by so great a ,
benefit, would justly suffer the most extreme,
and a yet more grievous punishment.

Elias once opened and shut Heaven, but


3 Gen. iii. 19.

4 Gen. iv. 12. [The Lxx. has y^ in both passages. The verbal
suggestion of the original may be retained by rendering : " Earth
thou art, and unto earth thou shalt return," and thou " tillest the
earth."- R.]

5 [T.iterallv, " that we shall hear."— R.] * Matt. .xxv. 30.


Homily XII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


79


that was to bring down rain, and restrain it;
whereas to thee the heaven is not so opened,
but in order for thee to ascend thither; and
what is yet more, not to ascend only, but to
lead up others also, if thou wilt; such great
confidence and power hath He bestowed on
thee in all that is His.

5. Forasmuch then as our house is there,
there let us store up all, and leave nothing
here, lest we lose it. For here, though thou
put a lock on it, and doors, and bars, and
set thousands of servants to watch it; though
thou get the better of all tae crafty ones,
though thou escape the eyes of the envious,
the worms, the wasting that comes of time; —
which is impossible; — death at any rate thou
wilt never escape, but wilt be deprived of all
those things in one moment of time; and not
deprived of them only, but wilt have to trans-
fer them into the hands often of thy very
enemies. Whereas if thou wouldest transfer
them into that house, thou wilt be far above
all. For there is no need to apply either
key, or doors, or bars; such is the virtue'
of that city, so inviolable is this place, and
Ijy nature inaccessible to corruption and all
wickedness.

How then is it not of the utmost folly,
where destruction and waste is the lot of all
that is stored, there to heap up all, but where
things abide untouched and increase, there
not to lay up even the least portion; and this,
when we are to live there forever ? For this
cause the very heathens' disbelieve the
things that we say, since our doings, not our
sayings, are the demonstration which they are
willing to receive from us; and when they see
us building ourselves fine houses, and laying
out gardens ana batiis, and buying fields,
they are not willing to believe that we are
preparing for another sort of residence away
from our city.

"For if this were so," say they, "they
would turn to money all they have here, and
lay them up beforehand there;" and this
they divine from the things that are done in
this world. For so we see those who are very
rich getting themselves houses and fields and
all the rest, chiefly in those cities in which

a ['EAAr)»/«t, "Greeks." Kut the ecclesiastical use is correctly
given in the iraiislation. In the New Testament, the trrni was
equivalent to " < Icntilcs," as npposcd to Jews; but was afterwarils
applied to heathen as opposeu to Christians. Sec S()l'lHiCLK>,
i,refk Lexicon of the Koinan and liyzantine periods, sub x<oce.
-R.]


they are to stay. But we do the contrary;
and with all earnest zeal we get possession of
the earth, which we are soon after to leave;
giving up not money only, but even our very
blood for a few acres and tenements: while
for the purchase of Heaven we do not endure
to give even what is beyond our wants, and
this though we are to purchase it at a small
price, and to possess it forever, provided we
had once purchased it.

Therefore I say we shall suffer the utmost
punishment, departing thither naked and
poor; or rather it will not be for our own
poverty that we shall undergo these irremedi-
able calamities, but also for our making others
to be such as ourselves. For when heathens
see them that have partaken of so great
mysteries earnest about these matters, much
more will they cling themselves to the things
present. Wherefore even from this we are
heaping much fire upon our head. For when
we, who ought to teach them to despise all
things that appear, do ourselves most of all
urge them to the lust of these things; when
shall it be possible for us to be saved, having
to give account for the perdition of others?
Hearest thou not Christ say, that He left us
to be for salt and for lights in this world, in
order that we may both brace up"* those that
are melting in luxury, and enlighten them
that are darkened by the care of wealth ?
When therefore we even cast them into more
thorough darkness, and make them more dis-
solute, what hope shall we have of salvation ?
There is none at all; but wailing antl gnash-
ing our teeth, and bound hand and foot, we
shall depart into the fire of hell, after being
full well worn down by the cares of riches.

Considering then all these things, let us
loose the bands of such deceit, that we may
not at all fall into those things which deliver
us over to the unquenchable fire. For he
that is a slave to money, the chains both
here and there will have him continually
liable to them; but he that is rid of this
desire will attain to freedom from both.
Unto which that we also may attain, let us
break in pieces tiie grievous yt^kc of avarice,
and make ourselves wings towanl Heaven;
by the grace and love towrirds man of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory ami
might forever and ever. Amen.

1 [<'fri(r<frivyui^<i', The verb means " to bind ti^fht," uud is vari-
ously applicil. — k.]


8o


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIII.


HOMILY XIII.


Matt. IV. i.


Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of the devil.'


Then. When ? After the descent of the
Spirit, after the voice that was borne from
above, and said, " This is My Beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased." And what was
marvellous, it was of the Holy Spirit; for
this, he here saith, led Him up. For since
with a view to our instruction He both did
and underwent all things; He endures also
to be led up thither, and to wrestle against
the devil: in order that each of those who are
baptized, if after his baptism he have to en-
dure greater temptations, may not be troubled
as if the result were unexpected, but may
continue to endure all nobly, as though it
were happening in the natural course of
things.

Yea, for therefore thou didst take up arms,
not to be idle, but to fight. For this cause
neither doth God hinder the temptations as
they come on, first to teach thee that thou
art become much stronger; next, that thou
mayest continue modest, neither be exalted
even by the greatness of thy gifts, the temp-
tations having power to repress thee; more-
over, in order that that wicked demon, who is
for a while doubtful about thy desertion of
him, by the touchstone of temptations may
be well assured that thou hast utterly for-
saken and fallen from him; fourthly, that
thou mayest in this way be made stronger,
and better tempered than any steel; fifthly,
that thou mayest obtain a clear demonstra-
tion of the treasures entrusted to thee.

For the devil would not have assailed thee,
unless he had seen thee brought to greater
honor. Hence, for example, from the begin-
ning, he attacked Adam, because he saw him
m the enjoyment of great dignity. For this
reason he arrayed himself against Job, be-
cause he saw him crowned and proclaimed by
the God of all.

How then saith He, " Pray that ye enter
not into temptation."' For this cause he
doth not show thee Jesus simply going up,
but "led up" according to the principle of
the Economy; = signifying obscurely by this,
that we ought not of ourselves to leap upon
it, but being dragged thereto, to stand man-
fully.


I Matt. xxvi. 41.


2 Kara rhv \6yov rr)<; o'tKovofxiaf;,


And see whither the Spirit led Him up,
when He had taken Him; not into a city and
forum, but into a wilderness. That is. He
being minded to attract the devil, gives him a
handle not only by His hunger, but also by
the place. For then most especially doth the
devil assail, when he sees men left alone, and
by themselves. Thus did he also set upon
the woman in the beginning, having caught
her alone, and found her apart from iter hus-
band. Just as when he sees us with others
and banded together, he is not equally con-
fident, and makes no attack. Wherefore we
have the greatest need on this very account
to be flocking together continually, that we
may not be open to the devil's attacks.

2, Having then found Him in the wilder-
ness, and in a pathless wilderness (for that
the wilderness was such, Mark hath declared,
saying, that He " was with the wild beasts" 3),
behold with how much craft he draws near,
and wickedness; and for what sort of oppor-
tunity he watches. For not in his fast, but
in his hunger he approaches Him; to instruct
thee how great a good fasting is, and how it
is a most powerful shield against the devil,
and that after the font,'* men should give
themselves up, not to luxury and drunken-
ness, and a full table, but to fasting. For,
for this cause even He fasted, not as needing
it Himself, but to instruct us. Thus, since
our sins before the fonf* were brought in by
serving the belly: much as if any one who had
made a sick man whole were to forbid his
doing those things, from which the distemper
arose; so we see here likewise that He Him-
self after the' font brought in fasting. For
indeed both Adam by the incontinence of
the belly was cast out of paradise; and the
flood in Noah's time, this produced; and this
brought down the thunders on Sodom. For
although there was also a charge of whorei
dom, nevertheless from this grew the root of
each of those punishments; which Ezekiel also
signified when he said, " But this was the in-
iquity of Sodom, that she waxed wanton in
pride and in fullness of bread, and in abun-
dance of luxury." s Thus the Jews also per-


3 Mark i. 13.

4 [Aofdi'Tp, " laver ;" here by metonymy for the rite of bap-
tism.—R.]

5 Eziik. xvi. 49.


Homily XIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


8l


petrated the greatest wickedness, being driven
upon transgression by tlieir drunkenness and
delicacy."

On triis account tlien even He too fasts
forty days, pointing out to us the medicines
of our salvation; yet proceeds no further, lest
on the other hand, through the exceeding
greatness of the miracle the truth of His
Economy = should be discredited. For as it
is, this cannot be, seeing that both Moses
and Elias, anticipating Him, could advance
to so great a length of time, strengthened by
the power of God. And if He had proceeded
farther, from this among other things His
assumption of our flesh would have seemed
incredible to many.

Having then fasted forty days and as many
nights,

" He was afterwards an hungered ;3 " afford-
ing him a point to lay hold of and approach,
that by actual conflict He might show how to
prevail and be victorious. Just so do wrest-
lers also: when teaching their pupils how to
prevail and overcome, they voluntarily in the
lists engage with others, to afford these in
the persons of their antagonists tlie means of
seeing and learning the mode of conquest.
Which same thing then also took place. For
it being His will to draw him on so far, He
both made His hunger known to him, and
awaited his approach, and as He waited for
him, so He dashed him to earth, once, twice,
and three times, with such ease as became
Him.

3. But that we may not, by hurrying over
these victories, mar your profit, let us begin
from the first assault, and examine each with
exact care.

Thus, after He was an hungered, it is said,

"The temi)ter came, and said unto Him,
If Thou be Son of God, command that these
stones be made bread,"*

For, because he had heard a voice borne
from above, and saying, "This is My be-
loved Son;" and had heard also John bear-
ing so large witness concerning Him, and
after that saw Him an hungered; he was
thenceforth in perplexity, and neither could
believe that He was a mere man, because of
the things spoken concerning Him; nor on
the other hand receive it that He was Son of
riod, seeing Him as he did in hunger.
Whence being in i)erplexity he utters aml)ig-
uous sounds. And much as when coming to
Adam at the beginning, he feigns things that
are not, that he may learn the things that

' Isa. V. 11, 12.

3 oinofo^ia. that is, the asMiinption nf hiiinunily. [Jimtin Nfar-
tyrand iKniitiuASo use the term ; sec reds, in Sui-HuCLKS, Orttk
Ltxicon, etc., sub vmc. — R.]

3 Malt. iv. J. 4 Matt. iv. 3.

C


are; even so here also, not knowing clearly
the unutterable mystery of the Econom}-, and
who He may be that is come, he attempts to
weave other nets, whereby he thought to
know that which was hidden and obscure.
And what saith he ? *' If Thou be Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread,"
He said not, because thou art an hungered,
but, *' if Thou be Son of God; " thinking to
cheat Him with his compliments. Where-
fore also he was silent touching the hunger,
that he might not seem to be alleging it, and
upbraiding Him. For not knowing the great-
ness of the Economy which was going on, he
supposed this to be a reproach to Him.
Wherefore flattering Him craftily, he makes
mention of His dignity only.

What then saith Christ ? To put down his
pride, and to signify that there was nothing
shameful in what had happened, nor unbe-
coming His wisdom; that which the other had
passed over in silence to flatter Him, He
brings forward and sets it forth, saying,

" Man shall not live by bread alone." s

So that He begins with the necessity of the
belly. But mark, I pray thee, the craft of
that wicked demon, and whence he begins his
wrestlings, and how he doth not forget his
proper art. For by what means he cast out
also the first man, and encompassed him with
thousands of other evils, with the same
means here likewise he weaves his deceit; I
mean, with incontinence of the belly. So too
even now one may hear many foolish ones
say their bad words by thousands because of
the belly. But Christ, lo show that the virtu-
ous man is not compelled even by this tyranny
to do anything that is unseemly, first hun-
gers, then submits not to what is enjoined
Him; teaching us to obey the devil in notii-
ing. Thus, because the first man did hereby
both offend God. and transgress the law, as
much and more doth He teach thee: — though
it be no transgression which he commands,
not even so to obey.

And why say I, " transgression " ? " Why,
even thougli sometliing expedient be sug-
gested by the devils,' do not thou," saith
He, " even so give heed unto tliem." Thus,
for instance, He stopped the mouths of those
devils'* also, proclaiming Him Son of God,
And Paul too a;^ain' rebuked them, crying
this self-same thing; and yet what they said
was i^rofitable; but he more abundantly dis-
honoring them, and obstructing their plot
against us, drove them away even wlien doc-
trines of s.'ilvalion were preacheil by them,


S Mntl. iv. 4.

* ( Here •• demiiiis " ■•> the more correct rendering. — R.]

7 Acta xvi. 18.


82


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIII.


yea, whatever we suffer, never to fall


closing up their mouths, and bidding them
be silent.

And therefore neither in this instance did
He consent to what was said. But what saith
He ? " Man shall not live by bread alone. "
Now His meaning is like this: " God is able
even by a word to nourish the hungry man; "
bringing him a testimony out of the ancient
Scripture, and teaching us, though we hun-
ger,
away from our Lord

But if a man say, "still He should have
displayed Himself; '' I would ask him, with
what intent, and for what reason ? For not
at all that he might believe did the other so
speak, but that he might, as he thought,
over-argue ' Him into unbelief. Since the
first of mankind were in this way beguiled
and over-argued by him, not putting earnest
faith in God. For the contrary of what God
had said he promised them, and puffed them
up with vain hopes, and brought them to un-
belief, and so cast them out of the blessings
they actually possessed. But Christ signifies
Himself not to have consented, either to him
then or afterwards to the Jews his partisans,
in their demand of signs: invariably instruct-
ing us, whatever we may have power to do,
yet to do nothing vainly and at random; nor
even when want urges to obey the devil.

4, What then doth ^is accursed one ?
Overcome, and unable to persuade Him to do
his bidding, and that when pressed by such
violent hunger, he proceeds to another thing,
saying,

"If Thou be Son of God, cast Thyself
down; for it is written, He shall give His
angels charge concerning Thee, and in their
hands they shall bear Thee up." ^

What can the reason be, that at each temp-
tation He adds this, "If Tliou be Son of
God ? " Much the same as he did in that
former case, he doth also at this time. That
is, as he then slandered God, saying, " In
the day ye eat, your eyes shall be opened; " ^
thereby intending to signify, that they were
beguiled and overreached, and had received
no benefit; even so in this case also he insin-
uates this same thing, saying, "in vain God
hath called Thee Son, and hath beguiled
Thee by His gift; for, if this be not so, afford
us some clear proof that Thou art of that
power." Then, because Christ had reasoned
with him from Scripture, he also brings in a
testimony of the prophet.

How then doth Christ? He is not indig-
nant, nor provoked, but with that extreme
gentleness He reasons with him again from


1 [cAtyfrj, "might convince," " argue over." — R.]

2 Matt. iv. 6. 3 Gen.


111. 5-


the Scriptures, saying, " Thou shalt not tempt
the Lord thy God:"" teaching us that we
must overcome the devil, not by miracles,
but by forbearance and long-suffering, and
that we should do nothing at all for display
and vainglory.

But mark thou his folly, even by the very
testimony which he produced. For while the
testimonies cited by the Lord were both of
them spoken with exceeding fitness: his, on
the other hand, were chance and random say-
ings, neither did he bring forward on his part
that which applied to the matter in hand.
For that it is written, " He shall give His
angels charge concerning Thee," this surely
is not advice to dash and toss one's self down
headlong; and moreover, this was not so
much as spoken concerning the Lord. How-
ever, this for the time He did not expose,
although there was both insult in his manner
of speech, and great inconsistency. For of
God's Son no man requires these things: but
to cast one's self down is the part of the
devil, and of demons. Whereas God's part
is to raise up even them that are down. And
if He ought to have displayed His own
power, it would not have been by casting and
tossing Himself down at random, but by sav-
ing others. But to cast ourselves down preci-
pices, and into pits, pertains properly to his
troop. Thus, for example, the juggler among
thern doth everywhere.

But Christ, even when these things are
said, doth not yet reveal Himself, but as man
for a while discourses with him. For the
sayings,
alone; "

Lord thy God,'' suited one not greatly reveal
ing Himself, but representing Himself as one
of the many.

But marvel thou not, if he in reasoning
with Christ oftentimes turn himself about.
For as pugilists, when they have received
deadly blows, reel about, drenched in much
blood, and blinded; even so he too, darkened
by the first and the second blow, speaks at
random what comes uppermost: and proceeds
to his third assault.

5. "And he leadeth Him up into a high
mountain, and showeth Him all the king-
doms, and saith. All these things will I give
Thee, if Thou wilt fall down and worship me.
Then saith He, Get thee behind me, Satan,
for it is written. Thou shalt worship the Lord
thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve." ^

For since he was now come to sinning
against the Father, saying, that all that is the
Father's was his, and was endeavoring to


" Man shall not live by bread
and, "Thou shalt not tempt the


4 Matt. iv. 7.


5 Matt. iv. 8-10.


Homily XIII.J


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


83


make himself out to be God, as artificer of
the universe; He then rebuked him: but not
even then with vehemence, but simply, " Get
thee hence, Satan;'' which itself had in it
something of command rather than of re-
buke. For as soon as He had said to him,
" Get thee hence," He caused him to take to
flight; since he brought not against Him any
otner temptations.

And how saith Luke, that "he ended all
temptation."' To me it seems that in men-
tioning the chief of the temptations, he had
spoken of all, as though the rest too were
included in these. For the things that form
the substance of innumerable evils are these:
to be a slave to the belly, to do anything for
vainglory, to be in subjection to the madness
of riches Which accordingly that accursed
one considering, set last the most powerful of
all, I mean the desire of more: and though
originally, and from the beginning, he was
travailing to come to this, yet he kept it for
the last, as being of more force than the rest.
For in fact this is the manner of his wrest-
ling, to apply those things last, which seem
more likely to overthrow. And this sort 6t
thing he did with respect to Job likewise.
Wherefore in this instance too, having begun
with the motives which seem to be viler and
weaker, he goes on to the more prevailing.

How then are we to get the better of him ?
In the way which Christ hath taught us, by
fleeing to God for refuge; and neither to be
depressed in famine, as believing in God who
is able to feed even with a word; nor amidst
whatever good things we may receive to tempt
Him who gave them, but to be content with
the glory which is from above, making no
account of that which is of men, and on every
occasion to despise wliat is beyond our need.
For nothing doth so make us fall under the
power of the devil, as longing for more, and
loving covetousness. And this we may see
even by what is done now. For now also
there are those who say, "All these things
will we give thee, if thou wilt fall down and
worshij); '' who are indeed men by nature,
but have become his instruments. Since at
that time too he approached Him, not by
himself only, but also by others. Which
Luke also was declaring, when he said, that
"he departed from Him for a season;"^
showing that hereafter he approached Him
by his i)roper instruments.

• [Luke iv. 13. The form of the paiuage is chanKcd bv Chry-
sostoni, but the words nr<- identical. The R. V. renders : "And
when the devil had coniplrteil every temptution." Chrysostom
puts the emphasis on the word " every," as his argument shows.

^ I.ulce iv. 13. [In I.ukc iv. 1 <, the reading; is a;^^! Kaipov, hut
Chrysostom has «iut xaipou, apparently ai ('ei)tin»( the sense K'^'f n
in the k. V. margin : " until u sciuton, ' which has much tu recom-
mend It. — K.]


"And, behold, angels came and ministered
unto Him." 3 For when the assault was
going on, He suffered them not to appear,
that He might not thereby drive away the
prey; but after He had convicted him in all
points, and caused him to take to flight, then
they appear: that thou also mayest learn,
that after thy victories which are copied from
His, angels will receive thee also, applauding
thee, and waiting as guards on thee in all
things. Thus, for example, angels take Laz-
arus ■♦ away with them, after the furnace of
poverty and of famine and of all distress.
For as I have already said, Christ on this
occasion exhibits many things, which we our-
selves are to enjoy.

6. Forasmuch then as all these things have
been done for thee, do thou emulate and
imitate His victory. And should any one ap-
proach thee of those who are that evil spirit's
servants, and savor the things that be of him,
upbraiding thee and saying, " If thou art
marvellous and great, remove the mountain; "
be not troubled, nor confounded, but answer
with meekness, and say some such thing as
thou hast heard thy Lord say: "Thou shall
not tempt the Lord thy God."

Or should he, offering glory and dominion,
and an endless amount of wealth, enjoin thee
to worship him, do thou stand again manfully.
For neither did th'e devil deal so with the
common Lord of us all only, but every day
also he brings these his machinations to bear
on each of His servants, not in mountains
only and in wildernesses, nor by himself: but
in cities likewise, in market-places, and in
courts of justice, and by means of our own
kindred, even men. What then must we do?
Disbelieve him altogether, and stop our ears
against him, and hate him when he flatters,
and when he proffers more, then so much the
more shun him. Because in Eve's case also,
when he was most lifting her up with hopes,
then he cast her down, and did her tlie great-
est evils. Yea, for he is an implacable
enemy, and hath taken up against us sucli war
as excludes all treaty. And we are not so
earnest for our own salvation, as he is for
our ruin. Let us then sinin him, not with
words only, but also with works; not in mind
only, but also in deed; and let us do none of
the things which he approves, for so shall we
do all tliose which God apj)roves. Yea, for
he makes also many promises, not that he
may give, but that he may take. He i)roin-
ises by rapine, that he iray dejirivc us of the
kingtiom, ami of righteousness; anil sets
treasures in the earth as a kind of gins or


.1 Matt. iv. II.


4 Luke xvi. 33.


84


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIII.


traps, that he may deprive us both of these
and of the treasures in Heaven, and he would
have us be rich here, that we may not be rich
there.

And if he should not be able by wealth to
cast us out of our portion there, he comes
another way, the way of poverty; as he did
with respect to Job. That is, when fie saw
that wealth did him no harm, he weaves his
toils by poverty, expecting on that side to get
the better of him. But what could be more
foolish than this ? Since he that hath been
able to bear wealth with moderation, much
more will he bear poverty with manliness;
and he who desires not riches when present,
neither will he seek them when absent; even
as that blessed man did not, but by his pov-
erty, on the other hand, he became still more
glorious. For of his possessions that wicked
demon had power indeed to deprive him, but
his love toward God he not only could not
take away, but made it even stronger, and
when he had stripped him of all, he caused
him to abound with more blessings; where-
fore also he was in perplexity. For the more
plagues he brought upon him, the more
mighty he then saw him become. And there-
fore, as you know, when he had gone through
all, and had thoroughly tried his metal,' be-
cause he made no way, he ran to his old
weapon, the woman, and assumes a mask of
concern, and makes a tragical picture of his
calamities in most pitiable tone, and feigns
that for removal of his evil he is introducing
that deadly counsel.^ But neither so did he
prevail; nay, for his bait was perceived by
that wondrous man, who with much wisdom
stopped the mouth of the woman speaking at
his instigation.

Just so we likewise must act: though it be
a brother, a tried friend, a wife, whom you
will of those nearest to us, whom he hath en-
tered into, and so utters something not con-
venient,^ we must not receive the counsel for
the person of him who so speaks, but for the
deadly counsel turn away from the speaker.
Since in fact now also he doth many such
things, and puts before him a mask of sym-
pathy, and while he seems to be friendly, he
is instilling his pernicious words, more griev-
ous than poisons. Thus, as to flatter for evil
is his part, so to chastise for our good, is
God's.

7. Let us not then be deceived, neither let
us by every mean seek after the life of ease.
For "whom the Lord loveth," it is said,
" He chasteneth."'* Wherefore when we en-
joy prosperity, living in wickedness, then

I SiaKdnSuiviaai; . 2 " Curse God and die," Job ii. 9.

3 [rt raiv ov TTpoirjKOVTmv. — R.] 4 Heb. xii. 6.


most of all should we grieve. For we ought
ever to be afraid while we sin, but especially
when we suffer no ill. For when God exacts
our penalties by little and little, he makes
our payment for these things easy to us; but
when he is long-suffering for each of our
negligences. He is storing us up, if we con-
tinue in such things, unto a great punish-
ment. Since, if for the well-doers affliction
be a necessary thing, much more for them
that sin.

See for instance how much long-suffering
Pharaoh met with, and afterwards underwent
for all most extreme punishment: in how
many things Nebuchadnezzar offended, yet
at the end expiated all; and the rich man,
because he had suffered no great ill here, for
this very cause chiefly became miserable, for
that having lived in luxury in the present life,
he departed to pay the penalty of all these
things there, where he could not obtain any-
thing at all to soothe his calamity.

Yet for all this some are so cold and sense-
less, as to be always seeking only the things
that are here, and uttering those absurd say-
mgs, " Let me enjoy all things present for a
time, and then I will consider about things
out of sight: I will gratify my belly, I will be
a slave to pleasures, I will make full use of
the present life; give me to-day, and take to-
morrow." Oh excess of folly ! Why, where-
in do they who talk so differ from goats and
swine ? For if the prophet ^ permits not them
to be accounted men, that " neigh after their
neighbor's wife," who shall blame us for es-
teeming these to be goats and swine, and
more insensible than asses, by whom those
things are held uncertain, which are more
evident than what we see ? Why, if thou
believest nothing else, attend to the devils in
their scourging, to them who had our hurt
for their object in all their practice, both in
word and deed. For thou wilt not, I am
sure, contradict this, that they do all to in-
crease our security, and to do away with the
fear of hell, and to breed disbelief of the
tribunals in that world. Nevertheless, they
that are so minded, by cryings and wailings
do oftentimes proclaim the torments that are
there.* Whence is it then that they so speak,
and utter things contrary to their own will ?
From no other cause, but because they are
under the pressure of stronger compulsion.
For they would have not been minded of
their own accord to confess either that they


5 Jerem. v. 8.

6 St. Cyril (about A. D. 350), Catech. x. 19, says, " The demons
who even to this day are being driven out by the faithful bear
witness to Christ." St. Augustin (a. d. ^26), in many places speaks
of the like miracle as no unusual thing in his time, particularly at
th£ tombs of the martyrs, De Civ. Dei. x. 22 ; xxii. 8 ; contra
Lit. Fetil. ii. 55.


Homily XIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


8s


are tormented by dead men, or that they at
all .suffer anything dreadful.

Wherefore now have I said this ? Because
evil demons confess hell, who would fain have
hell disbelieved; but thou w-ho enjoyest honor
so great, and hast been a partaker in unutter-
able mysteries, dost not so much as imitate
them, but art become more hardened even
than they.

8. "But who," one will say, "hath come
from those in hell, and hath declared these
things ? " Why, who hath arrived here from j
heaven, and told us that there is a God who
created all things ? And whence is it clear
that we have a soul ? For plainly, if thou art
to believe the things only that are in sight,
both God and angels, and mind and soul, will
be matter of doubting to thee, and in this
way thou wilt find all the doctrines of the
truth gone.

Yet surely, if thou art willing to believe
what is evident, the things invisible ought to
be believed by thee, rather than those which
are seen. Even though what I say be a par-
adox, nevertheless it is true, and among men
of understanding is fully acknowledged. For
whereas the eyes are often deceived, not in
the things unseen only (for of those they do
not so much as take cognizance), but even
in those which men think they actually see,
distance and atmosphere, and absence of
mind, and anger, and care, and ten thousand
other things impeding their accuracy; the
reasoning power of the soul on the other
hand, if it receive the light of the divine
Scriptures, will prove a more accurate, an
unerring standard of realities.

Let us not then vainly deceive ourselves,
neither in addition to the carelessness of our
life, which is the offspring of such doctrines
as these, heap up to ourselves, for the very
doctrines themselves, a more grievous fire.
For if there be no judgment, and we are not
to give account of our deeds, neither shall
we receive rewards for our labors. Observe
which way your blaspiiemies tend, when ye
say, that God, who is righteous, and loving,
and mild, overlooks so great labors and toils.
And how can this be reasonable ? Why, if
by nothing else, at any rate by the circum-
stances of thine own house, I bid thee weigh
these things, and tiien thou wilt see the
absurdity. For tliough thou wert thyself
savage and inhuman l)eyond measure, and
wilder than the very wild beasts, thou WDuId-
est not choose at thy death to leave unhon-
ored the servant that had been affectionate to
thee, but rcquitest liim both with freetlom,
and with a gift of money; and forasmuch as
in thine own person hereafter, having de-


parted, thou wilt be able to do him no good,
thou givest charge concerning him to the
future inheritors of thy substance, beseechino^,
exhorting, doing everything, so that he may
not remain unrewarded.

So then thou, who art evil, art so kind and
loving towards thy servant; and will the In-
finite Goodness, that is, God, the Unspeaka-
ble Love to man, the kindness so vast: will
He overlook and leave uncrowned His own
serv^ants, Peter and Paul, and James, and
John, those who every day for His sake suf-
fered hunger, were bound, were scourged,
were drowned in the sea, were given up to
wild beasts, were dying, were suffering so
great things as we cannot so much as reckon
up? And whereas the Olympic judge pro-
claims and crowns the victor, and the master
rewards the servant, and the king the sol-
dier, and each in general him that hath done
him service, with what good things he can;
shall God alone, after those so great toils and
labors, repay them with no good thing great
or small .'' shall those just and pious men,
who have walked in every virtue, lie in the
same state with adulterers, and parricides,
and manslayers, and violators of tombs ?
And in what way can this be reasonable ?
Since, if there be nothing after our departure
hence, and our interests reach no further
than things present, those are in the same
case with these, or rather not so much as in
the same. For what though hereafter, as
thou sayest, they fare alike ? yet here, the
whole of their time, the wicked have been at
ease, the righteous in chastisement. And
this what sort of tyrant, what savage and re-
lentless man did ever so devise, touching his
own servants and subjects ?

Didst thou mark the exceeding greatness
of the absurdity, and in what tiiis argument
issues ? Therefore if thou wilt not any other
way, yet by these reasonings be instructed to
rid thyself of this wicked thouglit, and to flee
from vice, and cleave to tlie toils whicti end
in virtue: and then shalt thou know certainly
that our concerns are not bounded by tlie
l^resent life. And if any one ask tliee, " Who
hath come from thence and brought word
what is there?" say unto him, '"of men not
one; for surely he would have been often dis-
believed, as vaunting, and exagger;iting the
tiling; but tiie LortI of the angels hath
brought word with exactness of all those
tilings. What need then have we of any man,
seeing He, that will demand account of us,
crieth aloud every day, that He hath both
made ready a hell, and prepared a kingdom;
and affords us clear demonstrations of these
things ? For if He were not hereafter to


86


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIV.


judge, neither would he have exacted any
penalty here.

9. "Well, but as to this very point, how
can it be reasonable ? that of the wicked some
should be punished, others not ? I mean, if
God be no respecter of persons, as surely He
is not, why can it be that of one He exacts
a penalty, but another He suffers to go away
unpunished ? Why, this is again more inex-
plicable than the former."

Yet if you are willing to hear what we say
with candor, we will solve this difficulty also.

What then is the solution ? He neither
exacts penalty of all here, lest thou shouldest
despair of the resurrection, and lose all ex-
pectation of the judgment, as though all were
to give account here; nor doth He suffer all
to go away unpunished, lest on the other hand
thou shouldest account all to be without His
providence; but He both punishes and ab-
stains from punishing: by those whom He
punishes, signifying that in that world also
He will exact a penalty of such as are unpun-
ished here; and by those whom He doth not
punish, working upon thee to believe that
there is some fearful trial after our departure
hence.

But if He were altogether indifferent about
our former deeds, He neither would have
punished any here, nor have conferred bene-
fits. But now thou seest Him for thy sake
stretching out the heaven, kindling the sun,
founding the earth, pouring forth the sea,
expanding the air, and appointing for the
moon her courses, setting unchangeable laws
for the seasons of the years, and all other
things too performing their own courses ex-
actly at a sign from Him. For both our
nature, and that of creatures irrational, of
them that creep, that walk, that fly, that
swim, in marshes, in springs, in rivers, in
mountains, in forests, in houses, in the air, in


plains; plants also, and seeds, and trees,
both wild and cultivated, both fruitful and
unfruitful; and all things in general, moved
by that unwearied Hand, make provision for
our life, affording to us of themselves their
ministry, not for our need only, but also for
our feeling of high station.'

Seeing therefore order so great and fair
(and yet we have not mentioned so much as
the least portion thereof), darest thou say,
that He who for thy sake hath wrougnt
things so many and great, will overlook thee
in the most critical points, and suffer thee
when dead to lie with the asses and swine:
and that having honored thee with so great a
gift, that of godliness, whereby He hath even
equalled thee with the angels. He will over-
look thee after thy countless labors and toils ?

And how can this be reasonable ? Why,
these things, if we be silent, " the stones will
immediately cry out;"^ so plain are they,
and manifest, and more lucid than the sun-
beam itself.

Having then considered all these things,
and having convinced our own soul, that after
our departure hence, we shall both stand at
the fearful judgment-seat, and give account
of all that we have done, and shall bear our
penalty, and submit to our sentence, if we
continue in our negligences; and shall receive
crowns and unutterable blessings, if we are
willing to give a little heed to ourselves; let
us both stop the mouths of them who gainsay
these things, and ourselves choose the way of
virtue; that with due confidence departing to
that tribunal, we may attain unto the good
things that are promised us, by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory and dominion, now
and ever, world without end. Amen.


^ (jtlkpTllJiLaV.


2 Luke xix. 40.


HOMILY XIV.


Matt, IV. 12.


" Now when Jesus had heard that John was delivered up. He departed into Galilee.'


I. Wherefore doth He depart? Again
instructing us not to go to meet temptations,'
but to give place and withdraw ourselves.
For it is no reproach, the not casting one's
self into danger, but the failing to stand man-


fully when fallen into it. To teach us this
accordingly, and to soothe the envy of the
Jews, He retires to Capernaum; at once ful-
filling the prophecy,^ and making haste to
catch the teachers of the world: for 'they, as


' [tois Treipao-iuoit ; here including " trials " of every kind. — R.l ] 2 Matt. iv. 14, and Is. ix. i, 2.


Homily XIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


^7


you know, were abiding there, following their
craft.

But mark, I pray thee, how in every case
when He is about to depart unto the Gentiles,
He hath the occasion given Him by Jews.
For so in this instance, by plotting against
His forerunner, and casting him into prison,
they thrust out Christ into the Galilee of the
Gentiles. For to show that He neither speaks
of the Jewish nation by a part of it, nor sig-
nifies obscurely all the tribes; mark how the
Prophet distinguishes that place, saying " The
land of Nephthalim, by the way of the sea,'
beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles, the
people which sat in darkness, saw great
light: "^ by darkness here not meaning that
which is sensible, but men's errors and un-
godliness. Wherefore he also added, "They
which sat in the region and shadow of death,
to them light is sprung up." For that thou
mightest learn that neither the light nor the
darkness which he speaks of are sensible, in
discoursing of the light, he called it not
merely light, but " a great light," which else-
where he expresses by the word, True:^ and
in describing the darkness, he termed it, "a
shadow of death."

Then implying that they did not of them-
selves seek and find, but that God showed
Himself to them from above, he saith to
them, "Light is sprung up;" that is, the
light of itself sprang up and shone forth: it
was not that they first ran to the light. For
in truth the condition of men was at the worst
l^efore Christ's coming. Since they more
than "walked in darkness;" they '' sat in
darkness;" a kind of sign that they did not
even hope to be delivered. For as persons
not even knowing where to put a step forward,
so they sat, overtaken by the darkness, not
being able so much as to stand any more.

2. " From that time Jesus began to preach
and to say, Repent; for the kingdom of
iieaven is at hand."

" From that time: " what time ? After John
was cast into prison. And wherefore did He
not preach to them from the beginning?
Indeed what occasion for John at all, wlien
the witness of His works was proclaiming
Him ?

That hence also thou mightest learn His
dignity; namely, that as the Fathers, so He
loo hath prophets; to which puri)ose Zacha-
rias also spake; " And thou, child, slialt be
called a prophet of the Higliest." * .And that
he might leave no occasion to tlie shaiuelcss


■ f R. v., " Towjird the st-a, (7< »v/-, the way of the sra." The
text IS cited accurately in the lluiiiily.'-k.|

'J Miitt. iv. 15, 16 • sec Is. ix. 1, J. I John i. 9.

4 Luke i. 76.


Jews; which motive He Himself alleged, say-
i'lg) " John came neither eating nor drinking,
and they say, he hath a devil. The Son of
Man came eating and drinking, and they
say. Behold a man gluttonous and a winebib-
ber, a friend of publicans and sinners. But
wisdom is justified of her children." ^

And moreover it was necessary that what
concerned Him should be spoken by another
first and not by Himself. For if even after
both testimonies and demonstrations so many
and so great, they sad, "Thou bearest re-
cord of Thyself, Thy record is not true: "*
had He, without John's saying anytliing,
come into the midst, and first borne record
Himself; what would they not have said.?
For this cause, neither did He preach before
John, nor did He work miracles, until John
was cast into prison; lest in this way the
multitude should be divided. Therefore also
John did no miracle at all; that by this
means also might give over the multitude to
Jesus, His miracles drawing them unto Him.

Again, if even after so many divine precau-
tions,' John's disciples, both before and after
his imprisonment, were jealously disposed
towards Him, and the people too suspected
not Him but John to be the Christ; what
would not the result have been, had none of
these things taken place ? For this cause
both ALatthew distinctly notes, that " from
that time He began to preach;" and when
He began His preaching. He Himself also
taught this same doctrine, which the other
used to preach; and no word as yet concern-
ing Himself doth the doctrine which he
preached say. Because it was for the time a
great thing even for this to be received, for-
asmuch as they had not as yet the proper
opinion about Him. Therefore also at the
beginning He puts notiiing severe or griev-
ous, as the other did, mentioning an axe. and
a tree cut down; a fan, antl a tlireshing-floor,
and unquencliable fire; but //is prehuies are
gracious: the Heavens and the kingdom there
are the gootl tidings which he declares to His
hearers.

3. "And walking by the sea of Galilee, He
saw two brethren, Simon that was surnanied
Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net
into the sea; for they were fishers. .And He
saitii unt(j them, Come ye alter me, and I
will make you fishers of men. .Ami they left
their nets, and followed Him.""

And yet John saith that they were called


5 Malt. xi. 18, ly. ri'hp c'iintion iHfruin Matthew, not l.ulcc.
hut the last cIuum: in the K. V. reads: ".-Xiid wisdom isiustilicd
hy her work*." Comp. however, the mari'iii and I.uke vii. 15.
K.f

'' 7<>hn viii. 11. 7 roaovTuf otxufuuiitftk'Twf.

•'■ Alatt. Iv. id, 19.


88


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIV.


in another manner. Whence it is evident
that this was a second call; and from many
things one may perceive this. For there it
is said, that they came to Him when "John
was not yet cast into prison; " but here, after
he was in confinement. And there Andrew
calls Peter, but here Jesus calls both. And
John saith, Jesus seeing Simon coming, saith,
" Thou art Simon, the Son of Jona, thou
shalt be called Cephas, which is by interpre-
tation, a stone."' But Matthew saith that
he was already called by that name; for his
words are, "Seeing Sim.on that was called
Peter." And from the place whence they
were called, and from many other things, one
may perceive this; and from their ready
obedience, and abandonment of all. For
now they were well instructed beforehand.
Thus, in the other case, Andrew is seen com-
ing into His house, and hearing many things;
but here, having heard one bare word, they
followed immediately. Since neither was it
unnatural^ for them to follow Him at the be-
ginning, and then leave Him again and return
anew to their own craft, when they saw both
John thrown into prison, and Himself depart-
ing. Accordingly you see that He finds them
actually fishing. But He neither forbad them
at the first when minded to withdraw, nor
having withdrawn themselves, did He let
them go altogether; but He gave way when
they started aside from Him, and comes
again to win them back; which kind of thing
is the great point in fishing. ^

But mark both their faith, and their obedi-
ence. For though they were in the midst of
their work (and ye know how greedy a thing
fishing is), when they heard His command,
they delayed not, they procrastinated not,
they said not, " let us return home, and con-
verse with our kinsfolk," but "they forsook
all and followed," even as Elisha did to
Elijah"'' Because such is the obedience
which Christ seeks of us, as that we delay not
even a moment of time, though something
absolutely most needful should vehemently
press on us. Wherefore also when some
other had come unto Him, and was asking
leave to bury his own father, ^ not even this
did He permit him to do: to signify that
before all we ought to esteem the following
of Himself.

But if thou should say, "the promise is
very great; " even for this do I most admire
them, for that when they had not as yet seen
any sign, they believed in so great a reach of
promise, and accounted all but second to that


J John i. 42.

3 /xe-yicTTO? TpoTTO? aKeia^,

S Matt. viii. 21, 22.


2 [" it was natural."— R."l
4 I Kings xix. 20, 21.


attendance. And this, because they believed
that by what words they were caught, by the
same they would be able to catch others also.

To these, then, such was His promise: but
to James and John He saith no such thing.
For the obedience of those that had gone be-
fore had by this time paved the way for these.
And besides they had also heard many things
before concerning Him.

A nd see how he doth with exact care inti-
mate unto us their poverty also: in that He
found them sewing up their nets. So exceed-
ing great was their poverty, that they were
mending what was worn out, not being able
to buy others. And this too was for the time
no small proof of virtue, their bearing pov-
erty with ease, their supporting themselves
by honest labor, their being bound one to
another by the power of love, their having
their father with them, and attending upon
them.

4. When therefore He had caught them,
then He begins in their presence to work
miracles, by His deeds confirming the words
of John concerning Him. And He was con-
tinually frequenting their synagogues, even
by this instructing them that He was not a
sort of adversary of God and deceiver, but
that He was come in accordance with the
Father.

And while frequenting them. He did not
preach only, but also showed forth miracles.
And this, because on every occasion, when-
soever anything is done strange and surpris-
ing, and any polity is introduced, God is wont
to work miracles, as pledges of his power,
which He affords to them that are to receive
His laws. Thus, for instance, when He was
about to make man, He created a whole
world, and then gave him that law which he
had in Paradise. And when He was to give
laws to Noah, He showed forth anew great
miracles, in that He reduced again the whole
creation to its elements,^ and made that fear-
ful sea to prevail for a full year; and in that,
amid so great a tempest. He preserved that
righteous man. And in the time of Abraham
too He vouchsafed many signs; as his victory
in the war, the plague upon Pharaoh, his de-
liverance from dangers. And when about to
legislate for the Jews, He showed forth those
marvellous and great prodigies, and then gave
the law. Just so in this case also, being to
introduce a certain high polity, and to tell
them what they had never heard, by the dis-
play of the miracles He confirms what He
saith.

Thus because the kingdom He was preach-


Homily XIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


89


ing appeared not, by the things that appear,
He makes it, though invisible, manifest.
And mark the evangelist's care to avoid


wickedness of the soul, is shown both by him
that had the palsy thirty and eight years, and
by him that was let down through the roof,


superfluity of words; ' how he tells us not of and by Cain also before these; and from


every one of them that are healed, but in a
few words speeds over showers of miracles."

For "they brought unto Hun," saith he,
"all that were sick with divers diseases, and
torments, and those which were possessed
with devils, and those which were lunatic, and
those that had the palsy, and He healed
them."

But our inquiry is this; why it can have
been that He demanded faith of none of
them ? For He said not, what we find Him
saying after this, " Believe ye that I am able
to do this ? " 3 because He had not as yet
given proof of His power. And besides, the
very act of approaching Him, and of bringing
others to Him, exhibited no common faith.
For they brought them even from far; where-
as they would never have brought them, un-
less tkey had persuaded themselves of great
thiags concerning Him.

Now then, let us too follow Him; for we
also have many diseases of our soul, and
these especially He would fain heal. Since
with this intent He corrects that other sort,
that He may banish these out of our soul.

5. Let us therefore come unto Him, and
let us ask nothing pertaining to this life, but
rather remission of sins. For indeed He
gives it even now, if we be in earnest. Since
as then " His fame went out into Syria," so
now iifto the whole world. And they indeed
ran together on hearing that He healed per-
sons possessed: and thou, after having much
more and greater experience of His power,
dost thou not rouse thyself and run ?

But whereas they left both country, and
friends, and kinsfolk; endurest thou not so
much as to leave thy house for the sake of
drawing near, and obtaining far greater
things? Or rather we do not require of thee
so much as this, but leave thy evil habits
only, and thou canst easily be made whole, lliine offenses in particular, that thou maycst


many other things likewise one may perceive
this. Let us do away then with tne well-
spring of our evils, and all the channels of
our diseases will be stayed. For the disease
is not palsy only, but also our sin; and this
more than that, by how much a soul is better
than a body.

Let us therefore now also draw nigh unto
Him; let us entreat Him that He would brace
our paralyzed soul, and leaving all things
that pertain to this life, let Us take account of
the things spiritual only. Or if thou cleave
unto these also, yet think of them after the
otlier.

Neither must thou think lightly of it, be-
cause thou hast no pain in sinning; rather
on this very account most of all do thou
lament, that thou feelest not the anguisii of
thine offenses. For not because sin bites not,
doth this come to pass, but because the of-
fending soul is insensible. Regard with this
view them that have a feeling of their own
sins, how they wail more bitterly than such
as are being cut, or burned; how many things
they do, how many suffer, how greatly they
mourn and lament, in order to be delivered
from their evil conscience. They would not
do any such tiling, unless they were exceed-
ingly pained in soul.

The best thing then is, to avoid sin in the
first instance: the next to it, is to feel that
we sin, and thorouglily amend ourselves.
But if we have not this, how shall we pray to
God, and ask forgiveness of our sins, we who
take no account of these matters .' lor when
thou thyself who hast offended art unwilling
to know so mucli as this very fact, that thou
hast sijined; for what manner of offenses will
thou entreat God for pardon ? For wiiat thou
knowestnot? And how wilt tliou know the
greatness of the benefit? Tell th:;rcfore


remainmg at home with thy friends,

But as it is, if we have any bodily ailment,
we do and contrive everything to be rid of
what pains us; but when our soul is indisposed,
we delay, and draw back. For which cause


learn for what thou receivest forgiveness,
that so thou mayesi become grateful towards
thy Benefactor.

Bufthou, when it is a man wliom thou hast
provoked, entreatest friends, neighbors, and


neither from the other sort are wc delivered: (loor-keepcrs, and spendest money, and con
since tlie things that are indispensable are sumest many days in visiting and petition-
becoming to us secondary, and the secondary I ing, and though he that is provoked utterly
indispensable; and letting alone tlie fountain reject tijee once, twice, ten thousaml times
of our ills, we would fain cleanse out the over, thou despondest not, but becoming
streams. I more earnest thou makest the more en-

I'Or that our bodily ills are caused by the treaty; but wiien the God of all is pro-
^ vokeil, wc gape, and throw ourselves b;ick,

« TO iWptTTo,-. .t«<i««, ff,M..w. . Matt. i.. ,«. I -"I'l 'ive ill luxury and in drunkenness, anil do


90


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIV.


all things as usual. And when shall we be
able to propitiate Him ? and how shall we by
this very thing fail to provoke Him so much
the more ? For not so much sinning, as sin-
ing without even pain, causes in Him indig-
nation and wrath. Wherefore it were meet
after all this to sink into the very earth, and
not so much as to behold this sun, nor to
breathe at all, for that having so placable a
Master, we provoke Him first, and then have
no remorse for provoking Him. And yet He
assuredly, even when He is wroth, doeth not
so as hating and turning away from us, but
in order that in this way at least He may win
us over to Himself. For if He continued
after insult befriending thee, thou wouldest
the more despise Him. Therefore in order
that this may not be. He turns away for a
little while, to" have thee ever with Him-
self.

6. Let us now, I pray you, take courage at
His love to man, and let us show forth an
anxious repentance, before the day come on,
which permits us not to profit thereby. For
as yet all depends on us, but then He that
judges hath alone control over the sentence.
" Let us therefore come before His face with
confession;"^ let us bewail, let us mourn.
For if we should be able to prevail upon the
Judge before the appointed day to forgive us
our sins, then we need not so much as enter
into the court; as on the other hand, if this
be not done, He will hear us publicly in the
presence of the world, and we shall no longer
have any hope of pardon. For no one of
those who have not done away with their sins
here, when he hath departed thither shall be
able to escape his account for them; but as
they who are taken out of these earthly
prisons are brought in their chains to the
place of judgment, even so all souls, when
they have gone away hence bound wixh the
manifold chains of their sins, are led to the
awful judgment-seat. For in truth our pres-
ent life is nothing better than a prison. But
as when we have entered into that apartment,
we see all bound with chains; so now if we
withdraw ourselves from outward show, and

I Ps. XCV. 2, LXX.


enter into each man's life, into each man's
soul, we shall see it bound with chains more
grievous than iron: and this most especially
if thou enter into the souls of them that are
rich. For the more men have about them,
so much the more are they bound. As there-
fore with regard to the prisoner, when thou
seest him with irons on his back, on his
hands, and often on his feet too, thou dost
therefore most of all account him miserable;^
so also as to the rich man, when thou seest
him encompassed with innumerable affairs,
let him not be therefore rich, but rather for
these very things wretched, in thine account.
For together with these bonds, he hath a
cruel jailor too, the wicked love of riches;
which suffers him not to pass out of this
prison, but provides for him thousands of
fetters, and guards, and doors, and bolts; and
when he hath cast him into the inner prison,
persuades him even to feel pleasure in these
bonds; that he may not find so much as any
hope of deliverance from the evils which press
on him.

And if in thought thou wert to lay open
that man's soul, thou wouldest see it not
bound only, but squalid, and filthy, and
teeming with vermin. For no better than
vermin are the pleasures of luxury, but even
more abominable, and destroy the body
more, together with the soul also; and upon
the one and upon the other they bring ten
thousand scourges of sickness.

On account then of all these things let us
entreat the Redeemer of our souls, th%t He
would both burst asunder our bands, and re-
move this our cruel jailor, and having set us
free from the burden of those iron chains,
He would make our spirits lighter than any
wing. -And as we entreat Him, so let us
contribute our own part, earnestness, and
consideration, and an excellent zeal. For
thus we shall be able both in a short time to
be freed from the evils which now oppress us,
and to learn in what condition we were be-
fore, and to lay hold on the liberty which be-
longs to us; unto which God grant we may all
attain, by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
and power forever and ever. Amen.


Homily XV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


91


HOMILY XV.


Matt. V. i, 2.


"And Jesus seeing the multitudes went up into the mountain, and when He was set, His
disciples came unto Him. And He opened His mouth, and taught them saying,
Blessed," etc.


See how unambitious He was, and void of
boasting: in that He did not lead people
about with Him, but whereas, when healing
was required. He had Himself gone about
everywhere, visiting both towns and country
places; now when the multitude is become
very great, He sits in one spot: and that not
in the midst of any city or forum, but on a
mountain and in a wilderness; instructing us
to do nothing for display, and to separate
ourselves from the tumults of ordinary life,'
and this most especially, when we are to study
wisdom, and to discourse of things needful
to be done.

But when He had gone up into the mount,
and "was set down, His disciples came unto
Him." Seest thou their growth in virtue ?
and how in a moment ^ they became better
men ? Since the multitude were but gazers
on the miracles, but these from that hour
desired also to hear some great and high
thing. And indeed this it was set Him on
His teaching, and made Him begin this dis-
course.

For it was not men's bodies only that He
was healing, but He was also amending their
souls; and again from the care of these He
would pass to attendance on the other. Thus
He at once varied the succor that He gave,
and likewise mingled with the instruction
afforded by His words, the manifestation of
His glory from His works; and besides, He
stopped the shameless mouths of the heretics,
signifying by this His care of both parts of
our being, that He Himself is the Maker of
the whole creation. Therefore also on each
nature He bestowed abundant providence,
now amending the one, now the other.

And in this way He was then employed.
For it is said, tiiat " He opened His moutii,
and taught them." And wlierefore is the
clause added, "He opened His mouth"?
To inform thee that in His very silence He
gave instruction, and not wiien He spoke
only: but at one time by "opening His

■ Taif iv itiaif Bopv^iav. ' [a8p6oVy " all at once." — R.]


mouth," at another uttering His voice by
the works which He did.

But when thou hearest that He taught ///<■///,
do not think of Him as discoursing with His
disciples only, but rather with all through
them.

For since the multitude was such as a mul-
titude ever is,^ and consisted moreover of
such as creep on the ground,* He withdraws
the choir of His disciples, and makes His dis-
course unto them: in His conversation with
them providing that the rest also, who were
yet very far from the level of His sayings,
might find His lesson of self-denial no longer
grievous unto them. Of which indeed both
Luke gave intimation, when he said, that He
directed His words unto them:^ and ^L^t-
thew too, clearly declaring the same, wrote,
" His disciples came unto Him, and He
taught them.'' For thus the others also were
sure to be more eagerly attentive to Him,
than they would have been, had He ad-
dressed Himself unto all.

2. Whence then doth He begin? and what
kind of foundations of His new polity doth
He lay for us ?

Let us hearken with strict attention unto
what is said. For though it was spoken unto
them, it was written for the sake also of all
men afterwards. And accordingly on this
account, though He iiad His disciples in His
mind in His i)nblic preaching, yet unto tiiem
He limits not His sayings, but applies all His
words of blessing without restriction. Thus
He said not, " Blessed are ye, if ye become
poor," l)ut " Blessed are the poor." Aiul I
may add that even if He hail spoken of
them, the advice would still be common to
all. For so, when He saith, " l,o ! I am
witii you always, even unto the end of the
world,'"' He is discoursing not with them
only, but also, through them, with all the
world. .\nd in pronouncing them blessed,
who are persecuted, and chased, and suffer

iif\liuiits. 4 kaMot <rvpo^«t^ui', al. ipx"!''^''*"'-

■i I iikr vi. m. " And Hr liftnl up Mis ryes on nisdiHciplc<t,anU
uuiil." And vcr. ^7, " I %ay unto you which hcur.'
<■ Matt, xxviii. au.


92


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XV.


all intolerable things; not for them only, but
also for all who arrive at the same excellency,
He weaves His crown.

However, that this may be yet plainer, and
to inform thee that thou hast great interest in
His sayings, and so indeed hath all mankind,
if any choose to give heed; hear how He be-
gins these wondrous words.

" Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs
is the kingdom of Heaven.^' '

What is meant by "the poor in spirit?"
The humble and contrite in mind. For by
*' spirit " He hath here designated the soul,
and the faculty of choice. That is, since
many are humble not willingly, but compelled
by stress of circumstances; letting these pass
(for this were no matter of praise), He blesses
them first, who by choice humble and con-
tract themselves.

But why said he not, "the humble," but
rather "the poor?*' Because this is more
than that. For He means here them who
are awestruck, and tremble at the command-
ments of God. Whom also by His prophet
Isaiah God earnestly accepting said, " To
whom will I look, but to him who is meek^
and quiet, and trembleth at My words?" ^
For indeed there are many kinds of humility:
one is humble in his own measure, another
with all excess of lowliness. It is this last
lowliness of mind which that blessed prophet
commends, picturing to us the temper that is
not merely subdued, but utterly broken,
when he saith, "The sacrifice for God is a
contrite spirit, a contrite and an humble heart
God will not despise."* And the Three
Children also offer this unto God as a great
sacrifice, saying, "Nevertheless, in a contrite
soul, and in a spirit of lowliness, may we be
accepted." 5 This Christ also now blesses.

3. For whereas the greatest of evils, and
those which make havoc of the whole world,
had their entering in from pride: — for both
the devil, not being such before, did thus
become a devil; as indeed Paul plainly de-
clared, saying, " Lest being lifted up with
pride, he fall into the condemnation of the
devil:''* — and the first man, too, puffed up
by the devil with these hopes, was made an
example of,'' and became mortal (for expect-
ing to become a god, he lost even what he
had; and God also upbraiding him with this,
and mocking his folly, said, "Behold, Adam
is become as one of us " ®); and each one of
those that came after did hereby wreck him-
self in impiety, fancying some equality with


I Matt. V. 3. 2 Taireivov, I.XX.

3 Isa. l.wi. 2, Lxx. 4 Ps. li. 17, lxx.

5 Dan. iii. 39, Lxx.; or Song of the Three Holy Children, ver. 16.

6 1 Tim. iii. 6. 7 tferpax'jAio'flj). 8 Gen. iii. 22.


God: — since, I say, this was the stronghold
of our evils, and the root and fountain of all
wickedness. He, preparing a remedy suitable
to the disease, laid this law first as a strong
and safe foundation. For this being fixed as
a base, the builder in security lays on it all
the rest. But if this be taken away, though
a man reach to the Heavens in his course of
life,' it is all easily undermined, and issues
in a grievous end. Though fasting, prayer,
almsgiving, temperance, any other good thing
whatever, be gathered together in thee; with-
out humility all fall away and perish.

It was this very thing that took place in the
instance of the Pharisee. For even after he
had arrived at the very summit, he "went
down " '° with the loss of all, because he had
not the mother of virtues: for as pride is the
fountain of all wickedness, so is humility the
principle of all self-command. Wherefore
also He begins with this, pulling up boasting
by the very root out of the soul of His
hearers.

"And what,'' one may ask, " is this to His
disciples, who were on every account humble ?
For in truth they had nothing to be proud of,
being fishermen, poor, ignoble, and illiter-
ate.'' Even though these things concerned
not His disciples, yet surely they concerned
such as were then present, and such as were
hereafter to receive the disciples, lest they
should on this account despise them. But it
were truer to say that they did also concern
His disciples. For even if not then, yet by
aiid by they were sure to require this help,
after their signs and wonders, and their honor
from the world, and their confidence towards
God. For neither wealth, nor power, nor
royalty itself, had so much power to exalt
men, as the things which they possessed in
all fullness. And besides, it was natural that
even before the signs they might be lifted
up, at that very time when they saw the mul-
titude, and all that audience surrounding
their Master; they might feel some human
weakness. Wherefore He at once represses
their pride.

And He doth not introduce what He saith
by way of advice or of commandments, but
by way of blessing, so making His word less
burthensome, and opening to all the course
of His discipline. For He said not, "This
or that person," but " they who do so, are
all of them blessed.'' So that though thou
be a slave, a beggar, in poverty, a stranger,
unlearned," there is nothing to hinder thee
from being blessed, if thou emulate this vir-
tue.


9 woAtTevo^evo?.


10 Luke xviii. 14.


II [iSlwTt)!.]


Homily XV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


93


4. Now having begun, as you see, where
most need was, He proceeds to another com-
mandment, one which seems to be opposed
to the judgment of the whole world. For
whereas all think that they who rejoice are
enviable, those in dejection, poverty, and
mourning, wretched. He calls these blessed
rather than those; saying thus,

" Blessed are they that mourn.'' '

Yet surely all men call them miserable.
For therefore He wrought the miracles be-
forehand, that in such enactments as these
He might be entitled to credit.

And here too again he designated not sim-
ply all that mourn, but all that do so for sins:
since surely that other kind of mourning is
forbidden, and that earnestly, which relates
to anything of this life. This Paul also
clearly declared, when he said, " The sorrow
of the world worketh death, but godly sorrow
worketh repentance unto salvation, not to be
repented of."''

These then He too Himself calls blessed,
whose sorrow is of that kind; yet not simply
them that sorrow did He designate, but them
that sorrow intensely. Therefore He did not
say, "they that sorrow," but "they that
mourn." For this commandment again is
fitted to teach us entire self-control. For if
those who grieve for children, or wife, or
any other relation gone from them, have no
fondness for gam or pleasure during that
period of their sorrow; if they aim not at
glory, are not provoked by insults, nor led
captive by envy, nor beset by any other pas-
sion, their grief alone wholly possessing them;
much more will they who mourn for their
own sins, as they ought to mourn, show forth
a self-denial greater than this.

Next, what is the reward for these ? " For
they shall be comforted, "saith He.

Where shall they be comforted ! tell me.
Both here and there. For since the thinir
enjoined was exceeding burthensome and
galling, He promised to give that, which
most of all made it light. Wheref(jre, if thou
wilt be comforted, mourn: and tiiink not this
a dark saying. For when Clod doth comfort,
though sorrows come ujwn thee by thoiisantls
like snow-flakes, thou wilt be above them all.
Since in truth, as the returns which God gives
are always far greater tli.an our labors; so He
hath wrought in this case, declaring them
that mourn to be blessed, not after the value
of what they do, but after His own love
towards man For they that mourn, mourn


' Matt. V. 4.

'■' ^,9*"'* *''•• '"• f*- ^'■< " " "■/'■"'"""• whiih lirini;<°tli no rc-
KTt," in the marKin, " unto u lulvalitin which brini;cth no regret. "


for misdoings, and to such it is enough to
enjoy forgiveness, and obtain wherewith to
answer for themselves. But forasmuch as
He is full of love towards man, He doth not
limit His recompense either to the removal of
our punishments, or to the deliverance from
our sins, but He makes them even blessed,
and imparts to them abundant consolation.

But He bids us mourn, not only for our
own, but also for other men's misdoings.
And of this temper were the souls of the
saints: such was that of Moses, of Paul, of
David; yea, all these many times mourned
for evils not their own.

5. " P^lessed are the meek, for they shall
inherit the earth." ^ Tell me, what kind
of earth? Some-* say a figurative earth, but it
is not this, for nowhere in Scripture do we
find any mention of an earth that is merely
figurative. 5 ]iut what can the saying mean ?
He holds out a sensible prize; even as Paul
also doth, in that when he had said, " Honor
thy father and thy mother,""^ he added,
" For so shalt thou live long upon the earth."
And He Himself unto the thief again, " To-
day shalt thou be with me in Paradise." ^

Thus He doth not incite us by means of
the future blessings only, but of the present
also, for the sake of the grosser sort of His
hearers, and such as before the future seek
those others.

Thus, for example, further on also He said,
"Agree with thine adversary." ^ Then He
appoints the reward of such self-command,
and saith, "Lest at anytime the adversary
deliver thee to the judge, and the judge to
the ofificer." ' Seest thou whereby He alarmed
us? By the things of sense, by what hap-
pens before our eyes. And again, " \\'hoso-
ever shall say to his brother, Kaca, shall be
in danger of the council."'"

And Paul too sets forth sensible rewards at
great length, and uses things present in his
exhortations; as wlu-n he is discoursing about
virginity. For l-.aving said notiiing about the
heavens there, for the time he urges it by
things present, saying, " Because of the
present distress," and, "Hut 1 spare you,"
and, " I wouUI have you without careful-
ness." "

Thus accordingly Christ also with the things
sjiiritual hath minj.jlcd the st^nsible. For
whereas the meek m;in is thought to lose ail
his own. He promises the contrary, saying.


lOr, "the land.'

4 So St. Ai.K'. </<• Sfrm. /'<>«/. in Afom/r,lib. i. c. i ; St. Jerome
in/.K.: Op. Iniprrf. in tiK ; St. Hilar, in /tic..- t >ri):. i/» Ln'it.,
Honi. XV. J, €t alihi.

5 i-oijTiif. ' K.ph. vi. 3, 7 I.uke xxiil. 43.
" Malt. V. 35. 9 Mutt. V. a$ >" Matt. v. aj.

" I Cor. vii, afi, a8, y-


94


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XV.


" Nay, but this is he who possesses his goods
in safety, namely, he who is not rash, nor
boastful: while that sort of man shall often
lose his patrimony, and his very life."

And besides, since in the Old Testament
the prophet used to say continually, " The
meek shall inherit the earth;"' He thus
weaves into His discourse the words to which
they were accustomed, so as not everywhere
to speak a strange language.

And this He saith, not as limiting the re-
wards to things present, but as joining with
these the other sort of gifts also. For neither
in speaking of any spiritual thing doth He
exclude such as are in the present life; nor
again in promising such as are in our life,
doth He limit his promise to that kind. For
He saith, '* Seek ye the kingdom of God, and
all these things shall be added unto you.'^^'
And again: "Whosoever hath left houses or
brethren, shall receive an hundred fold in this
world, and in the future shall inherit ever-
lasting life, "3

6. " Blessed are they which do hunger and
thirst after righteousness."*

What sort of righteousness ? He means
either the whole of virtue, or that particular
virtue which is opposed to covetousness.^
For since He is about to give commandment
concerning mercy, to show how we must show
mercy, as, for instance, not of rapine or
covetousness. He blesses them that lay hold
of righteousness.

And see with what exceeding force He puts
it. For He said not, " Blessed are they
which keep fast by righteousness," but,
" Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst
after righteousness: " that not merely any-
how, but with all desire we may pursue it.
For since this is the most peculiar property
of covetousness, and we are not so enamored
of meat and drink, as of gaining, and com-
passing ourselves with more and more, He
bade us to transfer this desire to a new object,
freedom from covetousness.

Then He appoints the prize, again from
things sensible; saying, " for they shall be
filled." Thus, because it is thought that the
rich are commonly made such by covetous-
ness, " Nay," saith He, " it is just contrary:
for it is righteousness that doeth this.
Wherefore, so long as thou doest righteously,
fear not poverty, nor tremble at hunger.
For the extortioners, they are the very per-
sons who lose all, even as he certainly who is
in love with righteousness, possesses himself
the goods of all men in safety."


I Ps. xxxvii. II. 2 Matt. vi. 33

3 Matt. xix. 29. See also Mark x. 29, 30 ; and Luke xviii. 29, 30.

4 Matt. V. 6. 5 See Aristot. Eth. Nit: v. 2.


But if they who covet not other men's goods
enjoy so great abundance,* much more they
who give up their own.

"Blessed are the merciful. "^

Here He seems to me to speak not of those
only who show mercy in giving of money,
but those likewise who are merciful in their
actions. For the way of showing mercy is
manifold, and this commandment is broad.

What then is the reward thereof ?

" For they shall obtain mercy."

And it seems indeed to be a sort of equal
recompence, but it is a far greater thing than
the act of goodness. For whereas they
themselves show mercy as men, they obtain
mercy from the God of all; and it is not the
same thing, man's mercy, and God's; but as
wide as is the interval between wickedness
and goodness, so far is the one of these re-
moved from the other.

" Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God."*

Behold again the reward is spiritual. Now
He here calls " pure," either those who have at-
tained unto all virtue, and are not conscious
to themselves of any evil; or those who live
in temperance. For there is nothing which
we need so much in order to see God, as this
last virtue. Wherefore Paul also said, " Fol-
low peace with all men, and holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord."' He is
here speaking of such sight as it is possible
for man to have.

For because there are many who show
mercy, and who commit no rapine, nor are
covetous, who yet are guilty of fornication
and uncleanness; to signify that the former
alone suffices not. He hath added this, much
in the same sense as Paul, writing to the
Corinthians, bore witness of the Macedonians,
that they were rich not only in almsgiving,
but also in all other virtue. For having
spoken of the noble spirit'" they had shown in
regard of their goods, he saith, " They gave
also their own selves to the Lord, and to us." "

7. " Blessed are the peace-makers." '-

Here He not only takes away altogether
our own strife and hatred amongst ourselves,
but He requires besides this something more,
namely, that we should set at one again
others, who are at strife.

And again, the re\vard which He annexes
is spiritual. Of what kind then is it.

" For they shall be called the children of
God."


(> Not that St. Chrysostom limited this or any of the Gospel
promises to a temporal sense. See below, sec. 7.

7 Matt. V. 7 8 Matt. V. 8. 9 Heb. xii. 14.

■o [(|>iAoTt/iAias. The term in later Greek means " munificence,"
and is so rendered below, in sec. 13. — R.]

" 2 Cor. viii. 5. 1= Matt. v. 9.


Homily XV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


95


Yea, for this became the work of the Only not be blessed, who is crowned with such


Begotten, to unite the divided, and to recon'
cile the alienated.

Then, lest thou shouldest imagine peace in
all cases a blessing. He hath added,

"Blessed are they which are persecuted
for righteousness' sake."'

That is, for virtue's sake, for succor^ given
to others, and for godliness: it being ever
His wont to call by the name of " righteous-
ness " the whole practical wisdom of the soul.

" Blessed are ye, when men shall revile
you and persecute you, and say all manner of


things as come to an end with this present
life, and hurry by quicker than a shadow.

8. But when He had said , "your reward
is great," he added also another consolation,
saying, " For so persecuted they the prophets
which were before you."

Thus, since that first, the promise of the
Kingdom, was yet to come, and all in expec-
tation. He affords them comfort from this
world; from their fellowship with those who
before them had been ill-treated.

For "think not," saith He, "that for


evil against you falsely, for my sake. Re- 1 something inconsistent in your sayings and


joice, and be exceedmg glad.''^


enactments ye suffer these things: or, as be-


As if He said, "Though they should call [ ing teachers of evil doctrines, ye are to be


you sorcerers, deceivers, pestilent persons,
or whatever else, blessed are ye": so He
speaks. What could be newer than these
injunctions ? wherein the very things which
all others avoid, these He declares to be
desirable; I mean, being poor, mourning,
persecution, evil report. But yet He both
affirmed this, and convinced not two, nor ten,
nor twenty, nor an hundred, nor a thousand
men, but the whole world. And hearing
things so grievous and galling, so contrary to
the accustomed ways of men, the multitudes
" were astonished." So great was the power
of Him who spake.

However, lest thou shouldest think that
the mere fact of being evil spoken of makes
men blessed. He hath set two limitations;
when it is for His sake, and when the things
that are said are false: for without these, he
who is evil spoken of, so far from being
blessed, is miserable.

Then see the prize again: " Because your
reward is great in heaven." But thou, though
thou hear not of a kingdom given in each
one of the blessings, be not discouraged.
For although He give different names to the
rewards, yet He brings all into His kingdom.
Thus, both when He saith, " they that mourn
shall be comforted;" and, " they that show
mercy shall ol)t.'iin mercy; " and, "the pure
in heart shall see God;" and, the peace-
makers "shall be called the cliildren of God;"
notiiingelse but the Kingdom doth He shadow
out by all these sayings. For such as enjoy
these, shall surely attain unto that. Think
not therefore that this reward is for the poor
in spirit only, but for those also who luinger
after righteousness, for the meek, and for all
the rest without excejition.

Since on this account He hath set His
blessing on them all, that thou mightest not


persecuted by them; the plots and dangers
proceed not of any wickedness in your say-
ings, but of the malice of those who hear you.
Wherefore neither are they any blame to you
who suffer wrong, but to them who do the
wrong. And to the truth of these things all
preceding time bears witness. For against
the prophets they did not even bring any
charge of transgressing the law, and of senti-
ments of impiety, that they stoned some,
chased away others, encompassed others with
innumerai)le afflictions. Wherefore let not
this trouble you, for of the very same mind
they do all that is done now." Seest thou
how He raised up their spirits, by placing
them near to the company of Moses and
Elias ?

Thus also Paul writing to the Thessalo-
nians, saith, " For ye became followers of the
Churches of God, which are in Judea; for ye
also have suffered the same things of your
own fellow-countrymen, even as they have of
the Jews: who both killed the Lord Jesus,
and their own prophets, and have driven us
out; and they please not God, and are con-
trary to all men."* Which same point here
also Christ hath established.

And whereas in the other beatitudes, He
said, " Blessed are the poor," antl " the mer-
ciful;" here He hath not put it generally,
but addresses His speech unto themselves,
saying, " Blessed are ye, when they shall
revile you, and persecute you, and say every
evil word: " signifying that tliis is an especial
privilege of theirs; and that beyond all others,
te;ichers have this for their own.

At the same time He here also covertlv
signifies His own dignity, ;m(l His equality
in honor witii Him who begat Him. For
" as tliey on the Father's accoiuit, " saith He,
" so shall ye also for ine suffer these tilings."


look for anything sensible: for that man can- j But when He saith, "the prophets wtnch


• Matt. V. lo.


» itpoaraaCas.


1 Malt


4 , TI:


irHH. 11. H, 15.


96


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XV.


were before you," He implies tiiat they were
also by this time become prophets.

Next, declaring that this above all profits
them, and m.akes them glorious, He did not
say, "they will calumniate and persecute
you, but I will prevent it." For not in their
escaping evil report, but in their noble en-
durance thereof, and in refuting them by
their actions. He will have their safety stand:
this being a much greater thing than the
other; even as to be struck and not hurt, is
much greater than escaping the blow.

9. Now in this place He saith, "Your re-
ward is great in heaven." But Luke ' reports
Him to have spoken this, both earnestly,
and with more entire consolation; for He not
only, as you know, pronounces them blessed,
who are evil spoken of for God's sake, but
declares them likewise wretched, who are
well spoken of by all men. For, " Woe unto
you,'' saith He, "when all men shall speak
well of you." And yet the apostles were
well spoken of, but not by all men.* Where-
fore He said not, " Woe unto you, when men
shall speak well of you," but, "when all
men" shall do so: for it is not even possible
that those who live in the practice of virtue
should be well spoken of by all men.

And again He saith, "When they shall
cast out your name as evil, rejoice ye, and
leap for joy." ^ For not only of the dangers
they underwent, but of the calumny also, He
appoints the recompence to be great.
Wherefore He said not, "When they shall
persecute, and kill you," but, "When they
shall revile you, and say all manner of evil.''
For most assuredly, men's evil reports have
a sharper bite than their very deeds. For
whereas, in our dangers, there are many
things that lighten the toil, as to be cheered ^
b)' all, to have many to applaud, to crown, to
proclaim our praise; here in our reproach
even this consolation is destroyed. Because
we seem not to have achieved anything great;
and this galls the combatant more than all his
dangers: at least many have gone on even to
hang themselves, not bearing evil report.
And why marvellest thou at the others ? since
that traitor, that shameless and accursed one,
he who had ceased to blush for anything
whatever, was wrought upon by this chiefiy to
hurry to the halter. And Job again, all
adamant as he was, and firmer than a rock;
when he had been robbed of all his posses-
sions, and was suffering those incurable ills,
and had become on a sudden childless, and
when he saw his body pouring out worms like
a fountain, and his wife attacking him, he


See I, like vi. 23, 26. ^ Luke vi. 22, 23. 3 aXii^tadKi.


repelled it all with ease; but when he saw his
friends reproaching and trampling upon him,
and entertaining an evil opinion of him, and
saying that he suffered those things for some
sins, and was paying the penalty of wicked-
ness: then was there trouble, then commo-
tion, even in that great and noble-hearted
man.-*

And David also, letting pass all that he
had suffered, sought of God a retribution for
the calumny alone For, "Let him curse,''
saith he, "for the Lord hath bidden him:
that the Lord may see my humiliation, and
requite me for this cursing of his on this
day." 5

And Paul too proclaims the triumph not of
those only who incur danger, or are deprived
of their goods, but of these also, thus saying,
"Call to remembrance the former days, in
which after ye were illuminated ye endured a
great fight of afflictions; partly whilst ye were
made a gazing stock by reproaches, and
afilictions." * On this account then Christ
hath appointed the reward also to be great.

After this, lest any one should say, " Here
thou givest no redress, nor stoppest men's
mouths; and dost thou assign a reward there?"
He hath put before us the prophets, to show
that neither in their case did God give re-
dress. And if, where the rewards were at
hand. He cheered them with things to come;
much more now, when this hope is become
clearer, and self-denial is increased.

And observe too, after how many com-
mandments He hath put this: for surely He
did it not without reason, but to show that it
is not possible for one unprovided, and un-
armed with all those other virtues, to go forth
unto these conflicts. • Tlierefore, you see, in
each instance, by the former precept making
way for the following one. He hath woven a
sort of golden chain for us. Thus, first, he
that is "humble," will surely also "mourn" for
his own sms: he that so "mourns," will be both
"meek," and "righteous," and "merciful;" he
that is "merciful," and "righteous," and "con-
trite," will of course be also" pure in heart:"
and such a one will be "a peacemaker" too:
and he that hath attained unto all these, will be
moreover arrayed against dangers, and will
not be troubled when evil is spoken of him,
and he is enduring grievous trials innumerable.

10. Now then, after giving them due ex-
hortation. He refreshes them again with


4 [Literally, " then was disturbed, then was troubled, that no-
ble and great man." — R.]

5 2 Sam. xvi. 11, 12.

6 Heb. X. 32, 33. [R. v., " in which, after ye were enlightened,
ye endured a great conflict of sufferings ; partly, being made a
pazing-stock both by reproaches and afflictions." The text of the
Homily omits " both."— R.]


Homily XV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


97


praises. As thus: the injunctions being
high, and far surpassing those in the Old
Testament; lest they should be disturbed,
and confounded, and say, " How shall we be
able to achieve these things ? " hear what He
saith:

" Ye are the salt of the earth." '

Implying, that of absolute necessity He
enjoins all this. For " not for your own life
apart," saith He, "but for the whole world,
shall your account be. For not to two cities,
nor to ten or twenty, nor to a single nation
am I sending you, as I sent the prophets;
but to earth, and sea, and the whole world;
and that in evil case." For by saying,
" Ye are the salt of the earth," He signified
all human nature to have "lost its savor, " =
and to be decayed by our sins. For which
cause, you see, He requires of them such
virtues, as are most necessary and useful for
the superintendence of the common sort.
For first, tlie meek, and yielding, and merci-
ful, and righteous, shuts not up his good
deeds unto himself only, but also provides
that these good fountains should run over for
the benefit of others. And he again who is
pure in heart, and a peacemaker, and is per-
secuted for the truth's sake; he again orders
his way of life for the common good.
"Think not then," He saith, "that ye are
drawn on to ordinary conflicts, or that for
some small matters you are to give account."
" Ye are the salt of the earth."

What then ? did they restore the decayed ?
By no means; for neither is it possible to do
any good to that which is already spoilt, by
sprinkling it with salt. This therefore they
did not. But rather, what things had been
before restored, and committed to their
charge, and freed from that ill savor, these
they then salted, maintaining and preserving
them in that freshness,' which they had re-
ceived of the Lord. For that men should be
set free from the rottenness of their sins was
the good work of Christ; but their not re-
turning to it again any more was the object
of these men's diligence and travail.

Seest thou how by degrees He indicates
their superiority to the very prophets ? in tiiat
He saith they are teachers, not of Palestine,
but of the whole world; and not simply teach-
ers, but awful ones too. For this is the mar-
vellous thing, that not by flattering, nor
soothing, but by sharply bracing* them, as
salt, even so they became dear to all men.

"Now marvel not," saith He, "if leaving
all others, I discourse to you, and draw you
on to so great dangers. For consider over

' Matt. V. 13. ' fi»tpav0*laay. 3 Vfap^nrrt.

4 [<iri(7Tu<^ofT((, iiHcd of uslriiiKcnt*. — R.]


how many cities, tribes, and nations, I am to
send you to preside. Wherefore I would
have you not only be prudent yourselves, but
that you should also make others the same.
And such persons have great need to be intel-
ligent, in whom the salvation of the rest is at
stake: they ought so much to abound in vir-
tue, as to impart of the profit to others also.
For if ye do not become such as this, ye will
not suffice even for your own selves.

" Be not then impatient, as though my
sayings were too burdensome. For while it
is possible for others who have lost their
savor to return by your means, you, if you
should come to this, will with yourselves de-
stroy others also. So that in proportion as
the matters are great, which ye have put in-
to your hands, you need so much the greater
diligence." Therefore He saith,

" But if the salt have lost its savor, where-
with shall it be salted ? it is thenceforth good
for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be
trodden under foot of men." ^

For other men, though they fall never so
often, may possibl)' obtain indulgence: but
the teacher, should this happen to him, is
deprived of all excuse, and will suffer the
most extreme vengeance. Thus, lest at the
words, "When they shall revile you. and
persecute you, and say all manner of evil
against you," they should be too timid to
go forth: He tells them, *' unless ye are pre-
pared to combat with all this, ye have been
chosen in vain." For it is not evil report
that ye should fear, but lest ye should prove
partners in dissimulation.* For then, "Ye
will lose your savor, and be trodden under
foot: " but if ye continue sharply to brace
them up, and then are evil spoken of, rejoice;
for this is the very use of salt, to sting the
corrupt,' and make them smart And so
their censure follows of course, in no way
harming you, but rather testifying your firm-
ness. But if through fear of it you give up
the earnestness that becomes you, ye will
have to suffer much more grievously, being
boti) evil spoken of, anil despised by all.
For tliis is the meaning of " trodden uiuler
toot."

II. After this He leails on to anotlier, a
higher image.

" Ye are tlic light of the world." "

" Of tiie world " again; not of one nation,
nor of twenty states,' but of the whole inli;ili-
ited earth. And " .i light" to the mind. f;ir
better than this sunbeam: like as they were
also a spiritiKil .»<///. .Xnd before they arc
S(i//, and now lif^ht ; to teach thee how great


S Matt. V. 13,

7 xa.\i\rov%.


A wpvira«pii>o^<i>ov«, cf. Oal. ii. 13.
* Mull. V. 14. « [iruAcwf.)


98


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XV.


is the gain of tliese strict ' precepts, and the
profit of tliat grave discipline: how it binds,
and permits not to become dissolute; and
causes clear sight, leading men on to virtue.

"A city that is set on a hill cannot be hid,
neither do men light a candle, and put it
under the bushel."''

Again, by these words He trains them to
strictness of life, teaching them to be earnest
in their endeavors, as set before the eyes of
all men, and contending in the midst of the
amphitheatre of the world. For, " look not
to this," He saith, "that we are now sitting
here, that we are in a small portion of one
corner. For ye shall be as conspicuous to
all as a city set on the ridge of a hill, as a
candle in a house on the candlestick, giving
light. "3

Where now are they who persevere in dis-
believing the power of Christ? Let them
hear these things, and let them adore His
might, amazed at the power of the prophecy.
For consider how great things he promised
to them, who were not known even in their
own country: that earth and sea should know
them, and that they should by their fame
reach to the limits of the inhabited world; or
rather, not by their fame, but by the working
of the good they wrought. For it was not
fame that bearing them everywhere made
them conspicuous, but also the actual dem-
onstration by their works. Since, as though
they had wings, more vehemently than the
sunbeam did they overrun the whole earth,
sowing the light of godliness."*

But here He seems to me to be also train-
ing them to boldness of speech. For to say,
"A city set on a hill cannot be hid," is to
speak as declaring His own powers. ^ For as
that city can by no means be hidden, so it was
impossible that what they preached should
sink into silence and obscurity. Thus, since
He had spoken of persecutions and calum-
nies, of plots and wars, for fear they might
think that these would have power to stop
their mouths; to encourage them. He saith,
that so far from being hid, it should over-
shine the whole world; and that on this very
account they should be illustrious and re-
nowned.

By this then He declares His own power.
In what follows. He requires that boldness of
speech which was due on their part; thus
saying,

*' Neither do men light a candle and put it


^ Kare(TTVtJLfJi€vitjv,

■^ Matt. V. 14, 15. [R. v., " lamp."— R.]

3 ["a lamp in a house, giving light ((fialvuiv) on the lamp-
stand."— »C.]

4 Lumine conserit arva, Lucr.

5 [Or, " is spoken of manifesting His power." — R.]


under the bushel, but on the candlestick,
and it giveth light unto all that are in the
house. Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven.'^*

" For I,** saith He, "it is true, have kin-
dled the light, but its continuing to burn, let
that come of your diligence: not for your own
sakes alone, but also for their sake, who are
to profit by these rays, and to be guided unto
the truth. Since the calumnies surely shall
not be able to obscure your brightness, if you
be still living a strict life, and as becomes
those who are to convert the whole world.
Show forth therefore a life worthy of His
grace; that even as it is everywhere preached,
so this light may everywhere accompany the
same.

Next He sets before them another sort of
gain, besides the salvation of mankind,
enough to make them strive earnestly, and to
lead them unto all diligence. As thus, "Ye
shall not only," saith He, "amend the world,
if ye live aright, but ye will also give occasion
that God shall be glorified; even as if ye do
the contrary, ye will both destroy men, and
make God's name to be blasphemed."

And how, it may be asked, shall God be
glorified through us, if at least men are to
speak evil of us ? Nay, not all men, and
even they themselves who in envy do this,
will in their conscience admire and approve
you; even as the outward flatterers of such
as live in wickedness do in mind accuse
them.

What then ? Dost thou command us to
live for display and vain glory ? Far from it;
I say not this; for I did not say, "Give ye
diligence to bring forward your own good
deeds," neither did I say, "Show them;"
but " Let your light shine." That is, " Let
your virtue be great, and the fire abundant,
and the lig^ht unspeakable." For when vir-
tue is so great, it cannot lie hid, though its
pursuer shade it over ten thousand fold.
Present unto them an irreprehensible life,
and let them have no true occasion of evil
speaking; and then, though there be thou-
sands of evil-speakers, no man shall be able to
cast any shade upon you. And well did He
say, "your light," for nothing makes a
man so illustrious, how manifold soever his
will to be concealed, as the manifestation of
virtue. For as if he were clad with the very
sunbeam, so he shines, yet brighter than it;
not spending his rays on earth, but sur-
mounting also Heaven itself.

6 Matt. V. 15, 16. |R. v., " Neither do men light a lamp, and
put it under the bushel, but on the stand ; and it shineth unto ali
that are in the house. Even so let your light shine," et<:. — R.]


Homily XV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


99


Hence also He comforts them more abun-
dantly. For, "What though the slander
pain you," saith He; "yet shall ye have
many to honor God on your account. And
in both ways your recompence is gathering,
as well because God is glorified through you,
as because ye are defamed for God's sake.
Thus, lest we should on purpose seek to be
reproached, on hearing that there is a reward
for it: first. He hath not expressed that sen-
timent simply, but with two limitations,
namely, when what is said is false, and when
it is for God's sake: — and next He signifies
how not that only, but also good report, hath
its great profit, the glory of it passing on to
God. And He holds out to them those gra-
cious hopes. "For," saith He, "the cal-
umny of the wicked avails not so much as to
put all others in the dark, in respect of see-
ing your light. For then only when you
have " lost your savor'' shall they tread you
under foot; but not when you are falsely
accused, doing right. Yea, rather then shall
there be many admiring, not you only, but
for your sake your Father also." And He
said not "God," l)ut "your Father;"
already sowing beforehand the seeds of that
noble birth, which was about to be bestowed
upon them. Moreover, indicating His parity
in honor, as He said above, "Grieve not
when ye are evil spoken of, for it is enough
for you that for my sake you are thus spoken
of;" so here He mentions the Father: every
where manifestmg His equality.

12. Since then we know the gain that arises
from this earnestness, and the danger of in-
dolence (for if our Lord be blasphemed be-
cause of us, that were far worse than our
perdition), let us "give none offense, neither
to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God." ' And while the life which
we present before them is brighter than the
sun, yet if any one will speak evil of us, let
us not grieve at being defamed, but only if
we be defamed with justice.

For, on the one hand, if we live in wicked-
ness, though there be none to sj^eak ill of us,
we shall be the most wretched of all men: on
the other hand, if we apply ourselves to vir-
tue, thougii the whole world speak evil of us,
at that very time we shall be more enviable
than any. And we shall draw on to follow
us all who clioose to be saved, for not the
calumny of the wicked, but our good life,
will draw their attention. For indeed no
truii)|)et is so clear as the proof that is given
by our actions: neither is the light itself so
transjiarent as a pure life, though our calum-
niators be l)eyon(l number.

■ I Cor. X. 3j,


I say, if all the above-mentioned qualities
be ours; if we be meek and lowly and merci-
ful; if we be pure, and peacemakers; if hear-
ing reproach, we revile not again, but rather
rejoice; then shall we attract all that observe
us no less than the miracles do. And all will
be kindly disposed towards us, though one
be a wild beast, a demon, or what you will.

Or if there should even be some who speak
evil of thee, be not thou at all troubled
thereat, nor because they revile thee in pub-
lic, regard it; but search into their conscience,
and thou shalt see them applauding and
admiring thee, and numbering up ten thou-
sand praises.

See, for instance, how Nebuchadnezzar
praises the children in the furnace; yet surely
he was an adversary and an enemy. But
upon seeing them stand nobly, he proclaims
their triumph, and crowns them: and that
for nought else, but because they disobeyed
him, and hearkened unto the law of God.
For the devil, when he sees himself effecting
nothing, from that time departs, fearing lest
he should be the cause of our winning more
crowns. And when he is gone, even one who
is abominable and depraved will recognize
virtue, that mist being withdrawn. Or if
men still argue perversely, thou shalt have
from God the greater praise and admiration.

Grieve not now, I pray thee, neither de-
spond; since the very apostles were to some
a " savor of death; "= to others, a " savor of
life." And if there be nothing to lay hokl
of in thyself, thou art rid of all their charges;
or rather, thou art become the more blessed.
Shine out therefore in thy life, and take no
account of them who speak evil of thee.
For it cannot, it cannot be, that one careful
of virtue, should not have many enemies.
However, this is nothing to the virtuous man.
For by such means his brightness will in-
crease the more abundantly.

Let us then, bearing these things in mind,
look to one object only; how to order our
own life with strictness. For thus wo shall
also guide to the life that is there, such as
are now sitting in darkness. For such is the
virtue of that light, as not only to shine here,
but also to conduct its followers thither, l-'cvr
when men see usdesi^sing all things present,
and preparing ourselves for that which is to
come, our actions will persuade them sooner
tiian any discourse. l""or who is there so
senseless, that at sight of one, who within a
(lay or two was living in luxury and wealth,
now stripi)ing iiimsclf of all, aiul putting on
wings, antl arrayed to meet lK)th hunger and
poverty, and all hardship, and dangers, and

•< I C.'or. ii. i6.


lOO


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XV.


blood, and slaughter, and everything that is
counted dreadful; will not from this sight
derive a clear demonstration of the things
which are to come ?

But if we entangle ourselves in things pres-
ent, and plunge ourselves in them more and
more, how will it be possible for them to be
persuaded that we are hastening to another
sojourn ? '

And what excuse after this shall we have,
if the fear of God avail not so much with us,
as human glory availed with the Greek phil-
osophers ? For some of them did really both
lay aside wealth, and despised death, that
they might make a show before men; where-
fore also their hopes became vain. What
plea then shall deliver us, when with so great
things set before us, and with so high a rule
of self-denial laid open to us, we are not able
even to do as they did, but ruin both our-
selves and others besides ? For neither is
the harm so great when a heathen commits
transgression, as when a Christian doeth the
same. Of course not; for their character is
already lost, but ours, by reason of the grace
of God, is even among the ungodly venera-
ble and glorious. Therefore when they would
most revile us, and aggravate their evil
speech, they add some such taunt as, " Thou
Christian:" a taunt which they would not
utter, did they not secretly entertain a great
opinion of our doctrine.

Hast thou not heard how many, and how
great precepts Christ enjoined ? Now when
wilt thou be able to fulfill one of those com-
mandments, while thou leavest all, and goest
about gathering interest, tacking together
usuries, setting on foot transactions of busi-
ness, buying herds of slaves, procuring silver
vessels, purchasing houses, fields, goods with-
out end ? And I would this were all. But
when to these unseasonable pursuits, thou
addest even injustice, removing landmarks,^
taking away houses by violence, aggravating
poverty, increasing hunger, when wilt thou be
able to set thy foot on these thresholds ?

13. But sometimes thou showest mercy to
the poor. I know it as well as thou. But
even in this again great is the mischief. For
thou doest this either in pride or in vainglory,
so as not to profit even by thy good deeds.
What can be more wretched than this, to be
making thy shipwreck in the very harbor?
To prevent this, when thou hast done any
good action, seek not thanks from me, that
thou mayest l>ave God thy debtor. For,


1 aTToBrjixtav.

2 [ yjji" anoTenvofifvo^. There is no reference to the Old Tes-
tament phrase in the original, which simply means " cutting off
land for one's self," i. e., to appropriate it wrongfully. — R.]


" Lend," saith He, " unto them from whom
ye do not expect to receive. "^

Thou hast thy Debtor; why leave Him, and
require it of me, a poor and wretched mortal ?
What? is that Debtor displeased, when the
debt is required of Him ? What ? is He
poor? Is He unwilling to pay? Seest thou
not His unspeakable treasures ? Seest thou
not His indescribable munificence ? Lay
hold then on Him, and make thy demand;
for He is pleased when one thus demands
the debt of Him. Because, if He see another
required to pay for what He Himself owes.
He will feel as though He were insulted, and
repay thee no more; nay. He justly finds
fault, saying, " Why, of what ingratitude
hast thou convicted me ? what poverty dost
thou know to be in me, that thou hastenest
by me, and resortest unto others ? Hast thou
lent to One, and dost thou demand the debt
of another? "

For although man received it, it was God
that commanded thee to bestow; and His will
is to be Himself, and in the original sense/
debtor, and surety, affording thee ten thou-
sand occasion to demand the debt of Him
from every quarter. Do not thou then let
go so great facility and abundance, and seek
to receive of me who have nothing. Why,
to what end dost thou display to me thy
mercy shown to the poor. What ! was it I
that said to thee, Give ? was it from me that
thou didst hear this; that thou shouldest
demand it back of me ? He Himself hath
said, " He that hath pity upon the poor lend-
eth to God." 5 Thou hast lent to God:* put
it to His account.

" But He doth not repay the whole now."
Well, this too He doth for thy good. For
such a debtor is He: not as many, who are
anxious simply to repay that which is lent;
whereas He manages and doeth all things,
with a view of investing likewise in security
that which hath been given unto Him.
Therefore some, you see. He repays here:
some He assigns' in the other place.

14. Knowing therefore as we do these
things, let us make our mercifulness abun-
dant, let us give proof of much love to man,
both by the use of our money, and by our
actions. And if we see any one ill-treated
and beaten in the market-place, whether we
can pay down money, let us do it: or whether
by words we may separate them, let us not
be backward. For even a word has its re-


3 [Comp. Luke vi. 34.]

4 TrpioToTvjros, archetypal : the word seems to imply the sym-
bolical use to be made of all visible things and their relations : as
here, the relation of debtor and creditor is a sort of token of God's
mercy, in binding Himself to do us good.

5 Prov, xix. 17. 6 aiiTiZirfpiS^i. 7 TO(i.i«U€Tai.


Homily XV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


lOI


ward, and still more have sighs. And this
the blessed Job said; " But I wept for every
helpless one, and 1 sighed when I saw a man
in distress." ' But if there be a reward for
tears and sighs; when words also, and an
anxious endeavor, and many things besides
are added, consider how great the recom-
pence becomes. -Yea, for we too were ene-
mies to God, and the Only-begotten recon-
ciled us, casting himself between, and for
us receiving stripes, and for us enduring
death.

Let us then likewise do our diligence to
deliver from countless evils such as are in-
curring them; and not as we now do, when
we see any beating and tearing one another:
we are apt to stand by, finding pleasure in
the disgrace of others, and forming a devilish
amphitheatre around: than which what can
be more cruel ? Thou seest men reviled,
tearing each other to pieces, rending their
clothes, smiting each other's faces, and dost
thou endure to stand by quietly?

What ! is it a bear that is fighting? a wild
beast? a serpent ? It is a man, one who hath
in every respect fellowship with thee: a
brother, a member.'' Look not on, but sepa-
rate them. Take no pleasure, but amend
the evil. Stir not up others to the shameful
sight, but rather drive off and separate those
who are assembled. It is for shameless per-
sons, and born slaves, ^ to take pleasure in
such calamities; for those that are mere
refuse, for asses without reason.

Thou seest a man behaving himself un-
seemly, and dost thou not account the un-
seemliness thine own ? Dost thou not inter-
pose, and scatter the devil's troop, and put
an end to men's miseries ?

"That I may receive blows myself," saith
one; " is this also thy bidding ? " Thou wilt
not have to suffer even this; but if thou
shouldest, the thing would l)e to thee a sort
of martyrdom; for thou didst suffer on God's
behalf. And if thou art slow to receive
blows, consider that thy Lord was not slow
to endure tlie cross for thee.

Since they for their part are drunken and
in darkness, wrath being their tyrant and
commander; and they need some one who
is sounil to help them, botli the wroug-doer,
and he who is injured; the one that he may be
delivered from suffering evil, the other that
he may cease to do it. Draw nigh, there-
fore, and stretch fortii the hand, thou that art
sober to him that is drunken. For there is a
drunkenness of wrath too, and that more
grievous than the drunkenness of wine.


■ Job XXX. as


■• Kph. iv. 35.


-I oiKOTpifiay.


Seest thou not the seamen, how, when they
see any meeting with shii)wreck, they spread
their sails, and set out with all haste, to res-
cue those of the same craft out of the waves ?
Now, if partakers in an art show so much
care one for another, how much more ouglit
they who are partakers of the same nature to
do all these things ! Because in truth here
too is a shipwreck, a more grievous one than
that; for either a man under provocation
blasphemes, and so throws all away: or he
forswears himself under the sway of his
wrath, and that way falls into liell: or he
strikes a blow and commits murder, and thus
again suffers the very same shipwreck. Go
thou then, and put a stop to the evil; pull out
them that are drowning, though thou descend
into the very depth of the surge; and having
broken up the theatre of the devil, take each
one of them apart, and admonish him to
quell the flame, and to lull the waves.

But if the burning pile wa.x greater, and the
furnace more grievous, be not thou terrified;
for thou hast many to help thee, and stretch
forth the hand, if thou furnish but a begin-
ning; and above all thou surely hast with
thee the God of peace. And if thou wilt
first turn aside the flames, many others also
will follow, and of what they do well, thou
wilt thyself receive the reward.

Hear what precept Christ gave to the Jews,
creeping as they did upon the earth: "If
thou see," saith He, " thine enemy's beast
of burden falling down, do not hasten by,
but raise it."'' And thou must see that to
separate and reconcile men that are fighting
is a much lighter thing than to lift up the
fallen beast. And if we ought to help in
raising our enemies' ass, much more our
friends* souls: and most when the fall is more
grievous; for not into mire do these fall, l)ut
into the fire of hell, not bearing tlie bunlen
of their wrath. .\nd thou, when thou seest
thy brotlier lying under the load, anil the
devil standing by, and kindling the pile, thou
runnest by, cruelly and unmercifully; a kind
of tiling not safe to do, even where brutes
are concerned.

And whcrc;is the Samaritan, seeing a
wounded man, unknown, and not at all ap-
pertaining to him, both staid, and set him on
a beast, and brouglu him home to the inn,
and hired a physician, and gave some money,
and promised more: thou, seeing one fallen
not among thieves, but amongst a band of
demons, and l)eset by anger; and this not
in a wilderness, but in the midst of the forum;

* F.xnd. xxiii. 5; Deut, xxii. 4. [The citation in made very
frrrly fri>m the t.xx. The former piuuaj;e wa.H probably in (he
mind of the preacher.- K.)


I02


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XV.


not having to lay out money, nor to hire a
beast, nor to bring him on a long way, but
only to say some words: — art thou slow to do
it ? and holdest back, and hurriest by cruelly
and unmercifully ? And how thinkest thou,
calling upon God, ever to find Him propi-
tious ?

15. But let me speak also to you, who
publicly disgrace yourselves: to him who is
acting despitefully, and doing wrong. Art
taou inflicting blows? tell me; and kicking,
and biting ? art thou become a wild boar,
and a wild ass ? and art thou not ashamed ?
dost thou not blush at thus being changed
into a wild beast, and betraying thine own
nobleness ? For though thou be poor, thou
art free; though thou be a working man, thou
art a Christian.

Nay, for this very reason, that thou art
poor, thou shouldest be quiet. For fightings
belong to the rich, not to the poor; to the
rich, who have many causes to force them to
war. But thou, not having the pleasure of
wealth, goest about gathering to thyself the
evils of wealth, enmities, and strifes, and
fightings; and takest thy brother by the
throat, and goest about to strangle him, and
throwest him down publicly in the sight of
all men: and dost thou not think that thou
art thyself rather disgraced, imitating the
violent passions of the brutes; nay rather,
becoming even worse than they ? For they
have all things in common; they herd one
with another, and go about together: but we
have nothing in common, but all in confus-
ion; fightings, strifes, revilings, and enmities,
and insults. And we neither reverence the
heaven, unto which we are called all of us in
comm^on; nor the earth, which He hath left
free to us all in common; nor our very
nature; but wrath and the love of money
sweeps all away.

Hast thou not seen him who owed the ten
thousand talents, and then, after he was for-
given that debt, took his fellow-servant by
the throat for an hundred pence, what great
evils he underwent, and how he was delivered
over to an endless punishment ? Hast thou
not trembled at the example ? Hast thou no
fear, lest thou too incur the same ? For we
likewise owe to our Lord many and great
debts: nevertheless. He forbears, and suffers
long, and neither urges us, as we do our fel-
low-servants, nor chokes and takes us by the
throat; yet Surely had he been minded to
exact of us but the least part thereof, we
had long ago perished.

16. Let us then, beloved, bearing these


things in mind, be humbled, and feel thank-
ful to those who are in debt to us. For they
become to us, if we command ourselves, an
occasion of obtaining most abundant pardon;
and giving a little, we shall receive much.
Why then exact with violence, it being meet,
though the other were minded to pay, for
thee of thine accord to excuse him, that thou
mayest receive the whole of God ? But now
thou doest all things, and art violent, and
contentious,' to have none of thy debts for-
given thee; and whilst thou art thinking to
do despite unto thy neighbor, thou art thrust-
ing the sword into thyself, so increasing thy
punishment in hell: whereas if thou wilt show
a little self-command here, thou makest thine
own accounts easy. For indeed God there-
fore wills us to take the lead in that kind of
bounty, that He may take occasion to repay
us with increase.

As many therefore as stand indebted to
thee, either for money, or for trespasses, let
them all go free, and require of God the
recompense of such tliy magnanimity. For
so long as they continue indebted to thee,
thou canst not have God thy debtor. But
if thou let them go free, thou wilt be able to
detain thy God, and to require of Him the
recompense of so great self-restraint in boun-
tiful measure. For suppose a man had come
up and seeing thee arresting thy debtor, had
called upon thee to let him go free, and
transfer to himself thy account with the
other: he would not choose to be unfair^
after such remission, seeing he had passed
the whole demand to himself: how then shall
God fail to repay us manifold, yea, ten thou-
sand fold, when for His commandment's sake,
if any be indebted to us, we urge no com-
plaint against them, great or small, but let
them go exempt from all liability? Let us
not then think of the temporary pleasure that
springs up in us by exacting of our debtors,
but of the loss, rather, how great ! which we
shall thereby sustain hereafter, grievously in-
juring ourselves in the things which are eter-
nal. Rising accordingly above all, let us
forgive those who must give account to us, both
their debts and their offenses; that we may
make our own accounts prove indulgent, and
that what we could not reach by all virtue
besides, this we may obtain by not bearing
malice against our neighbors; and thus enjoy
the eternal blessings, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and might now and always,
even forever and ever. Amen.


I [w<rT6.]


2 o.yVUi[t.OVil.V .


HoMii.v XVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


lO-


HOMILY XVI.

Matt. \', 17.


Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets."


Why, who suspected this ? or who accused
Him, that He siiould make a defense against
this charge ? Since surely from what had
gone before ' no such suspicion was generated.
For to command men to be meek, and gen-
tle, and merciful, and pure in heart, and to
strive for righteousness, indicated no such
design, but rather altogether the contrary.

Wherefore then can He have said this ?
Not at random, nor vainly: but inasmuch as
He was proceeding to ordain commandments
greater tlian those of old, saying, " It was
said to them of old time, Thou shalt not
kill;- but I say unto you, Be not even
angry; " and to mark out a way for a kind
of divine and heavenly conversation; ^ in
order that the strangeness thereof might not
disturb the souls of the hearers, nor dispose
them quite to mutiny against what He said,
He used this means of setting them right
beforehand.

For although they fulfilled not the law, yet
nevertheless they were possessed with much
conscientious regard to it; and whilst they
were annulling it every day by their deeds,
the letters thereof they would have remain
unmoved, and that no one should add any-
thing more to them. Or rather, they bore
with their rulers adding thereto, not however
for the better, but for the worse. For so
they used to set aside the honor due to our
parents by additions of their own, and very
many others also of the matters enjoined
them, they would free themselves o{* by
tliese unseasonable additions.

Therefore, since Christ in the first place
was not of the sacredotal tribe, and next, tlie
things which He was about to introduce were
a sort of addition, not however lessening, but
enhancing virtue; He knowing beloretiand
that both these circumstances would troui)le
them, before He wrote in their mind those
wondrous laws, casts out that which was sure
to be harboring there. And what was it tiint
was harboring there, and making an obstacle ?

2. They tliought that He, thus speaking,


did so with a view to the abrogation of the
ancient institutions. This suspicion there-
fore He heals; nor here only doth He so, but
elsewhere also again. Thus, since they ac-
counted Him no less than an adversary of
God, from this sort of reason, namely, His
not keeping the sabbath; He, to heal such
their suspicion, there also again sets forth
His pleas, of whicli some indeed were proper
to Himself; as when He saith, " My Father
worketh, and I work;"^ Imt some had in
them much condescension, as when He brings
forward the sheep lost on the sabbath day,*
and points out that the law is disturbed for
its preservation, and makes mention again of
circumcision, as having this same effect.'

Wherefore we see also that He often speaks
words somewhat beneath Him, to remove the
semblance of His being an adversary of God.
I For this cause He who had raised thou-
I sands of the dead with a word only, when Me
i was calling Lazarus, added also a prayer;
and then, lest this siiould make Him appear
less than Him that begat Him, He, to cor-
rect this suspicion, added, " I said these
things, because of the people which standeth
by, that they may believe that thou hast
sent me."^ And neither doth He work all
things as one who acted by His own power,
that He miy-ht thoroughlv correct their weak-
ness; nor doth He all things with prayer, lest
He should leave matter of evil suspicion to
them tliat shoukl follow, as thougii He were
without strength or power: but He mingles
the latter with the former, and those again
witli these. Neither dotii He this iiuliscrim-
inately, but with His own proper wisdom.
For while He doeth the greater works author-
itatively, in tlie less He looks u\t unto
Heaven. Thus, when absolving sins, and
revealing His secrets, and opening Paradise,
and driving away devils, and cleansing lepers,
and bridling death, and raising the dead by
thousands. He did all by way of command:
but when, what was much less than these. He


' [tuiI' tlprjfjiiyuil'.']

' [The trxl h.is aUo " Vc has'c liriiril that,
the latter half is not a direct quotation. — I'
I [iroAiTcia?.]


as ill Matt. v.


John V. 17. A Mutt. xii. II. 7 John vii. 33.

John xi. 4^. [" Thcsr lhinK»"clor* no! (Kciir in llir N«


TcHlunirnt iKiSHiinr. htit it inscrtrd hcrr to roinjilrtr llir srnsc.
Coinp. k. \ ., " liul because ol the niiillitiitlc wlmli %i.iiitletli
around I lutid it, thai ihcy nmy believe th.it thou didst send me."
K.]


I04


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVI.


was causing many loaves to spring forth out
of few, then He looked up to Heaven: signi-
fying that not through weakness He doth
this. For He who could do the greater with
authority, how in the lesser could He need
prayer ? But as I was saying, He doeth this
to silence their shamelessness. The same
reckoning, then, I bid thee make of His
words also, when thou hearest Him speak
lowly things. For many in truth are the
causes both for words and for actions of that
cast: as, for instance, that He might not be
supposed alien from God; His instructing
and waiting on all men; His teaching humil-
ity; His being encompassed with flesh; the
Jews' inability to hear all at once; His teach-
ing us to utter no high word of ourselves.
For this cause many times, having in His
own person said much that is lowly of Him-
self, the great things He leaves to be said by
others. Thus He Himself indeed, reasoning
with the Jews, said, "Before Abraham was,
I am:" • but His disciple not thus, but, " In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God." ^

Again, that He Himself made Heaven, and
earth, and sea, and all things visible and in-
visible, in His own person He nowhere ex-
pressly said: but His disciple, speaking plainly
out, and suppressing nothing, affirms this
once, twice, yea often: writing that "all
things were made by Him;'' and, "without
Him was not one thing made; " and. He was
in the world, and the world was made by
Him. "3

And why marvel, if others have said greater
things of Him than He of Himself; since
(what is more) in many cases, what He
showed forth by His deeds, by His words He
uttered not openly? Thus that it was Him-
self who made mankind He showed clearly
even by that blind man; but when He was
speaking of our formation at the beginning.
He said not, " I made,'* but " He who made
them, made them male and female."'*
Again, that He created the world and all
things therein. He demonstrated by the
fishes, by the wine, by the loaves, by the
calm in the sea, by the sunbeam which He
averted on the Cross; and by very many
things besi 'es: but in words He hath nowhere
said this plainly, though His disciples are
continually declaring it, both John, and Paul,
and Peter.

For if they who night and day hear Him
discourse, and see Him work marvels; to
whom He explained many things in private,
and gave so great power as even to raise the


' John viii. 58.
3 John i. 3, 10.


2 John i. 1.
4 Matt. xix. 4.


dead; whom He made so perfect, as to for-
sake all things for Him: if even they, after
so great virtue and self-denial, had not
strength to bear it all, before the supply of
the Spirit; how could the people of the Jews,
being both void of understanding, and far
behind such excellency, and only by hazard
present when He did or said anything, how
could they have been persuaded but that He
was alien from the God of all, unless he had
practised such great condescension through-
out ?

For on this account we see that even when
He was abrogating the sabbath. He did not
as of set purpose bring in such His legisla-
tion, but He puts together many and various
pleas of defense. Now if, when He was
about to cause one commandment to cease.
He used so much reserve in His language, ^
that He might not startle the hearers; much
more, when adding to the law, entire as it
was, another entire code of laws, did He re-
quire much management and attention, not
to alarm those who were then hearing Him.

For this same cause, neither do we find
Him teaching everywhere clearly concerning
His own Godhead. For if His adding to the
law was sure to perplex them so greatly,
much more His declaring Himself God.

3. Wherefore many things are uttered by
Him, far below His proper dignity, and here
when He is about to proceed upon His addi-
tion to the law, He hath used abundance for
correction beforehand. For neither was it
once only that He said, " I do not abrogate
the law," but He both repeated it again,
and added another and a greater thing; in
that, to the words, "Think not that I am
come to destroy,'* He subjoined, "I am not
come to destroy, but to fulfill."

Now this not only obstructs the obstinacy
of the Jews, but stops also the mouths of
those heretics,* who say that the old cove-
nant is of the devil. For if Christ came to
destroy his tyranny, how is this covenant not
only not destroyed, but even fulfilled by
Him ? For He said not only, " I do not de-
stroy it; " though this had been enough; but
"I even fulfill it:" which are the words of
one so far from opposing himself, as to be
even establishing it.

And how, one may ask, did He not de-
stroy it? in what way did He rather fulfill
either the law or the prophets ? The pro-
phets He fulfilled, inasmuch as He confirmed
by His actions all that had been said con-
cerning Him; wherefore also the evangelist
used to say in each case, " That it might be

5 Xoyftiv OLKOyofxCa.

6 The Gnostic and Manichaean sects


Homily XVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


105


fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet."
Both when He was born,' and when the chil-
dren sung that wondrous hymn to Him, and
when He sat on the ass,'' and in very many
more instances He worked this same fulfill-
ment: all which things must have been un-
fulfilled, if He had not come.

But the law He fulfilled, not in one way
only, but in a second and third also. In one
way, by transgressing none of the precepts of
the law. For that He did fulfill it all, hear
what He saith to John, " For thus it becom-
eth us to fulfill all righteousness." ^ And to
the Jews also He said, " Which of you con-
vinceth me of sin."-* And to His disciples
again, "The prince of this world cometh,
and findeth nothing in me."s And the pro-
phet too from the first had said that " He did
no sin."*

This then was one sense in which He ful-
filled it. Another, that He did the same
through us also; for this is the marvel, that
He not only Himself fulfilled it, but He
granted this to us likewise. Which thing
Paul also declaring said, "Christ is the end
of the law for righteousness to every one
that believeth."' And he said also, that
"He judged sin in the flesh, that the right-
eousness of the law might be fulfilled in us
who walk not after the flesh." ^ And again,
" Do we then make void the law through
faith ? God forbid ! yea, we establish the
law." 9 For since the law was laboring at
this, to make man righteous, but had not
power. He came and brought in the way of
righteousness by faith, and so established
that which the law desired: and what the law
could not by letters, this He accomplished
by faith. On this account He saith, " I am
not come to destroy the law."

4. But if any one will inquire accurately,
he will find also another, a third sense, in
which this hath been done. Of what sort is
it then ? In tiie sense of that future code of
laws, which He was about to deliver to tliem.

For His sayings were no repeal of the
former, but a drawing out, and filling up of
them. Thus, "not to kill," is not annulled
by the saying. Be not angry, but rather is
filled up and jnit in greater security: and so
of all the otiiers.

Wherefore, you see, as He had before un-
suspectedly cast tiie seeds of this teacliing; so
at the time when from His comparison of the
old and new commandments, He would be
more distinctly suspected of placing them in
opposition. He used His corrective before-


' Matt. i. 71, 33.
* lohn viii. 46.
7 Rum. X. 4.


» Matt. xxi. 5-16.
5 lolin xiv. 31J.
" Kom. viii. 3, 4.


«5-


J Matt iii

A Isii. liii.

9 Koin, iii. 31


hand. For in a covert way He had indeed
already scattered those seeds, by what He
had snid. Thus, "Blessed are the poor," is
the same as that we are not to be angry; and,
"Blessed are the pure in heart,'' as not to
"look upon a woman for lust;" and the
" not laying up treasures on earth," harmon-
izes with, "Blessed are the merciful;" and
''to mourn" also, "to be persecuted" and
" reviled,"' coincide with " entering in at the
strait gate;" and, "to hunger and thirst
after righteousness,'' is nothing else, than
that which He saith afterwards, " Whatsoever
ye would that men should do to you, do ye
also to them." And having declared "the
peace-maker blessed," He again almost said
the same, when He gave command " to leave
the gift," and hasten to reconciliation with
him that was grieved, and about "agreeing
with our adversary."

But there He set down the rewards of them
that do right, here rather the punishments of
them who neglect practice.'" Wherefore as
in that place He said, " The meek shall in-
herit earth;" so here, " He who calleth his
brother fool, shall be in danger of hell-fire;"
and there, " The pure in heart shall see
God;" here, he is a complete adulterer who
looks unchastely. And having there called
"the peace-makers, sons of God;" here He
alarms us from another quarter, saying,
'■ Lest at any time the adversary deliver thee
to the judge." Thus also, whereas in the
former part He blesses them that mourn, and
them that are persecuted; in the following,
establishing the very same point. He threatens
destruction to them that go not that way;
for, "They that walk 'in the broad way,'
saith He, 'make their end there.'" .And,
" Ye cannot serve God and mammon,'* seems
to me the same with, " Blessed are the mer-
ciful," ana, "those that hunger after right-
eousness."

But as I said, since He is going to say
these things more clearly, ami not only more
clearly, but also to add again mure than had
been already said (for He no longer merely
seeks a merciful man, but l)ids us give up
even our coat; not simply a meek person,
but to turn also the other cheek to him tliat
would smite us): therefore He first takes
away the apparent contradiction.

On this account, tiien, as I have already
stated. He said this not once only, but once
and again; in ti>at to tlie words, " Think not
that I am come to destroy," He added,
" I am not come to destroy, l)ut to fulfill."

" I-'or verily I say unto you. Til! Heaven


'" [ruic tit) iroiwvTwi'.^


io6


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVI.


" Whosoever therefore shall break one


and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in
no wise pass from the law, till all come to
pass." '

Now what He saith is like this: it cannot
be that it should remain unaccomplished,
but the very least thing therein must needs be
fulfilled. Wliich thing He Himself per-
formed, in that He completed ^ it with all ex-
actness.

And here He signifies to us obscurely that
the fashion of the whole world is also being
changed. Nor did He set it down without
purpose, but in order to arouse the hearer,
and indicate, that He was with just cause in-
troducing another discipline; if at least the
very works of the creation are all to be trans-
formed, and mankind is to be called to an-
other country, and to a higher way of practis-
ing how to live. 3

5
of these least commandments, and shall teach

men so, he shall be called least in the king-
dom of Heaven." ''

Thus, having rid Himself of the evil sus-
picion, and having stopped the mouths of
them who would fain gainsay, then at length
He proceeds to alarm, and sets d6wn a heavy
denunciation in support of the enactments
He was entering on.

For as to His having said this in behalf not
of the ancient laws, but of those which He
was proceeding to enact, listen to what fol-
lows, " For I say unto )^ou," saith he,
*' Except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of
Heaven. "5

For if He were threatening with regard to
the ancient laws, how said He, "except it
shall exceed?'' since they who did just the
same as those ancients, could net exceed
them on the score of righteousness.

But of what kind was the required excess ?
Not to be angry, not even to look upon a
woman unchastely.

For what cause then doth He call these
commandments " least," though they were so
great and high ? Because He Himself was
about to introduce the enactment of them;
for as He humbled Himself, and speaks of
Himself frequently with measure, so likewise
of His own enactments, hereby again teach-
ing us to be modest in everything. And
besides, since there seemed to be some sus-


1 Matt. V. i8. [R. v., " Till Heaven and earth pass away, one
jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass away from the law, till all
things be accomplished." — R.]

2 a7rapTi(ra5. 3 /3iou napacrKevriv ij\ltr)\oTepav,

4 Matt. V. ig.

5 [Matt. VI 2o. The citation is accurate ; the phrase " the
righteousness" is supplied in English ; see R. V. — R.]


picion of novelty. He ordered His discourse
for a while with reserve.*

But when thou hearest, " least in the king-
dom of Heaven," surmise thou nothing but
hell and torments. For He was used to
mean by "the kingdom," not merely the
enjoyment thereof, but also the time of the
resurrection, and that awful coming. And
how could it be reasonable, that while he who
called his brother fool, and trangressed but
one commandment, falls into hell; the
breaker of them all, and instigator of others
to the same, should be within the kingdom.
This therefore is not what He means, but
that such a one will be at that time /easf, that
is, cast out, last. And he that is last will
surely then fall into hell. For, being God,
He foreknew the laxity of the many. He
foreknew that some would think these sayings
were merely hyperbolical, and would argue
about the laws, and say. What, if any one call
another a fool, is he punished ? If one
merely look on a woman, doth he become an
adulterer? For this very cause He, destroy-
ing such insolence beforehand, hath set down
the strongest denunciation against either sort,
as well them who transgress, as them who
lead on others so to do.

Knowing then His threat as we do, let us
neither ourselves transgress, nor discourage
such as are disposed to keep these things.

" But whosoever shall do and teach," saith
He, " shall be called great.'*

For not to ourselves alone, should we be
profitable, but to others also; since neither is
the reward as great for him who guides him-
self aright, as for one who with himself adds
also another. For as teaching without doing
condemns the teacher (for "thou which
teachest another," it is said, " teachest thou
not thyself "7?) so doing but not guiding
others, lessens our reward. One ought
therefore to be chief in either work, and hav-
ing first set one's self right, thus to proceed
also to the care of the rest. For on this
account He Himself hath set the doing before
the teaching; to intimate that so most of all
may one be able to teach, but in no other
way. For one will be told, " Physician, heal
thyself."^ Since he who cannot teach him-
self, yet attempts to set others right, will
have many to ridicule him. Or rather such
a one will have no power to teach at all, his
actions uttering their voice against him. But
if he be complete in both respects, " he shall
be called great in the kingdom of Heaven."

6. " For I say unto you, Except your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness


^ u7reo'TaA/ii€i'ios.


7 Rom. ii. 21.


8 Luke iv. 23.


Homily XVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


107


of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no
case enter into the kingdom of Heaven."'

Here by righteousness He means the whole
of virtue; even as also discoursing of Job,
He said, " He was a blameless man, right-
eous."- According to the same signification
of the word, Paul also called that man
" righteous " for whom, as he said, no law is
even set. "For," saith he, "a law is not
made for a righteous man."^ And in many
other places too one might find this name
standing for virtue in general.

But observe, I pray thee, the increase of
grace; in that He will have His newly-come
disciples better than the teachers in the old
covenant. For by " Scribes and Pharisees"
here, He meant not merely the lawless, but
the well-doers. For, were they not doing
well, He would not have said they have a
righteousness; neither would He have com-
pared the unreal to the real.

And observe also here, how He commends
the old law, by making a comparison be-
tween it and the other; which kind of thing
implies it to be of the same tribe and kindred.
For more and less, is in the same kind. He
doth not, you see, find fault with the old
law, but will have it made stricter. Where-
as, had it been evil,-* He would not have re-
quired more of it; He would not have made
it more perfect, but would have cast it out.

And how one may say, if it be such, doth
it not bring us into the Kingdom ? It doth
not now bring in them who live after the
coming of Christ, favored as they are with
more strength, and bound to strive for greater
things: since as to its own foster-children,
them it doth bring in one and all. Yea, for
"many shall come," saith He, "from east
and west, and shall lie down in the bosoms
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob." = And Laz-
arus also receiving the great prize, is sliown
dwelling in Abraham's bosom. And all, as
many as have shone forth with excellency in
the old dispensation, shone by it, every one
of them. And Christ Himself, had it been in
anything evil or alien from Him, would not
have fulfilled it all when He came. For if
only to attract the Jews He was doing this,
and not in order to prove it akin to the new
law, and concurrent therewith; wherefore did
He not also fulfill the laws and customs of
the Gentiles, tliat He might attract liie Gen-
tiles also ?

So that from nil considerations it is clear.


' Matt. V. ao.

» Job i. I, I. XX. "That man \va« trur, blainrlru, riKlitcoua,
devout, refraining from every evil cicril."
1 I 1 im. i. 9.

4 There is Ms. authority fur reading " of an evil one."

5 Matt. viii. 1 1,


that not from any badness in itself doth it
fail to bring us in, but because it is now the
season of higher pjrecepts.

And if it be more imperfect than the new,
neither doth this imply it to be evil: liince
upon this principle the new law itself will be
in the very same case. Because in truth our
knowledge of this, when compared with that
which is to come, is a sort of partial and im-
perfect thing, and is done away on the com-
ing of that other. " For when," saith He,
"that which is perfect is come, then that
which is in part shall be done away: " * even
as it befell the old law through the new.
Yet we are not to blame the new '.aw for this,
though that also gives place on our attaining
unto the Kingdom: for "then," saith He,
" that which is in part shall be done away:"
but for all this we call it great.

Since tiien both the rewards thereof are
greater, and the power given by the Spirit
more abundant, in reason it requires our
graces to be greater also. For it is no
longer " a land that floweth with milk and
honey," nor a comfortable ^ old age, nor many
children, nor corn and wine, and flocks and
herds: but Heaven, and the good things in
the Heavens, and adoption and brotherhood
with the Only-Begotten, and to partake of the
inheritance and to be glorified and to reign
with Him, and those unnumbered rewartls.
And as to our having received more abundant
help, hear thou Paul, when he saith, " There
is therefore no condemnation now to them
which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit:^ for the law of
the Spirit of life hath made me free from the
law of sin and death." '

7. And now after threatening the trans-
gressors, and setting great rewards for them
that do right, and signifying that He justly
re<]uires of us something beyond the former
measures; He from this point begins to legis-
late, not simply, but by way of comparison
with the ancient ordinances, desiring to inti-
mate these two things: first, that not as con-
tending with the former, but rather in great
harmony with them, He is making these
enactments; next, that it w.is meet and very
seasonable for Him to add tlu-rcto these
second j>recepts.

And that lliis may be made yet clearer, let
us hearken to tlie wonls of tiie Legislator.

What then doth He Himself say?

" Ye have heard that it was said to them
of old time, Thou slialt not kill." "»

* I Cor. xiil. in. 7 Atirapoi'.

" [ I hi* iitlitition to Kom. viii. 1 (" who walk," rli .). now rc-
JFcIrd hy nil critical rdilorH, i« not founil in iiny |>atriHti< niithor-
ity older lliitn C'hry*<»>toin. The urxumrnl atiove nhow* how it
wji» ucldril (roMi an aiutumed ttp|>licutioa to Kunclitication.— K.]

9 koni. viii. I, J. •" Matt. v. ai.


io8


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVI.


And yet it was Himself who gave those
laws also, but so far He states them imper-
sonally. For if on the onchand He had said,
" Ye have heard that I said to them of old,"
the saying would have been hard to receive,
and would have stood in the way of all the
hearers. If again, on the other hand, after
bavins: said, " Ye have heard that it was said
to them of old by my Father/' He had
added, " But I say," He would have seemed
to be taking yet more on Himself.

Wherefore He hath simply stated it, mak-
ing out thereby one point only; the proof
that in fitting season He had come saying
these things. For by the words, "It was
said to them of old," He pointed out the
length of the time, since they received this
commandment. And this He did to shame
the hearer, shrinking from the advance to the
higher class of His commandments; as
though a teacher should say to a child that
was indolent, " Knowest thou not how long
a time thou hast consumed in learning sylla-
bles ?" This then He also covertly intimates
by the expression, "them of old time," and
thus for the future summons them on to the
higher order of His instructions: as if He
had said, " Ye are learning these lessons
long enough, and you must henceforth press
on LO such as are higher than these."

And it is well that He doth not disturb the
order of the commandments, but begins first
with that which comes earlier, with which the
law also began. Yea, for this too suits with
one showing the harmony between them.

" But I say unto you, that whosoever is
angry with his brother without a cause, shall
be in danger of the judgment." '

Seest thou authority in perfection ? Seest
thou a bearing suited to a legislator? Why,
which among prophets ever spake on this
wise ? which among righteous men ? which
among patriarchs ? None; but, " Thus saith
the Lord." But the Son not so. Because
they were publishing their Master's com-
mands, He His Father's. And when I say,
"His Father's," I mean His own. "For
mine," saith He, "are thine, and thine are
mine."= And they had their fellow-servants
to legislate for, He His own servants.

Let us now ask those who reject the law,
"is, ' Be not angry ' contrary to ' Do no mur-
der ' ? or is not the one commandment the
completion and the development of the
other?" Clearly the one is the fulfilling of
the other, and that is greater on this very


1 Matt. V. 22. [Chrysostom reads ei<cr) in this verse, and inter-
prets accordingly ; see also Homily XVII. 2. J he term is wanting
in the two oldest Mss. of the Greek Testament, and in the Vulgate.
Comp. R. V. in loco. — R.]

2 John xvii. 10.


account. Since he who is not stirred up to
anger, will much more refrain from murder;
and he who bridles wrath will much more
keep his hands to himself. For wrath is the
root of murder. And you see that He who
cuts up the root will much more remove the
branches; or rather, will not permit them so
much as to shoot out at all. Not therefore
to abolish the law did He make these enact-
ments, but for the more complete observation
of it. For with what design did the law en-
join these things ? Was it not, that no one
might slay his neighbor? It follows, that he
who was opposing the law would have to en-
join murder. For to murder, were the con-
trary to doing no murder. But if He doth
not suffer one even to be angry, the mind of
the law is established by Him more com-
pletely. For he that studies to avoid murder
will not refrain from it equally with him that
hath put away even anger; this latter being
further removed from the crime.

8. But that we may convict them in an-
other way also, let us bring forward all their
allegations. What then do they affirm ?
They assert that the God who made the
world, who "makes His sun to rise on the
evil and on the good, who sends the rain on
the just and on the unjust," is in some sense
an evil being. ^ But the more moderate (for-
sooth) among them, though declining this,
yet while they affirm Him to be just, they
deprive Him of being good. And some
other one, who is not, nor made any of the
things that are, they assign for a Father to
Christ. And they say that he, who is not
good, abides in his own, and preserves what
are his own; but that He, that is good, seeks
what are another's, and desires of a sudden
to become a Saviour to them whose Creator
He was not.-* Seest thou the children of the
devil, how they speak out of the fountain of
their father, alienating the work of creation
from God: while John cries out, " He came

3 Epiph. Haer. 41, sec. i. " Cerdon [circ. A. D. 150] with oth-
ers preached two first principles, and so in fact two Gods : the one
good, and unknown to all : whom he also called the Father of
Jesus : the other, the Demiurgus, or artificer, evil, and open to
knowledge, who spake in the law, and appeared in the prophets,
and hath often become visible." In this he agreed with the Ori-
ental heretics generally. Marcion, his disciple, within a few years
improved on him (Hser. 42, sec. 3), "saying, that there are three
principles : one, that on high, unnamed, and unseen, which it
pleases him to call the good God (this, however, was not the Crea-
tor of any of the things that are in the world) : another, a visible
God, Creator and Artificer : and, in the third place, the devil.
.... Now the Creator, and Artificer, and visible One, they say,
is the God of the Jews, and is also the Judge." C'f. ihid. sec. 6 ;
St. Aug. de Uteres. 22 ; Tertull. contr. Marc. i. 10 [Ante-Nicene
Fathers^ vol. III. p. 278]; St. Iren. i. 28, 29 \_Ante-Nicene Fath-
ers, vol. I. pp. 352, 353].

4 St. Iren. v. 2. " Vain also are those who say that the Lord
came to what was another's, as though coveting it, in order to
present that man who had been made by another, to that God,
who had neither made nor ordered him, yea, rather, who had de-
serted him from men's first original formation. His coming, there-
fore, is not just, coming as He did by their account to what was
none of His." \_Ihid. pp. 527, 528.] In Lib. iii. 11, he specifies
Marcion as teaching this doctrine.


HoMii.Y XVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


109


unto His own," and, "The world was made
by Him?"'

In the next place, they criticise the law in
the old covenant, whicii bids put out "an
eye for an eye, "and " a tooth for a tooth;" =*
and straightway they insult and say, " Why,
how can He be good who speaks so?"

What then do we say in answer to this ?
That it is the highest kind of philanthropy.
For He made this law, not that we might
strike out one another's eyes, but that fear
of suffering by others might restrain us from
doing any such thing to them. As therefore
He threatened the Ninevites with overthrow,
not that He might destroy them, (for had
that been His will, He ought to have been
silent), but that He might by fear make them
better, and so quiet His wrath: so also hath
He appointed a punishment for those who
wantonly assail the eyes of others, that if
good principle dispose them not to refrain
from such cruelty, fear may restrain them
from injuring their neighbors' sight.

And if this be cruelty, it is cruelty also for
the murderer to be restrained, and the adul-
terer checked. But these are the sayings of
senseless men, and of those that are mad to
the extreme of madness. For I, so far from
saying that this comes of cruelty, should say,
that the contrary to this would be unlawful,
according to men's reckoning. And whereas,
thou sayest, " Because He commanded to
pluck out " an eye for an eye," therefore He
is cruel;" I say, that if He had not given
this commandment, then He would have
seemed, in the judgment of most men, to be
that which thou saj'est He is.

For let us suppose that this law had been
altogether done away, and that no one feared
tlie punishment ensuing thereu[)on, but that
license had been given to all the wicked to
follow their own disposition in all security, to
adulterers, and to murderers,^ to perjured
persons, and to parricides; would not all
things have been turned upside down ? would
not cities, market-places, and houses, sea and
land, and the whole world, have been filled
witli unnumbered pollutions and murders?
Every one sees it. For if, when there are


' John I. 1 1, 10.

" I'ertiill, adv. Marcion. ii. 18 ; F.xod. xxi. s^. " Which iif the
Rood riiirs of tin- law should 1 rather drfriid, than tliosi; whirh
heresy hath craved for hrr own purposes? .As the rule of retalia-
tion, rcquirin){ eye for eye, tooth for t<K>tli, and liruisc for hruise.
There is no tinKe here of any permission for rc|)ayin>; an injury in
kind, but the wliole <lrift of it is to restrain violence. That is, he-
cause that most sluhhorn and faithless people would count it hard
or even inconceivalile to await (lod's redress, whicii the prophet
was afterwards to pni<laim, in the words, ' Vengeance is mine, I
will repay, saith the Lord;' the commission <if wroii).; during the
interval was tu l>e in a manner smothered hy the fcur of iii'.inediatc
retribution." [.I n/t-Xi'ifnc J-'at/n-i s.vtil. ll\. \). (ii.l ."si. .Vunns-
tin (contr. .Adim. <■. 8), says the same in reply to the Ntanu hzaiis.

3 ["And to thieves ' should be inserted here. 'I'hc oini.vsion
was probably accidental.- k.|


laws, and fear, and threatening, our evil dis-
positions are hardly checked; were even this
security taken away, what is there to prevent
men's choosing vice? and what degree of
mischief would not then come revelling upon
the whole of human life ?

The rather, since cruelty lies not only in
allowing the bad to do what they will, but in
another thing too quite as much; to overlook,
and leave uncared for, him who hath done
no wrong, but who is without cause or reason
suffering ili. For tell me; were any one to
gather together wicked men from all quarters,
and arm them with swords, and bid them go
about the whole city, and massacre all that
came in their way, could there be anything
more like a wild beast than he? And what
if some other should bind, and confine with
the utmost strictness those whom that man
had armed, and sliould snatch from those
lawless hands them, \vho were on the point
of being butchered; could anything be greater
humanity than this ?

Now then, I bid thee transfer these exam-
ples to the law likewise; for He that com-
mands to pluck out "an eye for an eye,"
hath laid the fear as a kind of strong chain
upon the souls of the bad, and so resembles
him, who detains those assassins in prison;
whereas he who appoints no punishment for
them, doth all but arm them by such secur-
ity, and acts the part of that other, who was
putting the swords in their hands, and letting
them loose over the whole city.

Seest thou not, how the commandments, so
far from coming of cruelty, come rather of
abounding mercy? And if on account of
these thou callest the Lawgiver grievous, ami
hard to bear with; tell me which sort of com-
mand is the more toilsome and grievous,
" Do no murder," or, " Be not even angry " ?
Which is more in extreme, lie who exacts a
penalty for murder, or for mere anger ? He
who subjects the adulterer to vengeance after
the fact, or he who enjoins a penalty even for
the very desire, and that penalty everlasting?
See ye not how their reasoning comes round
to the very contrary ? how the Ciod of the
old covenant, whom they call cruel, will be
found mild and meek: and He of the new,
whom they acknowledged to be good, will be
hard and grievous, according to their m.id-
ness ? Whereas we say, that tliere is but one
and the same Legisl.itor of either covenant,
who dispensed all meetly, anil adapted to the
difference of the times tlie difference between
the two systems of l.iw. Therefore neither
are the first commandments cruel, nor the
second hard and grievous, but all of one and
the s.ime providential care.


I lO


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTCM.


[Homily XVI.


For that He Himself gave the old cove-
ant also, hear the afifirmation of the prophet,
or rather (so we must speak), of Him who is
both the one and the other: "I will make
a covenant with you, not according to the
covenant which I made with your fathers/' '

But if he receive not this, who is diseased
with the Manichjenn doctrines, "^ let him hear
Paul saying the very same in another place,
" For Abraham had two sons, one by the
bondmaid, and another by the freewoman;
and these are two covenants/' ' As therefore
in that case the wives are different, the hus-
band the same; so here too the covenants
are two, the Lawgiver one.

And to prove to thee that it was of one and
the same mildness; in the one He saith,
"An eye for an eye," but in this other,

" If one smite thee on thy right cheek,
turn to him the other also." •»

For as in that case He checks him that
doth the wrong with the fear of this suffering,
even so also in this. " How so," it may be
said, "when He bids turn to him the other
cheek also ? " Nay, what of that ? Since not
to take away his fear did He enjoin this, but
as charging yourself to allow him to take his
fill entirely. Neither did He say, that the
other continues unpunished, but, " do not
thou punish;" at once both enhancing the
fear of him that smiteth, if he persist, and
comforting him who is smitten.

9. But these things we have said, as one
might say them incidentally, concerning all
the commandments. Now we must go on to
that which is before us, and keep to the
thread of what had been affirmed. " He that
is angry with his brother without a cause
shall be in danger of the judgment: " so He
speaks. Thus He hath not altogether taken
the thing away: first, because it is not possi-
ble, being a man, to be freed from passions:
we may indeed get the dominion over them,
but to be altogether without them is out of
the question.

Next, because this passion is even useful,
if we know how to use it at the suitable time.^
See, for instance, what great good was
wrought by that anger of Paul, which he felt
against the Corinthians, on that well-known
occasion; and how, as it delivered them from
a grievous pest, so by the same means again
he recovered the people of the Galatians like-
wise, which had fallen aside; and others too
beside these.

What then is the proper time for anger?

' Jer. xxxi. 31, 32.

2 Because they denied the authority of the Old Testament, but
received the New, including St. Paul's Epistles.

3 Gal. iv. 22. 4 Matt. v. 39.
5 See Bp. Butler's Sermon on Resentment.


When we are not avenging ourselves, but
checking others in their lawless freaks, or
forcing them to attend in their negligence.

And what is the unsuitable time? When
we do so as avenging ourselves: which Paul
also forbidding, said "Avenge not yourselves,
dearly beloved, but rather give place unto
wrath.'' * When we are contending for riches:
yea, for this hath he also taken away, where
he saith, " Why do ye not rather take wrong ?
why do ye not rather suffer yourselves to be
defrauded ? " ' For as this last sort is super-
fluous, so is the first necessary and profitable.
But most men do the contrary; becoming
like wild beasts when they are injured them-
selves, but remiss and cowardly when they
see despite done to another: both which are
just opposite to the laws of the Gospel.

Being angry then is not a transgression,
but being so unseasonably. For this cause
the prophet also said, " Be ye angry, and sin
not."«

10. And whosoever shall say to his brother,
Raca, shall be in danger of the council."

By the council in this place He means the
tribunal of the Hebrews: and He hath men-
tioned this now, on purpose that He might
not seem everywhere to play the stranger and
innovator.

But this word, "Raca," is not an expres-
sion of a great insolence, but rather of some
contempt and slight on the part of the
speaker. For as we, giving orders either to
our servants, or to any very inferior person,
say, "Away with thee; you here, tell such
an one:" 5 so they who make use of the
Syrians' language say, " Raca," putting that
word in stead of "thou." But God, the lover
of man, roots up even the least faults, com-
manding us to behave to one another in
seemly manner, and with due respect; and
this with a view of .destroying hereby also the


greater.


" But whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall
be in danger of hell fire." '°

To many this commandment hath appeared
grievous and galling, if for a mere word we
are really to pay so great a penalty. And
some even say that it was spoken rather
hyperbolically. But I fear lest, when we
have deceived ourselves with words here, we
may in deeds there suffer that extreme pun-
ishment.


* Rom. xii. 19. 7 i Cor. vi. 7.

8 Ps. iv. 5, Lxx., comp. Eph. iv. 26. " Stand in awe, and sin
not," in our version. Another part of the same Hebrew verb is,
however, rendered " rage " in our translation: 2 Kings xix. 27,
28 ; Is. xxxvii. 28, 29. [The R. V. has the marginal rendering,
" Be ye angry," in Ps. iv. 5. In Eph. iv. 26, the lxx. is accurately
cited.— R.]

9 [The original repeats the emphatic and contemptuous <tv. — R.]

10 [eis TJji' yffvvai' Tou irvpo?. Comp. R. V. in loco. — R.]


Homily XVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


1 1 I


For wherefore, tell me, doth the command-
ment seem overburdensome ? Knowest thou
not that most punishments and most sins
have their beginning from words ? Yea, for
by words are blasphemies, and denials are
by words, and revilings, and reproaches, and
perjuries, and bearing false witness.' Re-
gard not then its being a mere word, but
whether it have not much danger, this do
thou inquire. Art thou ignorant that in the
season of enmity, when wrath is inflamed,
and the soul kindled, even the least thing
appears great, and what is not very reproach-
ful is counted intolerable ? And often these
little things have given birth even to murder,
and overthrown whole cities. For just as
where friendship is, even grievous things are
light, so where enmity lies beneath, very
trifles appear intolerable. And however sim-
ply a word be spoken, it is surmised to have
been si)oken with an evil meaning. And as
in fire: if there be but a small spark, though
thousands of planks lie by, it doth not easily
lay hold of them; but if the flame have waxed
strong and high, it readily seizes not planks
only, but stones, and all materials that fall in
its way; and by what things it is usually
quenched, by the same it is kindled the more
(for some say that at such a time not only
wood and tow, and the other combustibles,
but even water darted forth upon it doth but
fan its power the more); so is it also with
anger; whatever any one may say, becomes
food in a moment for this evil conflagration.
All which kind of evils Christ checking be-
forehand, had condemned first him that is
angry without a cause to the judgment, (this
being the very reason why He said, " He
that is angry shall be in danger of the judg-
ment ") ; then him that saith " Raca," to the
council. But as yet these are no great
things; for the punishments are here.
Therefore for him wlio calleth '"fool" He hath
added the fire of hell, now for the first time
mentioning the name of hell. For having
before discoursed much of the kingdom, not
until then did He mention this; implying,
that the former comes of His own love and
indulgence towards man, this latter of our
negligence.

1 1. And see how He proceeds by little and
little in His punishments, all but excusing
Himself unto thee, and signifying that His
tiesire indeed is to threaten nothing of the
kind, but that we drag Him on to sucli de-
nunciations. For observe: " I bade thee,"
saith He, " not l)e angry for nought, because

' [One MS. adds hrre itai ocaipn'i' (" and inurdrrinn "). The
wordHare brackc-trd in Kicld's Greek text ; while ihe Ijitin vcmon
has ///a Aow/V/<//'(».-R.]


thou art in danger ot the judgment. Thou
hast despised the former commandment:
see what anger hath produced; it hath led
thee on straightway to insult, for thou hast
called thy [)rother ' Raca." Again, I set
another punishment, ' the council.' If thou
overlook even this, and proceed to that which
is more grievous, I visit thee no longer with
these finite punishments, but with the undy-
ing penalty of hell, lest after this thou
shouldest break forth = even to murder."
For there is nothing, nothing in the world
more intolerable than insolence; it is what
hath very great power ^ to sting a man's soul.
But when the word too which is spoken is in
itself more wounding than the insolence, the
blaze becomes twice as great. Think it not
then a light thing to call another " fool." For
when of that which separates us from the
brutes, and by which especially we are human
beings, namely, the mind and the under-
standing,— when of this thou hast robbed thy
brother, thou hast deprived him of all his
nobleness.

Let us not then regard the words merely,
but realizing the things themselves, and his
feeling, let us consider how great a wound is
made by this word, and unto how much evil
it proceeds. For this cause Paul likewise
cast out of the kingdom not only '' the adul-
terous" and " the effeminate," but " the re-
vilers " ■• also. And with great reason: for
the insolent man mars all the beauty of char-
ity, and casts upon his neighbor unnumbered
ills, and works up lasting enmities, and tears
asunder the members of Christ, and is daily
driving away that peace which God so desires:
giving much vantage ground unto the devil
by his injurious ways, and making him tiiC
stronger. Therefore Christ Himself, cutting
out the sinews of the devil's i)ower, brought
in this law.

For indeed He makes much account of
love: this being above all things the mother
of every good, ami the badge of His disci-
ples, and the bond wiiicli holds together our
whole condition. Witli reason therefore
doth He remove with great earnestness the
roots and the sources of that hatred which
utterly spoils it.

'i'liink not therefore that these sayings nro
in any wise hyperbolical, l)nt consider the
good done by them, and admire the mildness
of these laws. For there is nothing for which
God takes so much pains, as tliis; that we
should be united ami knit together one with
anotlier. Therefore both in His own person,
and by His disciples, as well those in the


4 I Cor. VI. 9, lo.


3 i M«Ai«Ta tvvarot A««r«ii>.


I 12


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVL


Old, as in the New Testament, He makes so
much account of this commandment; and is
a severe avenger and punisher of those who
despise the duty. For in truth nothing so
effectually gives entrance and root to all
wickedness, as the taking away of love.
Wherefore He also said, " When iniquity
abounds, the love of the many shall wax
cold."' Thus Cain became his brother's
murderer; thus Esau; thus Joseph's breth-
ren; thus our unnumbered crimes have come
revelling in, this bond being dissevered.
You see why He Himself also roots out
whatever things injure this, on every side,
with great exactness.

12. Neither doth He stop at those precepts
only which have been mentioned, but adds
also others more than those: whereby He
signifies how much account He makes there-
of. Namely, having threatened by "the
council," by "the judgment," and by
"hell," He added other sayings again in
harmony with the former, saying thus:

"If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and
there rememberest that thy brother hath
ought against thee; leave there thy gift be-
fore the altar, and go away;'' first be recon-
ciled to thy brother, and then come and offer
thy gift. "3

O goodness ! O exceeding love to man !
He makes no account of the honor due unto
Himself, for the sake of our love towards
our neighbor; implying that not at all from
any enmity, nor out of any desire to punish,
had He uttered those former threatenings,
but out of very tender affection. For what
can be milder than these sayings ? " Let my
service," saith he, "be interrupted, that thy
love may continue; since this also is a sacri-
fice, thy being reconciled to thy brother."
Yea, for this cause He said not, "after the
offering," or "before the offering;" but,
while the very gift lies there, and when the
sacrifice is already beginning, He sends thee
to be reconciled to thy brother; and neither
after removing that which lies before us,"* nor
before presenting the gift, but while it lies
in the midst, He bids thee hasten thither.


1 Matt. xxiv. j2. f" Shall be multiplied " is a more exact ren-
dering of the verb in the first clause. Comp. R. V. — R.]

2 ane\6e, St. Chrys. vira-ye, rec. text. [There is no Mss. author-
ity for the former readme i" the New Testament passage, but the
authorities for the text of the Homilies are divided between oTreASe
and ane\0uii'. — R.]

3 Matt. V. 23, 24.

4 o-vveKovTa to. TTpOKeineva. Mr. Field translates this, " quickly
doing the work in hand :" alleging that the word avvaipeii' cannot
well stand for " removing." But its strict meaning seems to be
" to pack up," or " put into a small compass." So Odyss. xx. 95.
)(\alvav ^iv <Tvv€\iiiv Ka'i KMsa, To'iaiv fvev&ev. And this meaning
suits well enough with the word irp oiceiju.ci'a, taken in its liturgical
sense. [The technical sense of the verb is " to contract," and the
context favors Field's view. The command was neither "after
hastening through the service ( Latin, KfC /ro/ere con/ecto sacri-
Jicio) nor before beginning it." — R.]


With what motive then doth He command
so to do, and wherefore? These two ends,
as it appears to me. He is hereby shadowing
out and providing for. First, as I have said.
His will is to point out that He highly values
charity, 5 and considers it to be the greatest
sacrifice: and that without it He doth not
receive even that other; next, He is imposing
such a necessity of reconciliation, as admits
of no excuse. For whoso hath been charged
not to offer before he be reconciled, will
hasten, if not for love of his neighbor, yet,
that this may not lie unconsecrated,* to run
unto him who hath been grieved, and do
away the enmity. For this cause He hath
also expressed it all most significantly, to
alarm and thoroughly to awaken him. Thus,
when He had said, "Leave thy gift,'' He
stayed not at this, but added, "before the
altar " (by the very place again causing him
to shudder) ; " and go away." And He said
not merely, "Go away," but He added,
" first, and then come and offer thy gift."
By all these things making it manifest, that
this table receives not them that are at enmity
with each other.

Let the initiated hear this, as many as
draw nigh in enmity: and let the uninitiated
hear too: yea, for the saying hath some rela-
tion to them also. For they too offer a gift
and a sacrifice: prayer, I mean, and almsgiv-
ing. For as to this also being a sacrifice,
hear what the prophet saith: "A sacrifice of
praise will glorify me; '''^ and again, " Sacri-
fice to God a sacrifice of praise; '' ^ and, "The
lifting up of mine hands is an evening sacri-
fice."» So that if it be but a prayer, which
thou art offering in such a frame of mind, it
were better to leave thy prayer, and become
reconciled to thy brother, and then to offer
thy prayer.

For to this end were all things done: to this
end even God became man, and took order
for all those works, that He might set us at
one.

And whereas in this place He is sending
the wrong doer to the sufferer, in His prayer
He leads the sufferer to the wrong doer, and
reconciles them. For as there He saith,
" Forgive men their debts;" so here, " If he
hath ought against thee, go thy wa}^ unto
him."

Or rather, even here too He seems to me
to be sending the injured person: and for
some such reason He said not. "Reconcile
thyself to thy brother," but, "Be thou rec-


5 Y-T-r\v ayan-jjc, properly rendered " love " in the next sentence.

6 areAeo'TOi'. 7 Ps. 1. 23.

8 Ps. 1. 14. 9 Ps. cxli. 2.


Homily XVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


onciled." And while the saying seems to
pertain to the aggressor, the whole of it
really pertains to him that is aggrieved.
Thus, " If thou art reconciled to him," saith
Christ, "through thy love to him thou wilt
have me also propitious, and wilt be able to
offer thy sacrifice with great confidence.
But if thou art still irritated, consider that
even I readily command that which is mine
to be lightly esteemed, that ye may become
friends; and let these thoughts be soothing
to thine anger."

And He said not, "When thou hast suf-
fered any of the greater wrongs, then be rec-
onciled; but, "Though it be some trifle that
he hath against thee." And He added not,
"Whether justly or unjustly; but merely,
"If he hath ought against thee." For
though it be justly, not even in that case
oughtest thou to protract the enmity; since
Christ also was justly angered with us, yet
nevertheless He gave Himself for us to be
slain, " not imputing those trespasses." '

For this cause Paul also, when urging us
in another way to reconciliation, said, "Let
not the sun go down upon your wrath." =
For much as Christ by this argument of the
sacrifice, so there Paul by that of the day, is
urging us on to the self-same point. Because
in truth he fears the night, lest it overtake
him that is smitten alone, and make the
wound greater. For whereas in the day there
are many to distract, and draw him off; in
the night, when he is alone, and is thinking
it over by himself, the waves swell, and the
storm becomes greater. Therefore Paul,
you see, to prevent this, would fain commit
him to the night already reconciled, that the
devil may after that have no opportunity,
from his solitude, to rekindle the furnace of
his wrath, and make it fiercer. Thus also
Christ permits not, though it be ever so little
delay, lest, the sacrifice being accomplished,
such an one become more remiss, procrastin-
ating from day to day: for He knows that the
case requires very speedy treatment. Antl
as a skillful physician exhibits not only the
preventives of our diseases, but their correc-
tives also, even so doth He likewise. Thus,
to forbid our calling " fool," is a preventive of
enmity; but to command reconciliation is a
means of removing the diseases that ensue
on the enmity.

And mark how both commands are set
forth with erirncstness. For as in the former
case He threatened hell, so here He receives
not the gift liefore the reconciliation, indi-
cating great displeasure, and by rdl tliese


' 3 Cor. V. 19.
8


» F.ph. iv. a^i.


methods destroying both the root and the
produce.

And first of all He saith, " Be not angry; "
and after that, "revile not." For indeed
both these are augmented, the one by the
other: from enmity is reviling, from reviling
enmity. On this account then He heals now
the root, and now the fruit; hindering indeed
the evil from ever springing up in the first in-
stance: but if perchance it may have sprouted
up and borne its most evil fruit, then by all
means He burnj it down the more.

13. Therefore, you see, having mentioned,
first the judgment, then the council, then
hell, and having spoken of His own sacrifice.
He adds other topics again, thus speaking:

"Agree with thine adversary quickly,
whilst thou art in the way with him.'^^

That is, that thou mayest not say, "What
then, if I am injured; " " what if I am plun-
dered, and dragged too before the tribunal ?"
even this occasion and excuse He hath taken
away: for He commands us not even so to be
at enmity. Then, since this injunction was
great, He draws His advice from the things
present, which are wont to restrain the
grosser sort more than the future. "Why,
what sayest thou?" saith He. " That thine
adversary is stronger, and doeth thee wrong ?
Of course then he will wrong thee more, if
thou do not make it up, but art forced to go
into court. For in the former case, by giving
up some money, thou wilt keep thy person
free; but when thou art come under the sen-
tence of the judge, thou wilt both be bound,
and pay the utmost penalty. But if thou
avoid the contest there, thou wilt reap two
good results: first, not having to suffer any-
thing painful; and secondly, that the good
done will be thereafter thine own doing, and
no longer the effect of compulsion on his
part. But if thou wilt not be ruled by these
sayings, thou wrongest not him, so much as
thyself."

And see here also how He hastens him;
for h.aving said, "Agree with thine adver-
sary," He added, "tiuickly;" and He was
not satisfied with this, l)ut even of this tpiick-
ness He hath required a further increase, say-
ing, " Whilst thou art in the way with him; "
pressing and hastening him hereby with gre:U
earnestness. For notliing doth so nuicli turn
our life upside down, as delay and procras-
tination in tiie performance of our good
works. Nay, this hath often cuised us to
lose all. Therefore, as Paul for his i)art
saith, " Before tlic sun set, ilo away the
enmity;" and as lie llmiself had said above,

3 Matt. V. j<.


114


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVI.


" Before the offering is completed, be recon-
ciled;'' so He saith in this place also,
"Quickly, whilst thou art in the way with
him," before thou art come to the doors of
the court; before thou standest at the bar,
and art come to be thenceforth under the
sway of him that judgeth. Since, before en-
tering in, thou hast all in thine own control;
but if thou set thy foot on that threshold,
thou wilt not by ever so earnest efforts be
able to arrange thy matters at thy will, hav-
ing come under the constrair^t of another.

But what is it "to agree?" He means
either, consent rather to suffer wrong ? " or,
"so plead the cause, as if thou wert in the
place of the other; " that thou mayest not
corrupt justice by self-love, but rather, delib-
erating on another's cause as thine own, may-
est so proceed to deliver thy vote in this
matter. And if this be a great thing, marvel
not; since with this view did He set forth all
those His blessings, that having beforehand
smoothed and prepared the hearer's soul, he
might render it apter to receive all His enact-
ments.

Now some say that He obscurely signifies
the devil himself, under the name of the
adversary; and bids us have nothing of his,
(for this, they say, is to " agree " with him):
no compromise being possible after our de-
parture hence, nor anything awaiting us, but
that punishment, from which no prayers can
deliver. But to me He seems to be speaking
of the judges in this world, and of the way
to the court of justice, and of this prison.

For after he had abashed men by higher
things, and things future, he alarms them
also by such as are in this life. Which thing
Paul also doth, using botli the future and the
present to sway his hearer: as when, deter-
ring from wickedness, he points out to him
that is inclined to evil, the ruler armed: thus
saying, "But if thou do that which is evil,
be afraid; for he beareth not the sword in
vain; for he is a minister of God."' And
again, enjoining us to be subject unto him,
he sets forth not the fear of God only, but
the threatening also of the other party, and
his watchful care. " For ye must needs be
subject, not only for wrath, but also for con-
science sake. " ^ Because the more irrational,
as I have already said, are wont to be sooner
corrected by these things, things which ap-
pear and are at hand. Wherefore Christ also
made mention, not of hell only, but also of a
court of justice, and of being dragged thither,
and of the prison, and of all the suffering
there; by all these means destroying the


J Ro:


m. xiii. 4.


2 Rora. V. 5.


roots of murder. For he who neither reviles,
nor goes to law, nor prolongs enmity, how
will he ever commit murder ? So that from
hence also it is evident, that in the advantage
of our neighbor stands our own advantage.
For he that agrees with his adversary, will
benefit himself much more; becoming free,
by his own act, from courts of law, and
prisons, and the wretchedness that is there.

14. Let us then be obedient to His sayings;
let us not oppose ourselves, nor be conten-
tious; for first of all, even antecedently to
their rewards, these injunctions have their
pleasure and profit in themselves. And if to
the more part they seem to be burdensome,
and the trouble which they cause, great; have
it in thy mind that thou art doing it for
Christ's sake, and the pain will be pleasant.
For if we maintain this way of reckoning at
all times, we shall experience nothing
burdensome, but great will be the pleasure
we reap from every quarter; for our toil will
no longer seem toil, but by how much it is
enhanced, so much the sweeter and pleasanter
doth it grow.

When therefore the custom of evil things,
and the desire of wealth, keep on bewitching
thee; do thou war against them with that
mode of thinking which tells us, "Great is
the reward we shall receive, for despising the
pleasure which is but for a season; " and say
to thy soul; "Art thou quite dejected because
I defraud thee of pleasure ? Nay, be of good
cheer, for I am introducing thee into Heaven.
Thou doest it not for man's sake, but for
God's. Be patient therefore a little while,
and thou shalt see how great is the gain.
Endure for the present life, and thou shalt
receive an unspeakable confidence." For if
we would thus discourse with our own soul,
and not only consider that which is burden-
some in virtue, but take account also of the
crown that comes thereof, we shall quickly
withdraw it from all wickedness.

For if the devil, holding out pleasure for a
season, but pain for ever, is yet strong, and
prevails; seeing our case is just the reverse
in these matters, the labor temporary, the
pleasure and profit immortal, what plea shall
we have, if we follow not virtue after so great
encouragement? Why, the object of our
labors is enough to set against all, and our
clear persuasion that for God's sake we are
enduring all this. For if one having the king
his debtor, thinks he hath sufficient security
for all his life; consider how great will he be,
who hath made the Gracious and Everlasting
God a debtor to himself, for good deeds both
small and great. Do not then allege to me
labors and sweats; for not by the hope only


Homily XVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


1 1


of the things to come, but in another way
also, God hath made virtue easy, assisting us
everywhere, and putting His hand to our
work. And if thou wilt only contribute a lit-
tle zeal, everything else follows. For to this
end He will have thee too to labor a little,
even that the victory may be thine also.
And just as a king would have his own son
present indeed in the array; he would have
him shoot with the bow,' and show himself,
that the trophy may be reckoned his, while
he achieves it all Himself: even so doth God
in our war against the devil: He requires of
thee one thing alone, that thou show forth a
sincere hatred against that foe. And if thou
contribute this to Him, He by Himself brings
all the war to an end. Though thou burn
with anger, with desire of riches, with any
tyrannical passion whatever; if He see thee
only stripping thyself and prepared against
it. He comes quickly to thee, and makes all
things easy, and sets thee above the flame,
as He did those children of old in the Baby-
lonian furnace: for they too carried in with
them nought but their good will.

In order then that we also may extinguish
all the furnace of disordered pleasure here,
and so escape the hell that is there, let these
each day be our counsels, our cares, and our
practice, drawmg towards us the favor of
God, both by our full purpose concerning
good works, and by our frequent prayers.

' [This clause is not found in the Greek text of Field, nor no-
ticed in the critical notes. The Latin version hasjaculn viprari\
and was probably inadvertently followed by the translator. — R.]


For thus even those things which appear in-
supportable now, will be most easy, and light,
and lovely. Because, so long as we are in
our passions, we think virtue rugged and
morose and arduous, vice desirable and most
pleasing; but if we would stand off from these
but a little, then both vice will appear abom-
inable and unsightly, and virtue easy, mild,
and much to be desired. And this you may
learn plainly from those who have done well.
Hear, for instance, how of those passions
Paul is asliamed, even after his deliverance
from them, saying, " For what fruit had ye
then in those things, whereof ye are now
ashamed ? " = But virtue, even after his labor,
he affirms to be light, calling ^ the laborious-
ness of our affliction momentary and " light,"
and rejoicing in his sufferings, and glorying
in his tribulations, and taking a pride in the
marks wherew'ith he had been branded for
Christ's sake.

In order then that we too may establish
ourselves in this habit, let us order ourselves
each day by what hath been said, and " for-
getting those things which are behind, and
reaching forth unto those things which are
before, let us press on towards the prize of
the high calling: "•• unto w'hich God grant
that we may all attain, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and power for ever and ever.
Amen.


- Rom. vi. 21.

1 2 Cor. iv. 17, xii. 10 ; Rom. v. 3 ; Gal. vi. 17 ; Col. i. 24.

4 Phil. iii. 13, 14.


HOMILY XVII.

Matt. V. 27, 28.


" Ye have heard that it was said to them of old time," Thou shalt not commit adultery; but
I say unto you, that every one who looketh upon a woman to lust after her, hath
committed adultery with her already in his heart."


Having now finished the former command-
ment, and having extended it unto the height
of self-denial. He, advancing in course and
order, proceeds accordingly unto the second,
herein too obeying the law.

"And yet," it may be said, "this is not
the second, but the third; for nciUu-r is the

'[The phruHC " to them of old tunc "(roit apx<>'<»t) is not
found in the oldest M.ss. of the New TcMamrnt, in .Mutt. v. ^7.
It would be readily inserted from similar piuutuxcs.— K.]


first, " Tiiou shalt not kill." but "The Lord
thy God is one Lord."'

Wherefore it is worth inquiring too, why
He did not begin with that. Wliy was it
then? Because, hail He begun from thence,
He must have enlarged it also, and have
brought in Himself together witii His Father.'

' Dcut. vi. 4. [('oin|>. Murk xii. j>j, uiiil the rcnderint;* of the
R. v. trxl and nuirxin in both {muo^cs. — K.J


ii6


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVII.


But it was not as yet time to teach any such
thing about Himself.

And besides, He was for a while practising
His moral doctrine only, being minded from
this first, and from His miracles, to convince
the hearers that He was the Son of God.
Now, if He had said at once, before He had
spoken or done anything, "Ye have heard
that it was said to them of old time, " I am
the Lord thy God, and there is none other
but me," but I say unto you. Worship me
even as Him; this would have made all
regard Him as a madman. For if, even after
His teaching, and His so great miracles,
while not even yet was He saying this openly,
they called Him possessed with a devil;' had
He before all these attempted to say any
such thing, what would they not have said ?
what would they not have thought ?

But by keeping back at the proper season
His teaching on these subjects, He was caus-
ing that the doctrine should be acceptable to
the many. Wherefore now He passed it by
quickly, but when He had everywhere estab-
lished it by His miracles, and by His most
excellent teaching, He afterwards unveiled
it in words also.

For the present, however, by the manifes-
tation of His miracles, and by the very
manner of His teaching, He unfolds it on
occasion, gradually and quietly. For His
enacting such laws, and such corrections of
laws, with authority, would lead of\ the atten-
tive and understanding hearer, by little and
little, unto the word of His doctrine. For it
is said, " they were astonished at Him, be-
cause He taught not as their Scribes." '

2. For beginning from those passions,
which most belong to our whole race, anger,
I mean, and desire (for it is these chiefly
that bear absolute sway within us, and are
more natural than the rest); He with great
authority, even such as became a legislator,
both corrected them, and reduced them to
order with all strictness. For He said not
that the adulterer merely is punished; but
what He had done with respect to the mur-
derer, this He doth here also, punishing even
the unchaste look: to teach thee wherein lies
what He had more than the scribes. Accord-
ingly, He saith, "He that looketh upon a
woman to lust after her hath already com-
mitted adultery with her; " that is, he who
makes it his business to be curious about
bright forms, and to hunt for elegant fea-
tures, and to feast his soul with the sight,
and to fasten his eyes on fair countenances.

For He came to set free from all evil deeds


not the body only, but the soul too before
the body. Thus, because in the heart we
receive the grace of the Spirit, He cleanses it
out first.

"And how," one may say, "is it possible
to be freed from desire?" I answer, first, if
we were willing, even this might be deadened,
and remain inactive.

In the next place. He doth not here take
away desire absolutely, but that desire which
springs up in men from sight. For he that
is curious to behold fair countenances, is
himself chiefly the enkindler of the furnace
of that passion, and makes his own soul a
captive, and soon proceeds also to the act.

Thus we see why He said not, " whosoever
shall lust to commit adultery,'' but, "whoso-
ever shall look to lust." And in the case of
anger He laid down a certain distinction, say-
ing, "without a cause," and "for nought; "
but here not so; rather once for all He took
away the desire. Yet surely both are natur-
ally implanted, and both are set in us for our
profit; both anger, and desire: the one that
we may chastise the evil, and correct those
who walk disorderly; the other that we may
have children, and that our race may be re-
cruited by such successions.

Why then did He not make a distinction
here also ? Nay, very great is the distinction
which, if thou attend, thou wilt see here also
included. For He said not simply, " whoso-
ever shall desire," since it is possible for one
to desire even when sitting in the mountains;
but, "Whosoever shall look to lust;" that is
to say, he who gathers in lust unto himself;
he who, when nothing compels him, brings in
the wild beast upon his thoughts when they
are calm. For this comes no longer of
nature, but of self-indulgence. This even
the ancient Scripture corrects from the first,
saying, "Contemplate not beauty which is
another's." ^ And then, lest any one should
say, "what then, if I contemplate, and be
not taken captive," He punishes the look,
lest confiding in this security thou shouldest
some time fall into sin. " What then," one
may say, " if I should look, and desire in-
deed, but do no evil?" Even so thou art
set among the adulterers. For the Lawgiver
hath pronounced it, and thou must not ask •
any more questions. For thus looking once,
twice, or thrice, thou wilt perhaps have power
to refrain; but if thou art continually doing
this, and kindling the furnace, thou wilt as-
suredly be taken; for thy station is not be-
yond that nature which is common to men.
As we then, if we see a child holding a knife,


' John viii. 48.


z Matt. vii. 28, 29.


3 Ecclus. ix. 8.


Homily XVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


1 I


though we do not see him hurt, beat him, and
forbid his ever holding it; so God Ukewise
takes away the unchaste look even before the
act, lest at any time thou shouldest fall in
act also. For he who hath once kindled the
flame, even when the woman whom he hath
beheld is absent, is forming by himself con-
tinually images of shameful things, and from
them often goes on even to the deed. For
this cause Christ takes away even that em-
brace which is in the heart only.

What now can they say, who have those
virgin inmates?' Why, by the tenor of this
law they must be guilty of ten thousand adul-
teries, daily beholding them with desire.
For this cause the blessed Job= also laid
down this law from the beginning, blocking
out from himself on all sides this kind of
gazing.

For in truth greater is the struggle on be-
holding, and not possessing the object of
fondness: nor is the pleasure so great which
we reap from the sight, as the mischief we
undergo from increasing this desire; thus
making our opponent strong, and giving
more scope to the devil, and no longer ^ able
to repulse him, now that we have brought
him into our inmost parts, and have thrown
our mind open unto him. Therefore He
saith, "commit no adultery with thine eyes,
and thou wilt commit none with thy mind."

For one may indeed behold in another
way, such as are the looks of the chaste;
wherefore he did not altogether prohibit our
seeing, but that seeing which is accompanied
with desire. And if He had not meant this,
He would have said simply, " He who look-
eth on a woman." But now He said not
thus, but, " He who looketh to lust," "he
who looketh to please his sight."

For not at all to this end did God make
thee eyes, that thou shouklest thereby intro-
duce adultery, but that, beholding His crea-
tures, thou shouldest admire the Artificer.

Just then as one may feel wrath at random,
so may one cast looks at random; that is,
when thou docst it for lust. Rather, if tliou
desirest to look and find pleasure, look at


' Ta? (Twoixovf napOifov^, they were often c.illcd avvtitraKToi.
The practice of tininarried men, rs|H:ciully of the clergy, liavinj.;
single yoiinv,' women in tlx-ir houses, is a frequent oljject of w.irn-
intt and censure both in the Homihesof the Kathrrs.iml in Church
Canons. 'I he earliest mention of such a thinn, and ol the siid
abuse conse<iuent on it, appears to be in St. Irenxus, i. 6, i : who
lays it to the char>;e of the Valentinian heretics. 'IVrtullian ((/<•
Jtjun. ad I'm.) im|>utes it to the lathohcs. St. Cyprian's fourth
Kpistlc(cd. Kell.) was written to repress and punish an instanie of
It in the Chun h of Carthage. It was one of tlic charges aKainst
Paul of Samos;ita,and was forhiihlen by the third ciinon r>f Nicica.
See Dr. Kouth's Kf/ii/uitr S,iir,r, 2,<;..6, to which the eihtor is
indebted for this note. The custom seems to have prevailed pjir-
ticularly at Antioch, ih. 482. Sec also an oration of Chrysostom
on this subject, vi, 314.

'■' Job xxxi. I.

3 [ovictri iaxvovrt^, " no Icm^cr havinK strength." — K,]


thine own wife, and love her continually; no
law forbids that. But if thou art to be curi-
ous about the beauties that belong to another,
thou art injuring both thy wife by letting
thine eyes wander elsewhere, and her on
whom thou hast looked, by touching her un-
lawfully. Since, although thou hast not
touched her with the hand, yet hast thou
caressed her with thine eyes; for which cause
this also is accounted adultery, and before
that great penalty draws after it no slight
one of its own. For then all within him is
filled with disquiet and turmoil, and great is
the tempest, and most grievous the pain, and
no captive nor person in chains can be worse
off than a man in this state of mind. And
oftentimes she who hath shot the dart is flown
away, while the wound even so remains. Or
rather, it is not she wlio hath shot the dart,
but thou gavest thyself the fatal wound, by
thine unchaste look. And this I say to free
modest women from the charge: since assur-
edly, should one deck herself out, and invite
towards herself the eyes of such as fall in her
way; even though she smite not him that
meets with her, she incurs the utmost pen-
alty: for she mixed the poison, she prepared
the hemlock, even though she did not offer
the cup. Or rather, she did also offer tlie
cup, though no one were found to drink it.

3. " Wny then doth He not discourse with
tliem also?" it may be said. Because the
laws which He appoints are in every case
common, although He seem to address Him-
self unto men only. For in discoursing with
the head, He makes His admonition common
to the whole body also. For woman and
man He knows as one living creature, and
nowhere distinguishes their kind.

lUit if thou desirest to hear also His rebuke
for them in particular, listen to Isaiah,* in
many words inveighing against tiiem, and
deriding their habit, their aspect, their gait,
their trailing garments, their tripping feet,
their drooping necks. Hear with him the
blessed Paul 5 also, setting many laws for
them; and both about garincnti, and ortuimfnts
of goU,^ :kw(\ plaiting of hair, and luxurious'
living, and all other such things, vehemently
rebuking tiiis sex. And Christ too, h\ wliat
follows next, obscurely intimated this very
same; for when He saith, *' pluck out ami
cut off the eye that offendeth thee,'"'' Ho
speaks as indicating His anger against them.

5. Wherefore also He subjoins,

4 Isii. lii. irt. 5 I Tim. ii. ■; ; Titus ii. 1, 4, j.

* (The words in italics are a IranaUition of the Ijiiin version :
nnthiiiK corrrsiMindini; to these terms occurs in the (ircck tc»t of
the Homily. K.]

7 < )r, MuiHli'MHfss. Sec I Tim. v. d.

" (The text has simply tOi' ff«a»-iaAifoKra. T'hc precept is thus
made more j{enerul.— K.)


ii8


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVII.


" If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out,
and cast it from thee." '

Thus, lest thou shouldest say, " But what
if she be akin to me ? what if in any other
way she belong to me ? " therefore He hath
given these injunctions; not discoursing about
our limbs; — far from it, — for nowhere doth
He say that our flesh is to be blamed for
things, but everywhere it is the evil mind
that is accused. For it is not the eye that
sees, but the mind and the thought. Often,
for instance, we being wholly turned else-
where, our eye sees not those who are pres-
ent. So that the matter does not entirely
depend upon its working. Again, had He
been speaking of members of the body. He
would not have said it of one eye, nor of the
right eye only, but of both. For he who is
offended by his right eye, most evidently will
incur the same evil by his left also. Why
then did He mention the right eye, and add
the hand ? To show thee that not of limbs is
He speaking, but of them who are near unto
us. Thus, "If," saith He, "thou so lovest
any one, as though he were in stead of a
right eye; if thou thinkest him so profitable
to thee as to esteem him in the place of a
hand, and he hurts thy soul; even these do
thou cut off." And see the emphasis; for
He saith not, "Withdraw from him," but to
show the fullness of the separation, " pluck it
out," saith He, "and cast it from thee.^'

Then, forasmuch as His injunction was
sharp. He shows also the gain on either
hand, both from the benefits and from the
evils, continuing in the metaphor.

*' For it is profitable for thee," saith He,
" that one of thy members should perish, and
not that thy whole body should be cast into
hell."'

For while he neither saves himself, nor
fails to destroy thee too, what kindness is it
for both to sink, whereas if they were sepa-
rated, one at least might have been pre-
served ?

But why did Paul then, it may be said,
choose to become accursed ?3 Not on condi-
tion of gaining nothing, but with a view to
the salvation of others. But in this case the
mischief pertains to both. And therefore He
said not, "pluck out'' only, but also "cast
from thee: " to receive him again no more, if
he continue as he is. For so shalt thou
both deliver him from a heavier charge, and
free thyself from ruin.

But that thou mayest see yet more clearly
the profit of this law; let us, if you please,

1 Matt. V. 29. [R. v., "If thy right eye causeth thee to
stumble," and so everywhere in rendering <rKav&a.Kii,ei.v. — R.]

2 [Matt. V. 29, 30.] 3 Rom. ix. 3.


try what hath been said, in the case of the
body itself, by way of supposition. I mean,
if choice were given, and thou must either,
keeping thine eye, be cast into a pit and per-
ish, or plucking it out, preserve the rest of
thy body; wouldest thou not of course accept
the latter ? It is plain to everyone. For this
were not to ace as one hating the eye, but as
one loving the rest of the body. This same
reckoning do thou make with regard to men
also and women: that if he who harms thee
by his friendship should continue incurable,
his being thus cut off will both free thee from
all mischief, and he also will himself be de-
livered from the heavier charges, not having
to answer for thy destruction along with his
own evil deeds.

Seest thou how full the law is of gentleness
and tender care, and that which seems to
men in general to be severity, how much love
towards man it discloses ?

Let them hearken to these things, who
hasten to the theatres, and make themselves
adulterers every day. For if the law com-
mands to cut off him, whose connexion with
us tends to our hurt; what plea can they
have, who, by their haunting those places,
attract towards them daily those even that
have not yet become known to them, and
procure to themselves occasions of ruin with-
out number ?

For henceforth. He not only forbids us to
look unchastely, but having signified the mis-
chief thence ensuing. He even straitens the
law as He goes on, commanding to cut off,
and dissever, and cast somewhere far away.
And all this He ordains, who hath uttered*
words beyond number about love, that in
either way thou mightest learn His provi-
dence, and how from every source He seeks
thy profit.

4. " Now it hath been said. Whosoever
shall put away his wife, let him give her a
writing of divorcement. s But I say unto you.
Whosoever shall put away his wife, saving
for the cause of fornication, causeth her to
commit adultery; and whosoever marrieth
her that is put away, committeth adultery."*

He goes not on to what lies before Him,
until He have well cleared out the former
topics. For, lo. He shows us yet another
kind of adultery. And what is this ? There
was an ancient law made,^ that he* who hated
his wife, for whatever kind of cause, should
not be forbidden to cast her out, and to bring

4 KivTjaai;.

5 ^i^Kiov a7ro(rTaa"tov, St. Chrys. Comp. Mark x. 4: aTrocrTa.<Ttov^
rer. Text. [There is no variation in the text of Matthew here,
but in verse 32 the best authorities read was 6 a-noKviav, " every
one that putteth away" (so R. V.). Chrysostom repeats os av
iiiToXvaf), as in text. rec. — R.]

6 Matt. vi. 31, 32. 7 Deut. xxiv. 1-4.


Homily XVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


119


home another instead of her. The law how-
ever did not command him simply to do this,
but after giving the woman a writing of
divorcement, that it might not be in her
power to return to him again; that so at least
the figure of the marriage might remain.

For if He had not enjoined this, but it were
lawful first to cast her out, and take another,
then afterwards to take back the former, the
confusion was sure to be great, all men con-
tinually taking each others' wives; and the
matter thenceforth would have been direct
adultery. With a view to this, He devised,
as no small mitigation, the writing of divorce-
ment.

But these things were done by reason of
another, a far greater wickedness; I mean,
had He made it necessary to keep in the
house her even that was hated, the husband,
hating, would have killed her. For such was
the race of the Jews. For they who did not
spare children, who slew propliets, and " shed
blood as water,"' much more would they
have showed no mercy to women. For this
cause He allowed the less, to remove the
greater evil. For that this was not a primary'
law, hear Him saying, " Moses wrote these
things according to the hardness of your
hearts," ^ that ye might not slay them, in the
house, but rather put them out. But foras-
much as He had taken away all wrath, having
forbidden not murder only, but even tlie
mere feeling of anger. He with ease intro-
duces this law likewise. With this view also
He IS ever bringing to mind the former words,
to signify that His sayings are not contrary
to them, but in agreement: that He is en-
forcing, not overthrowing them; perfecting,
not doing them away.

And observe Him everywhere addressing
His discourse to the man. Thus, " He that
putteth away his wife," saith He, " causeth
her to commit adultery, and he that marrieth
a woman put away, committeth adultery."
That is, the former, though he take not an-
other wife, by that act alone hath made him-
self liable to blame, having made the first an
adulteress; the latter again is become an
adulterer by taking lier who is another's.
For tell me not this, "the other liatii cast
her out; '' nay, for when cast out she contin-
ues to be tlie wife of him that exiK'lled her.
Then lest He should render the wife more
self-willed, i)y throwing it all upon him who
cast her out. He hath shut against her also
the doors of lum who was afterwards receiv-
ing her; in that He saith, " He who marrieth
her that is put away committeth adultery;"


and so makes the woman chaste even though
unwilling, and blocks up altogether her access
to all, and suffers her not to give an occa-
sion for jealousy.* For she who hath been
made aware that she positively must either
keep the husband, who was originally allotted
to her, or being cast out of that house, not
have any other refuge; — she even against her
will was compelled to make the best of her
consort.

And if He discourse not at all unto her
concerning these things, marvel not; for the
woman is rather a weak creature.^ For this
cause letting her go, in his threatening
against the men He fully corrects her remiss-
ness. Just as if any one who had a prodigal
child, leaving him, should rebuke those wiio
make him such, and forbid them to have in-
tercourse, or to approach him. And if that
be galling, call to mind, I pray thee. His
former sayings, on what terms He had
blessed His hearers; and thou wilt see that
it is very possible and easy. For he that is
meek, and a peacemaker, and poor in spirit,
and merciful, how shall he cast out his wife ?
He that is used to reconcile others, how shall
he be at variance with her that is his own ?

And not thus only, but in another way also
He hath lightened the enactment: forasmuch
as even for him He leaves one manner of
dismissal, when He saith, " E.xcept for tiie
cause of fornication;" since the matter had
else come round again to the same issue.
For if He had commanded to keep her in the
house, though defiling herself with many.
He would have made the matter end again
in adultery.

Seest thou how these sayings agree with
what had gone before ? For he who looks
not with unchaste eyes upon another woman,
will not commit whoredom; and not commit-
ting whoredom, he will g:ive no occasion to
the husband to cast out his wife.

Therefore, you see, after this He presses
the point without reserve, and builds u|) this
fear as a bulwark, urging on the husl)and the
great danger, if he do cast her out, in tliat he
makes himself accountable for iier adultery.
Thus, lest tliou being told, "pluck out the
eye," shouldest suppose this to be said even
of a wife: He added in gooil time this cor-
rective, in one way only giving leave to cast
her out, but no otherwise.

5. "Again, ye have heard that it was said
to them of old time, Thou shalt not forswear
thyself, hut sh;dt perfonn unto the Lord


« Ps. Ixxix. 3.
3 Matt. xix. 8.


•' irporjyovtitvoK.
[R. V. " for your hanliicM of heart." -It.)


4M««po«/>vxia«. . ^.. , , .,

S [a(r9tf«rr<pof yap i| yin-i). 1 lie IriiiKiulur pnn»pnr«»r« tliii

u* alxjvr, Ki^inK »" unnccr-owry tone nf dcprctiatum to the luii-

KUUKC -k.]


I20


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVII.


thine oaths. But I say unto you, swear not
at all.'"

Why did He go straightway not to theft,
but to false witness, passing over that com-
mandment? Because he that steals, doth
upon occasion swear also; but he that knows
not either swearing or speaking falsehood,
much less will he choose to steal. So that by
this He hath overthrown the other sin like-
wise: since falsehood comes of stealing.

But what means, " Thou shalt perform unto
the Lord thine oaths?"'' It is this, "thou
shalt be true in swearing." '' But I say unto
you, swear not at all."

Next, to lead them farther away from
swearing by God, He saith, "Neither by
Heaven, for it is God's throne, nor by the
earth, for it is the footstool of His feet; nor
by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great
King: " ^ still speaking out of the prophetical
writings, and signifying Himself not to be
opposed to the ancients. This was because
they had a custom of swearing by these
objects, and he intimates this custom near
the end of his Gospel."

But mark, I pray thee, on what ground He
magnifies the elements; not from their own
nature, but from God's relation to them, such
as it had been in condescension declared.
For because the tyranny of idolatry was
great, that the elements might not be thought
worthy of honor for their own sake, He hath
assigned this cause, which we have mentioned,
which again would pass on to the glory of
God. For He neither said, " because
Heaven is beautiful and great," nor, "be-
cause earth is profitable;" but "because the
one is God's throne, the other His footstool; "
on every side urging them on towards their
Lord.

"Neither by thy head," saith He, "be-
cause thou canst not make one hair white or
black." 5

Here again, not as wondering at man, hath
He withdrawn him from swearing by his
head (for so man himself would be wor-
shipped), but as referring the glory to God,
and signifying that thou art not master even
pf thyself, and of course therefore not of the
oaths made by thy head. For if no one
would give up his own child to another, much
more will not God give up His own work to
thee. For though it be thy head, yet is it
the property of another; and so far from
being master thereof, thou shalt not be able
to do with it, no not the least thing of all.
For He said not, "Thou canst not make one


I Matt. V. 33, 34. 2 See Num. xxx. 2 ; Deut. xxiii. 23.

3 Isa. Ixxvi. I ; Ps. xlviii. 2. 4 Matt, xxiii. 16, et seq.

5 Matt. V. 36.


hair grow;'' but, "Not so much as change
its quality."

" But what," it may be said, " if any one
should require an oath, and apply con-
straint?" Let the fear of God be more
powerful than the constraint: since, if thou
art to bring forward such excuses, thou wilt
keep none of the things which are enjoined.

Yea, for first with respect to thy wife thou
wilt say, " what if she be contentious and ex-
travagant;" and then as to the right eye,
"what if I love it, and am quite on fire?"
and of the unchaste look, "what then, if I
cannot help seeing?" and of our anger
against a brother, "what if 1 be hasty, and
not able to govern my tongue ? '' and in gen-
eral, all His sayings thou mayest on this wise
trample under foot. Yet surely with regard
to human laws thou darest not in any case
use this allegation, nor say, "what then if
this or that be the case," but, willing or un-
willing, thou receivest what is written.

And besides, thou wilt never have compul-
sion to undergo at all. For he that hath
hearkened unto those former blessings, and
hath framed himself to be such as Christ en-
joined, will have no such constraint to endure
from any, being held in reverence and vener-
ation by all.

" But let your yea, be yea; and your nay,
nay: for that which exceedeth these cometh
of the evil one." ^

What is it then that "exceeds yea" and
"nay"? it is the oath, not the perjury.
For this latter is quite acknowledged, and no
man needs to learn that it is of the evil one;
and it is not an excess, but an opposite:
whereas an excess means something more,
and added over and above: which kind of
thing swearing is.

"What then," saith one, "was it of the
evil one ? and if it was of the evil one, how
was it a law ? ' ' Well, this same thing thou
wilt say concerning the wife also; how is that
now accounted adultery, which was before
permitted ?

What now may one reply to this ? That
the precepts then uttered had reference to
the weakness of them who were receiving the
laws; since also to be worshipped with the
vapor of sacrifice is very unworthy of God,
just as to lisp is unworthy of a philosopher.
That kind of thing accordingly was now laid
down to be adultery, and swearing to be of
the evil one, now that the principles of virtue


6 Matt. V. 37. St. Chrysostom deviates from the received text
here : as if he were thinking also of James v. 12. [The varia-
tion is in the first half of the verse, but the resemblance to James
V. 12 is riot marked. In the latter half the citation is exact, and
Chrysostom explains ck toO Troi'rjpou as the R. V. does: "of the
evil one." — R.]


Homily XVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


121


have advanced. But if these things had
been, from the first, laws of the devil, they
would not have attained to so great goodness.
Yea, for had those not been forerunners in
the first place, these which we now have
would not have been so easily received. Do
not thou then require their excellency now,
when their use is past: but then, when the
time was calling for them. Or rather, if
thou wilt, even now: yea, for now also is
their virtue shown: and most of all for the
very cause, by reason of which we find fault
with them. 'For their appearing such now, is
the greatest commendation of them. For
had they not brought us up well, and made
us meet for the reception of the greater pre-
cepts, they would not have appeared such.

Therefore as the breast, when it hath ful-
filled all its part, and is dismissing the child
to the more manly diet, after that appears
useless; and the parents who before thought
it necessary for the babe, now abuse it with
ten thousand mockeries (and. many even
not content with words of abuse, anoint it
also with bitter drugs; that when their words
have not power to remove the child's unsea-
sonable propensity towards it, the real things
may quench their longing) : so also Christ
saith, that they are of the evil one, not to
indicate that the old law is of the devil, but
in order that with most exceeding earnestness
He might lead them away from their ancient
poverty. And to them He saith these things;
but with regard to the Jews, who were insen-
sible and persevered in the same ways, He
hath anointed their city all round with the
terror of captivity, as with some bittex drug,
and made it inaccessible. Kut since not even
this had power to restrain them, but they
desired to see it again, running to it, just as
a child to the breast. He hid it from them
altogether; both pulling it down, and leading
away the more part of them far from it: as
it is with our cattle; many, by shutting out
the calves, in time induce them to forego their
old familiar use of the milk.

But if the old law had belonged to the
devil, it would not have led people away from
idolatry, but rather would have drawn tliem
on and cast them into it; for this tlid tlie
devil desire. 15ut now we see the opposite
effect produced by the old law. And indeed
this very thing, the oath, was ordained of old
for this cause, that tliey might not swear by
the idols. For "ye shall swear," saitli He,
"by the true (iod."' They were then no
small advantages which the law effected, but
rather very great. I'or that they came unto

' Jcr. iv. 2, 1. XX. <tat 6)ji6a]), '/.jj Ki/piot, titra aAi70>ia« «■•, Kpurit,
nai tf &iKatotrvfj).


the "strong meat," was the work of its


care.


What then," it may be said, "is not
swearing of the evil one ?" Yes, indeed it is
altogether of the evil one; that is, now, after
so high a rule of self-restraint; but then not
so.

"But how," one may say, "should the
same thing become at one time good, at an-
otlier time not good ? '' Nay, I say the very
contrary: how could it help becoming good
and not good, while all things are crying
I aloud, that they are so: tlie arts, the fruits
of the earth, and all things else .'

See it, for example, taking place first in
our own kind. Thus, to be carried, in the
earliest age of life, is good, but afterwards
pernicious; to eat food that hath been soft-
ened in the mouth, in the first scene of our
life, is good, but afterwards it is full of dis-
gust; to be fed upon milk and to fly to the
breast, is at first profitalile and healthful,
but tends afterwards to decay and harm.
Seest thou how the same actions, by reason
of the times, appear good, and again not so ?
Yea, and to wear the robe of a child is well
as long as you are a boy, but contrariwise,
when you are become a man, it is disgraceful.
Wouldest thou learn of the contrary case too,
how to the child again the things of the man
are unsuited ? Give the boy a man's rolie,
and great will be the laughter; and greater
the danger, he being often upset in walking
after that fashion. Allow him to liandle
public affairs, and to traffic, and sow, and
reap, and great again will be the laughter.

And why do I mention tiiese things ? when
killing, which among all is acknowledged to
be an invention of the evil one. killing, I say,
having found its projier occasion, caused
Phinehas, who committed it, to be honored
witli tlie priestliood.- l-'or tliat killing is a
work of him whom I just now mentunied,
hear What Christ saith; "Ye will do the
works of your Father; he was a nianslayer
from tlie beginning."' But Pliineiias be-
came a nianslayer, anil " it was counted nnto
him " (so He speaks) " for righteousness: " ♦
and .\l)raliam again on becoming not a man-
slayer only, but (which was far worse) tlie
slayer of his child, won more and more aj)-
jirobation. And Peter too wrought a two-
fold slaughter, nevertheless what he diil w;is
of tlie Spirit.*

Let us not then examine simply the acts,
l)iit the season too, and the causes, and tlie
mind, and the dillereiice of persons, and
whatsoever else may accompany theni, these


» Num. ixv. 8.
* V». cvi. II.


S John vi:
< Ai-in V.


122


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVII.


let us search out with all exactness: for there
is no arriving at the truth otherwise.

And let us be diligent, if we would attain
unto the kingdom, to show forth something
more than the old commandments; since we
cannot otherwise lay hold of the things of
Heaven. For if we arrive but at the same
measure, that of the ancients, we shall stand
without that threshold; for "except your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye cannot enter
into the kingdom of Heaven." '

6. Yet, although so heavy a threat is set
down, there are some who so far from over-
passing this righteousness, even come short
of it; so far from shunning oaths, they even
swear falsely; so far from avoiding an un-
chaste gaze, they even fall into the very act
of wickedness. And all the rest of the
things which are forbidden, they dare to do,
as though past feeling: waiting for one thing
only, the day of punishment, and the time
when they are to pay the most extreme pen-
alty for their misdoings. And this is the
portion of those only who have ended their
lives in wickedness. For these have reason
to despair, and thenceforth to expect nothing
else but punishment; whereas they who are
yet here, may have power both to renew the
fight and to conquer and be crowned with
ease.

Despond not therefore, O man, neither put
away thy noble earnestness; for in truth the
things are not grievous, which are enjoined.
What trouble is it, I pray thee, to shun an
oath ? What, does it cost any money ? Is it
sweat and hardship ? It is enough to have
willed only, and the whole is done.

But if you allege to me thine habit; for
this very reason most of all do I say, that thy
doing right is easy. For if thou bring thy-
self to another habit, thou hadst effected all.

Consider, for example, how among the
Greeks, in many instances, persons lisping
have entirely cured by much practice their
halting tongue; while others, who were used
to shrug up their shoulders in an unseemly
way, and to be continually moving them, by
putting a sword over them, have broken
themselves of it.^

For since you are not persuaded out of the
Scriptures, I am compelled to shame you by
them that are without. This God also did
unto the Jews, when He said, "Go ye forth
unto the Isles of Chittim, and send unto
Kedar, and know if nations will change their
gods; which yet are no gods."^ And to the


1 Matt. V. 20.

2 He clearly alludes to the history of Demosthenes.

3jer. li. 10, II. [I'he citation is much abbreviated from the
Lxx., which does not vary materially from the Hebrew. — R.]


brutes likewise He sends us oftentimes, say-
ing on this wise, "Go to the ant, thou slug-
gard, and emulate her ways: " and " go forth
to the bee." "*

This therefore I also now say unto you;
consider the philosophers of the Greeks; and
then ye will know of how great punishment
we are worthy, who disobey the laws of God :
in that they for seemliness before men have
taken exceeding pains, and you bestow not
the same diligence, no, not for the things of
Heaven.

But if thou shouldest reply, ""Habit has a
wonderful power to beguile even those who
are very much in earnest:" this I likewise
acknowledge; however, there is another thing
which I say with it; that as it is powerful to
beguile, so also is it easy to be corrected.
For if thou wilt set over thyself at home
many to watch thee, such as thy servant, thy
wife, thy friend, thou wilt easily break oft
from the bad habits, being hard pressed and
closely restrained by all. If thou succeed in
doing this for ten days only, thou wilt after
that no longer need any further time, but all
will be secured to thee, rooted anew in the
firmness of the most excellent habit.

When therefore thou art beginning to cor-
rect this, though thou shouldest transgress
thy law a first, a second, a third, a twentieth
time, do not despair, but rise up again, and
resume the same diligence, and thou wilt
surely prevail.

For perjury surely is no trifling mischief.
If to swear is of the evil one, how great the
penalty which false swearing will bring ! Did
ye give praise to what hath been said ? ^
Nay, I want not applause, nor tumults, nor
noise. One thing only do I wish, that
quietly and intelligently listening, you should
do what is said. This is the applause, this
the panegyric for me. But if tnou praisest
what I say, but doest not what thou ap-
plaudest, greater is the punishment, more ag-
gravated the accusation: and to us it is
shame and ridicule. For the things here
present are no dramatic spectacle; neither do
ye now sit gazing on actors, that ye may
merely applaud. This place is a spiritual
school. Wherefore also there is but one
thing aimed at, duly to perform the things
that have been spoken, and to show forth our
obedience by our works. For then only shall
we have obtained all. Since as things are,


4 Prov. vi. 6-8, lxx. " Or go to the bee, and learn how indus-
trious she is, and how honorable she maketh her work ; whose la-
bors kings and private men make use of for health : and she is
desirable to all and glorious, although she be weak in strength ;
for holding wisdom precious she is preferred." [This is the addi-
tion to Prov. vi. 8, found in the lxx., but not in the Vulgate. — R-l

5 See St. Chrys. on i Cor. Hom. IV. and the note there.


Homily XVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


123


to say the truth, we have fairly given up in
despair. For I have not ceased giving these
admonitions either to those whom I meet in
private, or in discourse with you all in com-
mon. Yet I see no advantage at all gained,
but you are still clinging to the former rude
beginnings, which thing is enough to fill the
teacher with weariness.

See, for example, Paul himself, hardly
bearing it, because his scholars were delaying
a long time in their earlier lessons: " For
when for the time, " saith he, "ye ought to
be teachers, ye have need to be taught again
which be the first principles of the oracles of
God.'"

Wherefore we too mourn and lament. And
if I see you persisting, I will forbid you for
the future to set foot on this sacred threshold,
and partake of the immortal mysteries; as we
do fornicators and adulterers, and persons
charged with murder. Yea, for it is better
to offer our accustomed prayers, with two or
three, who keep the laws of God, than to
sweep together "^ a multitude of trangressors
and corrupters of others.

Let me have no rich man, no potentate,
puffing at me here, and drawing up his eye-


' Heb. V. 12 [The text of Heb. v. 12 is modified, SiSduKeadai
being substituted for SiSonrKfiv. The Vulgate also has the passive.
The R. v. takes rii'a as the indefinite pronoun : " that some one
teach you ;" but compare the margin. Notice, too, the acceptance
of the Pauline authorship of the Epistle. — R.]

2 eirtcrvpco'dat.


brows; all these things are to me a fable, a
shade, a dream. For no one of those who
are now rich, will stand up for me there,
when I am called to account and accused, as
not having thoroughly vindicated the laws of
God, with all due earnestness. For this, this
ruined even that admirable old man,^ though
in his own life giving no handle for blame;
yet for all that, because he overlooked the
treading under foot of God's laws, he was
chastised with his children, and paid that
grievous penalty. And if, where the absolute
authority of nature was so great, he who
failed to treat his own children with due
firmness endured so grievous a punishment;
what indulgence shall we have, freed as we
are from that dominion, and yet ruining all
by flattery ?

In order therefore that ye may not destroy
both us and your own selves with us, be per-
suaded, I entreat you; set very many to
watch over you, and call you to account, and
so free yourselves from the habit of oaths;
that going on orderly from thence, ye may
both with all facility succeed in attaining unto
all other virtue, and may enjoy the good
things to come; which God grant that \ve
may all win, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory and might now and always, even for
ever and ever. Amen.

3 I Sam. iii, 13.


HOMILY XVIII.

Matt. V. 38, 39, 40.

Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. But I
say unto you, that ye resist not the evil: " but whosoever shall smite thee on the right
cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take
away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also."


Seest thou that it was not of an eye that
He was speaking before, wlien He made tlie
law to pluck out the offending eye, but of
him wlio by his friendsliip is liarming us, and
casting us into the gulf of destruction ? For
He wlio in tiiis [^lace uses so great strengtli
of expression, and who, not even when an-

' [R. V. text, "him that ih evil." Chry»<»t<iin interprrts ry
»oio)p<ji, " the evil one." In ver»e 40 the R. V. renders " would )[o
to law with thee."— R.J


Other is i)liicking out your eye, [)ermits you
to strike out his; how should He have made
it a law to strike out one's own ?

Ikit if any one accuses tiie ancient law,
because it commands such retaliation, lie
seems to me very unskillful in the wisdom
that becomes a legislator, and ignorant of the
virtue of ()pp<jrtunities, and the gain of con-
descension. I'Or if he considcrctl who were
the hearers of these sayings, and how they


124


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVIII.


were disposed, and when they received this
code of laws, he will thoroughly admit the
wisdom of the Lawgiver, and will see that it is
one and the same, who made both those laws
and these, and who wrote each of them ex-
ceeding profitably, and in its due season.
Yes, for if at the beginning He had intro-
duced these high and most weighty command-
ments, men would not have received either
these, or the others; but now ordaining them
severally in their due time. He hath by the
two corrected the whole world.

And besides. He commanded this, not that
we might strike out one another's eyes, but
that we might keep our hands to ourselves.
For the threat of suffering hath effectually
restrained our inclination to be doing.

And thus in fact He is silently dropping
seed of much self-restraint, at least in that
He commands to retaliate with just the same
acts. Yet surely he that began such trans-
gression were worthy of a greater punishment,
and this the abstract nature of justice '
demands. But forasmuch as He was minded
to mingle mercy also with justice. He con-
demns him whose offenses were very great to
a punishment less than his desert: teaching
us even while we suffer to show forth great
consideration.

Having therefore mentioned the ancient
law, and recognized it all, He signifies again,
that it is not our brother who hath done these
deeds, but the evil one. For this cause he
hath also subjoined, " But I say unto you,
that ye resist not the evil one.'' He did not
say, " resist not your brother," but " the evil
one," signifying that on his motion men dare
so to act; and in this way relaxing and
secretly removing most of our anger against
the aggressor, by transferring the blame to
another.

"What then?" it is said, " ought we not
to resist the evil one ? " Indeed we ought,
but not in this way, but as He hath com-
manded, by giving one's self up to suffer
wrongfully; for thus shalt thou prevail over
him. For one fire is not quenched by an-
other, but fire by water. And to show thee
that even under the old law he that suffered
rather prevails, that he it is who wins the
crown; examine just what is done, and thou
wilt see that his advantage is great. For as
he that hath begun with unjust acts, will have
himself destroyed the eyes of both, his neigh-
bor's and his own (wherefore also he is
justly hated of all, and ten thousand accusa-
tions are aimed at him): so he that hath been
injured, even after his equal retaliation, will

^ 6 Tov SiKaiov Aoyos.


have done nothing horrible. Wherefore also
he hath many to sympathize with him, as
beina: clear from that offense even after he
hath retaliated. And though the calamity
be equal to both parties, yet the sentence
passed on it is not equal, either with God, or
with men. It should seem then, that neither
is the calamity equal in the end.

Now whereas at the beginning He said,
" he that is angry with his brother without a
cause," and "he that calleth him fool shall
be in danger of hell fire," here He requires
yet more entire self-restraint, commanding
him that suffers ill not merely to be quiet, but
even to be more exceedingly earnest in his
turn,^ by offering the other cheek.

And this He saith, not as legislating about
such a blow as this only, but as teaching also
what forbearance we should practise in all
our other trials. For just as when He saith,
" whoso calleth his brother fool, is in danger
of hell," He speaks not of this word only,
but also of all reviling; even so here also He
is making a law, not so much for our bearing
it manfully, when smitten, as that we should
be undisturbed, whatever we suffer. Because
of this He both there singled out the extrem-
est insult, and here hath set down that which
seems to be of all blows most opprobrious,
the blow on the cheek, so full of all insolence.
And He commands this as having regard
both of him that strikes and of him that is
stricken. Since both he that is insulted will
not think that he suffers any harm, being
thus framed to self-restraint (nay, he will
not even have any sense of the insult, as
striving rather for a prize than as receiving a
blow); and he that is offering the affront will
be made ashamed, and not add a second
blow, though he be fiercer than any wild
beast, yea, rather will condemn himself heart-
ily for the former. For nothing so restrains
the wrong doers, as when the injured bear
what is done with gentleness. And it not
only restrains them from rushing onward,
but works upon them also to repent for what
has gone before, and in wonder at such for-
bearance to draw back. And it makes them
more our own, and causes them to be slaves,
not merely friends, instead of haters and
enemies; even as avenging one's self does just
the contrary: for it both disgraces each of
the two, and makes them worse, and their
anger it heightens into a greater flame; yea,
often no less than death itself is the end of
it, going on from bad to worse. Wherefore
He not only forbade thee to be angry when
smitten, but even enjoined thee to satiate the


2 avTKjuAoTi^eio'flai,


Homily XVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


other's desire, that so neither may the former
blow appear to have befallen thee against thy
will. For thus, lost as he may be to shame,
thou wilt be able to smite him with a mortal
blow, rather than if thou hadst smitten him
with thine hand; or if his shamelessness be
still greater, thou wilt make him gentle in
proportion.

2. "And if any man will sue thee at the
law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy
cloak also." '

For not in the matter of blows only, but
of our goods also, He would have such for-
bearance exhibited. Wherefore He again
employs the same strong figure.- That is,
as in the other case He commands to over-
come in suffering, so here again, by allowing
ourselves to be deprived of more than the
wrong doer expected. However, He did not
put it so merely, but with something to en-
hance it: not saying, " give thy cloak to him
that asketh," but "to him that would sue
thee at the law," that is, "if he drag thee
into court, and give thee trouble."

And just as, after He had bidden not to
call another fool, nor to be angry without
cause, He went on and required more, in that
He commanded to offer the right cheek also;
even so here, having said, "Agree with thine
adversary," He again amplifies the precept.
For now He orders us not only to give what
the other would have, but even to show forth
a greater liberality.

" What then ! " one may say, " am I to go
about naked ?" We should not be naked, if
we obeyed these sayings with exactness;
rather more abundantly than any should we
be clothed. For first, no one would attack
men of this disposition; and next, if there
chanced to be any one so savage and ungen-
tle, as to proceed even so far, yet many more
would be found to clothe him, who acted
with such self-denial, not with garments only,
but even with their own flesh, if it were pos-
sible.

Further: even though one were of neces-
sity to go about naked on account of this sort
of self-denial, neither so were it any disgrace.
Since Adam too was " naked *'' in paradise,
"and was not ashnmed;'' and Isaiah was
"naked, and barefoot," and more glorious
than all the Jews;* and Joseph * also, when
he stripped himself, did then more than ever'
shine forth. For to be thus naked is no
evil, l)ut to be so clad, as we now are, with
costly garments, this is both disgrncefnl and
ridiculous. I'Or this cause, you see, those


had praise of God, but these He blames,
both by prophets and by apostles.

Let us not therefore suppose His injunc-
tions impossible. Nay, for besides their
expediency, they are very easy, if we are
sober-minded; and the profit of them is so
great as to be an exceeding help, not to our-
selves only, but to those also who are using
us despitefully. And in this chiefly stantls
I their excellence, that while they induce us to
sufter wrong, they by the same means teach
them also that do the wrong to control them-
selves. For while he on his part thinks it a
great thing to take what belongs to others,
but thou signifiest to him, that to thee it is
easy to give even what he doth not ask: while
I thou bringest in liberality for a counterpoise
; to his meanness, and a wise moderation to
his covetousness: consider wiiat a lesson he
will get, being taught not by sayings, but by
actual deeds, to scorn vice and to seek after
virtue.

For God will have us profitable not to our-
selves alone, but to all our neighbors as well.
Now if thou givest, and abstainest from
suing, thou hast sought thine own advantage
only; but if thou give him some other thing,
thou hast made him too better, and so sent
him away. Of this nature is salt, which is
what He would have them to be; seeing it
both recruits* itself, and keeps all other
bodies with which it may associate: of this
nature is light; for it shows objects both to a
man"s self and to all others. Forasmuch
then as He hath set thee in the rank of these
things, help thou likewise him who is sitting
in darkness, and teach him that neither be-
fore did he take any thing by force: persuade
him that he hath done no despite. Vea, for
thus thou thyself also wilt be had in more
respect and reverence, if thou signify that
thou gavest freely and wert not robbed.
Make therefore his sin, through thy modera-
tion, an instance of thine own bounty.

3. And if thou think this a great thing,
wait, and thou wilt see clearly, that neither
yet hast thou attained to perfection. For
not even here doth He stop with thee, who is
laying down the laws of patient endurance,
but lie proceeds even fiirtlier, tluis saying,

"If any one shall compel thee to go one
mile, go with him twain.'*'

Seest thou the height of self-denial ? in this
at least, that after giving thy coat, and thy
cloak, not even if thine enemy should wisli
to use thy naked boily for hardships anil
labors, not even so (saitli He), must thou
forbid him. For He would have us possess


» Matt. V. 40.
4 Is;i. XX. J, 3.


' i>ircp0oAi)i-.

S (>en. xxxix. 13.


3 Gen. ii. 35.


'' I7t'Y«pOTffi.


? .Mult. V. 41.


126


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVIII.


all things in common, both our bodies and
our goods, as with them that are in need, so
with them that insult us: for the latter comes
of manliness, the former of mercifulness.

Because of this, He said, " If any one shall
compel thee to go one mile, go with him
twain:" again leading thee higher up, and
commanding thee to show forth the same
kind of ambition.

For if the things of which He spake at the
beginning, being far less than these, have so
great blessings pronounced on them; consi-
der what sort of portion awaits them, who
duly perform these, and what they become
even before their rewards, in a human and
passible ' body winning entire freedom from
passion. Since when neither insult, nor
blows, nor the spoiling of their property, galls
them; while they give way to no such thing,
but rather add in large measure to their en-
durance; reflect what kind of training their
soul is undergoing.

On this account then, -as in regard of blows,
as in regard of our goods, so in this case also,
He hath bidden us act. "For why," saith
He, "do I mention insult, and property?
Though he should want to make use of thy
very own limbs for toil and weary work, and
this unjustly, do thou again conquer and
overpass His unjust desire."

For "to compel"^ is this, to drag un-
justly and without any reason, and by way of
despite. Nevertheless, for this also be thou
ready in thy station, so as to suffer more than
the other would fain do to thee.

"Give to him that asketh thee, and from
him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou
away.'' ^

These last are less than what went before;
but marvel not, for this He is ever wont to
do, mingling the small with the great. And
if these be little in comparison with those, let
them hearken, who take the goods of others,
who distribute their own among harlots, and
kindle to themselves a double fire, both by
the unrighteous income, and by the perni-
cious outlay.

But by "borrowing," here, He means not
the compact with usury, but the use merely.
And elsewhere He even amplifies it, saying
that we should give to them, from whom we
do not expect to receive/

4. "Ye have heard that it hath been said,

I [TTaOrtriZ. There is a paranomasia in the original, indicated
here by the word " passible."- R.]

' ayyapdiixai. LR. V. marg., ''^impress," a legal act of oppres-
sion. The Greek work is of Persian origin, and was transferred
into Latin also ; see Vulgate, Matt. v. 41. — R.]

3 Matt. V. 42.

4 Luke vi. 35. " Do good and lend, hoping for nothing again."
[But the R.V. renders "never despairing," with the margin, "Some
ancient authorities read desj>airi7!g of no man.'" — R.]


Thou shalt love thy neighbor, and hate thine
enemy. But I say unto you, love your ene-
mies, and pray for them which despitefully
use you: bless them that curse you. do good
to them that hate you. That ye may become
like 5 your Father which is in Heaven; for
He maketh His sun to rise on the evil and
on the good, and sendeth rain on the just
and on the unjust."^

See how He hath set the highest pinnacle
on our good deeds. For this is why He
teaches not only to endure a blow, but to
offer the right cheek also; not only to add the
cloak to the coat, but to travel also two miles
with him who compels thee to go one; in
order that thou mightest receive with all
facility that which is much more than these.
"But what," one may say, "is more than
these ? '' Not even to count as an enemy him
who is doing these things: or rather even
somewhat else more than this. For He said
not, "do not hate," but "love;" He said
not, " do not injure," but " do good."

And if any one should examine accurately,
he will see that even to these things some-
what is added, much greater than they are.
For neither did He simply command to love,
but to pray.

Seest thou how many steps He hath as-
cended, and how He hath set us on the very
summit of virtue ? Nay, mark it, numbering
from the beginning. A first step is, not to
begin with injustice: a second, after he hath
begun, to vindicate one's self by equal retali-
ation; a third, not to do unto him that is
vexing us the same that one hath suffered,
but to be quiet; a fourth, even to give one's
self up to suffer wrongfully; a fifth, to give
up yet more than the other, who did the
wrong, wishes; a sixth, not to hate him who
hath done so; a seventh, even to love him;
an eighth, to do him good also; a ninth, to
entreat God Himself on his behalf. Seest
thou, what height of self-command ? Where-
fore glorious too, as we see, is the reward
which it hath. That is, because the thing
enjoined was great, and needed a fervent'
soul, and much earnestness. He appoints for
it also such a reward, as for none of the
former. For He makes not mention here of
earth, as with respect to the meek; nor of
comfort and mercy, as with regard to the
mourners and the merciful; nor of the king-
dom of Heaven; but of that which was more
thrilling than all; our becoming like God, in


5 o|otoioi, Chrys. viol, rec. text. [For the former"reading in the
New Testament there is no MS. authority. — R.^

6 Matt. V. 43-45. [The briefer form of verse 44 is now accepted
by critical editors (so Vulgate). The longer reading is from Luke
vi. 27, 28. Comp. R. V. — R.]

7 t'eaviKJjs.


Homily XVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


such wise as men might become so. For He
saith, " That ye may become like unto your
Father which is in Heaven."

And observe, I pray thee, how neither in
this place, nor in the preceding parts, doth j
He call Him His own Father, but in that
instance, " God," and " a great King," when
he was discoursing about oaths, and here,
"their Father." And this He doth, as re-
serving for the proper season what He had
to say touching these points.

5. Then, bringing the likeness yet closer,
He saith,

"Because He maketh His sun to rise on
the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain
upon just and unjust." '

" For He too, so far from hating," so He
speaks, "even pours benefits on those that
insult Him.'' Yet surely in no respect is the
case parallel, not only because of the surpass-
ing nature of His benefits, but also by reason
of the excellence of His dignity. For thou
indeed art despised by thy fellow-slave, but
He by His slave, who hath also received ten
thousand benefits from Him: and thou indeed
givest words, in praying for him, but He,
deeds, very great and marvellous, kindling
the sun, and giving the annual showers.
"Nevertheless, even so I grant thee to be
mine equal, in such wise as it is possible for
a man so to be."

Hate not then the man that doeth thee
wrong, who is procuring thee such good
things, and bringing thee to so great honor.
Curse not him that uses thee despitefully;
for so hast thou undergone the labor, but
art deprived of the fruit; thou wilt bear
the loss, but lose the reward; which is of I
the utmost folly, having borne the more
grievous, not to bear what is less than it.
"But how," saith one, "is it possible for
this to take place?" Having seen God be-
come man, and descend so far, and suffer so
much for thy sake, dost thou still inquire
and doubt, how it is possible to forgive thy
fellow-servants their injuriousness ? Hearest
thou not Him on tlie cross, saying, " Forgive
them, for they know not what they doP''^"
Hearest thou not Paul, when he saith, " He
who is gone up on high, and is sitting on tiie
right liand intercedeth for us.>"3 Seest
thou not that even after the cross, and after
He had l)een received up, He sent tlie apos-
tles unt(j the Jews that had slain Him, to
bring them His ten thousand l)lt:ssings, and
this, though they were to suffer ten thousand
terrors at tiieir hands?

6. But hast thou been greatly wronged ?


■ Matt. V. 45.


' Luke xxiii. 34.


1 R')m. viii. 34.


Nay, what hast thou endured like thy Lord,
bound, beaten with whips, with rods, spit
upon by servants, enduring death, and that
death, which is of all deaths the most shame-
ful, after ten thousand favors shown ? And
even if thou hast been greatly wronged, for
this very cause most of all do thou do him
good, that thou mayest both make thine own
crown more glorious, and set thy brother free
from the worst infirmity. For so too the
physicians, when they are kicked, and shame-
fully handled by the insane, then most of all
pity them, and take measures for their per-
fect cure, knowing that the insult comes of
the extremity of their disease. Now I bid
thee too have the same mind touching them
that are plotting against thee, and do thou
so treat them that are injuring thee. For it
is they above all that are diseased, it is they
who are undergomg all the violence. De-
liver him then from this grievous contumely,
and grant him to let go his anger, and set
him free from that grievous demon, wrath.
Yea, for if we see persons possessed by
devils, we weep for them; we do not seek to
be ourselves also possessed.

Now let us do this too likewise with respect
to them that are angry; for in truth the en-
raged are like the possessed; yea rather, are
more wretched than they, being mad with
consciousness of it. Wherefore also their
frenzy is without excuse. Trample not then
on the fallen, but rather pity him. For so,
should we see any one troubled with bile,
blinded and giddy, and straining to cast up
this evil humor, we stretch forth a hand, and
continue to support him through his strug-
gles, and though we stain our garments, we
regard it not, but seek one thing only, how
we may set him free from this grievous dis-
tress. This then let us do with respect to the
angry also, and continue to bear them up
when vomiting and struggling; nor let him go,
until he put from hnn all the bitterness.
And then shall he feel toward thee the great-
est thankfulness; when he is at rest, then he
will know clearly from how great trouble thou
liast released him.

But why do I speak of the tlianks from
him? for God will straightway crown thee,
and will requite thee with ten thousand
honors, because thou hast freed thy lirother
from a grievous disease; and that brother too
will honor tliee as a master, ever rcvcrt-ncmg
thy forbearance.

Seest thou not the women that are in trav-
ail, how tliey bite those that stand by, and
they are not pained ? or rather tliey are
pained, but bear it bravely, and sympatliize
with them who arc in sorrow and are torn l>y


128


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XVIII.


those pangs. These do thou too emulate,
and prove not softer than women. For after
these women have brought forth (for these
men are more feeble minded than women),
then they will know thee to be a man in com-
parison.'

And if the things enjoined be grievous,
consider that to this end Christ came, that
He might implant these things in our mind,
that He might render us profitable both to
enemies and friends. Wherefore also He
commands us to have a care of both these:
of our brethren, when He saith, "If thou
bring thy gift;" of our enemies, when He
makes a law both to love them, and to pray
for them.

7. And not only from the example they
have in God, doth He urge them on to this,
but also from the contrary.

"For if ye love those," saith He, "that
lo\e you, what reward have ye? do not even
the publicans the same?"'' This Paul also
saith, " Ye have not yet resisted unto blood,
striving against sin. "^ If then thou doest
these things, thou hast taken thy stand with
God; hut if thou forsakest them, with the
publicans. Seest thou how that the interval
between the commandments is not so great
as the difference between the persons? Let
us not therefore infer this, " the injunction is
hard;'' but let us consider also the reward,
and think whom we are like, if we duly per-
form it, and to whom equal, if we wander
from it.

Thus then to our brother He commands us
to be reconciled, and not to desist till we
have removed the enmity: but when He is
discoursing of persons generally, He sub-
jects us no longer to this necessity, but re-
quires only what is on our part; in this way
also making the law easy. For inasmuch as
He had said, " They persecuted the prophets
which were before you; " lest on occasion of
those very words they should be unfavorably
disposed towards them. He bids them not
only to endure such as do so, but even to love
them.

8. Seest thou how He pulls up by the roots
wrath, and sensual lusts, as well as that of
riches, that of glory, all that belongs to this
life ? For this he had done indeed from the
first, but much more now. For the poor,
and the meek, and the mourner, empties
himself of his anger; the just and the merci-
ful, of the lust of riches; the pure in heart is
delivered from wicked lusts; he that is perse-
cuted and suffers insults, and is evil spoken
of, is practising of course entire contempt of

I <rf Toi/ ai'Spa elaofrai, "they will know thee to be the man.'"
aMatt. V. 46. 3Heb. xii.4.


things present, and is clear from pride and
vainglory.

Having therefore loosed the hearer from
these bonds, and having anointed him for the
conflicts, again in another way He roots up
these passions, and with increased strictness.
For having begun by anger, and having cut
out on every side the sinews of this passion;
having said, "he that is angry with his
brother," and "he that calleth fool," or
" Raca," let him be punished: and " he that
is offering his gift, let him not approach the
table until he have done away the enmity; "
and "he that hath an adversary, before he
see the tribunal, let him make the enemy a
friend: " He makes a transition to lust again,
and saith, "he that beholds with unchaste
eyes, let him be punished as an adulterer; "
whoso is offended by an unchaste woman, or
by a man, or by any other of those belonging
to him, let him cut off all these; "he that
hath a woman by law of marriage, let him
never cast her out, and look to another."
For hereby He hath pulled up the roots of
wicked lust. Then after this He restrains
the love of riches, commanding neither to
swear, nor to lie, nor to keep hold of the
very cloak with which one may chance to be
clad, but rather to give up one's coat too,
to him who would have it, and one's bodily
services; completely and more than com-
pletely taking away our longing for riches.
Then after all these things, and the varied
garland of these commandments. He goes on
to say " pray for them which despitefully use
you: " leading us up to the very highest sum-
mit of self-control.

For as being meek is not so much as to
take smiting, nor being merciful, as to give
one's coat also together with one's cloak, nor
being just, as to bear injury, nor being a
peacemaker, as to follow even when smitten
and compelled; so also to suffer persecution
is not so much as to bless when persecuted.
Seest thou how by degrees He leads us up
into the very arches " of Heaven ?

9. What then can we deserve, who are
commanded to emulate God, and are perhaps
in a way not so much as to equal the publi-
cans ? For if "to love them that love us"
be the part of publicans, sinners, and hea.
thens: when we do not even this (and we do
it not, so long as we envy our brethren who
are in honor), what penalty shall we not incur,
commanded as we are to surpass the scribes,
and taking our place below the heathens ?
How then shall we behold the kingdom, I
pray thee ? how shall we set foot on that holy

4 cufjtSa^,


Homily XVIIL]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


129


threshold, who are not surpassing even the
publicans? For this He covertly signified,
when He said, "Do not even the publicans
the same ?''

And this thing most especially we may
admire in His teaching, that while in each in-
stance He sets down with very great fullness
the prizes of the conflicts; such as "to see
God," and "to inherit the kingdom of
Heaven," and "to become sons of God,"
and "like God," and "to obtain mercy,"
and " to be comforted," and " the great re-
ward: " if anywhere He must needs mention
things grievous. He doth this in a subdued
tone. Thus in the first place, the name of
hell He hath set down once only in so many
sentences; and in some other instances too, it
is with reserve that He corrects the hearer,
and as though he were managing His dis-
course rather in the way of shaming than
threatening him; where He saith, "do not
even the publicans the same ?" and, " if the
salt have lost its savor;" and, " he shall be
called least in the kingdom of Heaven."

And there are places where He puts down
the sin itself by way of punishment, leaving
to the hearer to infer the grievousness of the
punishment: as when He saith, "he hath
committed adultery with her in his heart; "
and, "he that putteth away causeth her to
commit adultery;'-' and, "That which is
more than these is of the evil one." For to
them that have understandmg, instead of
the mention of the punishment, the very
greatness of the sin is sufficient for correc-
tion.

Wherefore also He here brings forward the
heathens and the publicans, by the quality
of the person putting the disciple to shame.


Which Paul too did, saymg, "Sorrow not,
even as the rest which have no hope; " ' and,
" Even as the Gentiles which know not
God." ^

And to signify that He requires nothing
very overpowering, but a little more than was
accustomed, He saith,

" Do not even the Gentiles ^ the same?"*

Yet nevertheless He stops not the discourse
at this, but makes it end with His rewards,
and those good hopes, saying,

"Be ye therefore perfect, as your Heav-
enly Father." s

And He intersperses everywhere abun-
dantly the name of tlie heavens, l)y the very

' I Thrss. iv. 13. 'I ThcM. iv. 5.

1 TtAutyai, rec. IcxI. I Hut oi i6vi*oi, thr rcadiii^j juccplcd by
Chrysosiiiin, is su|i|»irtcd by the best uuthoritics u( every cUiss.
Comn. k. v.— R.]

* Matt. V. 47.

5 Matt. V. ^H. [Thr text uf tlic Iloinily has yiH/rfl*. which is
probably imperative, but in Matt. v. 4K, Sata9t m thr inclisputeil
reading : coinp. R. V., " Ye therefore shall be perfect, ' etc. — K.|
0


place thoroughly elevating their minds. For
as yet, I know not how, they were somewhat
weak and dull.

10. Let us then, bearing in mind all the
things which have been said, show forth great
love even towards our enemies; and let us
cast away that ridiculous custom, to which
many of the more thoughtless give way, wait-
ing for those that meet them to address them
first. Towards that which hath a great
blessing, they have no zeal; but what is ridic-
ulous, that they follow after.

Wherefore now dost thou not address him
first? "Because he is waiting for this," is
the reply. Nay, for this very reason most of
all thou shouldest have sprung forward to
him, that thou mightest win the crown.
" No,^' saith he, " since this was his object."
And what can be worse than this folly?
That is, " Because this," saith he, "was his
object; — to become procurer of a reward for
me; — I will not put my hand to what he has
thus suggested." Now if he first address
thee, thou gainest nothing, even though thou
accost him. But if thou be first to spring
forward and speak to him, thou hast made
thyself profit of his pride, and hast gathered
in a manner abundant fruit from his obsti-
nacy.* What is it then but the utmost folly,
when we are to reap so large fruit from bare
words, to give up the gain; and condemning
him, to stumble at the very same thing?
For if thou blamest him for this, tluat he first
waits to be addressed by another, wherefore
dost thou emulate that same thing which
thou accusest ■' That which thou saidst was
evil, why art thou to imitate the same as
good? Seest thou how that nothing is more
senseless than a man who associates with
wickedness ? Wherefore, I entreat, let us flee
this evil and ridiculous practice. Yea, for
ten thousand friendships hatli tliis pestilence
overthrown, many enmities hath it wrought.

For this cause then let us anticipate them.
Since we who are commandeti to take blows,
and be compelleil to journey,' ami to be
stripped by enemies, and to bear it; wiiat
kind of indulgence should we deserv'e, exhib-
iting so great contentiousness in a mere for-
mal address ?

11. "Why," saith one, " we are despised
and spit upon, the moment we have given
him up tliis." And in order that man may
not despise thee, dost thou offend God ?
And in order that thy frenzied fellow servant
may not despise thee, dost thou despise the
Lord, who hatii bestoweil on thee benefits so
great ? Nay, if it be amiss that thine efjual

A airofoiat. 7 ayyaptvia9a.i. [See note on *cc. 3. — R,]


I30


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIX.


should despise thee, how much more that thou
shouldest despise the God that made thee ?

And together with this, consider that other
point also; that when he despises thee, he is
at that very moment employed in procuring
to thee a greater reward. Since for God's
sake thou submittest to it, because thou hast
hearkened to His laws. And this, to what
kind of honor is it not equal ? to how many
diadems ? Be it my portion both to be in-
sulted and despised for God's sake, rather
than to be honored by all kings; for nothing,
nothing is equal to this glory.

This then let us pursue, in such wise as
Himself commanded, and making no account
of the things of men, but showing forth per-


fect self-restraint in all things, let us so direct
our own lives. For so even now, from this
very time, we shall enjoy the good things of
the heavens, and of the crowns that are
there, walking as angels among men, going
about in the earth like the angelic powers,
and abiding apart from all lust, from all tur-
moil.

And together with all these things we shall
receive also the unutterable blessings: unto
which may we all attain, by the grace and
love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to whom be glory, and power, and worship,
with the unoriginate Father, and the Holy
and Good Spirit, now and always, even for-
ever and ever. Amen


HOMILY XIX.

Matt. VI. i.
Take heed that ye do not your alms' before men, to be seen of them/'


He roots out in what remains the most
tyrannical passion of all, the rage and mad-
ness with respect to vainglory, which springs
up in them that do right. For at first He
had not at all discoursed about it; it being
indeed superfluous, before He had persuaded
them to do any of the things which they
ought, to teach in which ivay they should
practise and pursue them.

But after He had led them on to self-com-
mand, then He proceeds to purge away also
the alloy which secretly subsists with it.
For this disease is by no means of random
birth; but when we have duly performed
many of the commandments.

It behooved therefore first to implant virtue,
and then to remove the passion which mars
its fruit.

And see with what He begins, with fasting,
and prayer, and almsgiving: for in these
good deeds most especially it is wont to make
its haunt. The Pharisee, for instance, was
liereby puffed up, who saith, "I fast twice a
week, I give tithes of my substance." ^ And
he was vainglorious too in his very prayer,

1 [All authorities of an early period, including many fathers
prior to Chrysostom, read SiKaLO<rvvriv (comp. R. V.). It seems
likely that the apparent homiletical advantage of the other reading
made it the common one. — R."]

2 I.uke xviii. 12.


making it for display. For since there was
no one else present, he pointed himself out
to the publican, 3 saying, " I am not as the
rest of men, nor even as this publican." ■*

And mark how Christ began, as though He
were speaking of some wild beast, hard to
catch, and crafty to deceive him who was not
very watchful. Thus, "take heed," saith
He, " as to your alms." So Paul also speaks
to the Philippians; " Beware of dogs. "^ And
with reason, for'^ the evil beast comes in upon
us secretly, and without noise puffs all away,
and unobservedly carries out all that is within.

Forasmuch then as He had made much
discourse about almsgiving, and brought for-
ward God, " Who maketh His sun to rise on
the evil and the good," ? and fy motives from
all quarters had urged them on to this, and
had persuaded them to exult in the abun-
dance of their giving; He finishes by taking
away also all things that encumber this fair
olive tree. For which same cause He saith,
" Take heed that ye do not your alms before
men," for that which was before mentioned,
is "God's" almsgiving.

3 Or, " by the publican :" rtp tcAiopj) kvihiiKvvTO. [The dative
is correctly rendered in the text, but the verb is used in a figurative
sense. — R.]

4 I.uke xviii. II. 5 Phil. iii. 2. [" The dogs," so R. V.— R.]
6 [Kal yap.] 7 Matt. v. 45.


Homily XIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


131


2, And when He had said, " not to do it
before men," He added, "to be seen of
them." And though it seems as if the same


vainglory, and not putting an end to liis suf-
fering.

It is not then the giving alms which is re-


thing were said a second time, yet if any one quired, but the giving as one ought, the giv-
give particular attention, it is not the same i mg for such and such an end.*
thing, but one is different from the other; Having then amply derided those men, and
and it hath great security, and unspeakable ' having handled them so, that the hearer
care and tenderness. For it may be, both should be even ashamed of them. He again


that one doing alms before men may not do
it to be seen of them, and again that one not
doing it before men may do it to be seen of
them. Wherefore it is not simply the thing,
but the intent, which He both punishes and
rewards. And unless such exactness were
employed, this would make many more back-
ward about the giving of alms, because it is
not on every occasion altogether possible to
do it secretly. For this cause, setting thee
free from this restraint. He defines both the
penalty and the reward not by the result of
the action, but by the intention of the doer.

That is, that thou mayest not say, " What?
am I then the worse, should another see?"
— "it is not this," saith He, "that I am
seeking, but the mind that is in thee, and
the tone of what thou doest." For His will
is to bring our soul altogether into frame,
and to deliver it from every disease. Now
having, as you see, forbidden men's acting


corrects thoroughly the mind which is so dis-
tempered: and having said how we ought not
to act, He signifies on the other hand how
we ought to act. How then ought we to do
our alms? 5

" Let not thy left hand know," saith He,
"what thy right hand doeth."*

Here again His enigmatical meaning is not
of the hands, but He hath put the thing
hyperbolically. As thus: "If it can be,"
saith He, " for thyself not to know it, let this
be the object of thine endeavor; that, if it
were possible, it may be concealed from the
very hands that minister." It is not. as
some say, that we should hide it from wrong-
headed ' men, for He hath here commanded
that it should be concealed from all.

And then the reward too; consider how
great it is. For after He had spoken of the
punishment from the one. He points out also
the honor derived from the other; from either


for display, and having taught them the pen- side urging them, and leading them on to

alty thence ensuing, namely, to do it vainly, high lessons. Yea, for He is persuading

and for nought, He again rouses their spirits them to know that God is everywhere pres-

by putting them in mind of the Father, and ent, and that not by our present life are our

of Heaven, that not by the loss alone He interests limited, but a yet more awful tribu-

might sting them, but also shame them by nal will receive us when we go hence, and

the recollection of Him who gave them being, the account of all our doings, and honors, and

'* For ye have no reward," saith He, "with punishments: and that no one will be iiid in

your Father which is in Heaven."' doing anything either great or small, though

Nor even at this did He stop, but proceeds ! he seem to be hid from men. For all tliis


yet further, by other motives also increasing
their disgust. For as above He set forth
publicans and heathens, by the quality of the
person shaming their imitators, so also in
this place the hypocrites.

" Therefore when thou doest thine alms,"
saith He, "do not sound a trumpet before
thee, as the hypocrites do.""


did He darkly signify, when He said,

" Thy Father which seeth in secret shall
reward thee openly."**

Setting for him a great ami august assem-
blage of spectators, and what He desires, that
very thing bestowing on him in great abun-
dance. "For what," saith He, "dost thou
wish ? is it not to iiave some to be spectators


Not that they had trumpets, but He means ( of what is going on ? Heboid then, thou hast
to display the greatness of their frenzy, by some; not angels, nor archangels, but the
the use of this figure of speech, deritling and God of all." Ami if thou desire to have


making a show^ of them hereby.


men also as spectators, neither of this desire


And well hath He called them " hypocrites " i doth He deprive thee at the fitting season,


for the mask was of mercy, but the spirit of
cruelty and inljumanity. For they do it, not
because they pity their neighbors, but tliat
they themselves may enjoy credit; and tiiis
came of the utmost cruelty; while ruiotlier
was perisliing with iiunger, to be seeking


but rather in greater abundance affords it


4 {iia Toi/TO.

5 [As in ihr
* Sliili, vi. (.


1

prrviiiiii L'lauxc, " ought wc to uct.' — K.]


' Matt. vi. I.


3 Matt. vi. J.


1 4itirofjiVtvittv,


7 axaiovt, literally, " on ihr Irfl liacul."

*< Mutt. vi. 4. II lir phrii-u- if ry <^ai'tp<p i* iMMirly •iipporlrd
in vcrnrn 4, A, 18. It ■vcrnm, howcvrr. in tic niccptrd by Chry»««»-
tiini. I'hr k. V. properly rniclrr* ' r 1 oiii[wn"w ihre ' t<> clitlin-
Kiii«h from the word " reward ' {iiio0oi'), winch occurs in vene j
and ■kimilur |MtM«xci. — K.J


132


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIX.


unto thee. For, if thou shouldest now make
a display, thou wilt be able to make it to ten
only, or twenty, or (we will say) a hundred
persons: but if thou take pains to lie hid
now, God Himself will then proclaim thee in
the presence of the whole universe. Where-
fore above all, if thou wilt have men see thy
good deeds, hide them now, that then all
may look on them with the more honor, God
making them manifest, and extolling them,
and proclaiming them before all. Again,
whereas now they that behold will rather con-
demn thee as vainglorious; when they see
thee crowned, so far from condemning, they
will even admire thee, all of them. When
therefore by waiting a little, thou mayest both
receive a reward, and reap greater admira-
tion; consider what folly it is to cast thyself
out of both these; and while thou art seeking
thy reward from God, and while God is be-
holding, to summon men for the display of
what is going on. Why, if display must
be made of our love, to our Father above all
should we make it; and this most specially,
when our Father hath the power both to
crown and to punish.

And let me add, even were there no pen-
alty, it were not meet for him who desires
glory, to let go this our theatre, and take in
exchange that of men. For who is there so
wretched, as that when the king was hasten-
ing to come and see his achievements, he
would let him go, and make up his assembly
of spectators of poor men and beggars ? For
this cause then. He not only commands to
make no display, but even to take pains to
be concealed: it not being at all the same,
not to strive for publicity, and to strive for
concealment.

3. "And when ye pray," saith He, "ye
shall not be as the hypocrites, for they love
to pray standing in the synagogues, and in
the corners of the streets. Verily I say
unto you, they have their reward." "

" But thou, when thou prayest, enter into
thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door,
pray to thy Father which is in secret.' ^

These too agam He calls "hypocrites,"
and very fitly; for while they are feigning to
pray to God, they are looking round after
men; wearing the garb not of suppliants, but
of ridiculous persons. For he, who is to do
a suppliant's office, letting go all other, looks
to him alone, who hath power to grant his
request. But if thou leave this one, and go
about wandering and casting around thine


'Matt. vi. 5. [R. v., " to stand and pray," and, " They have
received their reward." — R.]

2 Matt. vi. 6. [R. V., " Enter into thine inner chamber, and
having shut thy door, pray," etc. — R."]


eyes everywhere, thou wilt depart with empty
hands. For this was thine own will. Where-
fore He said not, " such shall not receive a
reward," but, "they have it out:" that is,
they shall indeed receive one, but from
those of whom they themselves desire to have
it. For God wills not this: He rather for
His part was willing to bestow on men the
recompence that comes from Himself; but
they seeking that which is from men, can be
no longer justly entitled to receive from Him,
for whom they have done nothing.

But mark, I pray thee, the lovingkindness
of God, in that He promises to bestow on us
a reward, even for those good things which
we ask of Him.

Having then discredited them, who order
not this duty as they ought, both from the
place and from their disposition of mind, and
having shown that they are very ridiculous:
He introduces the best manner of prayer,
and again gives the reward, saying, " Enter
into thy closet."

" What then,'* it may be said, '* ought we
not to pray in church?" Indeed we ought
by all means, but in such a spirit as this.
Because everywhere God seeks the intention
of all that is done. Since even if thou
shouldest enter into thy closet, and having
shut the door, shouldest do it for display, the
doors will do thee no good.

It is worth observing in this case also, how
exact the definition, which He made when
He said, '' That they may appear unto men.'*
So that even if thou shut the doors, this He
desires thee duly to perform, rather than the
shutting of the doors, even to shut the doors
of the mind. For as in everything it is good
to be freed from vainglory, so most especially
in prayer. For if even without this, we wan-
der and are distracted, when shall we attend
unto the things which we are saying, should
we enter in having this disease also ? And if
we who pray and beseech attend not, how do
we expect God to attend ?

4. But yet some there are, who after such
and so earnest charges, behave themselves so
unseemly in prayer, that even when their
person is concealed, they make themselves
manifest to all by their voice, crying out dis-
orderly,^ and rendering themselves objects of
ridicule both by gesture and voice. Seest
thou not that even in a market place, should
any one come up doing like this, and begging
clamorously, he wili drive away him whom he
is petitioning; but if quietly, and with the
proper gesture, then he rather wins over him
that can grant the favor ?


3 <7vp>j>eTutSa>i.


Homily XIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


T T -1


Let us not then make our prayer by the
gesture of our body, nor by the loudness of
our voice, but by the earnestness of our
mind: neither with noise and clamor and for
display, so as even to disturb those that are
near us, but with all modesty,' and with con-
trition in the mind, and with inward tears.

But art thou pained in mind, and canst
not help crying aloud ? yet surely it is the
part of one exceedingly pained to pray and
entreat even as I have said. Since Closes too
was pained, and prayed in this way and was
heard; for this cause alsct God said unto him,
*' Wherefore criest thou unto me."^ And
Hannah too again, her voice not being heard,
accomplished all she wished, forasmuch as
her heart cried out.^ But Abel prayed not
only when silent, but even when dying, and
his blood sent forth a cry more clear than a
trumpet.''

Do thou also then groan, even as that holy
one, I forbid it not. " Rend," as the pro-
phet commanded, 5 " thine heart, and not thy
garments." Out of deeps call upon God,
for it is said, " Out of the depths have I
cried to Thee, O Lord."* From beneath,
out of the heart, draw forth a voice, make
thy prayer a mystery. Seest thou not that
even in the houses of kings all tumult is put
away, and great on all sides is the silence ?
Do thou also therefore, entering as into a
palace, — not that on the earth, but what is far
more awful than it, that which is in heaven,
— show forth great seemliness. Yea, for
thou art joined to the choirs of angels, and
art in communion with archangels, and art
singing with the seraphim. And all these
tribes show forth much goodly order, singing
with great awe that mystical strain, and their
sacred hymns to God, the King of all. With
these then mingle thyself, when thou art
praying, and emulate their mystical order.

For not unto men art thou praying, but to
God, who is everywhere present, who hears
even before the voice, who knows the secrets
of the mind. If thou so pray, great is the
reward thou shalt receive.

" For thy Father," saith He, " who seeth
in secret, shall reward thee openly.""

He said not, " shall freely give thee," but,
" shall reward thee; " yea, for He hath made
Himself a debtor to tliee, and even from this
hath lionorcd thee with great honor. For
because He Himself is invisible. He would
iKive thy prayer be so likewise.

5. Then He speaks even the very words of
the prayer.


' initiKtia^. » F.xod. xiv. 15. 1 i Sam. i. i-j.

■«<;cn. iv. 10. S Jdcl ii. 13. * pg. cxxxi. 1.

7 Matt. vi. 6. [Sec note mi sec. a, verse 4. — R.]


" When ye pray," saith He, " use no vain
repetitions, even as the heathen do."^

You see that when He was discoursing: of
almsgiving. He removed only that mischief
which comes of vainglory, and added nothing
more; neither did He say whence one should
give alms; as from honest labor, and not from
rapine nor covetousness: this being abun-
dantly acknowledged among all. And also
before that, He had thoroughly cleared up
this point, when He blessed them " that hun-
ger after righteousness."

But touching prayer. He adds somewhat
over and above; " not to use vain repeti-
tions." And as there He derides the hypo-
crites, so here the heathen; shaming the
hearer everywhere most of all by the vileness
of the persons. For since this, in most
cases, is especially biting and stinging, I
mean our appearing to be likened to outcast
persons; by this topic He dissuades them;
calling frivolousness, here, by the name of
"vain repetition:" as when we ask of God
things unsuitable, kingdoms, and glory, and
to get the better of enemies, and abundance
of wealth, and in general what does not at all
concern us.

"For He knoweth," saith He, "what
things ye have need of. " '

And herewith He seems to me to command
in this place, that neither should we make
our prayers long; long, I mean, not in time,
but in the number and length of the things
mentioned. For perseverance indeed in the
same requests is our duty: His word being,
"continuing instant in prayer.'""

And He Himself too, by that example of
tlie widow, who prevailed witli tiie pitiless ami
cruel ruler, by the continuance of her inter-
cession; " and by that of the friend, who came
late at night time, and roused the sleeper
from his bed,'-' not for his friendshiji's, but
for his importunity's sake; what did He, but
lay down a law, that all should continually
make supplication unto Him? He doth not
however bill us compose a prayer of ten
thousand clauses, and so come to Him and
merely repeat it. For this He ol)scurely
signified when He said, " 'I'hey think that
they shall be heard for their much speaking."

"For He knowetli," saith He, "what
things ye have need of." .And if He know,
one may say, wh;it we have need of, where,
fore must we pray ? Not to instruct Him, but
to prevail witii Him; to be made intimate with
Him, by continuance in sui)plication; to be
luimi)led; to be reminded of thy sins.

H Matl. vi. 7. [in. v.. "And in pruying use not vain rcpcti.
tionn, a« the (irntlle* do." — R.]

'" Rom. xii. ii.


■> .Mtttt. vi. 8.
■ ■ I. like xviii. I.


■> l.ukc xi. y


134


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIX.


6. "After this manner, therefore, pray
)'e," saith He: "Our Father, which art in
heaven." '

See how He straightway stirred up the
hearer, and reminded him of all God's bounty
in the beginning. For he who calls God
Father, by him both remission of sins, and
taking away of punishment, and righteous-
ness, and sanctification, and redemption, and
adoption, and inheritance, and brotherhood
with the Only-Begotten, and the supply of
the Spirit, are acknowledged in this single
title. For one cannot call God Father, with-
out having attained to all those blessings.
Doubly, therefore, doth He awaken their
spirit, both by the dignity of Him who is
called on, and by the greatness of the bene-
fits which they have enjoyed. But when He
saith, "in Heaven," He speaks not this as
shutting up God there, but as withdrawing
him who is praying from earth, and fixing
him in the high places, and in the dwellings
above.

He teaches, moreover, to make our prayer
common, in behalf of our brethren also.
For He saith not, "my Father, which art in
Heaven," but, "our Father," offering up his
supplications for the body in common, and
nowhere looking to his own, but everywhere
to his neighbor's good. And by this He at
once takes away hatred, and quells pride, and
casts out envy, and brings in the mother of
all good things, even charity, and extermi-
nates the inequality of human things, and
shows how far the equalit)'' reaches between
the king and the poor man, if at least in
those things which are greatest and most in-
dispensable, we are all of us fellows. For
what harm comes of our kindred below, when
in that which is on high we are all of us
knit together, and no one hath aught more
than another; neither the rich more than the
poor, nor the master than the servant, neither
the ruler than the subject, nor the king than
the common soldier, nor the philosopher than
the barbarian, nor the skillful than the un-
learned ? For to all hath He given one
nobility, having vouchsafed to be called the
Father of all alike.

7. When therefore He hath reminded us
of this nobility, and of the gift from above,
and of our equality with our brethren, and of
charity; and when He hath removed us from
earth, and fixed us in Heaven; let us see
what He commands us to ask after this.

' Matt. vi. 9. [In Latin editions of the Homilies a division has
been made at this point, so as to separate the comments on the
Lord's Prayer mto a distinct Homily. But the Greek Mss. have
no such division. The latter half is numbered Homily XX., and
the enumeration of all the subsequent Homilies modified. In
Migne's edition, two sets of numbers are given to the Homilies
which follow. — R.]


Not but, in the first place, even that saying
alone is sufficient to implant instruction in
all virtue. For he who hath called God
Father, and a common Father, would be
justly bound to show forth such a conversa-
tion, as not to appear unworthy of this nobil-
ity, and to exhibit a diligence proportionate
to the gift. Yet is He not satisfied with
this, but adds, also another clause, thus say-
ino"

" Hallowed be Thy name."

Worthy of him who calls God Father, is
the prayer to ask nothing before the glory of
His Father, but to account all things second-
ary to the work of praising Him. For " hal-
lowed " is glorified. For His own glory
He hath complete, and ever continuing the
same, but He commands him who prays to
seek that He may be glorified also by our
life. Which very thing He had said before
likewise, " Let your light so shine before
men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven."^
Yea, and the seraphim too, giving glory,
said on thiswise, "Holy, holy, holy."^ So
that "hallowed'' means this, viz. "glori-
fied." That is, "vouchsafe," saith he,
"that we may live so purely, that through
us all may glorify Thee." Which thing
again appertains unto -perfect self-control,
to present to all a life so irreprehensible, that
every one of the beholders may offer to the
Lord the praise due to Him for this.

" Thy kingdom come." ■*

And this again is the language of a right-
minded child, not to be rivetted to things
that are seen, neither to account things pres-
ent some great matter; but to hasten unto
our Father, and to long for the things to
come. And this springs out of a good con-
science, and a soul set free from things that
are on earth. This, for instance, Paul him-
self was longing after every day: wherefore
he also said, that "even we ourselves, who
have the first-fruits of the Spirit, groan, wait-
ing for an adoption, the redemption of our
body. "5 For he who hath this fondness,^
can neither be puffed up by the good things of
this life, nor abashed by its sorrows; but as
though dwelling in the very heavens, is freed
from each sort of irregularity.'

" Thy will be done in earth, as it is in
Heaven."

Behold a most excellent train of thought \
in that He bade us indeed long for the things


= Matt. V. 16. 3 Is. vi. 3 ; Rev. i\. 8. 4 Matt. vi. 10.

5 Rom. viii. 23. [The citation is slightly abridged, but the lat-
ter part agrees exactly with the Greek text followed in the R. V.,
which renders : " waiting lor our adoption, to wit, the redemptioa
of our body." — R.]

6 epcora. 7 ai'ojjuaAta?.


Homily XIX].


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


135


to come, and hasten towards that sojourn;
and, till that may be, even while we abide
here, so long to be earnest in showing forth
the same conversation as those above. For
ye must long, saith He, for heaven, and the
things in heaven; however, even before
heaven. He hath bidden us make the earth
a heaven and do and say all things, even
while we are continuing in it, as having our
conversation there; insomuch that these too
should be objects of our prayer to the Lord.
For there is nothing to hinder our reaching
the perfection of the powers above, because
we inhabit the earth; but it is possible even
while abiding here, to do all, as though
already placed on high. What He saith
therefore is this: "As there all things are
done without hindrance, and the angels are
not partly obedient and partly disobedient,
but in all things yield and obey (for He
saith, ' Mighty in strength, performing His
word ') ; ' so vouchsafe that we men may not
do Thy will by halves, but perform all things
as Thou wiliest."

Seest thou how He hath taught us also to
be modest, by making it clear that virtue is
not of our endeavors only, but also of the
grace from above ? And again, He hath en-
joined each one of us, who pray, to take
upon himself the care of the whole world.
For He did not at all say, " Thy will be done"
in fne, or in us, but everywhere on the
earth; so that error may be destroyed, and
truth implanted, and all wickedness cast out,
and virtue return, and no difference in this
respect be henceforth between heaven and
earth. "For if this come to pass," saith
He, " there will be no difference between
things below and above, separated as they
are in nature; the earth exhibiting to us an-
other set of angels."

8. " Give us this day our daily bread."''

What is ^' daily bread"? That for one
day.^

For because He had said thus, " Thy will
be done in earth as it is in heaven," but was
discoursing to men encompassed with flesh,
and subject to the necessities of nature, and


' Ps. ciii. 20. - Malt. vi. ii.

) [This is one of the most important passa>,"cs in these Homilies,
from a lexical point of view. The (Ireek text is, Tt «ffTi, Toi' ap-
Jov rov •iridvo'ioi' ; Tou tft^ij/xepo^. The word «rrtou(rioc is fmiii(i
only in Matt. vi. 11, I. like xi. (, and in the Christian literature
ba.scd on these passa>;cs. As alt liiblieal scholars are aware, the
etymology and meaning are still open to discussion. See Thayer's
Crtek l.fxiion. S'l-.i' 7 i-stnmi-nt, s:i/i Torr. The Fathers (jeiier-
ally K-ive it a spiritual or mystical sense, and Chrysostom's (xisition
is, therefore, the more important. The modern views may he in-
ferred from the K. V. .which in the text of both renders the word
" daily," with the mari{in " dreek, our bread for the coming; day,"
but the .Ameruan Company add as a second marginal renderinK,
" our needful bread. ' 1 hesc two niarkfinal renderin>;s represent
two distinct etymolo^-ics, while " dally" is uii explanatory or in-
ferential rcnderiuK, for which the authority of Chrysostoin has
furnished strong support. • k.]


incapable of the same impassibility with
the angels: — while He enjoins the commands
to be practised by us also, even as they
perform them; He condescends likewise, in
what follows, to the infirmity of our nature.
Thus, " perfection of conduct," saith He,
" I require as great, not however freedom
from passions; no, for the tyranny of nature
permits it not: for it requires necessary food."
But mark, I pray thee, how even in things
that are bodily, that which is spiritual
abounds. For it is neither for riches, nor
for delicate living, nor for costly raiment,
nor for any other such thing, but for bread
only, that He hath commanded us to make
our prayer. And for " daily bread," so as
not to "take thought for the morrow."*
Because of this He added, '''daily bread,"
that is, bread for one day.

And not even with this expression is He
satisfied, but adds another too afterwards,
saying, "Give us this day;" so that we may
not, beyond this, wear ourselves out with the
care of the following day. For that day, the
interval 5 before which thou knowest not
whether thou shalt see, wherefore dost thou
submit to its cares ?

This, as He proceeded, he enjoined also
more fully, saying, " Take no thought for
the morrow." He would have us be on every
hand unencumbered and winged for flight,
yielding just so much to nature as the com-
pulsion of necessity requires of us.

9. Then forasmuch as it comes to pass that
we sin even after the washing of regenera-
tion. He, showing His love to man to be great
even in this case, commands us for the re-
mission of our sins to come unto God who
loves man, and thus to say,

" Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive
our debtors."*

Seest thou surpassing mercy ? After tak-
ing away so great evils, and after the un-
speakable greatness of His gift, if men sin
again, He counts them such as may be for-
given. For that this prayer belongs to be-
lievers, is taught us both by the laws of the
churcii, and by the beginning of tlie prayer.
For the uninitiated could not call GoiX Fatlicr.
If then the prayer belongs to believers, and
they prav, entreating that sins may be for-
given them, it is clear that not even after the
laver is the profit of repentante taken away.
Since, had He not meant to signify this. He
would not have made a law that we should so
pray. Now He who boili brings sins to


4 Matt. vi. 34. 5 Tb iiaaTifna.

<■ Nlutt. vi. I J. [k. v., "have forgiven our dcl>lor»," following
a different and better lupporlcd reudini; tliun Ihut accepted by
I'hrywjstom.— k.]


136


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIX.


remembrance, and bids us ask forgiveness,
and teaches how we may obtain remission,
and so makes the way easy; it is perfectly
clear that He introduced this rule of suppli-
cation, as knowing, and signifying, that it is
possible even after the font ' to wash our-
selves from our offenses; by reminding us of
our sins, persuading us to be modest; by the
command to forgive others, setting us free
from all revengeful passion; while by promis-
ing in return for this to pardon us also, He
holds out good hopes, and instructs us to
have high views " concerning the unspeakable
mercy of God toward man.

But what we should most observe is this,
that whereas in each of the clauses He had
made mention of the whole of virtue, and in
this way had included also the forgetfulness
of injuries (for so, that " His name be
hallowed," is the exactness of a perfect con-
versation; and that " His will be done,^' de-
clares the same thing again; and to be able
to call God "Father," is the profession of
a blameless life; in all which things had been
comprehended also the duty of remitting our
anger against them that have transgressed):
still He was not satisfied with these, but
meaning to signify how earnest He is in the
matter, He sets it down also in particular,
and after the prayer, He makes mention of
no other commandment than this, saying
thus:

" For if ye forgive men their trespasses,
your heavenly Father also will forgive you." 3

So that the beginning is of us, and we our-
selves have control over the judgment that is
to be passed upon us. For in order that no
one, even of the senseless, might have any
complaint to make, either great or small,
when brought to judgment; on thee, who art
to give account, He causes the sentence
to depend; and "in what way soever thou
hast judged for thyself,-* in the same," saith
He, "do I also judge thee." And if thou
forgive thy fellow servant, thou shalt obtain
the same favor from me; though indeed the
one be not equal to the other. For thou
forgivest in thy need, but God, having need
of none: thou, thy fellow slave; God, His
slave: thou liable to unnumbered charges;
God, being without sin. But yet even thus
doth He show forth His lovingkindness
towards man.

Since He might indeed, even without this,
forgive thee all thine offenses; but He wills
thee hereby also to receive a benefit; afford-
ing thee on all sides innumerable occasions


1 [luera to AouTpoi', rendered above, " after the laver." — R.]

2 ^iAoo-o(;>eii'. 3 Matt. vi. J4.
4 Many Mss. read hast given judgment on him.


of gentleness and love to man, casting out
what is brutish in thee, and quenching wrath,
and in all ways cementing thee to him who
is thine own member.

For what canst thou have to say ? that thou
hast wrongfully endured some ill of thy
neighbor ? (For these only are trespasses,
since if it be done with justice, the act is not
a trespass.) But thou too art drawing near
to receive forgiveness for such things, and for
much greater. And even before the for-
giveness, thou hast received no small gift, in
being taught to have a human soul, and in
being trained to all gentleness. And here-
with a great reward shall also be laid up for
thee elsewhere, even to be called to account
for none of thine offenses.

What sort of punishment then do we not
deserve, when after having received the priv-
ilege, we betray our salvation ? And how
shall we claim to be heard in the rest of our
matters, if we will not, in those which depend
on us, spare our own selves ?

10. "And lead us not into temptation; but
deliver us from the evil one: for Thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for
ever. Amen.'' s

Here He teaches us plainly our own vile-
ness, and quells our pride, instructing us to
deprecate all conflicts, instead of rushing
upon them. For so both our victory will be
more glorious, and the devil's overthrow
more to be derided. I mean, that as when
we are dragged forth, we must stand nobly;
so when we are not summoned, we should be
quiet, and wait for the time of conflict; that
we may show both freedom from vainglory,
and nobleness of spirit.

And He here calls the devil " the wicked
one," commanding us to wage against him a
war that knows no truce, and implying that
he is not such by nature. For wickedness ^
is not of those things that are from nature,
but of them that are added by our own
choice. And he is so called pre-eminently,
by reason of the excess of his wickedness,
and because he, in no respect injured by us,
wages against us implacable war. Where-
fore neither said He, "deliver us from the
wicked ones," but, " from the wicked one; "
instructing us in no case to entertain displeas-
ure against our neighbors, for what wrongs
soever we may suffer at their hands, but to
transfer our enmity from these to him, as
being himself the cause of all our wrongs.


5 Matt. vi. 13. [Two points of great interest are to be noticed
here : (i) that the interpretation " of the evil one " i.s unqualifiedly
accepted ; (2) that the doxology is given without any suggestion
of doubt respecting the genuineness of it. Here, as so often, the
e.xegetical accuracy of Chrysostom appears to exceed his critical
estimate of the Greek text of the New Testament.— R.]

6 7ro^T)pia.


Homily XIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


TIT


Having then made us anxious as before
conflict, by putting us in mind of the enemy,
and having cut away from us all our remiss-
ness; He again encourages and raises our
spirits, by bringing to our remembrance the
King under whom we are arrayed, and signi-
fying Him to be more powerful than all.
"For Thine," saith He, "is the kingdom,
and the power, and the glory."

Doth it not then follow, that if His be the
kingdom, we should fear no one, since there
can be none to withstand, and divide the
empire with him. For when He saith,
" Thine is the kingdom/' He sets before us
even him, who is warring against us, brought
into subjection, though he seem to oppose,
God for a while permitting it. For in truth
he too is among God's servants, though of
the degraded class, and those guilty of
offense; and he would not dare set upon any
of his fellow servants, had he not first re-
ceived license from above. And why say I,
"his fellow servants?'' Not even against
swine did he venture any outrage, until He
Himself allowed him;' nor against flocks,
nor herds, until he had received permission
from above.''

"And the power," saith He. Therefore,
manifold as thy weakness may be, thou may-
est of right be confident, having such a one
to reign over thee, who is able full}' to ac-
complish all, and that with ease, even by
thee.

"And the glory, for ever. Amen." Thus
He not only frees thee from the dangers that
are approaching thee, but can make thee also
glorious and illustrious. For as His power is
great, so also is His glory unspeakable, and
they are all boundless, and no end of them.
Seest thou how He hath by every means
anointed His Champion, and hath framed
Him to be full of confidence ?

II. Then, as I said before, meaning to
signify, that of all things He most loathes
and hates bearing malice, and most of all
accepts the virtue which is opposite to that
vice; He hath after the prayer also again put
us in mind of this same point of goodness;
both by the punishment set, and by the re-
ward appointed, urging the hearer to obey
this command.

" For if ye forgive men,'' saith He, " yf)ur
heavenly Father will also forgive you. lUit
if ye forgive not, neitlier will He forgive
you.''

With this view He hath again mentioned


' Luke viii. 3a. ■> Job i. la.

? Mutt. vi. 14, 15. [The latter vcrw i« ubrid((C(l, Imt there arc
vuriation.s in the .mss. of the New 'rcstuincnt ; comp. Tischendorf,
in loco. — K.]


heaven also, and their Father; to abash the
hearer by this topic likewise; that he of all
people, being of such a Father, should be
made a wild beast of; and summoned as he
is to heaven, should cherish an earthly and
ordinary^ sort of mind. Since not by grace
only, you see, ought we to become His chil-
dren, but also by our works. And nothing
makes us so like God, as being ready to for-
give the wicked and wrong-doers; even as
indeed He had taught before, when He spake
of His " making tne sun to shine on the evil
and on the good.''^

For this same cause again in every one of
the clauses He commands us to make our
prayers common, saying, " Our Father," and
" Thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven," and "Give us tlie bread, and for-
give us our debts," and "lead us not into
temptation," and " deliver //jt; " everywhere
commanding us to use this plural word, that
we may not retain so much as a vestige of
anger against our neighbor.

How great punishment then must they
deserve, who after all this, so far from them-
selves forgiving, do even entreat God for
vengeance on their enemies, and diametri-
cally as it were transgress this law; and this
while He is doing and contriving all, to hin-
der our being at variance one with another ?
For since love is the root of all that is good,
He removing from all sides whatever mars it,
brings us together, and cements us to each
other. For there is not, there is not one, be
he father, or mother, or friend, or what you
will, who so loved us as the God who created
us. And this, above all things, both His
daily benefits and His precejits make mani-
fest. But if thou tell me of the pains, and of
the sorrows, and of the evils of life; consider
in how many things thou offendest Him
every day, and thou wilt no longer marvel,
though more than these evils should come
upon thee, but if tliou shouldest enjoy any
good, then thou wilt mar%'t:l, and be aina/cd.
But as it is, we look uiK)n the calamities
that come upon us, but the offenses, where-
by we offend ilaily, we consider not: there-
fore we are perplexed. Since if we ditl but
reckon up with strictness our sins of one liay
only, in that case we should know well how
great evils we must be liable to.

And to let pass the other misdoings of
which we have l)een guilty, each t)ne for
himself, and to speak of what have been com-
mitted this day; .ilthoiigh of course I know
not in what each of us may have sinneil, yet
such is the abundance of our misdoings, that

4 ^iwTiKOf [here in the tense of " lecuUr."— K.]

5 Malt. V. 45.


138


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XIX>


not even he who knew all exactly would be
able to choose from among these only.
Which of us, for instance, hath not been care-
less in his prayers ? Which hath not been
insolent, or vainglorious ? Who hath not
spoken evil of his brother, hath not admitted
a wicked desire, hath not looked w.th un-
chaste eyes, hath not remembered things with
hostile feeling, even till he made his heart
swell ?

And if while we are in church, and in a
short time we have become guilty of so great
evils; what shall be when we are gone out
from hence ? If in the harbor the waves are
so high, when we are gone forth into the
channel of wickednesses, the forum I mean,
and to public business, and our cares at
home, shall we indeed be able so much as to
know ourselves again ?

But yet from our so great and so many
sins, God hath given us a short and easy
way of deliverance, and one that is free from
all toil. For what sort of toil is it to forgive
him that hath grieved us ? Nay, it is a toil
not to forgive, but to keep up our enmity:
even as to be delivered from the anger, both
works in us a great refreshment, and is very
easy to him that is willing. For there is no
sea to be crossed, nor long journey to be
travelled, nor summits of mountains to be
passed over, nor money to be spent, no need
to torment thy body; but it suffices to be
willing only, and all our sins are done away.

But if so far from forgiving him thyself,
thou makest intercession to God against him,
what hope of salvation wilt thou then have, if
at the very time when thou oughtest rather
to appease God, even then thou provokest
Him; putting on the garb of a suppliant, but
uttering the cries of a wild beast, and darting
out against thyself those shafts of the wicked
one ? Wherefore Paul also, making mention
of prayer, required nothing so much as the
observance of this commandment; for He
saith, " lifting up holy hands without wrath
and doubting."' And if when thou hast
need of mercy, not even then wilt thou let go
thine anger, but art rather exceedingly mind-
ful of it, and that, although thou knowest
thou art thrusting the sword into thyself;
when will it be possible for thee to become
merciful, and to spew out the evil venom of
this wickedness ?

But if thou iiast not yet seen this outrage-
ousness in its full extent, suppose it happen-
ing among men, and then thou wilt perceive
the excess of the insolence. As thus: should
one approach thee who are a man, seeking to


ing.


Tim. ii.
-R.J


8. [R. v., " disputing," with margin, " doubt-


obtain mercy, and then, in the midst of his
lying on the ground, should see an enemy,
and leaving off to supplicate thee, begin to
beat him; wouldest thou not make thyself
more angry with him ? This do thou consider
as taking place with regard to God also. For
so thou likewise, making supplication unto
God, leavest thy supplication m the midst,
and smitest thine enemy with thy words, and
insultest the laws of God. Him who made a
law to dismiss all anger, thou art summoning
against those that have vexed thee, and re-
quiring Him to do things contrary to His
own commandments. Is it not enough for
thee in the way of revenge, that thou thyself
transgressest the law of God, but entreatest
thou Him likewise to do so? What? hath
He forgotten what He commanded ? What ?
is He a man who spake these things? It is
God, who knows all things, and whose will
is, that His own laws be kept with the utmost
exactness, and who, so far from doing these
things which thou art requiring of Him, doth
even regard thee who sayest these things,
merely because thou sayest them, with aver-
sion and hatred, and exacts of thee the most
extreme penalty. How then seekest thou
to obtain of Him things, from which He very
seriously bids thee refrain ?

Yet some there are, who have come to such
a point of brutishness, as not only to make
intercession against their enemies, but even
to curse their children, and to taste, if only
it might be, of their very flesh; or rather
they are even tasting thereof. For tell me
not this, that thou hast not fixed thy teeth
in the body of him that vexed thee; since
thou hast done, at least as far as concerned
thee, what is much more grievous; in claim-
ing that wrath from above should fall upon
him, and that he should be delivered over to
undying punishment, and be overthrown with
his whole house.

Why, what sort of bites are as ferocious as
this? what kind of weapons as bitter? Not
so did Christ instruct thee; not so did He
command thee to stain thy mouth with blood.
Nay, mouths made bloody with human flesh
are not so shocking as tongues like these.

How then wilt thou salute thy brother?
how wilt thou touch the sacrifice ? how taste
the Lord's blood, when thou hast so much
venom upon thy mind ? Since when thou
sayest, "Rend him in pieces, and overthrow
his house, and destroy all," when thou art
imprecating on him ten thousand deaths,
thou art in nothing different from a murderer,
or rather from a wild beast that devours men.

Let us cease then from this disease and
madness, and that kindliness which He com-


Homily XIX. 1


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


139


manded let us show forth towards them that
have vexed us: that we may become like
" our Father which is in heaven." And we
shall cease therefrom, if we call to mind our
own sins; if we strictly search out all our
misdeeds at home, abroad, and in the market,
and in church.

12. For if for nothing else, surely for our
disrespectfulness here we are worthy to un-
dergo the utmost punishment. For when
prophets are chanting, and apostles singing
hymns, and God is discoursing, we wander
without, and bring in upon us a turmoil of
worldly business. And we do not afford to
the laws of God so great stillness, even as the
spectators in the theatres to the emperor's
letters, keeping silence for them. For there,
when these letters are being read, deputies at
once, and governors, and senate, and people,
stand all upright, with quietness hearkening
to the words. And if amid that most pro-
found silence any one should suddenly leap
up and cry out, he suffers the utmost punish-
ment, as having been insolent to the em-
peror. But here, when the letters from
heaven are being read, great is the confusion
on all sides. And yet both He who sent the
letters is much greater than this our king,'
and the assembly more venerable: for not
men only, but angels too are in it; and these
triumphs, of which the letters bear us the
good tidings, are much more awful than those
on earth. Wherefore not men only, but
angels also and archangels; both the nations
of heaven, and all we on the earth, are com-
manded to give praise. For, " Bless the
Lord," it is said, "all His works." ^ Yea,
for His are no small achievements, rather
they surpass all speech, and thought, and
understanding of man.

And these things the prophets proclaim
every day, each of them in a different way
publishing this glorious triumph. For one
saith, "Thou hast gone up on high, Thou
hast led captivity captive, and hast received
gifts amongst men."^ And, " 'I'he Lord
strong and mighty in battle." * And another
saith, " He shall divide the spoils of tlie
strong." 5 For indeed to this purpose He
came, that He might " i)reach deliverance to
captives, and recovery of sight to the blind." ''

Anil raising aloud tiie cry of victory over
death, he said, "Where, O Death, is thy
victory? Where, O Grave, is thy sting?"'
And another again, declaring glad tidings of


' [toD /SairiAcwf , the Greek title of the emperor. The tenn is
10 rendered above — R.]

■■' I's. ciii. 22. 3 Ps. Ixviii. i8. * IN. xxiv. 8.

5 Im. liii. I?. <■ Isa. Ixi. i ; I. like iv. iij.

7 Hosea xiii. 14. ['I'lii- i.xx. has l>crn inixlifird in ihis citation
toaccurd, in ihc first cluiisc. with 1 C<'r. xv. 55. K.]


the most profound peace, said, " They shall
beat their swords into ploughshares, and their
spears into pruning hooks, "^ And wiiile one
calls on Jerusalem, saying, " Rejoice greatly,
O daughter of Sion, for lo ! thy King cometh
to thee meek, riding upon an ass, and a
young colt; "' another proclaims His second
coming also, saying on this wise, " The Lord,
whom ye seek, will come, and who will abide
the day of His coming?'" Leap ye as calves
set free from bonds."" And another again,
amazed at such things, said, "This is our
God; there shall none other be accounted of
in comparison of Him." '-

Yet, nevertheless, while both these and
many more sayings than these are being
uttered, while we ought to tremble, and not
so much as account ourselves to be on the
earth; still, as though in the midst of a
forum, we make an uproar and disturbance,
and spend the whole time of our solemn as-
sembly '3 in discoursing of things which are
nothing to us.

When therefore both in little things, and in
great, both in hearing, and in doing, both
abroad, and at home, in the church, we are
so negligent; and together with all this, pray
also against our enemies: whence are we to
have any hope of salvation, adding to so
great sins yet another grievous enhancement,
and equivalent to them all, even this unlaw-
ful prayer ?

Have we then hereafter any. right to mar-
vel, if aught befall us of the things which are
unexpected and painful ? whereas we ought to
marvel when no such thing befalls us. For
the former is in the natural order of things,
but the latter were beyond all reason and ex-
pectation. For surely it is beyond reason,
that they who are become enemies of God,
and are provoking Him to anger, should
enjoy sunshine and showers, ami all the rest;
who being men surpass the barbarity of wild
beasts, setting themselves one against an-
other, and by the lilting of their neighbors
staining their own tongues with blood: after
the spiritual table, and His so great benefits,
and His innumerable injunctions.

Therefore, considering these things, let us
cast up that venom; let us put an euil to our
enmities, and let us make the prayers that
become such as we arc. Instead of the
brutality of devils, lei us take upon us tlie
mildness of angels; and in whatsoever things
we may have been injured, let us, consider-

" \*u. ii. 4 ; Micah iv. ^. 9 Zrth. ix. 9. '" Mai. iii. 1, 1.

" Mnl. iv. a. The prtw-nt rradinv! "f the l.xx. i* ff«t(>rij<7eTf,
" yr -thall Ifm)." [Su the Hebrew; conip. K. V. R]

'■' Itariic. iii. ts.

' 1 Tr|< cTi'ca(»<iit : "oflhr Holy ('•'inniunion. " I lliit urc ni^tr i
in lloiiiily V., |>. 3i,andcump. liuniily l.\.\X\'III. ut the clone.

K.)


140


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XX.


ing our own case, and the reward appointed
us for this commandment, soften our anger;
let us assuage the billows, that we may both
pass through the present life calmly, and
when we have departed thither, may find our
Lord such as we have been towards our fel-
low-servants. And if this be a heavy and
fearful thing, let us make it light and desira-
ble; and let us open the glorious gates of
confidence towards Him; and what we had
not strength to effect by abstaining from sin,
that let us accomplish by becoming gentle to


them who have sinned against us (for this
surely is not grievous, nor burdensome) ; and
let us by doing kindnesses to our enemies,
lay up beforehand much mercy for ourselves.
For so both during this present life all will
love us, and above all others, God will both
befriend and crown us, and will count us
worthy of all the good things to come; unto
which may we all attain, by the grace and
love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to whom be glory and might for ever and
ever. Amen.


HOMILY XX.^


Matt. VL 16.

*'And when ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance. For they disfigure

their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast."


Here it were well to sigh aloud, and to
wail bitterly: for not only do we imitate the
hypocrites^ but we have even surpassed
them. For I know, yea I know many, not
merely fasting and making a display of it,
but neglecting to fast, and yet wearing the
masks of them that fast, and cloaking them-
selves with an excuse worse than their sin.

For " I do this," say they, "that I may
not offend the many." What sayest thou?
There is a law of God which commands these
things, and dost thou talk of offense ? And
thinkest thou that in keeping it thou art
offending, in transgressing it, delivering men
from offense ? And what can be worse than
this folly ?

Wilt thou not leave off becoming worse
than the very hypocrites, and making thine
hypocrisy double? And when thou consider-
est the great excess of this evil, wilt thou not
be abashed at the force of the expression now
before us? In that He did not say, "they
act a part,*' merely, but willing also to touch
them more deeply, He saith, " For they dis-
figure their faces;" that is, they corrupt,
they mar them.

But if this be a disfiguring of the face, to
appear pale for vainglory, what should we
say concerning the women who corrupt their
faces with colorings and paintings to . the


' [Or Homily XXT. in the Latin versions ; see note on Homily
XIX., sec. 6, p. I34-— R-]


ruin of the unchaste sort of voung men ?
For while those harm themselves only, these
women harm both themselves and them who
behold them. Wherefore we should fly both
from the one pest and from the other, keeping
at distance enough and to spare. For so He
not only commanded to make no display,
but even to seek to be concealed. Which
thing He had done before likewise.

And whereas in the matter of almsgiving.
He did not put it simply, but having said,
"Take heed not to do it before men," He
added, "to be seen of them;^' yet concern-
ing fasting and prayer, He made no such
limitation. Why could this have been ?
Because for almsgiving to be altogether con-
cealed is impossible, but for prayer and
fasting, it is possible.

As therefore, when He said, " Let not thy
left hand know what thy right hand doeth,"
it was not of hands that He was speaking,
but of the duty of being strictly concealed
from all; and as ivhen He commanded us to
enter into our closet, not there alone abso-
lutely, nor there primarily, did He command
us to pray, but He covertly intimated the
same thing again; so likewise here, in com-
manding us "to be anointed," He did not
enact that we positively must anoint our-
selves; for then we should all of us be found
transgressors of this law; and above all,
surely, they who have taken the most pains


Homily XX. J


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


141


to keep it, the societies of tiie monks, who
have taken up their dwelling on the moun-
tains. It was not this then that He enjoined,
but, forasmuch as the ancients had a custom
to anoint themselves continually, when they
were taking their pleasure and rejoicing
(and this one may see clearly from David '
and from Daniel) ; ■ He said that we were
to anoint ourselves, not that we should posi-
tively do this, but that by all means we might
endeavor, with great strictness, to hide this
our acquisition. And to convince thee that
so it is, He Himself, when by action exhibit-
ing what He enjoined in words, having fasted
forty days, and fasted in secret, did neither
anoint nor wash Himself: nevertheless,
though He did not these things. He most
assuredly fulfilled the whole without vain-
glory. It is this then that He enjoins on us
likewise, both bringing before us the hypo-
crites, and by a twice repeated charge dis-
suading the hearers.

And somewhat else He signified by this
name, this of hypocrites, ^ I mean. That is,
not only by the ridiculousness of the thing,
nor by its bringing an extreme penalty, but
also by showing that such deceit is but for a
season, doth He withdraw us from that evil
desire. For the actor seerns glorious just
so long as the audience is sitting; or rather
not even then in the sight of all. For the
more part of the spectators know who it is,
and what part he is acting. However, when
the audience is broken up, he is more clearly
discovered to all. Now this, you see, the
vainglorious must in all necessity undergo.
For even here they are manifest to the
majority, as nut being that which they appear
to be, but as wearing a mask only; but much
more will they be detected hereafter, when
all things appear " naked and open."-*

And by another motive again He withdraws
them from the hypocrites, by showing that
His injunction is light. For He doth not
make the fast more strict, nor command us
to practise more of it, but not to lose tiie
crown thereof. So that what seems hard to
bear, is common to us and to the hypocrites,
for they also fast; but that wliich is lightest,
namely, not to lose the reward after our
labors, "this is what I commanil," saith
He; adding nothing to our toils, but gather-
ing our wages for us with all security, and
not suffering us to go away unrewarded, as
they do. Nay, they will not so mucli as
imitate them that wrestle in the Olympic
games, who although so great a multitude is
sitting there, and so many princes, desire to

« a Sam. xii. 20. » Ilan. x. 3. _ 1 Literally, "actorn."

4 llcl). iv. 13. [R. v., " laid upcn,"' TeTpttj;i|Ai<r(iico.- K.)


please but one, even him who adjudges the
victory amongst them; and this, though he
be much their inferior. But thou, though
, thou hast a twofold motive for displaying
j the victory to Him, first, that He is the per-
son to adjudge it, and also, that He is beyond
comparison superior to all that are sitting
in the theatre, — thou art displaying it to
others, who so far from profiting, do privily
work thee the greatest harm.

However, I do not forbid even this, saith
He. Only, if thou art desirous to make a
show to men, also, wait, and I will bestow on
thee this too in fuller abundance, and with
great profit. For as it is, this quite breaks
thee off from the glory which is with me,
even as to despise these things unites thee
closely; but then shalt thou enjoy all in en-
tire security; having, even before that last,
no little fruit to reap in this world also,
namely, that thou hast trodden under foot all
human glory, and art freed from the grievous
bondage of men, and art become a true worker
of virtue. Whereas now, as long at least as
thou art so disposed, if thou shouldest be in
a desert, thou wilt be deserted by all thy vir-
tue, having none to behold thee. This is to
act as one insulting virtue itself, if thou art
to pursue it not for its own sake, but with
an eye to the ropemaker, and the brazier,
and the common people of the baser sort,
that the bad and they that are far removed
from virtue may admire thee. And thou art
calling the enemies of virtue to the display
and the sight thereof, as if one were to
choose to live continently, not for the excel-
lency of continence, but that he might make
a show before prostitutes. Thou also, it
would seem, wouldest not choose virtue, but
for the sake of virtue's enemies; whereas
thou oughtest indeed to admire her on this
very ground, that she hath even her enemies
to praise her, — yet to admire iier (as is
meet), not for others, but for her own sake.
Since we too, when we artt loveti not for our
own, but for others' sake, account the thing
an insult. Just so I bid thee reckon in the
case of virtue as well, and neither to follow
after her for tiie sake of others, nor for men's
sake to obey (lod; but men for Cioil's sake.
Since if thou do the contrary, though thou
seem to follow virtue, thou hast jirovoked
equally with him who follows her not. For
just as he tiisobeyed by not doing, so thou
by doing unlawfully.

2 *' Lay not up for yourselves treasures
upon earth."*

'I'lius, after He hath cast out the disease


S Matt. vi. 19. [" u|Hin the earth," to R. V.— R.]


142


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XX.


of vainglory, and not before, He seasonably
introduces His discourse of voluntary pov-
erty." For nothing so trains men to be fond
of riches, as the fondness for glory. This,
for instance, is why men devise those herds
of slaves, and that swarm of eunuchs, and
their horses with trappings of gold, and their
silver tables, and all the rest of it, yet more
ridiculous; not to satisfy any wants, nor to
enjoy any pleasure, but that they may make
a show before the multitude.

Now above He had only said, that we must
show mercy; but here He points out also
how great mercy we must show, when He
saith, "Lay not up treasure." For it not
being possible at the beginning to introduce
all at once His discourse on contempt of
riches, by reason of the tyranny of the pas-
sion, He breaks it up into small portions, and
having set free the hearer's mind, instills it
therein, so as that it shall become accepta-
ble. Wherefore, you see. He said first,
"Blessed are the merciful;" and after this,
"Agree with thine adversary; " and after that
again, " If any one will sue thee at the law,
and take thy coat, give him thy cloak also;''
but here, that which is much greater than all
these. For there His meaning was, " if thou
see a law-suit impending, do this; since to
want and be freed from strife, is better than
to possess and strive;" but here, supposing
neither adversary nor any one at law with
thee, and without all mention of any other
such party. He teaches the contempt of riches
itself by itself, implying that not so much
for their sake who receive mercy, as for the
giver's sake. He makes these laws: so that
though there be no one injuring us, or drag-
ging us into a court of justice, even so we
may despise our possessions, bestowing them
on those that are in need.

And neither here hath He put the whole,
but even in this place it is gently spoken;
although He had in the wilderness shown
forth to a surpassing extent His conflicts in
that behalf. "= However He doth not express
this, nor bring it forward; for it was not yet
time to reveal it; but for a while He searches
out for reasons, maintaining the place of an
adviser rather than a lawgiver, in His sayings
on this subject.

For after He had said, " Lay not up treas-
ures upon the earth," He added, "where
moth and rust doth corrupt, and where
thieves break through, and steal."

For the present He signifies the hurtfulness
of the treasure here, and the profit of what is
there, both from the place, and from the


• aKTriiJ.o<rvvrii.


'■^ Matt. IV. 9, lo.


things which mar it. And neither at this
point doth He stop, but adds also another
argument.

And first, what things they most fear, from
these He urges them. For " of what art
thou afraid?" saith He: "lest thy goods
should be spent, if thou give alms? Nay,
then give alms, and so they will not be spent;
and, what is more, so far from being spent,
they will actually receive a greater increase;
yea, for the things in heaven are added unto
them."

However, for a time He saith it not, but
puts it afterwards. But for the present, what
had most power to persuade them, that He
brings forward, namely, that the treasure
would thus remain for them unspent.

And on either hand He attracts them.
For He said not only, " If thou give alms, it
is preserved:" but He threatened also the
opposite thing, that if thou give not, it per-
ishes.

And see His unspeakable prudence. For
neither did He say, " Thou dost but leave
them to others; '' since this too is pleasant to
men: He alarms them however on a new
ground, by signifying that not even this do
they obtain: since though men defraud not,
there are those which are sure to defraud,
" the moth " and " the rust.'" For although
this mischief seem very easy to restrain, it
is nevertheless irresistible and uncontrollable,
and devise what thou wilt, thou wilt be una-
ble to check this harm.

" What then, doth moth ^ make away with
the gold?" Though not moth,^ yet thieves
do. " What then, have all been despoiled ? "
Though not all, yet the more part.

3. On this account then He adds another
argument, which I have already mentioned,
saying,

" Where the man's treasure is, there is his
heart also."*

For though none of these things should
come to pass, saith He, thou wilt undergo no
small harm, in being nailed to the things
below, and in becoming a slave instead of a
freeman, and casting thyself out of the heav-
enly things, and having no power to think on
aught that is high, but all about money,
usuries and loans, and gains, and ignoble
trafifickings. Than this what could be more
wretched ? For in truth such an one will be
worse off than any slave, bringing upon him-
self a most grievous tyranny, and giving up


3 [o-ijs. The Oxford version has inadvertently rendered it
" rust."— R.]

4 Matt. vi. 21. [The correct text of Matt. vi. 21 is rendered,
" For where thy treasure is, there will thy heart be also " (R. V.),
but Chrysostom varies from this both here and below. The plural
form has little authority. — R.]


Homily XX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


M3


the chiefest thing of all, even the nobleness
and the liberty of man. For how much
soever any one may discourse unto thee, thou
wilt not be able to hear any of those things
which concern thee, whilst thy mind is nailed
down to money; but bound like a dog to a
tomb, by the tyranny of riches, more griev-
ously than by any chain, barking at all that
come near thee, thou hast this one employ-
ment continually, to keep for others what
thou hast laid up. Than this what can be
more wretched ?

However, forasmuch as this was too high
for the mind of His hearers, and neither was
the mischief within easy view of the general-
ity, nor the gain evident, but there was need
of a spirit of more self-command to perceive
either of these; first, He hath put it after
those other topics, which are obvious, saying,
"Where the man's treasure is, there is his
heart also;" and next He makes it clear
again, by withdrawing His discourse from the
intellectual to the sensible, and saying,

" The light of the body is the eye." '

What He saith is like this: Bury not gold
in the earth, nor do any other such thing, for
thou dost but gather it for the moth, and the
rust, and the thieves. And even if thou
shouldest entirely escape these evils, yet the
enslaving of thine heart, the nailing it to all
that is below, thou wilt not escape: " For
wheresoever thy treasure may be, there is
thine heart also." As then, laying up stores
in heaven, thou wilt reap not this fruit only,
the attainment of the rewards for these things,
but from this world thou already receivest thy
recompence, in getting into harbor there, in
setting thine affections on the tilings that are
there, and caring for what is there (for
where thou hast laid up tliy treasures, it is
most clear thou transferrest thy mind also);
so if thou do this upon earth, thou wilt ex-
perience the contrary.

But if the saying be obscure to thee, hear
what comes next in order.

" The light of the body is the eye; if there-
fore thine eye be single, thy whole body shall
be full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy
whole body shall be full of darkness. But if
the liglit that is in thee be darkness, how
great is the darkness ! '"•

He leads His discourse to the things which
are more within tlie reach of our senses. I
mean, forasmuch as He had spoken of the
mind as enslaved and brouglit into captivity,
and there were not many who could easily


discern this, He transfers the lesson to things
outward, and lying before men's eyes, that
by these the others also might reach their
understanding. Thus, " If thou knowest
j not,'" saith He, " what a thing it is to be in-
I jured in mind, learn it from the things of the
body; for just what the eye is to the body,
the same is the mind to the soul." As
therefore thou wouldest not choose to wear
gold, and to be clad in silken garments, thine
eyes withal being put out, but accountest
their sound health more desirable than all
such superfluity (for, shouldest thou lose
this health or waste it, all thy life besides will
do thee no good): for just as when the eyes
are blinded, most of the energy of the other
members is gone, their light being quenched;
so aho when the mind is depraved, thy life
will be filled with countless evils: ^ — as there-
fore in the body this is our aim, namely, to
keep the eye sound, so also the mind in the
soul. But if we mutilate this, which ought
to give light to the rest, by what means are
we to see clearly any more ? For as he that
destroys the fountain, dries up also the river,
so he who hath quenched the understanding
hath confounded all his doings in this life.
Wherefore He saith, " If the light that is in
thee be darkness, how great is the dark-


ness


?"


' Matt, vi

' Matt, vi _

readinK, and some Mss. of the Hi>milics have this rcadini: here.
-K.]


22. [R. v., '• The lamp of the body." etc.-R.l
22, 23. [In verse 21, " If therefore " is the correct


For when the pilot is drowned, and the
candle is put out, and the general is taken
prisoner; what sort of hope will there be,
after that, for those that are under command ?
Thus then, omitting now to speak of the
plots to which wealth gives occasion, the
strifes, the suits (these indeed He had sig-
nified above, when He said, " The adversary
shall deliver thee to the judge, and the jutlge
to the officer"); and setting down what is
more grievous than all these, as sure to occur,
He so withdraws us from the wicked desire.
For to inhabit the prison is not nearly so
grievous, as for the mind to be enslaved by
this disease; antl the former is not sure to
hapi^en, but the other is connected as an im-
mediate consequent with the desire of riches.
And this is why He puts it after tb.e first, as
being a more grievous thing, and sure to hap-
pen.

I For God, He saith, gave us understanding,
'that we might chase away all ignorance, am!
have the right judgment of things, and that
using this as a kind of weapon and light
against all that is grievous or hurtful, we
might remain in safety. But we l>ctray the
gift for the sake of things suiJcrtluous ami
useless.

3 [In the Greek text, the parenthetisextrnds to this place.— K.]


144


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XX.


For what is the use of soldiers arrayed in
gold, when the general is dragged along a
captive ? what the profit of a ship beautifully-
equipped, when the pilot is sunk beneath the
waves ? what the advantage of a well-propor-
tioned body, when the sight of the eyes is
stricken out ? As therefore, should any one
cast into sickness the physician (who should
be in good health, that he may end our dis-
eases), and then bid him lie on a silver
couch, and in a chamber of gold, this will
nothing avail the sick persons; even so, if
thou corrupt the mind (which hath power to
put down our passions)/ although thou set it
by a treasure, so far from doing it any good,
thou hast inflicted the very greatest loss, and
hast harmed thy whole soul.

4. Seest thou how by those very things,
through which most especially men every-
where affect wickedness, even by these most
of all He deters them from it, and brings
them back to virtue ? " For with what intent
dost thou desire riches?" saith He; "is it
not that thou mayest enjoy pleasure and
luxury ? Why now, this above all things
thou wilt fail to obtain thereby, it will rather
be just contrary." For if, when our eyes are
stricken out, we perceive not any pleasant
thing, because of such our calamity; much
more will this be our case in the perversion
and maiming of the mind.

Again, with what intent dost thou bury it
in the earth ? That it may be kept in safety ?
But here too again it is the contrary, saith
He.

And thus, as in dealing with him that for
vainglory fasts and gives alms and prays, by
those very things which he most desires He
had allured him not to be vainglorious: —
"for with what intent," saith He, "dost
thou so pray and give alms ? for love of the
glory that may be had from men ? then do
not pray thus," saith He, " and so thou shalt
obtain it in the day that is to come: '' — so He
hath taken captive the covetous man also,
by those things for which he was most
earnest. Thus: "what wouldest thou?"
saith He, "to have thy wealth preserved,
and to enjoy pleasure? Both these things I
will afford thee in great abundance, if thou
lay up thy gold in that place, where I bid
thee."

It is true that hereafter He displayed more
clearly the evil effect of this on the mind,. I
mean, when He made mention of the thorns; ^
but for the present, even here He hath strik-
ingly intimated ^ the same, by representing


1 [These clauses are not parenthetical, but in the Greek define
what precedes. — R.]

2 Matt. xiii. 22. 3 [(iix <"S «twx'-]


him as darkened who is beside him.self in
this way.

And as they that are in darkness see noth-
ing distinct, but if they look at a rope, they
suppose it to be a serpent, if at mountains
and ravines, they are dead with fear; so these
also: what is not alarming to them that have
sight, that they regard with suspicion. Thus
among other things they tremble at poverty:
or rather not at poverty only, but even at any
trifling loss. Yea, and if they should lose
some little matter, those* who are in want of
necessary food do not so grieve and bewail
themselves as they. At least many of the
rich have come even to the halter, not en-
during such ill fortune: and to be insulted
also, and to be despitefully used, seems to
them so intolerable, that even because of this
again many have actually torn themselves
from this present life. For to everything
wealth had made them soft, except to the
waiting on it. Thus, when it commands
them to do service unto itself, they venture
on murders, and stripes, and revilings, and
all shame. A thing which comes of the
utmost wretchedness; to be of all men most
effeminate, where one ought to practise self-
command, but where more caution was re-
quired, in these cases again to become more
shameless and obstinate. Since in fact the
same kind of thing befalls them, as one would
have to endure who had spent all his goods
on unfit objects. For such an one, when the
time of necessary expenditure comes on,
having nothing to supply it, suffers incurable
evils, forasmuch as all that he had hath been
ill spent beforehand.

And as they that are on the stage, skilled
in those wicked arts, do in them go through
many things strange and dangerous, but in
other necessary and useful things none so
ridiculous as they; even so is it with these
men likewise. For so such as walk upon a
stretched rope, making a display of so much
courage, should some great emergency de-
mand daring or courage, they are not able,
neither do they endure even to think of such
a thing. Just so they likewise that are rich,
daring all for money, for self-restraint's sake
endure not to submit to anything, be it small
or great. And as the former practise both a
hazardous and fruitless business; even so do
these undergo many dangers and downfalls,
but arrive at no profitable end. Yea, they
undergo a twofold darkness, both having
their eyes put out by the perversion of their
mind, and being by the deceitfulness of their
cares involved in a great mist. Wherefore
neither can they easily so much as see
through it. For he that is in darkness, is


Homily XX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW,


145


freed from the darkness by the mere appear-
ance of the sun; but he that hath his eyes
mutilated not even when the sun shines;
which is the very case of these men: not
even now that the Sun of Righteousness hath
shone out, and is admonishing, do they hear,
their wealth having closed their eyes. And
so they have a twofold darkness to undergo,
part from themselves, part from disregard to
their teacher.

5. Let us then give heed unto Him ex-
actly, that though late we may at length re-
cover our sight. And how may one recover
sight? If thou learn how thou wast blinded.
How then wast thou blinded ? By thy wicked
desire. For the love of money, like an evil
humor ' which hath collected upon a clear
eyeball, hath caused the cloud to become
thick.

But even this cloud may be easily scattered
and broken, if we will receive the beam of
the doctrine of Christ; if we will hear Him
admonishing us, and saying, " Lay not up
for yourselves treasures upon earth."

"But," saith one, "what avails the hear-
ing to me, as long as I am possessed by the
desire?'' Now in the first place, there will
be power in the continual hearing to destroy
even the desire. Next, if it continue to pos-
sess thee, consider that this thing is not
really so much as a desire. For what sort of
desire is this, to be in grievous bondage, and
to be subject to a tyranny, and to be bound
on all sides, and to dwell in darkness, and to
be full of turmoil, and to endure toils without
profit, and to keep thy wealth for others, and
often for thy very enemies ? with what sort of
desire do these things agree ? or rather of
what flight and aversion are they not worthy?
What sort of desire, to lay up treasure in
the midst of thieves ? Nay, if thou dost at
all desire wealth, remove it where it may re-
main safe and unmolested. Since what you
are now doing is the part of one desiring, not
riches, surely, but bondage, and affront,' and
loss, and continual vexation. Yet thou, were
any one among men on earth to show thee a
place beyond molestation, though lie lead
thee out into the very desert, promising
security in the keeping of thy wealth, — thou
art not slow nor backward; thou hast confi-
dence in him, and puttest out thy goods
there; but when it is dod instead of men
who makes thee tiiis jiromise, and when He-
sets before tliee not the desert, but Heaven,
thou acceptest the contrary. Yet surely,
how manifold soever be tlicir security l)eIow,
thou canst never become free from the care


' Xv>iot.


«frr|p«iav.


of them. I mean, though thou lose them
not, thou wilt never be delivered from anxiety
lest thou lose. But there thou wilt undergo
none of these things: and mark, what is yet
more, thou dost not only bury tliy gold, but
plantest it. For the same is both treasure
and seed; or rather it is more than either of
these. For the seed remains not for ever,
but this abides perpetually. Again, the
treasure germinates not, but this bears thee
fruits which never die.

6. But if thou tellest me of the time, and
the delay of the recompence, I too can point
out and tell how much thou receivest back
even here: and besides all this, from the very
things of this life, I will try to convict thee of
making this excuse to no purpose. I mean,
that even in the present life thou providest
many things which thou art not thyself to
enjoy; and should any one find fault, thou
pleadest thy children and their children, and
so thinkest thou hast found palliation enough
for thy superfluous labors. For when in ex-
treme old age thou art building splendid
houses, before the completion of which (in
many instances) thou wilt have departed;
when thou plantest trees, which will bear
their fruit after many years; ^ when thou art
buying i)roperties and inheritances, the
ownership of which thou wilt acquire after a
long time, and art eagerly busy in many other
such things, the enjoyment whereof thou wilt
not reap; is it indeed for thine own sake, or
for those to come after, that thou art so em-
ployed ? How then is it not the utmost folly,
here not at all to hesitate ■• at the delay of
time; and this though thou art by this delay
to lose all the reward of thy labors: but there,
because of such waiting to be altogether tor-
pid; and this, although it bring thee the
greater gain, and although it convey not thy
good things on to others, but procure the
gifts for thyself.

But besides this, the delay itself is not
long; nay, for those things are at the doors,
and we know not but that even in our own
generation all things which concern us may
have their accomplislmient, and that fearful
day may arrive, setting before us the awful
and incorruptible tril)unal. Yea, for tlie
more part of the signs are fulfiilcil, anil the
gospel moreover iiath been preached in all
parts of the world, anil the |)redictions of
wars, and of eartiujuakes, and of famines,
liavc come to |)ass, and the interval is not
great.

1 [In the Oreektcxt, brackettcd by Field, and in chr I jilin, oc-
I'uni tlii««Inu»c : " when " |<ir " for when "> " thmi phinlr«l (rrca
in (hr tirUI, the fruit of which will yield ufter iniiny (Hvpia) years."

4 a\vtiy.


146


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXI.


But is it that tliou dost not see any signs ?
Why, this self-same thing is a very great sign.
For neither did they in Noah's time see any
presages of that universal destruction, but in
the midst of their playing, eating, marrying,
doing all things to which they were used,
even so they were overtaken by that fearful
judgment. And they too in Sodom in like
manner, living in delight, and suspecting
none of what befell them, were consumed by
those lightnings, which then came down upon
them.

Considering then all these things, let us
betake ourselves unto the preparation for our
departure hence.

For even if the common day of the con-
summation never overtake us, the end of each


one is at the doors, whether he be old or
young; and it is not possible for men aftei^
they have gone hence, either to buy oil any
more, or to obtain pardon by prayers, though
he that entreats be Abraham,' or Noah, or
Job, or Daniel.^

While then we have opportunity, let us
store up for ourselves beforehand much con-'
fidence, let us gather oil in abundance, let us
remove all into Heaven, that in the fitting
time, and when we most need them, we may
enjoy all: by the grace and love towards man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be the
glory, and the might, now and always, and
forever and ever. Amen.


I Luke xvi. 24.


2 Ezek. xiv. 14.


HOMILY XXI.


Matt. VI. 24.


" No man can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or else

he will hold to one and despise the other."


Seest thou how by degrees He withdraws
us from the things that now are, and at
greater length introduces what He hath to
say, touching voluntary poverty, and casts
down the dominion of covetousness ?

For He was not contented with His former
sayings, many and great as they were, but
He adds others also, more and more alarm-
ing.'

For what can be more alarming than what
He now saith, if indeed we are for our riches to
fall from the service of Christ ? or what more
to be desired, if indeed, by despising wealth,
we shall have our affection towards Him and
our charity perfect ? ^ For what I am contin-
ually repeating, the same do I now say like
wise, namely, that by both kinds He presses
the hearer to obey His sayings; both by the
profitable, and by the hurtful; much like an
excellent physician, pointing out both the
disease which is the consequence of neglect,
and the good health which results from
obedience.

See, for instance, what kind of gain He
signifies this to be, and how He establishes

I [" More in number and more terrible." — R.] ^ [axpt/S^.]


the advantage of it by their deliverance from
the contrary things. Thus, " wealth,'' saith
He, " hurts you not in this only, that it arms
robbers against you, nor in that it darkens
3'our mind in the most intense degree, but
also in that it casts you out of God's service,
making you captive of lifeless riches, and in
both ways doing you harm, on the one hand,
by causing you to be slaves of what you
ought to command; on the other, by casting
you out of God's service, whom, above all
things, it is indispensable for you to serve."
For just as in the other place, He signified
the mischief to be twofold, in both laying up
here, "where moth corrupteth," and in not
laying up there, where the watch kept is im-
pregnable; so in this place, too. He shows
the loss to be twofold, in that it both draws
oflf from God, and makes us subject to mam-
mon.

But He sets it not down directly, rather
He establishes it first upon general consider-
ations, saying thus; " No man can serve two
masters: " meaning here two that are enjoin-
ing opposite things; since, unless this were
the case, they would not even be two. For
so, "the multitude of them that believed


Homily XXI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


147


order to show that the change

is easy

"I


were of one heart and of one soul," ' and
yet were they divided into many bodies; their
unanimity however made the many one.

Then, as adding to the force of it, He
saith, " so far from serving, he will even hate
and abhor:" "For either he will hate the
one, "saith He," and love the other, or else
he will hold to the one and despise the other."
And it seems indeed as if the same thing
were said twice over; He did not however
choose this form without purpose, but in

for the better
I mean, lest thou shouldest say,
am once for all made a slave; I am
brought under the tyranny of wealth," He
signifies that it is possible to transfer one's
self, and that as from the first to the second,
so also from the second one may pass over to
the first.

2. Having thus, you see, spoken generally,
that He might persuade the hearer to be an
uncorrupt judge of His words, and to sen-
tence according to the very nature of the
things; when he hath made sure of his assent,
then, and not till then, He discovers Him-
self. Thus He presently adds,

" Ye cannot serve God and mammon."

Let us shudder to think what we have
brought Christ to say; with the name of God,
to put that of gold. But if this be shocking,
its taking place in our deeds, our preferring
the tyranny of gold to the fear of God, is
much more shocking.

"What then? Was not this possible
among the ancients?" By no means.
" How then," saith one, "did Abraham, how
did Job obtain a good report ? '' Tell me not
of them that are rich, but of them that serve
riches. Since Job also was rich, but he
served not mammon, but possessed it and
ruled over it, and was a master, not a slave.
Therefore he so possessed all those things, as
if he had been the steward of another man's
goods; not only not e.xtorting from others,
but even giving up his own to them that were
in need. And what is more, when he had
them they were no joy to him: so he also de-
clared, saying, " If I did so much as rejoice
when my wealth wa.xed great:"" wherefore
neither did he grieve when it was gone. But
they that are rich are not now such as he was,
but are rather in a worse condition than any
slave, paying as it were tril)ute to some
grievous tyrant. Because their mind is as a
kind of citadel occupicti by the love of
money, which from thence daily sends out
unto them its commands full of all iniquity,
and there is none to di-sobey. I'c not there-


' Act* iv. 3a.


' Job xxxi. 35.


fore thus over subtle. ' Nay, for God hath
once for all declared and pronounced it a
thing impossible for the one service and the
other to agree. Say not thou, then, "it is
possible." Why, when the one master is com-
manding thee to spoil by violence, the other
to strip thyself of thy possessions; the one
to be chaste, the other to commit fornication;
the one to be drunken and luxurious, the
other to keep the belly in subjection; the one
again to despise the things that are, the
other to be rivetted to the present; the one
to admire marbles, and walls, and roofs, the
other to contemn these, but to honor self-
restraint: how is it possible that these should
agree ?

Now He calls mammon here "a master,"
not because of its own nature, but on account
of the wretchedness of them that bow them-
selves beneath it. So also He calls "the
belly a god," ■• not from the dignity of such
a mistress, but from the wretchedness of
them that are enslaved: it being a thing
worse than any punishment, and enough, be-
fore the punishment, in the way of vengeance
on him who is involved in it. For what con-
demned criminals can be so wretched, as they
who having God for their Lord, do from that
mild rule desert to this grievous tyranny,
and this when their act brings after it so
much harm even here? For indeed their
loss is unspeakable by so doing: there are
suits, and molestations, and strifes, and toils,
and a blinding of the soul; and what is more
grievous than all, one falls away from tlie
highest blessings; for such a blessing it is to
be God's servant.

3. Having now, as you see, in all ways
taught the advantage of contemning riches,
as well for the very preservation of the riches,
as for the pleasure of the soul, and for ac-
quiring self-command, and for the securing of
godliness; He proceeds to establish the prac-
ticability of this command. For this espec-
ially pertains to the best legislation, not only
to enjoin what is expedient, but also to make
it possible. Therefore He also goes on to
say,

" Take no liiought' for your life,* what ye
shall eat."

That is, lest they should say. '* What then?
if we cast all away, how shall wc be able to
live?" .\t tins objection, in what follows,
He makes a stand, very seasonably. For as


1 fMij ToiVvf m/uTTa ^lAoircM^o.]
sfkV


•1 Phil. iii. 19.
He not anxiotiH," iiiul «> throut;hc>ut


morr mrrcctly
the chuptrr— K.l

(' n) iltv\fi, "your scuil." [SoChrymwtoni inlrrprriH Nrr Ix-Iow^;
hut the Nrw rcslaiiicnt |wi!i*«>{c limit rcfrr In physuul h(r. In
the Uilirr part ii( ihr vrr»c thr higher " lifr " in »U){Ke!>tcd. Hut
lo undrrM.dul tlir iirt;ninrtit n( ChryiK'Stom, ^fxi niu»t be rendered
*' v>til " thrMiiL^hnul this p.(&siik;r. Iv.]


148


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXI.


surely as if at the beginning He had said,
"Take no thought/' the word would have
seemed burdensome; so surely, now that He
hath shown the mischief arising out of covet-
ousness. His admonition coming after is
made easy to receive. Wherefore neither did
He now simply say, "Take no thought,"
but He added the reason, and so enjoined
this. After having said, " Ye cannot serve
God and mammon," He added, "therefore
I say unto you, take no thought. There-
fore;" for what? Because of the unspeaka-
ble loss. For the hurt you receive is not in
riches only, rather the wound is in the most
vital parts, and in that which is the overthrow
of your salvation; casting you as it does out
from God, who made you, and careth for
you, and loveth you.

" Therefore I say unto you, take no
thought." Thus, after He hath shown the
hurt to be unspeakable, then and not before
He makes the commandment stricter; in that
He not only bids us cast away what we have,
but forbids to take thought even for our nec-
essary food, saying, "Take no thought for
your soul, what ye shall eat.'' Not because
the soul needs food, for it is incorporeal; but
He spake according to the common custom.
For though it needs not food, yet can it not
endure to remain in the body, except that be
fed. And in saying this, He puts it not sim-
ply so, but here also He brings up argu-
ments, some from those things which we have
already, and some from other examples.

From what we have already, thus saying:

" Is not the soul more than meat, and the
body more than the raiment ? " '

He therefore that hath given the greater,
how shall He not give the less ? He that
hath fashioned the flesh that is fed, how shall
He not bestow the food ? Wherefore neither
did He simply say, " Take no thought what
ye shall eat, "or "wherewithal ye shall be
clothed;" but, "for the body," and, "for
the soul: " forasmuch as from them He was
to make His demonstrations, carrying on
His discourse in the way of comparison.
Now the soul He hath given once for all, and
it abides such as it is; but the body increases
every day. Therefore pointing out both
these things, the immortality of the one, and
the frailty of the other, He subjoins and
says,

" Which of you can add one cubit unto his
stature ? " =

Thus, saying no more of the soul, since it
receives not increase, He discoursed of the


I Matt. vi. 25. [R. v., " Is not the life more than the food,"
i. e., the food that sustains it. — R.]
= Matt. VI. 27.


body only; hereby making manifest this
point also, that not the food increases it, but
the providence of God. Which Paul show-
ing also in other ways, said, "So then,
neither is he that planteth any thing, neither
he that watereth; but God that giveth the in-
crease." 3

From what we have already, then. He
urges us in this way: and from examples of
other things, by saying, "Behold the fowls
of the air."'* Thus, lest any should say,
"we do good by taking thought," He dis-
suades them both by that which is greater,
and by that which is less; by the greater,
/. (f. the soul and the body; by the less, /'. e.
the birds. For if of the things that are
very inferior He hath so much regard, how
shall He not give unto you ? saith He. And
to them on this wise, for as yet it was an or-
dinary s multitude: but to the devil not thus;
but how? "Man shall not live by bread
alone, but by every word that proceedeth out
of the mouth of God." * But here He makes
mention of the birds, and this in a way
greatly to abash them; which sort of thing is
of very great value for the purpose of ad-
monition.

4. However, some of the ungodly have
come to so great a pitch of madness, as even
to attack His illustration. Because, say
they, it was not meet for one strengthening^
moral principle, to use natural advantages as
incitements to that end. For to those ani
mals, they add, this belongs by nature.
What then shall we say to this? That even
though it is theirs by nature, yet possibly we
too may attain it by choice. For neither did
He say, "behold how the birds fly," which
were a thing impossible to man; but that they
are fed without taking thought, a kind of
thing easy to be achieved by us also, if we
will. And this they have proved, who have
accomplished it in their actions.

Wherefore it were meet exceedingly to ad-
mire the consideration of our Lawgiver, in
that, when He might bring forward His illus-
tration from among men, and when He might
have spoken of Moses and Elias and John,
and others like them, who took no thought;
that He might touch them more to the quick.
He made mention of the irrational beings.
For had He spoken of those righteous men,
these would have been able to say, " We are
not yet become like them." But now by
passing them over in silence, and bringing
forward the fowls of the air, He hath cut off
from them every excuse, imitating in this place
albo the old law. Yea, for the old covenant


3 I Cor. iii. 7.
6 Matt. iv. 4.


4 Matt. vi. 26.
7 a\ei<j>ovTa.


5 Srjfj.a)6rj^,


Homily XXL]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


149


likewise sends to the bee, and to the ant,'
and to the turtle, and to the swallow.- And
neither is this a small sign of honor, when
the same sort of things, which those animals
possess by nature, those we are able to ac-
complish by an act of our choice. If therl
He take so great care of them which exist
for our sakes, much more of us; if of the
servants, much more of the master. There-
fore He said, "Behold the fowls," and He
said not, " for they do not traffic, nor make
merchandise," ^ for these were among the
things that were earnestly forbidden. But
what? "they sow not, neither do they reap."
"What then?" saith one, "must we not
sow?" He said not, "we must not sow,"
but "we must not take thought;" neither
that one ought not to work, but not to be
low-minded, nor to rack one's self with cares.
Since He bade us also be nourished, but not
in " taking thought."

Of this lesson David also lays the founda-
tion from old time, saying enigmatically on
this wise, "Thou openest Thine hand, and
fillest every living thing with bounty; " * and
again, " To Him that giveth to the beasts
their food, and to the young ravens that call
upon Him.'' 5

"Who then," it may be said, "have not
taken thought"? Didst thou not hear how
many of the righteous I adduced ? Seest
thou not with them Jacob, departing from his
father's house destitute of all things ? Dost |
thou not hear him praying and saying, "If
the Lord give me bread to eat and raiment
to put on ? " *^ which was not the part of one |
taking thought, but of one seeking all of ,
God. This the apostles also attained, who
cast away all, and took no thought: also, the
" five thousand," and the " three thousand." '

5. But if thou canst not bear, upon hearing
so high words, to release thyself from these
grievous bonds, consider the unprofitableness
of the thing, and so put an end to thy care.
For

"Which of you by taking thought " (saith
He) "can add one cul)it unto his stature."^

Seest thou how by that which is evident,
He hatli manifested that also whicii is ob-
scure? Thus, "As unto thy body," saith
He, "thou wilt not by taking thought be
able to add, tliough it be ever so little; so
neither to gather food; tliink as thou mayest
otherwise."

Hence it is clear that not our diligence, but


the providence of God, even where we seem
to be active, effects all. So that, were He to
forsake us, no care, nor anxiety, nor toil,
nor any other such thing, will ever appear to
come to anything, but all will utterly pass away.
Let us not therefore suppose His injunc-
tions are impossible: for there are many who
duly perform them, even as it is. And if
thou knowest not of them, it is nothing mar-
vellous, since Elias too supposed he was
alone, but was told, " I have left unto myself
seven thousand men."' Whence it is mani-
fest that even now there are many who show
forth the apostolical life; like as the "three
thousand" then, and the "five thousand." '°

' And if we believe not, it is not because there
are none who do well, but because we are far
from so doing. So that just as the drunkard
would not easily believe, that there exists any
man who doth not taste even water (and yet
this hath been achieved by many solitaries in
our time ") ; nor he who connects himself
with numberless women, that it is easy to live
in virginity; nor he that extorts other men's
goods, that one shall readily give up even his
own: so neither will those, who daily melt
themselves down with innumerable anxieties,
easily receive this thing.

Now as to the fact, that there are many
who have attained unto this, we miglit show
it even from those, who have practised this
self-denial even in our generation.

I But for you, just now, it is enough to learn
not to covet, and that almsgiving is a good
thing; and to know that you must impart of

I what ye have. For these things if thou wilt

, duly perform, beloved, thou wilt sj)eedily
proceed to those others also.

6. For the present therefore let us lay aside
our excessive sumiUuousness, and let us en-
dure moderation, and learn to accpiire by
honest labor all that we are to have: sime
even the blessed John, when he was discours-
ing with tliose that were employed upon the
tribute, and with the soldiery, enjoined them
" to be content with tlieir wages. " '■' Anxious
though lie were to lead them on to another,
and a higher self-command, yet since they

I were still unfit for this, he sjicaks of the
lesser tilings. Because, if he had mentioned
what are liigiier than tliese, they would have
failed to apply themselves to them, and would
have fallen from the otiiers.

I'or this very reason we too are practising
you " in the inferior duties. Yes, because


• Prov. yi. 6-8, LXX. See before, Horn. XVH., 6, noic.
' Jcr. viii. 7.

1 Ka.irT]Kt\iovaiv, i)j.noptvovTai : twn wordu which in the New
Tcstiiincnt are alwuyii iiHcd in a had KcriHc,

•• I's. cxlv. 16. t I's. cxlvii. y. * Cirn. xxviii. ao.

7 Acts IV. 4, and ii. 41. B Matt. vi. jj.


9 I Kinsrs xix. 18 ; Rom. xl. a. » Acti ii. ^1, Iv. j. '

" Sre Siilpicuii Severn*, Dial. i. c. 14. " It i» uM «l » certain
holy man that he rtmotantly and entirely ubntaiiird from all drink:
uiid that by way of fiH>d, he lived uimjii oevcn fxa* only."

■•> I. nice iii. 14.

• 3 [u^af yuiivaiofiir, " we are cxerii»ini{ you."— R.]


I50


THE AVORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXII.


as yet, we know, the burden of voluntary
poverty is too great for you, and the heaven
is not more distant from the earth, than such
self-denial from you. Let us then lay hold,
if it be only of the lowest commandments, for
even this is no small encouragement. And
yet some amongst the heathens have achieved
even this, though not in a proper spirit, and
have stripped themselves of all their posses-
sions.' However, we are contented in your
case, if alms are bestowed abundantly by
)^ou; for we shall soon arrive at those other
duties too, if we advance in this way. But
if we do not so much as this, of what favor
shall we be worthy, who are hidden to surpass
those under the old law, and yet show our-
selves inferior to the philosophers among the
heathens ? What shall we say, who when we

' So Aristippus : vid. Hon Serm. 2, 3, 100.


ought to be angels and sons of God, do not
even quite maintain our being as men ? For
to spoil and to covet comes not of the gentle-
ness of men, but of the fierceness of wild
beasts; nay, worse than wild beasts are the
assailers of their neighbor's goods. For to
them this comes by nature, but we who are
honored with reason, and yet are falling away
unto that unnatural vileness, what indulgence
shall we receive ?

Let us then, considering the measures of
that discipline which is set before us, press
on at least to the middle station, that we may
both be delivered from the punishment which
is to come, and proceeding regularly, may
arrive at the very summit of all good things;
unto which may we all attain, by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory and dominion for
ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XXII.

Matt. VI. 28, 29.

*' Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin. And
yet I say unto you. That even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of
these."


Having spoken of our necessary food, and
having signified that not even for this should
we take thought, He passes on in what fol-
lows to that which is more easy. For rai-
ment is not so necessary as food.

Why then did He not make use here also
of the same example, that of the birds,
neither mention to us the peacock, and the
swan, and the sheep? for surely there were
many such examples to take from thence.
Because He would point out how very far the
argument may be carried both ways:' both
from the vileness ' of the things that partake
of such elegance, and from the munificence
vouchsafed to the lilies, in respect of their
adorning. For this cause, when He hath
decked them out, He doth not so much as
call them lilies any more, but "grass of the
field." 3 And He is not satisfied even with
this name, but again adds another circum-


2 [tiiTcAeias, " cheapness " first, then " meanness.'

3 Matt. vi. 30.


-R.]


Stance of vileness, saying, " which to-day is. ' '
And He said not, "and to-morrow is not,"
but what is much baser yet, '* is cast into the
oven." And He said not, " clothe," but " so
clothe."

Seest thou everywhere how He abounds in
amplifications and intensities? And this He
doth, that He may touch them home: and
therefore He hath also added, " shall He not
much more clothe you ? '' For this too hath
much emphasis: the force of the word,
"you,'' being no other than to indicate cov-
ertly the great value set upon our race, and
the concern shown for it; as though He had
said, '^ yoti, to whom He gave a soul, for
whom He fashioned a body, for whose sake
He made all the things that are seen, for
whose sake He sent prophets, and gave the
law, and wrought those innumerable good
works; for whose sake He gave up His only
begotten Son."

And not till He hath made His proof clear,
doth He proceed also to rebuke them, say-


Homily XXII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


151


ing, "O ye of little faith." For this is the
quality of an adviser: He doth not admonish
only, but reproves also, that He may awaken
men the more to the persuasive power of His
words.

Hereby He teaches us not only to take no
thought, but not even to be dazzled at the
costliness of men's apparel. Why, such
comeliness is of grass, such beauty of the
green herb: or rather, the grass is even more
precious than such apparelling. Why then
pride thyself on things, whereof the prize
rests with the mere plant, with a great
balance in its favor ?

And see how from the beginning He signi-
fies the injunction to be easy; by the con-
traries again, and by the things of which they
were afraid, leading them away from these
cares. Thus, when He had said, " Consider
the lilies of the field," He added, "they toil
not: " so that in desire to set us free from
toils, did He give these commands. In fact,
the labor lies, not in taking no thought, but
in taking thought for these things. And as
in saying, "they sow not," it was not the
sowing that He did away with, but the anxious
thought; so in saying, " they toil not, neither
do they spin," He put an end not to the
work, but to the care.

But if Solomon was surpassed by their
beauty, and that not once nor twice, but
throughout all his reign: — for neither can one
say, that at one time He was clothed with
such apparel, but after that He was so no
more; rather not so much as on one day did
He array Himself so beautifully: for this
Christ declared by saying, " in all his reign: "
and if it was not that He was suri^assed by
this flower, but vied with that, l)ut He gave
place to all alike (wherefore He also said,
" as one of these: " for such as between the
truth and the counterfeit, so great is the in-
terval between those robes and these flowers):
— if then he acknowledged his inferiority,
who was more glorious than all kings that
ever were: when wilt thou be able to surpass,
or ratlier to approach even faintly to such
perfection of form ?

.\ftcr this He instructs us, not to aim at all
at such ornament. See at least tlie end
thereof; after its triumpli " it is cast into
the oven: " and if of things mean, and worth-
less, and of no great use, (lod hatli displayed
so great care, how shall He give up thee, of
all living creatures the most important?

Wherefore then did lUt make them so
beautiful? That He might display His own
wisdom and the excellency of His power;
that from everything we might learn Ilis
glory. For not "the Heavens only declare


the glory of God," ' but the earth too; and
this David declared when he said, " Praise
the Lord, ye fruitful trees, and all cedars."'
For some by their fruits, some by their great-
ness, some by their beaut)', send up praise to
Him who made them: this too being a sign of
great excellency of wisdom, when even upon
things that are very vile (and what can be
viler than that which to-day is, and to-mor-
row is not ?) He pours out such great
beauty. If then to the grass He hath given
that which it needs not (for what doth the
beauty thereof help to the feeding of the
fire ?) how shall He not give unto thee that
when thou needest ? If that which is the
vilest of all things. He hath lavishly adorned,
and that as doing it not for need, but for
munificence, how much more will He honor
thee, the most honorable of all things, in mat-
ters which are of necessity.

2. Now when, as you see. He had demon-
strated the greatness of God's providential
care, and they were in what follows to be re-
buked also> even in this He was sparing, lay-
ing to their charge not want, but poverty, of
faith. Thus, " if God," saith He, " so clothe
the grass of the field, much more you, O ye
of little faith." 3

And yet surely all these things He Himself
works. For "all things were made by Him,
and without Him was not so much as one tiling
made."'' But yet He nowhere as yet makes
mention of Himself: it being sufficient for
the time, to indicate His full power, that He
said at each of the commandments, " Ve have
heard that it hath been said to them of old
time, but I say unto you."

Marvel not then, when in subsequent in-
stances also He conceals Himself, or speaks
something lowly of Himself: since for the
present He had but one object, ttiat His word
might proi^e such as they would readily re-
ceive, and might in every way demonstrate
that He was not a sort of adversary of God,
but of one niiiul, ami in agreement with the
Father.

AN'liich accordingly He doth here also; for
tlirougli so many words as He hath spent He
ceases not to set Him liefore us, admiring
His wisdom, His providence, His tender care
extending through all tilings, both great and
small. Thus, both when H'.' was speaking of
Jerusalem, He called it "the city of tlie
Great King;"' and when He mentioned
Heaven, He spake of it again as "God's
throne;"'*' and when He was discoursing of
His economy in the world, to Him again He
attributes it all, saying, '* He maketh His sun


> P». xix. I.
4 John i. 3.


> I's. rxlviii. .
5 Mult. V. \$.


« Mutt.
•6 Matt.


I"
34


152


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXII.


to rise on the evil and on tlie good, and
sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust.'"
And in the prayer too He taught us to say,
His " is the. kingdom and the power and the
glory." And here in discoursing of His
providence, and signifying how even in little
things He is the most excellent of artists, He
saith, that "He clothes the grass of the
field." And nowhere doth He call Him His
own Father, but theirs; in order that by the
very honor He might reprove them, and that
when He should call Him His Father, they
might no more be displeased.

Now if for bare necessaries one is not to
take thought, what pardon can we ^ deserve,
who take thought for things expensive ? Or
rather, what pardon can they deserve, who do
even without sleep, that they may take the
things of others ?

3. "Therefore take no thought, saying,
what shall we eat ? or, what shall we drink ?
or, wherewithal shall we be clothed ? For
after all these things do the nations of the
world seek." ^

Seest thou how again He hath both shamed
them the more, and hath also shown by the
way, that He had commanded nothing griev-
ous nor burdensome ? As therefore when He
said, *' If ye love them which love you," it is
nothing great which ye practise, for the very
Gentiles do the same; by the mention of
the Gentiles He was stirring them up to
something greater: so now also He brings
them forward to reprove us, and to signify
that it is a necessary debt which He is re-
quiring of us. For if we must show forth
something more than the Scribes or Phari-
sees, what can we deserve, who so far from
going beyond these, do even abide in the
mean estate of the Gentiles, and emulate
their littleness of soul ?

He doth not however stop at the rebuke,
but having by this reproved and roused them,
and shamed them with all strength of expres-
sion, by another argument He also comforts
them, saying, " For your Heavenly Father
knoweth that ye have need of all these
things." He said not, " God knoweth," but,
"your Father knoweth;" to lead them to a
greater hope. For if He be a Father, and
such a Fatiier, He will not surely be able to
overlook His children in extremity of evils:
seeing that not even men, being fathers, bear
to do so.

And He adds along with this yet another
argument. Of what kind then is it ? That

1 Matt. V. 45.

2 [Or, " thes','" as in the next sentence. — R.]

3 Matt. vi. 31, 32. [The text of Chrysostom is in doubt here ;
one MS. omits "of the world.'' The longer reading is probably
due to a recollection of Luke xii. 30, where this form occurs. — R.]


"ye have need" of them. What He saith is
like this. What ! are these things superflu-
ous, that He should disregard them ? Yet
not even in superfluities did He show Him-
self wanting in regard, in the instance of the
grass: but now are these things even neces-
sary. So that what thou considerest a cause
for thy being anxious, this I say is sufficient
to draw thee from such anxiety. I mean, if
thou sayest, "Therefore I must needs take
thought, because they are necessary; " on the
contrary, I say, " Nay, for this self-same rea-
son take no thought, because they are neces-
sary." Since were they superfluities, not
even then ought we to despair, but to feel
confident about the supply of them; but now
that they are necessary, we must no longer be
in doubt. For what kind of father is he. who
can endure to fail in supplying to his children
even necessaries ? So that for this cause
again God will most surely bestow them.

For indeed He is the artificer of our nature,
and He knows perfectly the wants thereof.
So that neither canst thou say, " He is indeed
our Father, and the things we seek are nec-
essary, but He knows not that we stand in
need of them." For He that knows our
nature itself, and was the framer of it, and
formed it such as it is; evidently He knows
its need also better than thou, who art placed
in want of them: it having been by His
decree, that our nature is in such need. He
will not therefore oppose Himself to what He
hath willed, first subjecting it of necessity to
so great want, and on the other hand again
depriving it of what it wants, and of absolute
necessaries

Let us not therefore be anxious, for we
shall gain nothing by it, but tormenting our-
selves. For whereas He gives both when we
take thought, and when we do not, and more
of the two, when we do not; what dost thou
gain by thy anxiety, but to exact of thyself a
superfluous penalty ? Since one on the point
of going to a plentiful feast, will not surely
permit himself to take thought for food; nor
is he that is walking to a fountain anxious
about drink. Therefore seeing we have a
supply more copious than either any fountain,
or innumerable banquets made ready, the
providence of God; let us not be beggars, nor
little minded.

4. For together with what hath been said,
He puts also yet another reason for feeling
confidence about such things, saying,

" Seek ye the kingdom of Heaven, and all
these things shall be added unto you." ''


4 Matt. vi. 33. [The reading of this verse given by Chrysos-
tom is peculiar. The best authorities support the form accepted
in the R. V., " his kingdom and his righteousness." But the read-


Homily XXII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


DO


Thus when He had set the soul free from
anxiety, then He made mention also of
Heaven. For indeed He came to do away
with the old things, and to call us to a greater
country. Therefore He doeth all, to deliver
us from things unnecessary, and from our
affection for the earth. For this cause He
mentioned the heathens also, saying that
" the Gentiles seek after these things; " they
whose whole labor is for the present life,
who have no regard for the things to come,
nor any thought of Heaven, But to you not
these present are the chief things,' but other
than these. For we were not born for this
end, that we should eat and drink and be
clothed, but that we might please God, and
attain unto the good things to come. There-
fore as things here are secondary in our labor,
so also in our prayers let them be secondary.
Therefore He also said, "Seek ye the king-
dom of Heaven, and all these things shall Ue
added unto you."

And He said not, " shall be given," but
" shall be added," that thou mightest learn,
that the things present are no great part of
His gifts, compared with the greatness of the
things to come. Accordingly, He doth not bid
us so much as ask for them, but while we ask
for other things, to have confidence, as though
these also were added to those. Seek then
the things to come, and thou wilt receive the
things present also; seek not the things that
are seen, and thou shalt surely attain unto
them. Yea, for it is unworthy of thee to ap-
proach thy Lord for such things. And thou,
who oughtest to spend all thy zeal and thy
care for those unspeakable blessings, dost
greatly disgrace thyself by consuming it on
the desire of transitory things.

" How then ? " saith one, " did He not bid
us ask for bread?" Nay, He added,
"daily," and to this again, "this day,"
which same thing in fact He doth here also.
For He said not, "Take no thought," but,
"Take no thought for the morrow," at the
same time both affording us liberty, and
fastening our soul on those things that are
more necessary to us.

For to this end also He bade us ask even
those, not as though (iod needed reminding
by us, but that we might learn that by His
help we accomi^lish whatever we do accom-
plish, and that we migiit be made more His
own by our continual prayer for tliese things.

Seest tliou how by this again He would per-
suade tliem, that they siiall surely receive the


inn of the rrccivcd text isancirnt. Soiiir other I'Hlhern utcrrr with
ChrysoHtoiii. The phrase " Iciiu^ilfnii of heaven *^ is pei uli.ir to
Matthew.— K]
> nportyovfjitva.


things present? Tor He that bestows the
greater, much more will He give the less.
" For not for this end," saith He, " did I tell
you not to take thought nof to ask, that ye
should suffer distress, and go about naked,
but in order that ye migtit be in abundance
of these things also: '' and this, you see, was
suited above all things to attract them to
Him. So that like as in almsgiving, when
deterring them from making a display to
men, he won upon them chiefly by promising
to furnish them with it more liberally; — " for
thy Father," saith He, "who seeth in secret,
shall reward thee openly;"' — even so here
also, in drawing them off from seeking these
things, this is His persuasive topic, that He
promises to bestow it on them, not seeking
it, in greater abundance. Thus, to this end,
saith He, do I bid thee not seek, not that
thou mayest not receive, but that thou may-
est receive plentifully; that thou mayest re-
ceive in the fashion ^ that becomes thee, with
the profit which thou oughtest to have; that
thou mayest not, by taking thought, and dis-
tracting thyself in an.xiety about these, render
thyself unworthy both of these, and of the
things spiritual; that thou mayest not undergo
unnecessary distress, and again fall away
from that which is set before thee.

5. "Take therefore no thought for the
morrow: for sufficient unto tlie day is the evil
thereof:" that is to say, the affiction, and
the bruising thereof.-' Is it not enough for
thee, to eat thy bread in the sweat of thy
face? Why add the further aftliction that
comes of anxiety, when thou art on the point
to be delivered henceforth even from the
former toils?

By " evil " here He means, not wickedness,
far from it, but affliction, and trouble, and
calamities; much as in anotlier place also He
saith, " Is there evil in a city, whicli the Lord
hath not done?"' not meaning rapines, nor
injuries,* nor any thing like tliese, but the
scourges which are l>orne from above. And
again, " I," saith He, " make peace, and
create evils: " ' For neitlier in this place doth
He speak of wickedness,* but of famines, and
jiestilences, things accounted evil by most
men: the generality being wont to call these
things evil. Thus, for exaniiile, the priests
and proj^liets of those five lordships, when
having yoked the kine to the ark, they let
them go without their calves,' gave the name
of " evil" to those heaven-sent plagues, and

' Matt. vi. 4. I (r)f>|uarof. 4 M.itt. v. ^4. i vufTpi^f).

' Amos iii. t<. fwAtoitfia^ ; but €inc Mss. reiitls ivfaartiat, re-
fcrrinjc to f>ppreMivc oliK«r<hic«, Ij«tin,/r/«. ;/,ir«j, K )
7 I»ji. x\v. 7.
K fxaiiiai', tlic word reiulcrrij " evil " thfuugliout this pusuKC

9 I Sam. Ti. 9.


154


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXII.


the dismay and anguish which thereby sprang
up within them.

This then is His meaning here also, when
He saith, " sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof." For nothing so pains the soul, as
carefulness and anxiety. Thus did Paul also,
when urging to celibacy, give counsel, saying,
" I would have you without carefulness,"'

But when He saith, "the morrow shall
take thought for itself," He saith it not, as
though the day took thought for these things,
but forasmuch as He had to speak to a peo-
ple somewhat imperfect, willing to make what
He saith more expressive, He personifies the
time, speaking unto them according to the
custom of the generality.

And here indeed He advises, but as He
proceeds, He even makes it a law, saying,
" provide neither gold nor silver, nor scrip for
your journey."^ Thus, having shown it all
forth in His actions, then after that He in-
troduces the verbal enactment of it more
determinately, the precept too having then
become more easy of acceptance, confirmed
as it had been previously by His own actions.
Where then did He confirm it by His actions ?
Hear Him saying, " The Son of Man hath not
where to lay His head." ^ Neither is He satis-
fied with this only, but in His disciples also
He exhibits His full proof of these things, by
fashioning them too in like manner, yet not
suffering them to be in want of anything.

But mark His tender care also, how He
surpasses the affection of any father. Thus,
" This I command," saith He, " for nothing
else, but that I may deliver you from super-
fluous anxieties. For even if to-day thou
hast taken thought for to-morrow, thou wilt
also have to take thought again to-morrow.
Why then what is over and above ? Wh)'-
force the day to receive more than the dis-
tress which is allotted to it, and together with
its own troubles add to it also the burden of
the following day; and this, when there is no
chance of thy lightening the other by the ad-
dition so taking place, but thou art merely
to exhilMt thyself as coveting superfluous
troubles ? " Thus, that He may reprove them
the more. He doth all but give life to the
very time, and brings it in as one injured,
and exclaiming against them for their cause-
less despite. Why, thou hast received the
day, to care for the things thereof. Where-
fore then add unto it the things of the other
day also? Hath it not then burden enough
in its own anxiety ? Why now, I pray, dost


J I Cor. vii. 32. [R. v., "to be free from care ;"' afiepCii-vov;,
a compound of the same origin as the word rendered " take no
thought " in the A. V.— R.]

2 ]\Iatt. X. 9, 10. 3 Matt. viii. 20.


thou make it yet heavier ? Now when the
Lawgiver saith these things, and He that is to
pass judgment on us, consider the hopes that
He suggests to us, how good they are; He
Himself testifying, that this life is wretched
and wearisome, so that the anxiety even of the
one day is enough to hurt and afflict us.

6. Nevertheless, after so many and so
grave words, we take thought for these things,
but for the things in Heaven no longer:
rather we have reversed His order, on either
side fighting against His sayings. For mark;
" Seek ye not the things, present,^' saith He,
" at all; " but we are seeking these things for
ever: "seek the things in Heaven, '' saith
He; but those things we seek not so much as
for a short hour, but according to the great-
ness of the anxiety we display about the
things of the world, is the carelessness we en-
tertain in things spiritual; or rather even
much greater. But this doth not prosper for
ever; neither can this be for ever. What if
for ten days we think scorn ? if for twenty? if
for an hundred ? must we not of absolute ne-
cessity depart, and fall into the hands of the
Judge?

'" But the delay hath comfort.-'^ And what
sort of comfort, to be every day looking for
punishment and vengeance ? Nay, if thou
wouldest have some comfort from this delay,
take it by gathering for thyself the fruit of
amendment after repentance. Since if the
mere delay of vengeance seem to thee a sort
of refreshment, far more is it gain not to fall
into the vengeance. Let us then make full
use of this delay, in order to have a full de-
liverance from the dangers that press upon
us. For none of the things enjoined is either
burdensome or grievous, but all are so light
and easy, that if we only bring a genuine
purpose of heart, we may accomplish all,
though we be chargeable with countless
offenses. For so Manasses had perpetrated
innumerable pollutions, having both stretched
out his hands against the saints, and brought
abominations into the temple, and filled the
city with murders, and wrought many other
things beyond excuse; yet nevertheless after
so long and so great wickedness, he washed
away from himself all these things."* How
and in what manner ? By repentance, and
consideration.

For there is not, yea, there is not any sin,
that doth not yield and give way to the power
of repentance, or rather to the grace of
Christ. Since if we would but only change,
we have Him to assist us. And if thou art
desirous to become good, there is none to

4 2 Chron. xxxiii. 1-20 ; 2 Kings xxi. i-iS.


Homily XX II.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


155


hinder us; or rather there is one to hinder
us, the devil, yet hath he no power, so long
as thou choosest what is best, and so attract-
est God to thine aid. But if thou art not
thyself willing, but startest aside, how shall
He protect thee ? Since not of necessity or
compulsion, but of thine own will, He wills
thee to be saved. For if thou thyself, hav-
ing a servant full of hatred and aversion for
thee, and continually going off, and fleeing
away from thee, wouldest not choose to keep
him, and this though needing his services;
much less will God, who doeth all things not
for His own profit, but for thy salvation,
choose to retain thee by compulsion; as on
the other hand, if thou show forth a right in-
tention only, He would not choose ever to
give thee up, no, not whatever the devil may
do. So that we are ourselves to blame for
our own destruction. Because we do not
approach, nor beseech, nor entreat Him, as
we ought: but even if we do draw nigh, it is
not as persons who have need to receive,
neither is it with the proper faith, nor as
making demand, but we do all in a gaping
and listless way.

7. And yet God would have us demand
things of Him, and for this accounts Himself
greatly bound to thee.' For He alone of all
debtors, when the demand is made, counts it
a favor, and gives what we have not lent
Him. And if He should see him pressing
earnestly that makes the demand, He pays
down even what He hath not received of us;
but if sluggishly. He too keeps on making
delays; not through unwillingness to give,
but because He is pleased to have the de-
mand made upon Him by us. For this cause
He told thee also the example of that friend,
who came by night, and asked a loaf;- and of
the judge that feared not God, nor regarded
men.' And He stayed not at similitudes,
but signified it also in His very actions, wiien
He dismissed that Phoenician woman, having
filled her with His great gift.* For through
her He signified, that He gives to them that
ask earnestly, even the things that pertain
not to them. " For it is not meet," saith
He, "to take the children's bread, and to
give 5 it unto the dogs." But for all that He
gave, because siie demanded of him earnestly.
But by the Jews He sliowed, that to them
that are careless, He gives not even tiieir
own. Tliey accordingly received nothing,
but lost what was their own. And while
these, because they asked not. did not receive
so much as their very own; she, because she


' fitak X"^?"" 'X" '^'" Toi/Tou rroAA^i'.] ' I. like xi. 5-8.

3 Luke xviii. i-H. -* Mult. XV. 31-38; Mark vii. 34-30.

S ioOi'at, See Horn. LI I.


assailed Him with earnestness, had power to
obtain even what pertained to others, and
the dog received what was the children's. So
great a good is importunity. For though
thou be a dog, yet being importunate, thou
shalt be preferred to the child being negligent:
for what things affection accomplishes not,
these, all of them, importunity did accom-
plish. Say not therefore, "God is an enemy
to me, and will not hearken." He doth
straightway answer thee, continually troubling
him, if not because thou art His friend, yet
because of thine importunity. And neither
the enmity, or the unseasonable time, nor
anything else becomes an hindrance. Say
not, " I am unworthy, and do not pray; '' for
such was the Syrophcenician woman too.
Say not, " I have sinned much, and am not
able to entreat Him whom I have angered;"
for God looks not at the desert, but at the
disposition. For if the ruler that feared not
God, neither was ashamed of men, was over-
come by the widow, much more will He that
is good be won over by continual entreaty.

So that though thou be no friend, though
thou be not demanding thy due, though thou
hast devoured thy Father's substance, and
have been a long time out of sight, though
without honor, though last of all, though
thou approach Him angry, though much dis-
pleased; be willing only to pray, and to re-
turn, and thou shalt receive all, and shall
quickly extinguish the wrath and the contlem-
nation.

But, "behold, I pray," saith one, "and
there is no result." Why, thou prayest not
like those; such I mean as the Syrophcenician
woman, the friend that came late at night,
and the widow that is continually trouliling
the judge, and tlie son that consumed his
father's goods. For tlidst thou so pray, thou
wouldest quickly obtain. For though despite
have been done unto Him, yet is He a
Father; and though He have been provoked
to anger, yet is He fond of His children;
and one thing only doth He seek, not to
take vengeance for our affronts, but to see
thee repenting and entreating Him. Would
that we were wanned in like measure, as
those bowels are moved tt) the love of us.
But tliis lire seeks a beginning only, and if
thou afford it a little spark, thou kinillest a
full llame of beneficence. For not because
He hath been insulted, is He sore vexed,
l)ut because it is thou who art insulting Him,
and so becoming frenzietl. For if we being
evil, when i>ur ( hildriu molest' us, grieve on
their account ; much more is God, who can-


A [The Greek word U that rendered " mtulc " in thii and the
preccdinK sentence. — K.]


156


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXII.


not so much as suffer insult, sore vexed on
account of thee, who hast committed it. If
we, who love by nature, much more He, who
is kindly affectioned beyond nature. " For
though," saith He, "a woman should forget
the fruits of her womb, yet will I not forget
thee."'

8. Let us therefore draw nigh unto Him,
and say, "Truth, Lord; for even the dogs
eat of the crumbs which fall from their mas-
ters' table." ^ Let us draw nigh " in season,
out of season:" or rather, one can never
draw nigh out of season, for it is unseasona-
ble not to be continually approaching. For
of Him who desires to give it is always sea-
sonable to ask: yea, as breathing is never out
of season, so neither is praying unseasonable,
but rather not praying. Since as we need
this breath, so do we also the help that comes
from Him; and if we be willing, we shall
easily draw Him to us. And the prophet, to
manifest this, and to point out the constant
readiness of His beneficence, said, " We
shall find Him prepared as the morning. "-
For as often as we may draw nigh, we shall
see Him awaiting our movements. And if
we fail to draw from out of His ever-springing
goodness, the blame is all ours. This, for
example, was His complaint against certain
Jews, when He said, " My mercy is as a
morning cloud, and as the early dew it goeth
away."-* And His meaning is like this; "I
indeed have supplied all my part, but ye, as

' Isa. xlix. 15. 2 Matt. xv. 27.

3 Hosea vi. 3, lxx. " His going forth is prepared as the morn-
ing," agreeing with the present Hebrew copies. The sentiment of
both readings (as we so often find, apparently by a special Provi-
dence) is the same. [R. V., " His going forth is sure as the
morning." This, too, conveys the same general sentiment, but is
a more accurate rendering of the Hebrew. — R.]

4 Hosea vi. 4, A.V.," Your goodness is as the morning cloud;"
and so also lxx. to IAeos vfjiuiv. And with this the Hebrew copies
agree, as did St._ Jerome's (in loc.X.. vi. 63, Venet. 1768). But St.
Cyx\\\in loc . t. iii. 96, reads to eAeo? fioO. And St. Jerome's Com-
mentary shows that according to his interpretation the two read-
ings came to the same meaning. " Your mercy, that wherewith I
have always had mercy upon you, hath passed by . . . for now is
the captivity near." [R. V., " For your goodness (or, kindness)
is as a morning cloud." In the Homily ii occurs, but is not trans-
lated.-R.]


a hot sun coming over scatters both the cloud
and the dew, and makes them vanish, so
have ye by your great wickedness restrained
the unspeakable Beneficence."

Which also itself again is an instance of
providential care: that even when He sees us
unworthy to receive good. He withholds His
benefits, lest He render us careless. But if
we change a little, even but so much as to
know that we have sinned. He gushes out
beyond the fountains. He is poured forth
beyond the ocean; and the more thou receiv-
est, so much the more doth He rejoice; and
in this way is stirred up again to give us
more. For indeed He accounts it as His
own wealth, that we should be saved, and that
He should give largely to them that ask.
And this, it may seem, Paul was declaring
when He said, that He is " rich unto all and
over all that call upon Him."^ Because
when we pray not, then He is wroth; when
we pray not, then doth He turn away from
us. For this cause " He became poor, that
He might make us rich; " * for this cause He
underwent all those sufferings, that He might
incite us to ask.

Let us not therefore despair, but having so
many motives and good hopes, though we sin
every day, let us approach Him, entreating,
beseeching, asking the forgiveness of our
sins. For thus we shall be more backward
to sin for the time to come; thus shall we
drive away the devil, and shall call forth the
lovingkindness of God, and attain unto the
good things to come, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and might forever and ever.
Amen.


5 Rom. X. 12. (cai i-ni irdi'Tai; is omitted in our presept copies.
Mr. Field refers to Rom iii. 22 ; " unto all and upon all them
that believe." [There is no authority for Kal cttI Travras in Rom.
X. 12, and in iii. 22 the weight of authority is against the phrase
(see R. v. in loco) ; but Chrysostom undoubtedly accepted the
longer reading in the latter passage, and seems to have combined
the two in the present instance. — R.]

6 2 Cor. viii. 9. [The citation is not accurate, probably the
variation is intentional. — R.i


Homily XXIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


d7


HOMILY XXIII.


Matt. VII. i.


Judge not, that ye be not judged,"


What then ? Ought we not to blame them
that sin ? Because Paul also saith this self-
same thing: or rather, there too it is Christ,
speaking by Paul, and saying,' "Why dost
thou judge thy brother? And thou, why
dost thou set at nought thy brother ? '' and,
"Who art thou that judgest another man's
servant?''^ And again, "Therefore judge
nothing before the time, until the Lord
come." 3

How then doth He say elsewhere, " Re-
prove, rebuke, exhort,"* and, "Them that
sin rebuke before all ? "s And Christ too to
Peter, " Go and tell him his fault between thee
and him alone," and if he neglect to hear,
add to thyself another also; and if not even
so doth he yield, declare it to the church
likewise ? '' * And how hath He set over us so
many to reprove; and not only to reprove,
bwt also to punish? For him that hearkens
to none of these. He hath commanded to be
" as a heathen man and a publican." '' And
how gave He them the keys also ? since if
they are not to judge, they will be without
authority in any matter, and in vain have
they received the power to bind and to loose.

And besides, if this were to obtain, all
would be lost alike, whether in churches, or
in states,* or in houses. For except tlie
master judge the servant, and the mistress
the maid, and tlie father the son, and friends
one another, there will be an increase of all
wickedness. And wliy say I, friends? unless
we judge our enemies, we shall never ha able
to put an end to our enmity, but all things
will 1)e turned upside down.

What then can tl\e saying be? Let us
carefully attend, lest the medicines of salva-
tion, and the laws of peace, be accounted by
an)» man laws of overtlirow and confusion.
First of all, then, even by wiiat follows. He
hath pointed out to them that have undsr-
standing the excellency of this law, saying,
*' Why beholdest thou the mote tliat is in tliy
brother's eye, but considerest not the beam
that is in thine own eye ? *''


' Rom. xiv. lo.

* 2 'I'im. iv. 2.
5 I Tim. V. 2o. [K. v., " reprove'

lame in Mntt. xviii. 15 also. — k. J

* Matt, xviii. 15, 16, 17. 7 .Matt, xviii. 17.
9 Matt. vii. 3.


' Rom. xiv. 4. J I Cor. iv. 5.

The Greek verb i« the
8 [irdAco'i.'l


But if to many of the less attentive, it
seem yet rather obscure, I will endeavor to
explain it from the beginning. In this place,
then, as it seems at least to me. He doth not
simply command us not to judge any of
men's sins, neither doth He simply forl)id the
doing of such a thing, but to them that are
full of innumerable ills, and are trampling
upon other men for trifles. And I think tiiat
certain Jews too are here hinted at, for that
while they were bitter accusing their neigh-
bors for small faults, and such as came to
nothing, they were themselves insensibly com-
mitting deadly'" sins. Herewith towards the
end also He was upbraiding them, when He
said, "Ye bind heavy burdens, and grievous
to be borne, but ye will not move tliem with
your finger,"" and, " ye pay tithe of mint and
anise, and liave omitted the weightier mat-
ters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith."'*

Well then, I think that these are compre-
hended in His invective; that He is checking
them beforehand as to those things, wherein
they were hereafter to accuse His disciples.
For although His disciples had been guilty
of no such sin, yet in them were supposed to
be offenses; as, for instance, not keeping the
sabbath, eating with unwashen hands, sitting
at meat with publicans; of which He saith
also in another place, " Ve which strain at
the gnat, and swallow the camel." '^ But yet
it is also a general law that He is laying down
on these matters.

And the Corinthians '* too Paul did not ab-
solutely command not to judge, l)ut not to
judge their own superiors, and upon grounds
that are not acknowledged; not absolutely
to refrain from correcting them that sin.
Neither indeed was He tlien rel>uking all
without distinction, but disciples doing so to
their teachers were the object of His reproof;
and they who, being guilty of innumerable
sins, bring an evil rejiort upon the guilt-
less.

This then is the sort of thing which Christ
also in tliis place intimated; not intimated
merely, but guarded " it too with a great ter-

■" ra fityaXa. The article impliea the diMinctiim.
" Mntt. x\m. 4. " Mutt, xxiii. 33.

M Mutt, xxiii. j^. ( K. v., morerorrrctly, " struiii out ; the word
" at " i* proliubly a typu|{raphiail blunder o( the A. \' . U]
'4 I Cur. iv, < itnoTTfa*.


158


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXIII.


ror, and the punishment from which no pray-
ers can deliver.

2. " For with what judgment ye judge,"
saith He, " ye shall be judged." '

That is, " it is not the other," saith Christ,
" that thou condemnest, but thyself, and thou
art making the judgment-seat dreadful to
thyself, and the account strict." As then in
the forgiveness of our sins the beginnings
are from us, so also in this judgment, it is by
ourselves that the measures of our condem-
nation are laid down. You see, we ought
not to upbraid nor trample upon them, but
to admonish; not to revile, but to advise;
not to assail with pride, but to correct with
tenderness. For not him, but thyself, dost
thou give over to extreme vengeance, by not
sparing him, when it may be needful to give
sentence on his offenses.

Seest thou, how these two commandments
are both easy, and fraught with great bless-
ings to the obedient, even as of evils on the
other hand, to the regardless ? For both he
that forgives his neighbor, hath freed himself
first of the two from the grounds of com-
plaint, and that without any labor; and he
that with tenderness and indulgence inquires
into other men's offenses, great is the allow-
ance^ of pardon, which he hath by his judg-
ment laid up beforehand for himself.

" What then! " say you: " if one commit
fornication, may I not say that fornication is
a bad thing, nor at all correct him that is
playing the wanton ? " Nay, correct him,
but not as a foe, nor as an adversary exacting
a penalty, but as a physician providing medi-
cines. For neither did Christ say, " stay not
him that is sinning," but " judge not; " that
is, be not bitter in pronouncing sentence.

And besides, it is not of great things (as
I have already observed), nor of things pro-
hibited, that this is said, but of those which
are not even counted offenses. Wherefore
He said also.

" Why beholdest thou the mote that is in
thy brother's eye ? " ^

Yea, for many now do this; if they see but
a monk wearing an unnecessary garment,
they produce against him the law of our
Lord,* while they themselves are extorting
without end, and defrauding men every day.
If they see him but partaking rather largely
of food, they become bitter accusers, while
they themselves are daily drinking to excess
and surfeiting: not knowing, that besides
their own sins, they do hereby gather up for
themselves a greater flame, and deprive
themselves of every plea. For on this point,


I Matt. vii. 2.
3 Matt. vii. 3.


2 (pavov.
4 Matt. X.


that thine own doings must be strictly in-
quired into, thou thyself hast first made the
law, by thus sentencing those of thy neigh-
bor. Account it not then to be a grievous
thing, if thou art also thyself to undergo the
same kind of trial.

" Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam
out of thine own eye."^

Here His will is to signify the great wrath,
which He hath against them that do such
things. For so, wheresoever He would indi-
cate that the sin is great, and the punishment
and wrath in store for it grievous, He begins
with a reproach.* As then unto him that was
exacting the hundred pence, He said in His
deep displeasure, " Thou wicked servant, I
forgave thee all that debt;"' even so here
also, "Thou hypocrite." For not of pro-
tecting care comes such a judgment, but of
ill will to man; and while a man puts forward
a mask of benevolence, he is doing a work of
the utmost wickedness, causing reproaches
without ground, and accusations, to cleave
unto his neighbors, and usurping a teacher's
rank, when he is not worthy to be so much
as a disciple. On account of this He called
him "hypocrite." For thou, who in other
men's doings art so bitter, as to see even the
little things; how hast thou become so remiss
in thine own, as that even the great things are
hurried over by thee ?

" First cast out the beam out of thine own
eye."

Seest thou, that He forbids not judging,
but commands to cast out first the beam from
thine eye, and then to set right the doings of
the rest of the world ? For indeed each one
knows his own things better than those of
others; and sees the greater rather than the
less; and loves himself more than his neigh-
bor. Wherefore, if thou doest it out of
guardian care, I bid thee care for thyself
first, in whose case the sin is both more cer-
tain and greater. But if thou neglect thy-
self, it is quite evident that neither dost thou
judge thy brother in care for him, but in
hatred, and wishing to expose him. For
what if he ought to be judged ? it should be
by one who commits no such sin, not .by
thee.

Thus, because He had introduced great
and high doctrines of self denial, lest any
man should say, it is easy so to practise it in
words; He willing to signify His entire con-
fidence, and that He was not chargeable with
any of the things that had been mentioned,
but had duly fulfilled all, spake this parable.
And that, because He too was afterwards to


5 Matt. vii. 5.


6 {fj3pe(U9.


7 Matt, xviii. 32.


Homily XXIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST MATTHEW.


159


judge, saying, "Woe unto you, Scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites." ' Yet was not he
chargeable with what hath been mentioned;
for neither did He pull out a mote, nor had
He a beam on His eyes, but being clean from
all these, He so corrected the faults of all.
*' For it is not at all meet," saith He, "to
judge others, when one is chargeable with the
same things." And why marvel at His es-
tablishing this law, when even the very thief
knew it upon the cross, saying to the other
thief, " Dost not thou fear God, seeing we
are in the same condemnation; " - expressing
the same sentiments with Christ ?

But thou, so far from casting out thine own
beam, dost not even see it, but another's
mote thou not only seest, but also judgest,
and essayest to cast it out; as if any one
seized with a grievous dropsy, or indeed with
any other incurnblS disease, were to neglect
this, and find fault with another who was
neglecting a slight swelling. And if it be an
evil not to see one's own sins, it is a twofold
and threefold evil to be even sitting in judg-
ment on others, while men themselves, as if
past feeling, are bearing about beams in their
own eyes: since no beam is so heavy as sin.

His injunction therefore in tnese words is
as follows, that he who is chargeable with
countless evil deeds, should not be a bitter
censor of other men's offenses, and especially
when these are trifling. He is not overthrow-
ing reproof nor correction, but forbidding
men to neglect their own faults, and exult
over those of other men.

For indeed this was a cause of men's going
unto great vice, bringing in a twofold wicked-
ness. For he, whose practice it had been to
slight his own faults, great as they were, and
to search bitterly into those of others, being
slight and of no account, was spoiling himself
two ways: first, l)y thinking lightly of his own
faults; next, by incurring enmities and feuds
with all men, and training liimself every day
to extreme fierceness, and want of feeling for
Others.

3. Having then put away all these things,
by this His excellent legislation, He added
yet another charge, saying,

" Give not that which is holy unto the
dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before
swine." '

"Yet surely further on," it will be said,
' He commanded, " What ye have lieard in


' Matt, xxiii. 1.

-■ l.ukc xxiii. 40, 41. [R. v., " Dost thou not even frar (lud,
set-in^ thou :iri in the Siimc ciindrmnntion." In ncvcriil pliirrit
ChrysostDiii n'wfi the plural furiu, as here, but there is httlc au-
thority for it in the New Tcstumrrit text, k.]

1 Matt. vii. 6. [K. V., " the »wine," the article is in the Greek
• «..• ^r .1.- 11 :f.. 1


text of the Homily. 1


the ear, that preach ye upon the housetops. "■»
But this is in no wise contrar}- to the former.
For neither in that place did He simply com-
mand to tell all men, but to whom it should
be spoken, to them He bade speak with free-
dom.= And by " dogs " here He figuratively
described them that are living in incurable
ungodliness, and affording no hope of change
for the better; and by "swine," them that
abide continually in an unchaste life, all of
whom He hath pronounced unworthy of hear-
ing such things Paul also, it may be ob-
served, declared this when He said, " But a
natural man receiveth not the things of the
Spirit, tor they are foolishness unto him."^
And in many other .places too He saith that
corruption of life is the cause of men's not
receiving the more perfect doctrines. Where-
fore He commands not to open the doors to
them; for indeed they become more insolent
after learning. For as to the well-disposed
and intelligent, things appear venerable when
revealed, so to the insensible, when they are
unknown rather. " Since then from their
nature, they are not able to learn them, " let
the thing be hidden," saith He, "that* at
least for ignorance they may reverence them.
For neither doth the swine know at all what a
pearl is. Therefore since he knows not,
neither let him see it, lest he trample under
foot what he knows not."

For nothing results, beyond greater mis-
chief to them that are so disposed when they
hear; for both the holy things are profaned .
by them, not knowing what they are; antl
they are the more lifted up and armed against
us. For this is meant by, " lest they tram-
ple them under their feet, and turn again
and rend you." ^

Nay, " surely," saith one, "they ought to
be so strong as to remain equally impregna-
ble after men's learning them, and not to
yield to other people occasions against us."
But it is not the things that yield it, but that
these men are swine; even as when the pearl
is trampled under foot, it is not so trampled,
because it is really contemptible, but because
it fell among swine.

And full well tlid He say, " turn again and
rend you: " for they feign gentleness,' so as
to be taught: then after tliey have learnt.


4 Matt. X. 37.

5 I Cor. ii. 14. In the verse before (hut to which rcfcrrmc
is here made, o.ir Saviour says, " Krar ihrin not ihrrrfnre." .An*!
attain in the verse udrr, " Kcar not them which kill the Ixnly."
whence the natural < (inclusion is, that Mischief purfMisc here wus
to caution Mis dis» ipirs against the fear of man.

' '1 hr words in iliilu s an omiltrd in the manuscripts. [The
construction of ihr (Irerk is very diU'uull, if the Mss. trxt is ttc-
ccptr<l. One .Ms., however, has an imperative in ,thc lu.st clause :
" lei ihem reverence them,' thus relieving the dilliculty. - K.I

7 •yirapoifcirat. " [R. V., proftcrly omits "sKain."— K.]

9 imwinttah'.


i6o


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMTLY XXIIL


quite changing from one sort to another, they
jeer, mock and deride us, as deceived per-
sons. Therefore Paul also said to Timothy/
"Of whom be thou ware also; for he Kath
greatly withstood our words;" and again in
another place, "From such turn away," =
and, "A man that is an heretic, after the first
and second admonition, reject." ^

It is not, you see, that those truths furnish
them with armor, but they become fools in
this way of their own accord, being filled with
more willfulness. On this account it is no
small gain for them to abide in ignorance, for
so they are not such entire scorners. But if
they learn, the mischief is twofold. For
neither will they themselves be at all profited
thereby, but rather the more damaged, and
to thee they will cause endless difficulties.

Let them hearken, who shamelessly asso-
ciate with all, and make the awful things con-
temptible. For the mysteries we too there-
fore celebrate with closed doors, and keep
out the uninitiated, not for any weakness of
which we have convicted our rites, but be-
cause the many are as yet imperfectly pre-
pared for them. For this very reason He
Himself also discoursed much unto the Jews
in parables, "because they seeing saw not."
For this, Paul likewise commanded " to know
how we ought to answer every man."''

4. "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek,
and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be
opened unto you.''^

For inasmuch as He had enjoined things
great and marvellous, and had commanded
men to be superior to all their passions, and
had led them up to Heaven itself, and had
enjoined them to strive after the resemblance,
not of angels and archangels, but (as far as
was possible) of the very Lord of all; and
had bidden His disciples not only themselves
duly to perform all this, but also to correct
others, and to distinguish between the evil
and them that are not such, the dogs and
them that are not dogs (although there be
much that is hidden in men); — that they
might not say, "these things are grievous
and intolerable," (foi indeed in the sequel
Peter did utter some, such things, saying,
"Who can be saved T"* and again, " If the
case of the man be so, it is not good to
marry) : in order therefore that they might
not now likewise say so; as in the first place
even by what had gone before He had proved
it all to be easy, setting down many reasons
one upon another, of power to persuade men:


' 2 Tim. iv. 15.

2 2 Tim. iii. 5. [The citation is modified. — R.]

3 Titus iii. 10. [R. V., " A man that is heretical (or factious)
after a first and second admonition, refuse (or avoid)." — R.]

4 Col, iv. 6. 5 Matt. vii. 6. * Matt. xix. 25, and 10.


so after all He adds also the pinnacle of all
facility, devising as no ordinary relief to our
toils, the assistance derived from persevering
piayers. Thus, we are not ourselves, saith
He, to strive alone, but also to invoke the
help from above: and it will surely come and
be present with us, and will aid us in our
struggles, and make all easy. Therefore He
both commanded us to ask, and pledged
Himself to the giving.

However, not simply to ask did He com-
mand us, but with much assiduity and earn-
estness. For this is the meaning of " seek."
For so he that seeks, putting all things out of
his mind, is taken up with that alone which
is sought, and forms no idea of any of the
persons present. And this which I am say-
ing they know, as many as have lost either
gold, or servants, and ar^ seeking diligently
after them.

By " seeking," then, He declared this; by
" knocking," that we approach with earnest-
ness and a glowing mind.

Despond not therefore, O man, nor show
less of zeal about virtue, than they do of de-
sire for wealth. For things of that kind thou
hast often sought and not found, but never-
theless, though thou know this, that thou art
not sure to find them, thou puttest in motion
every mode of search; but here, although
having a promise that thou wilt surely re-
ceive, thou dost not show even the smallest
part of that earnestness. And if thou dost
not receive straightway, do not even thus
despair. For to this end He said, " knock,"
to signify that even if He should not straight-
way open the door, we are to continue
there.

5. And if thou doubt my affirmation, at
any rate believe His example.

" For what man is there of you," saith He,
" whom if his son ask bread, will he give
him a stone ? " ^

Because, as among men, if thou keep on
doing so, thou art even accounted trouble-
some, and disgusting: so with God, when
thou doest not so, then thou dost more en-
tirely provoke Him. And if thou continue
asking, though thou receive not at once, thou
surely wilt receive. For to this end was the
door shut, that He may induce thee to knock;
to this end He doth not straightway assent,
that thou mayest ask. Continue then to do
these things, and thou wilt surely receive.
P'or that thou mightest not say, " What then
if I should ask and not receive?" He hath

7 Matt. vii. 9. [The citation is not exact. Here, as below,
Chrysostom gives the form : " For which is there of you," omit-
ting "man." The Oxford translator follows the A. V. here but
not below. " Of whom " (in R. V.) is better Enghsh (see below) ;
the Greek is the same in both passages. — R.]


Homily XXIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


i6r


blocked up' thy approach with that simili-
tude, again framing arguments, and by those
human things urging us to be confident on
these matters; implying by them that we
must not only ask, but ask what we ought. °

" For which of you is there, a father, of
whom if his son shall ask bread, will he give
him a stone ? " So that if thou receive not,
thy asking a stone is the cause of thy not re-
ceiving. For though thou be a son, this suf-
fices not for thy receiving: rather this very
thing even hinders thy receiving, that being a
son, thou askest what is not profitable.

Do thou also therefore ask nothing worldly,
but all things spiritual, and thou wilt surely
receive. For so Solomon, ^ because he asked
what he ought, behold how quickly he re-
ceived. Two things now, you see, should be
in him that prays, asking earnestly, and ask-
ing what he ought: " since ye too," saith He,
"though ye be fathers, wait for your sons
tJ ask: and if they should ask of you any-
thing inexpedient, ye refuse the gifts; just
as, if it be expedient, ye consent and bestow
it." Do thou too, considering these things,
not withdraw until thou receive; until thou
have found, retire not; relax not thy dili-
gence, until the door be opened. For if
thou approach with this mind, and say, " Ex-
cept I receive, 1 depart not;" thou wilt
surely receive, provided thou ask such things,
as are both suitable for Him of whom thou
askest to give, and expedient for thee the
petitioner. But what are these ? To seek
the things spiritual, all of them; to forgive
them that have trespassed, and so to draw
nigh asking forgiveness; "to lift up holy
hands without wrath and doubting." * If we
thus ask, we shall receive. As it is, surely
our asking is a mockery, and the act of
drunken rather than of sober men.

"What then," saith one, "if I ask even
spiritual things, and do not receive ? " Thou
didst not surely knock with earnestness; or
thou madest thyself unworthy to receive; or
didst quickly leave off.

"And wherefore," it may be inquired,
*'did He not say, what things we ought to
ask " ? Nay verily. He hath mentioned them
all in what precedes, and hath signified for
wiiat things we ought to draw nigh. Say not
then, " I drew nigh, and did not receive."
For in no case is it owing to God that we
receive not, God who loves us so much as


' «ir«T«iyiirf.

^ [oufc atT«il' Xfi'n ^oi'OU, aAAa Kai i )^pin atT«ii', '* not unly is It
fittinK ti) ask, but to ask what " is fillinK'" — l^-)

3 I KinKH ill. K>-i4 ; j C'hroii. i. ii, ij.

4 I 'I iin. ii. 8, perhaps " dispiitink; " ralhrr Ihiiii " dnubtin){."
[R. v. text " disputing," in ihr inarKin " doubunK." Coiiip.
Homily XIX. ii, p. ij8.-R.]


to surpass even fathers, to surpass them as
far as goodness doth this evil nature.

"For if ye, being evil, know how to give
good gifts unto your children, how much
more your heavenly Father." s

Now this He said, not to bring an evil
name on man's nature, nor to condemn our
race as bad; but in contrast to His own good-
ness He calls paternal tenderness evil,* so
great is the excess of His love to man.

Seest thou an argument unspeakable, of
power to arouse to good hopes even him that
hath become utterly desperate ?

Now here indeed He signifies His good-
ness by means of our fathers, but in what
precedes by the chief among His gifts, by
the "soul,"'" by the body. And nowhere
doth He set down the chief of all good things,
nor bring foru-ard His own coming: — for He
who thus made speed to give up His Son to
the slaughter, " how shall He not freely give
us all things ? " — because it had not yet come
to pass. But Paul indeed sets it forth, thus
saying, " He that spared not His own Son,
how shall He not also with Him freely give
us all things."* But His discourse with
them is still from the things of men.

6. After this, to indicate that we ought
neither to feel confidence in prayer, while
neglecting our own doings; nor, when taking
pains, trust only to our own endeavors; but
both to seek after the help from above, and
contribute withal our own part; He sets forth
the one in connection with the other. For
so after much exhortation, He taught also
how to pray, and when He had taught how to
pray. He proceeded again to His exhortation
concerning what we are to do; then from that
again to the necessity of praying continually,
saying, "Ask," and "seek," and "knock."
And thence again, to the necessity of being
also diligent ourselves.

"For all things," saith He, "whatsoever
ye would that men should do to you, do ye
also to them." '

Summing up ail in brief, ami signifying,
that virtue is compendious, and easy, and
readily known of all men.

And He did not merely say. "All things
whatsoever ye wouUI," but, "Therefore ;ill
things wliatsoever ye would." For this word,
" tlierefore," He diil not add without pur-
pose, l)ut with a concealed meaning: " if ye
desire," saitli He, "to be heard, togctlier
with what I iiave said, do these things also,"
What then are these? "Whatsoever ye

5 Matt. vil. II. [" Heavenly '' is lulMtitutrd for " which in in
Heaven." K.]

' iroi'iipiai'. 7 Or " life :" tee .Matt. vi. j$.

8 Kom. viii. 3a,

9 Matt. vil. IJ. [oi'Twt is omitted ; so the N'ulifate. K.]


1 62


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXIII.


would that men should do to you." Seest
thou how He hath hereby also signified that
together with prayer we need exact conversa-
tion?' And He did not say, "whatsoever
things thou wouldest to be done unto thee of
God, those do unto thy neighbor;" lest thou
should say, " But how is it possible ? He is
God and I am man: " but, " whatsoever thou
wouldest to be done unto thee of thy fellow
servant, these things do thou also thyself
show forth towards thy neighbor." What is
less burdensome than this ? what fairer ?

Then the praise also, before the rewards,
is exceeding great.

" For this is the law and the prophets."

Whence it is evident, that virtue is accord-
ing to our nature; that we all, of ourselves,
know our duties; and that it is not possible
for us ever to find refuge in ignorance.

7. " Enter ye in at the strait gate, for
wide is the gate and broad is the way that
leadeth to destruction, and many there be
which go in thereat: and strait is the gate and
narrow ^ is the way which leadeth unto life,
and few there be that find it." ^

And yet after this He said, " My yoke is
easy, and my burden is light."'* And in
what He hath lately said also, He intimated
the same: how then doth He here say it is
strait and confined ? In the first place, if
thou attend, even here He points to it as very
light, and easy, and accessible. "And how,"
it may be said, " is the narrow and confined
way easy ?'' Because it is a way and a gate;
even as also the other, though it be wide,
though spacious, is also a way and a gate.
And of these there is nothing permanent, but
all things are passing away, both the pains
and the good things of life.

And not only herein is the part of virtue
easy, but also by the end again it becomes
yet easier. For not the passing away of our
labors and toils, but also their issuing in a
good end (for they end in life) is enough to
console those in conflict. So that both the
temporary nature of our labors, and the per-
petuity of our crowns, and the fact that the
labors come first, and the crowns after, must
prove a very great relief in our toils.
Wherefore Paul also called their affliction
" light" ; not from the nature of the events,
but because of the mind of the combatants,
and the hope of the future. " For our light
affliction," saith he, " worketh an eternal
weight of glory, while we look not at the

I [n-oAiTfi'as.] 2 Confined, TeSAi/ut/oievr).

3 Matt. vi. 13, 14. [R. v., " by the narrow gate ;" " enter in
thereby ;" " For narrow is the gate, and straitened the way," &c.
Chrysostom introduces verse 14 with Kai ; and in some mss. of the
Homilies Ti is added. Comp. R.V. margin: "How narrow," etc.
-R.]

4 Matt. XI. 30.


things which are seen, but at the things which
are not seen, "s For if to sailors the waves
and the seas, to soldiers their slaughters and
wounds, to husbandmen the winters and the
frosts, to boxers the sharp blows, be light and
tolerable things, all of them, for the hope of
those rewards which are temporary and per-
ishing; much more when heaven is set forth,
and the unspeakable blessings, and the eter-
nal rewards, will no one feel any of the pres-
ent hardships. Or if any account it, even
thus, to be toilsome, the suspicion comes of
nothing but their own remissness.

See, at any rate, how He on another side
also makes it easy, commanding not to hold
intercourse with the dogs, nor to give one's
self over to the swine, and to " beware of the
false prophets; " thus on all accounts causing
men to feel as if in real conflict. And the
very fact too of calling it narrow contributed
very greatly towards making it easy; for it
wrought on them to be vigilant. As Paul
then, when he saith, " We wrestle not against
flesh and blood," ^ doth so not to cast down,
but to rouse up the spirits of the soldiers:
even so He also, to shake the travellers out
of their sleep, called the way rough. And
not in this way only did He work upon men
to be vigilant, but also by adding, that it
contains likewise many to supplant them;
and, what is yet more grievous, they do not
even attack openly, but hiding themselves;
for such is the race of the false prophets.
" But look not to this," saith He, " that it is
rough and narrow, but where it ends; nor
that the opposite is wide and spacious, but
where it issues."

And all these things He saith, thoroughly
to awaken our alacrity; even as elsewhere
also He said, " Violent men take it by
force. "7 For whoever is in conflict, when
he actually sees the judge of the lists marvel-
ling at the painfulness of his efforts, is the
more inspirited.

Let it not then bewilder us, when many
things spring up hence, that turn to our vex-
ation. For the way is strait, and the gate
narrow, but not the city.^ Therefore must
one neither look for rest here, nor there ex-
pect any more aught that is painful.

Now in saying, " Few there be that find
it," here again He both declared the careless-


5 2 Cor. iv. 17, 18.

6 Eph. vi. 12. [R. v., " our wrestling is not," etc. — R.]

7 Matt. xi. 12. [R. v., " men of violence," etc. — R.]

8 ' They pass in stooping low,

For strait and narrow was the way, which he did shew.


Each goodly thing is hardest to begin :
But entered in, a spacious court they see,
Both plaine, and pleasant to be walked in.

SJ>e>isers Faery Queen, b. i. c. x. 5, 6.


Homily XXIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


l6'


ness of the generality, and instructed His
hearers not to regard the felicities of the
many, but the labors of the few. For the
more part, saith He, so far from walking this
way, do not so much as make it their choice:
a thing of most extreme criminality. But we
should not regard the many, nor be troubled
thereat, but emulate the few; and, by all
means equipping' ourselves, should so walk
therein.

For besides that it is strait, there are also
many to overthrow us in the way that leads
thither. Wherefore He also added,

8. " Beware of false prophets, for they will
come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly
they are ravening wolves. " ^ Behold together
with tlie dogs and swine another kind of
ambush and conspiracy, far more grievous
than that. For those are acknowledged and
open, but these shaded over. For which
cause also, while from those He commanded
to hold off, these He charged men to watch
with exact care, as though it were not possi-
ble to see them at the first approach.
Wherefore He also said, "beware "; making
us more exact to discern them.

Then, lest when they had heard that it was
narrow and strait, and that they must walk on
a way opposite to the many, and must keep
themselves from swine and dogs, and together
with these from another more wicked kind,
even this of wolves; lest, I say, they should
sink down at this multitude of vexations,
having both to go a way contrary to most
men, and therewith again to have such
anxiety about these things: He reminded
them of what took place in the days of their
fathers, by using the term, " false prophets,"
for then also no less did such things happen.
Be not now, I pray you, troubled (so He
speaks), for nothing new nor strange is to
befall you. Since for all truth the devil is
always secretly substituting its appropriate
deceit.

And by the figure of " false propliets,"
lK;re, I think He shadows out not the her-
etics, but them tliat are of a corrupt life, yet
wear a mask of virtue; whom the generality
are wont to call by the name of imi)()stors.'
Wherefore He also said further,

" By their fruits ye shall know them."*

For amongst heretics one may often find
actual g(jodness,5 but amongst those whom I
was mentioning, by no means.

• iruyKpoTovi'Tai.

» Matt. vii. i^. [" For they will rotne " istutwtituted by Chry-
sostom for " which come," but without uny MS». authority known
tous.— R.l

I c'>ri0cTui/. 4 Matt. vii. ifi.

5 Pioj". Comp. Horn. XLVI. p. 486, Hen. [In the puswiK'c re-
ferred to, the word is rendered " practice." Kur the ethical iien'»e
of 3iov in classical usajje, see Trench, Synonyints Xeiu Tttlit-
mtnt, sub Tyi'^. — R.]


" What then," it may be said, " if in these
things too they counterfeit?" "Nay, they
will be easily detected; for such is the nature
of this way, in which I commanded men to
walk, painful and irksome; but the hypocrite
would not choose to take pains, but to make
a show only; wherefore also he is easily con-
victed.'' Thus, inasmuch as He had said,
"there be few that find it," He clears them
out again from among those, who find it not,
yet feign so to do, by commanding us not to
look to them that wear the masks only, but to
them who in reality pursue it.

"But wherefore," one may say, "did He
not make them manifest, but set us on the
search for them?" 'I'iiat we might watch,
and be ever prepared for conflict, guarding
against our disguised as well as against our
open enemies: which kind indeed Paul also
was intimating, when he said, that "by their
good words they deceive the hearts of the
simole."'' Let us not be troubled therefore,
when we see many such even now. Nay, for
this too Christ foretold from the begin-
ning.

And see His gentleness: how He said not,
"Punish them," but, "Be not hurt by
them," " Do not fall amongst them un-
guarded." Then that thou mightest not say,
" it is impossible to distinguish that sort of
men," again He states an argument from a
human example, thus saying,

" Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs
of thistles? even so every good tree bringeth
forth good fruit, but the corrupt tree bringeth
forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring
forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree
bring forth good fruit." ^

Now what He saith is like this- they have
nothing gentle nor sweet; it is tlie sheep
only so far as the skin; wherefore also it is
easy to discern them. And lest tiiou should-
est have any the least doubt, He compares it
to certain natural necessities, in matters
whicli admit of no result but one. In whicli
sense Paul also said, " 'I'he carnal mind i.s
death; for it is not suliject to the law of God,
neither indeed can be.""

And if He states the same thing twice, it is
not tautology. But, lest any one shouki say,
" Thougli the evil tree bear evil fruit, it bears
also good, and makes the distinction difficult,
the crop being twofold:" "This is not so,"
saith lie, " for it bears evil fruit only, anil


* Rom. xvl. 18. [R. v., " by their untMith and fair speech they
beuuile the hearts of the inniHent." Hut Chrysosiiun omits ««i
(vAoyiat, UKreeinK with the rcudinK of the four principal (irxco-
Ijitin Mss. of the I'auline Kpistlcs.— R.]

7 Matt. vii. it>-\%.

8 Rom. viii. 6. 7. [R. V.. " For the mind of the flesh," etc.
The translator hus not rendered vap, which occurs in the Circck o(
the Moinily, OS in Rom. viii. 6. — K.)


164


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXIII.


never can bear good: as indeed in the con-
trary case also."

" What then ? Is there no such thing as a
good man becoming wicked ? And the con-
trary again takes place, and life abounds with
many such examples."

But Christ saith not this, that for the
wicked there is no way to change, or that the
good cannot fall away, but that so long as he
is living in wickedness, he will not be able to
bear good fruit. For he may indeed change
to virtue, being evil; but while continuing in
wickedness, he will not bear good fruit.

What then ? did not David, being good,
bear evil fruit ? Not continuing good, but
being changed; since, undoubtedly, had he
remained always what he was, he would not
have brought forth such fruit. For not
surely while abiding in the habit of virtue,
did he commit what he committed.

Now by these words He was also stopping
the mouths of those who speak evil at ran-
dom, and putting a bridle on the lips of all
calumniators. I mean, whereas many sus-
pect the good by reason of the bad. He by
this saying hath deprived them of all excuse.
'* For thou canst not say, ' I am deceived
and beguiled;' since I have given thee ex-
actly this way of distinguishing them by their
works, having added the injunction to go to
their actions, and not to confound all at ran-
dom."

9. Then forasmuch as He had not com-
manded to punish, but only to beware of
them. He, at once both to comfort those
whom they vex, and to alarm and change
them, set up as a bulwark against' them the
punishment they should receive at His hands,
saying,

" Every tree that bringeth not forth good
fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire." ^

Then, to make the saying less grievous.
He added,

"Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know
them."-'

That He might not seem to introduce the
threatening as His leading topic, but to be
stirring up their mind in the way of admoni-
tion and counsel.

Here He seems to me to be hinting at the
Jews also, who were exhibiting such fruits.
Wherefore also He reminded them of the
sayings of John, in the very same terms de-
lineating their punishment. For he too said
the very same, making mention to them of
an " axe," and of a " tree cut down," and of
"unquenchable fire.''


eireTfixi.<T€v avTolf. 2 Matt. vii. 19.

Matt. vii. 20. [There is here a slight variation from the New
Testament text. — R.]


And though it appear indeed to be some
single judgment, the being burnt up, yet if
one examine carefully, these are two punish-
ments. For he that is burnt is also cast of
course out of God's kingdom; and this latter
punishment is more grievous than the other.
Now I know indeed that many tremble only
at hell, but I affirm the loss of that glory to
be a far greater punishment than hell. And
if it be not possible to exhibit it such in
words, this is nothing marvellous. For
neither do we know the blessedness of those
good things, that we should on the other
hand clearly perceive the wretchedness en-
suing on bemg deprived of them; since Paul,
as knowing these things clearly, is aware,
that to fall from Christ's glory is more griev-
ous than all. And this we shall know at that
time, when we shall fall into the actual trial
of it.

But may this never be our case, O thou
only-begotten Son of God, neither may we
ever have any experience of this irremediable
punishment. For how great an evil it is to
fall from those good things, cannot indeed be
accurately told: nevertheless, as I may be
able, I will labor and strive by an example
to make it clear to you, though it be but in
some small degree.

Let us then imagine a wondrous child, hav-
ing besides His virtue the dominion of the
whole world, and in all respects so virtuous,
as to be capable of bringing all men to the
yearning of a father's affection. What then
do you think the father of this child would
not gladly suffer, not to be cast out of His.
society ? And what evil, small or great,
would he not welcome, on condition of seeing
and enjoying Him ? Now let us reason just
so with respect to that glory also. For no
child, be he never so virtuous, is so desirable
and lovely to a father, as the having our por-
tion in those good things, and "to depart
and be with Christ."''

No doubt hell, and that punishment, is a
thing not to be borne. Yet though one sup-
pose ten thousand hells, he will utter nothing
like what it will be to fail of that blessed
glory, to be hated of Christ, to hear " I know
you not," s to be accused for not feeding Him
when we saw Him an hungered.* Yea, bet-
ter surely to endure a thousand thunderbolts,
than to see that face of mildness turning
away from us, and that eye of peace not en-
during to look upon us. For if He, while I
was an enemy, and hating Him, and turning
from Him, did in such wise follow after me,
as not to spare even Himself, but to give


4 Phil. i. 23.


5 Matt. XXV. 12.


6 Matt. XXV. 42.


Homily XXIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


165


Himself up unto death: when after all this I
do not vouchsafe to Him so much as a loaf
in His hunger, with what kind of eyes shall
I ever again behold Him ?

But mark even here His gentleness; in that
He doth not at all speak of His benefits, nor
say, "Thou hast despised Him that hath
done thee so much good: " neittier doth He
say, " Me, who brought thee from that which
is not into being, who breathed into thee a
soul, and set thee over all things on earth,
who for thy sake made earth, and heaven,
and sea, and air, and all things that are, who
had been dishonored by thee, yea accounted
of less honor than the devil, and did not even
so withdraw Himself, but had innumerable
thoughts for thee after it all; who chose to
become a slave, who was beaten with rods
and spit upon, who was slain, who died the
most shameful death, who also on high makes
intercession for thee, who freely gives thee
His Spirit, who vouchsafes to thee a king-
dom, who makes thee such promises, whose
will it is to be unto thee Head, and Bride-
groom, and Garment, and House, and Root,
and Meat, and Drink, and Shepherd, and
King, and who hatii taken thee to be brother,
and heir, and joint-heir with Himself; who
hath brought thee out of darkness into the
dominion of light." These things, I say,
and more than these He might speak of, but
He mentions none of these; but what? only
the sin itself.

Even here He shows His love, and indi-
cates the yearning which He hath toward
thee: not saying, "Depart into the fire pre-
pared for you," but " prepared for the devil."
And before He tells them what wrongs they
had done, and neither so doth He endure to
mention all, but a few. And before these
He calls the other sort, those who have done
well, to signify from this too that He is l)lam-
ing them justly.

What amount of punishment, then, is so
grievous as these words ? For if any one see-
ing but a man who was liis benefactor an
hungered, would not neglect him; or if he
should neglect him, being upbraided with it,
would choose rather to sink into the earth
than to hear of it in the i)rcsence of two or
three friends; what will be our feelings, on
hearing these words in tiic |)rcscnce of the
whole world; such as He would not say even
then, were He not ea4"nestly accounting for
His own doings? For that not to iij^braid
did He bring these things forward, but in
self-defense, and for the sake of slunving,
that not without ground nor at random was
He saying, "depart from me;" tliis is evi-
dent from His unspeakable bcnclits. For if lie


had been minded to upbraid. He would have
brought forwards all these, but now He men-
tions only what treatment He had received.

10. Let us therefore, beloved, fear the
hearing these words. Life is not a plaything:
or rather our present life is a plaything, but
the things to come are not such; or per-
chance our life is not a plaything only, but
even worse than this. For it ends not in
laughter, but rather brings exceeding damage
on them who are not minded to order their
own ways strictly. For what, I pray thee, is
the difference between children who are play-
ing at building houses, and us when we are
building our fine houses ? what again between
them making out their dinners, and us in our
delicate fare? None, but just that we do it
at the risk of being punished. And if we
do not yet quite perceive the poverty of what
is going on, no wonder, for we are not yet
become men; but when we are become so, we
shall know that all tnese things are childish.

For so those other things too, as we grow
to manhood, we laugh to scorn; but when we
are children we account them to be worth
anxiety; and while we are gathering together
potsherds and mire we think no less of our-
selves than they who are erecting their great
circuits of walls Nevertheless they straight-
way perish and fall down, and not even when
standing can they be of any use to us, as in-
deed neither can those fine houses. For the
citizen of Heaven they cannot receive, neither
can he bear to abide in them, who hath his
country above; but as we throw down these
with our feet, so he too ttiose by his high
spirit. And as we laugh at the children,
weeping at that overthrow, even so these also,
when we are bewailing it all, do not laugh
only, but weep also: because both tlieir
bowels are compassionate, and great is the
mischief thence arising.

Let us therefore become men. How long
are we to crawl on ttie earth, priding our-
selves on stones and stocks ? How long arc
we to play? .\nd wouUi we played only!
But now we even betray our own salvation;
and as children when they neglect their learn-
ing, and practise tliemselves in these things
at their leisure, suffer very severe blows;
even so we too, sjKMiding all our diligence
herein, and having t)R'n our spiritual lessons
required of us in our works, and not being
able to produce them, shall have to pay the
utmost jienalty. And tliere is none to deliver
us; though lie be father, brother, what you
will. But while these things shall all pass
away, the torment ensuing u|>on them re-
mains immortal and uik e ising; wliii li sort of
thing iiiileeil takes place Willi respect to the


1 66


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXIII.


children as well, their father destroying their
childish toys altogether for their idleness, and
causing them to weep incessantly.

11. And to convince thee that these things
are such, let us bring before us wealth, that
which more than anything seems to be worthy
of our pains, and let us set against it a virtue
of the soul (which soever thou wilt), ana
then shalt thou see most clearly the vileness
thereof. Let us, I say, suppose there are
two men (and I do not now speak of injuri-
ousness,' but as yet of honest wealth); and
of these two, let the one get together money,
and sail on the sea, and till the land, and find
many other ways of merchandise (although
I know not quite, whether, so doing, he can
make honest gains); nevertheless let it be so,
and let it be granted that his gains are gotten
with honesty; that he buys fields, and slaves,
and all such things, and suppose no injustice
connected therewith. But let the other one,
possessing as much, sell fields, sell houses,
and vessels of gold and silver, and give to
the poor; let him supply the necessitous,
heal the sick, free such as are in straits, some
let him deliver from bonds, others let him re-
lease that are in mines, these let him bring
back from the noose, those, who are captives,
let him rescue from their punishment. Of
whose side then would you be ? And we
have not as yet spoken of the future, but as
yet of what is here. Of whose part then
would ye be ? his that is gathering gold, or his
that is doing away with calamities ? with him
that is purchasing fields, or him who is mak-
ing himself a harbor of refuge for the human
race ? him that is clothed with much gold, or
him that is crowned with innumerable bless-
ings ? Is not the one like some angel come
down from Heaven for the amendment of the
rest of mankind; but the other not so much
as like a man, but like some little child that is
gathering all together vainly and at random ?

But if to get money honestly be thus
absurd, and of extreme madness; when not
even the honesty is there, how can such a
man choose but be more wretched than any ?
I say, if the absurdity be so great; when hell
is added thereto, and the loss of the king-
dom, how great wailings are due to him, both
living and dead ?

12. Or wilt thou that we take in hand some
other part also of virtue ? Let us then intro-
duce again another man, who is in power,
commanding all, invested with great dignity,
having a gorgeous herald, and girdle, and
lictors, and a large company of attendants.
Doth not this seem great, and meet to be
called happy ? Well then, against this man


I [TrAeofeftas.]


again let us set another, him that is patient
of injuries, and meek, and lowly, and long
suffering; and let this last be despitefully
used, be beaten, and let him bear it quietly,
and bless them that are doing such things.

Now which is the one to be admired, I
pray thee ? he that is puffed up, and inflamed,
or he that is self-subdued ? Is not the one
again like the powers above, that are so free
from passion, but the other like a blown
bladder, or a man who hath the dropsy, and
great inflammation ? The one like a spiritual
physician, the other, a ridiculous child that is
pufiing out his cheeks ?

For why dost thou pride thyself, O man ?
Because thou art borne on high in a chariot ?
Because a yoke of mules is drawing thee?
And what is this ? Why, this one may see
befalling mere logs of wood and stones. Is
it that thou art clothed with beautiful gar-
ments ? But look at him that is clad with
virtue for garments, and thou wilt see thyself
to be like withering hay, but him like a tree
that bears marvellous fruit, and affords much
delight to the beholders. For thou art bear-
ing about food for worms and moths, who, if
they should set upon thee, will quickly strip
thee bare of this adorning (for truly garments
and gold and silver, are the one, the spinning
of worms; the other earth and dust, and
again become earth and nothing more): but
he that is clothed with virtue hath such rai-
ment, as not only worms cannot hurt, but not
even death itself. And very naturally; for
these virtues of the soul have not their origin
from the earth, but are a fruit of the Spirit;
wherefore neither are they subject to the
mouths of worms. Nay, for these garments
are woven in Heaven, where is neither moth,
nor worm, nor any other such thing.

Which then is better, tell me ? To be rich,
or to be poor ? To be in power, or in dis-
honor ? In luxury, or in hunger ? It is quite
clear; to be in honor, and enjoyment, and
wealth. Therefore, if thou wouldest have
the things and not the names, leave the earth
and what is here, and find thee a place to
anchor in Heaven: for what is here is a
shadow, but all things there are immovable,
stedfast, and beyond any assault.

Let us therefore choose them with all dili-
gent care, that we may be delivered from the
turmoil of the things here, and having sailed
into that calm harbor, may be found with our
lading abundant, and with that unspeakable
wealth of almsgiving; unto which God grant
we may all attain, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be the glory and the might, world
without end. Amen.


Homily XXIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


167


HOMILY XXIV.


Matt. VH. 21.


"Not everyone that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven,
but he thatdoeth the will of my Father which is in Heaven."


Wherefore said He not, "but he that
doeth my will?" Because for the time it
was a great gain ' for them to receive even
this first; yea it was very great, considering
their weakness. And moreover He intimated
the one also by the other. And withal this
may be mentioned, that in fact* there is no
other will of the Son besides that of the
Father.

And here He seems to me to be censuring
the Jews chiefly, laying as they did the whole
stress upon the doctrines, and taking no care
of practice. For which Paul also blames
them, saying, " Behold thou art called a
Jew, and restest in the law, and makest thy
boast of God, and knowest His will:"'' but
thou art nothing advantaged thereby, so long
as the manifestation by life and by works is
not there.

But He Himself staid not at this, but said
also what was much more: that is,

" Many will say to me in that day, Lord,
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
name?"- For "not only," saith He, "is
he that hath faith, if his life be neglected,
cast out of Heaven, but though, besides his
faith, he have wrought many signs, yet if he
have done nothing good, even this man is
equally shut out from that sacred porch."
" For many will say unto me in that day.
Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
name?" Seest thou how He secretly brings
in Himself also here and afterwards, iiaving
now finished His whole exhortation? how He
implies Himself to be judge ? For that pun-
ishment awaits such as sin. He hath signified
in what precedes; and now who it is that
punishes. He liere proceeds to unfold.

And He said not openly, I am He, but,
" Many will say unto me; " making out again
the same thing. Since were He not tiie
judge, how could He have told them,

• [oyajrTjTdi' ; pnibably the »eniic is rather: "it must sufTicc
thrill," rtc. k.l

' Kom. ii. 17, 18. fR. V., " Hut if thmi liciirrsi \\\r name of «
Jew," etc., folliiwifix '"<• reading «i i«,\vhuli iHaliiiiidaiitly attcktcil.
Chrjsostciiii ha<iii<,as in the rci rivnl tent. K.l

3 Miitt vii. jj . (K. v., "did we not pnipliesy," etc. The
Greek vrrt> is an aorisl. — K.]


"And then will I profess unto them, de-
part from mo, I never knew you ? " *

" Not only in the time of the judgment,
but not even then, when ye were working
miracles," saith He. Therefore He said also
to His disciples. Rejoice not, that the devils
are subject unto you, but because your names
are written in Heaven. "^ And everywhere
He bids us practise great care of our way of
life. For it is not possible for one living
rightly, and freed from all the passions, ever
to be overlooked; but though he chance to
be in error, God will quickly draw him over
to the truth.

But there are some who say, " they made
this assertion falsely;" and this is their ac-
count why such men are not saved. Nay
then it follows that His conclusion is the
contrary of what He intends. For surely His
intention is to make out that faith is of no
avail without works. Then, enhancing it,
He added miracles also, declaring that not
only faith, but the exhibiting even of mira-
cles, avails nothing for him who works such
wonders without virtue. Now if they had
not wrought them, how could this point have
been made out here ? And besiiles. they
would not have dared, when the judgment
was come, to say these things to His face:
and tlie very reply too, and their speaki;ig in
the way of question, implies their having
wrought them: 1 mean, that they, having
seen the end contrary to their expectation,
and after they had been here admired among
all for their miracles, beholding themselves
there with nothing but punislmient awaiting
tlieni; — as amazed and marvelling they say,
" Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
name ? " how then tlost thou turn from us
now? What means this strange :ind un-
looked-for end ?

2. But though they marvel because they
are punislied after working such miracles, yet
do not thou marvel. For all the grace was of
the free gift of Him that gave it, but tiiey
c(Mitril)iited nothing on tlieir part; wherefore


4 Mutl. vii. S3.


S I.ulr« s. «o.


1 68


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXIV.


also they are justly punished, as having been
ungrateful and without feeling towards Him
that had so honored them as to bestow His
grace upon them though unworthy.

" What then," saith one, "did they perform
such things while working iniquity ? " Some
indeed say that it was not at the time when
they did these miracles that they also com-
mitted iniquity, but that they changed after-
wards, and wrought their iniquity. But if this
be so, a second time the point at which He is
laboring fails to be established. For what
He took pains to point out is this, that
neither faith nor miracles avail where practise
is not: to which effect Paul also said,
" Though I have faith, so that I could remove
mountains, and understand all mysteries, and
all knowledge, and have not charity, I am
nothing."' "Who then are these men ? '^
you ask. Many of them that believed re-
ceived gifts such as He that was casting out
devils,^ and was not with Him; such as Judas;
for even he too, wicked as he was, had a gift.
And in the Old Testament also this may
be found, in that grace hath oftentimes
wrought upon unworthy persons, that it might
do good to others. That is, since all men
were not meet for all things, but some were of
a pure life, not having so great faith, and
others just the contrary; by these sayings,
while He urges the one to show forth much
faith, the others too He was summoning by
this His unspeakable gift to become better
men. Wherefore also with great abundance
did He bestow that grace. For "we
wrought," it is said, "many mighty works."
But "then will I profess unto them, I knew
you not." For "now indeed they suppose
they are my friends; but then shall they
know, that not as to friends did I give to
them."

And why marvel if He hath bestowed gifts
on men that have believed on Him, though
without life suitable to their faith, when even
on those who have fallen from both these,
He is unquestionably found working? For
so Balaam was an alien both from faith and
from a truly good life; nevertheless grace
wrought on him for the service ^ of other men.
And Pharaoh too was of the same sort: yet
for all that even to him He signified the
things to come. And Nebuchadnezzar was
very full of iniquity; yet to him again He re-
vealed what was to follow after many genera-
ions.* And again to the son of this last,
though surpassing his father in iniquity, He

' I Cor. xiii. 2. [R. V., " love," as the uniform rendering of
oyaTTTj. — R,]

2 Mark ix. 38 ; Luke ix. 49. ["Demons," so in the New Tes-
tament passages. — R.]

3 oiKovo/i.iac. 4 Dan. iii.


signified the things to come, ordering a mar-
vellous and great dispensation. 5 Accordingly
because then also the beginnings of the gospel
were taking place, and it was requisite that
the manifestation of its power should be
abundant, many even of the unworthy used
to receive gifts. Howbeit, from those mira-
cles no gain accrued to them; rather they are
the more punished. Wherefore unto them
did He utter even that fearful saying, "I
never knew you: " there being many for
whom His hatred begins already even here;
whom He turns away from, even before the
judgment.

Let us fear therefore, beloved; and let us
take great heed to our life, neither let us
account ourselves worse off, in that we do not
work miracles now. For that will never be
any advantage to us, as neither any disadvan-
tage in our not working them, if we take heed
to all virtue. Because for the miracles we
ourselves are debtors, but for our life and
our doings we have God our debtor.

3. Having now, you see, finished all, hav-
ing discoursed accurately of all virtue, and
pointed out the pretenders to it, of divers
kinds, both such as for display fast and make
prayers, and such as come in the sheep's
hide; and them too that spoil it, whom He
also called swine and dogs: He proceeds to
signify how great is the profit of virtue even
here, and how great the mischief of wicked-
ness, by saying,

" Whosoever therefore heareth these say-
ings of mine, and doeth them, shall be
likened unto a wise man." *

As thus: What they shall suffer who do
not (although they work miracles), ye have
heard; but ye should know also what such as
obey all these sayings shall enjoy; not in the
world to come only, but even here. " For
whosoever," saith He," heareth these sayings
of mine, and doeth them, shall be likened to
a wise man.''

Seest thou how He varies His discourse;
at one time saying, "Not everyone that saith
unto me. Lord, Lord," and revealing Him-
self; at another time, " He that doeth the
will of my Father;" and again, bringing in
Himself as judge, " For many will say to
me in that day. Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name, and I will say, I
know you not." And here again He indi-
cates Himself to have the power over all, this
being why He said, "Whosoever heareth
these sayings of mine."


5 Dan. V.

* Matt. vii. 24. [R. V., " Every one, therefore, which heareth
these words of mine, and doeth them, shall be likened.' The
Greek text in the Homily is identical with that accepted in the
R. v.— R.]


Homily XXIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


169


Thus whereas all His discourse had been
touching the future; of a kingdom, and an |
unspeakable reward and consolation, and the
like; His will is, out of things here also to
give them their fruits, and to signify how
great is the strength of virtue even in the
present life. What then is this her strength ?
To live in safety, to be easily subdued by no
terror, to stand superior to all that despite-
fuUy use us. To this what can be equal ?
For this, not even he that wears the diadem
can provide for himself, but that man who
follows after virtue. For he alone is pos-
sessed of it in full abundance: in the ebb and
flow' of the things present he enjoys a great
calm. The truly marvellous thing being this,
that not in fair weather, but when the storm !
is vehement, and the turmoil great, and the
temptations continual, he cannot be shaken
ever so little.

" For the rain descended," saith He, " the
floods came, the winds blew, and beat upon
that house; and it fell not: for it was founded
upon the rock." =

By "rain" here, and "floods," and
"winds," He is expressing metaphorically
the calamities and afflictions that befall men;
such as false accusations, plots, bereave-
ments, deaths, loss of friends, vexations from
strangers, all the ills in our life that any one
could mention. " But to none of these,"
saith He, " doth such a soul give way; and
the cause is, it is founded on the rock.'' He
calls the stedfastness of His doctrine a rock;
because in truth His commands are stronger
than any rock, setting one above all the waves
of human affairs. For he who keeps these
things strictly, will not have the advantage of
men only when they are vexing liim, but even
of the very devils plotting against him. And
that it is not vain boasting so to speak. Job
is our witness, who received all the assaults
of the devil, and stood unmoveable; and the
apostles too are our witnesses, for that when
the waves of the whole world were beating
against them, when both nations and princes,
both their own people and strangers, both the
evil spirits, and the devil, and every engine
was set in motion, tliey stood firmer than a
rock, and dispersed it all.

And now, what can be happier than this
kind of life? For this, not wealth, not
strength of body, not glory, not power, nor
ought else will be able to secure, but only the
possession of virtue. For there is not, nay
there is not another life we may find free
from all evils, but this alone. And ye are

■ [tvpiirif), a Mrait, where the ebb and flow is gratt and frequent.
See I.iHdcll and Scott, Grttk /,<-a;Vo«. — R.]
' Matt. vii. 25.


witnesses, wlio know the plots in king's
courts, the turmoils and the troubles in the
houses of the rich. But there was not among
the apostles any such thing.

What then ? Did no such thing befall
them ? Did they suffer no evil at any man's
liand ? Nay, the marvel is this above all
things, tliat they were indeed the object of
many plots, and many storms burst upon
them, but their soul was not overset by them,
nor thrown into despair, but with naked
bodies they wrestled, prevailed, and tri-
umphed.

Thou then likewise, if thou be willing to
perform these things exactly, shalt laugh all
ills to scorn. Yea, for if thou be but
strengthened with such philosophy as is in
these admonitions, nothing shall be able to
hurt thee. Since in what is he to harm thee,
who is minded to lay plots? Will he take
away thy money? Well, but before their
threatening thou wast commanded to de-
spise it, and to abstain from it so exceed-
ingly, as not so much as even to ask any such
thing of thy Lord. But doth he cast thee
into prison ? Why, before thy prison, thou
wast enjoined so to live, as to be crucified
even to all the world. But doth he speak
evil ? Nay, from this pain also Christ hath
delivered thee, by promising thee without
toil a great reward for the endurance of evil,
and making thee so clear from the anger
and vexation hence arising, as even to com-
mand thee to pray for them. But doth he
banish thee and involve thee in innumerable
ills? Well, he is making th crown more
glorious for thee. But doth he destroy and
murder thee? Even hereby he profits thee
very greatly, procuring for thee the rewards
of the martyrs, and conducting thee more
quickly into the untroubleil haven, and af-
fording thee matter for a more abundant
recom pence, and contriving for thee to make
a gain of the universal penalty.' Which thing
inilecd is most marvellous of all, that the
plotters, so far from injuring at all, do rather
make the objects of their despite more ap-
proved. To this what can l^e comparable?
I mean, to the choice of such a mode of life
as this, and no other, is.

Thus whereas He hail called tue way str:ut
and narrow; to soothe our labors on this side
also, He signifies the security t'.iereof to be
great, and great the pleasure; even as of the
opposite course great is the unsoundness, aiid

^ tr\v KOiv'r\v hiit'i\v vpny^arffvccrfVai at vapttfrtfvi'a^'Mk*. *' 'I'hc
univrputi |>eimlly," if., I)ruth. Srr II tun. .\\X I \'.,u» minted by
Mr. Field, for this temr of frpayMorcica^ai. [ I'lic vrth means
"In enjjUKe ill liininrN*," und it is an eu^v transition to the sm-
cewfiil result of Iradini;. The Ijilin rendrriiiK of .Montfaurnn is:
ac lihi fm'idtts, ut a lommuni ilia rtiiJtnti>% ration* tt /x/#-


170


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXIV.


the detriment. For as virtue even from
things here was signified by Him to have her
rewards, so vice also her penalties. For
what I am ever saying, that I will say now
also: that in both ways He is everywhere
bringing about the salvation of His hearers,
on the one hand by zeal for virtue, on the
other by hatred of vice. Thus, because there
would be some to admire what He said, while
they yield no proof of it by their works, He
by anticipation awakens their fears, saying,
Though I he things spoken be good, hearing is
not sufficient for security, but there is need
also of obedience in actions, and the whole
lies chiefly in this. And here He ends His
discourse, leaving the fear at its height in
them.

For as with regard to virtue, not only from
the things to come did He urge them (speak-
ing of a kingdom, and of Heaven, and an un-
speakable reward, and comfort, and the un-
numbered good things): but also from the
things present, indicating the firm and im-
moveable quality of the Rock; so also with
respect to wickedness, not from the expected
things only doth He excite their fears (as
from the tree that is cut down, and the un-
quenchable fire, and the not entering into the
kingdom, and from His saying, " I know you
not ") : but also from the things present, the
downfall, I mean, in what is said of the
house.

4. Wherefore also He made His argument
more expressive, by trying its force ' in a par-
able; for it was not the same thing to say,
" The virtuous man shall be impregnable,
but the wicked easily subdued," as to sup-
pose a rock, and a house, and rivers, and
rain, and wind, and the like.

"And every one," saith He, " that heareth
these sayings of mine, and doeth them not,
shall be likened to a foolish man, which built
his house upon the sand.'^^

And well did He call this man " foolish ":
for what can be more senseless than one
building a house on the sand, and while he
submits to the labor, depriving himself of the
fruit and refreshment, and instead thereof
undergoing punishment? For that they too,
who follow after wickedness, do labor, is
surely manifest to every one; since both the
extortioner, and the adulterer, and the false
accuser, toil and weary themselves much to
bring their wickedness to effect; but so far
from reaping any profit from these their
labors, they rather undergo great loss. For
Paul too intimated this when he said, " He
that soweth to his flesh, shall of his flesh reap


I yvfivd^ujv.


2 Matt. vii. 26. [R. V., " these words."— R.]


corruption. " 3 To this man are they like
also, who build on the sand; as those that
are given up to fornication, to wantonness, to
drunkenness, to anger, to all the other things.

Such an one was Ahab, but not such Elijah
(since when we have put virtue and vice along
side of one another, we shall know more ac-
curately the difference): for the one had built
upon the rock, the other on the sand; where-
fore though he were a king, he feared and
trembled at the prophet, at him that had only
his sheepskin. Such were the Jews but not
the apostles; and so though they were few
and in bonds, they exhibited the steadfastness
of the rock; but those, many as they were, and
in armor, the weakness of the sand. For so
they said, "What shall we do to these men? " *
Seest thou those in perplexity, not who are in
the hands of others, and bound, but who are
active in holding down and binding? And
what can be more strange than this ? Hast
thou hold of the other, and art yet in utter
perplexity ? Yes, and very naturally. For in-
asmuch as they had built all on the sand,
therefore also were they weaker than all.
For this cause also they said again, "What
do ye, seeking to bring this man's blood upon
us? "5 What saith he? Dost thou scouge,
and art thou in fear? entreatest thou despite-
fully, and art in dismay? Dost thou judge,
and yet tremble ? So feeble is wickedness.

But the Apostles not so, but how ? " We
cannot but speak the things which we have
seen and heard. "^ Seest thou a noble
spirit ? seest thou a rock laughing waves to
scorn ? seest thou a house unshaken ? And
v/hat is yet more marvellous; so far from
turning cowards themselves at the plots formed
against them, they even took more courage,
and cast the others into greater anxiety.
For so he that smites adamant, is himself the
one smitten; and he that kicks against the
pricks, is himself the one pricked, the one
on whom the severe wounds fall: and he who
is forming plots against the virtuous, is him-
self the one in jeopardy. For wickedness
becomes so much the weaker, the more it
sets itself in array against virtue. And as
he who wraps up fire in a garment, extin-
guishes not the flame, but consumes the gar-
ment; so he that is doing despite to virtuous
men, and oppressing them, and binding
them, makes them more glorious, but de-
stroys himself.7 For the more ills thou suf-
ferest, living righteously, the stronger art
thou become; since the more we honor self-
restraint, the less we need anything; and the


3 Gal. vi. 8. 4 Acts iv. 16.

5 Acts V. 28. _ 6 Acts iv. 20.

7 [eauTof 5e i7<^a>'tcre, " but obliterates himself." — R.]


Homily XXV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


I/I


less we need anything, the stronger we grow,
and the more above all. Such a one was
John; wherefore him no man pained, but he
caused pain to Herod; so he that had nothing
prevailed against him that ruled; and he that
wore a diadem, and purple, and endless
pomp, trembles, and is in fear of him that is
stripped of all, and not even when beheaded
could he without fear see his head. For that
even after his death he had the terror of him
in full strength, hear what He saith, "This
is John, whom I slew." ' Now the expres-
sion, " I slew," is that of one not exulting,
but soothing his own terror, and persuading
his troubled soul to call to mind, that he him-
self slew him. So great is the force of virtue,
that even after death it is more powerful than
the living. For this same cause again, when
he was living, they that possessed much
wealth came unto him, and said, " What shall
we do ? " "^ Is so much yours, and are ye
minded to learn the way of your prosperity
from him that hath nothing? the rich from
the poor? the soldiers from him that hath
not even a house ?

Such an one was Elias too: wherefore also
with the same freedom did he discourse to
the people. For as the former said, "Ye
generation of vipers;''- so this latter, " How
long will ye halt unon both your hips?"'*
And the one said, " Hast thou killed, and in-
herited ? " 5 the other, " It is not lawful for
thee to have thy brother Philip's wife."*

Seest thou the rock ? Seest thou the sand;
how easily it sinks down, how it yields to
calamities ? how it is overthrown, though it


' Matt. xiv. 2 ; Luke ix. g. [The verb avei\ov, which occurs
here, is not found in the New Testament accounts of Herod's lan-
guage.—K.]

2 I.uke iii. lo, 14. 3 Matt. iii. 7.

* I Kings xviii. 21, lxx. 5 i Kings xxi. 19, LXX.

6 Mark vi. 18.


have the support of royalty, of number, of
nobility ? For them that pursue it, it makes
more senseless than all.

And it doth not merely fall, but with great
calamity: for "great indeed," He saith,
" was the fall of it." The risk not being of
trifles, but of the soul, of the loss of Heaven,
and those immortal blessings. Or rather
even before that loss, no life so wretched as
he must live that follows after this; dwelling
with continual despondencies, alarms, cares,
anxieties; which a certain wise man also was
intimating when he said, " The wicked fleeth,
when no man is pursuing."' For such men
tremble at their shadows, suspect their friends,
their enemies, their servants, such as know
them, such as know them not; and before
their punishment, suffer extreme punishment
here. And to declare all this, Christ said,
"And great was the fall of it;" shutting up
these good commandments with that suitable
ending, and persuading even by the things
present the most unbelieving to flee from
vice.

For although the argument from what is
to come be vaster, yet is this of more power
to restrain the grosser sort, and to withdraw
them from wickedness. Wherefore also he
ended with it, that the profit thereof might
make its abode in them.

Conscious therefore of all these things,
both the present, and the future, let us flee
from vice, let us emulate virtue, that we may
not labor fruitlessly and at random, but may
both enjoy the security here, and partake of
the glory there: unto which God grant we
may all attain, by the grace and love towards
man of our Ford Jesus Christ, to whom be
the glory and the mig'.it forever ami ever.
Amen.

7 Prov. xxviii. i.


HOMILY XXV.


Matt. VH. 2S.


"And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were astonished .it

His doctrine." '


Yet was it rather natural for them to grieve that many of them were even caught thereby,

at the unpleasantness of His sayings, and to and thrown into very great admiration, and

shudder at the loftiness of His injunctions; persuaded by reason of the sweetness of His

but now so great was the power of the Teacher, sayings, not even when He ceased to speak,

- to dejiart from Him :it all afterwards. For

» [R. v., "Whrn Jesus ended these word», the mullitudct were I ;i i-i ,1 IwTr/r*; <liMVirf Hf Invinir

Mtoni»hed.,thist.aching."-k.] [neither tlul the hearers ilcpart, lit, navmg


IJl


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXV.


come down from the mountain, but even then
the whole auditory followed Him; so great a
love for His sayings had He instilled into
them.

But they were astonished most of all at His
authority. For not with reference to another,
like the prophet and Moses, did He say what
He said; but everywhere indicating Himself
to be the person that had the power of decid-
ing. For so, when setting forth His laws, He
still kept adding, "But I say unto you."
And in reminding them of that day, He de-
clared Himself to be the judge, both by the
punishments, and by the honors.

And yet it was likely that this too would
disturb them. For if, when they saw Him
by His works showing forth His authority, the
scribes were for stoning and persecuting Him;
while there were words only to prove this,
how was it other than likely for them to be
offended ? and especially when at first setting
out these things were said, and before He
had given proof of His own power ? But
however, they felt nothing of this; for when
the heart and mind is candid, it is easily per-
suaded by the words of the truth. And this
is just why one sort, even when the miracles
were proclaiming His power, were offended;
while the other on hearing mere words were
persuaded and followed Him. This, I would
add, the evangelist too is intimating, when he
saith, "great multitudes followed Him,"'
not any of the rulers, nor of the scribes, but
as many as were free from vice, and had their
judgment uncorrupted. And throughout the
whole gospel thou seest that such clave unto
Him. For both while He spake, they used
to listen in silence, not making any intrusion,
nor breaking in upon the connexion of His
sayings, nor tempting Him, and desiring to
find a handle like the Pharisees; and after
His exhortation they followed Him again,
marvelling.

But do thou mark, I pray thee, the Lord's
consideration, how He varies the mode of
profiting His hearers, after miracles entering
on words, and again from the instruction by
His words passing to miracles. Thus, both
before they went up into the mountain. He
healed many, preparing the way for His say-
ings; and after finishmg that long discourse
to the people. He comes again to miracles,
confirming what had been said by what was
done. And so, because He was teaching as
" one having authority," lest His so teaching
should be thought boasting and arrogant, He
doth the very same in His works also, as hav-
ing authority to heal; that they might no

I Matt. viii. I.


more be perplexed at seeing Him teach in
this way, when He was working His miracles
also in the same.

2. " For when He was come down from
the mountain, there came a leper, saying,
Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou canst make me
clean." ^ Great was the understanding and
the faith of him who so drew near. For he
did not interrupt the teaching, nor break
through the auditory, but awaited the proper
time, and approaches Him "when He is
come down." And not at random, but with
much earnestness, and at His knees, he be-
seeches Him, 3 as another evangelist saith,
and with the genuine faith and right opinion
about him. For neither did he say, " If
Thou request it of God," nor, "If Thou
pray," but, " If Thou wilt, Thou canst make
me clean.'' Nor did he say. " Lord, cleanse
me,'' but leaves all to Him, and makes His
recovery depend on Him, and testifies that
all the authority is His

"What then," saith one, "if the leper's
opinion was mistaken ? " It were meet to do
away with it, and to reprove, and set it right.
Did He then so do? By no means; but
quite on the contrary, He establishes and
confirms what had been said. For this cause,
you see, neither did He say, "Be thou
cleansed," but, " I will, be thou clean; " that
the doctrine might no longer be a thing of
the other's surmising, but of His own ap-
proval.

But the apostles not so: rather in what way?
The whole people being in amazement, they
said, "Why give heed to us, as though by
our own power or authority we had made him
to walk ? " "t But the Lord, though He spake
oftentimes many things modestly, and be-
neath His own glory, what saith He here, to
establish the doctrine of them that were
amazed at Him for His authority? " I will,
be thou clean." Although in the many and
great signs which He wrought, He nowhere
appears to have uttered this word. Here
however, to confirm the surmise both of all
the people and of the leper touching His
authority, He purposely added, " I will."

And it was not that He said this, but did it
not; but the work also followed immediately.
Whereas, if he had not spoken well, but the
saying had been a blasphemy, the work ought
to have been interrupted. But now nature her-
self gave way at His command, and that
speedily, as was meet, even more speedily


2 Matt. vii. 2. [The first clause is from verse i ; and the pas-
sages are joined to point the lesson from the assumed delay. But
there can be little doubt that the healing of the leper took place
earlier. Comp. Mark i. 40-42 ; Luke v. 12-16. — R.]

3 Mark i. 40. Comp. Luke v. 12.

4 Acts iii. 12. [The New Testament passage has been modified
in the citation. — R.]


Homily XXV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


173


than the evangelist hath said. For the word, .
"immediately," falls far short of the quick-'
ness that there was in the work.

But He did not merely say, " I will, be
thou clean," but He also "put forth His
hand, and touched him;" a thing especially
worthy of inquiry. For wherefore, when
cleansing him by will and word, did He add
also the touch of His hand ? It seems to me,
for no other end, but that He might signify
by this also, that He is not subject to the
law, but is set over it; and that to the clean,
henceforth, nothing is unclean.' For this
cause, we see, Elisha did not so much as see
Naaman, but though he perceived that he was '
offended at his not coming out and touching
him, observing the strictness of the law, he
abides at home, and sends him to Jordan to
wash. Whereas the Lord, to signify that He
heals not as a servant, but as absolute mas-
ter, doth also touch. For His hand became
not unclean from the leprosy, but the leprous
body was rendered clean by His holy hand.

Because, as we know, He came not to heal
bodies only, but also to lead the soul unto
self-command. As therefore He from that
time forward no more forbad to eat with un-
washen hands, introducing that excellent law,
which relates to the indifference of meats;
just so in this case also, to instruct us for the
future, that the soul must be our care; — that
leaving the outward purifications, we must
wipe that clean, and dread the leprosy thereof
alone, which is sin (for to be a leper is no
hindrance to virtue): — He Himself first
touches the leper, and no man finds fault.
For the tribunal was not corrupt, neither were
the spectators under the i)ower of envy.
Therefore, so far from blaming, they were on
the contrary astonished at the miracle, and
yielded thereto: and both for what He said,
and for what He did, they adored his uncon-
trollable power.

3. Having therefore healed his body, He
bids him,

" Tell no man, but show himself to the
priest, and offer the gift that Moses com-
manded, for a testimony unto them." -

Now some say, that for this intent He
bade him tell no man, that they might prac-
tise no craft about tlie discerning of his cure;
a very foolish suspicion on tiieir part. For
He did not so cleanse as to leave the cleans-
ing questionable, but He bids him "tell no
man," teaching us to avoid boasting and
vainglory. And yet He well knew that tiie
other would not oi)cy, but would proclaim his
benefactor: nevertheless He doth 1 1 is own
part.


< Titus i. 15.


> Matt. viii. 4


" How then elsewhere doth He bid them
tell of it?" one may ask. Not as jostling
with or opposing Himself, but as teaching
men to be grateful; For neither in that place
did He give command to proclaim Himself,
but to "give glory to God;"^ by this leper
training us to be clear of pride and vainglory,
by the other to be thankful and grateful; and
instructing on every occasion to offer to the
Lord the praise of all things that befall us.
That is, because men for tlie most part re-
member God in sickness, but grow slacker
after recovery; He bids them continually
both in sickness and in health to give heed to
the Lord, in these words, "give glory to
God."

But wherefore did He command him also
to show himself to the priest, and to offer a
gift? To fulfill the law here again.* For
neither did He in every instance set it aside,
nor in every instance keep it, but sometimes
He did the one, sometimes the other; by the
one making way for the high rule^ of life that
was to come, by the other checking for a
while the insolent speech of the Jews, and
condescending to their infirmity. And why
marvel, if just at the beginning He Himself
did this, when even the very apostles, after
they were commanded to depart unto the
Gentiles, after the doors were opened for
their teaching throughout the world, and the
law shut up, and the commandments made
new, and all the ancient things had ceased,
are found sometimes observing the law, some-
times neglecting it ?

But what, it may be said, doth this saying,
"Show thyself to the priest,'' contribute to
the keeping of the law? No little. Because
it was an ancient law, that the leper when
cleansed should not entrust to himself the
judgment of his cleansing, but should show
himself to the priest, and present the demon-
stration thereof to his eyes, and by that sen-
tence be numbered amongst the clean. For
if the priest said not " The leper is cleansed,"
he remained still with tiie unclean witliout the
camp. Wherefore he saith, " Show thyself
to the priest, and offer the gift that .Moses
commanded." He said not, "which I com-
mand," but for a time remits him to the
law, by every means stopping tlieir mouths.
Thus, lest they shouki say, He had seized
upon the priests' honor; though He per-
formed the work Himself, yet the approving
it He entrusted to tiiem, and made tliem sit
as judges of His own miracles " ^^ hy, I

ll.ukexvii. 18. lThi< it the pnnntre prohahly rrfcnrd to.
I he < ).v(iir€l cditiDil rrtrr* In l.iikr vii. lU, unci llic I^iliii vrniull
111 Jnlict ix. J4, wlirrc tlic rx.ict phiifir iKcum, but in the luuuth*
of Chi


'hri«t'» u|>p<Mcrs. — K.]
4 Ixv, xiv. i-ja.


S ^lAotfo^tf ,


174


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXV.


am so far," He saith, " from striving either
with Moses or with the priests, that I guide
the objects of my favor to submit themselves
unto them."

But what is, " for a testimony unto them '' ?
For reproof, for demonstration, for accusa-
tion, if they be unthankful. For since they
said, as a deceiver and impostor we persecute
Him, as an adversary of God, and a trans-
gressor of the law; " Thou shalt bear me wit-
ness," saith He, " at that time, that I am not
a transgressor of the law. Nay, for having
healed thee, I remit thee to the law, and to
the approval of the priests;'' which was the
act of one honoring the law, and admiring
Moses, and not setting himself in opposition
to the ancient doctrines.

And if they were not in fact to be the bet-
ter, hereby most of all one may perceive His
respect for the law, that although He fore-
knew they would reap no benefit. He fulfilled
all His part. For this very thing He did in-
deed foreknow, and foretold it: not saying,
" for their correction," neither, " for their in-
struction," but, " for a testimony unto them,''
that is, for accusation, and for reproof, and
for a witness that all hath been done on my
part; and though I foreknew they would con-
tinue incorrigible, not even so did I omit
what ought to be done; only they continued
keeping up to the end their own wickedness.'

This, we may observe. He saith elsewhere
also; "This gospel shall be preached in all
the world for a testimony to all the nations,
and then shall the end come;"'' to the
nations, to them that obey not, to them that
believe not. Thus, lest any one should say,
"And wherefore preach to all, if all are not
to believe ? " — it is that I may be found to have
done all my own part, and that no man may
hereafter be able to find fault, as though he
had not heard. For the very preaching shall
bear witness against them, and they will not
be able hereafter to say, "We heard not;"
for the word of godliness " hath gone out
unto the ends of the world. "^

4. Therefore bearing these things in mind,
let us also fulfill all our duties to our neigh-
bor, and to God let us give thanks continually.
For it is too monstrous, enjoying as we do
His bounty in deed every day, not so much
as in word to acknowledge the favor; and
this, though the acknowledgment again yield
all its profit to us. Since He needs not, be
sure, anything of ours: but we stand in need
of all things from Him. Thus thanksgiving


1 [This interpretation is scarcely admissible, nor does Chrysos-
tom notice the disobedience of the healed man (Mark i. 45). The
" testimony " is that commanded by Moses. — R.]

2 Matt. xxiv. 14 3 Ps. xix 4 ; Rom. x. 18.


itself adds nothing to Him, but causes us to
be nearer to Him. For if men's bounties,
when we call them to memory, do the more
warm us with their proper love-charm; * much
more when we are continually bringing to
mind the noble acts of our Lord towards us,
shall we be more diligent in regard of His
commandments.

For this cause Paul also said, " Be ye
thankful.'' 5 for the best preservative of any
benefit is the remembrance of the benefit,
and a continual thanksgiving.

For this cause even the awful mysteries, so
full of that great salvation, which are cele-
brated at every communion, are called a sac-
rifice of thanksgiving,* because they are the
commemoration of many benefits, and they
signify the very sum of God's care for us,
and by all means they work upon us to be
thankful. For if His being born of a virgin
was a great miracle, and the evangelist said
in amaze, "now all this was done;" His
being also slain, what place shall we find for
that ? tell me. I mean, if to be lx)rn is called
" all this;" to be crucified, and to pour forth
His blood, and to give Himself to us for a
spiritual feast and banquet, — what can that
be called ? Let us therefore give Him thanks
continually, and let this precede both our
words and our works.

But let us be thankful not for our own bless-
ings alone, but also for those of others; for
in this way we shall be able both to destroy
our envy, and to rivet our charity, and make
it more genuine. Since it will not even be
possible for thee to go on envying them, in
behalf of whom thou givest thanks to the
Lord.

Wherefore, as you know, the priest also
enjoins to give thanks for the world, for the
former things, for the things that are now,
for what hath been done to us before, for
what shall befall us hereafter, when that sac-
rifice 7 is set forth.

For this is the thing both to free us from
earth, and to remove us into heaven, and to
make us angels instead of men. Because
they too form a choir, and give thanks to God
for His good things bestowed on us, saying,
" Glory to God in the highest, and on earth
peace, good will towards men." ^ "And what
is this to us, that are not upon earth, nor are
men ? " " Nay, it'is very much to us, for we
have been taught so to love our fellow serv-


4 Ttu ^ikrpijy.

6 , '


5 Col. iii. 15.


evxapi.<TTia. [The translator has paraphrased the passage
charist. " Ihere is no suggest


Literally, " which are at every assembly (crvva^iv), are called Eu-
irist. ' There is no suggestion of " sacrifice " in the Greek at
this point. — R.]


7 [Here the word meaning " sacrifice " is used. — R.]

8 Luke ii. 14. [The form is that of the received text ; but
' among men " is the correct rendering even of this reading. — R.]


Homily XXV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


^75


ants, as even to account their blessings
ours/'

Wherefore Paul also, everywhere in his
epistles, gives thanks for God's gracious acts
to the world.

Let us too therefore continually give
thanks, for our own blessings, and for those
of others, alike for the small and for the
great. For though the gift be small, it is
made great by being God's gift, or rather,
there is nothing small that cometh from Him,
not only because it is bestowed by Him, but
also in its very nature.

And to pass over all the rest, which exceed
the sand in multitude; what is equal to the
dispensation ' that hath taken place for our
sake ? In that what was more precious to
Him than all, even His only-begotten Son,
Him He gave for us His enemies; and not
only gave, but after giving, did even set
Him before us as food;- Himself doing all
things that were for our good, both in giving
Him, and in making us thankful for all this.
For because man is for the most part un-
thankful, He doth Himself everywhere take
in hand and bring about what is for our good.
And what He did with respect to the Jews, by
places, and times, and feasts, reminding them
of His benefits, that He did in this case also,
by the manner of the sacrifice bringing us to
a perpetual remembrance of His bounty in
these things.

No one hath so labored that we should be
approved, and great, and in all things right-
minded, as the God who made us. Where-
fore both against our will He befriends us
often, and without our knowledge oftener
than not. And if thou marvel at what I have
said, I point to this as having occurred not to
any ordinary person, but to the blessed Paul.
For even that l)lessed man, when in much
danger and affliction, often besought God that
the temptations might depart from him:
nevetheless God regarded not his request,
but his profit, and to signify this He said,
" My grace is sufficient for thee, for my
strength is made perfect in weakness." ^ So
that before He hath told liim tlie reason, He
benefits him against his will, and without his
knowing it.

5. Now whit great thing doth He ask, in
requiring us to be thankful in return for such
tender care ? Let us then obey, and every-
where kejL'p up this. Since neither were the
Jews by anytliing ruined so mucli, as by being
unthankful; those many stripes, one after
another, were brought upon them by nothing
else than this; or rather even before those


stripes this had ruined and corrupted their
I soul. "For the hope of the unthankful,"
saith one, " is like the winter's hoar frost; " *
it benumbs and deadens the soul, as that doth
our bodies.

And this springs from pride, and from
thinking one's self worthy of something.
But the contrite will acknowledge grounds of
thanksgiving to God, not for good things
only, but also for what seem to be adverse;
and how much soever he may suffer, will
count none of his sufferings undeserved.
Let us then also, the more we advance in
virtue, so much the more make ourselves
contrite; for indeed this, more than anything
else is virtue. Because, as the sharper our
sight is, the more thoroughly do we learn how
distant we are from the sky; so the more we
advance in virtue, so much the more are we
instructed in the difference between God and
us. And this is no small part of true wis-
dom,= to be able to perceive our own desert.
For he best knows himself, who accounts
himself to be nothing. Thus we see that
both David and Abraham, when they were
come up to the highest pitch of virtue, then
best fulfilled this; and would call themselves,
the one, "earth and ashes,''* the other, "a
worm;" 7 and all the saints too, like these,
acknowledge their own wretchedness. So
that he surely who is lifted up in boasting, is
the very person to be most ignorant of him-
self. Wherefore also in our common practice
we are wont to say of the proud, " he knows
not himself," "he is ignorant of himself."
And he that knows not himself, whom will he
know? For as he that knows himself will
know all things, so he who knows not this,
neither will he know the rest.

Such an one was he that saith, " I will exalt
my throne above the Heavens."* Being
ignorant of himself, he was ignorant of all
else. But not so Paul; he rather used to call
himsf^lf "one born out of due time," 'and
last of the saints,'" and did not account him-
self to be worthy so much as of the title of
the apostles, after so many and so great
deeds of goodness.

Him therefore let us emulate and follow.
.\nd we shall follow him, if we rid ourselves
of earth, and of things on eartli. For noth-
ing makes a man to be so ignorant of himself,
as the being rivetted to worldly concerns:
nor does anything again so much cause men
to be rivetted to worldly concerns, as igno-
rance of one's self: for these things depend
upon each other. I mean, that as he that is
fond of outward glory, and highly esteems


1 oiKovonia^.


Tpairtiav, it tabic.


1 a Cor. xii. 9.


4 WJMlom xvi. 3

7 l'«. ii. 7.

9 I Cor. XV. 8, 9


ii«


^ ^lAoiriM^iat. '' (Irn. xviii. •.•7

. XIV. I t, Tufft' atrrip^uy rov oi'ptiKoO, I \\.
•" l-'.ph. iii. 8, i\a)^iaTor*(>of, here iaxaroy.


176


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVI.


the things present, if he strive for ever, is
not permitted to understand himself; so he
that overlooks these things will easily know
himself; and having come to the knowledge
of himself, he will proceed in order to all the
other parts of virtue.

In order therefore that we may learn this
good knowledge, let us, disengaged from all
the perishable things that kindle in us so


great flame, and made aware of their vileness,
show forth all lowliness of mind, and self-
restraint: that we may attain unto blessings,
both present and future: by the grace and
love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with whom be glory, might, and honor, to the
Father, together with the Holy and Good
Spirit, now and ever, and world without end.
Amen.


HOMILY XXVI.

Matt. VHI. 5.

"And when He was entered into Capernaum, there came unto Him a centurion, beseeching
Him, and saying. Lord, my servant lieth at home ' sick of the palsy, grievously tor-
mented."


The leper came unto Him "when He was
come down from the mountain," but this
centurion, " when He was entered into Caper-
naum." Wherefore then did neither the one
nor the other go up into the mountain ? Not
out of remissness, for indeed the faith of
them both was fervent, but in order not to
interrupt His teaching.

But having come unto Him, he saith,
" My servant lieth at home sick of the palsy,
grievously tormented." Now some say, that
by way of excuse he mentioned also the
cause, why he had not brought him. " For
neither was it possible," saith he, " paralyzed
as he was, and tormented, and at his last
gasp, to lift and convey him." For that he
was at the point of expiring, Luke saith;
" He was even ready to die. "^ But I say,
this is a sign of his having great faith, even
much greater than theirs, who let one down
through the roof.^ For because he knew for
certain, that even a mere command was
enough for the raising up of the patient, he
thought it superfluous to bring him.

What then doth Jesus ? What He had in
no case done before, here He doeth. For
whereas on every occasion He was used to
follow the wish of His supplicants, here He
rather springs toward it, and offers not only
to heal him, but also to come to the house.


1 [R. v., " in the house."]

2 Luke vii. 2. [R. V., " and at the point of death ; /cac in the
citation means "and," not "even." — R.]

3 Luke V. 19.


And this He doth, that we might learn the
virtue of the centurion. For if He had not
made this offer, but had said, "Go thy way,
let thy servant be healed;" we should have
known none of these things.

This at least He did, in an opposite way,
in the case also of the Phoenician woman.
For here, when not summoned to the house,
of His own accord He saith, He will come,
that thou mightest learn the centurion's faith
and great humility; but in the case of the
Phoenician woman. He both refuses the grant,
and drives her, persevering therein, to great
perplexity."

For being a wise physician and full of re-
sources, He knows how to bring about con-
traries the one by the other.'* And as here
by His freely-offered coming, so there by His
peremptory putting off and denial. He unfolds
the woman's faith. So likewise He doth in
Abraham's case, saying, " I will by no means
hide from Abraham my servant; "^ to make
thee know that man's kindly affection, and
his care for Sodom. And in the instance of
Lot,^ they that were sent refuse to enter into
his house, to make thee know the greatness
of that righteous man's hospitality.

What then saith the centurion ? "I am
not worthy that thou shouldest come under
my roof." ' Let us hearken, as many as are

4 Sta Tu)!/ ivavTi<i>v to. evdvTia. The argument seems to require
ra. aiiTa, "the same things by opposite means:" but no MS. au-
thority appears for such a change.

5 Gen. xviii. 17 [i.xx.]. 6 Gen. xix. 2. 7 Matt. viii. 8.


Homily XXVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


1/7


to receive Christ: for it is possible to receive
Him even now. Let us hearken, and emu-
late, and receive Him with as jjreat zeal; for
indeed, when thou receivest a poor man who
is hungry and naked, thou hast received and
cherished Him.

2. " But say in a word only,' and my serv-
ant shall be healed."

See this man also, how, like the leper, he
hath the right opinion touching Him. For
neither did this one say, '' entreat," nor did
he say, "pray, and beseech," but "com-
mand only," And then from fear lest out of
modesty He refuse. He saith,

"For I also am a man under authority,
having under me soldiers; and I say to this
man, go, and he goeth; and to another, come,
and he cometh; and to my servant, do this,
and he doeth it." =

"And what of that," saith one, "if the
centurion did suspect it to be so ? For the
question is, whether Christ afifirmed and rati-
fied as much." Thou speakest well, and
very sensibly. Let us then look to this very
thing; and we shall find what happened in
the case of the leper, the same happening
here likewise. For even as the leper said,
" If thou wilt " (and not from the leper only
are we positive about His authority, but also
from the voice of Christ; in that, so far
from putting an end to the suspicion, He did
even confirm it more, by adding what were
else superfluous to say, in the phrase, " I
will, be thou cleansed," in order to establish
that man's doctrine): so here too, it is right
to see whether any such thing occurred. In
fact, we shall find this same thing again tak-
ing place. For when the centurion had
spoken such words, and had testified His so
great prerogative; so far from blaming. He
did even approve it, and did somewhat more
than approve it. For neither hath the evan-
gelist said, that He praised the saying only,
but declaring a certain earnestness in His
praise, that He even "marvelled;" and
neither did He simply marvel, but in the,
presence also of the whole people, and set]
Him as an example to the rest, that they
should emulate Him.

Seest thou how eacli of them that bore wit-
ness of His authority is " marvelled at ? And
the multitudes were astonished at His doc-
trine, because He taught as one having
authority; "' and so far from blaming them.
He both took tliein witli Him when He came
down, and by His words of cleansing to the
leper, confirmed their judgment. Again,

» [R. v., " only «ay the word." " Or. with a word." Chry»o»-
tom viirirs from the order, placing " only " lost. K,]

'' Matt. viii. 4. ] Mutt. vii. 39,

iv;


that leper said, " If thou wilt, thou canst
make me clean; " * and so far from rebuking,
He on the contrary cleansed him by such
treatment as He had said. Again, this cen-
turion saith, " Speak the word only, and my
servant shall be healed: '' ^ and " marvelling "
at him. He said, '* I have not found so great
faith, no, not in Israel."^

Now, to convince thee of this by the oppo-
site also; Martha having said nothing of this
sort, but on the contrary, "Whatsoever thou
wilt ask of God, He will give Thee; "' so far
from being praised, although an acquaint-
ance, and dear to Him, and one of them that
had shown great zeal toward Him, she was
rather rebuked and corrected by Him, as not
having spoken well; in that He said to her,
" Said I not unto chee, that if thou wouldest
believe, thou shouldest see the glory of
God ? " * blaming her, as though she did not
even yet believe. And again, because she
had said, " Whatsoever Thou wilt ask of God,
He will give Thee;" to lead her away from
such a surmise, and to teach her that He
needs not to receive from another, but is
Himself the fountain of all good things, He
saith, " I am the resurrection and the life; " »
that is to say, *' I wait not to receive active
power," but work all of myself."

Wherefore at the centurion He both mar-
vels, and prefers him to all the people, anti
honors him with the gift of the kingdom,
and provokes the rest to the same zeal.
And to show thee that for this end He so
spake, 2'i::. for the instructing of the rest to
believe in like manner, listen to the exact-
ness of the evangelist, how he hath intimated
it. For,

"Jesus," saith He, "turned Him about,
and said to them that followed Him, I have
not found so great faith, no, not in Israel.""

It follows, that to have high imaginations
concerning Him, this esjiecially is of faith,
antl tends to procure the kingdom ami His
other blessings. For neither ditl His jiraise
reach to words only, but He both rcstoretl
the sick man whole, in recompence of his
faith, and weaves for him a glorious crown,
and promises great gifts, saying on this wise,

" Many shall come from the east and west,
and shall sit down in tlie bosoms of Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob; but the cliildrt-n of
the kingdom shall be cast out."'-


•4 Matt. viii. 3. ^ Mult. viii. 8.

* Malt. viii. lo. [The readioK <>( the r<>ccivc«l Irxt ih found
hrrr. Coll))), k. v. inurt^in for the rrudint; of ihe Valicun M>.,
niccplril l>y Aiinii^lin. K.]

7 John xi ;j. * John x\. 40.

9 lotiii xi. -'S. *^^4ytpy«iav.

" Nl.iti \iii. 10. Comp. I tiLr \ii. ii. (" Tiiriinl hiiii about. "
ffTpai^cK, m lukcn from ihr luiirr [wni-ii;'* K.]

■'■Matt. viii. II. I.' (K<>r"wilh" l'hr)-*u«lom (ubntitutet " in


178


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVI.


Thus, since He had shown many miracles,
He proceeds to talk with them more unre-
servedly.

Then, that no one might suppose His
words to come of flattery, but that all might
be aware that such was the mind of the cen-
turion. He saith,

"Go thy way; as thou hast believed, so be
it done unto thee." '

And straightway the work followed, bear-
ing witness to his character.^

"And his servant was healed from that
hour."

Which was the result in the case of the
Syrophoenician woman also; for to her too
He saith, "O woman, great is thy faith; be
it unto thee even as thou wilt. And her
daughter was made whole." ^

3. But since Luke, also relating this mira-
cle, inserts by the way a good many other
things, which seem to indicate some disagree-
ment; these too must be explained by us.

What then saith Luke ? He sent elders of
the Jews unto Him entreating Him to come.'*
But Matthew saith, that he approached him-
self, and said, " I am not worthy." And
some indeed say, the one is not the, same as
the other, though they have many points of
resemblance. Thus, of the one it is said,
that " He both hath builded our synagogue,
and loveth our nation; " = but concerning this
other Jesus Himself saith, " I have not found
so great faith, no not in Israel.'' And touch-
ing the former. He did not say, " many shall
come from the east;'' whence it is likely that
he was a Jew.

What then are we to say ? That this solu-
tion is indeed easy, but the question is,
whether it be true. To me this one seems
to be the same as the other. How then, it
may be asked, doth Matthew relate, that he
himself said, "I am not worthy that thou
shouldest come under my roof," but Luke,
that he sent for Christ to come ? To me
Luke seems to be intimating to us the flattery
of the Jews; and that persons in affliction,
being unsettled, form to themselves many
different counsels. For it is likely that the
centurion, when he wished to have gone, was
stopped by the Jews, flattering him, and say-
ing, " We will go and bring Him."

See at least that even their entreaty is full
of flattering. " For He loveth our nation"
(so it runs), " and our synagogue He
builded:"* neither know they for what to
praise the man. For whereas they ought to


the bosom of " (eis tous icdAjrovs), commenting upon the term be-
low (sec. 5). There is no authority for this reading, so far as now
known. — R.]

■ Matt. viii. 13. ^ Tjj TrpoaipcVei. 3 Matt. xv. 28.

4 Luke vii. 2. 5 Luke vii. 5. 6 Luke vii. 5.


have said. He was minded himself to come
and entreat Thee, " but we forbad him, see-
ing his affliction, and the calamity lying upon
his house; " and so they should have set forth
the greatness of his faith; this they say not,
for neither were they willing, for envy, to
declare the man's faith: but they chose rather
to cast a shade over his virtue, for whom
they had come to make their supplication,
lest He who was entreated, should seem to be
some great one; than by proclaiming the
other's faith, to accomplish that for which
they had come. For envy is enough to blind
the understanding. But He who knows the
secret things, even against their will pro-
clairred that centurion.

And that this is true, hear Luke himself
again, interpreting it. For he himself saith
on this wise : "When He was rjow not far
off, he sent, saying, O Lord, trouble not
Thyself: for I am not worthy that Thou
shouldest enter under my roof." ^ That is,
when he was freed from their importunity, then
he sends, saying, " Think not it was for sloth
that I came not, but I accounted myself un-
worthy to receive Thee in my house." And
if Matthew saith that not by his friends, but
by himself did he say this; that proves* noth-
ing; for the question is, whether each of them
has set before us the zealousness of the man,
and his having had the right opinion concern-
ing Christ. But it is likely, that after send-
ing his friends, he himself also came and said
these things. And if Luke did not speak of
the one, no more did Matthew of the other;
and this is not the part of men disagreeing
amongst themselves, but rather of those that
are filling up the things omitted by one
another. But see by another thing also how
Luke hath proclaimed his faith, saying that
his servant " was ready to die. " ' Neverthe-
less, not even this cast him into despondency,
neither did it cause him to give up: but even
so he trusted that he should prevail. And if
Matthew affirm Christ to have said, " I have
not found so great faith, no, not in Israel,"
and hereby to show clearly that he was not
an Israelite; while Luke saith, " He built our
synagogue;'' neither is this a contradiction.
For it was possible for one, even though not
a Jew, both to build the synagogue, and to
love the nation.

4. But do not thou, I pray thee, merely
inquire what was said by him, but add there-
to nis rank also, and then thou wilt see the
man's excellency. Because in truth great
is the pride of them that are in places of com-
mand, and not even in afflictions do they take


7 Luke vii. 6.


9 Luke vii. 2.


HOMII.Y XXVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


179


lower ground. He, for example, who is set
down in John, is for dragging Him unto his
house, and saith, " Come down, for my child
is ready to die."' But not so this man;
rather he is far superior both to him, and to
those who let down the bed through the roof.
For he seeks not for His bodily presence,
neither did He bring the sick man near the
physician; a thing which implied no mean
imaginations concerning Him, but rather a
suspicion of His divine dignity. And he
saith, "speak the word only.'' And at the
beginning he saith not even, "speak the
word," but only describe his affliction : for
neither did he, of great humility, expect that
Christ would straightway consent, and in-
<iuire for his house. Therefore, when he
heard Him say, " I will come and heal him,"
then, not before, he saith, " speak the word."
Nor yet did the suffering confound him, but
still under calamity he reasons coolly,^ not
looking so much to the health of the servant,
as to the avoiding all appearance of doing
-anything irreverent.

And yet it was not he that pressed it, but
•Christ that offered it: nevertheless even so he
feared, lest perchance he should be thought
to be going beyond his own deservings, and
to be drawing upon himself a thing above his
strength. 3 Seest thou his wisdom ? Mark
the folly of the Jews, in saying, "He was
worthy for whom He should do the favor."*
For when they should have taken refuge in
the love of Jesus towards man, they rather
allesre this man's worthiness; and know not
so much as on what ground to allege it.
But not so he, but he affirmed himself even
in the utmost degree unworthy, not only of
the benefit, but even of receiving the Lord in
his house. Wherefore even when he said,
"My servant lieth sick,'' he did not add,
" speak," for fear lest he should be unworthy
to obtain the gift; but he merely made known
his affliction. And when he saw Christ zeal-
ous in His turn, not even so did he spring
forward, but still continues to keep to the end
his own proper measure.

And if any one should say, "wherefore
did not Christ honor liim in return?" we
would say this, that He did make return to
him in honor, and that exceedingly: first by
bringing out his mind, wiiich thing chiefly
appeared by His not coming to his house;
and in the second place, by introducing him
into His kingdom, and preferring him to the
whole Jewish nation. For because he made
himself out unworthy even to receive Christ
into his house, he became worthy both of a


■ John iv. 49.
1 Papii npayna.


* l.iikr vii. 4


kingdom, and of attaining unto those good
things which Abraham enjoyed.

" But wherefore," one may say, " was not
the leper commended, who showed forth
things greater than these ? " For he did not
so much as say, " speak the word," but what
was far more, "be willing only," which is
what the prophet saith concerning the
Father, "He hath done whatsoever He
pleased." 5 But he also was commended.
For when He said, " Offer the gift that Moses
commanded, for a testimony unto them,''*
He means nothing else but, "thou shall be
an accuser of them, in that thou didst be-
lieve." And besides, it was not the same
for one that was a Jew to believe, and for one
from without that nation. For that the cen-
turion was not a Jew is evident, both from his
being a centurion and from its being said,
" I have not found so great faith, no, not in
Israel." And it was a very great thing for a
man who was out of the list of the Jewish
people to admit so great a thought. For he
did no less than imagine to himself, as it
seems to me, the armies in Heaven; or that
the diseases and death, and everything else,
were so tsubject to Him, as his soldiers to
himself.

Wherefore he said likewise, " For I also
am a man set under authority;'' that is.
Thou art God, and I man; I under authority,
but Thou not under authority. If I there-
fore, being a man, and under authority, can
do so much; far more He, both as God, and
as not under authority. Tluis with the
strongest expression He desires to convince
Him, that he saith this, as one giving not a
similar example, but one far exceeding. For
if I (said he), being equal in honor to them
whom I command, and under authority, yet
by reason of the trifling superiority of my
rank am ab'e to do such great things; and no
man contradicts me, but what I command,
that is done, though the injunctions be vari-
ous (" for I say to this man, go, and he
goetli; and (o another, come, and he com-
eth":') much more wilt Thou Thyself he
able.

And some actually read tlie |ilace in this
way, " For if I, being a man,'' and having
inserted a stop, they add, "having soldiers
under authority under nic."

liut mark tlioii, I pray thee, how he signi-
fied that C'hrist is able both to overcome even
deatli as a slave, and to command it as its
m.ister. For in saying, "come, ami he coni-
etli," and "go, and he goeth;" he exj^resses
this: "If Thou shouldcsl command his end
not to come upon him, it will not come."

$ P». cxv .3. ' M«ll. viii. 4. 7 Man. viii. 9.


i8o


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVI.


Seest thou how believing he was ? For
that which was afterwards to be manifest to
all, here is one who already hath made it
evident; that He hath power both of death
and of life, and " leadeth down to the gates
of hell, and bringeth up again/' ' Nor was
he speaking of soldiers only, but also of
slaves; which related to a more entire obedi-
ence.

5, But nevertheless, though having such
great faith, he still accounted himself to be
unworthy. Christ however, signifying that
he was worthy to have Him enter into his
house, did much greater things, marvelling
at him, and proclaiming him, and giving
more than he had asked. For he came in-
deed seeking for his servant health of body,
but went away, having received a kingdom.
Seest thou how the saying had been already
fulfilled, "Seek ye the kingdom of heaven,
and all these things shall be added unto
you." ^ For, because he evinced great faith,
and lowliness of mind, He both gave him
heaven, and added unto him health.

And not by this alone did He honor him,
but also by signifying upon whose casting out
he is brought in. For now from this time
forth He proceeds to make known to all,
that salvation is by faith, not by works of the
law. And this is why not to Jews only, but
to Gentiles also the gift so given shall b'e
proffered, and to the latter rather than to the
former. For "think not," saith He, "by
any means, that so it hath come to pass in
regard of this man alone; nay, so it shall be
in regard of the whole world. And this He
said, prophesying of the Gentiles, and sug-
gesting to them good hopes. For in fact
there were some following Him from Galilee
of the Gentiles. And this He said, on the
one hand, not letting the Gentiles despair, on
the other, putting down the proud spirits of
the Jews.

But that His saying might not affront ^ the
hearers, nor afford them any handle; He
neither brings forward prominently what He
hath to say of the Gentiles, but upon occasion
taken from the centurion; nor doth He use
nakedly the term, Gentiles: not saying,
"many of the Gentiles," but, "many from
east and west: "'' which was the language of
one pointing out the Gentiles, but did not so
much affront the hearers, because His mean-
ing was under a shadow.

Neither in this way only doth He soften
the apparent novelty of His doctrine, but also

1 1 Sam. xxvi.

2 Matt. vi. 33. [Comp. Horn. XXII. 4, p. 148, on the reading
"kingdom of heaven." — R.]

3 Trpoo'CTTrji'ai, " disagree with, be nauseous to."
■t Matt. viii. 11.


by speaking of "Abraham's bosom" instead
of "the kingdom," For neither was that
term familiar to them:^ moreover, the intro-
duction of Abraham would be a sharper sting
to them. Wherefore John also spake noth-
ing at first concerning hell, but, what was
most apt to grieve them. He saith, "Think
not to say, we are children of Abraham."*

He is providing for another point also; not
to seem in any sense opposed to the ancient
polity. For he that admires the patriarchs,
and speaks of their bosom as an inheritance
of blessings, doth much more than sufficiently
remove also this suspicion.

Let no man therefore suppose that the
threat is one only, for both the punishment
of the one and the joy of the other is double:
of the one, not only that they fell away, but
that they fell away from their own; of the
other, not only that they attained, but that
they attained what they had no expectation
of: and there is a third together with these,
that the one received what pertained to the
other. And he calls them "children of the
kingdom," for whom the kingdom had been
prepared: which also more than all was apt to
gall them; in that having pointed to them as
being in their bosom by His offer and prom-
ise, after all He puts them out.

6. Then, because what He had said was
mere affirmation. He confirms it by the mir-
acle; as indeed He shows the miracles in
their turn, by the subsequent accomplishment
of the prediction. He accordingly, who dis-
believes the health which the servant then re-
ceived, let him from the prophecy, which
hath this day come to pass, believe that other
also. For so that prophecy again, even be-
fore the event, was made manifest to all by
the sign which then took place. To this end,
you see, having first uttered that, prediction,
then and not before He raised up the sick of
the palsy; that He might make the future
credible by the present, and the less by the
greater. Since for virtuous men to enjoy His
good things, and for the contrary sort to un-
dergo His penalties, were nothing improba-
ble, but a reasonable event, and according to
the tenor of laws: but to brace up the feeble,
and to'raise the dead, was something beyond
nature.

But nevertheless, unto this great and mar-
vellous work the centurion too contributed no
little; which thing, we see, Christ also de-
clared, saying, " Go thy way, and as thou hast
believed, so be it done unto thee." Seest
thou how the health of the servant proclaimed

5 [Both terms were current in Jewish theological language ;
but it is implied in the argument that " Abraham's bosom " was-
not so well known, or so definitely apprehended. — R.]

6 Matt. iii. g.


Homily XXVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


l8l


aloud both Christ's power, and the faith of
the centurion, and also became a pledge of
the future ? Or rather it was all a proclama-
tion of Christ's power. For not only did He
quite heal the servant's body, but tiie soul
also of the centurion He did Himself bring
over unto the faith by His miracles.

And do thou look not to this only, that the
one believed, and the other was healed, but
marvel how quickly also. For this too the
evangelist declared, saying, "And his servant
was healed in the self-same hour: " even as
of the leper also he said, " he was straightway
cleansed." For not by healing, but by doing
so both in a wonderful manner and in a
moment of time, did He display His power.
Neither m this way only doth He profit us,
but also by his constant practice, in the man-
ifestation of His miracles, of opening inci-
dentally His discourses about His kingdom,
and of drawing all men towards it. For
those even whom He was threatening to cast
out. He threatened not in order to cast them
out, but in order that through such fear, He
might draw them into it by His words. And
if not even hereby were they profited, theirs
is the whole blame, as also of all who are in
the like distemper.

For not at all among Jews only may one
see this taking place, but also among them
that have believed. For Judas too was a
child of the kingdom, and it was said to him
with the disciples, "Ye shall sit on twelve
thrones;"' yet he became a child of hell;
whereas the Ethiopian, barbarian as he was,
and of them " from the east and west," shall
enjoy the crowns with Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob. This takes place among us also
now. "For many," saith He, "that are
first shall be last, and the last first." ^ And
this He saith, that neither the one may grow
languid, as unable to return; nor the others
be confident, as standing fast. This John
also declared before from the beginning,
when he said, " God is able of these stones to
raise up children unto Abraliam." ^ Thus,
since it was so to come to pass, it is pro-
claimed long before; that no one may be con-
founded at the strangeness of the event.
But he indeed speaks of it as a possible thing
(for he was first); Christ on the other hand
as what will surely be, affording the proof of
it from His works.

7. Let us not then be confident, who stand,
but let us say to ourselves, " Let him that
thinketii lie stantlcth take heed lest he fall;"*
neither let us who are fallen despair, but let
us say to ourselves, "He that falleth, doth


lie not arise ? "5 For many even who have
j mounted to the very summit of Heaven, and
! have shown forth all austerity, and had made
their abode in the deserts, nor saw any
woman so much as in a dream; having be-
come a little remiss, have been tripped up,
and have come unto the very gulf of wicked-
ness. While others again from thence have
gone up to Heaven, and from the stage and
orchestra have passed over unto the disci-
pline of angels, and have displayed so great
virtue, as to drive away devils, and to work
many otner such miracles. And of these ex-
amples both the Scriptures are full, and our
life is also full. Even whoremongers and
effeminate persons stop the mouths of the
Manichffians, who say that wickedness is
immoveat)le, enrolling themselves on the
devil's side, and weakening the hands of
them that would wish to be in earnest, and
overturning all our life.

For they who inculcate these things, not
only injure men as to the future, but here
also turn all things upside down, for their
own part at least. Because when will any
regard virtue, from among those that are liv-
ing in wickedness, so long as he accounts his
return that way, and His change for the bet-
ter, a thing impossible ? For if now, when
both laws exist, and penalties are threatened,
and there is common opinion to recall the
ordinary sort, and hell is looked for, and a
kingdom promised, and wrong things re-
proached, and the good praised; hardly do
any choose the labors that are to be under-
gone for virtue's sake: shouldest thou take
away all these things, what is there to hinder
ruin and corruption universal ?

Knowing therefore the devil's craft, and
that as well the lawgivers of the Gentiles as
the oracles of God, and the reasonings of
nature, and the common opinion of all men,
yea barbarians, and Scythians, and Thra-
cians, and generally all, are directly opposed
both to these, and to sucli as strive to enact
the doctrines of fate: let us be sober, be-
loved, and bidding farewell to all those, let
us travel along the narrow way, being both
confident and in fear: in fear because of the
precipices on either side, confident because of
Jesus our guide. Let us travel on, sober
and wakeful. For though but for a little
while one slumber, he is swept away (piickly.

8. For we are not more perfect than Daviil,
who by a little carelessness was hurled into
the very gulf of sin. Vet he arose again
(juickly. Look not tlien to his liaving sinned
only, but also to liis having washed away his


< Matt. xix. 38.
3 Miitt. ill. g.


' Mall. xix. 30.
4 I (dr. X. ta.


Sjer. vill. 4.


l82


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVI.


sin. For to this end He wrote that history,
not that thou shouldest behold him fallen,
but admire him risen; to teach thee, when
thou art fallen, how thou shouldest arise.
Thus, as physicians choose out the most
grievous diseases, and write them in their
books, and teach their method of cure in
similar cases; if so be men having practised
on the greater, may easily master the less;
even so God likewise hath brought forward
the greatest of sins, that they also who offend
in small things may find the cure of these
easy, by means of the other: since if those
admitted of healing, much more the less.

Let us look then to the manner both of the
sickness, and of the speedy recovery of that
blessed man. What theh was the manner of
his sickness ? He committed adultery and
murder. For I shrink not from proclaiming
these things with a loud voice. Since if the
Holy Ghost thought it no shame to record '
all this history, much less ought we to draw
any shade over it. Wherefore I not only
proclaim it, but I add another circumstance
also. For in fact, whosoever hide these
things, they most of all men throw his virtue
into the shade. And as they that say noth-
ing of the battle with Goliath deprive him of
no small crowns, so also they that hurry by
this history. Doth not my saying seem a
paradox ? Nay, wait a little, and then ye
shall know that with reason have we said this.
For to this end do I magnify the sin, and
make my statement stranger, that I may the
more abundantly provide the medicines.

What is it then which I add .^ The man's
virtue; which makes the fault also greater.
For all things are not judged alike in all men.
"For mighty" men (it is said) "shall be
mightily tormented: "^ and " He that knew
his Lord's will, and doeth it not, shall be
beaten with many stripes." ^ So that more
knowledge is a ground of more punishment.
For this same reason the priest, if he commit
the same sin as those under government,
shall not have the same to endure, but things
far more grievous.

Perhaps, seeing the charge against him
amplified, ye tremble and fear, and marvel at
me, as though I were going down a precipice.
But I am so confident on that righteous man's
behalf, that I will proceed even farther; for
the more I aggravate the charge, so much
the more shall I be able to show forth the
praise of David.

"And what more than this," you will say,
' ' can be uttered ? ' ' Abundantly more. For
as in the case of Cain, what was done was


3 Luke xii. 47.


2 iTacrSriaovTai. Wisdom vi. 6.


not a murder only, but worse than even many
murders; for it was not a stranger, but a
brother, whom he slew; and a brother who
had not done but suffered wrong; not after
many murderers, but having first originated
the horrid crime: so here too that which was
perpetrated was not murder only. For it was
no ordinary man that did it, but a prophet:
and he slays not him that had done wrong,
but him that had suffered wrong; for indeed
»he had been mortally wronged, by the forcing
away his wife: nevertheless after that he
added this also.

9. Perceive ye, how I have not spared that
righteous one ? how without any the least re-
serve 1 have mentioned his offenses ? But
yet, so confident am I concerning his defense,
that after so great load as this of his sin, I
would there were present both the Manichae-
ans who most deride all this, and they that
are diseased in Marcion's way,'* that I might
fully stop their mouths. For they indeed
say "he committed murder and adultery;"
but I say not this only, but have also proved
the murder to be twofold, first from him who
suffered the wrong, then from the quality of
the person who offended. For it is not the
same thing, for one to whom the Spirit was
vouchsafed, and on whom so great benefits
had been conferred, and who had been admit-
ted to such freedom of speech, and at such
a time of life, to venture on crimes of that
sort; as without all these, to commit this
self-same thing. Nevertheless even in this
respect is that illustrious man most of all
wortlay of admiration, that when he had fallen
into the very pit of wickedness, he did not
sink nor despair, nor cast himselt down in
supineness, on receiving of the devil so fatal
a wound; but quickly, or rather straightway,
and with great force, he gave a more fatal
blow than he had received.

And the same thing occurred, as if in war
and in battle some barbarian had struck his
spear into the heart of a chieftain, or shot an
arrow into his liver, and had added to the
former wound a second more fatal than it,
and he that had received these grievous
blows, when fallen, and wallowing in much
blood all about him, were first to rise up
quickly, then to hurl a spear at him that
wounded him, and exhibit him dead on the
ground in a moment. Even so in this case
also, the greater thou declarest the wound, so
much the more admirable dost thou imply the
soul of him that was wounded to be, that he

4 Both these sects ascribed the Old Testament to an evil prin-
ciple, and argued against it from such cases as this of David. Of
Marcion, see St. Iren. i. 29, iv. 45. Of Manes, St. Aug. contra
Faustum, xxii. 5, 66. \_Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers^ first
series, vol. iv. p. 297.]


Homily XXVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


i8


had power after this grievous wound both to
rise up again, and to stand in the very fore-
front of the battle array, and bear down him
that had wounded him.

And how great a thing this is, they best
know, whosoever are fallen into grievous sins.
For it is not so much a proof of a generous
and vigorous soul to walk upright, and to run
all the way (for such a soul hath the good
hope going along with it, to cheer and to
rouse it, to nerve and render it more zeal-
ous); as after those innumerable crowns, and
so many trophies, and victories, having un-
dergone the utmost loss, to be able to resume
the same course. And that what I say may
be made plain, I will endeavor to bring be-
fore you another example, not at all inferior
to the former.

For imagine, I pray thee, some pilot, when
he had compassed seas without number, and
sailed over the whole ocean; after those
many storms, and rocks and waves, to sink,
having with him a great freight, in the very
mouth of the harbor, and hardly with his
naked body to escape this grievous ship-
wreck; how would he naturally feel towards
the sea, and navigation, and such labors ?
Will such a one then ever choose, unless he
be of a very noble soul, to see a beach, or a
vessel, or a harbor? I trow not; but he will
lie hiding his face, seeing night all through
the day, and shrinking from all things; and
he will choose rather to live by begging, than
to put his hand to the same labors.

But not such was this blessed man; but
though he had undergone such a shipwreck,
after those innumerable troubles and toils, he
stayed not with his face covered, but
launched his vessel, and having spread his
sails, and' taken the rudder in hand, he ap-
plies himself to the same lal)ors, and hath
made his wealth more abundant again. Now
if to stand be so admirable, and not to lie
down for ever after one has fallen; to rise up
again, and to do such deeds, what crowns
would not this deserve ?

And yet surely there were many things to
drive him to despair; as first, the greatness
of his sins; secondly, that not at the begin-
ning of life, when our hopes also are more
abundant, but near the end, these things
befell him. For neither doth the merchant,
who hatli just gone out of the harbor and
been wrecked, grieve ecjually with him, who
after very many traffickings strikes on a
rock. Thirdly, that when he hatl already
obtained great wealth, lie incurred this.
Yea, for by that time he had stored up no
small merchandise: for instance, the deeds
of his early youth, when he was a shepherd;


those about Goliath, when he set up the
glorious trophy; those pertaining to his self-
command respecting Saul. Since he showed
forth even the evangelical long-suffering, in
that he got his enemy ten thousand times
into his hands, and continually spared him;
and chose racher to be an outcast from his
country and from liberty, and from life itself,
than to slay him that was unjustly plotting
against him. Likewise after his coming to
the kingdom, there were noble deeds of his
to no small amount.

And besides what I have sr.id, his credit
also among the many, and his fall from glory
so bright, would cause no ordinary perplexity.
For the purple did by no means so much
adorn him, as the stain of his sin disgraced
him. And ye know of course what a great
thing it is for evil deeds to be exposed, and
how great a soul is required in such an one,
not to despond after the censure of the mul-
titude, and when he hath so many witnesses
of his own offenses.

Nevertheless all these darts that noble per-
son drew out of his soul, and so shone forth
after this, so wiped out the stain, became so
pure, that his offspring even after his death
had their sins mitigated by him: and that
which was said of Abraham, we find God say-
ing the same of this man also; or rather,
much more of the latter. For with respect
to the patriarch it is said, "I remembered
my covenant with Abraham; " ' but here He
saith not " the covenant," but liow ? " I will
defend this city for my servant David's
sake."= And besides, on account of His
favor towards him. He suffered not Solomon
to fall from the kingdom, great as tlie sin was
which he had committed. .And so great was
the glory of the man, that Peter, so many
years after, in exhorting the Jews, spake on
this wise: " Let me freely speak unto you of
the patriarch David, that he is both dead and
buried." 3 And Christ too, discoursing with
the Jews, signifies him after his sin to have
had the Spirit vouchsafed to such a degree,
that he was counted worthy to prophesy again
even concerning His Godhead; ami tliereby
stopping their mouths, He said, " How then
I doth David in spirit call Him Lord, saying.
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on
I my right hand?"* And much as with
Moses, so it fell out also with David. . For as
Miriam, even against Moses' will, was pun-
ished by God for insolence to her brother,*
because He greatly loved the holy man; even
so this man, injuriously treateil I'V his son,


1 KxckI. ii. 14. » I»«. xxjtvii. 3$.

4 Mull. xxii. 43 ; P». ex. 1.


1 Acts ii. }g.

S Nuiub. xii. 13, 14.


1 84


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVII.


God did swiftly avenge, and that against his
will.

These things then are sufificient, yea rather
before all others these are sufficient to indi-
cate the man's excellency. For when God
pronounces His judgment, we ought to in-
quire no further. But if ye would become
particularly acquainted with His self com-
mand, ye may by perusing his history after
his sin, perceive his confidence towards God,
his benevolence, his growth in virtue, his
strictness unto his last breath.

lo. Having then these exampiCs, iet us be
sober, and let us strive not to despond, and if at
any time we fall, not to lie prostrate. For
not to cast you into slothfulness, did I speak
of the sins of David, but to work in you more
fear. For if that righteous man through a
little remissness received such wounds, what
shall we have to suffer, who are every day
negligent? Do not therefore look at his fall,
and be remiss, but consider what great things


he did even after this, what great mournings,
how much repentance he showed forth, add-
ing his nights to his days, pouring forth foun-
tains of tears, washing his couch with his
tears, withal clothing himself in sackcloth.

Now if he needed so great a conversion,
when will it be possible for us to be saved,
feeling insensible after so many sins ? For
he that hath many good deeds, would easily
even by this throw a shade over his sins; but
he that is unarmed, wherever he may receive
a dart, receives a mortal wound.

In order therefore that this may not be so,
let us arm ourselves with good works; and if
any offense have befallen us, let us wash it
away: that we may be counted worthy, after
having lived the present life to the glory of
God, to enjoy the life to come; unto which
may we all attain, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and might forever and ever.
Amen.


HOMILY XXVII.

Matt. YIll. 14, 15.

"And when Jesus was come into Peter's house, He saw his wife's mother laid and sick
of a fever: ^ and He touched her hand, and the fever left her, and she arose and
ministered unto Him.''''


But Mark adds also, " immediately, "^ mean-
ing to declare the time as well: but this evan-
gelist hath set down only the miracle, without
signifying besides the time. And whereas
the others say, that she that lay ill did also
entreat Him, this too he hath passed over in
silence. But this comes not of any disso-
nance, but the one of brevity, the other of
exact narrative. But for what intent did
He go into Peter's house ? As it seems to
me, to take food. This at least is declared
when it is said,

" She arose and ministered unto Him.''''
For He used to visit His disciples (as

1 [R. v., " lying sick of a fever."]

2 A. v., "unto them." [The Oxford edition has " rec. vers."
here. But the word " received " is now applied, in matters of
text, only to the editions of Stephens and Elzevir and the readings
they contain. The reference is, of course, to the authorized ver-
sion, and that version in Matt. viii. 15 follows the received text.

3 Mark i. 31. See Luke iv. 3Q. [Mark's favorite terra, ewflus, is
rendered "straightway " in the R. \., /.issi'm. -R.]

4 Matt. viii. 15.


Matthew likewise, when He had called him),
so honoring them and making them more
zealous.

But do thou mark, I pray thee, herein also
Peter's reverence towards Him. For though
he had his wife's mother at home lying ill,
and very sick of a fever, he drew Him not
into his house, but waited first for the teach-
ing to be finished, then for all the others to
be healed; and then when He had come in,
besought Him. Thus from the beginning
was he instructed to prefer the things of all
others to his own.

Therefore neither doth he himself bring
Him in, but He entered of His own accord
(after the centurion had said, "I am not
worthy that Thou shouldest come under my
roof "5): to show how much favor He be-
stowed on His disciple. And yet consider of

5 Matt. viii. S.


Homily XXVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


1S5


what sort were the houses of these fisher-
men; but for all that. He disdained not to
enter into their mean huts, teaching thee
by all means to trample under foot human
pride.

And sometimes He heals by words only,
sometimes He even stretches forth His hand,
sometimes He doeth both these things, to
bring into sight His way of healing. For it
was not His will always to work miracles in
the more surpassing manner: it being needful
for Him to be concealed awhile, and espec-
ially as concerned His disciples; since they
out of their great delight would have pro-
claimed everything. And this was evident
from the fact, that even after coming to the
mount, it was needful to charge them that
they should tell no man.

Having therefore touched her body, He
not only quenched the fever, but also gave
her back perfect health. Thus, the disease
being an ordinary one, He displayed His
power by the manner of healing; a thing
which no physician's art could have wrought.
For ye know that even after the departing of
fevers, the patients yet need much time to
return to their former health. But then all
took place at once.

And not in this case only, but also in that
of the sea. For neither there did He quiet
the winds only and the storm, but He also
stayed at once the swelling of the waves; and
this also was a strange thing. For even if
the tempest should cease, the waves continue
to swell for a long time.

But with Christ it was not so, but all at
once was ended: and so it befell this woman
also. Wherefore also the evangelist, to de-
clare this, said, "She arose and ministered
unto Him;"' which was a sign both of
Christ's power, and of the disposition of the
woman, which she showed towards Christ.

And another thing together with these we
may hence observe, that Christ grants the
healing of some to the faith even of others.
Since in this case too, others besought Him,
as also in the instance of the centurion's
servant. And this grant He makes, when
there is no unbelief in him that is to be
healed, but either through disease he cannot
come unto Him, or througti ignorance imag-
ines nothing great of Him, or because of His
immature age.

2. " When the even was come, they
brought unto Him many that wore possessed
with devils: and He cast out the spirits from
them with a word, and healed all that were
sick: that it might be fulfilled which was


< Matt. viii. 15.


spoken by the Prophet Esaias, that He took
our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses." ^

Seest thou the multitude, by this time
growing in faith ? For not even when the
time pressed could they endure to depart, nor
did they account it unseasonable to bring
their sick to Him at eventide.

But mark, I pray thee, how great a multi-
tude of persons healed the evangelists pass
quickly over, not mentioning one by one, and
giving us an account of them, but in one word
traversing an unspeakable sea of miracles.
Then lest the greatness of the wonder siiould
drive us again to unbelief, that even so great
a people and their various diseases should be
delivered and healed by Him in one moment
of time, He brings in the prophet also to bear
witness to what is going on: indicating the
abundance of the proof we have, in every
case, out of the Scriptures; such, that from
the miracles themselves we have no more;
and He saith, that Esaias also spake of these
things; "He took our infirmities, and bare
our sicknesses." 3 He said not, "He did
them away," but " He took and bare them; "
which seems to me to be spoken rather of
sins, by the prophet, in harmony with John,
where he saith, " Behold the Lamb of God,
that beareth the sin of the world."*

How then doth the evangelist here apply it
to diseases? Either as rehearsing the pas-
sage in the historical sense, ' or to show that
most of our diseases arise from sins of the
soul. For if the sum of all, death itself,
hath its root and foundation from sin, much
more the majority of our diseases also: since
our very capability of suffering diil itself
originate there.

3 " Now when Jesus saw great multitudes
about Him, He gave commandment to depart
unto the other side.""

Seest thou again His freedom from osten-
tation ? in that as the others say, "He
charged tiie devils not to say it was He,"' so
this writer saith, He rejiels the multitudes from
Him. Now in so doing. He was at once both
training us to be moderate,' and at the same
time allaying the envy of tlie Jews, and teach-
ing us to do nothing for display. For He
was not, we know, a healer to boilies only.


= Matt. viii. 16. 17. [R. V., " our di»e««c»."l

1 Isa. liii. 4. The Fvnnn«"li»l wrms toquotr the Hrhrrir, not
the LXX. [The explanutimi K'ven in the Homily «Krrri with the
I \x , " he luireuur »ln« «nil siiffrreil iMtinloJft-aTat) in our l>rhiiU."
llrhrrw has " sorrow!* " instead of " »iiknc!uw» " or "tli»eiwe%."

-^■\ w •

* John I. at).

^ mara iffroptav Tf)»' tidprvpiav a»'(tyii*w(r««ui-. " reading; the tevC
in that tense, In whii h the actual knowlrilKe of tlie farts I'oncrrn-
inK Christ, a|>arl from whut faith teaches, miKht t>'->>^' " "uin."
See Suicer in v. iffropta.

* Matt. viii. 18. 7 Mark i. 14 ; I.ukc iv. 41.

* I. f., " mixlerate, as receiver*, in what we rx|>ect from Hira :
and averse to all display, when we jtivr In Mis NuAr."


1 86


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVIL


but a curer also of the soul, and a teacher of
sell-restraint; by both disclosing Himself,
both by putting away their diseases, and by
doing nought for display. Because they in-
deed were cleaving unto Him, loving Him,
and marvelling at Him, and desiring to look
upon Him. For who would depart from one
who was doing such miracles ? Who would
not long, were it only to see the face, and the
mouth that was uttering such words ?

For not by any means in working wonders
only was He wonderful, but even when
merely showing Himself, He was full of great
grace; and to declare this the prophet said,
"Fair' in beauty beyond the children of
men."- And if Esaias saith, "He hath no
form nor comeliness," ^ he affirms it either in
comparison of the glory of His Godhead,
which surpasses all utterance and description;
or as declaring what took place at His pas-
sion, and the dishonor which He underwent
at the season of the cross, and the mean
estate which throughout His life He exem-
plified in all respects.

Further: He did not first give " command-
ment to depart unto the other side," nor until
He had healed them. For surely they could
not have borne it. As therefore on the
mountain they not only continued with Him
while exhorting them, but also when it was
silence followed Him; so here too, not in His
miracles only did they wait on Him, but also
when He had ceased again, from His very
countenance receiving no small benefit. For
if Moses had his face made glorious, and
Stephen like that of an angel; consider thou
our common Lord, what manner of person it
was likely He would appear at such a time.

Many now perchance have fallen into a
passionate desire of seeing that form; but if
we are willing we shall behold one far better
than that. For if we can pass through our
present life with Christian boldness,* we shall
receive Him in the clouds, meeting Him in
an immortal and incorruptible body.

But observe how He doth not simply drive
them away, lest He should hurt them. For
He did not say, "withdraw," but "gave
commandment to depart to the other side,"
giving them to expect that He would surely
come thither.

4. And the multitudes for their part
evinced this great love, and were following
with much affection; but some one person,
a slave of wealth, and possessed with much
arrogance, approaches Him, and saith,

" Master, I will follow Thee whithersoever
Thou goest." 5


I topatos. 2 Ps. xlv. 2, LXX.

3 Isa. liii. 2^LXX. [So the Hebrew.] 4 jxera n-apprjo-ias.

5 Matt. viii. 19.


Seest thou how great his arrogance ? For
as not deigning to be numbered with the mul-
titude, and indicating that he is above the
common sort, so he comes near. Because
such is the Jewish character; full of unsea-
sonable confidence. So too another after-
wards, when all men were keeping silence, of
his own accord springs up, and saith,
" Which is the first commandment ? " ^

Yet nevertheless the Lord rebuked not his
unseasonable confidence, teaching us to bear
even with such as these. Therefore He doth
not openly convict them who are devising
mischief, but replies to their secret thought,
leaving it to themselves only to know that
they are convicted, and doubly doing them
good, first by showing that He knows what is
in their conscience, next by granting unto
them concealment after this manifestation,
and allowing them to recover themselves
again, if they will: which thing He doth in
the case of this man also.

For he, seeing the many signs, and many
drawn after Him, thought to make a gain out
of such miracles; wherefore also he was for-
ward to follow Him. And whence is this
manifest ? From the answer which Christ
makes, meeting not the question, as it stands
verbally, but the temper shown in its mean-
ing. For, "What?" saith He, "dost thou
look to gather wealth by following me ?
Seest thou not then that I have not even a
lodgine, not even so much as the birds
have ? "

For "the foxes,'' saith He, "have holes,
and the birds of the air have nests, but the
Son of Man hath not where to lay His head.'' ^

Now these were not the words of one turn-
ing Himself away, but of one who while put-
ting to the proof his evil disposition, yet per-
mitted him (if he were willing with such a
prospect) to follow Him. And to convince
thee of his wickedness, when he had heard
these things, and had been proved, he did
not say, " I am ready to follow Thee."

5. And in many other places also Christ is
clearly doing this; He doth not openly con-
vict, but by His answer He manifests the
purpose of them that are coming unto Him.
Thus to him again that said, " Good Master,"
and had thought by such flattery to gain His
favor, according to his purpose He made
answer, saying, " Why callest thou me good ?
There is none good but one, that is, God."*


6 Matt. xxii. 36 ; Luke x. 25. [The passage in Luke tells of an
entirely different incident. The citation from Matthew is not
exact, though " first " occurs in the answer of our Lord. — R.]

7 Matt. viii. 20.

8 Matt. xix. 16, 17; Luke xviii. 18, 19. [The citation agrees
more exactly with Mark x. 18. In Matthew, according to the best
Mss. authorities, and also the Latin versions and fathers, another
form of the answer occurs. Even in Homily LXIIL, where the


Homily XXVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


187


And when they said unto Him, " Behold^
Thy mother and Thy brethren seek Thee; '' '
forasmuch as these were under the influence
of some human infirmity, not desirmg to hear
something profitable, but to make- a display
of their relationship to Him, and therein to
be vainglorious; hear what He saith: " Who
is my mother, and who are my brethren ? "

And again to His brethren themselves, say-
ing unto Him, " Show thyself to the world," -
and wishing thence to feed their vainglory,
He said, "Your time" (so He speaks) "is
always ready, but my time is not yet come."

And in the opposite cases too He doth so;
as in that of Nathanael, saying, " Behold an
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile." ^
And again, "Go and show John again those
things which ye do hear and see."^ For
neither in this did He reply to the words, but
to the intention of him that sent them. And
with the people again in like manner, He
addresses His discourse unto their conscience,
saying, " What went ye out into the wilder-
ness to see ? " 5 That is, because they were
probably feeling about John, as though he
had been a sort of easy. and wavering person;
to correct this their suspicion. He saith,
" What went ye out into the wilderness to
see ? A reed shaken with the wind ? " or, "a
man clothed with soft raiment ?'* by both
these figures declaring, that he was neither of
himself a waverer, nor would be softened by
any luxury. Thus then in the present case
also He makes His answer to their meaning.

And see how in this also He shows forth
great moderation: in that He said not, "I
have it indeed, but despise it," but " I have
it not." Seest thou wliat exact care goes
along with His condescension? Even as
when He eats and drinks, when He seems to
be acting in an opposite way to John, this too
He doeth for the sake of the Jews' salvation,
or rather for that of the whole world, at once
both stopping the mouths of the heretics,'
and desiring to win also more abundantly
those of that day to Himself.

6. But a certain other one, we read, said
unto Him,

" Lord, suffer mc first to go and bury my
father."'

Didst thou mark the difference? how one
impudently saith, " I will follow 'I'hee wliitlier-
soevcr Thou gocst;" but this other, although
asking a thing of sacred duty,* saith, " Sulicr


incident is commented upon, Chrysoatoin docs not directly attribute
this lanxuaKc, as (jiven above, to .Matthew's (itwpcl, R.]

' Matt. xli. 47, 48. ' John vii. 4, 6. J John i. 47.

4 Malt. xi. 4. SAlatt. xi. 7.

^i.f., of those heretics who "commanded to abstain from
meats." as th(>ti)i;h possrssrd with some rvil principle: the Muni-
chzan and Marcionitc schixilt. I omp. St. Chrys. on t 'lim. 1. 5.

7 .Matt. viii. 31. *> o<rtu>>.


me." Yet He suffered him not, but saitii,
" Let the dead bury their dead, but do thou
follow me." For in every case He had re-
gard to the intention. And wherefore did
He not suffer him? one may ask. Because,
on the one hand, there were those that would
fulfill that duty, and the dead was not going
to remain unljuried; on the other, it was noi
fit for this man to be taken away from the
weightier matters. But by saying, "their
own dead," He implies taat this is not one
of His dead. And that because he that was
dead, was, at least as I suppose, of the unbe-
lievers.

Now if thou admire the young man, that
for a matter so necessary he besought Jesus,
and did not go away of his own accord; much
rather do thou admire him for staying also
when forbidden.

Was it not then, one may say, extreme in-
gratitude, not to be present at tiie burial of
his father? If indeed he did so out of negli-
gence, it was ingratitude, but if in order not
to interrupt a more needful work, his depart-
ing would most surely have been of extreme
inconsideration. For Jesus forbad him, not as
commanding to think lightly of the honor
due to our parents, but signifying that noth-
ing ought to be to us more urgent than the
things of Heaven, and that we ought with all
diligence to cleave to these, and not to put
them off for ever so little, thougii our engage-
ments be exceeding indispensable and press-
ing. For what can be more needful than to
bury a father? what more easy? since it
would not even consume any long time.

But if one ought not to spend even as
much time as is required for a father's
burial, nor is it safe to be parted even so long
from our spiritual concerns; consider what
we desen'e, wl~.o all our time stanti otf from
the things tliat pertain to Christ, anil prefer
things very ordinary to such as are needful,
and are remiss, when there is nothing to
press on us ?

And herein too we should admire the in-
structiveness' of His teaching, that He nailed
him fast to His word, and with this ircctl him
from those eiulless evils, such as lamcnta-
tions, and mournings, and the things that fol-
low thereafter. For after the burial he must
of necessity proceed to iiujuire about the will,
then about liic (listrii)ulion of the inheritance,
;uul all the other things that follow there-
upon; ami thus waves after waves coming in
succession iipt)n him, would bear him away
very far from the harbor of truth. I'or this
cause He draws iiim, and fastens him to
Hun se I f ,


i88


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVII.


But if thou still marvellest, and art per-
plexed, that he was not permitted to be pres-
ent at his father's burial; consider that many
suffer not the sick, if it be a father that is
dead, or a mother, or a child, or any other
of their kinsmen, to know it, nor to follow
him to the tomb; and we do not for this
charge them with cruelty nor inhumanity: and
very reasonably. For, on the contrary, it
were cruelty to bring out to the funeral
solemnity men in such a state.

But if to mourn and be afflicted in mind for
them that are of our kindred is evil, much
more our being withdrawn from spiritual dis-
courses. For this same cause He said else-
where also, " No man having put his hand to
the plough, and looking back, is fit for the
kingdom of Heaven.^' ' And surely it is far
better to proclaim the kingdom, and draw
back others from death, than to bury the
dead body, that is nothmg advantaged there-
by; and especially, when there are some to
fulfill all these duties.

7 Nothing else then do we learn hereby,
but that we must not wantonly lose any, no
not the smallest time, though there be ten
thousand things to press on us; but to set
what is spiritual before all, even the most in-
dispensable matters, and to know both what
is life, and what is death. Since many even
of them that seem to live are nothing better
than dead men, living as they do in wicked-
ness; or rather these are worse than the dead;
' 'For he that is dead," it is said, " is freed
from sin," ^ but this man is a slave to sin.
For tell me not of this, that he is not eaten of
worms, nor lies in a coffin, nor hath closed
his eyes, nor is bound in graveclothes. Nay,
for these things he undergoes more griev-
ously than the dead, no worms devouring
him, but the passions of his soul tearing him
to pieces more fiercely than wild beasts.

And if his eyes be open, this too again is
far worse than having closed them. For
those of the dead see no evil thing, but this
man is gathering unto himself diseases with-
out number, while his eyes are open. And
whereas the other lies in a coffin, unmoved
by anything, this one is buried in the tomb
of his innumerable distempers.

But thou seest not his body in a state of
decay. And what of that? Since before his
body, his soul is corrupted and destroyed,
and undergoes greater rottenness. For the
other stinketh a few ^ days, but this for the


1 Luke ix, 62. iv t?; pa<ji\eia. [The citation is peculiar : (i) iv
is not found in any of our mss. of the New Testament, the received
text is eis ririv ^ao-iAeiai", while the dative alone is better supported.
(2) tCiv oiipavuiv is substituted for toO 0eov ; the former occurring
in Matthew only in connection with PacriXeia.—R.]

2 Rom. vi. 7. 3 [More exactly, "ten days."— R.]


whole of his life exhales evil odors, having
a mouth more foul than sewers.

And so the one differs from the other, by
just so much as this, that the dead indeed
undergoes that decay, only which comes of
nature, but this man together with that, brings
in also that rottenness which is from intem-
perance, devising each day unnumbered
causes of corruption.

But is he borne on horseback ? And what
of that ? Why, so is the other on a couch.
And what is very hard, while the other is
seen by no one in his dissolution and decay,
but hath his coffin for a veil, this man is
going about everywhere with his evil savor,
bearing about a dead soul in his body as in a
tomb.

And if one could but once see a man's
soul who is living in luxury and vice, thou
wouldest perceive that it is far better to lie
bound in a grave than to be rivetted by the
chains of our sins; and to have a stone laid
over thee, than that heavy cover ■• of insensi-
bilit3% Wherefore above all things it behooves
the friends of these dead men, seeing that
they are past feeling, t.o come near to Jesus in
their behalf, as Mary then did in the case of
Lazarus. Though he "stinketh," though he
be "dead four days," do not despair, but
approach, and remove the stone first. Yea,
for then thou shalt see him lying as in a
tomb, and bound in his grave clothes.

And if ye will, let it be some one of them
that are great and distinguished, whom we
bring before you. Nay, fear not, for I will
state the example without a name: or rather,
though I should mention the name, not even
so need there be any fear: for who ever fears
a dead man ? seeing that whatever one may
do, he continues dead, and the dead cannot
injure the living either little or much.

Let us then behold their head bound up.
For indeed, when they are for ever drunken,
even as the dead by their many wrappers and
grave-clothes, so are all their organs of sense
closed and bound up. And if thou wilt look
at their hands too, thou shalt see these again
bound to their belly, like those of the dead,
and fastened about not with grave-clothes,
but what is far more grievous, with the bands
of covetousness: obtaining as they do no
leave from her to be stretched out for alms-
giving, or for any other of such like good
deeds; rather she renders them more useless
than those of the dead. Wouldest thou also
see their feet bound together ? See them
again fastened about with cares, and for this
cause never able to run unto the house of
God.

4 j7u>/ia, the lid of a coffer of any kind : here of a sarcophagus.


Homily XXVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


189


Hast thou seen the dead ? behold also the
embalmer. Who then is the embalmer of
these ? The devil, who carefully fastens
them al)Out, and suffers not the man any
longer to appear a man, but a dry stock.
For where there is no eye, nor hands, nor
feet, nor any other such thing, how can such
an one appear a man ? Even so may we see
their soul also swaddled up, and rather an
image ' than a soul.

Forasmuch then as they are in a sort of
senseless state, being turned to dead men, let
us in their behalf draw nigh unto Jesus, let
us entreat Him to raise them up, let us take
away the stone, let us loosen the grave
clothes. For if thou take away the stone,
that is, their insensibility to their own miser-
ies, thou wilt quickly be able to bring them
also out of the tomb; and having brought

I e'lSdiXov. The classical use of this word is well known : see
e. g. Odyss. xi. 602. " A shadow or phantom : not a true substan-
tial soul."


them out, thou wilt more easily rid them of
their bonds. Then shall Christ know thee,
when thou art risen, when unbound; then will
He call thee even unto His own supper.^ As
many therefore of you as are friends of
Christ, as many as are disciples, as many as
love him that is gone, draw near unto Jesus,
and pray. For even though his ill savor
abound and be ever so intense, nevertheless
not even so should we, his friends, forsake
him, but so much the rather draw near; even
as the sisters of Lazarus then did; neither
should we leave interceding, beseeching, en-
treating, until we have received Him alive.

For if we thus order our own affairs, and
those of our neighbors, we shall also attain
speedily unto the life to come; unto which
may we all attain, by the grace and love to
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory forever and ever. Amen.

= Alluding to John xii. 2.


HOMILY XXVIII.

Matt. VHL 23, 24.


"And when He was entered into a ship. His disciples followed Him. And, behold, there
arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship was covered with tiie waves,
but He was asleep."


Now Luke,' to free himself from having
the order of time required of Him, saith
thus, "And it came to pass on a certain day
that He went into a ship with His disciples;"
and Mark in like manner.'' But this evan-
gelist not so, but he maintains the order in
this place also. For they did not all of them
write all things in this way. And these
things I have mentioned before, lest any
one from the omission should suppose there
was a discordance.

The multitudes then He sent on, but the
disciples He took with Himself: for the
others mention this too. And He took them
with Iliiii, not for nought, iior al lia/.ard, but


' I.uke viii. 22.

a See Miirk is-. ;i5. [Hut Mark is very upccific as to time. This
event is plai i-d vc ry much out nf chronoloKiial (Mmitiou in Mul-
thcw's iiicciiiiil*- Hul (hryso-itfiiii <li.cs not dis< iis-, mu li qurslimis
with iiiiy fullness. Indcrd, the nrdrr of .Matllirw scnun In havr
been ac ( rpird up to his time. The curliest hiirinonirs were based
upon Matthew. Comp. even AuKUsliii, //artiiony, Nuerif iinii
Poil-Xheiif Fathers^ vol. vi., fir»t »crieii, pp. 67-69, and cliic-
where.-k.]


in order to make them spectators of the mir-
acle that was to take place. For like a most
excellent trainer. Me was anointing them with
a view to both objects; as well to be undis-
mayed in dangers, as to |)e modest in honors.
Thus, that they might not be high minded,
because having sent away the rest. He re-
tained them. He suffers them to be tossed
with the tempest; at once correcting this,
ami disciplining tiiem to bear trials nobly.

For great indeed were the former miracles
too, but this contained also in it ;i kind of
discipline, and that no inconsiderable one.
and was a sign akin to that of old.' F(»r this
cause He takes the ilisciples only with Him-
self, For as, when there was a displ.iy of
miracles, He suffers the people also to be
present; so when trials and terrors were rising
up against Him, tlu-n He takes with Him
none I)Ut the chaini)ions of the whol<- world,
whom He was to discipline.

3 «'. /., the miracle at the Kcd iica, afterward* menlioDcd.


190


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVIII.


And while Matthew merely mentioned that
"He was asleep,'" Luke saith that it was
" on a pillow; " signifying both His freedom
from pride, and to teach us hereby a high
degree of austerity.^

The tempest therefore being thoroughly
excited, and the sea raging, "They awake
Him, saying, Lord, save us: we perish "^
But He rebuked them before He rebuked the
sea. Because as I said, for discipline these
things were permitted, and they were a type
of the temptations that were to overtake
them. Yea, for after these things again, He
often suffered them to fall into more griev-
ous tempests of fortune,* and bare long with
them. Wherefore Paul also said, " I would
not, brethren, have you ignorant, that we
were pressed out of measure beyond strength,
insomuch that we despaired even of life;"^
and after this again, "Who delivered us
from so great deaths." Signifying therefore
hereby, that they ought to be confident,
though the waves rise high, and that He
orders all things for good, He first of all re-
proves them. For indeed their very alarm
was a profitable occurrence, that the miracle
might appear greater, and their remembrance
of the event be rendered lasting. Since
when anything strange is about to happen,
there are prepared beforehand many things
to cause remembrance, lest after the miracle
hath passed by. men should sink into forget-
fulness.

Thus Moses also first is in fear of the ser-
pent, and not merely in fear, but even with
mucn distress: and then he sees that strange
thing come to pass.^ So these too, having
first looked to perish, were then saved, that
having confessed the danger, they might
learn the greatness of the miracle.

Therefore also He sleeps: for had He been
awake when it happened, either they would
not have feared, or they would not have be-
sought Him, or they would not so much as
have thought of His being able to do any
such thing. Therefore He sleeps, to give
occasion for their timidity, and to make their
perception of what was happening more dis-
tinct. For a man looks not with the same
eyes on what happens In the persons of
others, as in his own. Therefore since they
had seen all benefitted, while themselves had
enjoyed no benefit, and were supine (for
neither were they lame, nor had they any
other such infirmity); and it was meet they
should enjoy His benefits by their own per-
ception: He permits the storm, that by their


' See Mark iv. 38. ^ <f>iAo<TO(J>iai'.

4 TrpaytiaTiov, " of things."
* Exod. iv. 3, 4.


3 Matt. viii. 25.
5 2 Cor. i. 8, 10,


deliverance they might attain to a clearer
perception of the benefit.

Therefore neither doth He this in the pres-
ence of the multitudes, that they might not
be condemned for little faith, but He has
them apart, and corrects them, and before
the tempest of the waters He puts an end to
the tempests of their soul, rebuking them,
and saying,

" Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith:"
instructing them also, that men's fear is
wrought not by the approach of the tempta-
tions, but by the weakness of their mind.

But should any one say, that it was not
fearfulness, or little faith, to come near and
awaken Him; I would say this, that that very
thing was an especial sign of their wanting
the right opinion concerning Him, That is.
His power to rebuke when awakened they
knew, but that He could do so even sleeping,
they knew not as yet.

And why at all marvel that it was so now,
when even after many other miracles their
impressions were still rather imperfect ?
wherefore also they are often rebuked; as
when He saith, "Are ye also yet without un-
derstanding? " ^ Marvel not then, if when
the disciples were in such imperfect disposi-
tions, the multitudes had no exalted imagina-
tion of Him, For

" They marvelled, saying, What manner
of man is this, that even the sea and the
winds obey Him ?"*

But Christ chode not with them for calling
Him a man, but waited to teach them by His
signs, that their supposition was mistaken.
But from what did they think Him a man ?
First from His appearance, then from His
sleeping, and His making use of a ship. So
on this account they were cast into perplex-
ity, saying, "What manner of man is this?"
since while the sleep and the outward ap-
pearance showed man, the sea and the calm
declared Him God.

For because Moses had once done some
such thing, in this regard also doth He sig-
nify His own superiority, and that the one
works miracles as a slave, the other as Lord.
Thus, He put forth no rod, as Moses did,
neither did He stretch forth His hands to
Heaven, nor did He need any prayer, but,
as was meet for a master commanding His
handmaid, or a creator His creature, so did
He quiet and curb it by word and command
only; and all the surge was straightway at an


7 Matt. XV. 16. [" For" is part of the citation, in the Greek
text of the Homily, but does not occur in the Gospel narratives.
The order, " the sea and the winds," is also peculiar to the text
of the Homily. The Oxford translator gives the order of the A,
v., which is well attested, but not followed here. — R.]

8 Matt. viii. 27.


Homily XXVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


191


end, and not one trace of the disturbance re-
mained. For this the evangelist declared,
saying, "And there was a great calm."'
And that which had been spoken of the
Father as a great thing, this He showed forth
again by His works. And what had been
said concerning Him? "He spake," it
saith, "and the stormy wind ceased." = So
here likewise, He spake, and " there was a
great calm." And for this most of all did
the multitudes marvel at him; who would not
have marvelled, had He done it in such man-
ner as did Moses.

2. Now when He is departed from the sea,
there follows another miracle yet more awful.
F'or men possessed with devils,^ like wicked
runaways at sight of their master, said,

"What have we to do with Thee, Jesus,
Thou Son of God ? Art Thou come hither to
torment us before the time?"^

For, because the multitudes called Him
man, the devils came proclaiming His God-
head, and they that heard not the sea swelling
and subsiding, heard from the devils the same
cry, as it by its calm was loudly uttering.

Then, lest the thing might seem to come
of flattery, according to their actual experi-
ence they cry out and say, "Art Thou come
hither to torment us before the time?"
With this view, then, their enmity is avowed
beforehand, that their entreaty may not incur
suspicion. For indeed they were invisibly
receiving stripes, and the sea was not in such
a storm as they; galled, and inflamed, and
suffering things intolerable from His mere
presence. Accordingly, no man daring to
bring them to Him, Christ of Himself goes
unto them.

And Matthew indeed relates that they said,
**Art Thou come hither before the time to
tr)rment us?" but the other evangelists have
added, that they also entreated and adjured
Him not to cast them into the deep.^ For
they supposed that their punishment was now
close upon them, and feared, as even now
about to fall into vengeance.

And though Luke and those who follow
liim* say tiiat it was one person, but this
evangelist two, this doth not exhibit any dis-
crepancy at all. I grant if they had said,
there was only one, and no other, they would
appear to disagree with Matthew; but if that
spake of tiie one, this of the two, tlie state-
ment comes not of disagreement, but of a dif-
ferent manner of narration. That is, I for
my part think, Luke singled out the fiercest

' Matt. viii. a6. •' P«. cvii. a^, i.xx.

ifK. v., " drmixis," iifid wi the translator in niany places in
this Mc.mily.-R.)

•• .\lait. viii. 31). 5 Mark v. 10 ; I.ukc viii. 31.

^ oi fr<pi Toi' Aouicat'.


one of them for his narrative, wherefore also
in more tragical wise doth he report their
miserable case; as, for instance, that bursting
his bonds and chains he used to wander
about the wilderness. And Mark saith, that
he also cut himself with the stones.

And their words too are such as well betray
their implacable and shameless nature. For,
saith he, "Art thou come hither to torment
us before the time?" You see, that they
had sinned, they could not deny, but they
demand not to suffer their punishment before
the time. For, since He had caught them in
the act of perpetrating those horrors so incur-
able and lawless, and deforming and punish-
ing =' His creature in every way; and they
supposed that He, for the excess of their
crimes, would not await the time of their
punishment: therefore they besought and en-
treated Him: and they that endured not even
bands of iron come bound, and they that run
about the mountains, are gone forth into the
plain; and those who hinder all others from
passing, at sight of Him blocking up the way,
stand still.

3. But what can be the reason that they
love also to dwell in the tombs ? They would
fain suggest to the multitude a pernicious
opinion, as though the souls of the dead be-
come demons,^ which God forbid we should
ever admit into our conception. " But what
then wilt thou say,'' one may ask, "when
many of the sorcerers take children and slay
them, in order to have the soul afterwards to
assist them ? " Why, whence is this evident ?
for of their slaying them, indeed, many tell
us, but as to the souls of the slain being witii
them, whence knowest thou it, I pray thee ?
"The possessed themselves," it is replied,
"cry out, I am the soul of such a one.'*
But this too is a kind of stnge-piay, and
devilish deceit. For it is not the spirit of
the dead that cries out, but the evil spirit
that feigns these things in order to deceive
' the hearers. For if it were possible for a soul
to enter into the substance of an evil spirit,
much more into its own body.

And besides, it stands not to reason that


7 Tl^uipOD/KfOVf.

8 So St. AiiKiistin t/f Civitale Pfi, ix. 11. " Plotinui *»y% that
the souLs (if men are clcinon*. iind of men become Ijires, if they
arc of j;"<xl desert ; if of Iwd, I.emurr* or I jirv*." Mr. r ield re-
fers til St. Chrys j Horn, oh /..fr<ir«j, vi. jjn, fi (Savile). " Mtiny
of the siinplrr Mirt iinuKine thai the lUiuU cf s\\>\\ uh die \ii>lent
deathn are turnrd into deniona, whereas the soiiUwhuh really Ik--
come .Mich are theirs who are yet living in their sins, not l>y cliuni;e
of siibstuiue, liiit I'y iinilaliiiK their evil mind. . . . Why did the
devil introduce this wicked diHtrme f Me tried to tindrriiiiiic the
Iflory of the martyrs. 1 mean, l>ec^se they die violent deaths, he
wishing to diffuse an evil impre^inn of them, did this. This,
however, he couUI not do, hut uiioiher very grievous result he did
accomplish, lie indiice<l, by these diKlrines, the vircerem that
minister to him to bull her the Ixxlies of many tender youths, in
the ho|>e that ihry would liecome drmons, aiitl in return minister
to ihein." Me prucccda to argue axainst the superstitiun much aa
in the text here.


192


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVIII.


the injured soul should co-operate with the
wrons-doer, or that a man should be able to
change an incorporeal power into another
substance. For if in bodies this were impos-
sible, and one could not make a man's body
become that of an ass; much more were this
impossible in the invisible soul; neither
could one transform it into the substance of
an evil spirit. So that these are the sayings
of besotted old wives, and spectres to frighten
children.

Nor indeed is it possible for a soul, torn
away from the body, to wander here any
more. For " the souls of the righteous are
in the hand of God;'^' and if of the right-
eous, then those children's souls also; for
neither are they wicked: and the souls too of
sinners are straightway led away hence.
And it is evident from Lazarus and the rich
man; and elsewhere too Christ saith, "This
day they require thy soul of thee."'' And it
may not be that a soul, when it is gone forth
from the body, should wander here; nor is
the reason hard to see. For if we, going
about on the earth which is familiar and well
known to us, being encompassed with a body,
when we are journeying in a strange road,
know not which way to go unless we have
some one to lead us; how should the soul,
being rent away from the body, and having
gone out from all her accustomed region,
know where to walk without one to show her
the way ?

And from many other things too one might
perceive, that it is not possible for a disem-
bodied soul to remain here. For both
Stephen saith, "Receive my spirit; "^ and
Paul, "To depart and to be with Christ is
far better;"'' and of the patriarch too the
Scripture saith, that " he was gathered unto
his fathers, being cherished in a good old
age. "5 And as to the proof, that neither
can the souls of sinners continue here; hear
the rich man making much entreaty for this,
and not obtaining it; since had it been at all
possible, he would have come, and have told
what had come to pass there.* Whence it is
evident that after their departure hence our
souls are led away into some place, having
no more power of themselves to come back
again, but awaiting thac dreadful day.

4. Now, should any one say, "And where-
fore did Christ fulfill the devils' request, suf-
fering them to depart into the herd of
swine ?" this would be our reply, that He did
so, not as yielding t%them, but as providing
for many objects thereby. One, to teach
them that are delivered from those wicked


tyrants, how great the malice of their insidi-
ous enemies: another, that all might learn,
how not even against swine are they bold,
except He allow them; a third, that they
would have treated those men more griev-
ously than the swine, unless even in their
calamity they had enjoyed much of God's
providential care. For that they hate us
more than the brutes is surely evident to
every man. So then they that spared not the
swine, but in one moment of time cast them
all down the precipice, much more would they
have done so to the men whom they pos-
sessed, leading them towards the desert, and
carrying them away, unless even in their very
tyranny the guardian care of God had
abounded, to curb and check the excess of
their violence. Wnence it is manifest that
there is no one, who doth not enjoy the ben-
efit of God's providence. And if not all
alike, nor after one manner, this is itself a
very great instance of providence; in that
according to each man's profit, the work also
of providence is displayed.

And besides what hath been mentioned,
there is another thing also, which we learn
from this; that His providence is not only
over all in common, but also over each in
particular; which He also declared with re-
spect to His disciples, saying, " But the very
hairs of your head are numbered."' And
from these demoniacs too, one may clearly
perceive this; who would have " been
choked " long before, if they had not enjoyed
the benefit of much tender care from above.

For these reasons then He suffered them
to depart into the herd of swine, and that
they also who dwelt in those places should
learn His power. For where His name was
great. He did not greatly display Himself:
but where no one knew Him, but they were
still in an insensible condition, He made His
miracles to shine out, so as to bring them
over to the knowedge of His Godhead. For
it is evident from the event that the inhabit-
ants of that city were a sort of senseless peo-
ple; for when they ought to have adored and
marvelled at His power, they sent Him away,
and "besought Him that He would depart
out of their coasts." ^

But for what intent did the devils destroy
the swine ? Everywhere they have labored
to drive men to dismay, and everywhere they
rejoice in destruction. This, for instance,
the devil did with respect to Job, although in
that case too God sufi'ered it, but neither in
that case as complying with the devil, but
willing: to show His own servant the more


I Wisd. iii. i.
4 Phil. i. 23.


= Luke xii. 20.

5 Gen. XV. 15, in Lxx.


3 Acts vii. 59.
6 Luke xvi. 27, 28


7 Matt. X. 30.

8 Matt. viii. 34. [R. V.


from their borders."]


Homily XXVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


193


glorious, cutting off from tlie evil spirit all
pretext for his shamelessness, and turning on
his own head wliat was done against the right-
eous man. Because now also the contrary of
what they wished came to pass. For the
power of Christ was gloriously proclaimed,
and the wickedness of the demons, from which
He deliv'^ered those possessed by them, was
more plainly indicated; and how they want
power to touch even swine, without permis-
sion from the God of all.

And if any would take these things in a
hidden sense,' there is nothing to hinder.
For the history indeed is this, but we are to
know assuredly, that the swinish sort of men
are especially liable to the operations of the
demons. And as long as they are inen that
suffer such things, they are often able yet to
prevail; but if they are become altogether
swine, they are not only possessed, but are
also cast down the precipice. And besides,
lest any should suppose what was done to be
mere acting, instead of distinctly believing
that the devils = were gone out; by the death
of the swine this is rendered manifest.

And mark also His meekness together with
His power. For when the inhabitants of that
country, after having received such benefits,
were driving Him away. He resisted not, but
retired, and left those who had shown them-
selves unworthy of His teaching, having given
them for teachers them that had been freed
from the demons, and the swine-herds, that
they might of them learn all that had hap-
pened; whilst Himself retiring leaves the fear
vigorous in them. For the greatness withal
of the loss was spreading the fame of what
had been done, and the event penetrated
their mind. And from many quarters were
wafted sounds, proclaiming the strangeness
of the miracle; from the cured, and from the
drowned, from the owners of tlie swine, from
the men that were feeding them.

5. These things any one may see happen-
ing now also, even many in the tombs pos-
sessed of evil spirits, wiiom nothing restrains
from their madness; not iron, nor chain, nor
multitude of men, nor advice, nor admoni-
tion, nor terror, nor threat, nor any other
such thing.

For so when any man is dissolute, eager
after all embraces,' he differs not at all from
the demoniac, but goes about naked like liiin,
clad indeed in garments, but deprived of the
true covering, and stri^iped of his proper
glory; cutting himself not with stones, but

' Kara ai<a'y<>i'y>|f. fComp, ihc " aniilcik(irul " Kcniic of Scripture
in the Inter lleniirncutics. Hut < )ri>;eii iiiid mhrrit hud iilrnuly
made the term afayuyrj familiar and tci hnlcul in the iisa^e of
ecclesiastical flrerk.— K.]

^ [" drni<)n.s,"J 1 trw/iara.


with sins more hurtful than many stones.
Who then shall be al'le to bind such a one?
Who, to stay his unseemliness and frenzy,
his way of never coming to himself, but for-
ever haunting the tombs ? For such are the
resorts of the harlots, full of much evil savor,
of much rottenness.

And what of the covetous man ? Is he not
like this? For who will be able ever to bind
him ? Are there not fears and daily threats, and
admonitions, and counsels? Nay, all these
bonds he bursts asunder; and if any one
come to set him free, he adjures him that he
may not i^e freed, accounting it tlie greatest
torture not to be in torture: than which what
can be more wretched ? For as to tiiat evil
spirit, even though he despised men, yet he
yielded to the command of Clirist, and
quickly sprang out of the man's body; but
this man yields not even to His command-
ment. See at least how he daily hears Him
saying, "Ye cannot serve God and mam-
mon,''* and threatening hell, and the incura-
ble torments, and obeys not: not tliat He is
stronger than Christ, but because against our
will Christ corrects us not.^ Therefore such
men live as in desert places, though they be
in the midst of cities. For who, that hath
reason, would choose to be with such men ?
I for my part would sooner consent to dwell
with ten thousand demoniacs, than with one
diseased in this way.

And that I am not mistaken in saying this,
is manifest from their respective feelings.
For these last account him an enemy that
hath done them no wrong, and desire even
to take him for a slave when he is free, and
encompass him witii ten thousand evils; but
the demoniacs do no such thing, but toss
their disease to and fro within themselves.
And while these overturn many houses, and
cause the name of God to be blasphemed,
and are a pest to the city and to the whole
earth; they that are troul)led by evil spirits,
deserve rather our pity and our tears. .And
the one for the more part act in insensibility,
but the others are frantic while they reason,
keeping their orgies in tlie mitlst of cities,
ami maddened with some new kind of mad-
ness. l''or what do all the demoniacs so bad,
as what Judas dared to do, when he showed
forth that extremity of wickedness? Ami all
too that imitate liitn, like tierce wild beasts
escaped from their cage, tr()ul)le their cities,
no man restraining them. For these also
have bonds uj)on them on every sitle; such as
the fears of the judges, the threatening of
the laws, the condemnation of the multitude,


4 M«lt. vi. «4.


5 fow ff»»J>tfoi-is««l


194


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXVIII.


and other things more than these; yet burst-
ing asunder even these, they turn all things
upside down. And should any one remove
these altogether from them, then would he
know assuredly the demon that is in them to
be far fiercer, and more frantic than he who
is just now gone forth.

But since this may not be, let us for the
time suppose it for argument's sake: and let
us take off from him all his chains, and then
shall we clearly know his manifest madness.
But be not afraid of the monster, when we
urrcover it; for it is the representation, in
word, not the thing in truth. Let there be
then some man, darting fire from his eyes,
black, having from either shoulder serpents
hanging down instead of hands; and let him
have also a mouth, with sharp swords set in it
instead of teeth, and for a tongue a gushing
fountain of poison and some baneful drug;
and a belly more consuming than any fur-
nace, devouring all that is cast unto it, and a
sort of winged feet more vehement than any
flame; and let his face be made up of a dog
and of a wolf; and let him utter nothing
human, but something discordant, and un-
pleasing, and terrible; and let him have also
in his hands a firebrand. Perhaps what we
have said seems to you to be terrible, but we
have not even yet fashioned him worthily;
for together with these things we must add
others besides. I mean, that he is also to
slay them that meet with him, to devour them,
to fasten upon their flesh.

Yet is the covetous man much more fierce
even than this, assailing all like hell, swallow-
ing all up, going about a common enemy to
the race of men. Why, he would have no
man exist, that he may possess all things.
And he stops not even at this, but when in
his longing he shall have destroyed all men,
he longs also to mar the substance of the
earth, and to see it all become gold; nay, not
the earth only, but hills also, and woods, and
fountains, and in a word all things that ap-
pear.

And to convince you that not even yet have
we set forth his madness, let there be no man
to accuse and frighten him, but take away the
terror of the laws in supposition awhile, and
thou wilt see him snatching up a sword, lay-
ing violent hands on all, and sparing none;
neither friend, nor kmsman, nor brother, nor
even his very parent. Nay rather, in this
case there is not even need of supposing, but
let us ask him, if he is not for ever framing
to himself such imaginations, and if he does
not in thought range among all men to de-
stroy them; both friends and kinsmen, and
even his very parents. Nay rather there is


no need even to ask, because in truth all men
know that they who are under the power of
this disease are wearied even of their father's
old age; and that which is sweet, and uni-
versally desirable, the having children, they
esteem grievous and unwelcome: many at
least with this view have even paid money to
be childless, and have maimed their nature,
not only by slaying their children after birth,
but by not suffering them even to be born at
all.

6. Marvel not, therefore, if we have thus
sketched the covetous man (for in truth he
is far worse than what we have said); but let
us consider how we shall deliver him from the
demon. How then shall we deliver him ? If
he may be clearly made aware, that his love
of money stands very much in his way in re-
spect of this very object, the gaining of
money; for they that wish to gain in little
things undergo great losses; whence accord-
ingly a proverb hath been put forth to this
same effect.' Many, for instance, on many
occasions, wishing to lend at large usury, and
through the expectation of gain not having
inquired about them who receive their money,
have together with the interest lost also all
their capital. Others again falling into dan-
gers, and not willing to give up a little, have
together with the substance lost their life too.

Again, when it has been in men's power to
purchase either gainful offices, or some other
such thing, by some trifling meanness they
have lost all. For because they know not
how to sow, but have ever practised reaping,
they of course continually fail of their har-
vest. For no man can be always reaping, as
neither can he be always gaining. Therefore
since they are not willing to spend, neither
do they know how to gain. And should they
have to take a wife, the same thing again be-
falls them; for either they are deceived into
taking a poor wife for a rich one, or when
they have brought home one that is rich, but
full of faults without number, here too they
have incurred more loss than gain. For it is
not superfluity, but virtue, that causes wealth.
For what profit is there of her wealth, when
she is expensive and dissolute, and scatters
all abroad more vehemently than any wind ?
What if she be unchaste, and bring in num-
berless lovers ? what if she be drunken ?
Will she not quickly make her husband the
poorest of men ? But they do not only
marry, but also buy at great risk, from their
great covetousness, laboring to find not good
slaves, but cheap ones.


I Perhaps the p^pOcrea xaAicecuji', of which Erasmus says, " Con-
veniet uti, quoties cfficium aut iniinus longe impari munere
pensatur. . . . Admissus est in amicitiatn principis^sedexczdit
ex amicitia Ckristi." Adag. Chil. i, Cent. ii. Prov. i.


Homily XXIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


^95


Consider then all these things (for the
words concerning hell and the kingdom ye
are not yet able to hear), and bearing in mind '
the losses which ye have often undergone
from your love of money, in loans, and in j
purchases, and in marriages, and in offices of
power, and in all the rest; withdraw your-
selves from doaiing on money.

For so shall ye be able to live the present


life in security, and after a little advance to
hear also the words that treat on self-govern-
ment, and see through and look upon the
very Sun of Righteousness, and to attain unto
the good things promised by Him; unto
which God grant we may all attain, by the
grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might
forever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XXIX.


Matt. IX. i, 2.


**And He entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into His own city. And, behold,
they brought to Him a man sick of the palsy, lying on a bed: and Jesus seeing their
faith said unto the sick of the palsy; Son, be of good cheer; thy sins be forgiven thee." '


By His own city here he means Capernaum.
For that which gave Him birth was Bethle-
hem; that which brought Him up, Nazareth;
that which had Him continually inhabiting it,
Capernaum.

This paralytic, however, was different from
that one who is set forth in John." For he
lay at the pool, but this at Capernaum; and
that man had his infirmity thirty and eight
years, but concerning this, no such thing is
mentioned; and the other was in a state des-
titute of protectors, but this had some to take
care of him, who also took him up, and car-
ried him. And to this He saith, "Son, thy
sins be forgiven thee," ' but to that He saith,
"Wilt thou be made whole ?"3 And the
other He healed on a sabbath day, but this
not on a sabbath, for else the Jews would
have laid this also to His charge; and in the
case of this man they were silent, but in that
of the other they were instant in persecuting
him.

And this I have said, not without purpose,
lest any one should think tiiere is a discrep-
ancy from suspecting it to be one and the
same jxiralytic.

But do thou, I pray thee, mark the humility
and meekness of our Lord. For He had also
before this put away the multitudes from
Him, and moreover when sent away iiy them
at (iadara, He witlistood not, but retired, not
however to any great distance.


'[R. v., accepting the sumc Greek text with Chrytottom,
'thy sin* arc forgiven." — R.]
' John V. 1. J John V. 6.


And again He entered into the ship and
passed over, when He might have gone over
afoot. For it was His will not to be always
doing miracles, that He might not injure the
doctrine of His humanity. ■•

Now Matthew indeed saith, that "they
brought him," but the others, that they also
broke up the roof, and let him down.^ And
they put the sick man before Christ, saying
nothing, but committing the whole to Him.
For though in the beginning He Himself went
about, and did not require so much faith of
them that came unto Him; yet in this case
they both approached Him, and had faith
required on their part. For, "Seeing," it is
said, " their faitli; " that is, the faith of them
that had let the man down. For He doth
not on all occasions require faith on the part
of the sick only: as for instance, wlien tl»ey
are insane, or in any otlier way, through ttieir
disease, are out of their own ccMitrol. Or
rather, in this case the sick man too had part
in the faith; for he wouk! not have suffered
himself to be let down, unless lie had believed.

Forasmuch then as they had evinced so
great faith, He also evinces His own power.
with all autliority absolving his sins, and sig-
nifying in all ways that He is equal in lienor
witli Hini tliat I)eg;it Him. And mark; He
implied it from tiie beginning, by His teach-
ing, when He t;iught tlu-m ;is one having


4 Ty T^t ai<ofofiia< Aoyy. [" 1 luuriiution " r»|irr->%r< bcttrr the
Irchniiul Hcnnr of l he (i reck term, tu here used. Coiiip. Humily
XIll. J, l>. Hi. note R.)

5 .Murk ii. 4-; Luke v. 19.


196


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXIX.


authority; by the leper, when He said, "I
will, be thou clean/' ' by the centurion, when
upon his saying, " Speak the word only, and
my servant shall be healed. He marvelled at
him," ^ and celebrated him above all men; by
the sea, ivhen He curbed it with a mere word;
by the devils, when they acknowledged Him
as their judge, and He cast them out with
great authority.

Here again in another and a greater way
He constrains His very enemies to confess
His equality in honor, and by their own
mouth He makes it manifest. For He, to
signify His indifference to honor (for there
stood a great company of spectators shutting
up the entrance, wherefore also they let him
down from above), did not straightway hasten
to heal the visible body, but He takes His
occasion from them; and He healed first that
which is invisible, the soul, by forgiving his
sins; which indeed saved the other, but
brought no great glory to Himself. They
themselves rather, troubled by their malice,
and wishing to assail Him, caused even
against their will what was done to be con-
spicuous. He, in fact, in His abundance of
counsel, made use of their envy for the man-
ifestation of the miracle.

Upon their murmuring,^ then, and saying,
"This man blasphemeth; who can forgive
sins but God only ? "* let us see what He saith.
Did He indeed take away the suspicion ?
And yet if He were not equal, He should
have said, " Why fix upon me a notion which
is not convenient ? I am far from this
power." But now hath He said none of
these things, but quite the contrary He hath
both affirmed and ratified, as well by His own
voice, as by the performance of the miracle.
Thus, it appearing that His saying certain
things of himself gave disgust to his hearers.
He affirms what He had to say concerning
Himself by the others; and what is truly
marvellous, not by His friends only, but also
by His enemies; for this is the excellency of
His wisdom. By His friends on the one
hand, when He said, "I will, be thou
clean," 5 and when He said, "J have not
found so great faith, no, not in Israel; " * but
by His enemies, now. For because they had
said, " No man can forgive sins but God
only," He subjoined,

" But that ye may know that the Son of
Man hath power to forgive sins upon the
earth (then saith He to the sick of the palsy).


I Matt. viii. 3. 2 Matt. viii. 8.

3 [eSopv/SoOi/To ; a stronger word than the Gospel narratives
suggest. I'he translator tones it down, as above. — R.]

4 Matt. viii. 3. Comp. Mark ii. 7 [from which the latter part
of the citation is taken. — R.]

5 Matt. viii. 3. 6 Matt. viii. 10.


Arise, and take up thy bed, and go unto thine
house." 7

And not here only, but also in another case
again, when they were saying, " For a good
work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy,
and because that thou, being a man, makest
thyself God."^ neither in that instance did
He put down this opinion, but again con-
firmed it, saying, "If I do not the works of
my Father, believe me not; but if I do,
though ye believe not me, believe the
works." 9

2. In this case indeed He discloses also
another sign, and that no small one, of His
own Godhead, and of His equality in honor
with the Father. For whereas they said,
"To unbind sins pertains to God only," He
not only unbinds sins, but also before this
He makes another kind of display in a thing
which pertained to God only; the publishing
the secrets in the heart. For neither had they
uttered what they were thinking.

For "behold, certain of the scribes," it
saith, ' ' said within themselves. This man blas-
phemeth. And Jesus knowing their thoughts,
said, Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts ?"'"

But that it belongs to God only to know
men's secrets, hear what saith the prophet,
"Thou most entirely alone" knowest the
hearts; " ^^ and again, " God trieth the hearts
and reins;'3" and Jeremiah too saith, "The
heart is deep above all things, and it is man,
and who shall know him ? " "* and, " Man shall
look on the face, but God on the heart." '^
And by many things one may see, that to
know what is in the mind belongs to God
alone.

Implying therefore that He is God, equal
to Him that begat Him; what things they
were reasoning in themselves (for through
fear of the multitude, they durst not utter
their mind), this their opinion He unveils
and makes manifest, evincing herein also His
great gentleness."^

"For wherefore," saith He, "think ye
evil in your hearts ? " '^

And yet if there were cause for displeas-
ure, it was the sick man who should have
been displeased, as being altogether deceived,
and should have said, " One thing I came to
have healed, and amendest Thou another?
Why, whence is it manifest that my sins are
forgiven ? "

But now he for his part utters no such
word, but gives himself up to the power of

7 Matt. viii. 6. [" Upon the earth " is placed in this peculiar
position by Chrysostom here. In the next reference to the pas-
sage the correct order is followed. — R.]

8 John X. 33. 9 John x. 37, 38. 'o Matt. ix. 3, 4.
/lioi'luTaTo?. I- 2 Chron. vi. 30. i3 Ps. vii. 9.


14 Jer. .wii. 9, Lxx.
J? Matt. ix. 4.


15 I Sam. xvi. 7.


ax^ej.


Homily XXIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


197


the healer; but these being curious and en-
vious, plot against the good deeds of others.
Wherefore He rebukes them indeed, but with
all gentleness. "Why, if ye disbelieve,"
saith He, "what went before, and account
my saying a boast; behold I add to it also
another, the uncovering of your secrets;, and
after that again another." What then is
this ? The giving tone to the body of the
paralyzed.

And whereas, when He spake unto the sick
of the palsy, He spake without clearly mani-
festing His own authority: for He said not,
" I forgive thee thy sins," but, '' thy sins be
forgiven thee: " upon their constraining. He
discloses His authority more clearly, saying,
" But that ye may know tiiat the Son of Man
hath power" on earth to forgive sins."

Seest thou, how far He was from unwilling-
ness to be thought equal to the Father ? For
He said not at all, "The Son of Man hath
need of another; " or, " He hath given Him
authority," but, "He hath authority."
Neither doth He say it for love of honor, but
"to convince you," so He speaks, "that I
do not blaspheme in making myself equal
with God.''

Thus everywhere His will is to offer proofs
clear and indisputable; as when He saith,
" Go thy way, show thyself to the priest; " -
and when He points to Peter's wife's mother
ministering, and permits the swine to cast
themselves down headlong. And in the same
manner here also; first, for a certain token
of the forgiveness of his sins. He provides
the giving tone to his body: and of that
again, his carrying his bed; to hinder the
fact from being thought a mere fancy. And
He doeth not this, before He had asked them
a question. " For whether is easier," saith
He, "to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee? or
to say. Take up thy bed, and go unto thine
house? "3 Now what He saith is like this,
"Which seems to you easier, to bind up a
disorgani/.ed ■• body, or to undo^ the sins of a
soul? It is quite manifest; to bind u]) a
body. For. by how much a soul is better
than a l)ody, l)y so much is the doing away
sins a greater work than this; but because
the one is unseen, the other in sight, I throw
in that, wliich although an inferior tiling, is
yet more open to sense; that the greater also
and the unseen may thereby receive its
proof;'' thus by His works anticipating even


■ [R. v., ninrKin, " authority ;" compnre the next paragraph.
On tht; ordiT, see note 7, p. 196. — R J

'J Mntt. viii. 4. 3 Matt. ix. ;, 6.

4 iiifiici<rfj.ivov,\\lrr:i\\y, " <l!<itributc<l intoclifTcrctil haliitiitiiins;"
as when ihr pupulation of M; iitinrii was lirokrn up by tlir Ijiie-
(la'mnnians, otifiKiafii) i) iiayjivtia : iu:c Xcn, HelleHU , v. j, 7 ;
comp. Drin. Je J'acf, i. 59, cJ. Rciskc ; </•• Fait. Leg. i. 366.

5 AO<rat.


now the revelation of what had been said by
John, that " He taketh away the sins of the
world."

[ Well then, having raised him up, He sends
; him to His house; here again signifying His
unboastfulness,* and that the event was not a
mere imagination; for He makes the same
persons witnesses of his infirmity, and also of
his health. For I indeed had desired, saith
He, through thy calamity to heal those also,
that seem to be in health, but are diseased in
mind; but since they will not, depart t!iou
home, to heal them that are there.

Seest thou how He indicates Him' to be
Creator both of souls and bodies ? He heals
therefore the palsy in each of the two sub-
stances, and makes the invisible evident by
that which is in sight. But nevertheless they
still creep upon the earth.

" For when the multitudes saw it, they
marvelled, and glorified God, which'' (it is
said) "had given such power unto men:"*
for the flesh was an offense unto them.' But
He did not rebuke them, but proceeds by His
works to arouse them, and exalt their
thoughts. Since for the time it was no small
thing for Him to be thought greater than all
men, as having come from God. For had
they well established these things in their own
minds, going on orderly they would have
known, that He was even the Son of God.
But they did not retain these things clearly,
wherefore neither were they able to approach
Him. For they said again, "This man is
not of God; " '° " how is this man of God ? "
And they were continually harping on these
things, putting them forward as cloaks for
their own passions.

3. Which thing many now also do; and
thinking to avenge God, fulfill their own pas-
sions, when they ought to go about all with
moderation. For even the God of all, hav-
ing power to launch His thunderbolt against
them that blasjiheme Him, makes tiie sun to
rise, and semis forth the showers, and affords
them all other things in abundance; whom
we ought to imitate, and so to entreat, advise,
admonish, with meekness, not angry, not
m;iking ourselves wild lieasts.

For no harm at all ensues unto God by
their blas|)hemy, th.it thou sliouldest be
angered, but he who blasphemed hatli himself
also received the wound. Wherefore groan,
bewail, for the calamity indeed deserves
tears. And the wounded man, again,— noth-

* [to aTv4>ov.'\

7 [ I hr rrtrrrnce here necinii to be to ritxl, but a rrflmive mom


in not iiii|>rfibablc ; " in<li
« Malt, ix «. Ik, \
vcllc.l " (A. V.» But i '
rcceivrcl, f.illnwcil bythc A. V.J
9 iTfMytftcyraro avroK.


tl- (I.


!.• \


John ix. 16.


198


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXX.


ing can so heal him as gentleness: gentleness,
I say, which is mightier than any force.

See, for example, how He Himself, the in-
sulted one, discourses with us, both in the
Old Testament, and in the New; in the one
saying, " O my people, what have I done unto
thee ?" " in the other, " Saul, Saul, why per-
secutest thou me." ^ And Paul too bids, *' In
meekness instruct those that oppose them-
selves." ^ And Christ again, when His disci-
ples had come to Him, requiring fire to come
down from heaven, strongly rebuked them,
saying, " Ye know not what, manner of spirit
ye are of." "*

And here again He said not, " O accursed,
and sorcerers as ye are; O ye envious, and
enemies of men's salvation;" but, "Where-
fore think ye evil in your hearts ? "

We must, you see, use gentleness to eradi-
cate the disease. Since he who is become
better through the fear of man, will quickly
return to wickedness again. For this cause
He commanded also the tares to be left, giv-
ing an appointed day of repentance. Yea,
and many of them in fact repented, and be-
came good, who before were bad; as for
instance, Paul, the Publican, the Thief; for
these being really tares turned into kindly
wheat. Because, although in the seeds this
cannot be, yet in the human will it is both


I Micah vi. 3. 2 Acts ix. 4. 3 2 Tim. ii. 25.

4 Luke ix. 55. [This clause is not found in the oldest Greek
MSS, of the New Testament. Comp. R. V. text and margin. — R.]


manageable and easy; for our will is bound
by no limits of nature, but hath freedom of
choice for its privilege.

Accordingly, when thou seest an enemy of
the truth, wait on him, take care of him, lead
him back into virtue, by showing forth an
excellent life, by applying " speech that can-
not be condemned," ^ by bestowing attention
and tender care, by trying every means of
amendment, in imitation of the best physi-
cians. For neither do they cure in one
manner only, but when they see the wound
not yield to the first remedy, they add an-
other, and after that again another; and now
they use the knife, and now bind up. And
do thou accordingly, having become a physi-
cian of souls, put in practice every mode of
cure according to Christ's laws; that thou
mayest receive the reward both of saving thy-
self and of profiting others, doing all to the
glory of God, and so being glorified also
thyself. "For them that glorify me," saith
He, "I will glorify; and they that despise
me, shall be lightly esteemed." ^

Let us, I say, do all things unto His. glory;
that we may attain unto that blessed portion,
unto which God grant we may all attain, by
the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might for-
ever and ever. Amen.

5 Tit. ii. 8.

6 I Sam. ii. 30. [" Shall be despised," according to the form
given in the text. But in the Lxx. the last verb is not the same as
the preceding one. — R.]


HOMILY XXX.

Matt. IX. 9.

"And as Jesus passed forth from thence, He saw a man sitting at the receipt of custom,'
named Matthew; and He saith unto him, Follow me."


For when He had performed the miracle,
He did not remain, lest, being in sight, He
should kindle their jealousy the more; but
He indulges them by retiring, and soothing
their passion. This then let us also do, not
encountering them that are plotting against
us; let us rather soothe their wound, giving
way and relaxing their vehemence.

But wherefore did He not call him together

I [R. v., " at the place of toll."]


with Peter and John and the rest? As in
their case He had come at that time, when
He knew the men would obey Him; so Mat-
thew also He then called when He was assured
he would yield himself. And therefore Paul
again He took, as a fisher his prey, after the
resurrection. Because He who is acquainted
with the hearts, and knows the secrets of
each man's mind, knew also when each of
these would obey. Therefore not at the be-
ginning did He call him, when he was yet in


Homily XXX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


199


rather a hardened state, but after His count-
less miracles, and the great fame concerning
Him, when He knew him to have actually
become more prepared for obedience.

And we have cause also to admire the self-
denial' of ttie evangelist, how he disguises
not his own former life, but adds even his
name, when the others had concealed him
under another appellation. -

But why did he say he was " sitting at the
receipt of custom ? " To indicate the power
of Him that called him, that it was not when
he had left off or forsaken this wicked trade,
but from the midst of the evils He drew him
up; much as He converted the blessed Paul
also when frantic and raging, and darting
fire; which thing he himself makes a proof of
the power of Him that called him, saying to
the Galatians, " Ye have heard of my conver-
sation in time past in the Jews' religion, how
that beyond measure I persecuted the church
of God." 3 And the fishermen too He called
when they were in the midst of their business.
But that was a craft not indeed in bad report,
but of men rather rudely bred, not mingling
with others, and endowed with great simplic-
ity; wliereas the pursuit now in question was
one full of all insolence and boldness, and a
mode of gain whereof no fair account could
be given, a shameless traffic, a robbery under
cloak of law: yet nevertheless He who uttered
the call was ashamed of none of these things.

And why talk I of His not being ashamed
of a publican ? since even with regard to a
harlot woman, so far from being ashruned to
call her, He actually permitted her to ki.ss
His feet, and to moisten them with her tears. "•
Yea, for to this end He came, not to cure
bodies only, but to heal likewise the wicked-
ness of the soul. Which He did also in the
case of the paralytic; and having shown
clearly that He is al)le to forgive sins, then,
not before, He comes to him whom we are
now speaking of; that they might no more
be troubled at seeing a publican chosen into
the choir of the disciples. For He that hath
power to undo all our offenses, why marvel if
He even make this man an apostle ?

But as thou hast seen the power of Him
that called, so consider also the obedience of
him that was called: how he neither resisted,
nor disi)uting said, " What is this? Is it not
indeed a deceitful calling, wlierewitli He calls
me, being such as 1 am?" nay; for tliis
luimility again had jjcen out of season: but
he ol)cyccl straightway, and did not even rt*-
quest to go home, and to communicate will)
his relations concerning this matter; as


'neither indeed did the fishermen; but as they
left their net and their ship and their father,
so did he his receipt of custom and his gain,
and followed, exliibiting a mind prepared for
all things; and breaking himself at once away
from all worldly things, by !iis complete obe-
dience he bare witness iliat He who called
him had chosen a good time.

i And wherefore can it be, one may say, that
he hath not told us of the others also, how
and in what manner they were called; but
only of Peter and James, and John and
Philip, and nowhere of the others ?5

Because these more than others were in so
strange and mean ways of life. For there is
nothing either worse than the publican's bus-
iness, or more ordinary than fishing. And
that Philip also was among the very ignoble,
is manifest from his country. Therefore
these especially tliey proclaim to us, with
their ways of life, to show that we ought to
believe them in the glorious parts of their his-
tories also. For they who choose not to pass
by any of the things whch are accounted re-
proachful, but are exact in publishing these
more than the rest, whether they relate to the
Teacher or to the disciples; how can they be
suspected in the parts which claim reverence ?
more especially since many signs and miracles
are passed over by them, while the events of
the cross, accounted to be reproaches, they
utter with exact care and loudly; and the
disciples' pursuits too, and their faults, and
those of their Master's ancestry wlio were
notorious for sins," they discover with a clear

i voice. Whence it is manifest that they made
much account of truth, and wrote nothing for
favor, nor for display.

2. Having therefore called him. He also
honored him with a very great honor by par-
taking straightway of his table; for in this
way He would both give him good hope for
the future, and lead him on to a greater con-
fidence.^ For not in a long time, but at
once. He healed his vice. Ami not with him
only doth. He sit down to meat, but with
many others also; although this very thing
wis accounted a cliarge against Him, that He
chasetl not away tlie sinners. Ihit neither do
they conceal this point, what sort of blame
is endeavored to be fixed on His proceedings.
Now the publicans come together as to one
of tlie same trade; for lie, exulting" in the
entrance of C'lirist, had called them all to-
gether. The fact is, Christ used to try every
kind of treatment; and not wlien discoursing
only, nor wlu-n ht-aling, nor wiien reproving


' ^lAoo'oifiiai',
3 Cal. i. I j.


3 Nfitrk ii. 14 ; Luke v. ^7.

4 Luke vii, ji.


Sit appcnraby thia that St. ChrvMniom diil not cuiuider N«-
thaiiurl 111 lie the uiiiie with Si. Ilarlliolomrw

^ Mud. iii. (: 7 mai>in)9iav. ■* <Y«aAA>>iii{6M<>'<K.


200


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXX.


His enemies, but even at His morning meal,
He would often correct such as were in a bad
way; hereby teaching us, that every season
and every work may by possibility afford us
profit. And yet surely what was then set be-
fore them came of injustice and covetousness;
but Christ refused not to partake of it, be-
cause the ensuing gain was to be great: yea
rather He becomes partaker of the same roof
and table with them that have committed
such offenses. For such is the quality of a
physician; unless he endure the corruption of
the sick, he frees them not from their infirmity.

And yet undoubtedly He incurred hence
an evil report; first by eating with him, then
in Matthew's house, and thirdly, in company
with many publicans. See at least how they
reproach Him with this. " Behold a man
gluttonous, and a winebibber, a friend of
publicans and sinners. '''

Let them hear, as many as are striving to
deck themselves with great honor for fasting,
and let them consider that our Lord was
called " a man gluttonous and a winebibber, "
and He was not ashamed, but overlooked
all these things, that he might accomplish
what He had set before him; which indeed
was accordingly done. For the publican was
actually converted, and thus became a better
man.

And to teach thee that this great thing was
wrought by his partaking of the table with
Him, hear what Zacchseus saith, another
publican. I mean, when he heard Christ
saying, " To-day, I must abide in thy
house," the delight gave him wings, and he
saith, "The half of my goods I give to the
poor, and if I have taken anything from any
man by false accusation, I restore him four-
fold."^ And to him Jesus saith, "This day
is salvation come to this house." So possi-
ble is it by all ways to give instruction.

But how is it, one may say, that Paul com-
mands, " If any man that is called a brother
be a fornicator or covetous, with such an one
no, not to eat ? " ^ In the first place, it is not
as yet manifest, whether to teachers also he
gives this charge, and not rather to brethren
only. Next, these were not yet of the num-
ber of the perfect, "* nor of those who had be-
come brethren. And besides, Paul com-
mands, even with respect to them that had
become brethren, then to shrink from them,
when they continue as they were, but these
had now ceased, and were converted.

3. But none of these things shamed the
Pharisees, but they accuse Him to His dis-
ciples, saying,


' Matt. xi. ig.
3 I Cor. V. II.


2 Luk: .\ix. 5, 8, 9.
4 amqpTLfffXGVwv.


" Why eateth your Master with publicans
and sinners ? '^^

And when the disciples seem to be doing
wrong, they intercede with Him, saying,
" Behold thy disciples do that which is not
lawful to do on the sabbath -day; " * but here
to them they discredit Him. All which was
the part of men dealing craftily, and wishing
to separate from the Master the choir of the
disciples.

What then saith Infinite Wisdom ?

"They that be whole need not a physi-
cian," saith He, " but they that are sick.^' '

See how He turned their reasoning to the
opposite conclusion. That is, while they
made it a charge against Him that He was in
company with these men: He on the contrary
saith, that His not being with them would be
unworthy of Him, and of His love of man;
and that to amend such persons is not only
blameless, but excellent, and necessary, and
deserving of all sorts of praise.

After this, that He might not seem to put
them that were bidden to shame, by saying,
" they that are sick; " see how He makes up
for it again, by reproving the others, and
saying,

"Go ye and learn what that meaneth, I
will have mercy, and not sacrifice."^

Now this He said, to upbraid them with
their ignorance of the Scriptures. Wherefore
also He orders His discourse more sharply,
not Himself in anger, far from it; but so as
that the publicans might not be in utter per-
plexity.

And yet of course He might say, " Did ye
not mark, how I remitted the sins of the sick
of the palsy, how I braced up his body?"
But He saith no such thing, but argues with
them first from men's common reasonings,
and then from the Scriptures. For having
said, " They that be whole need not a physi-
cian, but they that are sick;" and having
covertly indicated that He Himself was the
Physician; after that He said, "Go ye and
learn what that meaneth, I will have mercy,
and not sacrifice." Thus doth Paul also:
when he had first established his reasoning
by illustrations from common things, and had
said, "Who feedeth a flock, and eateth not
of the milk thereof? " ^ then he brings in the
Scripture.; also, saying, " It is written in the
law of Moses, Thou shalt not muzzle the ox
that treadeth out the corn;"'" and again,
" Even so hath the Lord ordained, that they


5 Matt. ix. II. 6 Matt. xii. 2.

7 Matt. ix. 12. [R. v., " They that are whole have no need of
a physician."]

8 Matt. ix. 13. 9 I Cor. ix. 7.

10 I Cor. ix. 9. [R. v., "when he treadeth."] See Deut. xxv. 4.


Homily XXX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


20I


which preach the gospel should live of the
gospel." '

But to His disciples not so, but He puts
them in mind of His signs, saying on this
wise, " Do ye not yet remember the five
loaves of the five thousand, and how many
baskets ye took up ? " - Not so however with
these, but He reminds them of our common
infirmity, and signifies them at any rate to be
of the number of the infirm; who did not so
much as know the Scriptures, but making
light of the rest of virtue, laid all the stress
on their sacrifices; which thing He is also
earnestly intimating unto them, when He sets
down in brief what had been afTfirmed by all
the prophets, 3 saying, " Learn ye what that
meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacri-
fice."

The fact is, He is signifying hereby that
not He was transgressing the law, but they;
as if He had said, ''Wherefore accuse me?
Because I bring sinners to amendment ?
Why then ye must accuse the Father also for
this." Much as He said also elsewhere, es-
tablishing this point: " My Father worketh
hitherto, and I work:"* so here again, "Go
ye and learn what that meaneth, I will have
mercy, and not sacrifice." "For as this is
His will, saith Christ, so also mine." Seest
thou how the one is superfluous, the other
necessary? For neither did He say, " I will
have mercy, and sacrifice," but, " I will have
mercy, and not sacrifice." That is, the one
thing He allowed, tlie other He cast out; and
proved that what they blamed, so far from
being forbidden, was even ordained by the
law, and more so than sacrifice; and He
brings in the Old Testament, speaking words
and ordaining laws in harmony with Himself.

Having then reproved tliem, both by com-
mon illustrations and by tlie Scriptures, He
adds again,

" I am not come to call righteous men, but
sinners to repentance." s

And this He saith unto them in irony; as
when He said, " Behold, Adam is become as
one of us; "* antl again, " If I were hungry,
I would not tell tliee." ^ For that no man on
earth was riglitcous, Paul declared, saying,
" For all have smned, and come short of the
glory of God."*^ And by this too the others
were comforted, I mean, the guests. " Why,
I am so far," saith He, " from loathing sin-
ners, that even for their sakes only am I

' I Cor. ix. 14 ; comp. Matt. x. 10. » Mntt. xvi. 0.

3 Sec Hosca vi. 6; I's. 1. 8-15; Prov, xxi. 3; Isa. i. 11-15;
Micah vi. 6, 7, 8.

* (ohn V. 17,

5 Nlatt. ix. n. [The bent (Ireck Mss., with the Viil>;aCc (no
Augtixtin) d<) not suxtain the rradinK : " unto rc|ieiituncc."
Comp. I, like V. 32. — R.]

* (Icii. lii. aa, 1.XX. 7 IN. I. u. " Rimi. iii. aj.


come." Then, lest He should make them
more careless, He staid not at the word
"sinners," but added, "unto repentance."
" For I am not come that they should con-
tinue sinners, but that they should alter, and
amend."

4. He then having stopped their mouths
every way, as well from the Scriptures as
from the natural consequence of things; and
they having nothing to say, proved as they
were obnoxious to the charges which they
had brought against Him, and adversaries of
the law and the Old Testament; they leave
Him, and again transfer their accusation to
the disciples.

And Luke indeed affirms that the Phari-
sees said it, but this evangelist, that it was
the disciples of John;' but it is likely that
both said it. That is, they being, as might
be expected, in utter perplexity, take the
other sort witli them; as they did afterwards
vvith the Herodians likewise. Since in truth
John's disciples were always disposed to be
jealous of Him, and reasoned against Him:
being then only humbled, when first John
abode in the prison. They came at least
then, "and told Jesus;"'''' but afterwards
they returned to their former envy.

Now what say they? "Why do we and
the Pharisees fast oft, but thy disciples fast

I not?" "

; This is the disease, which Christ long be-
fore was eradicating, in the words, " When
thou fastest, anoint thy head, and wash thy
face;"'- foreknowing the evils that spring

j therefrom. But yet He doth not rebuke
even these, nor say, "O ye vainglorious and
over-busy; " but He discourses to them with
all gentleness, saying, "The children of the
bridechamber cannot fast, as long as the
bridegroom is with them."" Thus, when
others were to be spoken for, the publicans I
mean, to sootiie their wounded soul, He was
more severe in His reproof of their revilcrs;
but when they were dcriiling Himself and
His disciples. He makes His reply with all
gentleness.

Now their meaning is like this; " Granted,"
say they, "Thou doest this as a j^hysician;
why do Thy disciples also leave fasting, anil
cleave to such tables?" Then, to make tlie
accusation heavier, they put themselves first,
and then the Pharisees; wisliing by the com-
parison to aggravate tlie charge. For inilecd

."both we," it is said, "and the Pharisees,

Ifast oft." Anil in truth they did fast, the
one having learnt it frdiu Joiui, the other

I 9 Comp. Matt. {x. 14 ; I.uke v. 31, ftc, and Mark il. 18, tie.
""See Malt. XIV. ij. •' Mali. ix. 14. '•' Mull. vl. 17.

M Malt. ix. 15. Comp. Mark li. ly ; I.uke v. jj.


202


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXX.


from the law; even as also the Pharisee said,
" I fast twice in the week."'

What then saith Jesus? "Can the chil-
dren of the bridechamber fast, while the bride-
groom is with them". " Before, He called
Himself a physician, but here a bridegroom;
by these names revealing His unspeakable
mysteries. Yet of course He might have
told them, more sharply, " These things de-
pend not on you, that you should make such
laws. For of what use is fasting, when the
mind is full of wickedness; when ye blame
others, when ye condemn them, bearing
about beams in your eyes, and do all for dis-
play ? Nay, before all this ye ought to have
cast out vainglory, to be proficients in all the
other duties, in charity, meekness, brotherly
love." However, nothing of this kind doth
He say, but with all gentleness, " The chil-
dren of the bridechamber cannot fast, so long
as the bridegroom is with them;" recalling to
their mind John's words, when he said, " He
that hath the bride, is the bridegroom, but
the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth
and heareth Him, rejoiceth greatly because
of the bridegroom's voice," ^

Now His meaning is like this: The present
time is of joy and gladness, therefore do not
bring in the things which are melancholy.
For fasting is a melancholy thing, not in its
own nature, but to them that are yet in rather
a feeble state; for to those at least that are
willing to practise self-command, the observ-
ance is exceedingly pleasant and desirable.
For as when the body is in health, the spirits
are high,^ so when the soul is well condi-
tioned, the pleasure is greater. But accord-
ing to their previous impression He saith
this. So also Isaiah,'' discoursing of it, calls
it " an affliction of the soul; " and Moses too
in like manner.

Not however by this only doth He stop
their mouths, but by another topic also, say i ng,

" Days will come, when the bridegroom
shall be taken from them, and then shall they
fast. "5

For hereby He signifies, that what they did
was not of gluttony, but pertained to some
marvellous dispensation. And at the same
time He lays beforehand the foundation of
what He was to say touching His passion, in
His controversies with others instructing His
disciples, and training them now to be versed
in the things which are deemed sorrowful.
Because for themselves already to have this
said to them, would have been grievous and
galling, since we know that afterwards, being

' Luke xviii. 12. ^ John iii. zg. 3 [ttoAAt) ri ev<^po<riiKij.]
.' Isa. ' ''


4 Lit., " humiliation

5 Matt. ix. 15.


Isa. Iviii. 3 ; Numb. xxi.x. 7.


Uttered, it troubled them;* but spoken to
others, it would become rather less intolera-
ble to them.

It being also natural for them to pride
themselves on John's calamity. He from this
topic represses likewise such their elation:
the doctrine however of His resurrection He
adds not yet, it not being yet time. For so
much indeed was natural, that one supposed
to be a man should die, but that other was
beyond nature.

5. Then what He had done before, this
He doth here again. I mean, that as He,
when they were attempting to prove Him
blameable for eating with sinners, proved to
them on the contrary, that His proceeding
was not only no blame, but an absolute praise
to Him: so here too, when the}^ wanted to
show of Him, that He knows not how to
manage His disciples. He signifies that such
language was the part of men not knowing
how to manage their inferences,' but finding
fault at random.

"For no man," saith He, putteth a piece
of new cloth unto an old garment."*

He is again establishing His argument by
illustrations from common life. And what
He saith is like this, " The disciples have
not yet become strong, but still need much
condescension. They have not yet been re-
newed by the Spirit, and on persons in that
state one ought not to lay any burden of in-
junctions."

And these things He said, setting laws and
rules for His own disciples, that when they
should have to receive as disciples those of
all sorts that should come from the whole
world, they might deal with them very gently.

" Neither do m.en put new wine into old
bottles." 9

Seest thou His illustrations, how like the
Old Testament ? the garment ? the wine skins ?
For Jeremiah too calls the people " a girdle,"
and makes mention again of " bottles "and of
"wine."'° Thus, the discourse being about
gluttony and a table. He takes His illustra-
tions from the same.

But Luke" adds something more, that the
new also is rent, if thou put it upon the old.
Seest thou that so far from any advantage
taking place, rather the mischief is increased ?


6 Matt. xvi. 22, xvii. 23.

7 Kexpr)(T8aL Toi? eTrojuet'oi!, " to treat their followers." The
last editor thinks there is a designed play upon the words, by way
of rhetorical turn, here.

8 Matt. ix. 15. [The three accounts of the sayings in verses
15-17 vary greatly in form, and the authorities for the Greek text
present a great number of various readings. It will be sufficient
to refer to the R. V., and to note a few verbal changes. — R.]

9 Matt. ix. 17. [R. v., " wineskins." Comp. the next para-
graph.]

10 |er. xiii. 10-12. '' See Luke v. 36, 37. to xaiy'oy crxCitL.


Homily XXX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


20'


And while He speaks of the present, He
foretells also the future; as that they shall
hereafter be new, but until that come to pass,
nothing austere and grievous ought to be im-
posed on them. For he, saith Christ, that
seeks to instill the high doctrines before the
proper time, thenceforth not even when the
time calls will he find them to his purpose,
having once for all made them unprofitable.
And this comes to pass not l\v any fault of
the wine, nor of the deceivers, but from the
unseasonable act of them that put it in.

Hereby He hath taught us also the cause
of those lowly expressions, which He was
continually using in discourse with them.
That is, by reason of their infirmity He said
many things very short of His proper dignity:
which John also pointing out, relates Him to
have said, " I have many things to say unto
you, but ye cannot bear them now." ' Here,
that they might not suppose those things
only to be which He had spoken, but might
imagine to themselves others also, and far
greater; He set before them their own in-
firmity, with a promise that when they siiould
have become strong, He would tell them also
the rest; which thing He saith here too,
" Days will come, when the bridegroom shall
be taken from them, and then shall they
fast."

6. Therefore neither let us require all
things of all men in the beginning, but so
much as is possible; and soon shall we have
made our way to the rest. But if thou art
urgent and in haste, for this very cause I bid
thee urge not, l)ecause thou art in haste. And
if the saying seem to thee a riddle, learn it
from the very nature of the things, and then
wilt thou see the whole force thereof.

And let none move thee of those who find
fault unseasonably; since here too the cen-
surers were Pharisees, and the reproached,
disciples; nevertheless, none of these things
persuaded Christ to reverse His judgment,
neitiier did He say, " it is a shame for these
to fast, and for those not to fast." But as
the perfect pilot heeds not the troubled
waves, but his own art; so at that time did
Christ. For in truth it was a shame, not that
they should fori)car fasting, but that on ac-
count of the fast they should be wounded in
vital points, and be cut off, and broken away.

These things then let us also bear in mind,
and treat accordingly all those that l)elong
to us. Yea, if thou have a wife fond of
dress, gaping and eager after modes of paint-
ing the face, and dissolved in great luxury,
and talkative, and foolish (although it is not


of course possible that all these should con-
cur in one woman; however let us frame in
our discourse a woman of that sort).

"Why then is it," some one may say,
"that thou fashionest a woman, and not a
man?" There are men too worse than this
woman. But forasmuch as the authority is
intrusted to men, we accordingly are framing
a woman, for the present, not as though vice
more abounded in tliem. For there are many
things to be found in men also, which are not
amongst women; as for instance man-slaying,
breaking open of tombs, figiiting with wild
beasts, and many such like things. Think
not therefore that we do this as undervaluinjj:
the sex; it is not, it is not this, but thus it
was convenient at present to sketch out the
picture.

Let us then suppose such a woman, and let
her husband endeavor in every way to reform
her. How then shall he reform her? Not
by enjoining all at once, but the easier things
first, and in matters by which she is not
vehemently possessed. For if thou hasten to
reform her entirely at the beginning, thou
hast ruined all. Do not accordingly take off
her golden ornaments at once, but let her
have them, and wear them for a time, for this
seems a less evil than her paintings and shad-
ings. Let these therefore be first taken away,
and not even these by fear and threatening,
but by persuasion and mildness, and by
blaming of otliers, and by your own opinion
and judgment. And tell her continually, that
to thee a countenance so decked up is not
lovely, but rather in a high degree unpleas-
ing, and persuade her above all things that
this vexes thee. And after thine own suf-
frage, l)ring in also the judgment expressed
by otiiers, and say that even beautiful women
are wont to l)e disfigured by this; that thou
mayest root out the passion. And say noth-
ing yet of hell, or of the kingdom, for thou
wilt talk of these things in vain: but persuade
her tliat she plenses thee more liy displaying
tiie work of dod undisguiseil; but she wlu>
tortures, and strains, and daubs her coiuite-
nance, doth not even to people in general ap-
pear fair and beautiful. Antl first by com-
mon reasonings and the suffrages of all men
expel the pest, and wlien thou hast softened
her down l)y tliese words, add also tiie otiicr
consider.'itions. .And though thou shouldest
speak once and not persuade her, do not
grow weary of pouring in' the same words, a
second and a third time and often; not iiow-
ever in a wtrarisome kiiul of way, but sport-


» John xvi, la.


3 <ir<iKrAwp, " luint; fomrnlation." Src Mr. Field'* n<ite on

ihr pl.u • .


204


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXX.


ively; and do thou now turn from her, now
flatter and court her.

Seest thou not the painters, how much they
rub out, how much they insert, when they are
making a beautiful portrait? Well then, do
not thou prove inferior to these. For if
these, in drawing the likeness of a body,
used such great diligence, how much more
were it meet for us, in fashioning a soul, to
use every contrivance. For if thou shouldest
fashion well the form of this soul, thou wilt
not see the countenance of the body looking
unseemly, nor lips stained, nor a mouth like
a bear's mouth dyed with blood, nor eyebrows
blackened as with the smut of some kitchen
vessel, nor cheeks whitened with dust like the
walls of the tombs. For all these things are
smut, and cinders, and dust, and signals of
extreme deformity.

But stay: I have been led on unobserv-
ing, I know not how, into these expres-
sions; and while admonishing another to
teach with gentleness, I have been myself
hurried away' into wrath. Let us return
therefore again unto the more gentle way
of admonition, and let us bear with all the
faults of our wives, that we may succeed in
doing what we would. Seest thou not how
we bear with the cries of children, when we
would wean them from the breast, how we
endure all for this object only, that we may
persuade them to despise their former food ?
Thus let us do in this case also, let us bear
with all the rest, that we may accomplish
this. For when this hath been amended,
thou wilt see the other too proceeding in due
order, and thou wilt come again unto the
ornaments of gold, and in the same way wilt
reason concerning them likewise, and thus
by little and little bringing thy wife unto the
right rule, thou wilt be a beautiful painter, a
faithful servant, an excellent husbandman. .

Together with these things remind her also
of the women of old, of Sarah, of Rebecca,
both of the fair and of them that were not so,
and point out how all equally practised
modesty. For even Leah, the wife of the
patriarch, not being fair, was not constrained
to devise any such thing, but although she
were uncomely, and not very much beloved
by her husband, she neither devised any such
thing, nor marred her countenance, but con-
tinued to preserve the lineaments thereof un-
disfigured, and this though brought up by
Gentiles.^

But thou that art a believing woman, thou
that hast Christ for thine head, art thou
bringing in upon us a satanic art? And dost

2 ['EAAij^cui' ; see note on Homily XII. s, p. 70. --R.]


thou not call to mind the water that dashed
over thy countenance, the sacrifice that
adorns thy lips, the blood that hath reddened
thy tongue ? For if thou wouldest consider
all these things, though thou wert fond of
dress to the ten thousandth degree, thou wilt
not venture nor endure to put upon thee that
dust and those cinders. Learn that thou hast
been joined unto Christ, and refrain from
this unseemliness. For neither is He de-
lighted with these colorings, but He seeks
after another beauty, of which He is in an
exceeding degree a lover, I mean, that in the
soul. This the prophet likewise hath charged
thee to cherish, and hath said, " So shall the
King have pleasure in thy beauty." ^

Let us not therefore be curious in making
ourselves unseemly. For neither is any one
of God's works imperfect, nor doth it need
to be set right by thee. For n®t even if to
an image of the emperor, after it was set up,
any one were to seek to add his own work,
would the attempt be safe, but he will incur
extreme danger. Well then, man works and
thou addest not; but doth God work, and
dost thou amend it ? And dost thou not con-
sider the fire of hell ? Dost thou not con-
sider the destitution of thy soul ? For on
this account it is neglected, because all thy
care is wasted on the flesh.

But why do I speak of the soul ? For to
the very flesh everything falls out contrary
to what ye have sought. Consider it. Dost
thou wish to appear beautiful ? This shows
thee uncomely. Dost thou wish to please
thy husband? This rather grieves him; and
causes not him only, but strangers also, to
become thine accusers. Wouldest thou ap-
pear young ? This will quickly bring thee to
old age. Wouldest thou wish to array thy-
self honorably ? This makes thee to be
ashamed. For such an one is ashamed not
only before those of her own rank, but even
those of her maids who are in her secret, and
those of her servants who know; and, above
all, before herself.

But why need I say these things ? For
that which is more grievous than all T have
now omitted, namely, that thou dost offend
God; thou underminest modesty, kindlest the
flame of jealousy, emulalest the harlot women
at their brothel.

All these things then consider, ye women,
and laugh to scorn the pomp of Satan and
the craft of the devil; and letting go this
adorning, or rather disfiguring, cultivate that
beauty in your own souls which is lovely ev^n
to angels, and desired of God, and delightful

3 Ps. Xlv. II.


Homily XXXI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. iMATTHEW.


205


to your husbands; that ye may attain both attain, by the grace and love towards man of
unto present glory, and unto that which is to our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and
come. To which God grant that we may all might forever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XXXL


Matt. LX. 18.


While He spake these things unto them, behold, there came in' a ruler, and worshipped
Him, saying. My daughter is even now dead; but come and lay Thy hand upon her,
and she shall live."


The deed overtook the words; so that the
mouths of the Pharisees were the more
stopped. For both he that came was a ruler
of the synagogue, and his affliction terrible.
For the young damsel was both his only child,
and twelve years old, the very flower of her
age; on which account especially He raised
her up again, and that immediately.

And if Luke say that men came, saying,
" Trouble not the Master, for she is dead; "''
we will say this, that the expression, " she is
even now dead,'' was that of one conjecturing
from the time of liis journeying, or exagger-
ating his affliction. For it is an usual thing
with persons in need to heighten their own
evils by their report, and to say something
more than is really true, the more to attract
those whom they are beseeching.

But see his dullness: how he requires of
Christ two things, both His actual presence,
and the laying on of His hand: and this by
the way is a sign that he had left her still
breathing. This Naaman also, that Syrian,
required of the propliet. " For I thouglit,"
saitli he, " he will surely come out, and will
lay on his tiand."' For in truth they who
are more or less dull of temper, require sight
and sensil)le tilings. |

And whereas Mark* saitli. He took the;
three disciples, and so doth Luke;' our
evangelist merely saith, "the disciples."
Wherefore then did He not take with Him
Mattliew, though he liad i)ut just come unto
Him ? 'i'o bring him to a more earnest long-
ing, and because he was yet rather in an im-
perfect state. For to this intent doth He


' [dtrAduc, "cimc in," SJ) 'I'lHthrnrlurf, liiit thr R. V. iirccpts
the reading «i« i\9uiv, " ihcrc came one ruler." k.]

■•' I.uke viii. ^l). 3 i Kin^s v. ii, Lx.y.

4 Mark v. 37. 5 l.iikc viii. 51.


honor those, that these may grow such as
those are. But for him it sufficed for the
present, to see what befell the woman with
the issue of blood, and lo be honored by His
table, and by His partaking of his salt.

And when He had risen up many followed
Him, as for a great miracle, both on account
of the person who had come, and because
the more part being of a grosser disposition
were seeking not so much the care of the
soul, as the healing of the body; and they
flowed together, some urged by their own
afflictions, some hastening to behold how
other men's were cured: however, there were
as yet but few in the habit of coming princi-
pally for the sake of His words and doctrine.
Nevertheless, He did not suffer them to enter
into the house, but His disciples only; and
not even all of these, everywhere instructing
us to repel the applause of the multitude.

2. "And, behold," it is said, "a woman
that had an issue of blood twelve years, came
beiiind Him, and touched the hem of His
garment. For she said witliin iierself. If I
may but touch His garment, I shall be
whole.""

Wherefore did slie not approach Him
boldly? She was asliamcd on account of her
affliction, accounting herself to be unclean.
For if the menstruous woman was judged not
to be clean, much more would she have the
same tliought, wlio was afflicteil witli such a
disease; since in fact that complaint was
under the law accounted a great uncleanness.''
Therefore siie lies liidden, and conceals Iier-
self. For ncitiier had she as yet the jiroper
and correct opinion concerning Him: else she

4 Mutt. ix. ai, aa. I R. V., " border " for *' bein ;" " do " for

" muy ;" " in«de whale" for "whole."]
1 l.cvit. XV. J5.


2o6


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXI.


would not have thought to be concealed.
And this is the first woman that came unto
Him in public, having heard of course that
He heals women also, and that He is on His
way to the little daughter that was dead.

And she durst not invite him to her house,
although she was wealthy;' nay, neither did
she approach publicly, but secretly with faith
she touched His garments. For she did not
doubt, nor say in herself, " Shall I indeed be
delivered from the disease ? shall I indeed
fail of deliverance?" But confident of her
health, she so approached Him. " For she
said," we read, "in herself. If I may only
touch His garment, I shall be whole." Yea,
for she saw out of what manner of house He
was come, that of the publicans, and who
they were that followed Him, sinners and
publicans; and all these things made her to
be of good hope.

What then doth Christ? He suffers her
not to be hid, but brings her into the midst,
and makes her manifest for many purposes.

It is true indeed that some of the senseless
ones say, " He does this for love of glory.
For why," say they, " did He not suffer her
to be hid ? " What sayest thou, unholy, yea,
all unholy one ? He that enjoins silence, He
that passes by miracles innumerable, is He
in love with glory ?

For what intent then doth He bring her
forward ? In the first place He puts an end
to the woman's fear, lest being pricked by
her conscience, as having stolen the gift, she
should abide in agony. In the second place,
He sets her right, in respect of her thinking
to be hid. Thirdly, He exhibits her faith to
all, so as to provoke the rest also to emula-
tion; and His staying of the fountains of her
blood was no greater sign than He affords in
signifying His knowledge of all things.
Moreover the ruler of the synagogue, who
was on the point of thorough unbelief, and
so of utter ruin. He corrects by the woman.
Since both they that came said, " Trouble
not the Master, for the damsel is dead; " and
those in the house laughed Him to scorn,
when He said, "She sleepeth; " and it was
likely that the father too should have experi-
enced some such feeling. Therefore to cor-
rect this weakness beforehand. He brings for-
ward the simple woman. For as to that ruler
being quite of the grosser sort, hear what He


' Eusebius, E. H.,viii. i8, mentions a tradition that she belonged
to Caesarea Philippi .otherwise called Paneas,and that certain brazen
statues, ofamanholdingouthishandanda woman kneeling, which
were there in his time, were set up at her expense, that being her
native place. He adds, that a certain plant which grew by the
Saviour's statue, when it came to touch the hem of His garment,
stopped growing ; and that it was endowed with virtue to cure all
manner of diseases.


saith unto him: "Fear not, do thou believe
only, and she shall be made whole."''

Thus He waited also on purpose for death
to come on, and that then He should arrive;
in order that the proof of the resurrection
might be distinct. With this view He both
walks more leisurely, and discourses more
with the woman; that He might give time
for the damsel to die, and for those to come,
who told of it, and said, *' Trouble not the
Master. "3 This again surely the evangelist
obscurely signifies, .when he saith, "While
He yet spake, there came from the house
certain which said. Thy daughter is dead,
trouble not the Master." For His will was
that her death should be beUeved, that her
resurrection might not be suspected. And
this He doth in every instance. So also in
the case of Lazarus, He waited a first and a
second and a third day.'*

On account then of all these things He
brings her forward, and saith, " Daughter,
be of good cheer," ^ even as He had said also
to the paralyzed person, " Son, be of good
cheer." Because in truth the woman was ex-
ceedingly alarmed; therefore He saith, "be
of good cheer," and He calls her
"daughter;" for her faith had made her a
daughter. After that comes also her praise:
" Thy faith hath made thee whole."

But Luke tells us also other things more
than these concerning the woman. Thus,
when she had approached Him, saith he, and
had received her health, Christ did not imme-
diately call her, but first He saith, " Which is
he that touched me ? " Then when Peter
and they that were with Him said. Master,
the multitude throng Thee, and press Thee,
and sayest Thou, who touched me ? " ^
(whicn was a very sure sign both that He was
encompassed with real flesh, and that He
trampled on all vainglory, for they did not
follow Him at all afar off, but thronged Him
on every side); He for His part continued to
say, ' ' Somebody hath touched me, for I per-
ceive that virtue is gone out of me;''7 an-
swering after a grosser manner according to
the impression of His hearers. But these
things He said, that He might also induce
her of herself to make confession. For on
this account neither did He immediately con-
vict her, in order that having signified that
He knows all things clearly. He might in-
duce her of her own accord to publish all,
and work upon her to proclaim herself what
had been done, and that He might not incur
suspicion by saying it.

2 Luke viii. 50. 3 Mark v. 35 ; Luke viii. 49.

4 John xi. 6, 39. 5 Matt. ix. 22 ; see verse 2.

6 Luke viii. 45. 7 Luke viii. 46. [R. V., "power."]


1


Homily XXXI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


207


Seest thou the woman superior to the ruler
of the synagogue ? She detained Him not,
she toolc no hold of Him, but touched Him
only with the end of her fingers, and though
she came later, she first went away healed.
And he indeed was bringing the Physician
altogether to his house, but for her a mere
touch suffered. For though she was bound
by her affliction, yet her faith had given her
wings. And mark how He comforts her,
saying, "Thy faith hath saved thee.'' Now
surely, had He drawn her forward for display,
He would not have added this; but He
saith this, partly teaching the ruler of the
synagogue to believe, partly proclaiming the
woman's praise, and affording her by these
words delight and advantage equal to her
bodily health.

For that He did this as minded to glorify
her, and to amend others, and not to show
Himself glorious, is manifest from hence;
that He indeed would have been equally an
object of admiration even without this (for
the miracles were pouring around Him faster
than the snow-flakes, and He both had done
and was to do far greater things than these):
but the woman, had this not happened, would
have gone away hid, deprived of those great
praises. For this cause He brought her for-
ward, and proclaimed her praise, and cast out
iier fear, (for " she came," it is said, " trem-
bling " '); and He caused her to be of good
courage, and together with health of body.
He gave her also other provisions for her
journey, in that He said, "Go in peace. " =

3. "And when He came into the ruler's
house, and saw the minstrels and the people
making a noise. He saith unto them, Give
place, for the maid is not dead, but sleepeth.
And they laughed Him to scorn.'' ^

Noble tokens, surely, these, of the rulers
of synagogues; in the moment of her death
pipes and cymbals raising a dirge ! What
then doth Christ? All the rest He cast out,
but the parents He brought in; to leave no
room for saying that He healed lier in any
other way. And before lier resurrection too.
He raises her in His word; saying, "The
maid is not dead, but sleepetli.'' And in
many instances besides He doeth this. As
then on tlie sea He expels tumult from the
mind of the l)y-standers, at the same time
both signifying that it is easy for Him to raise
tiie tlead (which same thing He did with
respect to Lazarus also, saying, " Our friend
Lazarus sleepeth ••); " and also teaching us

■ I.uke viii. 47. [The EngtUh rcndenni; hax been modified td
indiciitr more cxiictly the word* cited. --R.]

'J I.ilkc viii. 4S.

3 Matt. ix. 21, js. [R. v., "the lliilr-pliiycr^, and ihc crowdii
making a tiiiiiiid."] 4 Jcihii xi. ii.


not to fear death; for that it is not death,
but is henceforth become a sleep. Thus,
since He Himself was to die, He doth in the
persons of others prepare His disciples be-
forehand to be of good courage, and to bear
the end meekly. Since in truth, when He
had come, death was from that time forward
a sleep.

But yet they laughed Him to scorn: He
however was not indignant at being disbe-
lieved by those for whom He was a little
afterwards to work miracles; neither did He
rebuke their laughter, in order that both it
and the pipes, and the cymbals, and all the
other things, might be a sure proof of her
death. For since for the most Dart, after the
miracles are done, men disbelieve, He takes
them beforehand by their own answers; which
was done in the case both of Lazarus and of
Moses. For to Moses first He saith, " What
is that in thine hand ? " s in order that
when he saw it become a serpent. He
should not forget that it was a rod before,
I but being reminded of his own saying, might
I be amazed at what was done. And witli re-
gard to Lazarus He saith, "Where have ye
laid him ?" * that they who had said, " Come
and see," and " he stinketh, for he hathjieen
dead four days," might no longer be able to
disbelieve His having raised a dead man.

Seeing then the cymbals and ttie multitude,
He put them all out, and in the presence of
the parents works the miracle; not introduc-
ing another soul, but recalling the same that
had gone out, and awakening her as it were
out of a sleep.

And He holds her by the hand, assuring
the beholders; so as by that sight to make a
way for the belief of lier resurrection. For
whereas the father said, *' Lay thy hand uiion
her; "^ He on His part doth somewhat more,
for He lays no hand on her, but rather takes
hold of her, and raises her, implying that to
' Him all things are ready. Antl He not only
raises her up, but al5o commands to give her
meat, that the event might not seem to be an
illusion. And He doth not give it Himself,
but commands them; as also with regard to
Lazarus He said, " Loose liim, and let him
go,"* and afterwards makes him partaker of
His table.' For so is He wont always to
establish both points, making out with all
completeness the demonstration alike of the
death and of the resurrection.

But do thou mark, I pray thee, not her
resurrection only, but also His commanding
'* to tell no man; " and by all learn thou this
especially, His freedom from haughtiness


< Kx. iv. J.
" Ji>hn xi. 44.


'• I..hii xi. 34, j9.
•> John xii. ;.


7 Matt. ix. 16.


208


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXI.


and vainglory. And withal learn this other
thing also, that He cast them that were beat- 1
ing themselves out of the house, and declared
them unworthy of such a sight; and do not
thou go out with the minstrels, but remain
with Peter, and John, and James.

For if He cast them out then, much more
now. For then it was not yet manifest that
death was become a sleep, but now this is
clearer than the very sun itself. But is it
that He hath not raised thy daughter now?
But surely He will raise her, and with more
abundant glory. For that damsel, when she
had risen, died again; but thy child, if she
rise again, abides thenceforth in immortal
being.

4. Let no man therefore beat himself any
more, nor wail, neither disparage Christ's
achievement. For indeed He overcame
death. Why then dost thou wail for nought?
The thing is become a sleep. Why lament
and weep? Why, even if Greeks' did this,
they should be laughed to scorn; but when
the believer behaves himself unseemly in
these things, what plea hath he ? What ex-
cuse will there be for them that are guilty of ^
such folly, and this, after so long a time, and j
so clear proof of the resurrection ?

But thou, as though laboring to add to the
charge against thee, dost also bring us in
heathen women singing dirges, to kindle thy
feelings, and to stir up the furnace thoroughly:
and thou hearkenest not to Paul, saying,
"What concord hath Christ with Belial? or
what part hath he that believeth with an in-
fidel ?" ^

And while the children of heathens, who
know nothing of resurrection, do yet find
words of consolation, saying, " Bear it man-
fully, for it is not possible to undo what hath
taken place, nor to amend it by lamenta-
tions; " art not thou, who hearest sayings
wiser and better than these, ashamed to be-
have thyself more unseemly than they? For
we say not at all, " Bear' it manfully, because
it is not possible to undo what hath taken
place," but, "bear it manfully, because he
will surely rise again; ^' the child sleeps and
is not dead; he is at rest and hath not per-
ished. For resurrection will be his final lot,
and eternal life, and immortality, and an
angel's portion. Hearest thou not the Psalm
that saith, " Return unto thy rest, O my soul,
for the Lord hath dealt bountifully with
thee? "3 God calleth it "bountiful dealing,"
and dost thou make lamentation ?

And what more couldest thou have done.


1 [Probably " Gentiles" or " heathen " would be a better read-
ing. The contrast is with " believer." — R.]

2 2 Cor. vi. 15. [R. v.. " unbeliever."] 3 Ps. cxvi. 7.


if thou wert a foe and an enemy of the dead ?
Why, if there must be mourning, it is the
devil that ought to mourn. He may beat
himself, he may wail, at our journeying to
greater blessings. This lamentation becomes
his wickedness, not thee, who art going to
be crowned and to rest. Yea, for death is a
fair haven. Consider, at any rate, with how
many evils our present life is filled; reflect
how often thou thyself hast cursed our pres-
ent life. For indeed things go on to worse,
and from the very beginning thou wert in-
volved in no small condemnation. For, saith
He, "In sorrow thou shalt bring forth chil-
dren; '^ and, " In the sweat of thy face shalt
thou eat thy bread;"-* and, "In the world
ye shall have tribulation." s

But of our state there, no such word at all
is spoken, but all the contrary; that "grief
and sorrow and sighing have fled away."*
And that " men shall come from the east and
from the west, and shall recline in the bosoms
of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob."' And
that the region there is a spiritual bride-
chamber, and bright lamps, and a translation
to Heaven.

5. Why then disgrace the departed ? Why
dispose the rest to fear and tremble at death ?
Why cause many to accuse God, as though
He had done very dreadful things ? Or
rather, why after this invite poor persons, and
entreat priests to pray?* "In order," saith
he, " that the dead may depart into rest; that
he may find the Judge propitious." For
these things then art thou mourning and
wailing ? Thou art therefore fighting and
warring with thyself: e.xciting a storm against
thyself on account of his having entered into
harbor.

" But what can I do ? " saith he: " such a
thing is nature.'' The blame is not nature's,
neither doth it belong to the necessary conse-
quence of the thing; but it is we that are
turning all things upside down, are overcome
with softness, are giving up our proper nobil-
ity, and are making the unbelievers worse.
For how shall we reason with another con-
cerning immortality ? how shall we persuade
the heathen, when we fear death, and shud-
der at it more than he ? Many, for instance,
among the Greeks' although they knevv noth-
ing of course about immortality, have
crowned themselves at the decrease of their
children, and appeared in white garments,

4 Gen. iii. 16, 19. 5 John xvi. 33.

6 Is. XXXV. 10. 7 Matt. viii. 11.

8 Because the feasts and prayers for the dead being supposed
to benefit those only who have fallen asleep in the Lord, and
whose final happiness was therefore sure, it was an inconsistency
in those who celebrated them to sorrow as if they had no hope.
See P)ingham, b. xxiii. c. iii. sees. 13, 15.

9 [Or, " Gentiles."]


Homily XXXI. ]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


209


that they might reap the present glory; but body, He resumed it again in greater glory,

thou not even for the future glory's sake herein also holding out to thee good hopes,

ceasest thy woman's behavior and wailing. If these things be not a fable, lament not.

But hast thou no heirs, nor any to succeed If thou account these things to be sure, weep

to thy goods? And which wouldest thou not; but if thou dost weep, how wilt thou be


rather, that he should be heir of thy posses-
sions, or of Heaven ? And which didst thou
desire, that he should succeed to the things
that perish, which he must have let go soon
after, or to things that remain, and are im-
moveable ? Thou hadst him not for heir,
but God had him instead of thee; he became
not joint- heir with his own brethren, but lie
became " joint-heir with Christ."

" But to whom," saith he, " are we to leave
our garments, to whom our houses, to whom
our slaves and our lands?" To him again,
and more securely than if he lived; for there
is nothing to hinder. For if barbarians burn
the goods of the departed together with them,
much more were it a righteous thing for thee
to send away with the dead what things he
hath: not to be turned to ashes, like those,
but to invest him with more glory; and that
if he departed a sinner, it may do away his
sins;' but if righteous, that it may become
an increase of reward and recompense.

But dost thou long to see him ? Then live
the same life with him, and thou wilt soon
obtain that sacred vision.

And herewith consider this also, that
though thou shouldest not hearken to us,
thou wilt certainly yield to time. But no re-
ward then for thee; for the consolation comes
of the number of the days. Whereas if thou
art willing now to command thyself, thou wilt
gain two very great points: first, thou wilt de-
liver tliyself from the intervening ills, ne.xt,
thou wilt be crowned with the brighter crown
from God. For indeed neither almsgiving


able to persuade the Greek that thou be-
lievest?

6. But even so doth the event still appear
intolerable to thee ? Well then, for this very
cause it is not meet to lament for him, for
he is delivered from many such calamities.
Grudge not therefore against him, neither
envy him: for to ask death for yourself be-
cause of his premature end, and to lament
for him that he did not live to endure many
such things, is rather the part of one grudg-
ing and envying.

And think not of this, that he will no more
return home: but that tliyself also art a little
while after to go to him. Regard not this,
that he returns here no more, but that neither
do these things that are seen remain such as
they are, but these too are being transformed.
Yea, for heaven, and enrth, and sea, and all,
are being put together afresh,-* and then slialt
thou recover thy child in greater glory.

And if indeed he departed a sinner, his
wickedness is stayed; for certainly, had God
known that he was being converted, He would
not have snatched^ him away before his re-
pentance: but if he ended his life righteous,
he now possesses all good in safety. Whence
it is manifest that thy tears are not of kindly
affection, but of unreasoning passion. For
if thou lovedst the departed, thou shouldest
rejoice and be glad that he is delivered frtim
the present waves.

For what is there more, I pray thee ?
What is there fresli and new ? Do we not


see the same things dailv


revolving ,


Day


nor anything else is nearly so great as bear- and night, night and day, winter ami sum


mer, summer and winter, and nothing more.
And tliese indeed are ever the same; but our


ing affliction meekly.

Bear in mind, that even the Son of God

died: and He indeed for thee, but thou for evils are fresh, and newer. Wouldest thou

thyself. And when He said, " If it be pos- then have him every day drawing up more of
sible, let the cup pass from me,"' and suf-| these things, and abiding here, and sicken-

fcrcd pain, and was in agony, nevertiieless ing, and niourning. and in fear and trem-

He shunned not the end, but underwent it, bling, and enduring sonic of the ills of life,

and that with its whole course of exceeding dreading others lest he some time endure

woe.' That is. He did by no means simply them? Since assuredly thou canst not say

endure death, but the most shameful death; this, that one sailing over this great sea

and before His death, stripes; and before might jiossibly be free from despondency and


His stripes, upbraidings, and jeers, and revil-
ings; instructing tliee to bear all manfully.
And though He died, and put off His


cares, and from all other such things.

•And withal take this also into account, th.it
thou diilst not bring him forth immortal; and
that if he had not died now, he must h;ive


•Not that St. Chrysfwtom imnKincd that anything could be 1 , , . - n .. ■ • 1 » 1

don<- I.. chimt,'c the rrfativr (■..n(iiti..ii of iiinsrwi... imvr died in 1 endured it soon :uter. l.iit IS It that tliou

thi- favoror liisplrnsurc of ( '.«!: sec <•. ^'.. llnin. XXW'I. p. ^tU; cd.
Field. Iiulced, the senile is implied in the words which liiiiiirdi-
ately follow, " I )ost thou luni; to hcc him? Then live the siiine
life with him," &c.

' Malt. xxvi. 39. 3 n«Ta iroAA^c T^t rpayyjiat. '


hadst not thy fill of him ? But thou wilt of a


4 fitSapnoitTai,


2IO


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXII.


certainty enjoy him tliere. But longest tiiou
to see liim here also ? And what is there to
hinder thee ? For thou art permitted even
here, if thou be watchful; for the hope of the
things to come is clearer than sight.

But thou, if he were in some king's court
wouldest not ever seek to see him, so long as
thou heardest of his good report: and seeing
him departed to the things that are far better,
art thou faint-hearted about a little time; and
that, when thou hast in his place one to dwell
with thee ?

But hast thou no husband ? yet hast thou
a consolation, even the Father of the orphans,
and Judge of the widows. Hear even Paul
pronouncing this widowhood blessed, and say-
ing, "Now she that is a widow indeed and
desolate, trusteth in the Lord." ' Because
such an one will appear more approved,
evincing as she doth greater patience. Mourn
not therefore for that which is thy crown,
that for which thou demandest a reward.

Since thou hast also restored His deposit,
if thou hast e.xhibited the very thing entrusted


^ I Tim. V. 5. [R. v., " hath her hope set on God." Chrysos-
tora reads KvpLov, and Augustin followed the same reading. — R.]


to thee. Be not in care any more, having
laid up the possession in an inviolable treasure-
house.

But if thou wouldest really learn, both
what is our present being, and what our life
to come; and that the one is a spider's web
and a shadow, but the things there, all of
them, immoveable and immortal; thou would-
est not after that want other arguments. For
whereas now thy child is delivered from all
change; if he were here, perhaps he might
continue good, perhaps not so. Seest thou
not how many openly cast off"" their own
children ? how many are constrained to keep
them at home, although worse than the open
outcasts ?

Let us make account of all these things and
practise self-command; for so shall we at
once show regard to the deceased, and enjoy
much praise from men, and receive from God
the great rewards of patience, and attain
unto the good things eternal; unto which may
we all attain, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory and might forever and ever. Amen.

2 ajroKr)pi)TTOU(7t.


HOMILY XXXIL

Matt. IX, 27 — 30.

'And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed Him, crying, and saying. Thou
Son of David, have mercy on us.^ And when He was come into the house, the blind
men came to Him: and Jesus saith unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this?
They say unto Him, Yea, Lord. Then touched He their eyes, saying. According to
your faith be it= unto you. And their eyes were opened."


Wherefore can it be that He puts them
off, 3 and they crying out ? Here again teach-
ing us utterly to repel the glory that cometh
from the multitude. For because the house
v.-as near. He leads them thither to heal them
in private. And this is evident from the fact,
that He charged them moreover to tell no
man.

But this is no light charge against the
Jews; when these men, though their eyes


I [R. V. (and Chrysostom), " Have mercy on us, thou Son of
David."]

= L^- v., " be it done."] 3 TrapeAKei.


were struck out, receive the faith by 'hearing
alone, but they beholding the miracles, and
having their sight to witness what was hap-
pening, do all just contrary. And see their
earnestness also, both by their cry, and by
their prayer itself. For they did not merely
approach Him, but with loud cries, and alleg-
ing nought else but " mercy."

And they called Him "Son of David,"
because the name was thought to be honora-
ble. In many passages, for instance, did the
prophets'* likewise so call the kings, whom

4 Perhaps Isa. xxxvii. 35.


Homily XXXII. J


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


21 I


they wished to honor, and to declare
great.

And having brought them into the house,
He puts to them a further question. For in
many cases He made a point of healing on
entreaty, lest any should suppose Him to be
rushing' upon these miracles through vain-
glory: and not on this account alone, but to
indicate also that they deserve healing, and
that no one should say, "If it was of mere
mercy that He saved, all men ought to be
saved." For even His love to man hath a
kind of proportion; depending on the faith of
them that are healed. But not for these
causes only doth He require faith of them,
but forasmuch as they called Him "Son of
David," He to lead them up to what is
higher, and to teach them to entertain the
imaginations they ought of Himself, saith,
*' Believe ye that I am able to do this ? " He
did not say, *' Believe ye that I am able to
entreat my Father, that I am able to pray"
but, " that I am able to do this ? "

What then is their word? "Yea, Lord."
They call Him no more Son of David, but
soar higher, and acknowledge His dominion.

And then at last He for His part lays His
hand upon them, saying, "According to your
faith be it unto you." And this He doth to
confirm their faith, and to show that they are
participators in the good work, and to witness
that their words were not words of flattery.
For neither did He say, '" Let your eyes be
opened," but, "According to your faith be it
unto you; " which He saith to many of them
that came unto Him; before the healing of
their bodies, hastening to proclaim the faith
in their soul; so as both to make them more
approved, and to render others more serious.

Thus with respect to the sick of the palsy
also; for there too before giving nerve to the
body, He raises up the fallen soul, saying,
" Son, be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven
thee." ' And the young damsel too, when He
had raised her up, He detained, and by the
food taught her her Benefactor; and in the case
of the centurion also He did in like manner,
leaving the whole to his faith; and as to His
disciples again, when delivering them from
the storm on the sea. He delivered them first
from their want of faith. Just so likewise in
tliis case: He knew indeed, even l)ef()re their
cry, the secrets of their mind; but tliat He
might lead on others also to the same earnest-
ness, He makes them known to the rest as
well, by the result of their cure proclaiming
their hidden faith.


Then after their cure He commands them
to tell no man; neither doth He merely com-
mand them, but with much strictness.

" For Jesus," it is said, " straitly charged
them, saying. See that no man know it. But
they, when they were departed, spread abroad
His fame in all that country. "^

They however did not endure this, but be-
came preachers, and evangelists; and when
bidden to hide what had been done, they en-
dured it not.

And if in another place we find Him say-
ing, "Go thy way, and declare the glory of
God,"'* that is not contrary to this, but even
highly in agreement herewith. For He in-
structs us to say nothing ourselves, concern-
ing ourselves, but even to forbid them that
would eulogise us: but if the glory be re-
ferred to God, then not only not to forbid,
but to command men to do this.

2. "And as they went out," it is said,
"behold, they brought unto Him a dumb
man possessed with a devil." ^

For the affliction was not natural, but the
device of the evil Spirit; wherefore also he
needs others to bring him. For he could
neither make entreaty himself, being speech-
less, nor supplicate others, when the evil
spirit had bound his tongue, and together
with his tongue had fettered his soul.

For this cause neither doth He require
faith of him, but straightway heals the dis-
ease.

" For when the devil was cast out," it saith,
" the dumb spake: and the multitudes mar-
velled, saying. It was never so seen in
Israel. "«

Now this especially vexed the Pharisees,
that they preferred Him to all, not only that
then were, but that had ever been. And tliey
preferred Him, not for His healing, but for
His doing it easily and quickly, and to dis-
eases innumerable and incurable.

And thus the multitude; but the Pharisees

quite contrariwise; not only disjiaraging the

' works, but saying things contradictory to

themselves, and not ashamed. Such a thing

is wickedness. For what say they ?

" He castcth out devils through the prince
;of the devils." ^

! \\'hat can be more foolish than this ? For
in the first place, as He also saith further on,
it is impossible that a devil should cast out a
devil for that being is wont to repair wtiat
belongs to himself, not to pull it down. But


• «iriirT)8at>.
3 Matt. ix. I.
XXIX. i.-R.]


[" Thy sins urc for){ivcii." Coin|). Homily


^ Matt. ix. 30, 31. 4 Mark v. ly ; I.iikr viil. jq.

5 Malt. ix. 3a. ("Demon" is mure i.irrcct, here and through-
out the |>;t!UlUKC. — R.j

'• Malt. ix. 33.

7 Matt. ix. \^. [R. \., " Ily (or, in) the prince of the deviU
(Itrcck, demons' he casteth out dcviU."]


212


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXII.


He did not cast out devils only, but also
cleansed lepers, and raised the dead, and
curbed the sea, and remitted sins, and
preached the kingdom, and brought men unto
the Father; things which a demon would
never either choose, or at any time be able to
effect. For the devils bring men to idols,
and withdraw them from God, and persuade
them to disbelieve the life to come. The
devil doth not bestow kindness when he is in-
sulted; forasmuch as even when not insulted,
he harms those that court and honor him.

But He doeth the contrary. For after
these their insults and revilings,

3, "He went about," it is said, "all the
cities and villages, teaching in their syna-
gogues, and preaching the gospel of the
kingdom, and healing every sickness and
every disease." '

And so far from j anishing them for their
insensibility, He did not even simply rebuke
them; at once both evincing His meekness,
and so refuting the calumny; and at the same
time minded also by the signs which followed
to exhibit His proof more completely: and
then to adduce also the refutation by words.
He went about therefore both in cities, and in
countries, and in their synagogues; instruct-
ing us to requite our calumniators, not with
fresh calumnies, but with greater benefits.
Since, if not for man's sake, but God's, thou
doest gciod to thy fellow-servants; whatsoever
they may do, leave not thou off doing them
good, that thy reward may be greater; since
he surely, who upon their calumny leaves off
his doing good, signifies that for their praise'
sake, not for God's sake, he applies himself
to that kind of virtue.

For this cause Christ, to teach us that of
mere goodness He had entered on this, so
far from waiting for the sick to come to Him,
of Himself hastened unto them, bearing them
two of the greatest blessings; one, the gospel
of the kingdom; another, the perfect cure of
all their diseases. And not a city did He over-
look, not a village did He hasten by, but
visited every place.

4. And not even at this doth He stop, but
He exhibits also another instance of His fore-
thought. That is,

"When He saw," it is said, "the multi-
tudes. He was moved with compassion on
them, because they were troubled,^ and scat-
tered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd.
Then saith He unto His disciples, The har-


1 Matt. ix. 35. [R. v., "all manner of disease and all manner
of sickness." In the Homily, as in the best New Testament Mss.
eu TO) Aaa> is not found. — R.]

2 ecTKuAfieVot, ve.rati, the reading of the Vulgate, and of most
MSS. and Fathers : adopted by Gnesbach into tlie text. [The R.
V. renders this " distressed."]


vest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are
few, pray ye therefore the Lord of the har-
vest, that He will send forth laborers into
His harvest. "3

See again His freedom from vainglory.
That He may not draw all men unto Him-
self, He sends out His disciples.

And not with this view only, but that He
might also teach them, after practising in
Palestine, as in a sort of training-school, to
strip themselves for their conflicts with the
world. For this purpose then He makes the
exercises even more serious than the actual
conflicts, so far as pertained to their own
virtue; that they might more easily engage in
the struggles that were to ensue; as it were a
sort of tender nestlings whom He was at
length leading out to fly. And for the pres-
ent He makes them physicians of bodies, dis-
pensing to them afterwards the cure of the
soul, which is the principal thing.

And mark how He points out the facility
and necessity of the thing. For what saith
He? "The harvest truly is plenteous, but
the laborers are few." That is, " not to the
sowing," saith He, " but to the reaping do I
send you.'' Which in John He expressed
by, " Other men labored, and ye are entered
into their labors." '^

And these things he said, at once repress-
ing their pride, and preparing them to be of
good courage, and signifying that the greater
part of the labor came first.

And contemplate Him here too beginning
from love to man, not with any requital.
" For He had compassion, because they were
troubled and scattered abroad as sheep having
no shepherd.'' This is His charge against
the rulers of the Jews, that being shepherds
they acted the part of wolves. For so far
from amending the multitude, they even
marred their progress. For instance, when
they were marvelling and saying, " It was
never so seen in Israel:" these were affirm-
ing the contrary, " He casteth out devils
through the prince of the devils.'' ^

But of what laborers doth He speak here t
Of the twelve disciples. What then ? whereas
He had said, ''But the laborers are few,"
did He add to their number? By no means,
but He sent them out alone. Wherefore then
did He say, "Pray ye the Lord of the har-
vest, that He would ^ send forth laborers into
His harvest; and made no addition to their
number ? Because though they were but
twelve, He made them many from that time


3 Matt. ix. 36-38. [" will "' is unnecessary. — R.]

4 John iv. 38.

5 Matt. xii. 23, 24. [See on verse 34, in sec. 2.]

6 [Omit "would."]


Homily XXXII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


213


forward, not by adding to their number, but
by giving them power.

Then to signify how great the gift is, He
saith, "Pray ye the Lord of the harvest;"
and indirectly declares it to be His own pre-
rogative. For after having said, " Pray ye
the Lord of the harvest;" when they had not
made any entreaty nor prayer, He Himself at
once ordains them, reminding them also of
the sayings of John,' of the threshing floor,
and of the Person winnowing, and of the
chaff, and of the wheat. Whence it is evident
that Himself is the husbandman, Himself the
Lord of the harvest. Himself the master and
owner of the prophets. For if He sent them
to reap, clearly it was not to reap what be-
longs to another, but what Himself had sown
by the prophets.

But not in this way only was He indirectly
encouraging them, in calling their ministry
a harvest; but also by making them able for
the ministry.

"And when He had called unto Him," it
saith, " His twelve disciples. He gave them
power against- unclean spirits, to cast them
out, and to heal all manner of sickness, and
all manner of disease."^

Still the Spirit was not yet given. For
" there was not yet," it saith, " a Spirit, be-
cause that Jesus was not yet glorified. ''*
How then did they cast out the spirits ? By
His command, by His authority.

And mark, I pray thee, also, how well
timed was the mission. For not at the be-
ginning did He send them; but when they
had enjoyed sufficiently the advantage of fol-
lowing Him, and had seen a dead person
raised, and the sea rebuked, and devils ex-
pelled, and a paralytic new-strung, and sins
remitted, and a leper cleansed, and had re-
ceived a sufficient proof of His power, both
by deeds and words, then He sends them
forth: and not to dangerous acts, for as yet
there was no danger in Palestine, but they
had only to stand against evil speakings.
However, even of tliis He forewarns them, I
mean of their perils; preparing them even
before the time, and making them feel as in
conflict by His continual preilictions of that
sort.

5, Then, since He had mentioned to us
two pairs of apostles, that of I'(?tcr, and tliat
of John, and alter those had pointcil out the
calling of ALitthew, but had said nothing to


•"]


• Matt. iii. la. » [R. V., "authority over."

1 Slatt. X. I. ["SickncM" ana " dinciwc " Hitould be t
posi'd. Comp. on chap. ix. 35, and R. V. k.| .

••John vii. )i). (('hryH<«t<im iirrcpis the rradin^ sustiilnrd by
Olir brst aulhorilirs ; but the lilrral rrnilcrinK v''^'"!' abnvr docH
not represent his virw. In llmnily 1.1., in John, he distinitly
•uiys : Kor the Holy Cihost wn!» not yet, that is, ' wan not yet
given.' " — R.]


us either of the calling or of the name of the
other apostles; liere of necessity He sets
down tlie list of them, and their number, and
makes known tlieir names, saying thus:

" Now the names of the twelve apostles are
these; first, Simon, who is called Peter. "5

Because there was also another Simon, the
Canaanite; and there was Judas Iscariot, and
Judas the brother of James; and James the
son of Alphaius, and James the son of Zebe-
dee.

Now Mark doth also put them according
to their dignity; for after the two leaders,
He then numbers Andrew; but our evangelist
not so, but without distinction; or rather He
sets before himself even Thomas who came
far short of him.

But let us look at the list of them from the
beginning.

" First, Simon, who is called Peter, and
Andrew his brother."

Even this is no small praise. For the one
he named from his virtue, the other from his
high kindred, which was in conformity to his
disposition.

Then, "James the son of Zebedee, and
John his brother."

Seest thou how He arranges them not ac-
cording to their dignity. For to me John
seems to be greater, not only than the others,
but even than his brother.

After this, when he had said, " Philip, and
Bartholomew, '^ he added, "Thomas, and
Matthew the Publican."*

But Luke not so, but in the opposite order,
and he puts him before Thomas

Next, " James the son of Alph.-eus." For
there was, as I have already said, the son of
Zebedee also. Then after having mentioned
" Lebbaius, wiiose surname was Thaddceus,"'
and "Simon"' Zelotes, wliom he calls also
"the Canaanite," he comes to the traitor.
Aiid not as a sort of enemy or foe, but as one
writing a history, so hath he described him.
He saith not, *' the unholy, the all unholy
one," but hath named him from his city,
"Judas Iscariot." Because there was also
another Judas, " Lebliivus, whose surname
was Tliadchuus," who, Luke saith, was the
brother of James, saying, " Judas the brother
of James."" Therefore to distinguish him
from this man, it saith, " Juilas Iscariot, who
also betrayed llim." '■' And he is not asluimed
to say, " wlu) also betrayetl Him." So far
were they from ever disguising aught even of


S Matt. X. a. 6 Miill. x. v

7 I k. v., " 'l'hadd<ru«," The longer rrudinK iiri.sr quite early,
'riwhendorf acceplH " l.ebba:ii«," lhouv;h it in n>>t Nlrouijly »up-
|>i>rte(l, rniiinly l>ecuute Murk hu-s " Thaddxus." K.l

" l.iikc vi. i6. V .Nfatt. X. 4.


214


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXII.


those things that seem to be matters of re-
proach.

And first of all, and leader of the choir/
is the " unlearned, the ignorant man." '

But let us see whither, and to whom, He
sends them.

"These twelve," it is said, "Jesus sent
forth. "3

What manner of men were these ? The
fishermen, the puolicans: for indeed four
were fishermen and two publicans, Matthew
and James, and one was even a traitor. And
what saith He to them ? He presently
charges them, saying,

" Go not into the way ''of the Gentiles, and
into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not;
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel. ''5

"For think not at all," saith He, "be-
cause they insult me, and call me demoniac,
that I hate them and turn away from them.
Nay, as I sought earnestly to amend them in
the first place, so keeping you away from all
the rest, to them do I send you as teachers
and physicians. And I not only forbid you
to preach to others before these, but I do not
suffer you so much as to touch upon the road
that leads thither, nor to enter into such a
city." Because the Samaritans too are in a
state of enmity with the Jews. And yet it
was an easier thing to deal with them, for
they were much more favorably disposed to
the faith; but the case of these was more dif-
ficult. But for all this. He sends them on
the harder task, indicating his guardian care
of them, and stopping the mouths of the
Jews, and preparing the way for the teaching
of the apostles, that people might not here-
after blame them for "entering in to men
uncircumcised,"^ and think they had a just
cause for shunning and abhorring them.
And he calls them "lost," not "stray,"
" sheep," in every way contriving how to ex-
cuse them, and winning their mind to him-
self.

6. "And as ye go," saith He, "preach,
saying, The kingdom of Heaven is at hand." ^

Seest thou the greatness of their ministry?
Seest thou the dignity of apostles ? Of
nothing that is the object of sense are they
commanded to speak, nor such as Moses
spake of, and the prophets before them, but
of some new and strange things. For while
the former preached no such things, but
earth, and the good things in the earth, these
preached the kingdom of Heaven, and what-
ever is there.


And not from this circumstance only were
these the greater, but also from their obedi-
ence: in that they shrink not, nor are they
backward, like those of old;* but, warned as
they are of perils, and wars, and of those in-
supportable evils, they receive with great
obedience His injunctions, as being heralds
of a kingdom.

"And what marvel," saith one, " if having
nothing to preach that is dismal or grievous,
they readily obeyed?" What sayest thou?
nothing grievous enjoined them ? Dost thou
not hear of the prisons, the executions, the
civil wars, the hatred of all men ? all which.
He said a little while after, they must under-
go-
True, as to other men, He sent them to be
procurers and heralds of innumerable bless-
ings: but for themselves. He said and pro-
claimed beforehand, that they were to suffer
terrible and incurable ills.

After this, to- make them trustworthy, « He
saith,

" Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers,'° cast
out devils: freely ye have received, freely


give.


See how He provides for their conduct,
and that no less than for their miracles, im-
plying that the miracles without this are
nothing. Thus He both quells their pride b}'-
saying, "' Freely ye have received, freely
give; " and takes order for their being clear
of covetousness. Moreover, lest it should
be thought their own work," and they be
lifted up by the signs that were wrought. He
saith, "freely ye have received." " Ye be-
stow no favor on them that receive vou, for
not for a price did ye receive these things,
nor after toil: for the grace is mine. In like
manner therefore give ye to them also, for
there is no finding a price worthy of them."

7. After this plucking up immediately the
root of the evils, '^ He saith,

" Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass

in your purses, nor scrip for your journey,

neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet a
staff. "'3

He said not, " take them not with you," but,
" even if you can obtain them from another,
flee the evil disease." And you see that
hereby He was answering many good pur-


I KOpv(|>aio;.

^ [R. v., " any way.

6 Acts xi. 3.


2 Acts iv. ii.
7 Matt. X. 7.


3 Matt. X. 5.
SMatt. X. 5, 6.


8 See E.xod. iv. 10-14 ; Jerem. i. 6.

9 [aftoiricTTous, worthy of the confidence of those to whom they
preached. — R.]

10 Matt. X. 8. " Raise the dead," is added in our copies. [There
is some authority for omitting this clause in the New Testament,
but recent critical editors retain it. — R.]

" KaTopOutfjLa ; nearly answering, perhaps, both here and in
other places, to tiieritum.

12 I Tim. vi. 10.

13 Matt. X. 9, 10. [R. v., "Get you no gold, nor silver, nor
brass in your purses (Greek, girdles); no wallet for your journey,
neither two coats, nor shoes, nor staff."]


Homily XXXII.]


THE GQSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


21


poses; first setting His disciples above sus-
picion; secondly, freeing them from all care,
so that they might give all their leisure to
the word; thirdly, teaching them His own
power. Of this accordingly He quite speaks
out to them afterwards, "Lacked ye any-
thing, when I sent you naked and unshod ? " '

He did not at once say, " Provide not,''
but when He had said, "Cleanse the lepers,
cast out devils," then He said, "Provide
nothing; freely ye have received, freely
give;'' by His way of ordering things con-
sulting at once for their interest, their credit,
and their ability.

But perhaps some one may say, that the
rest may not be unaccountable, but " not to
have a scrip for the journey, neither two
coats, nor a staff, nor shoes," why did He
enjoin this ? Being minded to train them
up unto all perfection; since even further
back. He had suffered them not to take
thought so much as for the next day. For
even to the whole world He was to send them
out as teachers. Therefore of men He makes
them even angels (so to speak); releasing
them from all worldly care, so that they
should be possessed with one care alone, that
of their teaching; or rather even from that
He releases them, saying, " Take no thought
how or what ye shall speak." '

And thus, what seems to be very grievous
and galling, this He shows to be especially
light and easy for them. For nothing makes
men so cheerful as being freed from an.xiety
and care; and especially when it is granted
them, being so freed, to lack nothing, God
being present, and becoming to them instead
of all things.

Next, lest they should say, "whence then
are we to obtain our necessary food?" He
saith not unto them, "Ye have heard that I
have told you before, ' P>ehoId the fowls of
the air; ' " ^ (for they were not yet able to
realise* this commandment in their actions);
i)ut He added what came far short of this,
saying, " For the workman is wortliy of his
meat; " 5 declaring that they must be nour-
ished l)y their disciples, that neither they
might be high minded towards tiiose whom
they were teaching, as though giving all and
receiving nothing at their hands; nor these
again break away, as being despised by their
teachers.

After this, that they may not say, " Dost
thou then command us to live by begging? "
and be ashamed of this, He signifies the thing

< Luke xxii. ^s. [I'hc dussukc in tuiniplinucd by ChrysoMluin.
-R.l

» Matt. Xi 19. [R. v., " lie not anxious," etc.]

3 Matt. vi. v6. 'I «'iri2ci(a<r9at.

S Matt. X. I.J, [R. v., "I'ur tlir laborer in worlliy of Iuh food."]


to be a debt, both by calling them "work-
men," and by terming what was given,
" hire."^ For " think not," saith He, " be-
cause the labor is in words, that the benefit
conferred by you is small; nay, for the thing
hath much toil; ahd whatsoever they that are
taught may give, it is not a free gift which
they bestow, but a recompence which they
render: " for the workman is worthy of his
meat.'' But this He said, not as declaring
so much to be the worth of the apostles'
labors, far from it; God forbid: but as both
making it a law for them to seek nothing
more, and as convincing the givers, that what
they do is not an act of liberality, but a debt.

8. "And into whatsoever city or town ye
shall enter, inquire who in it is worthy: and
there abide till ye go thence." ^

That is, " it follows not," saith He, '* from
my saying, ' The workman is worthy of his
meat,' that I have opened to you all men's
doors: but herein also do I require you to use
much circumspection. For this will profit
you both in respect of your credit, and for
your very maintenance. For if he is worthy,
he will surely give you food; more especially
when ye ask nothing beyond mere neces-
saries.''

And He not only requires them to seek out
worthy persons, but also not to change house
for house, whereby they would neither vex
him that is receiving them, nor themselves
get the character of gluttony and self-intiulg-
ence.* For this He declared by saying,
" There abide till ye go thence." And this
one may perceive from the other evangelists
also. 9

Seest thou how He made them honorable by
this also, and those that received them c:ire-
ful; by signifying that they rather are the
gainers, both in honor, and in respect of ad-
vantage ?

Then pursuing again the same subject. He
saith,

"And when ye come into an house, salute
it. And if the house be worthy, let your
peace come upon it; but if it be not worthy,
let your peace return to you.'' '°

Seest thou liow far He dcdiiies not to carry
His injunctions ? And very fitly. For as
champions of godliness, and preac'iers to the
whole world, was He training them. .Vnd in
that regard disposing them to jiractise moilcr-
ation, and making them objects of love, He
saith,

"And whosoever sliall not receive you, nor
hear your wortis, when ye depart out oi tliat


* .Sre I.ukc X. 7.

7 .Nliitt X. II. [R. v., " Search out who, clrj

x>ii«uAia<. V l.uke x. 7. ' M.4tl. x. i», 13.


2l6


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXII.


house or city, shake off the dust of your feet.
Verily I say unto you, it shall be more toler-
able for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in
the day of judgment, than for that city."'

That is, " do not," saith He, " because ye
are teachers, therefore wait 'to be saluted by
others, but be first in showing that respect."
Then, implying that this is not a mere sal-
utation, but a blessing. He saith, "If the
house be worthy, it shall come upon it," but
if it deal insolently, its first punishment will
be, not to have the benefit of your peace;
and the second, that it shall suffer the doom
of Sodom." "And what," it will be said,
" is their punishment to us ? " Ye will have
the houses of such as are worthy.

But what means, "Shake off the dust of
your feet? " It is either to signify their hav-
ing received nothing of them, or to be a wit-
ness to them of the long journey, which they
had travelled for their sake.

But mark, I pray thee, how He doth not
even yet give the whole to them. For neither
doth He as yet bestow upon them foreknowl-
edge, so as to learn who is worthy, and who
is not so; but He bids them inquire, and
await the trial. How then did He Himself
abide with a publican ? Because he was be-
come worthy by his conversion.

And mark, I pray thee, how when He had
stripped them of all, He gave them all, by
suffering them to abide in the houses of those
who became disciples, and to enter therein,
having nothing. For thus both themselves
were freed from anxiety, and they would con-
vince the others, that for their salvation only
are they come: first by bringing in nothing
with them, then by requiring no more of them
than necessaries, lastly, by not entering all
their houses without distinction.

Since not by the signs only did He desire
them to appear illustrious, but even before
the signs, by their own virtue. For nothing
so much characterizes strictness of life,^ as to
be free from superfluities, and so far as may
be, from wants. This even the false apostles
knew. Wherefore Paul also said, " That
wherein they glory, they may be found even


as we


•'3


But if when we are in a strange country,
and are going unto persons unknown to us,
we must seek nothing more than our food for
the day, much more when abiding at home.

9. These things let us not hear only, but
also imitate. For not of the apostles alone
are tjiey said, but also of the saints after-
wards. Let us therefore become worthy to
entertain them. For according to the dispo-


1 Matt.


X. 14, 15.


2 <l)iKo<To(l)iav,


3 2 Cor. xi. 12.


sition of the entertainers this peace both
comes and flies away again. For not only on
the courageous speaking of them that teach,
but also on the worthiness of them that re-
ceive, doth this effect follow.

Neither let us account it a small loss, not
to enjoy such peace. For this peace the
prophet also from of old proclaims, saying,
" How beautiful are the feet of them that
bring good tidings of peace. '^* Then to ex-
plain the value thereof he added, " That bring
good tidings of good things."

This peace Christ also declared to be great,
when He said, " Peace I leave with you, my
peace I give unto you." ^ And we should do
all things, so as to enjoy it, both at home and
in church. For in the very church too the
presiding minister gives peace.* And this
which we speak of is a type of that. And
you should receive it with all alacrity, in
heart '' before the actual communion.^ For
if not to impart it after the communion ^ be
disgusting, how much more disgusting to re-
pel from you him that pronounces it !

For thee the presbyter sits, for thee the
teacher stands, labormg and toiling. What
plea then wilt thou have, for not affording
him so much welcome as to listen to Him ?
For indeed the church is the common home
of all, and when ye have first occupied it, we
enter in, strictly observing the type which
they exhibited. For this cause we also pro-
nounce "peace" in common to all, directly
as we enter, according to that law.

Let no one therefore be careless, no one in-
attentive,'" when the priests have entered in
and are teaching; for there is really no small
punishment appointed for this. Yea, and I
for one would rather enter into any of your
houses ten thousand times, and find myself


4 Isa. lii. 7 ; Rom. x. 15. 5 John xiv. 27.

6 See Bingham i^, 10, 8, quoting St. Chrys. Horn. />z cos (;ui
primuni Pascka jcjunatit, P. vi. 383. Sav. "There is nothing
like peace and harmony. Therefore our Father (the Bishop)
mounts not up to this throne, until he have invoked peace upon
you all : nor when he stands up, doth he begin his instruction to
you, until he have given peace to all ; and the priests, when about
to consecrate, first make this prayer for you, and so begin the
blessing : and the deacon also, when he bids you pray, joins this
with the rest as matter of your prayer, that you should ask for the
angel of peace, and that all the things set before you should be for
your peace : also in dismissing you from this assembly, this is what
he implores for you, saying, ' Depart in peace.' And in a word,
we may not say or do any thingwithout this peace." See also
Bingham, 14, 4, 6 ; 4. 14 ; 15, 3, i, 2 ; and the authors quoted
by him, especially St. Chrysostom in various places : from which it
is evident that "the table " here means the holy table, and that his
argument is, " We should receive our brethren's salutations as
home and elsewhere with a brotherly mind, that we may be fit to
impart to him the kiss of peace in the holy mysteries : the one is a
type of, and a preparation for, the other: as was the salutation
here enjoined to the apostles. Especially ought we to be ready
and attentive at the many salutations which the ministers offer to
us in the earlier part of the service, that we may lose none of the
benefit of that mysterious salutation which we know will come m
the end and most awful part of it."

9 i. '(?., to refuse the kiss of peace, which was always a part of
the altar service.

10 utre'copos.


Homily XXXII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


■217


baffled, than not be heard when I speak here.
This latter is to me harder to bear than the
other, by how much this house is of greater
dignity; our great possessions being verily
laid up here, here all the hopes we have.
For what is here, that is not great and awful ?
Thus both this table is far more precious and
delightful than the other/ and this candle-
stick than the candlestick there. And this
they know, as many as have put away dis-
eases by anointing themselves with oil " in
faith and in due season. And this coffer too
is far better and more indispensable than that
other chest; for it hath not clothes but alms
shut up in it; even though they be few that
own them. Here too is a couch better than
that other; for the repose of the divine Scrip-
tures is more delightful than any couch.

And had we attained to excellence in re-
spect of concord, then had we no other home
beside this. And that there is nothing over-
burdensome in this saying, the "three thou-
sand,"^ bear witness, and the "five thou-
sand," " who had but one home, one table,
one soul; for "the multitude of them that
believed," we read, "were of one heart and
of one soul.'' s But since we fall far short of
their virtue, and dwell scattered in our several
homes, let us at least, when we meet here,
be earnest in so doing. Because though
in all other things we be destitute and poor,
yet in these we are rich. Wherefore here at
least receive us with love when we come in
unto you. And when I say, " Peace be unto
you,"* and ye say, "And with thy spirit,"
say it not with the voice only, but also with
the mind; not in mouth, but in understanding
also. But if, while here thou sayest, " Peace
also to thy spirit," out of doors thou art mine
enemy, spitting at and calumniating me, and
secretly aspersing me with innumerable re-
proaches; what manner of peace is this ?

For I indeed, though thou si:)eak evil of me
ten thousand times, give thee that peace with
a pure heart, with sincerity of purpose, and I
can say nothing evil at any time of thee; for

« /. <•., than the common tables in your own houses.

a Sec James v. 14, 15; Tcrtnll. </./ .S'iv»/«/. c. 4. 'Sevcrus
sought out one I'roculus, a Christian, who had riircci him at a cer-
tain time with oil, and kept him in his court until he dird." St.
Jerome, Tit. SI, /li/arii>n, c. tj. " Very many, wounded hy ser-
pents, having had recourse to Ililarioii, inilt'i-<l all the hiishandmrn
and shepherds, upon touchinkC their wounds with consecrated oil,
recovered lasting health.". Other ciiscs <in:ur in church history,
and illustrate the iinportaiue which ihr e.irly writers utirihiite io
the sjicred oil in the church ritual, and the account of the miracle
of St. Narcissus in Kuseb. I-'.. M. vi. •;. This slaleinrnt of St.
(■hrysf)Stom should be Imrne in mind, as qiialifyiiiK what he so of-
ten seems to afTirm or imply, that miruculuus gifts had been with-
drawn.

1 Acts ii. 41. 4 .Arts iv. 4. 5 Act.s iv. -^i.

* Sec St. Chrys. on Coloss. Mom. III. (as quoted by Mr. l''ield).
" When the bishop enters the church, immediately he wiys, ' I'riicc
be to all ;' when he exhorts, ' I'eace to all,' wlii-n he consecrntrii,
' I'eace to alt ;' when he enjoins the sidiilatioii, ' I'eace to all ;'
when the sacrifi<i- is end>-d, ' I'cacc to all :' and at interval* aKain,
' (Jracc to you and I'caie.' "


I have a father's bowels. And if I rebuke
thee at any time, I do it out of concern for
thee. But as for thee, by thy secret carping
at me, and not receiving me in the Lord's
house, I fear lest thou shouldest in return
add to my despondency; not for thine insult-
ing me, not for thy casting me out, but for
thy rejecting our peace, and drawing down
upon thyself that grievous punishment.

For though I shake not off the dust, though
I turn not away, what is threatened remains
unchanged. For I indeed oftentimes pro-
nounce peace to you, and will not cease from
continually speaking it; and if, besides your
insults, ye receive me not, even then I shake
not off the dust; not that I am disobedient to
our Lord, but that I vehemently burn for you.
And besides, I have suffered nothing at all
for you; I have neither come a long journey,
nor with that garb and that voluntary poverty
am I come (therefore we first blame our-
selves), nor without shoes and a second coat;
and perhaps this is why ye also fail of your
part. However, this is not a sufficient plea
for you; but while our condemnation is
greater, to you it imparts no excuse.

10. Then the houses were churches, but
now the church is become a house. Then
one might say nothing worldly in a house,
now one may say nothing spiritual in a church,
but even h^e ye bring in the business from
the market place, and while God is discours-
ing, ye leave off listening in silence to His
sayings, and bring in the contrary things, and
make discord. And I would it were your
own affairs, but now the things which are
nothing to you, those ye both speak and
hear.

For tliis I lament, and will not cease
lamenting. For I have no power to quit this
house, but here we must needs remain until
we dejxart from this present life. " Receive
us"' therefore, as Paul commanded. For
his language in that place related not to a
meal, but to the temper and mind. This we
also seek of you, even love, tliat fervent and
genuine affection. lUit if ye endure not
even this, at least love yourselves, and lay
aside your present remissness. This is suf-
ficient for our consolation, if we see you ap-
proving yourselves, and l)ecoming lietter men.
So will I also myself show forth iiureased
love, even *' though the more abumiantly I
love you, the less I be loved.""

For iiulccil tlicre are many things to binil
us together. C)ne table is set before all, one


7 a Cor. vii. a.

" a Cor. xii. 15. [U, V., " .\iii I loved the less?" The readintE
accepted by Chryiostom okfccs better with (his inlerpretation.


2l8


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXII.


Father begat us, we are all the issue of the
same throes, the same drink hath been given
to all; or rather not only the same drink, but
also to drink out of one cup. For our Father
desiring to lead us to a kindly affection, hath
devised this also, that we should drink out of
one cup; a thing which belongs to intense
love.

But "there is no comparison between the
apostles and us." I confess it too, and
would never deny it. For I say not, to them-
selves, but not even to their shadows are we
comparable.

But nevertheless, let your part be done.
This will have no tendency to disgrace you,
but rather to profit you the more. For when
even to . unworthy persons ye show so much
love and obedience, then shall ye receive the
greater reward.-

For neither are they our own words which
we speak, since ye have no teacher at all on
earth; but what we have received, that we
also give, and in giving we seek for nothing
else from you, but to be loved only. And if
we be unworthy even of this, yet by our
loving you we shall quickly be worthy. Al-
though we are commanded to love not them
only that love us, but even our enemies.
Who then is so hardhearted, who so savage,
that after having received such a law, he
should abhor and hate even them that love
him, full as he may be of innumerable evils ?

We have partaken of a spiritual table, let
us be partakers also of spiritual love. For if
robbers, on partaking of salt, forget their
character; what excuse shall we have, who
are continually partaking of the Lord's body,
and do not imitate even their gentleness ?
And yet to many, not one table only, but
even to be of one city, hath sufficed for
friendship; but we, when we have the same
city, and the same house, and table, and way,
and door, and root, and life, and head, and
the same shepherd, and king, and teacher,
and judge, and maker, and father, and to
whom all things are common; what indulg-
ence can ve deserve, if we be divided one
from another?

II. But the miracles, perhaps, are what ye
seek after, such as they wrought when they
entered in; the lepers cleansed, the devils
driven out, and the dead raised ? Nay, but
this is the great indication of your high birth,
and of your love, that ye should believe God
without pledges. And in fact this, and one
other thing, were the reasons why God made
miracles to cease. I mean, that if when mir-
acles are not performed, they that plume
themselves on other advantages, — for in-
stance, either on the word of wisdom, or on


show of piety, — grow vainglorious, are puffed
up, are separated one from another; did mir-
acles also take place, how could there but be
violent rendings ? And that what I say is not
mere conjecture, the Corinthians bear wit-
ness, who from this cause were divided into
many parties.

Do not thou therefore seek signs, but the
soul's health. Seek not to see one dead man
raised; nay, for thou hast learnt that the
whole world is arising. Seek not to see a
blind man healed, but behold all now restored
unto that better and more profitable sight;
and do thou too learn to look chastely, and
amend thine eye.

For in truth, if we all lived as we ought,
workers of miracles would not be admired so
much as we by the children of the heathen.
For as to the signs, they often carry with
them either a notion of mere fancy, or an-
other evil suspicion, although ours be not
such. But a pure life cannot admit of any
such reproach; yea, all men's mouths are
stopped b^the acquisition of virtue.

Let virtue then be our study: for abundant
are her riches, and great the wonder wrought
in her. She bestows the true freedom, and
causes the same to be discerned even in slav-
ery, not releasing from slavery, but while men
continue slaves, exhibiting them more honor-
able than freemen; which is much more than
giving them freedom: not making the poor
man rich, but while he continues poor, exhib-
iting him wealthier than the rich.

But if thou wouldest work miracles also, be
rid of transgressions, and thou hast quite ac-
complished it. Yea, for sin is a great demon,
beloved; and if thou exterminate this, thou
hast wrought a greater thing than they who
drive out ten thousand demons. Do thou
listen to Paul, how he speaks, and prefers
virtue to miracles. "But covet earnestly,"
saith he, "the best gifts: and yet show I
unto you a more excellent way."' And
when hz was to declare this " way," he spoke
not of raising the dead, not of cleansing of
lepers, not of any other such thing; but in
place of all these he set charity. Hearken
also unto Christ, saying, "Rejoice not that
the demons obey you, but that your names
are written in Heaven." = And again before
this, " Many will say to me«in that day. Have
we not prophesied in Thy name, and cast out
devils, and done many mighty works, and
then I will profess unto them, I know you
not." 3 And when He was about to be cruci-
fied. He called His disciples, and said unto
them, "By this shall all men know that ye


I I Cor. xii. 31.


2 Luke X. 20.


3 Matt. vii. 22, 23.


Homily XXXIIT.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


219


are my disciples," not " if ye cast out devils,"
but " if ye have love one to another." ' And
again, " Hereby shall all men know that
Thou hast sent me; " not " if these men raise
the dead," but, " if they be one.''^"

For, as to miracles, they oftentimes, xvhile
they profited another, have injured him who
had the power, by lifting him up to pride and
vainglory, or haply in some other way: but in
our works there is no place for any such sus-
picion, but they profit both such as follow
them, and many others.

These then let us perform with much dili-
gence. For if thou change from inhumanity
to almsgiving, thou hast stretched forth the


I John xiii, 35.


a John xvii. 23, 22.


hand that was withered. If thou withdraw
from theatres and go to the church, thou hast
cured the lame foot. If thou draw back
thine eyes from an harlot, and from beauty
not thine own, thou hast opened them when
they were blind. If instead of satanical
songs, thou hast learnt spiritual psalms, being
dumb, thou hast spoken.

These are the greatest miracles, these the
wonderful signs. If we go on working these
signs, we shall botli ourselves ht a great and
admirable sort of persons through these, and
shall win over all the wicked unto virtue, and
shall enjoy the life to come; unto which may
we all attain, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory and might forever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XXXIII.


Matt. X. i6.


" Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves; be ye therefore wise as ser-
pents, and harmless as doves."


Having made them feel confident about
their necessary food, and opened unto tliem
all men's houses, and having invested their
entrance with an appearance to attract vener-
ation, charging them not to come in as wan-
derers, and beggars, but as much more ven-
erable than those who received them (for this
He signifies by His saying, "the workman
is worthy of his hire; " and by His command-
ing them to inquire, who was worthy, and
there to remain, and enjoining them to salute
such as receive tliem; and by His threatening
such as receive them not with those incurable
evils): having I say, in tliis way cast out their
anxiety, and armed them with the display of
miracles, and made them as it were all iron
and adamant, by delivering them from all
worldly things, and enfranchising them from
all temporal care: He speaks in what follows
of the evils also that were to befall them; not
only those that were to happen soon after,
but those too that were to be in long course
of time; from tlie first, even l(jng beforehand,
preparing them for the war against the devil.
Yea, and many advantages were hence se-
cured; and first, that they learnt tiie power
of His foreknowledge; secon<lly, that no one


should suspect, that through weakness of
their IMaster came these evils upon them;
thirdly, that such as undergo these things
should not be dismayed by their falling out
unexpectedly, and against hope; fourthly,
that they might not at the very time of the
cross be troubled on hearing these things.
For indeed, they were just so affected at that
time; when also He upliraided them, saying,
" liecause I have saitl these things unto you,
sorrow hath filled your hearts; and none of
you asketh me, whitlier goest Thou ? " ' And
yet He had said nothing as yet touching
Himself, as that He sliouUl be bound, and
scourged, and put to death, that He might
not hereby also confoimd their minds; but
for the present He announces before what
shouitl hajipen to themselves.

Then, that they might learn tliat this sys-
tem of war is new, and the manner of the
array unwonted; as He sends them bare, and
witii one coat, and unshod, and without staff,
and without girdle or scrip, and bids them be
maintained by such as receive them; so
neither here did He stay His speech, but to

« John xvi. 6, 5.


220


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIII.


signify His unspeakable power, He saith,
" Even thus setting out, exhibit the gentle-
ness of "sheep," and this, though ye are to
go unto "wolves;" and not simply unto
wolves, but " into the midst of wolves."

And He bids them have not only gentle-
ness as sheep, but also the harmlessness of
the dove. " For thus shall I best show forth
my might, when sheep get the better of
wolves, and being in the midst of wolves, and
receiving a thousand bites^ so far from being
consumed, do even work a change on them:
a thing far greater and more marvellous than
killing them, to alter their spirit, and to
reform their mind; and this, being only
twelve, while the whole world is filled with the
wolves."

Let us then be ashamed, who do the con-
trary, who set like wolves upon our enemies.
For so long as we are sheep, we conquer:
though ten thousand wolves prowl around, we
overcome and» prevail. But if we become
wolves, we are worsted, for the help of our
Shepherd departs from us: for He feeds not
wolves, but sheep: and He forsakes thee, and
retires, for neither dost thou allow His might
to be shown. Because, as Fie accounts the
whole triumph His own, if thou being ill
used, show forth gentleness; so if thou follow
it up and give blows, thou obscurest His vic-
tory.

2. But do thou consider, I pray thee, who
they are that hear these injunctions, so hard
and laborious: the timid and ignorant; the
unlettered and uninstructed; such as are in
€very respect obscure, who have never been
trained up in the Gentile laws, who do not
readily present themselves in the public
places; the fishermen, the publicans, men full
of innumerable deficiencies. For if these
things were enough to confound even the lofty
and great, how were they not enough to cast
down and dismay them that were in all re-
spects untried, and had never entertained any
noble imagination ? But they did not cast
them down.

"And very naturally," some one may per-
haps say; "because He gave them power to
cleanse lepers, to drive out devils." I would
answer as follows: Nay, this very thing was
enough especially to perplex them, that for
all their raising the dead, they were to un-
dergo these intolerable evils, both judgments,
and executions, and the wars which all would
wage on them, and the common hatred of the
world ; and that such terrors await them, while
themselves are working miracles.

3. What then is their consolation for all
these things ? The power of Him that sends
them. Wherefore also He puts this before


all, saying, "Behold, I send you." This
suffices for your encouragement, this for con-
fidence, and fearing none of your assailants.

Seest thou authority ? seest thou preroga-
tive ? seest thou invincible might ? Now His
meaning is like this: " Be not troubled" (so
He speaks), " that sending you among wolves,
I command you to be like sheep and like
doves. For I might indeed have done the
contrary, and have suffered you to undergo
nothing terrible, nor as sheep to be exposed
to wolves; I might have rendered you more
formidable than lions; but it is expedient
that so it should be. This makes you also
more glorious; this proclaims also my power."

This He said also unto Paul: " My grace is
sufficient for thee, for my strength is made
perfect in weakness."' " It is I, now mark
it, who have caused you so to be.'' For in
saying, " I send you forth as sheep," He in-
timates this. "Do not therefore despond,
for I know, I know certainly, that in this way
more than any other ye will be invincible to
all."

After this, that they may contribute some-
thing on their own part also, and that all
might not seem to be of His grace, nor they
supposed to be crowned at random, and
vainly, He saith, "Be ye therefore wise as
serpents, and harmless as doves." "But
what," it might be said, "will our wisdom
avail in so great dangers ? nay, how shall we
be able to have wisdom at all, when so many
waves are drenching us all over ? For let a
sheep be ever so wise, when it is in the midst
of wolves, and so many wolves, what will it
be able to do ? Let the dove be ever so
harmless, what will it profit, when so many
hawks are assailing it?" In the brutes in-
deed, not at all: but in you as much as possi-
ble.

But let us see what manner of wisdom
He here requires. That of the serpent,
He saith. For even as that animal gives up
everything, and if its very body must be cut
off, doth not very earnestly defend it, so that
it may save its head; in like manner do thou
also, saith He, give up every thing but the
faith; though goods, body, life itself, must
be yielded. For that is the head and the
root; and if that be preserved, though thou
lose all, thou wilt recover all with so much
the more splendor. -

On this account then He neither com-
manded to be merely a simple and single-
hearted sort of person, nor merely wise; but
hath mixed up both these, so that they may
become virtue; taking in the wisdom of the


I 2 Cor. xii. 9.


2 TTCpK^ai^eiac.


Homily XXXIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


serpent that we may not be wounded in our
vitals; and the harmlessness of the dove, that
we may not retaliate on our wrongdoers, nor
avenge ourselves on them that lay snares;
since wisdom again is useless, except this be
added. Now what, I ask, could be more
strict than these injunctions ? Why, was it
not enough to suffer wrong? Nay, saith He,
but I do not permit thee so much as to be
indignant. For this is "the dove." As
though one should cast a reed into fire, and
command it not to be burnt by the fire, but
to quench it.

However, let us not be troubled; nay, for
these things have come to pass, and have had
an accomplishment, and have been shown in
very deed, and men became wise as serpents,
and harmless as doves; not being of another
nature, but of the same with us.

Let not then any one account His injunc-
tions impracticable. For He beyond all
others knows the nature of things; He knows
that fierceness is not quenched by fierceness,
but by gentleness. And if in men's actual
deeds too thou wouldest see this result, read
the book of the Acts of the Apostles, and
thou wilt see how often, when the people of
the Jews had risen up against them and were
sharpening their teeth, these men, imitating
the dove, and answering with suitable meek-
ness, did away with their wrath, quenched
their madness, broke their impetuosity. As
when they said, " Did not we straitly com-
mand you, that ye should not speak in this
name ? " ' although able to work any number
of miracles, they neither said nor did any-
thing harsh, but answered for themselves with
all meekness, saying, " Whether it be right
to hearken unto you more than unto God,
judge ye. " =

Hast thou seen the harmlessness of the
dove? Behold the wisdom of the serpent.
" For we cannot but speak the things, which
we know and have heard. "^ Seest thou how
we must be j)erfect on all points, so as neither
to be abased by dangers, nor provoked by
anger?

4. Therefore He said also,^

" Beware of men, for they shall deliver you
up to coimcils, and they shall scourge you in
tiieir synagogues: and ye siiall be brought
before governors and kings for my sake, for a
testimony to them and the (ientiles."

'J'hus again is He preparing tliem to l)e
vigilant, in every case assigning to them the
sufferance of wrong, and permitting tlie in-
fliction of it to otiiers; to teach thee that tlie
victory is in suffering evil, and that His glori-


« Acts V. a8.
3 Actf iv, ao.


» Art! iv. 19.

* .Matt. X. 17, 18.


ous trophies are thereby set up. For He said
not at all, " Fight ye also, and resist them
that would vex you," but only, "Ye shall
suffer the utmost ills."

O how great is the power of Him that

.speaks ! How great the self-command of
them that hear ! For indeed we have great
cause to marvel, how they did not' straight-
way dart away from Him on hearing these
things, apt as they were to be startled at
every sound, and such as had never gone
further than that lake, around which they
used to fish; and how they did not reflect,
and say to themselves, "And whither after all
this are we to flee? The courts of justice
against us, the kings against us, the govern-
ors, the synagogues of the Jews, the nations
of the Gentiles, the rulers, and the ruled."
(For hereby He not only forewarned them of
Palestine, and the ills therein, but discovered
also the wars throughout the world, saying,
" Ye shall be brought before kings and gov-
ernors;" signifying that to tlT^ Gentiles also
He was afterwards to send them as heralds.)
" Thou hast made the world our enemy.
Thou hast armed against us all them that
dwell on the earth, peoples, tyrants, kings."

j And what follows again is much more fear-
ful, since men are to become on our account
murderers of brothers, of children, of fathers.
"For the brother," saith He, "shall de-
liver up the brother to death, and the father
the child; and children shall rise up against

their parents, and cause them to be put to
death." s

"How, then," one might say, "will the
rest of men believe, when they see on our
account, children slain by their fathers, and
brethren by brethren, and all things filled
with abominations ? " What? will not men,
as tliough we were destructive demons, will
they not, as though we were devoted, and
pests of the world, drive us out from every
quarter, seeing the earth filled with blood of
kinsmen, and with so many murtlerers?
Surely fair is the peace (is it not?) which we
are to bring into men's houses and give
them, while we are filling those houses with
so many slaughters. ^^ hy, liad wc betn
some great number of us, instead of twelve;
had we been, instead of " unlearned and
ignorant," wise, and skilled in riietonc, and
mighty in speech; nay more, had we been
even kings, and in possession of armies and
abuiul.'uicf of wealth; how could we have per-
suaded any, while kindling up civil wars, yea,
and other wars far worse than tliey ? Wliy,
though wc were to despise our own safely,
which of all other men will give heed to us?"

S Matt. X. 91.


222


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIII.


But none of these things did they either
think or say, neither did they require any ac-
count of His injunctions, but simply yielded
and obeyed. And this came not from their
own virtue only, but also of the wisdom of
their Teacher. For see how to each of the
fearful things He annexed an encouragement;
as in the' case of such as received them not,
He said, " It shall be more tolerable for the
land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of
judgment, than for that city; " so here again,
when He had said, " Ye shall be brought be-
fore governors and kings," He added, "for
my sake, for a testimony to them, and the
Gentiles." And this is no small consolation,
that they are suffering these things both for
Christ, and for the Gentiles' conviction.
Thus God, though no one regard, is found to
be everywhere doing His own works. Now
these things were a comfort to them, not that
they desired the punishment of other men,
but that they might have ground of confi-
dence, as surefto have Him everywhere pres-
ent with them, who had both foretold and
foreknown these things; and because not as
wicked men, and as pests, were they to suffer
all this.

And together with these, He adds another,
and that no small consolation for them, say-
ing,

"But when they deliver you up, take no
thought' how or what ye shall speak, for it
shall be given you in that hour what ye shall
speak. For it is not ye that speak, but the
Spirit of your Father that speaketh in you." ^

For lest they should say, " How shall we
be able to persuade men, when such things
are taking place?" He bids them be confi-
dent as to their defense also. And elsewhere
indeed He saith, "I will give you a mouth
and wisdom; " ^ but here, " It is the Spirit of
your Father that speaketh in you,'' advancing
them unto the dignity of the prophets.
Therefore, when He had spoken of the power
that was given, then He added also the ter-
rors, the murders, and the slaughters.

"For the brother shall deliver up the
brother." saith He, " to death, and the father
the child, and the children shall rise up
against their parents, and cause them to be
put to death." "*

And not even at this did He stop, but
added also what was greatly more fearful, and
enough to shiver a rock to pieces: "And ye
shall be hated of all men." And here again
the consolation is at the doors, for, " For my
name's sake," saith He, " ye shall suffer
these things.'' And with this again another,


I [R. v., " be not anxious."]
3 Luke xxi. is.


- Matt. X. 19, 20.
4 Matt. X. 21.


" But he that endureth to the end, the same
shall be saved." =

And these things in another point of view
likewise were sufficient to rouse up their
spirits; since at any rate the power of their
gospel was to blaze up so high, as that nature
should be despised, and kindred rejected„and
the Word preferred to all, chasing all mightily
away. For if no tyranny of nature is strong
enough to withstand your sayings, but it is
dissolved and trodden under foot, what else
shall be able to get the better of you ? Not,
however, that your life will be in security,
because these things shall be; but rather ye
will have for your common enemies and foes
them that dwell in the whole world.

5. Where now is Plato? Where Pythago-
ras ? Where the long chain* of the Stoics ?
For the first, after having enjoyed great
honor, was so practically refuted, as even to
be sold out of the country, ^ and to succeed in
none of his objects, no, not so much as in
respect of one tyrant: yea, he betrayed his
disciples, and ended his life miserably. And
the Cynics, mere pollutions as they were,
have all passed by like a dream and a
shadow. And yet assuredly no such thing
ever befell them, but rather they were ac-
counted glorious for their heathen philosophy,
and the Athenians made a public monument
of the epistles of Plato, sent them by Dion;
and they passed all their time at ease, and
abounded in wealth not a little. Thus, foi
instance, Aristippus was used to purchase
costly harlots; and another made a will,
leaving no common inheritance; and another,
when his disciples had laid themselves down
like a bridge, walked on them; and he of
Sinope, they say, even behaved himself un-
seemly in the market place.

Yea, these are their honorable things.
But there is no such thing here, but a strict
temperance, and a perfect decency, and a war
against the whole world in behalf of truth and
godliness, and to be slain every day, and not
until hereafter their glorious trophies.

But there are some also, one may say,
skilled in war amongst them; as Themistocles,
Pericles. But these things too are children's
toys, compared with the acts of the fisher-
men. For what canst thou say? That he
persuaded the Athenians to embark in their
ships, when Xerxes was marching upon
Greece? Why in this case, when it is not
Xerxes marching, but the devil with the
whole world, and his evil spirits innumerable

5 Matt. X. 22. * op/uaSos.

7 For the story of Plato's slavery, see D!o,a:en. Laertius, lib. 3 ;
St. Chrys. in i Cor. Horn. IV. sec. 9; and Plutarch (as there
quoted) in his Life of I -ion. as to its authenticity, see Mitford's
Greece, iv. c. 31, sec. 8.


Homily XXXIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


2 2 ^


assailing these twelve men, not at one crisis
only, but throughout their whole life, they
prevailed and vanquished; and what was truly
marvellous, not by slaying their adversaries,
but by converting and reforming them.

For this especially you should observ^e
throughout, that they slew not, nor destroyed '
such as were plotting against them, but hav-!
ing found them as bad as devils, they made ;
them rivals of angels, enfranchising human :
nature from this evil tyranny, while as to j
those execrable demons that were confound- <
ing all things, they drave them out of the
midst of markets, and houses, or rather even
from the very wilderness. And to this the
choirs of the monks bear witness, whom they
have planted everywhere, clearing out not
the habitable only, but even the uninhabita-
ble land. And what is yet more marvellous,
they did not this in fair conflict, but in the
enduring of evil they accomplished it all.
Since men actually had them in the midst,
twelve unlearned persons, binding, scourging,
dragging them about, and were not able to
stop their mouths; but as it is impossible to
bind the sunbeam, so also their tongue.
And the reason was, " it was not they" them-
selves "that spake," but the power of the
Spirit. Thus for instance did Paul overcome
Agrippa, and Xero, who surpassed all men in
wickedness. " For the Lord," saith he,
" stood with me, and strengthened me, and
delivered me out of the mouth of the lion." '

But do thou also admire them, how when
it was said to them, "Take no thought,"
they yet l)elieved, and accepted it, and none
of the terrors amazed them. .And if thou
say, He gave them encouragement enough,
by saying, " It shall be the Spirit of your
Father that shall speak; " even for this am I
most amazed at them, that they doubted not,
nor sought deliverance from tiieir perils; and
this, when not for two or three years were
they to suffer these things, but all their life
long. For the saying, " He that endureth to
the end, the same shall be saved," is an in-
timation of this.

For His will is, that not
should be contributed, but
deeds should be also done of them. Mark,
for instance, how from the first, part is His,
|)art His disciples*. Thus, to do miracles is
His, l)ut to provide nothing is theirs. Again,
to open all men's houses, was of the grace
from above; but to recjuirc no more than was
needful, of their own self-denial. '* For the
workman is worthy of his hire." 'I'lieir be-
stowing peace was of tiie gift of God, their

' a Tim. iv. 17.


His part only
that the good


inquiring for the worthy, and not entering in
without distinction unto all, of their own self
command. Again, to punish such as received
them not was His, but to retire with gentle-
ness from them, without reviling or insulting
them, was of the apostles' meekness. To
give the Spirit, and cause them not to take
thought, was of Him that sent them, but to
become like sheep and doves, and to bear all
things nobly, was of their calmness and pru-
dence. To be hated and not to despond, and
to endure, was their own; to save them that
endured, was of Him who sent them.

Wherefore also He said, " He that endur-
eth to the end, the same shall be saved."
That is, because the more part are wont at
the beginning indeed to be vehement, but
afterwards to faint, therefore saith He, "I
require the end." For what is the use of
seeds, flourishing indeed at first, buc a little
after fading away ? Therefore it is continued
patience that He requires of them. I mean,
lest any say. He wrought the whole Himself,
and it was no wonder that they should prove
such, suffering as they did nothing intolera-
ble; therefore He saith unto them, " There
is need also of patience on your part. For
though I should rescue you from the first
dangers, I am reserving you for others more
grievous, and after these again others will
succeed; and ye shall not cease to have
snares laid for you, so long as )'e have breath.
For this He intimated in saying, " But he
that endureth to the end, the same shall be
saved."

For this cause then, though He said,
*' Take no thought what ye shall speak; " yet
elsewhere He saith, " Be ready to give nn
answer to every man that asketh you a reason
of the hope that is in you."'' That is, as
long as the contest is among friends, He
commands us also to take thought; but when
there is a terrible tribunal, and frantic assem-
blies, and terrors on all sides, He bestows the
influence from Himself, that they may take
courage and speak out, and not be discour-
aged, nor betray the righteous cause.

For in truth it was a very great thing, for a
man occupied about lakes, and skins, and
receipt of custom, when tyrants were on their
thrones, and satraps, and guards stamling by
them, and the swords drawn, and all stamling
on their side; to enter in alone, bound, hang-
ing down his head, and yet be able to open
his mouth. For indeed they allowed them
neither speech nor defense with respect to
their doctrines, but set al)out torturing them
to death, as conmion pests of the world.

3 I Pctcr iii. 13.


224


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIII.


For "They," it is said, "that have turned
the world upside down, are come hither
also;" and again, " They preach things con-
trary to the decrees of Caesar, saying that
Jesus Christ is king. '^' And everywhere the
courts of justice were preoccupied by such
suspicions, and much influence from above
was needed, for their showing both the truth
of the doctrine they preached, and that they
are not violating the common laws; so that
they should neither, while earnest to speak
of the doctrine, fall under suspicion of over-
turning the laws; nor again, while earnest to
show that they were not overturning the com-
mon government, corrupt the perfection of
their doctrines: all which thou wilt see ac-
complished with all due consideration, both
in Peter and in Paul, and in all the rest.
Yea, and as rebels and innovators, and revo-
lutionists, they were accused all over the
world; yet nevertheless they both repelled
this impression, and invested themselves with
the contrary, all men celebrating them as sav-
iors, and guardians, and benefactors. And
all this they achieved by their much patience.
Wherefore also Paul said, "I die daily; "^
and he continued to "stand in jeopardy''
unto the end.

6. What then must we deserve, having
such high patterns, and in peace giving way
to effeminacy, and remissness ? With none
to make war (it is too evident) we are slain;
we faint when no man pursues, in peace we
are required to be saved, and even for this
we are not sufificient. And they indeed, when
the world was on fire, and the pile was being
kindled over the whole earth, entering,
snatched from within, out of the midst of the
flame, such as were burning; but thou art not
able so much as to preserve thyself.

What confidence then will there be for us ?
What favor? There are no stripes, no
prisons, no rulers, no synagogues, nor aught
else of that kind to set upon us; yea, quite
on the contrary we rule and prevail. For
both kings are godly, and there are many
honors for Christians, and precedences, and
distinctions, and immunities, and not even so
do we prevail. And whereas they being daily
led to execution, both teachers and disciples,
and bearing innumerable stripes, and contin-
ual brandings, were in greater luxury than
such as abide in Paradise; we who have en-
dured no such thing, not even in a dream, are
softer than any wax, " But they.'' it will be
said, "wrought miracles." Did this then
keep them from the scourge? did it free
them from persecution ? Nay, for this is the


' Acts xvii. 6, 7.


2 1 Cor. XV. 31, 30.


Strange thing, that they suffered such things
often even at the hands of them whom they
benefited, and not even so were they con-
founded, receiving only evil for good. But
thou if thou bestow on any one any little
benefit, and then be requited with anything
unpleasant, art confounded, art troubled, and
repentest of that which thou hast done.

If now it should happen, as I pray it may
not happen nor at any time fall out, that there
be a war against churches, and a persecution,
imagine how great will be the ridicule, how
sore the reproaches. And very naturally;
for when no one exercises himself in the
wrestling school, how shall he be distin-
guished in the contests ? What champion,
not being used to the trainer, will be able,
when summoned by the Olympic contests, to
show forth anything great and noble against
his antagonist? Ought we not every day to
wrestle and fight and run ? See ye not them
that are called Pentathli, when they have no
antagonists, how they fill a sack with much
sand, and hanging it up try their full strength
thereupon ? And they that are still younger,
practise the fight against their enemies upon
the persons of their companions.

These do thou also emulate, and practise
the wrestlings of self denial. For indeed
there are many that provoke to anger, and
incite to lust, and kindle a great flame.
Stand therefore against thy passions, bear
nobly the mental pangs, that thou mayest
endure also those of the body.

7, For so the blessed Job, if he had not
exercised himself well before his conflicts,
would not have shone so brightly in the
same. Unless he had practised freedom from
all despondency, he would have uttered some
rash word, when his children died. But as it
was, he stood against all the assaults, against
ruin of fortune, and destruction of so great
affluence: against loss of children, against his
wife's commiseration, against plagues in
body, against reproaches of friends, against
revilings of servants.

And if thou wouldest see his ways of exer-
cise also, hear him saying, how he used to
despise wealth: " If I did but rejoice," saith
he, " because my wealth was great: if I set
gold up for a heap, if I put my trust in a pre-
cious stone. "3 Therefore neither was he
confounded at their being taken away, since
he desired them not when present.

Hear how he also managed what related to
his children, not giving way to undue soft-
ness, as we do, but requiring of them all cir-
cumspection. For he who offered sacrifice

3 Job xxxi. 25, 24, Lxx.


Homily XXXIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


225


even for their secret sins, imagine how strict
.1 judge he was of such as were manifest.'

And if thou wouldest also hear of his striv-
ings after continence, hearken to him when
he saith, " I made a covenant with mine eyes,
that I should not think upon a maid." - For
this cause his wife did not break his spirit,
for he loved her even before tiiis, not how-
ever immoderately, but as is due to a wife.

Wherefore I am led even to marvel, whence
it came into the devil's thought to stir up the
contest, knowing as he did of his previous
training. Whence then did it occur to him ?
The monster is wicked, and never despairs:
and this turns out to us a very great condem-
nation, that he indeed never gives up the
hope of our destruction, but we despair of
our own salvation.

But for bodily mutilation and indignity,
mark how he practised himself. Why, inas-
much as he himself had never undergone any
such thing, but had continued to live in
wealth and luxury, and in all other splendor,
he used to divine other men's calamities, one
by one. And this he declared, when he said,
" For the thing which I greatly feared is come
upon me; and that which I was afraid of is
come unto me."^ And again, "But I wept
for every helpless man, and groaned when I
saw a man in distress. " ■•

So because of this, nothing of what hap-
pened confounded him, none of those great
and intolerable ills. For I bid thee not look
at the ruin of his substance, nor at the loss of
his children, nor at that incurable plague, nor
at his wife's device against him; but at those
things which are far more grievous than
these.

"And what/' saith one, "did Job suffer
more grievous than these ? for from his his-
tory there is nothing more than these for us
to learn." Because we are asleep, we do not
learn, since he surely that is anxious, and
searches well for the pearl, will know of many
more particulars than tliese. For the more
grievous, and apt to infuse greater perplex-
ity, were different.

.■Vnd first, his knowing nothing certain
about the kingdom of heaven, and the resur-
rection; which indeed he also spoke of,
lamenting. " For I sliall not live alway, that
I sliould suffer long. "= Next, his being con-
scious to himself of many good works.
Thirdly, his being conscious of no evil thing.
Fourtlily, his supposing tliat at (Jod's hands
lie was undergoing it; or if at the devil's,
this again was enough to offend him. Fifthly,
his hearing his friends accusing him of wick-


« Job i. 5.
* Job XXX.


'5-
15


iJoL
!joh


ub xxxi. I.
S Job vii. 16, I.XX.


3 Jobiii. 33.


edness, "For thou hast not been scoursfed."
say they, "according to what thy sins de-
serve."* Sixthly, his seeing such as lived in
wickedness prospering, and exulting over
him. Seventhly, ndt having any other to
whom he might look as even having ever suf-
fered such things.

8. And if thou wouldest learn how great
these things are, consider our present state.
For if now, when we are looking for a king-
dom, and hoping for a resurrection, and for
the unutterable blessings, and are conscious
to ourselves of countless evil deeds, and when
we have so many examples, and are partakers
of so high a philosophy; should any persons
lose a little gold, and this often, after having
taken it by violence, they deem life not to be
lived in, having no wife to lay sore on them,
nor bereaved of children, nor reproached by
friends, nor insulted by servants, but rather
having many to comfort them, some by
words, some by deeds; of how noble crowns
must not he be worthy, who seeing what he
had gotten together by honest labor, snatched
away from him for nought and at random,
and after all that, undergoing temptations
without number, like sleet, yet throughout all
abides unmoved, and offers to the Lord his
due thanksgiving for it all ?

Why, though no one had spoken any of the
other taunts, yet his wife's words alone were
sufficient utterly to shake a very rock. Look,
for example, at her craft. No mention of
money, none of camels, and flocks, and herds,
(for she was conscious of her husband's self
command with regard to these), but of wliat
was harder to bear than all these, I mean,
their children; and she deepens the tragedy,
and adds to it her own intUience.

Now if when men were in wealth, and suf-
fering no distress, in many things and oft
have women prevailed on them: imagine how
courageous was that soul, which repulsed lier.
asJKiulting him witli such powerful weapons,
and whicli trod under foot the two most
tyrannical passions, ilesire and pity. And
yet many having coiujuered desire, have
yielded to pity. Tiiat noble Joseph, for in-
stance, held in subjection the most tyrannical
of pleasures, and rejiulsed that strange woman,
plying him as she did with innumerable de-
vices; but his tears he contained not, but
wlien he saw his brethren that hail wronged
iiim, he was all on fire with that passion, and
(jiiickly cast off the mask, and discovered the
part he had lieen playing.' But wlien first of
all she is his wife, and when her w(irds are
piteous, and the moment favorable for her,


« Job xi. 6.


7 Ipana.


226


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIV.


as well as his wounds and his stripes, and
those countless waves of calamities; how can
one otherwise than rightly pronounce the soul
impassive to so great a storm to be firmer
than any adamant? ♦

Allow me freely to say, that the very apos-
tles, if not inferior to this blessed man, are
at least not greater than he was. For they
indeed were comforted by the suffering for
Christ; and this medicine was so sufficient
daily to relieve them, that the Lord puts it
everywhere, saying, "for me, for my sake,"
and, " If they call me, the master of the
house, Beelzebub." ' But he was destitute of
this encouragement, and of that from mira-
cles, and of that from grace; for neither had
he so great power of the Spirit,

And what is yet greater, nourished in much
delicacy, not from amongst fishermen, and
publicans, and such as lived frugally, but
after enjoyment of so much honor, he suf-
fered all that he did suffer. And what
seemed hardest to bear in the case of the
apostles, this same he also underwent, being
hated of friends, of servants, of enemies, of
them who had received kindness of him: and
the sacred anchor, the harbor without waves,
namely, that which was said to the apostles,
*' for my sake," of this he had no sight.

I admire again the three children, for that
they dared the furnace, that they stood up
against a tyrant. But hear what they say,

I Matt. X. 25.


"We serve not thy Gods, nor worship the
image which thou hast set up."=' A thing
which was the greatest encouragement to
them, to know of a certainty that for God
they are suffering all whatsoever they suffer.
But this man knew not that it was all con-
flicts, and a wrestling; for had he known it,
he would not have felt what was happening.
At any rate, when he heard, " Thinkest thou
that I have uttered to thee mine oracles for
nought, or that thou mightest be proved
righteous? '^3 consider how straightway, at a
bare word, he breathed again, how he made
himself of no account, how he accounted
himself not so much as to have suffered what
he had suffered, thus saying, "Why do I
plead any more, being admonished and re-
proved of the Lord, hearing such things, I
being nothing?"'* And again, "I iiave
heard of Thee before, as far as hearing of the
ear; but now mine eye hath seen Thee;
wherefore I have made myself vile, and have
melted away; and I accounted myself earth
and ashes." ^

This fortitude then, this moderation, of
him that was before law and grace, let us
also emulate, who are after law and grace;
that we may also be able to share with him
the eternal tabernacles; unto which may we
all attain, by the grace and love towards man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be the
glory and the victory forever and ever. Amen.


2 Dan. lii. 18.
4 Job xl. 4, LXX.


3 Job xl. 3, LXX.

5 Job xlii. 5, 6, LXX.


HOMILY XXXIV.


Matt. X. 23.

But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into the other; for verily I say unto
you, ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son of Man be come.''


Having spoken of those fearful and horri-
ble things, enough to melt very adamant,
which after His cross, and resurrection, and
assumption, were to befall them, He directs
again His discourse to what was of more
tranquil character, allowing those whom He
is training to recover breath, and affording
them full security. For He did not at all
command them, when persecuted, to close
with the enemy, but to fly. That is, it being
so far but a beginning, and a prelude, He
gave His discourse a very condescending


turn. For not now of the ensuing persecu-
tions is He speaking, but of those before the
cross and the passion. And this He showed
by saying, " Ye shall not have gone over the
cities of Israel, till the Son of Man be come."
That is, lest they should say, "What then, if
when persecuted we flee, and there again they
overtake us, and drive us out ? " — to destroy
this fear, He saith, " Ye shall not have gone
round Palestine first, but I will straightway
come upon yoo."

And see how here again He doeth not


Homily XXXIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


227


away with the terrors, but stands by them in
their perils. For He said not, " I will snatch
you out, and will put an end to the persecu-
tions; " but what ? "Ye shall not have gone
over the cities of Israel, till the Son of Man
be come." Yea, for it sufficed for their con-
solation, simply to see Him.

But do thou observe, I pray thee, how He
doth not on every occasion leave all to grace,
but requires something also to be contributed
on their part. "For if ye fear," saith He,
" flee," for this He signified by saying, " flee
ye," and "fear not."' And He did not
command them to flee at first, but when per-
secuted to withdraw; neither is it a great dis-
tance that He allows them, but so much as
to go about the cities of Israel.

Then again. He trains them for another
branch of self-command; first, casting out all
care for their food: secondly, all fear of their
perils; and now, that of calumny. Since
from that first anxiety He freed them, by
saying, " The workman is worthy of his
hire,"- and by signifying that many would
receive them; and from their distress about
their dangers, by saying, "Take no thought
how or what ye shall speak," and, " He that
endureth unto the end, the same shall be
saved." ^

But since withal it was likely that they
should also bring upon themselves an evil
report, which to many seems harder to bear
than all; see whence He comforts them even
in this case, deriving the encouragement from
Himself, and from all that had been said
touching Himself; to which nothing else was
equal. For as He said in that other place,
"Ye shall be hated of all men," and added,
" for my name's sake," so also here.

And in another way He mitigates it, join-
ing a fresh topic to that former. What kind
of one then is it ?

"The disciple," saith He, "is not above
his Master, nor the servant above his Lord
It is enough for the disciple that he be as his
Master, and the servant as his Lord. If they
have called the Master of the house Beelze-
])ub, how much more shall they call them of
His household ? Fear them not therefore." ^

See how He discovers Himself to be the
Lord and God and Creator of all things.
What tlien ? Is tliere not any disciple above
his Master, or servant al)Ove his Lord?' So
long as he is a disciple, and a servant, he is
not, by tlie nature of tliat honor. For tell me
not here of the rare instances, hut take the
principle from tlie majority. And He saith

' Matt. X. 36. ' M*tt. X. 10.

3 Matt. X. iq, 22. 4 Matt. x. 24-36.

5 [In thK (Ireelc this seems to be a repctitiun of verse 34, and
not a question. — R.]


not, " How much more His servants," but
"them of His household," to show how very
near He felt them to be to Him.'^ And else-
where too He said, " Henceforth I call you
not servants; ye are my friends." ' And He
said not. If they have insulted the Master of
the house, and calumniated Him; but states
also the very form of the insult, that they
"called Him Beelzebub.''

Then He gives also another consolation,
not inferior to tiiis: for this indeed is the
greatest; but because for them who were not
yet living strictly, there was need also of an-
other, such as might have special power to
refresh them. He states it likewise. And the
saying seems indeed in form to be an univer-
sal proposition, nevertheless not of all mat-
ters, but of those in hand only, is it spoken.
For what saith He ?

" There is nothing covered, that shall not
be revealed; nor hid, that shall not be
known. "^ Now what He saith is like this.
It is indeed sufficient for your encourage-
ment, that I also shared with you in the same
reproach; I who am your Master and Lord.
But if it still grieve you to hear these words,
consider this other thing too, that even from
this suspicion ye will soon be released. For
why do ye grieve ? At their calling you sor-
cerers and deceivers ? But wait a little, and
all men will address you as saviors, and
benefactors of the world. Yea, for time dis-
covers all things that are concealed, it will
both refute their false accusation, and make
manifest your virtue. For when the event
shows you saviors, and benefactors, and ex-
amples of all virtue, men will not give heed
to their words, but to tlie real state of the
case; and they will appear false accusers, and
liars, and slanderers, but ye brighter than the
sun, length of time revealing and proclaiming
you, and uttering a voice clearer than a trum-
pet, and making all men witnesses of your
virtue. Let not therefore what is now said
humble you, but let the hope of the good
things to come raise you up. For it cannot
be, that what relates to you should be hid.

2, Then, having rid them of all distress,
and fears, and anxiety, and set them above
men's reproaclies, then, and not till then, He
seasonably discourses to them also of bold-
ness in their preaching.

For, "What I tell you," saith He, "in
darkness, that speak ye in light; and what ye
liavc licard in the ear, that preach ye' upon
the housetops." '"

Yet it was not at all darkness, wlien He
was saying these things; neither was He dis-


' y|/i)<Ti6TT|Ta iniitixfviiivof
H Mutt. X. I('.


7 John XV. 11;, 14.
[ k . v., " proclaim."] '" .Matt. x. 37.


228


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIV,


coursing unto them in the ear; but He used
a strong figure, thus spealcing. That is, be-
cause He was conversing with them alone,
and in a small corner of Palestine, therefore
He said, " in darkness," and " in the ear; "
contrasting the boldness of speech, which He
was hereafter to confer on them, with the
tone of the conversation which was then going
on. " For not to one, or two, or three cities,
but to the whole world ye shall preach,'' saith
He, "traversing land and sea, the inhabited
country, and the desert; to princes alike and
tribes, to philosophers and orators, saying all
with open face,' and with all boldness of
speech." Therefore, He said, "On the
house tops," and, "In the light," without
any shrinking, and with all freedom.

And wherefore said He not only, " Preach
on the housetops," and " Speak in the light,"
but added also, " What I tell you in dark-
ness," and " What ye hear in the ear" ' It
was to raise up their spirits. As therefore
when He said, " He that believeth on me, the
works that I do shall he do also, and greater
works than these shall he do;" ^ even so here
too, to signify that He will do it all by them,
and more than by Himself, He inserted this.
For "the beginning indeed," saith He, "I
have given, and the prelude; but the greater
part it is my will to effect through you."
Now this is the language of one not com-
manding only, but also declaring beforehand
what was to be, and encouraging them with
His sayings, and implying that they should
prevail over all, and quietly also removing ^
again their distress at the evil report. For
as this doctrine, after lying hid for a while,
shall overspread all things, so also the evil
suspicion ot the Jews shall quickly perish.

Then, because He had lifted them up on
high. He again gives warning of the perils
also, adding wings to their mind, and exalt-
ing them high above all. For what saith
He? "Fear not them which kill the body,
but are not able to kill the soul."'* Seest
thou how He set them far above all things,
persuading them to despise not anxiety only
and calumny, dangers and plots, but even
that which is esteemed of all things most ter-
rible, death ? And not death alone, but by
violence too? And He said not, "ye shall
be slain," but with the dignity that became
Him, He set this before them, saying, " Fear
not them which kill the body, but are not
able to kill the soul; but rather fear Him =
which is able to destroy both soul and body


I yvfxv^ Tjj K€<j)a\Ti. 2 John xiv. 12.

3 vTropiiTTovTO!. 4 Matt. x. 28.

5 [Chrysostom plainly refers this to God, not Satan. Hence
the capital letter of the Oxford translator.— R].


in hell;" bringing round the argument, as
He ever doth, to its opposite. For what ? is
your fear, saith He, of death ? and are ye
therefore slow to preach ? Nay for this very
cause I bid you preach, that ye fear death:
for this shall deliver you from that which is
really death. What though they shall slay
you ? yet over the better part they shall not
prevail, though they strive ten thousand ways.
Therefore He said not, " Who do not kill the
soul," but, who "are not able to kill." For
wish it as they may, they shall not prevail.
Wherefore, if thou fear punishment, fear
that, the more grievous by far.

Seest thou how again He doth not promise
them deliverance from death, but permits
them to die, granting them more than if He
had not allowed them to suffer it ? Because
deliverance from death is not near so great as
persuading men to despise death. You see
now, He doth not push them into dangers,
but sets them above dangers, and in a short
sentence fixes in their mind the doctrines that
relate to the immortality of the soul, and
having in two or three words implanted a sav-
ing doctrine, He comforts them also by other
considerations.

Thus, lest they should think, when killed
and butchered, that as men forsaken they
suffered this. He introduces again the argu-
ment of God's providence, saying on this
wise: "Are not two sparrows sold for a far-
thing ? And one of them shall not fall into a
snare *^ without your Father. But the very
hairs of your head are all numbered." ^
" For what is viler than they?" saith He;
"nevertheless, not even these shall be taken
without God's knowledge." For He means
not this, "by His operation they fall," for
this were unworthy of God; but, " nothing
that is done is hid from Him." If then He
is not ignorant of anything that befalls us,
and loves us more truly than a father, and so
loves MS, as to have numbered our very
hairs; we ought not to be afraid. And this
He said, not that God numbers our hairs, but
that He might indicate His perfect knowl-
edge, and His great providence over them.
If therefore He both knows all the things
that are done, and is able to save you, and
willing; whatever ye may have to suffer, think
not that as persons forsaken ye suffer. For
neither is it His will to deliver you from the
terrors, but to persuade you to despise them,
since this is, more than anything, deliverance
from the terrors.

6 See received text above, Horn. IX. 4. ['I'he reading here
followed is accepted by several others of the Fathers, but has no
Mss. authority. See Tischendorf, /« /oco. In Homily IX. 4, there
IS no variation from the Greek text, as now attested.— R.]

7 Matt. X. 29, 30.


Homily XXXIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


229


3. " Fear ye not therefore; ye are of more
value than many sparrows."' Seest thou
that the fear had already prevailed over
them ? Yea, for He knew the secrets of the
heart; therefore He added, " Fear them not
therefore;" for even should they prevail, it
will be over the inferior part, I mean, the
body; which though they should not kill,
nature will surely take with her and depart.
So that not even this depends on them, l)ut
men have it from nature. And if tliou fear
this, much more shouldest thou fear what is
greater, and dread " Him who is able to de-
stroy both soul and body in hell." And He
saith not openly now, that it is Himself,
"Who is able to destroy both soul and
body," but where He before declared Him-
self to be judge, He made it manifest.

But now the contrary takes place: Him,
namely, who is able to destroy the soul, that
is, to punish it, we fear not, but those who
slay the body, we shudder at. Yet surely
while He together with the soul punishes the
body also, they cannot even chasten the
body, much less the soul; and though they
chasten it ever so severely, yet in that way
they rather make it more glorious.

Seest thou how He signifies the conflicts
to be easy ? Because in truth, death did ex-
ceedingly agitate their souls, inspiring terror
for a time, for that it had not as yet been
made easy to overcome, neither had they
that were to despise it partaken of the grace
of the Spirit.

Having, you see, cast out the fear and dis-
tress that was agitating their soul; by what
follows He also encourages them again, cast-
ing out fear by fear; and not by fear only,
but also by the hope of great prizes; and He
threatens with much authority, in both ways
urging them to speak boldly for the truth; and
saith further,

" Whosoever therefore shall confess me be-
fore men, him' will I also confess before my
Father wliich is in Heaven. But whoso-
ever sliail deny me before men, him will I
also deny before my Father which is in
Heaven." ^

Thus not from the good things only, but
also from the opposites. doth He urge them;
and He concludes with the dismal part.

And mark His e.xact care; He said not
"me," but " in me," implying tliat not by a
power of his own, but by the help of grace
from aliove, tl»e confessor makes his confes-
sion. But of him that denies, He said not,

• Matt. X. 31.

» (R. v., "Kvcry one, therefore, who xhnll confesn me ((".rrrk.
in mc) hrfiire men, him (fircck, in him)," etc. See the use ir.adc
in thr llnmily of the (Ircck prcjiosition " in." — R.]

3 Malt. X. 32, 33.


" in me," but " me;" for he having become
destitute of the gift, his denial ensues.

"Why then is he blamed." one may say,
"if being forsaken, he denies.^" Because
the being forsaken is the fault of the forsaken
person himself.

But why is He not satisfied with the faith
in the mind, but requires also the confession
with the mouth? To train us up to boldness
in speech, and a more abundant love and de-
termination, and to raise us on high. Where-
fore also He addresses Himself to all. Nor
doth He at all apply this to the disciples only
in person, for not them, but their disciples
too. He is now rendering noble hearted. Be-
cause he that hath learnt this lesson will not
only teach with boldness, but will likewise
suffer all things easily, and with ready mind.
This at any rate brought over many to the
apostles, even their belief in this word. Be-
cause both in the punishment the infliction is
heavier, and in the good things the recom-
pense greater. I mean, whereas he that
doeth right hath the advantage in time,* and
the delay of the penalty is counted for gain
by the sinner: He hath introduced an equiv-
alent, or rather a much greater advantage,
the increase of the recompenses. " Hast
thou the advantage," saith He, " by having
first confessed me here? I also will have the
advantage of thee, by giving thee greater
things, and unspeakably greater; for I will
confess thee there." Seest thou that both
the good things and the evil things are there
to be dispensed ? Why then hasten and hurry
thyself ? and why seek thy rewards here, thou
who art "saved by hope ? " ^ Wherefore,
whether thou hast done anything good, and
not received its recompense here, be not
troubled (for with increase, in the time to
come, the reward thereof awaits thee): or
whether thou hast done any evil, and not
paid the penalty, be not easy; for there will
vengeance receive thee, if thou turn not and
amend.

But if thou believe it not, from the things
here form tliy conjecture about things to
come also. Why, if in the season of tlie
contlicts they tiiat confess are so glorious,
imagine what they will be in the season of the
crowns. If the enemies here applaud, how
shall that tenderest of all fatliers fail to
admire and proclaim thee ? Yea, then shall
we have both our gifts for tlie good, ami our
]iunisliments for the evil. So tliat such as
ileiiy shall suffer harm, botii here and there;

4 Tw xc^''V "Afoi'#«Tfr, " hr is beforehand with his rrwnrdrr:"
hit Hiirtrrinn"', ""'I 'hr siniirr'n riijny inrnt, innir rrs|iriiivrly fimt.

5 Kiiin. viii. 'i4. [" Suvrtl in Impr " or " for h>i|>c " cxurcMc*
ihc iiicaniuK l>ettrr, und aj:rec» with the argument in the Homily.

-R]


230


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIV.


here living with an evil conscience, though
they were never to die, they shall be surely
dead; and there, undergoing the last pen-
alty: but the other sort will profit both here
and there, both here making a gain of their
death, and in this way becoming more glori-
ous than the living, and there enjoying those
unspeakable blessings.

God then is in no wise prompt to punish
only, but also to confer benefits; and for this
last more than for the first. But why hath
He put the reward once only, the punishment
twice ? He knows that this would be more
apt to correct us. For this cause when He
had said, " Fear Him which is able to destroy
both soul and body in hell," He saith again,
" Him will I also deny." So doth Paul also,
continually making mention of hell.

Thus we see that He, having by all ways
trained on His scholar (both by opening
Heaven to him, and by settmg before him
that fearful judgment-seat, and by pointing
to the amphitheatre of angels, and how in the
midst of them the crowns shall be proclaimed,
which thing would thenceforth prepare the
way for the word of godliness to be very
easily received); in what follows, lest they
grow timid and the word be hindered, He
bids them be prepared even for slaughter it-
self; to make them aware that such as con-
tinue in their error, will have to suffer (among
other things) for plotting against them.

4. Let us therefore despise death, although
the time be not come that requires it of us;
for indeed it will translate us to a far better
life. " But the body decays. " Why, on this
account most especially we ought to rejoice,
because death decays, and mortality perishes,
not the substance of the body. For neither,
shouldest thou see a statue being cast, would-
est thou call the process destruction, but an
improved formation. Just so do thou reason
also concerning the body, and do not bewail.
Then it were right to bewail, had it remained
in its chastisement.

"But," saith one, "this ought to take
place without the decay of our bodies; they
should continue entire." And what would
this have advantaged either the living or the
departed ? How long are ye lovers of the
body ? How long are ye rivetted to the earth
and gaping after shadows ? Why, what good
would this have done ? or rather, what harm
would it not have done? For did our bodies
not decay, in the first place the greatest of all
evils, pride, would have continued with many.
For if even while this is going on, and worms
gushing out, many have earnestly sought to
be gods; what would not have been the re-
sult did the body continue ?


In the second place, it would not be be-
lieved to be of earth; for if, its end witnessing
this, some yet doubt; what would they not
have suspected if they did not see this?
Thirdly, the bodies would have been exces-
sively loved; and most men jvould have be-
come more carnal and gross; and if even
now some cleave to men's tombs and coffins,
after that themselves have perished, what
would they not have done, if they had even
their image preserved ? Fourthly, they would
not have earnestly desired the things to come.
Fifthly, they that say the world is eternal,
would have been more confirmed, and would
have denied God as Creator. Sixthly, they
would not have known the excellence of the
soul, and how great a thing is the presence of
a soul in a body. Seventhly, many of them
that lose their relations would have left their
cities, and have dwelt in the tombs, and have
become frantic, conversing continually with
their own dead. For if even now men form
to themselves images, since they cannot keep
the body (for neither is it possible, but
whether they will or no it glides and hurries
from them), and are rivetted to the planks of
wood; what monstrous thing would they not
then have devised ? To my thinking, the
generality would have even built temples for
such bodies, and they that are skilled in such
sorceries would have persuaded evil spirits to
speak through them; since at least even now,
they that venture on the arts of necromancy
attempt many things more out of the way
than these. And how many idolatries would
not have arisen from hence ? when men even
after the dust and ashes, are yet eager in
those practices.

God therefore, to take away all our extrav-
agances, and to teach us to stand off from all
earthly things, destroys the bodies before our
eyes. For even he that is enamored of
bodies, and is greatly affected at the sight of
a beautiful damsel, if he will not learn by dis-
course the deformity of that substance, shall
know it by the very sight. Yea, many of the
like age with her whom he loves, and often-
times also fairer, being dead, after the first
or second day, have emitted an ill savor, and
foul matter, and decay with worms. Imagine
then what sort of beauty thou lovest, and
what sort of elegance has power so to disturb
thee. But if bodies did not decay, this
would not be well known: but as evil spirits
run unto men's graves, so also many of our
lovers, continually sitting by the tombs,
would have received evil spirits in their soul,
and would quickly have perished in this
grievous madness.

But as it is, together with all other things


Homily XXXV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


this also comforts the soul, that the form is
not seen: it brings men to forgetfulness of
their affliction. Indeed, if this were not so,
there would be no tombs at all, but thou
wouldest see our cities having corpses instead
of statues, each man desiring to look upon
his own dead. And much confusion would
arise hence, and none of the ordinary sort
would attend to his soul, nor would give room
to the doctrine of immortality to enter in:
land many other things too, more shocking
than these, would have resulted, which even
to speak of were unseemly. Wherefore it
decays presently, that thou mightest see un-
veiled the beauty of the soul. For if she be
the procurer of all that beauty and life, much
more excellent must she herself be. And
if she preserve that which is so deformed and
unsightly, much more herself.

5. For it is not the body wherein the beauty
lies, but the expression,' and the bloom
which is shed over its substance by the soul.
Now then, I bid thee love that which makes
the body also to appear such as it is. And
why speak I of death? Nay even in life it-
self, I would have thee mark how all is hers
that is beautiful. For whether she be pleased,
she showers roses over the cheeks; or whether
she be pained, she takes that beauty, and in-
volves it all in a dark robe. And if she be
continually in mirth, the body improves in
condition; if in grief, she renders the same
thinner and weaker than a spider's web; if in
wrath, she hath made it again abominable and
foul; if she show the eye calm, great is the
beauty that she bestows; if she express envy,
very pale and livid is the hue she sheds over
us; if love, abundant the gracefulness she at
once confers. Thus in fact many women, not
being beautiful in feature, have derived much

« tiavAoait, " the moulding of it by the informing soul."


grace from tlie soul; others again of brilliant
bloom, by having an ungracious soul, have
marred their beauty. Consider how a face
that is pale grows red, and by the variation
of color produces great delight, when there is
need of shame and blushing. As, on the other
hand, if it be shameless, it makes the coun-
tenance more unpleasing than any monster.

For nothing is fairer, nothing sweeter than
a beauteous soul. For while as to bodies, the
longing is with pain, in the case of souls the
pleasure is pure and calm. Why then let go
the king, and be wild about the herald ? Why
leave the philosopher, and gape after his in-
terpreter? Hast thou seen a beautiful eye?
acquaint thyself with that which is within;
and if that be not beautiful, despise this
likewise. For surely, didst thou see an ill-
favored woman wearing a beautiful mask, she
would make no impression on thee: just as
on the other hand, neither wouldest thou
suffer one fair and beautiful to be disguised
by the mask, but wouldest take it away, as
choosing to see her beauty unveiled.

This then I bid thee do in regard of the
soul also, and acquaint thyself with it first; for
this is clad with the body instead of a mask;
wherefore also that abides such as it is; but
the other, though it be mishapen, may quickly
become beautiful. Though it have an eye
that is unsightly, and harsh, and fierce, it
may become beautiful, mild, calm, sweet-
tempered, gentle.

This beauty therefore let us seek, this
countenance let us adorn; that God also may
" have pleasure in our beauty,'*' and impart
to us of His everlasting blessings, by the
grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory and might forever
and ever. Amen.

» Ps. Xlv. 12, LXX.


HOMILY XXXV.

Ma 11. X. 34.

** Think not that I am come ' to send peace on earth; I am not come" to send peace, liut

a sword."


AoAiN, He sets forth the things that arc
more painful, and that with great aggravation:
and the objection tlicy were sure to meet
Him with, He prevents them by stating. 1

■ [R. v., " came."] • [R. V., " came not."]


mean, lest hearing this, they should say,
** For this tlieii art 'I'hou come, to destroy
both us. and them that ()l)cy us, and to fill
tlie earth witli war? " He first s.iitli Himself,
" I am not come to send peace on earth.''


232


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXV.


How then did He enjoin them to pronounce
peace on entering into each house? And
again, how did the angels say, "Glory to
God in the highest, and on earth peace"?'
And how came all the prophets too to publish
it for good tidings ? Because this more than
anythi'ng is peace, when the diseased is cut
off, when the mutinous is removed. For
thus it is possible for Heaven to be united to
earth. Since the physician too in this way
preserves the rest of the body, when he am-
putates the incurable part; and the general,
when he has brought to a separation them
that were agreed in mischief. Thus it came
to pass also in the case of that famous tower;
for their evil peace ^ was ended by their good
discord, and peace made thereby. Thus
Paul also divided them that were conspiring
against him.^ And in Naboth's case that
agreement was at the same time more griev-
ous than any war.'' For concord is not in
every case a good thing, since even robbers
agree together.

The war is not then the effect of His pur-
pose, but of their temper. For His will in-
deed was that all should agree in the word of
godliness; but because they fell to dissen-
sion, war arises. Yet He spake not so; but
what saith He ? "I am not come to send
peace;" comforting them. As if He said.
For think not that ye are to blame for these
things; it is I who order them so, because
men are so disposed. Be not ye therefore
confounded, as though the events happened
against expectation. To this end am I come,
to send war among men; for this is my will.
Be not ye therefore troubled, when the earth
is at war, as though it were subject to some
hostile device. For when the worse part is
rent away, then after that Heaven is knit unto
the better.

And these things He saith, as strengthen-
ing them against the evil suspicion of the
multitude.

And He said not "war," but what was
more grievous than it, "a sword." And if
there be somewhat painful in these expres-
sions, and of an alarming emphasis, marvel
not. For, it being His will to train their ears
by the severity of His words, lest in their
difficult circumstances they should start aside.
He fashioned His discourse accordingly; lest
any one should say it was by flattery He per-
suaded them, and by concealing the hard-
ships; therefore even to those things which
merited to be otherwise expressed, He gave
by His words the more gaLing and painful


1 Luke li. 14.
3 Acts xxiii. 6, 7


2 Gen. xi. 7, S.
4 I Kings xxi.


turn. For it is better to see persons' gentle-
ness in things, than in words.

2. Wherefore neither with this was He sat-
isfied, but unfolds also the very nature of the
war, signifying it to be far more grievous
even than a civil war; and He saith,

" I am come to set a man at variance
against his father, and the daughter against
her mother, and the daughter-in-law against
her mother-in-law." 5

For not friends only, saith He, nor fellow
citizens, but even kinsmen shall stand against
one another, and nature shall be divided
against herself. " For I am come," saith
He, "to set a man at variance against his
father, and the daughter against her mother,
and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-
law." That is, not merely among those of
the same household is the war, but among
those that are dearest, and extremely near to
each other. And this more than anything
signifies His power, that hearing these things,
they both accepted Him, and set about per-
suading all others.

Yet was it not He that did this: of course
not: but the wickedness of the other sort:
nevertheless He saith it is His own doing.
For such is the custom of the Scripture.
Yea, and elsewhere also He saith, " God hath
given them eyes that they should not see: " *
and here He speaks in this way, in order that
having, as I said before, exercised themselves
in these words, they might not be confounded
on suffering reproaches and insults.

But if any think these things intolerable,
let them be reminded of an ancient history.
For in times of old also this came to pass,
which thing especially shows the old covenant
to be akin to the new, and Him who is here
speaking, the same with the giver of those
commands. I mean that in the case of the
Jews also, when each had slain his neighbor,
then He laid aside His anger against them;
both when they made the calf, and when they
were joined to Baal Peor.'' Where then are
they that say, "That God is evil, and this
good ? " For behold He hath filled the world
with blood, shed by kinsmen. Nevertheless
even this we affirm to be a work of great love
towards man.

Therefore, you see, implying that it was
He who approved those other acts also. He
makes mention also of a prophecy, which if
not spoken for this end, yet involves the
same meaning. And what is this ?

"A man's foes shall be they of his own
household." *


5 Matt. X. 35. [R. v., " I came," etc.] 6 Rom. xi. 8.

7 Exod. xxxii. 29 ; Numb. xxv. 7-1 1. ^ Matt. x. 36.


Homily XXXV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


o ^ ^


For indeed among the Jews also something
of the kind took place. That is, there were
prophets, and false prophets, and the people
was divided, and families were in dissension;
and some believed the one, and some the
other. Wherefore the prophet admonishes,
saying, "Trust ye not in friends, have not
hope in guides; yea, even of her tiiat lieth in
thy bosom beware, in respect of communicat-
ing aught to her:" and, "A man's enemies
are the men that are in his own house." '

And this He said, preparing him that should
receive the word to be above all. For to die
is not evil, but to die an evil death. On this
account He said moreover, "I am come to
cast fire upon the earth." ^ And this He
said, to declare the vehemence and warmth
of the love which He required. For, because
He loved us very much, so He will likewise
be loved of us. And these sayings would
strengthen ^ the persons present also, and lift
them higher. "For if those others," saith
He, " are to despise kinsmen, and children, j
and parents, imagine what manner of men ye
their teachers ought to be. Since neither
will the hardships stop with you, but will also
pass on to the rest. For since I am come
bringing great blessings, I demand also great
obedience, and purpose of heart."

3. "He that loveth father or mother more
than me, is not worthy of me; and he that
loveth son or daughter more than me, is not
worthy of me; and he that taketh not his
cross and followeth after me, is not worthy
of me."* ]

Seest thou a teacher's dignity? Seest
thou, how He signifies himself a true Son of
Him that begat Him, commanding us to let
go all things beneath, and to take in prefer-
ence the love of Him?

"And why speak I," saith He, " of friends
and kinsmen ? Even if it be thine own life
which thou preferrest to my love, thy place is
far from my disciples.'' What then ? Are
not these things contrary to the Old Testa-
ment ? Far from it, rather they are very
much in harmony therewith. For there too
He commands not only to hate the worship-
pers of idols, but even to stone them; and in
Deuteronomy again, admiring these. He saitli,
*' Who said unto his father, and to his mother,
I have not seen thee; neither did he acknowl-
edge his brethren, and his own sons he dis-
owned: he kept Thy oracles.'' ^ And if Paul
gives many directions touching parents, com-
manding us to obey tliem in all things, mar-
vel not; for in those things only iloth lie

' Micah vii. 5, 6. > I. tike xii. 41^.

3 »A<i4><, " would anoint tlinn for actimi."

4 Matt. X. 37, jtl. i Dcut. xxxiii. 9.


mean us to obey, as many as do not hinder
godliness.* For indeed it is a sacred duty
to render them all other honors: but when
they demand more than is due, one ought
not to obey. For this reason Luke saith,
" If any man come to me, and hate not his
father, and mother, and wife, and children,
and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own
life also, he cannot be my disciple;"' not
commanding simply to hate them, since this
were even quite contrary to the law; but
"when one desires to be loved more than I
am, hate him in this respect. For this ruins
both the beloved himself, and the lover."
And these things He said, both to render the
children more determined, and to make the
fathers more gentle, that would hinder them.
For when they saw He had such strength and
power as to sever their children from them,
they, as attempting things impossible, would
even desist. Wherefore also He leaves the
fathers, and addresses His discourse to the
children, instructing the former not to make
the attempt, as attempting things impractica-
ble.

Then lest they should be indignant, or
count it hard, see which way He makes His
argument tend: in that having said, " Who
hateth not father and mother," He adds,
"and his own life." For why dost thou
speak to me of parents, saith He, and
brothers, and sisters, and wife? Nothing is
nearer than the life to any man: yet if thou
hate not this also, thou must bear in all things
the opposite of his lot who loveth me.

And not even simply to hate it was His
command, but so as to expose it to war, and
to battles, and to slaughters, and blood.
" For he that beareth not his cross, and
cometli after me, cannot be my disciple." ®
Thus He said not merely that we must stand
against death, but also against a violent
deatli; and not violent only, but ignominious
too.

And He discourses nothing as yet of His
own passion, that when they had been for a
time instructed in these things, they might
more easily receive His word concerning it.
Is there not, therefore, cause for amazement,
how on their hearing these things, their soul
did not wing its way from the body, the hard-
sliips being everywhere at hand, and the good
things in e.\pcct;ili()n ? How tlien did it not
flee away? (Ireat was both tlic power of the
spe.ikcr, and tlie love of the hearers. ^V■here-
fore though hearing things far more iniolera-

^ Fph. vi. I. Src there St. Chrysostom'i cxplaitalion of the
exprcHsiiin, "in the Lord."

7 I. like xiv. a6.

"Matt. X. jR. Comp. I.uke xiv. 07. fThe word "beareth"
(from l.iikc) is licrc xutxstittitcd for " l.ikrth ' K |


234


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


Homily XXXV.


ble and galling than those great men, Moses
and Jeremiah, they continued to obey, and to
say nothing against it.

"He that findeth his life," saith He,
*' shall lose it: and he that loseth his life for
my sake, shall find it."' Seest thou how
great the damage to such as love it unduly?
how great the gain to them that hate it ? I
mean, because the injunctions were disagree-
able, when He was bidding them set them-
selves against parents, and children, and
nature, and kindred, and the world, and their
very soul, He sets forth the profit also, being
very great. Thus, "These things," saith
He, " so far from harming, will very greatly
profit; and their opposites will injure; " urging
them, as He ever doth, by the very things
which they desire. For why art thou willing
to despise thy life ? ^ Because thou lovest it ?
Then for that very reason despise it, and so
thou wilt advantage it in the highest degree,
and do the part of one that loves it.

And mark an instance of unspeakable con-
sideration. For not in respect of our parents
only doth He practise this reasoning, nor of
our children, but with regard to our life,
which is nearer than all; that the other point
may thenceforth become unquestionable, and
they may learn that they will in this way
profit those of their kindred likewise, as much
as may be; since so it is in the case even of
our life, which is more essential to us than
all.

4. Now these things were enough to recom-
mend men to receive them, their appointed
healers. Yea, who would choose but receive
with all readiness them that were so noble,
such true heroes, and as lions running about
the earth, and despising all that pertained to
themselves, so that others might be saved ?
Yet nevertheless He proffers also another re-
ward, indicating that He is caring here for
the entertainers more than for the guests.

And the first honor He confers is by say-
ing,

" He that receiveth you, receiveth me, and
he that receiveth me, receiveth Him that
sent me." ^

With this, what may compare ? that one
should receive the Father and the Son !

But He holds out herewith another reward
also.

"He," saith He, "that receiveth a pro-
phet in the name of a prophet, shall receive
a prophet's reward; and he that receiveth a
righteous man in the name of a righteous


1 Matt. X. 39.

2 Or " soul ;" the same word standing in the Greek for both
"soul" and "life;" which makes it impossible to give the full
force of the passage in English.

3 Matt. X. 40.


man, shall receive a righteous man's re-
ward." *

And as before He threatens punishment to
such as do not receive them, here He defines
also a certain refreshment s for the good.
And to teach thee His greater care for them.
He said not simply, "He that receiveth a
prophet," or "He that receiveth a righteous
man," but subjoined, " in the name of a pro-
phet," and, "in the name of a righteous
man; " that is, if not for any worldly prefer-
ment, nor for any other temporal thing, he
receive him, but because he is either a pro-
phet or a righteous man, he shall receive a
prophet's reward, and a righteous man's re-
ward; such as it were meet for him to have,
that hath received a prophet, or a righteous
man; or, such as that other is himself to re-
ceive. Which kind of thing Paul also said:
" That your abundance may be a supply for
their want, that their abundance also may
be a supply for your want." *

Then, lest any one should allege poverty,
He saith,

"Or whosoever shall give to drink unto
one of these little ones a cup of cold water
only in the name of a disciple, verily I say
unto you, he shall in no wise lose his re-
ward." ?

" Though a cup of cold water be thy gift,
on which there is nothing laid out, even of
this shall a reward be stored up for thee.
For I do all things for the sake of you the
receivers."

Seest thou what mighty persuasions He
used, and how He opened to them the houses
of the whole world ? Yea, He signified that
men are their debtors: first, by saying, " The
workman is worthy of his hire; " secondly,
by sending them forth having nothing;
thirdly, by giving them up to wars and fight-
ings in behalf of them that receive them;
fourthly, by committing to them miracles also;
fifthly, in that He did by their lips introduce
peace, the cause of all blessings, into the
houses of such as receive them; sixthly, by
threatenmg things more grievous than Sodom
to such as receive them not: seventhly, by
signifying that as many as welcome them are
receiving both Himself and the Father;
eighthly, by promising both a prophet's and a
righteous man's reward: ninthly, by under-
taking that the recompenses shall be great,
even for a cup of cold water. Now each one
of these things, even by itself, were enough
to attract them. For who, tell me, when a

4 Matt. X. 41.

5 avecFiv, opposed to KoKaiTiv, " punishment," in the same way,
Hom. XIII. 8, in the Benedictine edition, p. 176, c; and else-
where.

<> 2 Cor. viii. 14. 7 Matt. x. 43.


Homily XXXV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


235


leader of armies wounded in innumerable
places, and dyed in blood, came in sight, re-
turning after many tropliies from war and
conflict, would not receive him, throwing open
every door in his house ?

5. But who now is like this ? one may say.
Therefore He added, '* In the name of a dis-
ciple, and of a prophet, and of a righteous
man;" to instruct thee that not for the wor-
thiness of the visitor, but for the purpose of
him that gives welcome, is His reward ap-
pointed. For though here He speak of pro-
phets, and righteous men, and disciples, yet
elsewhere He bids men receive the veriest
outcasts, and punishes such as fail to do so.
For, " Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of
the least of these, ye did it not to me; " ' and
the converse again He affirms with respect to
the same persons.

Since though he may be doing no such
great work, he is a man, inhabiting the same
world with thee, beholding the same sun,
having the same soul, the same Lord, a par-
taker with thee of the same mysteries, called
to the same heaven with thee; having a
strong claim, his poverty, and his want of
necessary food. But now they that waken
thee with flutes and pipes in the winter sea-
son, and disturl) thee without purpose or
fruit, depart from thee receiving many gifts. -
And they that carry about swallows,^ and
smut themselves over,"* and abuse every one,
receive a reward for this their conjuration.
But if there come to thee a poor man wanting
bread, there is no end of revilings, and re-
proaches, and charges of idleness, and up-
braidings, and insults, and jeers; and thou
considerest not with thyself, that thou too art
idle, and yet God giveth thee His gifts. For
tell me not this, that thou too art doing
somewhat, but point me out this rather, if it
be anything really needful that tliou doest,
and art busy about. But if thou tellest one
of money-getting, and of traffic, and of the
care and increase of thy goods, I also would


' Matt. XXV. 45.

» This was part of the festivities of the Saturnalia ; " it besjan
on the 13th of January, when the flutf players used to run about
the city with much license and wantonness in female apparel ; as
at this time, .ibout the Kpiphany scas<m, pipers and singers are
wont to come into the houses of the rich, to sinn for largesses,
with some in masks at their head. / '/</. I.iv. lib. ix. c. 30. " Fran-
cisc. Modius d( Ludis tt Sped. I 'eleruni, ii. 28, ap. Oronov. 'I'hes.
xi. 10J5.

3 Here Mr. Field quotes from Hois as follows : *' It is a descrip-
tion of certain juKxIers, who used to carry about swallows trained
to come and no when let loose, and settle on their heads, and take
meat out of their mouths. So 1 conjecture." Mr. Field adds, " I
have nothing to adil to this. For those whom Athanxus " (from
Thco).;nis) " mentions, as ^alhf i>i^ it ifi>/f /or Ihf s^tulllm^>^.^. 300,
H.) seem not to answer to what is hen- iiicanl. I'hcy, by way of
beKKin;;, used to chant a sort of sonj; about the comiin; of the
swallow. It was the custom of the Khodians particularly. '

4 ScaliRcr, I'oel i. i.>, s;iys, "Some actors in low cuniedy were
not masked, but smeared with s<K>t ; . . and used to dance (o music
in honor of Hacchus, and boundint; forward, to jeer at every one."
ap. Hoffman, voc. Minius.


say unto thee. Not these, but alms, and
prayers, and the protection of the injured,
and all such things, are truly works, with re-
spect to which we live in thorough idleness.
Yet God never told us, " Because thou art
idle, I light not up the sun for thee; because
thou doest nothing of real consequence, I
quench the moon, I paralyze the womb of the
earth, I restrain the lakes, the fountains, the
rivers, I blot out the atmosphere, I withhold
the annual rains:" but He gives us all
abundantly. And to some that are not merely
idle, but even doing evil. He freely gives the
benefit of these things.

When therefore thou seest a poor man, and
sayest, " It stops my breath that this fellow,
young as he is and healthy, having nothing,
would fain be fed in idleness; he is surely
some slave and runaway, and hath deserted
his proper master: " I bid thee speak these
same words to thyself; or rather, permit him
freely to speak them unto thee, and he will
say with more justice, " It stops my breath
that thou, being healthy, art idle, and prac-
tisest none of the things which God hath
commanded, but having run away from the
commandments of thy Lord, goest about
dwelling in wickedness, as in a strange land,
in drunkenness, in surfeiting, in theft, in ex-
tortion, in subverting other men's houses."
And thou indeed imputest idleness, but I evil
works; in thy plotting, in thy swearing, in thy
lying, in thy spoiling, in thy doing innumera-
ble such things.

And this I say, not as making a law in
favor of idleness, far from it; but rather very
earnestly wishing all to be employed; for
sloth is the teacher of all wickedness: but I
beseech you not to be unmerciful, nor cruel.
Since Paul also, having made infinite com-
plaints, and said, '* If any will not work,
neither let him eat," stopped nut at this, but
added, '* But ye, be not weary in well
doing.'' 5 " Nay, but these things are contra-
dictory. For if thou hast commaiuleil for
them not to eat, how e.xhortcst thou us to
give?" I do so, saitti He, for I have also
commanded to avoid them, and *' to have no
company with them;" and again I saitl,
"Count them not as enemies, but adnvonish
them;"* not making contradictory laws, but
such as are quite in unison with each other.
Because, if thou art prompt to mercy, both
he, tlie poor man, will soon be rid of his iillc-
ness, and thou of thy cruelty.

" But he hath many lies and inventions,"
you reply. Well, hence again is he pitiable,
for that he hath fallen into such distress, as


5 3 Thc».s. iii. 10, 13.


i Then. iii. 14, 15.


236


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXX t


to be hardened even in such doings. But
we, so far from pitying, add even those cruel
words, " Hast thou not received once and
again?" so we talk. What then? because
he was once fed, hath he no need to be fed
again ? Why dost thou not make these laws
for thine own belly also, and say to it like-
wise, Thou wert filled yesterday, and the day
before, seek it not now? But while thou fill-
est that beyond measure, even to bursting,'
from him thou turnest away, when he asks
but what is moderate; whereas thou oughtest
therefore to pity him, because he is con-
strained to come to thee every day. Yea, if
nought else incline thee to him, thou should-
est pity him because of this; for by the con-
straint of his poverty he is forced on these
things, and doeth them. And thou dost not
pity him, because, being so spoken to, he
feels no shame: the reason being, that his
want is too strong for him.

Nay, thou instead of pitying, dost even
make a show of him; and whereas God hath
commanded to give secretly, thou standest
exposing publicly him that hath accosted
thee, and upbraiding him, for what ought to
move thy pity. Why, if thou art not minded
to give, to what end add reproach, and bruise
that weary and wretched soul ? He came as
into a harbor, seeking help at thine hands;
why stir up waves, and make the storm more
grievous? Why dost thou condemn him of
meanness ? What ? had he thought to hear
such things, would he have come to thee ?
Or if he actually came foreseeing this, good
cause therefore both to pity him, and to
shudder at thine own cruelty, that not even
so, when thou seest an inexorable necessity
laid upon him, dost thou become more gentle,
nor judgest him to have a sufficient excuse
for his importunity in the dread of hunger,
but accusest him of impudence: and yet hast
thou often thyself practised greater impu-
dence, yea in respect of grievous matters.
For while here the very impudence brings
with it ground of pardon, we, often doing
things punishable, brazen it out: and when we
ought to bear all that in mind, and be hum-
ble, we even trample on those miserable men,
and when they ask medicines, we add to
their wounds. I say, if thou wilt not give,
yet why dost thou strike ? If thou wilt not
be bounteous, yet why be insolent ?

" But he submits not to be put off in any
other way." Well then, as that wise man
commanded,^ so do. "Answer him peacea-
ble words with meekness." For not of his
own accord, surely, is he so very importu-


' [iiTrep TO iiirpov Siapprjyvveis.]


2 Ecclus. iv. 8.


nate. For there is not, there cannot be, any
man desiring to be put to shame for its own
sake. How much soever ^y may contend,
I cannot yield ever to be convinced that a
man who was living in plenty would choose to
beg.

6. Let no man then beguile us with argu-
ments. But although Paul saith, " If any
will not work, neither let him eat,''^ to them
he saith it; but to us he saith not this, but,
on the contrary, "Be not weary in well
doing."'* Even thus do we at home; when
any two are striving with each other, we take
each apart, and give them the opposite ad-
vice. This did God also, and Moses. For
while to God he said, " If thou wilt forgive
them their sin, forgive it; else blot me out
also; "5 them on the contrary he commanded
to slay one another, and all that pertained to
them. Yet these things are contrary; never-
theless, both looked to one end.

Again, God said to Moses in the hearing of
the Jews, " Let- me alone, that I may con-
sume the people,"* (for though they were
not present when God was saying this, yet
they were to hear it afterwards): but privately
He gives him directions of the opposite tenor.
And this, Moses upon constraint revealed
afterwards, thus saying, "What? did I con-
ceive them, that thou sayest to me. Carry
them, as a nurse would carry the sucking
child in her bosom ? " '

These things are done also in houses, and
often a father while he blames the tutor in
private for having used his child reproach-
fully, saying, "Be not rough, nor hard," to
the youth speaks in the contrary way,
" Though thou be reproached unjustly, bear
it; " out of those opposites making up some
one wholesome result. Thus also Paul said
to such as are in health and beg, " If any
man will not work, neither let him eat,'' that
he may urge them into employment: but to
such as can show mercy, " Ye, for your part,
be not weary in well doing:" that he may
lead them to give alms.

So also, when he was admonishing those of
the Gentiles, in his Epistle to the Romans,
not to be highminded against the Jews, he
brought forward also the wild olive, and he
seems to be saying one thing to these, an-
other to those."

Let us not therefore fall away into cruelty,
but let us listen to Paul, saying, "Be not
weary in well doing; " let us listen to the
Lord, who saith, " Give to every man that
asketh of thee,"' and, "Be ye merciful as


3 2 Thess. iii. 10.
5 I'.xDci. xxxii. 32 [lxx.].
7 Numb. xi. 12 [lxx.],
9 Luke vi. 30.


4 2 Thess. iii.
' Exod. xxxii.
* Rom. xi. 17.


T-V


Homily XXXV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


/J -I —
-0/


your Father, ■' ' And though He hath spoken
of many things, He hath nowhere used this
expression, but with regard to our deeds of
mercy only. For nothing so equals us with
God, as doing good.

" But nothing is more shameless,'* saith
one, " than a poor man." Why, I pray thee ?
Because he runs up, and cries out after thee ?
Wilt thou then let me point out, how we are
more importunate than they, and very shame-
less ? Remember, I say, now at the season
of the fast, how often, when thy table was
spread at eventide, and thou hadst called thy
ministering servant; on his moving rather
leisurely,- thou hast overset everything, kick-
ing, insulting, reviling, merely about a little
delay; although fully assured, that if not im-
mediately, yet a little after thou shalt enjoy
thy victuals. Upon which thou dost not call
thyself impudent, changed as thou art into a
wild beast for nothing; but the poor man,
alarmed and trembling about his greater
interests (for not about delay, but aliout
famine, is all his fear), him dost thou call
audacious, and shameless, and impudent, and
all the most opprobrious names ? Nay, how
is this anything but extreme impudence.

But these things we do not consider: there-
fore we account such men troublesome: since
if we at all searched into our own doines,
and compared them with theirs, we should
not have thought them intolerable.

Be not then a severe judge. Why, if thou
wert clear of all sins, not even then would the
law of God permit thee to be strict in search-
ing out other men's sins. And if the Phari-
see perished on this account, what defense
are we to find ? If He suffer not such as have
done well to be bitter in searching out other
men's doings, much less them that have
offended.

7. Let us not then be savage, nor cruel,
not without natural feeling, not implacable,
not worse than wild beasts. For I know
many to have gone even so far in brutishness,
as for a little trouble to sliglit famishing per-
sons, and to say these words: " I have no
servant now witli me; we are far from home;
there is no money-changer that I know."
Oh cruelty ! Didst thou promise the greater,
and dost thou not fulfill the less? To save
thy walking a little way, dotli he perish with
himger? Oh insolence! Oh pride ! Wliy,
if it were ten furlongs to l>e walked, oughtest
thou to be backward ? Doth it not even come
into thy mind that so thy reward is made
greater ? For whereas, when thou givest,

» Luke VI. 36.

» [The cnnstnictiim i^ diflficiilt : iva cvoKaiortpov Paitaji. Wc
must accept here u causal sense of iva. — U..]


thou receivest reward for the gift only: when
thou thyself also goest, for this again is ap-
pointed thee a recompense.

Yea, the patriarch himself we admire for
this, that in his own person be ran to the
herd, and snatched up the calf,^ and that,
when he had three hundred and eighteen serv-
ants born in his house." But now some are
filled with so much pride, as to do these
things by servants, and not to be ashamed.
" But dost thou require me to do these things
myself?" one may say. " How then shall I
not seem to be vainglorious ? " Nay, but as
it is, thou art led by another kind of vain-
glory to do this, being ashamed to be seen
talking with a poor man.

But I am in no respect strict about this;
only give, whether by thyself or by another
thou art minded to. do so; and do not accuse,
do not smite, do not revile. For medicines,
not wounds, doth he need who comes unto
thee; mercy, not a sword. For tell me, if
any one who had been smitten with a stone,
and had received a wound in his head, were
to let go all others, and run unto thy knees,
drenched in his blood; wouldest thou indeed
smite him with another stone, and add unto
him another wound ? I, for my part, think
not; but even as it was, thou wouldest en-
deavor to cure it. Why then doest thou the
contrary with respect to the poor? Knowest
thou not how much power a word hath, both
to raise up, and to cast down ? " For a
word," it is said, " is better than a gift."^

Dost thou not consider that thou art thrust-
ing the sword into thyself, and art receiving
a more grievous wound, when he, being re-
viled, silently withdraws, with groans and
many tears? Since indeed of God he is sent
unto thee. Consider then, in insulting him,
upon whom thou art causing the insult to
pass; when God indeed sends him unto thee,
and commands thee to give, but thou, so far
from giving, dost even insult him on his com-
ing.

And if thou art not aware how exceed-
ingly amiss this is, look at it as among men,
and then thou wilt fully know the greatness
of the sin. As thus: if a servant of tliine
had been commanded by thee to go to another
servant, who had money of thine, to receive
it, and were to come back not only with
empty hands, but also wilii despiteful usage;
what wouldest thou not do to him tliat had
wrouglit tiie insult? What penalty wouldest
thou not exact, as though, after this, it \v<rc
thyself that had been ill used ?

This reckoning do thou make in regard of


1 Orn. xviii. 7.
5 F.ctlu.H. xviii. i6.


* tirn. xiv. 14. Comp. cp. i>f Iturn. t. q.


238


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HOMTLY XXXVI.


God also; for truly it is He that sends the
poor to us, and of His we give, if indeed we
do give. But if, besides not giving, we also
send them away insulted, consider how many
bolts, how many thunders, that which we are
doing deserves.

Duly considering then all these things, let
us both bridle our tongue, and put away in-
humanity, and let us stretch forth the hand


to give alms, and not with money only, but
with words also, let us relieve such as are in
need; that we may both escape the punish-
ment for reviling, and may inherit the king-
dom which is for blessing and almsgiving, by
the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might for-
ever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XXXVI.


Matt. XI. i.

"And it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding His twelve dis-
ciples. He departed thence to teach and to preach in their cfties.'^


That is, after He had sent them. He pro-
ceeded to withdraw Himself, to give them
room and opportunity to do what He had en-
joined. For while He was present and heal-
ing, no one would be willing to approach
them.

" Now when John had heard in the prison
the works of Jesus,' he sent two of =" his disci-
ples, and asked Him, saying. Art thou He
that should come,^ or do we look for an-
other?""

But Luke saith, they also told John of the
miracles, and then he sent them.^ However,
this contains no matter of difficulty, but of
consideration only; for this, among other
things, indicates their jealousy towards Him.

But what follows is completely among the
controverted points. Of what nature then is
this? Their saying, "Art Thou He that
should come, or do we look for another?"
That is, he that knew Him before His mira-
cles, he that had learned it of the Spirit, he
that heard it of the Father, he who had pro-
claimed Him before all men; doth he now
send to learn of Him, whether it be Himself
or no ? And if yet thou didst not know that
it is surely He, how thinkest thou thyself
credible, affirming as thou dost concerning
things, whereof thou art ignorant ? For he
that is to bear witness to others, must be first

I [R. v., " Of the Christ," as in nearly all authorities, but
Chryso^tom reads tov 'It/o-oO. — R.]

-^ [R. v., " by his disciples," but some ancient authorities (Vul-
gate also) support " two.' Taken from Luke vii. zg. — R.]

3 [R. v., " He that coraeth."] 4 Matt. xi. 2, 3.

S Luke vii. 18.


worthy of credit himself. Didst thou not say,
" I am not meet to loose the latchet of His
shoe ? " * Didst thou not say, " I knew Him
not, but He that sent me to baptize with
water, the same said unto me. Upon whom
thou shalt see the Spirit descending and rest-
ing upon Him, the same is He which baptiz-
eth with the Holy Ghost ? " ^ Didst thou not
see the Spirit in form of a dove ? didst thou
not hear the voice ? Didst thou not utterly
forbid Him, saying, " I have need to be bap-
tized of Thee ? " ^ Didst thou not say even
to thy disciples, " He must increase, I must
decrease? "9 Didst thou not teach all the
people, that "He should baptize them with
the Holy Ghost and with fire?''" and that
He "is the Lamb of God that taketh away
the sin of the world ?" " Didst thou not be-
fore His signs and miracles proclaim all these
things ? How then now, when He hath been
made manifest to all, and the fame of Him
hath gone out everywhere, and dead men
have been raised, and devils driven away, and
a display made of so great miracles, dost thou
after this send to learn of Him ?

What then is the fact? Were all these
sayings a kind of fraud: a stage play and
fables? Nay, who that hath any under-
standing would say so ? I say not, John, who
leaped in the womb, who before his own birth
proclaimed Him, the citizen of the wilder-
ness, the exhibitor of the conversation of

* John i. 27. 7 John i. 33. * Matt. iii. 14.

9 John iii. 30. 'o Matt. iii. 11.

" John i. 2q. [R. V., " Or, beareth the sin," etc.]


Homily XXXVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


239


angels; but even though he were one of the
common sort, and of them that are utterly
outcast, he would not have hesitated, after so
many testimonies, both on his own part and
on the part of others.

Whence it is evident, that neither did he
send as being himself in doubt, nor did he
ask in ignorance. Since no one surely could
say this, that though he knew it fully, yet on
account of his prison he was become rather
timid: for neither was he looking to be deliv-
ered therefrom, nor if he did look for it,
would he have betrayed his duty to God,
armed as he was against various kinds of
death. For unless he had been prepared for
this, he would not have evinced so great
courage towards a whole people, practised in
shedding blood of prophets; nor would he
have rebuked that savage tyrant with so much
boldness in the midst of the city and the
forum, severely chiding him, as though he
were a little child, in hearing of all men.
And even if he were grown more timid, how
was he not ashamed before his own disciples,
in whose presence he had so often borne
witness unto Him, but asked his question by
them, which he should have done by others ?
And yet surely he knew full well, that they
too were jealous of Christ, and desired to
find some handle against Him. And how
could he but be abashed before the Jewish
people, in whose presence he had proclaimed
such high things ? Or what advantage ac-
crued to him thereby, towards deliverance
from his bonds ? For not for Christ's sake had
he been cast into prison, nor for having pro-
claimed His power, but for his own rebuke
touching the unlawful marriage. And what
child so silly, what person so frantic, but that
so he would have put on himself their char-
acter ?'

2. What then is it which he is bringing
about ? For that it belongs not to John to
have doubt hereupon, no nor to any ordinary
person, nor even to one extremely foolish and
frenzied; so much is evident from what we
have said. And now we have only to add the
solution.

For what intent then did he send to ask ?
John's disciples were starting aside from
Jesus, and this surely any one may see, and
they had always a jealous feeling towards
Him. And it is plain, from what they said
to their master: " He that was with thee,"
it is said, " beyond Jordan, to whom thou
barest witness, i)eliold, the same baj)tizetli,
and all men come unto Him. ' ■" And again,
" There arose a question between John's dis-


■ [ouic av (auTu &6(av ircpic9>)<(c.]


' John iii. a6.


ciples and the Jews about purifying. "' And
again they came unto Him, and said, "Why
do we and the Pharisees fast oft, but Thy
disciples fast not?"" For as yet they knew
not who Christ was, but imagining Jesus to
be a mere man, but John greater than after
the manner of man, were vexed at seeing the
former held in estimation, but the latter, as
he had said, now ceasing. And this hindered
them from coming unto Him, their jealousy
quite blocking up the access. Now so long
as John was with them, he was exhorting
them continually and instructing them, and
not even so did he persuade them; but when
he was now on the point of dying, he uses
the more diligence: fearing as he did lest he
might leave a foundation for bad doctrine,
and they continue broken off from Christ.
For as he was diligent even at first to bring
to Christ all that pertained to himself; so on
his failing to persuade them, now towards his
end he does but exert the more zeal.

Now if he had said, "Go ye away unto
Him, He is better than I," he would not
have persuaded them, minded as they were
not easily to be separated from him, but
rather he would have been thought to say it
out of modesty, and they would have been the
more rivetted to him; or if he had held his
peace, then again nothing was gained. What
then doth he ? He waits to hear from them
that Christ is working miracles, and not even
so doth he admonish them, nor doth he send
all, but some two (whom he perhaps knew to
be more teachable than the rest); that the
inquiry might be made without suspicion, in
order that from His acts they might learn
the difference between Jesus and himself.
And he saith. Go ye, and say, "Art thou He
that should come, or do we look for an-
other? "s

But Christ knowing the purpose of John,
did not say, I am He; for this would again
have offended the hearers, although this was
what it naturally followed for Him to say, but
He leaves them to learn it from His acts.
For it saith, " when these were come to Him,
then "He cured many.'''" And yet wliat
congruity was there, tliat being asked, "Art
thou He," He sliould say nothing to that,
but should presently cure tliem that were
sick; unless it had l)een His mind to establish
tills which I have mentioned ? Because they
of course wouki account the testimony of His
deeds surer, and more above suspicion than
that of His words.

Knowing therefore, as being God, the mind

I hihiiiii. 2j. [K. V., " with ii |rw." So .mh- ms. Iirrc. In
Huinily XXIX. im lohn, ChryMistom distiiiitly aurpls the sin-
gulur, UH ill) iirnrly ull tircck Mss.— R.J

* Mult IX. 14. 5 Mult. xi. y ^ Luke vii. ai.


240


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXVI.


with which John had sent them, He straight-
way cured bUnd, lame, and many others; not
to teach him (for how should He him that
was convinced), but these that were doubting:
and having healed them, He saith,

" Go and show John again those things
which ye do hear and see; the blind receive
their sight, and the lame walk, and the lepers
are cleansed, and the deaf hear, and the dead
are raised up, and the poor have the gospel
preached unto them."' And he added,
"And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be
offended inme;"^ implying that He knows
even their unuttered thoughts. For if He
had said, "I am He," both this would have
offended them, as I have already said; and
they would have thought, even if they had
not spoken, much as the Jews said to Him,
" Thou bearest record of Thyself." ^ Where-
fbre He saith not this Himself, but leaves
them to learn all from the miracles, freeing
what He taught from suspicion, and making
it plainer. Wherefore also He covertly added
His reproof of them. That is, because they
were " offended in Him," He by setting forth
their case and leaving it to their own con-
science alone, and by calling no witness of
this His accusation, but only themselves that
knew it all, did thus also draw them the more
unto Himself, in saying, " Blessed is he,
whosoever shall not be offended in me."
For indeed His secret meaning was of them
when He said this.

3. But in order to our making the truth
more evident to you by the comparison of
the several statements, producing not only
our own sayings, but also what is stated by
others; we must needs add some account of
them.

What then do some affirm ? That this
which we have stated was not the cause, but
that John was in ignorance, yet not in ignor-
ance of all; but that He was the Christ, he
knew, but whether He was also to die for
mankind, he knew not, therefore he said,
"Art Thou He that should come?" that is.
He that is to descend into hell." But this is
not tenable; for neither of this was John
ignorant. This at least he proclaimed even
before all the others, and bare record of this
first, "Behold," saith he, "the Lamb of
God, which taketh away the sin of the
world." 5 Now he called Him a lamb, as pro-
claiming the cross, and again in saying,

1 Matt. iv. 5.

2 Matt. xi. 6. [R. V., " shall find none occasion of stumbling
in me."]

3 John viii. 13. [R. V., " witness."]

__ 4 See OriKen, 2 Horn. /« J\f^. t. ii. p. 495, 6 ; St. Ambr. :n Luc.
vii. iQ ; St, Jerome in loc. [The Greek term used is " Hades,"
not " Gehenna." — R.]
5 John i. 29.


" That taketh away the sin of the world," he
declared this same thing. For not otherwise
than by the cross did He effect this; as Paul
likewise said: "And the handwriting which
was contrary to us, even it He took out of the
way, nailing it to His cross." * And his say-
ing too, " He shall baptize you with the
Spirit,"'' is that of one who was foretelling
the events after the resurrection.

Well: that He was to rise again, he knew,
say they, and that He was to give the Holy
Ghost; but that He should likewise be cruci-
fied, he knew not. How then was He to rise
again, who had not suffered, nor been cruci-
fied ? And how was this man greater than a
prophet, who knew not even what the pro-
phets knew ? For that he was greater than a
prophet, even Christ Himself bare record,*
but that the prophets knew of the passion is
surely plain to every one. For so Isaiah saith,
" He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter,
and as a sheep before her shearer is dumb. ' ' *
And before this testimony also he saith,
" There shall be a root of Jesse, and He that
shall rise again to rule the Gentiles, in Him
shall the Gentiles trust. "'° Then speaking of
His passion, and of the ensuing glory, he
added, "And His rest shall be honor.'' And
this prophet foretold not only that He should
be crucified, but also with whom. " For,"
saith he, " He was numbered with the trans-
gressors." " And not this only, but that He
should not even plead for Himself; " For
this man," he saith, " openeth not His
mouth: " and that He should be unjustly
condemned; " For in His humiliation," saith
he, " His judgment was taken away." '^ And
before this again, David both saith this, and
describes the judgment hall. " Why," saith
he, "do the heathen rage, and the people
imagine a vain thing? The kings of the
earth stand up, and the rulers are gathered
together against the Lord, and against His
anointed. "'3 And elsewhere he mentions also
the image of the cross, saying on this wise,
" They pierced my hand and my feet,"''' and
those things which the soldiers were embold-
ened to do, he adds with all exactness, " For
they parted my garments," saith he, " among
them, and for my vesture they did cast
lots." '5 And elsewhere again he saith, that
they also offered Him vinegar; " For they
gave me," saith He, "gall for my meat, and
for my thirst they made me drink vinegar."'*

So then the prophets, so many years be-
fore, speak of the hall of judgment, and of
the condemnation, and of them that were


6 Col. ii. 14. [Comp. R. V., in loco.'] 7 Matt. iii. 11.

8 Matt. xi. 9. 9 Isa. liii. 7. 1° Isa. xi.io.

" Isa. liii. 12. 12 Isa. liii. 8, from Lxx. '3 Ps. ii. i, 2.

14 Ps. xxii. 16. '5 Ps. xxii. 18. '* Ps. Ixix. 21.


Homily XXXVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


•41


crucified with Him, and of the division of the
garments, and of the lot cast upon them, and
of many more things besides (for indeed it
is unnecessary to allege all now, lest we make
our discourse long) : and was this man, greater
than them all, ignorant of all these things ?
Nay, how should this be reasonable ?

And why did he not say, "Art thou He
that should come to hell,"' but simply, " He
that should come?" Although this were far
more absurd than the others, I mean their
saying, "he therefore said these things, that
he might preach there also after his depart-
ure." To whom it were seasonable to say,
" Brethren, be not children in understanding,
howbeit in malice be ye children."'' For the
present life indeed is the season for right
conversation, but after death is judgment and
punishment. "For in hell," it is said, "who
will confess unto thee ? " ^

How then were " the gates of brass burst,
and the bars of iron broken in sunder"?-*
By His body; for then first was a body shown,
immortal, and destroying the tyranny of
death. And besides, this indicates the de-
struction of the might of death, not the loos-
ing of the sins of those who had died before
His coming. And if this were not so, but
He have delivered all that were before Him
from hell, 5 how saith He, " It shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomor-
rah ? " * For this saying supposes that those
are also to be punished; more mildly indeed,
yet still that they are to be punished. And
yet they did also suffer here the most ex-
treme punishment, nevertheless not even this
will deliver them. And if it is so with them,
much more with such as have suffered noth-
ing.

" What then?" one may say, "were they
wronged, who lived before His coming?''
By no means, for men might then be saved,
even though they had not confessed Christ.
For this was not required of them, but not to
worship idols, and to know the true God.
" For the Lord thy God," it is said, '' is one
Lord."^ Therefore the Maccabees were ad-
mired, because for the observance of the law
they suffered wliat they did suffer; and the
three children, and many others too amongst
the Jews, having shown forth a very virtuous
life, and having maintained tiic standard of
this their knowledge, had nothing more re-
quired of them. For then it was sufficient
for salvation, as I liavc said already, to know
God only; but now it is so no more, but there
is need also of the knowledge of Christ.


' [«<* rhv aSjiv.'\
4 Ps. cvii. 16.


7 Dcut.


» I Cor. xiv. 30.
5 lytiy^nJ%.]


3 P,. vi. 5 [aSnl
' Mutt. X. 15.


VI. 4.

16


Therefore He said, " If I had not come and
spoken unto them, they had not had sin, but
now they have no cloak for their sin.'' "

So likewise with regard to the rule of prac-
tice. Then murder was the destruction of
him that committed it, but now even to be
angry. And then to commit adultery, and
to lie with another man's wife, brought pun-
ishment, but now even to look with unchaste
eyes. For as the knowledge, so also the rule
of life is now made stricter. So that there
was no need of a forerunner there.

And besides, if unbelievers are after death
to be saved on their believing, no man shall
ever perish. For all will then repent and
adore. And in proof that this is true, hear
Paul saying, "Every tongue shall confess,
and every knee shall bow, of things in heaven,
and things in earth, and things under the
earth."9 And, "The last enemy that shall
be destroyed is death."'" But there is no
advantage in that submission, for it comes not
of a rightly disposed choice, but of the nec-
essity of things, as one may say, thenceforth
taking place.

Let us not then any more bring in such old
wives' doctrines, and Jewish fables. Hear at
least what Paul saith touching these things.
" For as many as have sinned without law,
shall also perish without law;"" where his
discourse is of those who lived in the time
before the law; and, "As many as have sinned
in the law, shall be judged by the law.""
speaking of all after Moses. And, " That
the wrath of God is revealed from heaven
against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness
of men," '^ and," indignation and wrath, tribu-
lation and anguish upon every soul of man
that worketh evil, of the Jew first, and also
of the Gentile.'' '* And yet countless were
the evils which the Gentiles have suffered in
this world, and tiiis is declared alike by the
histories of the heathens, and by the Scrip-
tures that are in our hands. For who could
recount the tragic calamities of the Babylon-
ians, or those of the Egyptians? But in
proof that they who, not having known Christ
before His coming in tiic flesh, yet refrained
from idolatry and worshipped God only, and
siiowed forth an excellent life, shall enjoy all
the blessings; hear what is said: " But glory,
and honor, and peace to every one that
worketh good, to the- Jew first, and also to the
Gentile." Seest thou that for their good
deeds there are many rewards, and chastise-
ments again, and penalties for such as have
done the contrary ?

8 Johti 3tv. 91. [R. v., " excuse"! •» Phil. ii. 10, 11.

'" I ('or. XV. j6. " koiii. li. u. '^ kora. ii. la.

■J Kuiii. i. 18. >4 Kuiii. ii. 8, 9.


242


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXVI.


4. Where now, tell me, are the utter unbe-
lievers in hell ? Why, if those before Christ's
coming, who had not so much as heard the
name of hell,' nor of a resurrection, and were
punished here, shall suffer punishment there
also; how much more we that have been nur-
tured in so many lessons of strict virtue ?="

And how is it reasonable, asks one, that
they that have, never heard of hell,^ should
fall into hell? For they will say, "If thou
hadst threatened hell, we should have feared
more, and have been sobered,'' To be sure;
(is it not so ?) at our rate of living now, who
hear daily the sayings about hell, and give
no heed at all.

And besides, there is this also to be
said; that he who is not restrained by the
judgments in sight, much less will he be
restrained by those others. For the less
reasonable sort, and those of a grosser dispo-
sition, are wont to be sobered rather by things
which are at hand, and straightway to happen,
than by such as will come to pass a long time
after. "But over us," one may say, "a
greater fear is suspended, and herein were
they wronged." By no means. For first,
there are not the same measures * set to us as
to them, but much greater for us. Now they
that have undertaken greater labors, ought
to enjoy greater help. And it is no little
help, that our fear has been increased. And
if we have an advantage over them in know-
ing things to come, they have an advantage
over us in that the severe punishments are
presently laid upon them.

I3ut there is something else, which the mul-
titude say with respect to this also. For
"where," say they, "is God's justice, when
any one for sinning here, is punished both
here and there?" Would ye then I should
put you in mind of your own sayings, that ye
may no longer give us trouble, but furnish
the solution from within yourselves. I have
heard many of our people, if haply they were
told of a murderer cut off in a court of jus-
tice, how they had indignation, and talked in
this way: " This unholy and accursed wretch,
having perpetrated thirty murders, or even
many more, hath himself undergone one
death only; and where is the justice of it?"
So that ye yourselves confess, that one death
is not sufficient for punishment; how give ye

I [yeivyri^.] 2 <f,i\o(TO<t>Cai.

3 [yefi'i'i)?, and SO throughout the paragraph. — R.]

4 a-Ka.fiii.aTa.


then an opposite sentence now. Because not
others but yourselves are the objects of your
judgment: so great a hindrance is self-love
to our perceiving what is just. Because of
this, when we are judging others, we search
out all things with strictness, but when we
are sitting in judgment on ourselves, we are
blinded. Since if we were to search into
these things in our own case too, as we do
with regard to other men, we should give an
uncorrupt sentence. For we also have sins,
deserving not two or three, but ten thousand
deaths. And to pass over all the rest, let us
recollect ourselves, as many of us as partake
unworthily of the mysteries; such men being
guilty of the body and blood of Christ.
Wherefore, when thou art talking of the mur-
derer, take account of thyself also. For he
indeed hath murdered a man, but thou art
under the guilt of slaying the Lord; and he,
not having partaken of mysteries, but we,
while enjoying the benefit of the sacred table.

And what are they that bite and devour
their brethren, and pour out such abundance
of venom ? What is he that robs the poor
of their food ? For if he who imparts not of
his own, is such as I have said, muck more he
that takes the things of others.^ How many
robbers do the covetous surpass in wicked-
ness ! how many murderers and robbers of
tombs, the rapacious ! and how many after
spoiling men are desirous even of their blood !

"Nay," saith he, "God forbid." Now
thou sayest, God forbid. When thou hast an
enemy, then say, God forbid, and call to
mind what hath been said, and show forth a
life full of great strictness; lest the portion
of Sodom await us also, lest we suffer the lot
of Gomorrha, lest we undergo the ills of the
Tyrians and Sidonians; or rather, lest we
offend Christ, which were a thing more griev-
ous mid more to be feared t\\3in all.

For though to many hell * seem to be a
fearful thing, yet I for my part will not cease
continually to say, that this is more grievous
and fearful than any hell; and you I entreat
to be of the same mind. For so shall we
both be delivered from hell, and enjoy the
glory that is bestowed of Christ; unto which
may we all attain, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory and might forever and ever. Amen.


5 The words in italics, both here and below, are omitted in sev-
eral MSS.

6 [ye'eyva, and similarly throughout the paragraph. — R.]


Homily XXXVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


243


HOMILY XXXVII.

Matt. X. 7, 8, 9.

'And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning John, What
went ye out into the wilderness to see ' A reed shaken with tlie wind ? But what
went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment; behold, they that wear soft
clothing are in kings' houses. But what went ye out for to see? A prophet?' yea, I
say unto you, and more than a prophet."


For the matter indeed of John's disciples
had been ordered well, and they were gone
away assured by the miracles which had just
been performed; but there was need after
that of remedy as regarded the people. For
although they could not suspect anything of
the kind of their own master, the common
people might from the inquiry of John's dis-
ciples form many strange suspicions, not
knowing the mind with which he sent his dis-
ciples. And it was natural for them to rea-
son with themselves, and say, " He that bore
such abundant witness, hath he now changed
his persuasion, and doth he doubt whether
this or another be He that should come ?
Can it be, that in dissension with Jesus he
saith this ? that the prison hath made him
more timid ? that his former words were
spoken vainly, and at random?" It being
then natural for them to suspect many such
things, see how He corrects their weakness,
and removes these their suspicions. For
"as they departed, He began to say to the
multitudes." Why, "as they departed?"
That He might not seem to be flattering the
man.

And in correcting the people, He doth not
publish their suspicion, but adds only the
solution of the thouglits that were mentally
disturbing them: signifying that He knew
the secrets of all men. For He saith not,
as unto the Jews, " Wlierefore think ye
evil?"' Because if they had it in their
minds, not of wickedness did they so reason,
but of ignorance on the points that had been
spoken r^f. Wherefore neither dotii He dis-
course unto them in the way of rebuke, but
merely sets right their understanding, and
defends John, and signifies that he is not
fallen away from his former opinion, neither
is he changed, not being at all a man easily

" [R. v. text, " Hut wherefore went yr out ? to see n prophet ?"
In the marKin the received rr;iilin>f is Kiven. Chryiuntom >{ivcs
the latter here, l)ut has the other in hi* cointncnt.<i. Sec sec. a.
-R.I

-• Matt. IX. 4.


swayed and fickle, but steadfast and sure, and
far from being such as to betray the things
committed unto him.

And in establishing this. He employs not at
first his own sentence, but their former testi-
mony, pointing out how they bare record of his
firmness, not by their words only, but also
by their deeds.

Wherefore He saith, " What went ye out
into the wilderness to see?" as though He
had said, Wherefore did ye Itave your cities,
and your houses, and come together all of
you into the wilderness? To see a pitiful
and flexible kind of person ? Nay, this were
out of all reason, this is not what is indicated
by that earnestness, and the concourse of all
men unto the wilderness. So much people
and so many cities would not have poured
themselves out with so great zeal towards the
wilderness and the river Jordan at that time,
had ye not expected to see some great and
marvellous one, one firmer than any rock.
Yea, it was not "a reed'' surely, that "ye
went out to see shaken by the wind: '' for the
flexible and such as are lightly brought round,
and now say one thing, now another, and
stand firm in nothing, are most like tiiat.

And see how He omits all wickedness, and
mentions this, which then especially haunted ^
them; and removes the susj^icion of lightness.

" But what went ye out for to see ? a man
clothed in soft raiment ? Behold, they that
wear soft clotliing are in kings' houses." ••

Now His meaning is like this: He was not
of iiimself a waverer; and this ye yourselves
showed by your earnestness. Much less
could any one say tiiis, that he was indeed
firm, but having made himself a slave to
luxury, he afterwards became languid. For
among men, some are such as they are of
tliemselves, others become so; for instance,
one man is passionate by nature, and another
from liaving fallen into a long illness gets
this infirmity. Again, some men arc flexible


3 v^opiiovaar.


4 Mntl. n. 8.


244


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXVII.


and fickle by nature, while others become so
by being slaves to luxury, and by living ef-
feminately. " But John," saith He, " neither
was such a character by nature, for neither
was it a reed that ye went out to see; nor by
giving himself to luxury did he lose the ad-
vantage he possessed." For that he did not
make himself a slave to luxury, his garb
shows, and the wilderness, and the prison.
Since, had he been minded to wear soft rai-
ment, he would not have lived in the wilder-
ness, nor in the prison, but in the king's
courts: it being in his power, merely by keep-
ing silence, to have enjoyed honor without
limit. For since Herod so reverenced him,
even when he had rebuked him, and was in
chains, much more would he have courted
him, had he held his peace. You see, he
had indeed given proof of his firmness and
fortitude; and how could he justly incur sus-
picions of that kind ?

2. When therefore as well by the place, as
by his garments, and by their concourse unto
Him, He had delineated his character. He
proceeds to bring in the prophet. For hav-
ing said, " Why went ye out? To see a pro-
phet ? Yea I say unto you, and more than a
prophet;^' ' He goes on, " For this is he of
whom it is written/ Behold, I send my mes-
senger before Thy face, which shall prepare
Thy way before Thee."^ Having before set
down the testimony of the Jews, He then ap-
plies that of the prophets; or rather. He
puts in the first place the sentence of the
Jews, which must have been a very strong
demonstration, the witness being borne by
his enemies; secondly, the man's life; thirdly,
His own judgment; fourthly, the prophet;
by all means stopping their mouths.

Then lest they should say, " But what if at
that time indeed he were such an one, but
now is changed ? " He added also what fol-
lows; his garments, his prison, and together
with these the prophecy.

Then having said, that he is greater than a
prophet, He signifies also in what he is
greater. And in what is he greater ? In
being near Him that was come. For, " I
send," saith He, " my messenger before Thy
face;" that is, nigh Thee. For as with
kings, they who ride near the chariot, these
are more illustrious than the rest, just so
John also appears in his course near the ad-
vent itself. See how He signified John's ex-
cellency by this also; and not even here doth
He stop, but adds afterwards His own suf-
frage as well, saying,

"Verily I say unto you, among them that


' Matt. xi. 9. [See note i, p. 243.]
3 Matt. xi. 10.


2 See Mai. iii. i.


are born of women, there hath not arisen a
greater than John the Baptist.""*

Now what He said is like this: "woman
hath not borne a greater than this man.''
And His very sentence is indeed sufficient;
but if thou art minded to learn from facts
also, consider his table, his manner of life,
the height of his soul.- For he so lived as
though he were in heaven: and having got
above the necessities of nature, he travelled
as it were a new way, spending all his time
in hymns and prayers, and holding inter-
course with none among men, but with God
alone continually. For he did not so much
as see any of his fellow-servants, neither was
he seen by any one of them; he fed not on
milk, he enjoyed not the comfort of bed, or
roof, or market, or any other of the things
of men; and yet he was at once mild and
earnest. Hear, for example, how consider-
ately he reasons with his own disciples, how
courageously with the people of the Jews,
how openly with the king. For this cause
He said also, " There hath not risen among
them that are born of women a greater than
John the Baptist."

3. But lest the exceeding greatness of His
praises should produce a sort of extravagant
feeling, the Jews honoring John above
Christ; mark how He corrects this also. For
as the things which edified His own disciples
did harm to the niultitudes, they supposing
Him an easy kind of person; so again the
remedies employed for the multitudes might
have proved more mischievous, they deriving
from Christ's words a more reverential opin-
ion of John than of Himself.

Wherefore this also, in an unsuspected way,
He corrects by saying, " He that is less,* in
the kingdom of Heaven is greater than he."
Less in age, and according to the opinion of
the multitude, since they even called Him
' ' a gluttonous man and a winebibber; " ^ and,
" Is not this the carpenter's son?''^ and on
every occasion they used to make light of
Him.

" What then ? " it may be said, is it by com-
parison that He is greater than John ? " Far
from it. For neither when John saith. He is
mightier than I," ' doth he say it as compar-
ing them; nor Paul, when remembering
Moses he writes. For this man was counted
worthy of more glory than Moses,'' '° doth he
so write by way of comparison; and He Him-
self too, in saying. Behold, a greater than


4 Matt. xi. II.

5 [t7)s yvioju.-/)!; "zeal" would be a better rendering, though
there is no precise English etjuivalent. — R.]

6 [R. v., " but little ;" Gr. " lesser."] 7 Matt. xi. 19.
8 Matt. xiii. 55. 9 Matt. iii. 11.

10 Heb. iii. 3.


Homily XXXVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


245


Solomon is here,"' speaks not as making a
comparison.

Or if we should even grant that this was
said by Him in the way of comparison, this
was done in condescension,'' because of the
weakness of the hearers. For the men really
had their gaze very much fixed upon John;
and then he was rendered the more illustrious
both by his imprisonment, and by his plain-
ness of speech to the king; and it was a great
point for the present, that even so much
should be received among the multitude.
And so too, the Old Testament uses in the
same way to correct the souls of the erring,
by putting together in a way of comparison
things that cannot be compared; as when it
saitii, "Among the gods there is none like
unto Thee, O Lord: " ^ and again, " There is
no god like our God.""

Now some affirm, that Christ said this of
the apostles, others again, of angels.^ Thus,
when any have turned aside from the truth,
they are wont to wander many ways. For
what sort of connexion hath it, to speak either
of angels or of apostles? And besides, if He
were speaking of the apostles, what hindered
his bringing them forward by name ? whereas,
when He is speaking of Himself, He natur-
ally conceals His person, because of the still
prevailing suspicion, and that He may not
seem to say anything great of Himself; yea,
and we often find Him doing so.

But what is, " In the kingdom of heaven ? "
Among spiritual beings, and all them that
are in heaven.

And moreover His saying, "There hath
not risen among them that are born of women
a greater than John," suited one contrasting
John with Himself, and thus tacitly except-
ing Himself. For though He too were born
of a woman, yet not as John, for He was not
a mere man, neither was He born in like
manner as a man, but by a strange and won-
drous kind of birth.

4. "And from the days of John the Bap-


« Matt. xii. 42. » Or, " by way of economy ;" oixocoMt'cuf.

3 Ps. Ixxxvi. 8. 4 I>s. Ixxvii. 13.

5 "Many will iindrrstand lliisof the Saviour; that hewhoisless
in time Is greater in diunity. Hut let us simply understand, that
every saint who is alrraily with (lod is greater than he whose post
is yet in the battle. For it is one thin>{ to possess the crown
of victory, another still to fl^ht in the battle. Some will take it
that the lowest an){cl serving (;r)d in Heaven is greater than any
even the first of men who as yet dwells on earth." St. Jerome,
in loco.

" Kinally, it is so iilti-rly impossible that there should beany
comparison between John and tiic Son of CJod, that the former is
of less csle<-in evi-n ttian thir angels. Thus, on the one hand, in-
asmuch as He Ii.kI I ailed him an an>;el " (Mai. i:i. 1), "He is of
course set above men ; on the other, because he had declared him
chief amon>{ those (jorn of women. He therefore added, I'or /;<•
•who is Itsser in the A-ingiicm 0/ lieitTtn is gi eiili-r than hi- : that
you mi^ht know he could not compare with the angels."
St. Ambr. on St. Luke, vii. 27; St. Au({. C'otitr. Aii-.'ers. J.i-gis
et rro/<h. ii, xx, states both interpretations, without any preference
for either. Hut in his ij I'rmt. on .SV. Jo/niy c. i1. he jj'ves the
same as St. C!hrysostom.


tist," saith He, " until now, the kingdom of
heaven suffereth violence, and tlie violent
take it by force."*

And what sort of connexion may this have
with what was said before ? Much, assuredly,
and in full accordance therewith. Yea, by
this topic also He proceeds to urge and press
them into the faith of Himself; and at the
same time likewise, He is speaking in agree-
ment witli what had been before said by
John. " For if all things are fulfilled even
clown to John, I am " He that should come."

"For all the prophets," saith He, "and
the law prophesied until John."^

For tlie prophets would not have ceased,
unless I were come. Expect therefore noth-
ing further, neither wait for any one else.
For that I am He is manifest both from the
prophets ceasing, and from those that every
day " take by force " tlie faith that is in me.
For so manifest is it and certain, that many
even take it by force. Why, who hath so
taken it ? tell me. All who approach it with
earnestness of mind.

Then He states also another infallible sign,
saying, " If ye will receive it, he is Elias,
which was for to come." For " I will send
you," it is said, "Elias the Tishbite, who
shall turn the heart of the father to the chil-
dren." * This man then is Elias, if ye attend
exactly, saith He. For "I will send," saith
He, " my messenger before Thy face." »

And well hath He said, " If ye will receive
it," to show the absence of force. For I do
not constrain, saith He. And this He said,
as requiring a candid mind, and showing that
John is Elias, and Elias Jolin. For both of
them received one ministry, and both of
them became forerunners. Wherefore neither
did He simply say, " This is Elias," but, " If
ye are willing to receive it, this is he," that
is, if with a candid mind ye give heed to
what is going on. And He ditl not stop even
at this, but to the words, "This is Elias,
which was for to come," He added, to show
that understanding is needed, " He that hath
ears to hear, let liim hear." '"

Now He used so rnnny dark sayings, to
stir them up to intiiiiry, .Viul if not even so
were they awakened, much more, had all
been plain and clear. For this surely no
man could say, that they dared not ask Him,
and tliat He was difficult of approach. For
they that were asking him questions, and

* Matt. xi. la. [R. V., " men of violence. "J

7 Matt. xi. II.

"Mai. iv. 5, 6 [i.xx., but with "children" substituted for
" s<m." R.]

') Mal. iii. I. [" My face," in Mai. iii. i.but " thy fare " in the
New 'IVstumcnt citations. C'omp. verse lo, .Murk i. .1, l.ukc vii.

-•7 K]

■" Matt. XI. 15.


246


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXVII.


tempting Him about common matters, and
whose mouths were stopped a thousand times,
yet they did not withdraw from Him; how
should they but have inquired of Him, and
besought Him touching the indispensable
things, had they indeed been desirous to
learn ? For if concerning the matters of the
law they asked, " Which is the first com-
mandment," and all such questions, although
there was of course no need of His telling
them that; how should they but ask the mean-
ing of what He Himself said, for which also
He was bound to give account in His an-
swers ? And especially when it was He Him-
self that was encouraging and drawing them
on to do this. For by saying, " The violent
take it by force,'' He stirs them up to ear-
nestness of mind; and by saying, "He that
hath ears to hear, let him hear," He doth
just the same thing.

5. " But whereunto shall I liken this gen-
eration ? " saith He, " It is like unto children
sitting in the market place, and saying. We
have piped unto you, and ye have not danced;
we have mourned unto you, and ye have not
lamented."' This again seems to be uncon-
nected with what came before, but it is the
most natural consequence thereof. Yea, He
still keeps to the same point, the showing
that John is acting in harmony with Himself,
although the results were opposite; as indeed
with respect to his inquiry also. And He
implies that there was nothing that ought to
have been done for their salvation, and was
omitted; which thing the prophet'' saith of
the vineyard; "What ought I to have done
to this vineyard, and have not done it ? For
whereunto," saith He, "shall I liken this
generation ? It is like unto children sitting
in the market, and saying. We have piped
unto you, and ye have not danced, we have
mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented.
For John came neither eating nor drinking,
and they say, He hath a devil. ^ The Son of
Man came eating and drinking, and they say,
Behold a man gluttonous, and a winebibber,
a friend of publicans and sinners." *

Now what He saith is like this: We have
come each of us an opposite way, I and John;
and we have done just as if it were some
hunters with a wild beast that was hard to
catch, and which might by two ways fall into
the toils; as if each of the two were to cut it
off his several way, and drive it, taking his
stand opposite to the other; so that it must
needs fall into one of the two snares. Mark,

I Matt. xi. 16, 17. [The former verse is abridged. R. V. (ver.
17), " We piped unto you, and ye did not dance ; we wailed, and
ye did not mourn (Greek, beat the breast)." — R.]

= Jsa. V. 4 [i.xx.] 3 [" demon."]

4 Matt. xi. 16-19 [see note i].


for instance, the whole race of man, how it is
astonished at the wonder of men's fasting,
and at this hard and self-denying life. For
this reason it had been so ordered, that
John should be thus brought up from his
earliest youth, so that hereby (among other
things) his sayings might obtain credit.

But wherefore, it may be asked, did not
He Himself choose that way ? In the first
place He did also Himself proceed by it,
when He fasted the forty days, and went
about teaching, and not having where to lay
His head. Nevertheless He did also in an-
other mode accomplish this same object, and
provide for the advantage thence accruing.
For to be testified of by him that came this
way was the same thing, or even a much
greater thing than to have come this way
Himself.

And besides, John indeed exhibited no
more than his life and conversation; for
"John," it is said, *' did no sign, '^s but He
Himself had the testimony also from signs
and from miracles. Leaving therefore John
to be illustrious by his fasting, He Himself
came the opposite way, both coming unto
publicans' tables, and eating and drinking.

Let us ask the Jews then, " Is fasting a
good thing, and to be admired ? you should
then have obeyed John, and received him,
and believed his sayings. For so would
those sayings have led you towards Jesus.
Is fasting, on the other hand, a thing griev-
ous, and burdensome ? then should you have
obeyed Jesus, and have believed in Him that
came the opposite way. Thus, either way,
ye would have found yourselves in the king-
dom." But, like an intractable wild beast,
they were speaking evil of both. The fault
is not then theirs who were not believed, but
they are to be blamed who did not believe.
For no man would ever choose to speak evil
of opposite things, any more than he would
on the other hand commend them. I mean
thus: he that approves the cheerful and free
character, will not approve him that is sad
and grave; he that commends the man of a
sad countenance will not commend the cheer-
ful man. For it is a thing impossible to give
your vote both ways at once. Therefore also
He saith, " We have piped unto you, and ye
have not danced;" that is, "I have exhibited
the freer kind of life, and ye obeyed not:"
and, "We have mourned, and ye have not
lamented;" that is, "John followed the
rugged and grave life, and ye took no heed."
And He saith not, " he this, I that," but the
purpose of both being one, although their

5 John X. 41.


Homily XXXVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


247


modes of life were opposite, for this cause
He speaks of their doings as common. Yea,
for even their coming by opposite ways arose
out of a most exact accordance, such as con-
tinued looking to one and the same end.
What sort of excuse then can ye have after
all this ?

Wherefore He subjoined, "And wisdom is
justified of her children; " ' that is, though ye
be not persuaded, yet with me after this ye
cannot find fault. As the prophet saith
touching the Father, " That Thou mightest
be justified in Thy sayings." - For God,
though He should effect nothing more by
His care over us, fulfills all His part, so as
to leave to them that will be shameless not
so mucii as a shadow of excuse for uncandid
doubt.

And if the similitudes be mean, and of an
ill sound, marvel not, for He was discoursing
with a view to the weakness of His hearers.
Since Ezekiel too mentions many similitudes
like them, and unworthy of God's majesty.^
But this too especially becomes His tender
care.

And mark them, how in another respect
also they are carried about into contradictory
opinions. For whereas they had said of
John, " he hath a devil," ■* they stopped not
at til is, but said the very same again concern-
ing Him, 5 taking as He did the opposite
course; thus were they forever carried about
into conflicting opinions.

But Luke herewith sets down also another
and a heavier charge against them, saying,
" For the publicans justified God, having
received the baptism of John."*

6. Then He proceeds to upbraid the cities;
now that wisdom hath been justified; now
that He hath shown all to be fully performed.
That is, having failed to persuade them. He
now doth but lament over them; whicli is
more than terrifying For He had exhibited
both His teaching by His words, and His
wonder-working power by His signs. But
forasmuch as they abode in their own unbe-
lief, He now does but upbraid.

For "then," it is said, "began Jesus to
upbraid the cities, wherein most of His
mighty works were done, because they re
pented not; saying. Woe unto thee, Chora-
zin ! woe unto tiiee, Bethsaida !'''

Then, to show thee that they are not such
by nature. He states also the name of the
city out of which proceeded five apostles.

' Matt. xi. iq. [The text of the Moiiiily iiK'rri-s with the re-
ceived text. ('<im|). I.iiki- vii. 35, where this rcadiii); is undoubt-
edly the correct one.- k.J

2 P.s. li. 4. 3 See Ezck. iv. 5, la, 13, 34, &c.

* Matt. xi. 18. 5 John vii. a<. ; viii. 48, y ■ x. -jo.

* Luke vii. 29, 30. litfatitvoi for PairTi<r9«t'T«t in I.tikr.]
7 Matt. xi. 30, ai.


For both Philip, and those two pairs of the
chief apostles, were from thence.^

"For if," saith He, "the mighty works
which were done in you had been done in
Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented in
sackcloth and ashes. But I say unto you, It
shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon,
at the day of judgment, than for you. And
thou, Capernaum, which art exalted unto
heaven, shalt be brought down to hell,' for if
the mighty works which have been done in
thee had been done in Sodom, it would have
remained until this day. But I say unto you.
It shall be more tolerable for the land of
Sodom in the day of judgment, than for
thee."'"

And He adds not Sodom with the others
for nought, but to aggravate the charge
against them. Yea, for it is a very great
proof of wickedness, when not only of them
that now are, but even of all those that ever
were wicked, none are found so bad as they.

Thus elsewhere also He makes a compari-
son, condemning them by the Ninevites, and
by the Queen of the south; there, however,
it was by them that did right, here, even by
them that sinned; a thing far more grievous.
With this law of condemnation, Ezekiel too
was acquainted: wherefore also he said to
Jerusalem, "Thou hast justified thy sisters
in all thy sins."" Thus everywhere is He
wont to linger in the Old Testament, as in a
favored place. And not even at this doth He
stay His speech, but makes their fears yet
more intense, by saying, that they should
suffer things more grievous than Sodomites
and Tyrians, so as by every means to gather
them in, both by bewailing, and by alarming
them.

7. To these same things let us also listen:
since not for the unbelievers only, but for us
also, hath He appointed a punishment more
grievous than that of the Sodomites, if we
will not receive the strangers that come in
unto us; I mean, when He commanded to
shake off the very dust: and very fitly.
For as to the Sodomites, although they com-
mitted a great transgression, yet it was before
the law and grace; but we, after so much care
shown towards us, of what indulgence should
we be worthy, showing so much inhospitality,
and shutting our doors against them tii:U are
in need, and before our doors, our ears.' or
rather not against the jioor only, but against
the apostles themselves? For therefore we


"John i. 44. "[K. v., •• Hadrv"]

'■'"Slatt. xi. 31-34. I 1 hr (irrck here a^;rrri with tlir received

text. In vcrnc 3-\ the U. V. follow-i a different and better cslab-

lislird readin)^. — K.]

" I'./ek. XVI. 51. [The LXX. ia nut cited with verbal accuracy.

-R.]


248


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXVII.


do it to the poor, because we do it to the very-
apostles. For whereas Paul is read, and thou
attendest not; whereas John preaches, and
thou hearest not: when wilt thou receive a
poor man, who wilt not receive an apostle ?

In order then that both our houses may be
continually open to the one, and our ears to
the others, let us purge away the filth from
the ears of our soul. For as filth and mud
close up the ears of our flesh, so do the har-
lot's songs, and worldly news, and debts, and
the business of usury and loans, close up the
ear of the mind, worse than any filth; nay
rather, they do not close it up only, but also
make it unclean. And they are putting dung
in your ears, who tell you of these things.
And that which the barbarian threatened,
saying, "Ye shall eat your own dung," and
what follows;^ this do these men also make
you undergo, not in word, but in deeds; or
rather, somewhat even much worse. For
truly those songs are more loathsome even
than all this; and what is yet worse, so far
from feeling annoyance when ye hear them,
ye rather laugh, when ye ought to abominate
them and fly.

But if they be not abominable, go down
unto the stage, imitate that which thou
praisest; or rather, do thou merely take a
walk with him that is exciting that laugh.
Nay, thou couldest not bear it. Why then
bestow on him so great honor ? Yea, while
the laws that are enacted by the Gentiles
would have them to be dishonored, thou re-
ceivest them with thy whole city, like ambas-
sadors and generals, and dost convoke all
men, to receive dung in their ears. And thy
servant, if he say anything filthy in thy hear-
ing, will receive stripes in abundance; and be
it a son, a wife, whoever it may, that doth as
I have said, thou callest the act an affront;
but if worthless fellows, that deserve the
scourge, should invite thee to hear the filthy
words, not only art thou not indignant, thou
dost even rejoice and applaud. And what
could be equal to this folly ?

But dost thou thyself never utter these
base words? Why what is the profit? or
rather, this very fact, whence is it manifest ?
For if thou didst not utter these things,
neither wouldest thou at all laugh at hearing
them, nor wouldest thou run with such zeal
to the voice that makes thee ashamed.

For tell me, art thou pleased at hearing
men blaspheme ? Dost thou not rather shud-
der, and stop thine ears? Surely I think
thou dost. Why so ? Because thou blas-
phemest not thyself. Just so do thou act


■ Isa. xxxvi. 12.


with respect to filthy talking also; and if thou
wouldest show us clearly, that thou hast no
pleasure in filthy speaking, endure not so
much as to hear them. For when wilt thou
be able to become good, bred up as thou art
with such sounds in thine ears? When wilt
thou venture to undergo such labors as chas-
tity requires, now that thou art falling gradu-
ally away through this laughter, these songs,
and filthy words ? Yea, it is a great thing for
a soul that keeps itself pure from all this, to
be able to become grave and chaste; how
much more for one that is nourished up in
such hearings ? Know ye not, that we are of
the two more inclined to evil ? While then
we make it even an art, and a business, when
shall we escape that furnace ?

8. Heardest thou not what Paul saith,
" Rejoice in the Lord ? " ^ He said not, " in
the devil. '* When then wilt thou be able to
hear Paul ? when, to gain a sense of thy
wrong actions ? drunken as thou art, ever and
incessantly, with the spectacle I was speaking
of. For thy having come here is nothing
wonderful nor great; or rather it is wonder-
ful. For here thou comest any how, and so
as just to satisfy a scruple,^ but there with
diligence and sp£ed, and great readiness.
And it is evident from what thou bringest
home, on returning thence.

For even all the mire that is there poured
out for you, by the speeches, by the songs,
by the laughter, ye collect and take every
man to his home, or rather not to his home
only, but every man even into his own mind.

And from things not worthy of abhorrence
thou turnest away; while others which are to
be abhorred, so far from hating, thou dost
even court. Many, for instance, on coming
back from tombs, are used to wash them-
selves, but on returning from theatres they
have never groaned, nor poured forth any
fountains of tears; yet surely the dead man
is no unclean thing, whereas sin induces such
a blot, that not even with ten thousand foun-
tains could one purge it away, but with tears
only, and with confessions. But no one hath
any sense of this blot. Thus because we fear
not what we ought, therefore we shrink from
what we ought not.

And what again is the applause ? what the

2 Philip, iv. 4.

3 o.(j>o<Ti.ovfj.evoi, "just saying, 'God forgive me;' just doing
enough to come without scruple." I'ld. Suicer in 7'et-b. who
quotes St. Chrys. on Ps. 41. " Let us not come in hither any how,
nor make our responses d</)o<rtoii/oiefot, just well enough to keep off
a curse " (i. 617, Sav.) Also Horn. XXIX. 071 Acis, t. iv. p. 777.
"How may one form a judgment of a church? If we go away
daily with some profit, great or small, not simply satisfying a rule
and a(|)ocriou/ix6»'oi, quitting ourselves of a scruple." Again, z'iz'd.
" What we do, is turned into a mere regulation and a<|>oeri<o(ris, a
formal deprecation of a curse." Cf. Isseus de A^pollodori Hered.
p. 185. Ed. Reiske, "not a</)0(rtoii/ii€i'os, but preparin,: himself as
jvell as possible,"


Homily XXXVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW,


249


tumult, and the satanical cries, and the devil-
ish gestures ? For first one, being a young
man, wears his hair long behind, and chang-
ing his nature into that of a woman, is striv-
ing both in aspect, and in gesture, and in
garments, and generally in all ways, to pass
into the likeness of a tender damsel.' Then
another who is grown old, in the opposite way
to this, having his hair shaven, and with his
loine girt about, his shame cut off before his
hair, stands ready to be smitten with the rod,
prepared both to say and do anything. The
women again, their heads uncovered, stand
without a blush, discoursing with a whole
people, so complete is their practice in shame-
lessness; and thus pour forth all effrontery
and impurity into the souls of their hearers.
And their one study is, to pluck up all chas- '
tity from the foundations, to disgrace our
nature, to satiate the desire of the wicked
demon. Yea, and there are both foul say-
ings, and gestures yet fouler; and the dress-
ing of the hair tends that way, and the gait,
and apparel, and voice, and flexure of the
limbs; and there are turnings of the eyes,
and flutes, and pipes, and dramas, and plots;
and all things, in short, full of the most ex-
treme impurity. When then wilt thou be
sober again, I pray thee, now that the devil is
pouring out for thee so much of the strong
wine of whoredom, mingling so many cups of
unchastity ? For indeed both adulteries and
stolen marriages are there, and there are
women playing the harlot, men prostituting,
youths corruptmg themselves: all there is in-
iquity to the full, all sorcery, all shame.
Wherefore they that sit by should not laugh
at these things, but weep and groan bitterly.
"What then? Are we to shut up the
stage?" it will be said, " and are all things
to be turned upside down at thy word ? "
Nay, but as it is, all things are turned upside
down. For whence are they, tell me, that
plot against our marriages ? Is it not from
this theatre ? Whence are they that dig
through into chambers ? Is it not from that
stage ? Comes it not of this, when husbands
are insupportable to their wives ? of this,
when the wives are contemi^tible to tlieir hus-
bands ? of this, that the more jiart are adul-
terers ? So that the subverter of all things is
he that goes to the theatre; it is he that
brings in a grievous tyranny. " Nay," thou
wilt say, " this is appointed by the good
order of the laws." ^\'hy, to tear away men's
wives, and to insult young boys, and to over-
throw houses, is proper to those who have

' The women in plays wire personated by men : those men-
tioned below were singers ; the sluvc'a part in described in the next
BcntcDcc.


seized on citadels.^ "And what adulterer,"
wilt thou say, " hath been made such by these
spectacles ? '' Nay, who hath not been made
an adulterer ? And if one might but mention
them now by name, I could point out how
many husbands those harlots have severed
from their wives, how many they have taken
captive, drawing some even from the marriage
bed itself, not suffering others so much as to
live at all in marriage.

" What then ? I pray thee, are we to over-
throw all the laws?" Nay, but it is over-
throwing lawlessness, if we do away with these
spectacles. For hence are they that make
havoc in our cities; hence, for example, are
seditions and tumults. For they that are
maintained by the dancers, and who sell their
own voice to the belly, whose work it is to
shout, and to practise everything that is mon-
strous, these especially are the men that stir
up the populace, that make the tumults in
our cities. For youth, when it hath joined
hands with idleness, and is brought up in so
great evils, becomes fiercer than any wild
beast. The necromancers too, I pray thee,
whence are they ? Is it not from hence, that
in order to excite the people who are idling
without object, and make the dancing men
have the benefit of much and loud applause,
and fortify the harlot women against the
chaste, they proceed so far in sorcery, as not
even to shrink from disturbing the bones of
the dead ? Comes it not hence, when men
are forced to spend without limit on that
wicked choir of the devil ? And lascivious-
ness, whence is that, and its innumerable
mischiefs ? Thou seest, it is thou who art
subverting our life, by drawing men to these
things, while I am recruiting it by putting
them down,

" Let us then pull down the stage," say
they. Would that it were possible to pull it
down; or rather, if ye be willing, as far as
regards us, it is pulled down, and digged up.
Nevertheless, I enjoin no such thing. Stand-
ing as these places are, I bitl you make them
of no effect; which thing were a greater praise
than pulling them down.

9. Imitate at least the barbarians, if no one
else; for they verily are altogether clean from
seeking such sights. What excuse then can
we have after all this, we, the citizens of
Heaven, and j\irtners in the choirs of the
cherubim, and in fellowship with the angels,
making ourselves in this respect worse even
than the barbarians, and this, wiien innumer-
able other pleasures, better than these, are
within our reach ?

= /. /■., to tyrants, such as Pisistrntus mid others.


2 so


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXVIII.


Why, if thou desirest that thy soul may
find delight, go to pleasure grounds, to a
river flowing by, and to lakes, take notice of
gardens, listen to grasshoppers as they sing,
be continually by the coffins of martyrs,
where is health of body and benefit of soul,
and no hurt, no remorse after the pleasure,
as there is here.

Thou hast a wife, thou hast children; what
is equal to this pleasure ? Thou hast a house,
thou hast friends, these are the true delights:
besides their purity, great is the advantage
they bestow. For what, I pray thee, is
sweeter than children? what sweeter than a
wife, to him that will be chaste in mind ?

To this purpose, we are told, that the bar-
barians uttered on some occasion a saying full
of wise severity. I mean, that having heard
of these wicked spectacles, and the unseason-
able delight of them; " why the Romans,'*
say they, " have devised these pleasures, as
though they had not wives and children;"
implying that nothing is sweeter than children
and wife, if thou art willing to live honestly.

" What then," one may say, " if I point to
some, who are nothing hurt by their pastime
in that place ? " In the first place, even this
is a hurt, to spend one's time without object
or fruit, and to become an offense to others.
For even if thou shouldest not be hurt, thou
makest some other more eager herein. And
how canst thou but be thyself hurt, giving


occasion to what goes on ? Yea, both the
fortune-teller, and the prostitute boy, and the
harlot woman, and all those choirs of the
devil, cast upon thy head the blame of their
proceedings. For as surely as, if there were
no spectators, there would be none to follow
these employments; so, since there are, they
too have their share of the fire due to such
deeds. So that even if in chastity thou wert
quite unhurt (a thing impossible), yet for
others' ruin thou wilt render a grievous ac-
count; both the spectators^ and that of those
who assemble them.

And in chastity too thou wouldest profit
more, didst thou refrain from going thither.
For if even now thou art chaste, thou would-
est have become chaster by avoiding such
sights. Let us not then delight in useless
argument, nor devise unprofitable apologies:
there being but one apology, to flee from the
Babylonian furnace, to keep far from the
Egyptian harlot, though one must escape her
hands naked.'

For so shall we both enjoy much delight,
our conscience not accusing us, and we shall
live this present life with chastity, and attain
unto the good things to come, by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ; to whom be glory and might, now and
ever, and world without end. Amen.

I Gen. xxxix. 12.


HOMILY XXXVIII.


Matt, XI. 25, 26.

"At that time Jesus answered and said, I make acknowledgment unto Thee,' O Father,
Lord of Heaven and earth; because Thou hast hid these things from the wise and


prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes,
in Thy sight. "^


Even so, Father, for so it seemed good


Seest thou, how many ways He leads them
on to the faith ? First,^ by His praises of
John. For by pointing to him as a great and
marvellous one. He proved likewise all his
sayings credible, whereby he used to draw
them on to the knowledge of Him. Secondly,-*

I LA. v., " I thank thee," so R. V., with margin, " Or, praise.'"
The Oxford translator gives the exact sense of the Greek verb,
but below reverts to the rendering " thank," in accordance with
the explanation of Chrysostom. — R.]

= [R. v., " Yea, Father, for (or, that) so it was well-pleasing in
thy sight." Comp. the explanation in the Homily. ^R.]

3 Matt. xi. 7-11. 4 Matt. xi. 12.


by saying, "The kingdom of Heaven suffer-
eth violence, and the violent take it by
force;" for this is the language of one who
is pressing and urging them. Thirdly, = by
signifying that the number of the prophets
was finished; for this too manifested Himself
to be the person that was announced before-
hand by them. Fourthly,* by pointing out
that whatsoever things should be done by
him, were all accomplished; at which time


S Matt. vi. 13.


6 Matt, vi. 14-19.


Homily XXXVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


251


also He made mention of the parable of the
children. Fifthly, by His upbraiding them
that had not believed, and by His alarming
and threatening them greatly.' Sixthly, by
His giving thanks for them that believed.
For the expression, " I make acknowledg-
ment to Thee," here is, "I thank Thee."
"I thank Thee," He saith, "because Thou
hast hid these things from the wise and pru-
dent."

What then ? doth He rejoice in destruc-
tion, and in the others not having received
this knowledge ? By no means; but this is a
most excellent way of His to save men. His
not forcing them that utterly reject, and are
not willing to receive His sayings; that, since
they were not bettered by His call, but fell
back, and despised it, His casting them out
might cause them to fall into a longing for
these things. And so likewise the attentive
would grow more earnest.

And while His being revealed to these was
fit matter of joy, His concealment from those
was no more of joy but of tears. Thus at
any rate He acts, where He weeps for the
city. Not therefore because of this doth He
rejoice, but because what wise men knew not,
was known to these. As when Paul saith,
" I thank God, that ye were servants of sin,
but ye obeyed from the heart the form of
doctrine which was delivered unto you.""^
You see, neither doth Paul therefore rejoice,
because they were "servants of sin,'* but
because being such, they had been so highly
favored.

Now by the "wise," here. He means the
Scribes, and the Pharisees. And these things
He saith, to make the disciples more earnest,
and to show what had been vouchsafed to the
fishermen, when all those others had missed
of it. And in calling them "wise," He
means not the true and commendable wisdom,
but this which they seemed to have tlirough
natural shrewdness. Wherefore neither did
He say, " thon hast revealed it to fools,"
but " to babes: "' to unsophisticated, that is,
to simple-minded men; and He imphes that
so far from tlieir missing these privdeges
contrary to their desert, it was just what
might be expected. And He instructs us
throughout, to I)e free from pride, and to
follow after sim|ilicity. For this cause Paul
also cxpressctl it with more exceeding ear-
nestness, writing on this wise: " If any man
among you seemeth to l)e wise in tins world,


' Matt. xi. 20-24.

' kom. vi. 17. ^R. v., "that form of teaching whereunto yc
were delivered." The A. V. renders the pniuutKc incorrectly:
there beinjf no doubt as t<i the Cireck text. I hr K. V. hImi brniKH
out the thiniKht which the Homily indiiiiCes.- K.]


; let him become a fool, that he may be wise." ^
For thus is God's grace manifested.

But wherefore doth He give thanks to the
Father, although of course it was Himself
who wrought this? As He prays and inter-
cedes with God, showing His great love
towards us, in the same way doth He this
too: for this also is of much love. And He
signifies, that not from Him only had they
fallen away, but also from the Father.
Thus, what He said, speaking to His disci-
ples, " Cast not the holy things unto dogs," *
this He Himself anticipated them in perform-
ing.

Moreover He signifies hereby both His
own principals will, and that of the Father;
His own, I say, by His giving thanks and
rejoicing at what had taken place; His
Father's, by intimating that neither had He
done this upon entreaty, but of Himself upon
His own will; "For so," saith He, "it
seemed good in Thy sight: " that is, " so it
pleased Thee."

And wherefore was it hidden from them ?
Hear Paul, saying, that " Seeking to establish
their own righteousness, they have not sub-
mitted themselves to the righteousness of
God,"^

Consider now how it was likely the disci-
ples should 7 be affected, hearing this; that
what wise men knew not, these knew, and
knew it continuing babes, and knew it by
God's revelation. But Luke saith, that "at
the very hour," when the seventy came tell-
ing Him about the devils, then He "re-
joiced " and spake these things,'* which, be-
sides increasing their diligence, would also
dispose them to be modest. That is, since
it was natural for them to pride themselves
on their driving away devils, on this among
other grounds He refrains them; that it was
a revelation, whatever had been tlone, no dil-
igence on their jiart. Wiierefore also tlie
scribes, and the wise men, tiiinking to be in-
telligent for themselves, fell away through
their own vanity. Well then, if for this cause
it was hidden from them, "do you also."
saith He, " fear, and continue babes." l-dr
this caused you to have the benefit of the rcv-
j elation, as indeed on the other hanil the con-
I trary made them be de|)rived of it. I'or l)y

3 I Cor. iii. 18. * Matt. vii. 6.

5 irpoijyouMU'oi'. Tn the sjime sense in which Hiniker Siivs,
' "He wilirlh [xisilively that which Hiiuself wurkrth ; He willeth
I by permisNioM thai which Hi« creatures do." K. I', v. .App. No. i,
p. 714. ( f. Ill VS'iiltoii's life, ]). i<y. " That in C'ukI there were two
wills, an nnlecidrnt mid a conseiiueiit will ; His first will, I hat all
mankind should be sjived ; His se< .iiid, that those only should be
saved, who liveil answerable to that dcjcree <if Kr.uc which lie h.id
offered."

'' Kom. X. 3.

7 \" would ; " but the whole clause ha.s been freely paraphrused.

" I. like X. 21.


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXVIII,


no means, when He saith, " Thou hast hid,"
doth He mean that it is all God's doing: but
as when Paul saith, " He gave them over to
a reprobate mind," ' and, " He hath bhnded
their minds/' = it is not meant to bring Him
in as the doer of it, but those who gave the
occasion: so here also He uses the expres-
sion, " Thou hast hid."

For since He had said, ''I thank ^ Thee,
because Thou hast hid them, and hast re-
vealed them unto babes; " to hinder thy sup-
posing that as being Himself deprived of this
power, and unable to effect it, so He offers
thanks. He saith,

"All things are delivered unto me of my
Father."* And to them that are rejoicing,
because the devils obey them, " Nay, why
marvel," saith He.^ "that devils yield to
you? All things are mine; "All things are
delivered unto me."

But when thou hearest, " they are deliv-
ered," do not surmise anything human. For
He uses this expression, to prevent thine
imagining two unoriginate Gods. Since, that
He was at the same time both begotten, and
Lord of all, He declares in many ways, and
in other places also.

2. Then He saith what is even greater than
this, lifting up thy mind; "And no man
knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither
knoweth any man the Father, but the Son."
Which seems indeed to the ignorant uncon-
nected with what went before, but hath full
accordance therewith. As thus: having said,
"All things are delivered unto me of my
Father," He adds, "And what marvel," so
He speaks, " if I be Lord of all ? I who have
also another greater privilege, the knowing
the Father, and being of the same substance."
Yea, for this too He covertly signifies by His
being the only one who so knew Him. For
this is His meaning, when He saith, "No
man knoweth the Father but the Son."

And see at what time He saith this. When
they by His works liad received the certain
proof of His might, not only seeing Him
work miracles, but endowed also in His name
with so great powers. 1'hen, since He had
said, " Thou hast revealed them unto babes,"
He signifies this also to pertain to Himself;
for " neither knoweth any man the Father,"
saith He, " save the Son, and he to whomso-
ever the Son is willing* to reveal Him;^ not
"to whomsoever He may be enjoined," "to
whomsoever He may be commanded." But


' Rom. i. 28.

2 2 Cor. iv. 4. [This passage is irrelevant, since it speaks of
' the god of this world.'' — R.]

3 [See above, and note i, p. 250.— R.3

4 Matt. xi. 27. 5 Luke x. 22.
6 /SoOArjTai. [R. V., " willeth."] 7 Matt. xi. 27.


if He reveals Him, then Himself too. This
however He let pass as acknowledged, but
the other He hath set down. And every-
where He affirms this; as when He saith,
"No man cometh unto the Father, but by


me


J' 8


And thereby he establishes another point
also, His being in harmony and of one mind
with Him. " Why," saith He, " I am so far
from fighting and warring with Him, that no
one can even come to Him but by me." For
because this most offended them, His seem-
ing to be a rival God, He by all means doth
away with this; and interest>ed Himself about
this not less earnestly, but even more so, than
about His miracles.

But when He saith, " Neither knoweth any
man the Father, save the Son," He means
not this, that all men were ignorant of Him,
but that with the knowledge wherewith He
knows' Him, no man is acquainted with
Him; which may be said of the Son too."
For it was not of some God unknown, and
revealed to no man, that He was so speaking,
as Marcion saith;" but it is the perfection of
knowledge that He is here intimating, since
neither do we know the Son as He should be
known; and this very thing, to add no more,
Paul was declaring, when he said, " We know
in part, and we prophesy in part." '^

3. Next, having brought them by His
words to an earnest desire, and having signi-
fied His unspeakable power. He after that
invites them, saying, " Come unto me, all ye
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest."'^ Not this or that person,
but all that are in anxiety, in sorrows, in sins.
Come, not that I may call you to account,
but that I may do away your sins; come, not
that I want your honor, but that I want your
salvation. "For I," saith He, "will give
you rest." He said not, " I will save you,"
only; but what was much more, " I will place
you in all security."

" Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me,
for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye
shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke
is easy, and my burden is light."'* Thus,
"be not afraid," saith He, "hearing of a
yoke, for it is easy: fear not, because I said,
" a burden," for it is light.

And how said He before, "The gate is


8 John xiv. 6. 5 cTrccrTaTat.

'o That is, that none but the Father has full knowledge of Him.

" Tertull. adv. Marc. i. 8. " The Marcionites bring forward a
new God, as if we were ashamed of the ancient One. ... I hear
them talk of a new God, in the old world and in the old age, and
under that ancient God, unknown and unheard of." lAnfe-A^i-
ce/ie Fathers^ vol. lii. p. 276.] It seems to have been common to
all the Oriental sects, to speak of the Supreme God as utterly un-
known until the Christian dispensation began.

12 I Cor. xiii. 9. '3 Matt. xi. 28. '4 Matt. xi. 29, 30.


Homily XXXVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


narrow and the way strait ? " ' Whilst thou
art careless, whilst thou art supine; whereas,
if thou duly perform His words, the burden
will be light; wherefore also He hath now
called it so.

But how are they duly performed? If
thou art become lowly, and meek, and gentle.
For this virtue is the mother of all strictness
of life. Wherefore also, when beginning
those divine laws, with this He began.- And
here again He doeth the very same, and ex-
ceeding great is the reward He appoints.
*' For not to another only dost thou become
serviceable; but thyself also abovQ all thou
refreshest," saith He. "For ye shall find
rest unto your souls.''

Even before the things to come. He gives
thee here thy recompense, and bestows the
prize already, making the saying acceptable,
both hereby, and by setting Himself forward
as an example. For, "Of what art thou
afraid?" saith He, "lest thou shouldest be
a loser by thy low estate ? Look to me, and
to all that is mine; learn of me, and then
shalt thou know distinctly how great thy
blessing." Seest thou how in all ways He is
leading them to humility? By His own
doings: " Learn of me, for I am meek." By
what themselves are to gain; for, " Ye shall
find," saith He, '* rest unto your souls." By
what He bestows on them; for, " I too will
refresh you,'' saith He. By rendering it
light; " For my yoke is easy, and my burden
is light." So likewise doth Paul, saying,
" For the present light affliction, which is but
for a moment, worketh a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of glory." ^

And how, some one may say, is the burden
light, when He saith, " Except one hate
father and mother; " and, "Whosoever tak-
eth not up his cross, and followeth after me,
is not worthy of me: " and, " Whosoever for-
saketh not all that he hath, cannot be my
disciple: "■• when He commands even to give
up our very life?^ Let Paul teach thee, say-
ing, " Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or per-
secution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril,
or sword?'" And that, " 'I'he sufferings of
tliis present time are not worthy to be com-
pared with tiie glory tliat shall be revealed in
us." ' Let those teach thee, who return from
the council of tiie Jews after plenty of stripes,
and " rejoice that they were counted worthy
to suffer shame for the name of Christ.""
And if thou art still afraid and frremblest at
hearing of the yoke and the burden, the fear


' Matt. vii. 13. » Matt. v. 3. 3 a Cor. iv. 17.

< I.ukc xiv. 26, 27, 33 ; Maft. x. 17, 38. S Atntl. xvi. 35.

*> Rom. viii. 35. 7 Rom. viii. 18. * Act* v. 41.


comes not of the nature of the thing, but of
thy remissness; since if thou art prepared,
and in earnest, all will be easy to thee and
liglit. Since for this cause Christ also, to
signify that we too must needs labor our-
selves, did not mention the gracious things
only, and then hold His peace, nor the pain-
I ful things only, but set down both. Thus He
'both spake of "a yoke," and called it
"easy;'' both named a burden, and added
that it was "light;" that thou shouldest
neither flee from them as toilsome, nor de-
spise them as over easy.

But if even after all this, virtue seem to
thee an irksome thing, consider that vice is
more irksome. And this very thing He was
intimating, in that He said not first, " Take
my yoke upon you," but before that, " Come,
ye that labor and are heavy laden; '' implying
that sin too hath labor, and a burden that is
heavy and hard to bear. For He said not
only, "Ye that labor," but also, "that are
heavy laden." This the prophet too was
speaking of, when in that description of her
nature, "As an heavy burden they weighed
heavy upon me.''' And Zacharias too, de-
scribing her, saith she is "A talent of lead."'°

And this moreover experience itself proves.
For nothing so weighs upon the soul, and
presses it down, as consciousness of sin;
nothing so much gives it wings, and raises it
on high, as the attainment of righteousness
and virtue.

And mark it: what is more grievous, I pray
thee, than to have no possessions ? to turn
the cheek, and when smitten not to smite
again ? to die by a violent death ? Yet never-
theless, if we practise self-command, all tliese
things are liglit and easy, and pleasurable.

But be not disturbed; rather let us take
up each of these, and inquire about it accu-
rately; and if ye will, that first whicli many
count most painful. Which then of the two,
tell me, is grievous and burdensome, to be in
care for one belly, or to be anxious about ten
thousand ? To be clothed with one outer
garment, and seek for nothing more; or hav-
ing many in one's house, to bemoan one's
self every day and night in fear, in trembling,
about the jireservation of them, grieved, and
ready to choke about the loss of them; lest
one should be motii-eaten, lest a servant pur-
loin and go off with them ?

4. But whatever I may say, my speecli will
present no sucli proof as the actual trial.
Wherefore I would there were present here
witli us some one of those wlio have attained
unto that summit of self-restraint, and then


9 Pt. xxxviii. 4.


«° Zcch. V. 7, 8.


254


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXVIII.


you would know assuredly the delight there-
of; and that none of those that are enamored
of voluntary poverty would accept wealth,
though ten thousand were to offer it.

But would these, say you, ever consent to
become poor, and to cast away the anxieties
which they have ? And what of that ? This
is but a proof of their madness and grievous
disease, not of anything very pleasurable in
the thing. And this even themselves would
testify to us, who are daily lamenting over
these their anxieties, and accounting their
life to be not worth living. But not so those
others; rather they laugh, leap for joy, and
the wearers of the diadem do not so glory,
as they do in their poverty.

Again, to turn the cheek is, to him that
gives heed, a less grievous thing than to smite
another; for from this the contest hath be-
ginning, in that termination: and whereas by
the former thou hast kindled the other's pile
too, by the latter thou hast quenched even
thine own flames. But that not to be burnt
is a pleasanter thing than to be burnt, is
surely plain to every man. And if this hold
in regard of bodies, much more in a soul.

And whether is lighter, to contend, or to
be crowned ? to fight, or to have the prize ?
and to endure waves, or to run into harbor ?
Therefore also, to die is better than to live.
For the one withdraws us from waves and
dangers, while the other adds unto them, and
makes a man subject to numberless plots and
distresses, which have made life not worth
living in thine account.

And if thou disbelievest our sayings,
hearken to them that have seen the counte-
nances of the martyrs in the time of their
conflicts, how when scourged and flayed, they
were exceeding joyful and glad, and when
exposed upon hot irons, rejoiced, and were
glad of heart, more than such as lie upon a
bed of roses. Wherefore Paul also said,
when he was at the point of departing hence,
and closing his life by a violent death, " I
joy, and rejoice with you all; for the same
cause also do ye joy, and rejoice with me." '
Seest thou with what exceeding strength of
language he invites the whole world to par-
take in his gladness? So great a good did
he know his departure hence to be, so desir-
able, and lovely, and worthy of prayer, that
formidable thing, death.

5. But that virtue's yoke is sweet and

I Phil. ii. 17, i8 . [R. V., " and in the same manner also," etc.]


light, is manifest many other ways also; but
to conclude, if you please, let us look also at
the burdens of sin. Let us then bring for-
ward the covetous, the retailers and second-
hand dealers in shameless bargains. What
now could be a heavier burden than such
transactions ? how many sorrows, how many
anxieties, how many disappointments, how
many dangers, how many plots and wars,
daily spring up from these gains ? how many
troubles and disturbances ? For as one can
never see the sea without waves, so neither
such a soul without anxiety, and despond-
ency, and fear, and disturbance; yea, the
second overtakes the first, and again others
come up, and when these are not yet ceased,
others come to a head.

Or wouldest thou see the souls of the re-
vilers, and of the passionate ? Why, what is
worse than this torture ? what, than the
wounds they have within ? what, than the fur-
nace that is continually burning, and the
flame that is never quenched ?

Or of the sensual, and of such as cleave
unto this present life ? Why, what more
grievous than this bondage ? They live the
life of Cain, dwelling in continual trembling
and fear at every death that happens; the
kinsmen of the dead mourn not so much, as
these do for their own end.

What again fuller of turmoil, and more
frantic, than such as are puffed up with pride ?
"For learn," saith He, "of me, for I am
meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find
rest unto your souls." Because long-suffer-
ing is the mother of all good things.

Fear thou not therefore, neither start away
from the yoke that lightens thee of all these
things, but put thyself under it with all for-
wardness, and then thou shalt know well the
pleasure thereof. For it doth not at all
bruise thy neck, but is put on thee for good
order's sake only, and to persuade thee to
walk seemly, and to lead thee unto the royal
road, and to deliver thee from the precipices
on either side, and to make thee walk with
ease in the narrow way.

Since then so great are its benefits, so
great its security, so great its gladness, let
us with all our soul, with all our diligence,
draw this yoke; that we may both here " find
rest unto our souls," and attain unto the
good things to come, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and might, now and ever, and
world without end. Amen.


Homily XXXIX. ]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


-\-^o


HOMILY XXXIX.


Matt. XH. i,


"At that time Jesus went on the Sabbath day through the corn; and His disciples were an
I hungered, and began to phick the' ears of corn, and to eat."


But Luke saith, " On a double Sabbath. " =
Now what is a double Sabbath ? When the
cessation from toil is twofold, both that of the
regular Sabbath, and that of another feast
coming upon it. For they call every cessa-
tion from toil, a sabbath.

But why could He have led them away from
it, who foreknew all, unless it had been His
will that the Sabbath should be broken ? It was
His will indeed, but not simply so; wherefore
He never breaks it without a cause, but giv-
ing reasonable excuses: that He might at once
bring the law to an end, and not startle them.
But there are occasions on which He even
repeals it directly, and not with circumstance:
as when He anoints with the clay the eyes of
the blind man;^ as when He saith, "My
Father worketh hitherto, and I work." * And
He doth so, by this to glorify His own Father,
by the other to soothe the infirmity of the
Jews. At which last He is laboring here,
putting forward as a plea the necessity of
nature; although in the case of acknowledged
sins, that could not of course ever be an ex-
cuse. For neither may the murderer make
his anger a plea, nor the adulterer allege his
lust, no, nor any other excuse; but here, by
mentioning their hunger. He freed them
from all blame.

But do thou, I pray thee, admire the dis-
ciples, how entirely they control themselves,
and make no account of the things of tlie
body, but esteem the table of the flesh a
secondary thing, and though they have to
struggle with continual hunger, do not even
so withdraw themselves. For except hunger
had sorely constrained them, they would not
iiave done so much as this.

What tiien do tlie Pharisees? "When
they saw it," it is said, " they said unto Him,
Behold, Thy discii)Ies do tliat whicli is not
lawful to do upon the Sabbatli day."'


■ [With our best M^s. authorities, the nrticle is omitted in thr
Honiily. I'omi). K. V., in /nn). — k.]

3 itvTtponputTif, I, like vi. I. jOn the textual flinfuiilty, sir
Tischcndorf (viii.) iind Wcntcotl and llort. I he former returns
it, jjivinK the patristic conimentH uixin it. The latter put it in the
margin, renardiiiK it uh spuriouii. — K.]

1 John ix. (i, 14.

* lohn V. 17. [R. v., " even until now," etc.]

5 Matt. xii. J.


Now here indeed with no great vehemence
(yet surely that would have been consistent
in them), — nevertheless they are not vehe-
mently provoked, but simply find fault. But
when He stretched out the withered hand
and healed it,* then they were so infuriated,
as even to consult together about slaying and
destroying Him. For where nothing great
and noble is done, they are calm; but where
they see any made whole, they are savage,
and fret themselves, and none so intolerable
as they are: such enemies are they of the sal-
vation of men.

How then doth Jesus defend His disciples ?
" Have ye not read," saith He, " what David
did in the temple,' when he was an hungered,
himself and all they that were with him ?
how he entered into the house of God, and
did eat the show-bread, which was not law-
ful for him to eat, neither for them which
were with him, but only for the priests ? " *

Thus, whereas in pleading for His disci-
ples. He brings forward David; for Himself,
it is the Father.'

And observe His reproving manner:
" Have ye not read what David did ? " For
great indeed was that prophet's glory, so that
Peter also afterwards pleading with the Jews,
spake on this wise, " Let me freely speak
unto you of the patriarch David, that he is
both dead and buried."'"

But wherefore doth He not call him by
the name of his rank, either on this occasion
or afterwards? Perhaps because He derived
His race from him.

Now had they been a candid sort of per-
sons, He would have turned His discourse to
the disciples' suffering from hunger; but
abominable as tliey were and inluinian, He
ratiier reiiearses unto them a history.

But Mark s.-iitli, " In tiie days of .Xbiathar
the High Priest: " " not stating what was con-


*• Matt. xii. 10, 14.

7 [eV Tw itpif is inserted here (not in Homily XI..) by Chrysos-
lom, hut docs not <Hcur in ony of our Mss. of the New Tcstamcnl.


k.1
« Matt. XII. 3, 4.


3. i- "> John V, 17. ••• .Arts li. jq.

" Mark ii. .><>. [The Iloniilv reads toO ap\i>pru><, whiih is to
he thus rendered. I he K. \', fiill.iws the best Ms.s. in rejcctinff
rou, rendering " when Ahialharwus hifjh priest;" but Kivesthe
other rcadinti in the niurKin. — R.]


256


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIX.


trary to the history, but implying that he had
two names; and adds that " he gave unto
him," ' indicating tliat herein also David had
much to say for himself, since even the very
priest suffered him; and not only suffered,
but even ministered unto him. For tell me
not that David was a prophet, for not even
so was it lawful, but the privilege was the
priests': wherefore also He added, "but for
the priests only." For though he were ten
thousand times a prophet, yet was he not a
priest; and though he were himself a pro-
phet, yet not so they that were with him;
since to them too we know that he gave.

" What then," it might be said, " were they
all one with David ? " Why talk to me of
dignity, where there seems to be a transgres-
sion of the law, even though it be the con-
straint of nature ? Yea, and in this way too
He hath the more entirely acquitted them of
the charges, in that he who is greater is
found to have done the same.

"And what is this to the question," one
may say; " for it was not surely the Sabbath,
that he transgressed?" Thou tellest me of
that which is greater, and which especially
shows the wisdom of Christ, that letting go
the Sabbath, He brings another example
greater than the Sabbath. For it is by no
means the same, to break in upon a day, and
to touch that holy table, which it was not
lawful for any man to touch. Since the Sab-
bath indeed hath been violated, and that
often; nay rather it is continually being vio-
lated, both by circumcision, and by many
other works; and at Jericho^ too one may
see the same to have happened; but this hap-
pened then only. So that He more than
obtains the victory. How then did no man
blame David, although there was yet another
ground of charge heavier than this, that of
the priests' murder, which had its origin from
this ? But He states it not, as applying him-
self to the present subject only.

2. Afterwards again He refutes it in an-
other way also. For as at first He brought
in David, by the dignity of the person quell-
ing their pride; so when He had stopped
their mouths, and had put down their boast-
ing, then He adds also the more appropriate
refutation. Ana of what sort is this?
" Know ye not, that in the temple the priests
profane the Sabbath, and are blameless ?'' ^
For in that other instance indeed, saith He,
the emergency made the relaxation, but here
is the relaxation even without emergency.
He did not however at once thus refute them,
but first by way of permission, afterwards as


I Abimelech, i Sam. xxi. 6. 2 Josh. vi. 15. 3 Matt, xii, 5.


insisting upon his argument. Because it was
meet to draw the stronger inference last,
although the former argument also had of
course its proper weight.

For tell me not, that it is not freeing one's
self from blame, to bring forward another
who is committing the same sin. For when
the doer incurs no blame, the act on which
he hath ventured becomes a rule for others
to plead. •

Nevertheless He was not satisfied with
this, but subjoins also what is more decisive,
saying that the deed is no sin at all; and this
more than anything was the sign of a glori-
ous victory, to point to the law repealing it-
self, and in two ways doing so, first by the
place, then by the Sabbath; or rather even in
three ways, in that both the work is twofold *
that is done, and with it goes also another
thing, its being done by the priests; and what
is yet more, that it is not even brought as a
charge. " For they," saith He, " are blame-
less."

Seest thou how many points He hath
stated? the place; for He saith, "In the
temple;" the persons, for they are "the
priests;" the time, for He saith, "the Sab-
bath;" the act itself, for " they profane;"
(He not having said, " they break," but what
is more grievous, "they profane;") that
they not only escape punishment, but are
even free from blame, " for they," saith He,
" are blameless."

Do not ye therefore account this. He saith,
like the former instance. For that indeed was
done both but once, and not by a priest, and
was of necessity; wherefore also they were
deserving of excuse; but this last is both
done every Sabbath, and by priests, and in
the temple, and according to the law. And
therefore again not by favor, but in a legal
way, they are acquitted of the charges. For
not at all as blaming them did I so speak,
saith He, nor yet as freeing them from blame
in the way of indulgence, but according to
the principle of justice.

And He seems indeed to be defending
them, but it is His disciples whom He is
clearing of the alleged faults. For when He
saith, "those are blameless,^' He means,
" much more are these."

"But they are not priests." Nay, they
are greater than priests. For the Lord of
the temple Himself is here: the truth, not
the type. Wherefore He said also,

" But I say unto you. That in this place is
one greater than the temple." ^

4 As being done, i, in the holy place ; 2, on the holy day.

5 Matt. xii. 6. [R. v., " that one greater (Greek, a greater
thing) than the temple is here."]


Homily XXXIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. Mx\TTHEW.


257


Nevertheless, great as the sayings were
which they heard, they made no reply, for
the salvation of men was not their object.

Then, because to the hearers it would seem
harsh, He quickly draws a veil over it, giving
His discourse, as before, a lenient turn, yet
even so expressing Himself with a rebuke.
"But if ye had known what this meaneth, I
will have' mercy and not sacrifice, ye would
not have condemned the guiltless."''

Seest thou how again He inclines His
speech to lenity, yet again shows them to be
out of the reach of lenity? " For ye would
not have condemned," saith He, "the guilt-
less." Before indeed He inferred the same
from what is said of the priests, in the words,
" they are guiltless; " but here He states it
on His own authority; or rather, this too is
out of the law, for He was quoting a pro-
phetic saying. 3

3. After this He mentions another reason
likewise; " For the Son of man," saith He,
" is Lord of the Sabbath day; " * speaking it
of Himself. But ^Lark relates Him to have
said this of our common nature also; for He
said, "The Sabbath was made for man, not
man for the Sabbath." ^

Wherefore then was he punished that was
gathering the sticks?* Because if the laws
were to be despised even at the beginning, of
course they would scarcely be observed after-
wards.

For indeed the Sabbath did at the first con-
fer many and great benefits; for instance, it
made tliem gentle towards those of their
household, and humane; it taught them God's
providence and the creation, as Ezekiel
saith; 7 it trained them liy degrees to abstain
from wickedness, and disposed them to re-
gard the things of the Spirit.

For because they could not have borne it,^
if when He was giving the law for the Sab-
bath, He had said, " Do your good works on
the Sabbath, but do not the works which are
evil,'' therefore He restrained them from all
alike- for, "Ye must do nothing at all,"
saith He: and not even so were they kept in
order. But He Himself, in the very act of
giving the law of the Sabhatli, did even there-
in darkly signify that He will have them re-
frain from the evil works only, by the saying,
" Ye must do no work, except what shall !)e
done for your life."'' Ancl in tlie temple
too all went on, and with more diligence and
double toil." Thus even bv tin- v( i \- shadow


■ Ll<. v., "dcsi
4 Malt. xii. 8.


L-sirc.'] ' Mult. xii. 7.

5 Murk ii. jj.
' Numb. XV. iJ-)6. 7 K/ck. xx. ij.

" The inruiiinK mi'iiis to be, it wuuld liuvc been t
of their reli^;iijiis <liscrelion.

9 Exod. xii. 16, i.xx. 'o Numb, xxviii. y, 10.

17


3 Hosea


VI. 6.


He was secretly opening unto them the
truth.

Did Christ then, it will be said, repeal a
thing so highly profitable ? Far from it; nay,
He greatly enhanced it. For it was time for
them to be trained in all things by the higher
rules, and it was unnecessary that his hands
should be bound, who was freed from wick-
edness, winged for all good works; or that
men should hereby learn that God made all
things; or that they should so be made gen-
tle, who are called to imitate God's own love
to mankind (for He saitli, " Be ye merciful,
as your Heavenly Father");" or that they
should make one day a festival, who are com-
manded to keep a feast all their life long;
(" For let us keep the feast," it is said, " not
with old leaven, neither with leaven of malice
and wickedness; but with unleavened bread
of sincerity and truth") ;" as neither need
they stand by an ark and a golden altar,
who have the very Lord of all for their
inmate, and in all things hold communion
with Him; by prayer, and by oblation, and
by scriptures, and by almsgiving, and by
having Him within them. Lo now, why is
any Sabbath required, by him who is always
keeping the feast, whose conversation is in
Heaven ?

4. Let us keep the feast then continually,
and do no evil thing; for this is a feast: and
let our spiritual things be made intense, while
our earthly things give place: and let us rest
a spiritual rest, refraining our hands from
covetousness; withdrawing our body from
our superfiuous and unprofitable toils, from
such as the people of the Hebrews did of old
endure in Egypt. For ttiere is no difference
betwixt us who are gathering gold, ancl those
that were bound in the mire, working at those
bricks, and gathering stubble, and being
beaten. Yea, for now too the devil bids us
make bricks, as Pharaoh did then. For what
else is gold, than mire ? and what else is
silver, tlian stubble? Like stubble, at least,
it kindles the llaine of desire; like mire, so
doth gold defile him that possesses it.

Wherefore He sent us, not Moses from the
wilderness, but His Son from Heaven. If
then, after He is come, thou abide in Egypt,
thou wilt suffer with the Egyptians: but if
leaving that land thou go up witii the spirit-
ual Israel, thou shall see all the miracles.

Yet not even this suffices for salvation.
For we must not only be delivered out of
l-lgypt, but we must also enter into tiie jiroin-
ise. Since tlie Jews too, as Paul saith, both
went througli tlie \\c(\ Sen," and ate innniia,


hurd .1 tri.il


" I.ukc vi. 3^.


'J I Cor. V. 8.


n , r


Ac.


258


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XXXIX.


and drank spiritual drink, but nevertheless
they all perished.

Lest then the same befall us also, let us
not be slow, neither draw back; but when
thou hearest wicked spies even now bringing
up an evil report against the strait and nar-
row way, and uttering the same kind of talk
as those spies of old, let not the multitude,
but Joshua, be our pattern, and Caleb the
son of Jephunneh; and do not thou give up,
until thou have attained the promise, and
entered into the Heavens.

Neither account the journey to be difficult.
" For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God, much more, being recon-
ciled, shall we be saved." ' " But this way,"
it will be said, "is strait and narrow."
Well, but the former, through which thou
hast come, is not strait and narrow only, but
even impassable, and full of savage wild
beasts. And as there was no passing through
the Red Sea, unless that miracle had been
wrought, so neither could we, abiding in our
former life, have gone up into Heaven, but
only by baptism intervening. Now if the
impossible hath become possible, much more
will the difficult be easy.

" But that,'' it will be said, " was of grace
only." Why, for this reason especially thou
hast just cause to take courage. For if,
where it was grace alone, He wrought with
you; will He not much more be your aid,
where ye also show forth laborious works ?
If He saved thee, doing nothing, will He not
much more help thee, working ?

Above ^ indeed I was saying, that from the
impossibilities thou oughtest to take courage
about the difficulties also; but now I add
this, that if we are vigilant, these will not be
so much as difficult. For mark it: death is
trodden under foot, the devil hath fallen, the


' Rom. V. TO.

2 ['AvioTepui ; but " before " agrees better with English usage
in public address. — R.]


law of sin is extinguished, the grace of. the
Spirit is given, life is contracted into a small
space, the heavy burdens are abridged.

And to convince thee hereof by the actual
results, see how many have overshot the in-
junctions of Christ; and art thou afraid of
that which is just their measure ? What plea
then wilt thou have, when others are leaping
beyond the bounds, and thou thyself too
slothful for what is enacted ?

Thus, thee we admonish to give alms of
such things as thou hast, but another hath
even stripped himself of all his possessions:
thee we require to live chastely with thy wife,
but another hath not so much as entered into
marriage: and thee we entreat not to be en-
vious, but another we find giving up even his
own life for charity: thee again we entreat to
be lenient in judgments, and not severe to
them that sin, but another, even when smit-
ten, hath turned the other cheek also.

What then shall we say, I pray thee ?
What excuse shall we make, not doing even
these things, when others go so far beyond
us? And they would not have gone beyond
us, had not the thing been very easy. For
which pines away, he who envies other men's
blessings, or he who takes pleasure with them,
and rejoices ? Which eyes all things with
suspicion and continual trembling, the chaste
man, or the adulterer? Which is cheered by
good hopes, he that spoils by violence, or
he that shows mercy, and imparts of his own
to the needy ?

Let us then bear in mind these things, and
not be torpid in our career for virtue's sake;
but having stripped ourselves with all readi-
ness for these glorious wrestlings, let us labor
for a little while, that we may win the per-
petual and imperishable crowns; unto which
may we all attain, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and might forever and ever.
Amen.


Homily XL.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


59


HOMILY XL.


Matt. XH. 9, 10.


"And when He was departed tlience, He went into the-ir synagogue: and, behold, a

man which had his hand withered."


Again He heals on a Sabbath day, vindi-
cating what had been done by His disciples.
And the other evangelists indeed say, that He
"set" the man "in the midst," and asked
them, '* If it was lawful to do good on the
Sabbath days.'"

See the tender bowels of the Lord. " He
set him in the midst," that by the sight He
might subdue them; that overcome by the
spectacle they might cast away their wicked-
ness, and out of a kind of shame towards the
man, cease from their savage ways. But
they, ungentle and inhuman, choose rather
to liurt the fame of Christ, than to see this
person made whole: in both ways betraying
their wickedness; by their warring against
Christ, and by their doing so with such con-
tentiousness, as even to treat with despite
His mercies to other men.

And while the other evangelists say. He
asked the question, this one saith, it was
asked of Him. "And they asked Him," so
it stands, " saying. Is it lawful to heal on the
Sabbath days ? that they might accuse Him." ^
And it is likely that both took place. For
being unholy wretches, and well assured that
He would doubtless proceed to the healing,
they hastened to take Him beforehand with
their question, thinking in this way to hinder
Him. And this is why they asked, "Is it
lawful to heal on the Sabbath days?" not for
information, but that " they might accuse
Him." Yet surely the work was enough, if
it were really their wish to accuse Him; but
they desired to find a handle in His words too,
preparing for themselves beforehand an abun-
dance of arguments.

liut He in His lovt towards man doth this
also: He answers them, te:iching His own
meekness, and turning it all back upon them;
and i)oints out their inhumanity. And He
" setteth '' the man " in the midst;" not in
fenr of them, but endeavoring to profit them,
and move them to pity.

But when not even so did He prevail with
them, then was He grieved, it is said, and


> Sre Mark iii. 3, 4, and l.uke vi. 8, 9.


I Mutt.


wroth with them for the hardness of their
heart, and He saith,

" What man is there among you that shall
have one sheep, and if this fall into a pit on
the Sabbath days, will he not lay hold of it,
and lift it out? How much then is a man
better than a sheep ?3 Wherefore it is lawful
to do well' on the Sabbath days." =

Thus, lest they have ground of obstinacy,
and of accusing him again of transgression,
He convicts them by this example. And do
thou mark, I pray thee, how variously and
suitably in each case. He introduces His
pleas for the breaking of the sabbath. Thus,
first, in the case of the blind man,' He doth
not so much as defend Himself to them,
when He made the clay: and yet then also
were they blaming Him; but the manner of
the creation was enough to indicate the Lord
and Owner 7 of the law. Next, in the case of
the paralytic, when he carried his bed, and
they were finding fault,* He defends Him-
self, now as God, and now as man; as man,
when He saith, " If a man on the Sabbath
day receive circumcision, that the law should
not be broken;" (and He said not " that a
man should be profited "); " are ye angry at
me, because I have made a man every whit
whole on the Sabbath day ? " ' As God again,
when He saith, " My Father worketh hither-
to, and I work."'"

But when blamed for His disciples, He
said, " Have ye not read what David did,
when he was an hungereil, himself and they
tiiat were with him, how he entered into the
house of God, and did eat the show-bread ? ""
He brings forward tiie priests also.

And here again; "Is it lawful to do good
on the Sabbath days, or to do evil ? '-' Which
of you shall have one sheep?" For He
knew their love ol wealth, that they were all


1 [R. v., " How much, then, i« a mun uf more viiltic (hua a
thcrp!"]

4 I K. v., "to doK«<Kl."] S Mntl. xii. 1. »Johnix.6.

7 [rnv SfawoTTfv, not twolitlro, as the EoKfiih rendering would
»UKi;e»I. -k.]

" John V. 1), 10.


*> lohn


'" lohn V. 17. " Malt. xii. i, 4.

" [So Murk and l.uke, hut not Matthew.— R.]


26o


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XL.


taken up with it, rather than with love of
mankind. And indeed the other evangelist
saith/ that He also looked about upon them
when asking these questions, that by His
very eye He might win them over; but not
even so did they become better.

And yet here He speaks only; whereas
elsewhere in many cases He heals by laying
on of hands also. But nevertheless none of
these things made them meek; rather, while
the man was healed, they by his health be-
came worse.

For His desire indeed was to cure them
before him, and He tried innumerable ways
of healing, both by what He did in their
presence, and by what He said: but since
their malady after all was incurable, He
proceeded to the work, " Then saith He to
the man, Stretch forth thine hand. And he
stretched it forth, and it was restored whole,
like as the other." ^

2. What then did they ? They go forth, it
is said, and take counsel together to slay
Him. For " the Pharisees," saith the Scrip-
ture, "went out and held a council against
Him, how they might destroy Him."^ They
had received no injury, yet they went about
to slay Him. So great an evil is envy.
For not against strangers only, but even
against our own, is it ever warring. And
Mark saith, they took this counsel with the
Herodians.''

What then doth the gentle and meek One ?
He withdrew, on being aware of it. " But
when Jesus knew their devices, ^ He withdrew
Himself," it is said, " from them " * Where
now are they who say, miracles ought to be
done ? Nay, by these things He signified,
that the uncandid soul is not even thereby
persuaded; and He made it plain that His
disciples too were blamed by them without
cause. This however we should observe,
that they grow fierce especially at the benefits
done to their neighbors; and when they see
any one delivered either from disease or from
wickedness, then is the time for them to find
fault, and become wild beasts. Thus did
they calumniate Him, both when He was
about to save the harlot, and when He was
eating with publicans, and now again, when
they saw the hand restored.

But do thou observe, I pray thee, how He
neither desists from His tender care over the
infirm, and yet allays their envy. "And
great multitudes ^ followed Him, and He

' Mark iii. 5 ; Luke vi. 10. 2 Mat*^ xii. 13.

3 Matt. xii. 14. [R. v., " took counsel," etc.]

4 Mark iii. 6.

4 [" '['heir devices " is borrowed from verse 25, where the Greek
phrase occurs (" their thoughts," A. V.) — R.]

6 >Tatt. xii. 15.

7 [So Chrysostom, with the received text. Comp. R. V. — R.]


healed them all; and He charged them that
were healed, that they should make Him
known to no man. " ® Because, while the mul-
titudes everywhere both admire and follow
Him, they desist not from their wickedness.

Then, lest thou shouldest be confounded
at what is going on, and at their strange
frenzy. He introduces the prophet also, fore-
telling all this. For so great was the accuracy
of the prophets, that they omit not even these
things, but foretell His very journeyings, and
changes of place, and the intent with which
He acted therein; that thou mightest learn,
how they spake all by the Spirit. For if the se-
crets of men cannot by any art be known, much
more were it impossible to learn Christ's
purpose, except the Spirit revealed it.'

What then saith the prophet ? Nay, it is
subjoined: " That it might be fulfilled which
was spoken by Esaias the Prophet, saying,
Behold my servant, whom I have chosen;
my beloved, in whom my soul is well pleased.
I will put my Spirit upon Him, and He shall
show judgment to the Gentiles. He shall
not strive nor cry," neither shall any man hear
His voice in the streets. A bruised reed
shall He not break, and smoking flax shall
He not quench, till He send forth judgment
unto victory. And in His name shall the
Gentiles trust.""

The prophet celebrates His meekness, and
His unspeakable power, and opens to the
Gentiles "a great door and effectual;" he
foretells also the ills that are to overtake the
Jews, and signifies His unanimity with the
Father. For "behold," saith He, " my ser-
vant, whom I have chosen, my beloved, in
whom my soul is well pleased." Now if He
chose Him, not as an adversary doth Christ
sec aside the law, nor as being an enemy of
the lawgiver, but as having the same mind
with Him, and the same objects.

Then proclaiming His meekness, he saith,
"He shall not strive nor cry." For His
desire indeed was to heal in their presence;
but since they thrust Him away, not even
against this did He contend.

And intimating both His might, and their
weakness, he saith, "A bruised reed shall He
not break." For indeed it was easy to break
them all to pieces like a reed, and not a reed
merely, but one already bruised.

"And smoking flax shall He not quench."
Here lie sets forth both their anger that is
kindled, and His might that is able to put


8 Matt. xii. 15, 16,

9 Cf. I Cor. ii. II.
■' Mate. xii. 17

" trust. ^'1


[" To no man," peculiar to Chrysostom.


21 ; see Isa. xlii. i


[R. v., "cry aloud."]

-4. [R. v., " hope '* for


Homily XL.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


261


down their anger, and to quench it with all
ease; whereby His great mildness is signi-
fied.

What then ? Shall these things always be ?
And will He endure them perpetually, form-
ing such frantic plots against Him ? Ear
from it; but when He hath performed His
part, then shall He execute the other pur-
poses also. For this He declared by saying
"Till He send forth judgment unto victory:
and in His name shall the Gentiles trust."
As Paul likewise saith, " Having in a readi-
ness to revenge all disobedience, when your
obedience is fulfilled." '

But what is, "when He sends forth judg-
ment unto victory ? " When He hath fulfilled
all His own part, then, we are told, He will
bring down upon them His vengeance also,
and that a perfect vengeance. Then shall
they suffer His terrors, when His trophy is
gloriously set up, and the ordinances that
proceed from Him have prevailed, and He
hath left them no plea of contradiction, how-
ever shameless. For He is wont to call right-
eousness, "judgment."

But not to this will His dispensation be
confined, to the punishment of unbelievers
only, but He will also win to Himself the
whole world. Wherefore He added, "And
in His name shall the Gentiles trust."

Then, to inform thee that this too is ac-
cording to the purpose of the Father, in the
beginning the prophet had assured us of this
likewise, together with what had gone be-
fore; saying, " My well-beloved, in whom my
soul is well pleased." For of the well-
beloved it is quite evident that He did these
things also according to the mind of the
beloved. =*

3. "Then they brought unto Him one
possessed with a devil, blind and dumb, and
He healed him, insomuch that the bliml ami
duml) both spake and saw."^

0 wickedness of the evil spirit ! he had
barred up both entrances, whereby that per-
son should have believed, as well sight as
hearing; nevertheless, botli did Christ open.

"And all tiie people were amazed, saying.
Is not this the Son of David?* But tlie
Pharisees said. This fellow doth ^ not cast out
devils, but by Beelzebul), the prince of the
devils."*

And yet what great thing iiad been said ?
Nevertheless, not even this did they endure;

• 1 Cor, X. 6. [R. v., *' bcinf( in rrndii.ru to avenge all di»o-
bcdiciicc, whfii ymir nlMclirmc shall l>r fulfilled. "1

■■■0 oyairrjTo? Toi) •{>iAoi'U'>'OK. Scr Is;i. v. I. [ well-l)elc)ved "
answrr.H in ijic former term, rnidrrrd " Iirloved " «1m)VC. — R.]

1 Mult. xii. aa. [" Then w;>s Lroiinlit " f A. V. iind R. V.), hut
the iiihcr form imc urn in the llnmily. R. V. oinit-i " ImiiIi."- R.J

* IK. v., " K this the Soil o( D.ivid?"]

5 [R. v., " ihix ii.an."] ' Mult. xii. jj, ».».


to such a degree, as I have already remarked,
are they ever stung by the good works done
to their neighbors, and nothing grieves them
so much as the salvation of men. And yet
He had actually retired, and had given room
for their passion to subside; but the evil was
again rekindled, because a benefit was again
conferred; and the evil spirit was not so in-
dignant as they. For he indeed departed
from the body, and gave place and fled away,
uttering no sound; but these were endeavor-
ing now to slay, now to defame Him. That
is, their first aim not succeeding, they would
fain hurt His good name.

Such a thing is envy, than which no worse
evil can exist. For the adulterer indeed en-
joys some pleasure, such as it is, and in a
short time accomplishes his proper sin; but
the envious man punishes himself, and takes
vengeance upon himself more than on the
person whom he envies, and never ceases
from his sin, but is continually engaged in
the commission thereof. For as a sow in
mire, and evil spirits in our hurt, so also doth
he delight in his neighbor's ills; and if any-
thing painful take place, then is he refreslied,
and takes breath; accounting the calamities
of others his own joys, and the blessings of
others his own ills; and he considers not
what pleasure may accrue to himself, but
what pain to his neighbor. These men there-
fore were it not meet to stone and beat to
death, like mad dogs, like destroying demons,
like the very furies ?

For as beetles feed on dung, so do these
men on the calamities of others, being a sort
of common foes and enemies of our nature.
And wliereas the rest of mankind pity even a
brute when it is killed, dost thou, on seeing
a man receive benefits, become like a wild
beast, tremble, and turn pale ? Why, what
can be worse than this madness ? Therefore,
you see, whoremongers and publicans were
able to enter into the kingdom, but the en-
vious, being within it, went out: For "the
ciiildren of the kingdom," it is said, "shall
be cast out."' And the former, once freed
from their present wickedness, attained to
tilings wliich they never looked for, wliile
these latter lost even the good things which
they had; and very reasonably. For this
turns a man into a devil, this renders one a
savage demon. Tlius did the first murder
arise; thus was nature forgotten; thus the
earth defiled; thus afterwards did it open its
mouth, to receive yet living, aiul utterly de-
stroy, Datiian, ami Korah, ami .Abirain, and
all that multitude."


7 Malt, viii I J


• Niimh. xvi.


262


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XL.


4. But to declaim against envy, one may
say, is easy; but we ouglit to consider also
how men are to be freed from the disease.
How then are we to be rid of this wickedness ?
If we bear in mind, that as he who hath com-
mitted fornication cannot lawfully enter the
church, so neither he that envies; nay, and
much less the latter than the former. For
as things are, it is accounted even an indif-
ferent thing; wherefore also it is little thought
of; but if its real badness be made evident,
we should easily refrain from it.

Weep then, and groan; lament, and entreat
God. Learn to feel and to repent for it, as
for a grievous sin. And if thou be of this
mind, thou wilt quickly be rid of the disease.

And who knows not, one may say, that
envy is an evil thing? No one indeed is
ignorant of it: yet they have not the same
estimation of this passion as of adultery and
fornication. When, at least, did any one
condemn himself bitterly for having envied ?
when did he entreat God concerning this
pest, that He would be merciful to him ?
No man at any time: but if he shall fast and
give a little money to a poor man, though he
be envious to the thousandth degree, he
counts himself to have done nothing horrid,
held as he is in subjection by the most ac-
cursed passion of all. Whence, for example,
did Cain become such as he was ? Whence
Esau ? Whence the children of Laban ?
Whence the sons of Jacob ? Whence Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram, with their company ?
Whence Miriam ? Whence Aaron ? Whence
the devil himself?

Herewith consider this also; that thou in-
jurest not him whom thou enviest, but into
thyself thou art thrusting the sword. For
wherein did Cain injure Abel? Did he not
even against his own will send him the more
quickly into the kingdom ? but himself he
pierced through with innumerable evils.
Wherein did Esau harm Jacob? Did not
Jacob grow wealthy, and enjoy unnumbered
blessings; while he himself both became an
outcast from his father's house, and wandered
in a strange land, after that plot of his?'
And wherein did Jacob's sons again make
Joseph the worse, and this, though they pro-
ceeded even unto blood ? had not they to
endure famine, and encounter peril to the
utmost, whereas he became king of all
Egypt ? For the more thou enviest, the more
dost thou become a procurer of greater bless-
ing to the object of thine envy. For there is
a God who beholds these things; and when
He sees him injured, that doeth no injury,

' Gen. xxvii. 41.


him He exalts the more, and so makes him
glorious, but thee He punishes.

For if them that exult over their enemies.
He suffer not to go unpunished (" For re-
joice not^-" it is said, "when thine enemies
fall, lest at any time the Lord see it, and it
displease Him '*''); much more such as envy
those who have done no wrong.

Let us then extirpate the many-headed wild
beast. For in truth many are the kinds of
envy. Thus, if he that loves one that is a
friend to him hath no more than the publi-
can,^ where shall he stand who hates him that
doeth him no wrong ? and how shall he escape
hell,'* becoming worse than the heathens?
Wherefore also I do exceedingly grieve, that
we who are commanded to copy the angels,
or rather the Lord of the angels, emulate the
devil. For indeed there is much envy, even
in the church; and more among us, than
among those under authority. Wherefore we
must even discourse unto ourselves.

5. Tell me then, why dost thou envy thy
neighbor? Because thou seest him reaping
honor, and words of good report ? Then
dost thou not bear in mind how much evil
honors bring on the unguarded ? lifting them
up to pride, to vainglory, to arrogance, to
contemptuousness; making them more care-
less ? and besides these evils, they wither also
lightly away. For the most grievous thing
is this, that the evils arising therefrom abide
immortal, but the pleasure at the moment of
its appearing, is flown away. For these
things then dost thou envy ? tell me.

" But he hath great influence with the
Ruler, and leads and drives all things which
way he will, and inflicts pain on them that
offend him, and benefits his flatterers, and
hath much power.'' These are the sayings
of secular persons, and of men that are riveted
to the earth. For the spiritual man nothing
shall be able to hurt.

For what serious harm shall he do to him ?
vote him out of his ofiice ? And what of
that? For if it be justly done, he is even
profited; for nothing so provokes God; as for
one to hold the priest's office unworthily.
But if unjustly, the blame again falls on the
other, not on him; for he who hath suffered
anything unjustly, and borne it nobly, obtains
in this way the greater confidence towards
God.

Let us not then aim at this, how we may
be in places of power, and honor, and
authority, but that we may live in virtue and
self denial. For indeed places of authority
persuade men to do many things which are


2 Prov. xxiv. 17, if


3 Matt. V. 46.


4 [yeevvav.^


Homily XL.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


not approved of God; and great vigor of
soul is needed, in order to use authority
aright. For as he that is deprived thereof,
practises self restraint, whether with or
against his will, so he that enjoys it is in some
such condition, as if any one living with ai
graceful and beautiful damsel were to receive
rules never to look upon lier unchastely.
For authority is that kind of thing. Where-
fore many, even against their will, hath it in-
duced to show insolence; it awakens wrath,
and removes the bridle from the tongue, and
tears off the door of the lips; fanning the
soul as with a wind, and sinking the bark in
the lowest depth of evils. Him then who is
in so great danger dost thou admire, and say-
est thou he is to be envied ? Nay, how great
madness is here ! Consider, at any rate
(besides what we have mentioned), how many
enemies and accusers, and how many flatter-
ers this person hath besieging him. Are
these then, I pray thee, reasons for calling a
man happy ? Nay, who can say so ?

"But the people," you say, "hold high
account of him." And what is this? For
tke people surely is not God, to whom he is to
render account: so that in naming the peo-
ple, thou art speaking of nothing else than of
other breakers, and rocks, and shoals, and
sunken ridges. For to be in favor with the
people, the more it makes a man illustrious,
the greater the dangers, the cares, the de-
spondencies it brings with it. For such an
one has no power at all to take breath or
stand still, having so severe a master. And
why say I, "stand still and take breath"?
Though such an one have never so many
good works, hardly doth he enter into the
kingdom. For nothing is so wont to over-
throw' men, as the honor which comes of the
multitude, making them cowardly, ignoble,
flatterers, hypocrites.

^Vlly, for instance, did the Pharisees say
that Christ was possessed ? Was it not be-
cause they were greedy of the honor of the
multitude ?

And whence did tlie multitude pass the
right judgment on Him ? Was it not because
this disease had no iiold on them ? For noth
ing, nothing so much tends to make men law-
less and foolish, as gaping after the honor of
the multituile. Nothing makes tiiem glori-
ous and immoveable, like despising the same.

Wherefore also great vigor of soul is needed
for him who is to hold out against sucli an
impulse, and so violent a blast, l-'or as when
things are prosperous, he jircfers himself to
all. so when he undergoes tiie contrary, he
would f.-iin i)ury himself alive: and this is to


him both hell, and the kingdom, when he
hath come to be overwhelmed by this passion.
Is all this then, I pray thee, matter of
envyings, and not rather of lamentations and
tears ? Every one surely can see. But thou
doest the same, in envying one in that kind
of credit, as if a person, seeing another bound
and scourged and torn by innumerable wild
beasts, were to envy him his wounds and
stripes. For in fact, as many men as the
multitude comprises, so many bonds also,
so many tyrants hath he: and, what is yet
more grievous, each of these hath a different
mind: and they all judge whatever comes
into their heads concerning him that is a
slave to them, without examining into any-
thing; but whatever is the decision of this or
that person, this they also confirm.

What manner of waves then, what tempest
so grievous as this ? Yea, such a one is both
puffed up in a moment by the pleasure, and
is under water again easily, being ever in
fluctuation, in tranquillity never. Thus, be-
fore the time of the assembly, and of the con-
tests in speaking, he is possessed with anxiety
and fear; but after the assembly he is either
dead with despondency, or rejoices on the
contrary without measure; a worse thing than
sorrow. For that pleasure is not a less evil
than sorrow is plain from the effect it has on
the soul; how light it makes it, and unsteady,
and fluttering.

And this one may see even from those of
former times. When, for instance, was David
to be admired; when he rejoiced, or when
he was in anguish ? When, the people of the
Jews? groaning and calling upon God, or
exulting in the wilderness, and worshiiiiiing
the calf? Wlierefore Solomon too, wlio best
of all men knew what pleasure is, saith, " It
is better to go to the house of mourning,
than to the house of laughter." - Wlierefore
Christ also blesses the one, saying, " Blessed
are they tliat mourn," ^ but the other sort
He bewails, saying, "Woe unto you tliat
laugh, for ye shall weep."-* And very fitly.
For in delight the soul is more relaxed and
effeminate, but in mourning it is braceil up.
and grows sober, and is ilelivereil from the
whole swarm of passions, and becomes higlier
and stronger.

Knowing thcMi all these things, let us slum
the glory that c<unes from the nniltiuulc, and
the jileasure that springs therefrom, that we
may win the real and everlasting glory; unto
which may we all attain, by the grace and
love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to whom be glory and migiu, lorever and
ever. Amen.


3 KitIc*. vii. a.


1 Nf«tt. V. 4.


4 I.iilcc vi. J>.


264


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLI.


HOMILY XLI.

Matt. XII. 25, 26.

'And Jesus knew their thoughts, and said unto them, Every kingdom divided against
itself shall be brought to desolation; and every city or house divided against itself,
shall not stand: and if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how shall
then his kingdom stand ? "


Even before now they had accused Him of
this, that " by Beelzebub He casteth out the
devils." ' But wnereas then He did not re-
buke them, allowing them both to know His
power by His more numerous miracles, and
by His teaching to learn His majesty: now,
since they continued saying the same. He
proceeds also to rebuke them, showing His
Godhead by this first, that He made their
secrets public; and secondly, by the very act
of casting out the devils with ease.

And indeed the accusation too was very
shameless. Because, as I have said, envy
seeks not what to say, but only that it may
say somewhat. Yet for all that, not even so
did Christ despise them, but defends Him-
self with the forbearance proper to Him,
teaching us to be meek to our enemies; and
though they say such things, as we are neither
conscious of, nor have they any the least
probability, not to be disturbed, nor troubled,
but with all long suffering to render them an
account. This then He did most especially
on that very occasion, affording the strongest
proof, that the things were false that were
said by them. For neither was it a demo-
niac's part to exhibit so much meekness; it
was not a demoniac's part to know men's
secrets.

For, in truth, both because of the exceed-
ing impudence of such a suspicion, and be-
cause of the fear of tlie multitude, they durst
not publicly make these charges, but were
turning them in their mind. But He, to show
them that He knew all that likewise, doth not
set down the accusation, nor doth He expose
tlieir wickedness; but the refutation He adds,
leaving it to the conscience of them that bad
said it to convict them. For on one thing
only was He bent, to do good to them that
were sinning, not to expose them.

Yet surely, if He had been minded to ex-
tend his speech in length, and to make them
ridiculous, and withal to have exacted of
them also the most extreme penalty, there


I Matt. ix. 34. [" Demons," and so throughout.— R.]


was nothing to hinder Him. Nevertheless
He put aside all these things, and looked
to one object only, not to render them more
contentious, but more candid, and so to dis-
pose them better toward amendment.

How then doth He plead with them ? Not
by allegation out of the Scriptures (for they
would not so much as attend, but were sure
rather to distort their meaning), but by the
events of ordinary life. For "every king-
dom,'' saith He, "divided against itself shall
not stand: and a city and a house, if it be
divided, is soon dissolved." ^

For the wars from without are not so ruin-
ous as the civil ones. Yea, and this is tlie
case in bodies too; it is the case even in all
things; but for this time He takes His illus-
tration from those that are more publicly
known.

And yet, what is there more powerful on
earth than a kingdom ? Nothing, but never-
theless it perishes if in dissension. And if in
that case one throw the blame on the great
burden of the affairs thereof, as breaking down
by its own weight; what wouldest thou say of
a city ? and what of a house ? Thus, whether
it be a small thing, or a great, if at dissension
with itself, it perishes. If then I, having a
devil, do by him cast out tlie devils, there is
dissension and fighting among devils, and
they take their stand one against another.
But if they stand one against another, their
strength is wasted and destroyed. " For if
Satan cast out Satan " (and He said not " the
devils,'' implying their great unanimity one
with another), "he is then divided against
himself; '' so He speaks. But if he be
divided, he is become weaker, and is ruined;
and if he be ruined, how can he cast out an-
other ?

Seest thou how great the absurdity of the
accusation, how great the folly, the incon-
sistency ? Since it is not for the same persons
to say first, that He stands, and casts out
devils, and then to say, that He stands by

- [Comp. verse 25.]


Homily XLI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


26^


that, which it was likely would be the cause
of His undoing.

2. This then being the first refutation, the
next after it is that which relates to the dis-
ciples. For not always in one way only, but
also in a second and third, He solves their
objections, being minded most abundantly to
silence their shamelessness. Which sort of:
thing He did also with respect to the Sabbath,
bringing forward David, the priests, the testi-
mony that saith, " I will have mercy, and
not sacrifice," the cause of the Sabbath, for
which it was ordained; "for the Sabbath,"
saith He," was for man." ' This then He doth
in the present case also: where after the first
He proceeds to a second refutation, plainer
than the former. j

" For if I," saith He, " by Belezebub cast j
out devils, by whom do your sins cast them. |
out?"= _ '

See here too His gentleness. For He said
not, "my disciples," nor, "the apostles,"
but "your sons;'' to the end that if indeed
they were minded to return to the same
nobleness ^ with them, they might derive hence
a powerful spring that way; but if they were
uncandid, and continued in the same course,
they might not thenceforth be able to allege
any plea, though ever so shameless.

But what He saith is like this, " By whom
do the apostles cast them out ? " For in fact
they were doing so already, because they had
received authority from Him, and these men
brought no charge against them; their quarrel
not being with the acts, but with the person
only. As then it was His will to show that
their sayings arose only from their envy
against Him, He brings forward the apostles;
thus: If I so cast them out, much more those,
who have received their authority from me.
Nevertheless, no such thing have ye said to
them. How then bring ye these charges
against me, the author of their doings, while
acquitting them of the accusations? This,
however, will not free you from your punish-
ment, rather it will contlemn you the more.
Therefore also He added, " They shall be
your judges." For when persons from
among you, and having been practised in
tliese tilings, both believe me and obey, it is
most clear that they will also c(jndemn those
who arc against mc l)Oth in i]cxi\ and word.

" ]Uit if I cast out devils by the Spirit of
(jod, then the Kingdom of (lod is come unto

•'4


you.


What means "the Kingdom".''


My


coming.


See liow again He conciliates and


• Spc Matt. xii. 1, s. 7. nnd Mark ii. 17. » Matt. xii. 37.

3 tiiytftiav, "hereditary k<x><I feeling." [Comp. Acts x%'ii. 11.]

4 .M.iu. xii. j'i. [K. \'., '■ upon you. ']


soothes them, and draws them to the knowl-
edge of Himself, and signifies that they are
warring with their own good, and contentious
against their own salvation. " For whereas
ye ought to rejoice," saith He, " and leap
for joy, that One is come bestowing those
great and unutterable blessings, hymned of
old by the prophets, and that the time ol
your prosperity is at hand; ye do the con-
trary; so far from receiving the blessings,
you do even speak ill of them, and frame
accusations that have no real being."

Now Matthew indeed saith, "If I by the
Spirit of God cast out "; but Luke, " If I by
the finger of God cast out the devils: " = im-
plying that to cast out devils is a work of tiie
greatest power, and not of any ordinary grace.
And He means indeed that from these things
they should infer and say. If this be so, then
the Son of God is come. This, however, He
saith not, but in a reserved way, and so as
not to be galling to them. He darkly intimates
it by saying, " Then the kingdom of God is
come unto you."

Seest thou exceeding wisdom ? By the
very things which they were blaming, He
showed His presence shining fortli.

Then, to conciliate them, He said not sim-
ply, " The Kingdom is come," but, "unto
you,"* as though He had said, To you the
good things are come; wherefore then feel
displeased at your proper blessings ? why war
against your own salvation ? This is that
time, which the prophets long ago foretold:
this, the sign of tliat advent which was cele-
brated by them, even these things being
wrought by divine power. For the fact in-
deed, that they are wrought, yourselves know;
but that they are wrougiit liy divine power,
the deeds themselves cry out. Yea, nm\ it is
impossible that Satan should be stronger now;
rather he must of absolute necessity be weak.
But it cannot be, that he who is weak should,
as though he were strong, cast out the strong
devil.

Now thus speaking He signified the jiower
of charity, and the weakness of separation
and contentiousness. Wherefore He was
Himself also continually charging His dis-
ciples, on every occasion, concerning charity,
and teaching them that tlie devil, tu subvert
it, leaves notiiing undone.

3. Having then uttered His second refuta-
tion, He adds also a third, thus saying:

" How can one enter into the strong man's

; liouse, and spoil his gooils, e.\cept lie first

'l)iiul the strong man, and then spoil his

goods ? '' 1


S I.ukc xi. -JO.

7 Matt. xii. 3.). [I'hr R. V nn«'
iiiK III the liLst cluiiHr. — K.]


* [" upon voii," »ee I' • I 1
iml A. V. foll.iw u ilill.rriit


read-


266


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLI.


For that Satan cannot possibly cast out
Satan is evident from what hath been said;
but that neither in any other way is it possi-
ble to cast him out, except one first get the
better of him, this too is acknowledged by
all.

What then is established hereby ? The
former statement, with more abundant evi-
dence. " Why, I am so far," saith He,
" from using the devil as an ally, that I make
war upon him, and bind him; and an infalli-
ble proof thereof is the plundering of his
goods." See how the contrary is proved, of
what they were attempting to establish. For
whereas they wished to show, that not by His
own power doth He cast out devils. He shows
that not only the devils, but even their very
chief leader is held by Him bound with all
authority; and that over him, before them,
did He prevail by His own power. And this
is evident from the things that are done. For
if he be the prince, and they subjects, how,
except he were worsted, and made to bow
down, could they have been spoiled ?

And here His saying seems to me to be a
prophecy likewise. For not only, I suppose,
are the evil spirits the goods of the devil,
but also the men that are doing his works.
Therefore to declare that He doth not only
cast out devils, but also will drive away all
error from the world, and will put down his
sorceries, and make all his arts useless. He
said these things.

And He said not, He will take away, but
"He will spoil,'' to express what is done
with authority. But He calls him " strong,"
not because he is so by nature, God forbid,
but declaring his former tyranny, which arose
from our remissness.

4. " He that is not with me is against me,
and he that gathereth not with me scattereth
abroad.'" '

Behold also a fourth refutation. For what
is my desire ? saith He. To bring men to
God, to teach virtue, to proclaim the king-
dom. What, that of the devil, and the evil
spirits ? The contrary to these. How then
should he that gathers not with me, nor is at
all with me, be likely to co-operate with me ?
And why do I say co-operate? Nay, on the
contrary, his desire is rather to scatter abroad
my goods. He then who is so far from co-
operating that he even scatters abroad, how
should he have exhited such unanimity with
me, as with me to cast out the devils ?

Now it is a natural surmise that He said
this not of the devil only, but Himself also of
Himself, as being for His part against the


I Matt. xii. 30.


devil, and scattering abroad his goods. And
how, one may say, is he that is not with me
against me ? By this very fact, of his not
gathering. But if this be true, much more
he that is against him. For if he that doth
not co-operate is an enemy, much more he
that wages war.

But all these things He saith, to indicate
His enmity against the devil, how great and
unspeakable it is. For tell me, if thou must
go to war with any one, he that is not willing
to fight on thy side, by this very fact is he
not against thee ? And if elsewhere He
saith, " He that is not against you is for
you," ^ it is not contrary to this. For here
He signified one actually against them, but
there He points to one who in part is on their
side: " For they cast out devils," it is said
" in Thy name." -

But to me He seems here to be hinting also
at the Jews, setting them on the devil's side.
For they too were against Him, and were
scattering what He gathered. As to the fact
that He was hinting at them also. He de-
clared it by speaking thus,

" Therefore I say unto you, that all man-
ner of sin and blasohemv shall be forgiven
unto men." *

5. Thus having defended Himself, and
refuted their objection, and proved the vanity
of their shameless dealings, He proceeds to
alarm them. For this too is no small part of
advice and correction, not only to plead and
persuade, but to threaten also; which He
doth in many passages, when making laws
and giving counsel.

And though the saying seem to have much
obscurity, yet if we attend, its solution will
prove easy.

First then it were well to listen to the very
words: "All manner of sin and blasphemy
shall be forgiven unto men; but th2 blas-
phemy of the Holy Ghost shall not be for-
given unto them. And whosoever speaketh a
word against the Son of Man, it shall be
forgiven him; but whosoever speaketh against
the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this world, neither in the world to
come." 5

What now is it that He affirms ? Many
things have ye spoken against me; that I am
a deceiver, an adversary of God. These
things I forgive you on your repentance, and
exact no penalty of you; but blasphemy
against the Spirit shall not be forgiven, no,


2 Mark ix. 40; Luke ix. 50. [In Mark " us " is better sup-
ported.—R.]

3 Mark ix. 38 ; I/uke ix. 49.

4 Matt. xii. 31. [R. v., "every sin," etc.]

5 Matt. xii. 31, 32. [The Greek text is almost identical witti
that followed in the R. V.— R.]


1


Homily XLI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


267


not to those who repent. And how can this
be right ? For even this was forgiven upon
repentance. Many at least of those who said
these words believed afterward, and all was
forgiven them. What is it then that He
saith ? That this sin is above all things un-
paraonable. Why so? Because Himself
indeed they knew not, who He might be, but
of the Spirit they received ample experience.
For the prophets also by the Spirit said what-
ever they said; and indeed all in the Old
Testament had a very high notion of Him.

What He saith, then, is this: Be it so: ye
are offended at me, because of the flesh with
which I am encompassed: can ye say of the
Spirit also. We know it not ? And therefore
is your blasphemy unpardonable, and both
here and hereafter shall ye suffer punishment.
For many indeed have been punished here
only (as he who had committed fornica-
tion,' as they who partook unworthily of the
mysteries,' amongst the Corinthians); but
ye, both here and hereafter.

Now as to your blasphemies against me,
before the cross, I forgive them: and the
daring crime too of the cross itself; neither
shall ye be condemned for your unbelief
alone. (For neither had they, that believed
before the cross, perfect faith. And on
many occasions He even charges them to
make Him known to no man before the Pas-
sion; and on the cross He said that this sin
was forgiven them.) But as to your words
touching the Spirit, they will have no excuse.
For in proof that He is speaking of what was
said of Him before the crucifixion, He added,
" Whosoever shall speak a word against the
Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him; but
whosoever shall speak against the Holy
Ghost," there is no more forgiveness.
Wherefore? Because this is known to you;
and the truths are notorious which you harden
yourselves against. For though ye say that
ye know not me; yet of this surely ye are
not ignorant, that to cast out devils, and to
do cures, is a work of the Holy Ghost. It is
not then I only whom ye are insulting, but
the Holy Ghost also. Wherefore your
punisiiment can be averted by no prayers,
neither here nor there.

For so of men, some are punished both
here, and there, some here only, some there
only, others neither here nor there. Here
and there, as these very men (for both here
did they pay a jienalty, when they suffered
those incurable ills at the taking of their
city, and there shall tliey undergo a very
grievous one), as the inhabitants of Sodom;

» See I Cor. v. and vi.


j as many others. There only, as the rich
1 man who endured the flames,- and ha.l not
j at his command so much as a drop of water.
Here, as he that had committed fornication
amongst the Corinthians. Neither here nor
there, as the apostles, as the prophets, as
the blessed Job; for their sufferings were not
surely in the way of punishment, but as con-
tests and wrestlings.

Let us labor, therefore, to be of the same
jpart with these: or if not with these, at least
with them that wash away their sins here.
For fearful indeed is that other judgment,
and inexorable the vengeance, and incurable
the punishment.

6. But if thou desire not to be punished
even here, pass judgment on thyself, exact
thine own penalty. Listen to Paul, when he
saith, " If we would judge ourselves, we
should not be judged." ^ If thou do this,
proceeding in order thou shalt even arrive at
a crown.

But how are we to exact our own penalty "^
one may ask. Lament, groan bitterly,
humble, afflict thyself, call to remembrance
thy sins in their particulars. This thing is no
small torture to a man's soul. If any man
hath been in a state of contrition, he knows
that the soul is punished by this more than
anything. If any hath been living in re-
membrance of sins, he knows the anguish
thence arising. Therefore doth God appoint
righteousness as a reward for such repent-
ance, saying, " Be thou first to tell thy sins,
that thou mayest be justified.''* For it is not,
it is not indeed, a small step towards amend-
ment, to lay together all our sins, and to be
continually revolving and reckoning them up
with their particulars. For he that is doing
this will be so heart-broken, as not to think
himself worthy so much as to live; and he
that thinks thus, will be tenderer than any
wax. For tell me not of acts of fornication
only, nor of adulteries, nor of these tilings
that are manifest, and acknowledged amongst
all men: but lay together also thy secret
crafts, and thy false accusations, and thine
evil speakings, and thy vain gloryings, and
thine envy, and all such things. For
neither will these biing a trilling punisii-
ment. For the reviler too shall fall into hell;
and the drunkard hath no part in the king-
dom; and he that lovest not his neighbor so
otieiuls God, as to find no help even in his
own martyrdom; and he th.it neglects his
own hath denied the faith, and he who over-
looks the poor is sent into the fire.

^— ^^-^—

^ airari)Yai'ii,'o^cro<, " wi(.4 broiling;."
I 1 I C'lir. xi. ti. [The iircek text i)f 1 Cur. x\. 31 i* (lixhtly
modifiril here — K.]
4 Ki. xliii. a6[LXX.].


268


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLII,


Account not then these things to be little,
but put all together, and write them as in a
book. For if thou write them down, God
blots them out; even as on the other hand, if
thou omit writing them, God both inscribes
them, and exacts their penalty. It were then
far better for them to be written by us, and
blotted out above, than on the contrary, when
we have forgotten them, for God to bring
them before our eyes in that day.

Therefore that this may not be so, let us
reckon up all with strictness, and we shall
find ourselves answerable for much. For
who is clear from covetousness ? Nay, tell
me not of the quantity, but since even in a
small amount we shall pay the same penalty,
consider this and repent. Who is rid of all
insolence? Yet this casts into hell. Who
hath not secretly spoken evil of his neighbor?
Yet this deprives one of the Kingdom. ^
Who hath not been self-willed ? Yet this
man is more unclean than all. Who hath not
looked with unchaste eyes ? Yet this is a
complete adulterer. Who hath not been
" angry with his brother without a cause '* ?
Yet such an one is " in danger of the
council." Who hath not sworn? Yet this
thing is of the evil one. Who hath not for-
sworn himself? but this man is something

I [This clause is wanting in three mss. — R.]


more than of the evil one. Who hath not
served mammon ? but this man is fallen away
from the genuine service of Christ.

I have also other things greater than these
to mention: but even these are enough, and
able, if a man be not made of stone, nor
utterly past feeling, to bring him to com-
punction. For if each one of them casts into
hell, what will they not bring to pass when all
are met together ?

How then can one be saved ? it may be
asked. By application of the countervailing
remedies: alms, prayers, compunction, re-
pentance, humility, a contrite heart, con-
tempt of possessions. For God hath marked
out for us innumerable ways of salvation, if
we be willing to attend. Let us then attend,
and let us every way cleanse out our wounds,
showing mercy, remitting our anger against
them that have displeased us, giving thanks
for all things to God, fasting acccording to
our power, praying sincerely, " making unto
ourselves friends of the mammon of unrighte-
ousness." '' For so sliall we be able to obtain
pardon for our offenses, and to win the
promised good things; whereof may we all be
counted worthy, by the grace and love toward
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory and might forever and ever. Amen.


2 I.tike xvi. 9.
out of."]


[R. v., " by means of," with margin, " Greek,


HOMILY XLII.


Matt. XII. 33


Either make the tree good, and his fruit good, or else make the tree corrupt, and his
fruit corrupt; for the tree is known by his fruit."


Again in another way He shames them, and
is not content with His former refutations.
But this He doth, not freeing Himself from
accusations, (for what went before was quite
enough), but as wishing to amend them.

Now His meaning is hke this: none of you
hath either found fault about the persons
healed, as not being healed; nor hath said,
that it is an evil thing to deliver one from a
devil. For though they had been ever so
shameless, they could not have said this.

Since therefore they brought no charge
against the works, but were defaming the


Doer of them, He signifies that this accusa-
tion is against both the common modes of
reasoning, and the congruity of the circum-
stances. A thing of aggravated shamelessness,
not only to interpret maliciously, but also to
make up such charges as are contrary to
men's common notions.

And see how free He is from contentious-
ness. For He said not, " Make the tree
good, forasmuch as the fruit also is good;"
but, most entirely stopping their mouths,
and exhibiting His own considerateness, and
their insolence. He saith. Even if ye are


Homily XLII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


269


minded to find fault with my works, I forbid
it not at all, only bring not inconsistent and
contradictory charges. For thus were they
sure to be most clearly detected, persisting
against what was too palpable. Wherefore
to no purpose is your maliciousness, saith He,
and your self-contradictory statements. Be-
cause in truth the distinction of the tree is
shown by the fruit, not the fruit by the tree;
Init ye do the contrary. For what if the tree
be the origin of the fruit; yet it is the fruit
that makes the tree to be known. And it
were consistent, either in blaming us to find
fault with our works too, or praismg these, to
set us who do them free from these charges.
But now ye do the contrary; for having no
fault to find with the works, which is the
fruit, ye pass the opposite judgment upon the
tree, calling me a demoniac; which is utter
insanity.

Yea, and what He had said before,' this
He establishes now also; that a good tree
cannot bring forth evil fruit, nor again can
the converse be. So that their charges were
against all consistency and nature.

Then since He is arguing not for Himself,
but for the Spirit, He hath dealt out His
reproof even as a torrent, saying, " O gener-
ation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak
good things ?'' -

Now this is at once to accuse, and to give
demonstration of His own sayings from their
case. For behold, saith He, ye being evil
trees, cannot bring forth good fruit. I do
not then marvel at your talking thus: for ye
were both ill nurtured, being of wicked an-
cestors, and ye have acquired a bad mind.

And see how carefully, and without any
hold for exception. He hath expressed His
accusations: in that He said not, *' How can
ye speak good things, being a generation of
vipers ? (for this latter is nothing to the for-
mer): but, ** How can ye, being evil, speak
good tilings ? "

But He called them "broods of vipers,"
because they prided themselves on their fore-
fathers. To signify therefore that they had
no advantage thereby. He botii casts them
out from their relationship to Abraham, and
assigns them forefathers of kindred disposi-
tion, having stripped them of that ground of
illustriousness.

" For out of the at)undanceof the heart the
mouth speaketh.'" Here again He indicates
His flodhead, whicli knew their secrets: and
tiiat not for wor<ls only, l)ut also for wicked
thouglits, they shall suffer punishment; and
that He knows it all, as (jod. And He saitli.


' Mutt. vii. ifi-i8.


' Malt. xii. 34.


that it is possible even for men to know these
things; for this is a natural consequence,
that when wickedness is overflowing within,
its words should be poured forth through the
lips. So that when thou hearest a man speak
wicked words, do not suppose only so much
wickedness to be in him as the words dis-
play, but conjecture the fountain to be much

' more abundant; for that which is spoken out-

' wardly, is the superabundance of that which
is within.

See how vehemently He reprehends them.
For if what they had said is so evil, and is of

, the very mind of the devil, consider the root

I and well-spring of their words, how far that
must reach. And this is naturally the case;
for while the tongue through shame often
pours not forth all its wickedness at once,
tne heart having no human witness, fearlessly
gives birth to whatever evils it will; for of
God it hath not much regard. ^ Since then

1 men's sayings come to examination, and are
set before all, but the heart is concealed;

I tnerefore the evils of the former grow less,
while those of the latter increase. But when

I that within is multiplied, all that hath been
awhile hidden comes forth with a violent
gushing. And as persons vomiting strive at
first to keep down the humors that force their
way out, but, when they are overcome, cast
forth much abomination; so do they that
devise evil things, and speak ill of their
neighbors.

"A good man out of his good treasure,"
saith He, " brmgeth forth good things, and
an evil man out of his evil treasure bringeth
forth evil things." *

For think not by any means, saith He, that
it is so m respect of wickedness only, for in
goodness also the same occurs: for tiiere too
the virtue within is more than the words with-
out. By wliich He signified, that both tiiey
were to be accounted more wicked than their
words indicated, and Himself more perfe*:tly
good than His sayings declared. And He
calls it "a treasure," indicating its abun-
dance.

Then again He fences them in with great
terror. For think not at all, saith He, that
the thing stops at this, tliat is, at tlie con-
demnation of the multitude; nay. for .ill that
do wickedly in such things shall suffer the
utmost punishment. .\nil He said not,
" y^>" I^-^rtly in order to instruct our whole
race, partly to make His s;iying the less bur-
ilensome.

" But I say unto y(Mi." this is His word,

1 [ov iroAix Xiyoi airrp, " it takes not much account." — R.]
4 Nlutt. xii. 35. [R. v., " 'I"hc youti man . . . the evil man,"
etc.]


270


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLII.


"that every idle word that men shall speak,
they shall give account thereof in the day of
judgment." '

And that is idle, which is not according to
the fact, which is false, which hath in it un-
just accusation; and some say, that which
is vain also, for instance, provoking inordi-
nate laughter, or what is filthy, and immod-
est, and coarse.

"For by thy words thou shalt be justified,
and by thy words thou shalt be condemned."^

Seest thou how far the tribunal is from in-
vidiousness ? how favorable the account
required ? For not upon what another hath
said of thee, but from what thou hast thyself
spoken, will the Judge give His sentence;
which is of all things the very fairest: since
surely with thee it rests, either to speak, or
not to speak.

2. Wherefore not those that are slandered,
but the slanderers, have need to be anxious
and to tremble. For the former are not con-
strained to answer for themselves touching
the evil things which are said of them, but
the latter will, for the evil they have spoken;
and over these impends the whole danger.
So that the persons censured should be with-
out anxiety, not being to give account of the
evil that others have said; but the censurers
have cause to be in anxiety, and to trem.ble,
as being themselves to be dragged before the
judgment-seat in that behalf. For this is
indeed a diabolical snare, and a sin having in
it no pleasure, but harm only. Yea, and such
an one is laying up an evil treasure in his
soul. And if he that hath an evil humor in
him doth himself first reap the fruits of the
malady, much more he that is treasuring up
in himself what is more bitter than any bile,
I mean, wickedness, will suffer the utmost
evils, gathering unto himself a grievous dis-
ease. And it is evident from the things that
He vomits out. For if they pain others so
muQh, far more the soul that gives them birth.

Thus the plotter destroys himself first;
just as he that treads ^ on fire burns up him-
self, and he that smites adamant spites him-
self, and he that kicks against the pricks
draws blood from himself. For somewhat of
this kind is he that knows how to suffer
wrong, and to bear it manfully; he is ada-
mant, and the pricks, and fire; but he that
hath used himself to do wrong is feebler than
any clay.

Not therefore to suffer wrong is evil, but to
do it, and not to know how to bear being

I Matt. xii. 36. 2 Matt. xii. 37.

3 narCiv. Bened. from mss. avanToiv , " he that kindles : "
which seems to agree with the tenor of the sentence better. [There
are other various readings : dnroiv^ an-Tioi'. All can be more read-
ily accounted for, if naruiv is accepted as the original form. — R.]


wronged. For instance, how great wrongs did
David endure ! How great wrongs'* did Saul
commit ! Which then was the stronger and
happier ? which the more wretched and miser-
able ? was it not he that did wrong ? And
mark it. Saul had promised, if David should
slay the Philistine, to take him for his son-in-
law, and to give him his daughter with great
favor. He slew the Philistine; the other
broke his engagements, and so far from be-
stowing her, did even go about to slay him.
Wnich then became the more glorious ? Was
not the one choking with despair and the evil
demon, while the other shone brighter than
the sun with his trophies, and his loyalty to
God ? Again, before the choir of the women,
was not the one suffocated with envy, while
the other enduring all in silence, won all men,
and bound them unto himself ? And when
he had even gotten him into his hands, and
spared him, which again was happy ? and
which wretched ? which was the weaker ?
which the more powerful ? Was it not this
man, who did not avenge himself even justly ?
And very naturally. For the one had armed
soldiers, but the other, righteousness, that is
more mighty than ten thousand armies, for
his ally and helper. And for this reason,
though unjustly conspired against, he en-
dured not to slay him even justly. For he
knew by what had taken place before, that
not to do evil, but to suffer evil, this is what
makes men more powerful. So it is with
bodies also, so also with trees.

And what did Jacob? Was he not injured
by Laban, and suffered evil ? Which then was
the stronger? he that had gotten the other
into his hands, and durst not touch him, but
was afraid and trembling; = or he whom we
see without arms and soldiers proving more
terrible to him than innumerable kings ?

But that I may give you another demon-
stration of what I have said, greater than
this, let us again in the instance of David
himself try the reasoning on the opposite
side. For this man^^who being injured was
so strong, afterwards upon committing an in-
jury became on the contrary the weaker party.
At least, when he had wronged Uriah, his
position was changed again, land the weak-
ness passed to the wrong doer, and the might
to the injured; for he being dead laid waste
the other's house. And the one being a
king, and alive, could do nothing, but the
other, being but a soldier, and slain, turned
upside down all that pertained to his adver-
sary.


4 [Oxford version : " things ; ' probably a misprint, the Gi«ek
being the same as before. — R.]

5 Gen. xxxi. 29.


Homily XLII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


2;i


Would ye that in another way also I should
make what I say plainer ? Let us look into
their case, who avenge themselves even
justly. For as to the wrong doers, that they
are the most worthless of all men, warring
against their own soul; this is surely plain to
every one.

But who avenged himself justly, yet kindled
innumerable ills, and pierced himself through
with many calamities and sorrows ? The cap-
tain of David's host. For he both stirred up
a grievous war, and suffered unnumbered
evils; not one whereof would have happened,
had he but known how to command himself."

Let us flee therefore from tliis sin, and
neither in words nor deeds do our neighbors
wrong. For He said not, If thou slander,
and summon a court of justice, but simply, If
thou speak evil, though within thyself, even
so shalt thou suffer the utmost punishment.
Though it be true which thou hast said,
though thou have spoken upon conviction,
even so shall vengeance come upon thee.
For not according to what the other hath
done, but according to what thou hast spoken,
will God pass sentence; " for by thy words
thou shalt be condemned,'' saith He. Art
thou not told that the Pharisee also spake the
truth, and affirmed what was manifest to all
men, without discovering what was hidden?
Nevertheless, he paid the utmost penalty.

But if we ought not to accuse men of things
which are acknowledged, much less of those
which are disputed; nay, for the offender
hath a judge. Do not now, I warn thee,
seize upon the privilege of the Only Begotten.
For Him is the throne of judgment reserved.

3. Wouldest thou however be a judge?
Thou hast a court of jutlgment which hath
great profit, and bears no blame. Make con-
sideration, as judge, to sit down upon thy
conscience, and bring before it all thy trans-
gressions, search out the sins of thy soul, and
exact with strictness the account thereof, and
say, "wherefore didst thou dare to do this
and that?" And if she shun these, and be
searching into other men's matters, say to
her, " Not about these am I judging tiiee, not
for these art thou come here to plead. For
what, if such a one be a wicked man ? Thou,
why didst thou commit tliis and tliat offense ?
.Answer for thyself, not to accuse; look to
thine own matters, do not those of others."
And be thou continually urging her to this
anxious trial. Then, if she have notliing to
say, l)ut shrink back, wear her out with the
scourge, like some restless and unchaste
handmaid. And this tribunal do thou cause

> See 3 Samuel iii. 3J-30, and xx. 9, lo; 1 Kinga ii. 5, 6.


to sit every day, and picture the river of fire,
the venomous worm, the rest of the torments.

And permit her not to be with the devil
any more, nor bear with her shameless say-
ings, " he comes to me, he plots against me,
he tempts me; " but tell her, " If thou wert
not willing, all that would be to no purpose."
And if she say again, " I am entangled with
a body, I am clothed with flesh, I dwell in
che world, I abide on earth;" tell her, "All
these are excuses and pretexts. For such an
one too was encompassed with flesh, and such
another dwelling in the world, and abiding
on earth, is approved; and thou thyself too,
when thou doest well, doest it encompassed
with flesh." And if she be pained at hear-
ing this, take not off thine hand; for she will
not die, if thou smite her, but thou wilt save
her from death. And if she say again,
" Such an one provoked me," tell her, " But
it is in thy power not to be provoked; often
at least thou hast restrained thine anger."
And if she say, " The beauty of such a
woman moved me; " tell her, " Yet wast thou
able to have mastered thyself." Bring for-
ward those that have got the better, bring
forward the first woman, who said, " The
serpent beguiled me,"- and yet was not ac-
quitted of the blame.

And when thou art searching out these
things, let no man be present, let no man
disturb thee; but as the judges sit under cur-
tains to judge, so do thou too, instead of cur-
tains, seek a time and place of quiet. And
when after thy supper thou art risen up, and
art about to lie down, then hold this thy
judgment; this is the time convenient for
thee, and the place, thy bed, and tiiy cham-
ber. This the propliet likewise commanded,
saying, " For the things which ye say in your
hearts, be ye moved to compunction upon
your beds." 3 \^'^^\ for small offenses require
great satisfaction, that unto the great thou
mayest never even approach. If thou dc^this
every day, thou wilt with confidence stand at
that fearful judgment-seat.

In this way Paul became clean; therefore
also he said, " For if we judged ourselves,
we should not be judged."* Thus tlitl Job
cleanse his sons.' For he that offered sacri-
fices for secret sins, much more did lie re-
quire an account of such as were manifest.

4. But we do not so, but altogetlier tlu- con-
trary. For as soon as we are laid down to
rest, we rather think overall our worldh- mat-
ers; and some introduce unclean thoughts,
some usuries, and contracts, and temporal
cares.


'■> (icn. iii. 13.
4 I Cur. xi. 31.


1 P«. iv. 4, Lxx,
S job. i. 5.


2/2


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLIIL


And if we have a daughter, a virgin, we
watch her strictly; but that which is more
precious to us than a daughter, our soul, her
we suffer to play the harlot and defile herself,
introducing to her innumerable wicked
thoughts. And whether it be the love of
covetousness, or that of luxury, or that of
fair persons, or that of wrath, or be it what
you will else that is minded to come in, we
throw open the doors, and attract and invite
it, and help it to defile our soul at its leisure.
And what can be more barbarous than this,
to overlook our soul that is more precious
than all, abused by so many adulterers, and
so long companying with them, even until
they are sated ? which will never be. So it
is, therefore, that when sleep overtakes us,
then only do they depart from her; or rather
not even then, for our dreams and imagina-
tions furnish her with the same images.
Whence also, when day is come, the soul
stored with such images often falls away to
the actual performance of those fancies.

And thou, while into the apple of thine
eve thou sufferest not so much as a grain of
dust to enter, dost thou pass unnoticed thy
soul, gathering to itself a heap of so great
evils? When shall we then be able to clear
out this filth, which we are daily laying up
within us ? when to cut up the thorns ? when
to sow the seed ? Knowest thou not that
henceforth the time of harvest is at hand ?
But we have not yet so much as ploughed our
fields. If then the husbandman should come
and find fault, what shall we say ? and what
answer shall we make ? That no man gave
us the seed ? Nay, this is sown daily,
no man, then, hath cut up the thorns ?
every day we are sharpening the sickle


That

Nay,
But


do the necessary engagements of life distract
thee ? And why hast thou not crucified thy-
self to the world ? For if he that repays that
only, which is given him, is wicked, because
he did not double it; he that hath wasted
even this, what will be said to him? If that
person was bound, and cast out where is
gnashing of teeth, what shall we have to suf-
fer, who, when numberless motives are draw-
ing us toward virtue, shrink back and are un-
willing ?

For what is there, that hath not enough in
it to persuade thee ? Seest thou not the vile-
ness of the world, the uncertainty of life, the
toil, the sweat, for things present ? What ?
is it the case that virtue must be toiled for,
but may vice be had without toil ? If then
both in the one and in the other there is toil,
why didst thou not choose this, which hath
so great profit ?

Or rather, there are some parts of virtue,
which are free even from toil. For what
kind of toil is it, not to calumniate, not to lie,
not to swear, to lay aside our anger against
our neighbor ? Nay, on the contrary, to do
these things is toilsome, and brings much
anxiety.

What plea then shall we have, what excuse,
not doing right even in these matters? For
hereby it is plain, that out of remissness and
sloth the more toilsome duties also altogether
escape us.

All these things let us consider; let us flee
vice, let us choose virtue, that we may attain
both unto the good things that are present,
and unto those that are to come, by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory and might forever
and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XLIII.


Matt. XII. 38, 39.


" Then certain of the Scribes and Pharisees answered Him, saying. Master, we would see a
sign from Thee. But He answered and said,' An evil and adulterous generation
seeketh after a sign, and there shall no sign be given to it, but the sign of the Prophet
Jonas."


Could then anything be more foolish than
these men (not more impious only), who
after so many miracles, as though none had

I [" Unto them " is omitted in the Greek text here, against all
our New Testament codices. — R.]


been wrought, say, " We would see a sign
from Thee?" With what intent then did
they so speak? That they might lay hold
of Him again. For since by His words He
had stopped their mouths, once and twice


Homily XLIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


273


I


and often, and had checked their shameless
tongue, they come to His works again. At
which also the evangelist marvelling again,
said,

" Then certain of the scribes answered
Him, asking a sign,"

"Then," when? When they ought to be
stooping before Him, to admire, to be amazed
and give way, "then" they desist not from
their wickedness.

And see their words too, teeming with flat-
tery and dissimulation. For they thought to
draw Him towards them in that way. And
now they insult, now they flatter Him; now
calling Him a demoniac, now again " Mas-
ter," both out of an evil mind, how contrary
soever the words they speak.

Wherefore also He rebukes them severely.
And when they were questioning Him roughly
and insulting Him, He reasoned with them
gently; when they were flattering, reproach-
fully, and with great severity; implying that
He is superior to either passion, and is
neither at the one time moved to anger, nor
at the other softened by flattery. And see
His reproach, that it is not merely hard
words, but contains a demonstration of their
wickedness. For what saith He ?

"An evil and adulterous generation seeketh
after a sign." Now what He saith is to this
effect: What marvel if ye behave so to me,
who have been hitherto unknown to you,
when even to the Father, of whom ye have
had so much experience, ye have done the
very same ? forsaking Him, ye have run unto
the devils, drawing to yourselves wicked
lovers. With this Ezekiel too was continu-
ally upbraiding them.'

IS^ow by these sayings He signified Himself
to be of one accord with His Father, and
them to be doing nothing new; He was also
unfolding their secrets, how with hypocrisy
and as enemies they were making their de-
mand. Therefore He called them "an evil
generation," because they have been always
ungrateful towards their benefactors; because
upon favors they become worse, whicli be-
longs to e.xtreme wickedness.

And He called it " adulterous,'* declaring
both their former and their present unbelief;
wiiereby He implies Himself again to be
equal to the Father, if at least the not believ-
ing Him makes it "adulterous."

2. Then, after His reproach, what saitii
He? "There shall no sign be given to it,
but the sign of Jonas the projihet." Now is
He striking the first nf)te of tiic doctrine of
His resurrection, and confirming it by the
ty pe^


■ See Kzek. xvi. 23,
18


etc.


Sign


given


What then? one may say; was no

it ? None was given to it on asking.
For not to bring in them did He work His
signs (for He knew them to be hardened),
but in order to amend others. Either then
this may be said, or that they were not to re-
ceive such a sign as that was. For a sign
did befall them, when by their own punish-
ment they learnt His power. Here then He
speaks as threatening, and with this very
meaning obscurely conveyed: as if He said,
innumerable benefits have I showed forth,
none of these hath drawn you to me, neither
were ye willing to adore my power. Ye
shall know therefore my might b)' the con-
trary tokens, when ye shall see your city cast
down to the ground, the walls also disman-
tled, the temple become a ruin; when ye shall
be cast out both from your former citizenship
and freedom, and shall again go about every-
where, houseless and in exile. (For all these
things came to pass after the cross.) These
things therefore shall be to you for great
signs. And indeed it is an exceeding great
sign, that their ills remain unchanged; that
altJiough ten thousand have attempted it, no
one hath been able to reverse^ the judgment
once gone forth against them.

All this however He saith not, but leaves it
to after time to make it clear to them, but for
the present He is making trial of ^ the doc-
trine of His resurrection, which they were to
come to know by the things which they
should afterwards suffer.

" For as Jonas," saith He, " was three days
and three nights in the whale's belly, so shall
the Son of ^Ian be three days and three nights
in the heart of the earth." ■• Thus, He said
not indeed openly that He should rise again,
since tliey would have even laughed Him to
scorn, but He intimated it in such manner,
that they might believe Him to have fore-
known it. For as to their being aware of it,
they say to Pilate, "That deceiver said,"
these are tlieir words, " wliile He was yet
alive, After three clays I will rise again; "'
antl yet we know His ilisciples were ignorant
of this; even as they had been beforehand
more void of understanding than these:
wherefore also tliese became self-condemned.

But see luiw exactly He expresses it, even
though in a dark saying. For He saiil not.
"In the earth," but. "In the iieart of the
eartii; " that He might designate llis very
sepulchre, and that no one might suspect a
mere semblance.* And for this intent too


^ SiOpOitaai, 1 yv^va^ci. 4 Nfalt. xxii. 40.

^ Mntt. xxvii. 61. [The cilaiiKn i* not exmt ; ut ihc cUwc a
xliffrrcnt vrrt>, in a <li(Icrrnt tnur, i» (jivrii — K. j

'• 66tcitviy : »<> .^oKijTai wiis ilic name of those heretics who de-
nied (he rculity of uiir I,(ird'« incurnutiun und death.


2/4


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLIII.


did He allow three days, that the fact of His
death might be believed. For not by the
cross only doth He make it certain, and by
the sight of all men, but also by the time of
those days. For to the resurrection indeed
all succeeding time was to bear witness; but
the cross, unless it had at the time many
signs bearing witness to it, would have been
disbelieved; and with this disbelief \^ould
have gone utter disbelief of the resurrection
also. Therefore He calls it also a sign. But
had He not been crucified, the sign would
not have been given. For this cause too He
brings forward the type, that the truth may
be believed. For tell me, was Jonah in the
whale's belly a mere appearance ? Nay, thou
canst not say so. Therefore neither was
Christ in the heart of the earth such. For
surely the type is not in truth, and the truth
in mere appearance. For this cause we every
where show forth His death, both in the
mysteries, and in baptism, and in all the rest.
Therefore Paul also cries with a clear voice,
" God forbid that I should glory, save in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ." '

Whence it is clear, that they who are
diseased in Marcion's way are children of the
devil, blotting out these truths, to avoid the
annulling whereof Christ did so many things,
while to have them annulled the devil took
such manifold pains: I mean. His cross and
His passion.

3. Therefore He said elsewhere also,
" Destroy this temple, and in three days I
will raise it up: " ^ and, " The days will come
when the Bridegroom shall be taken away
from them: "3 and here, "There shall no
sign be given it, but the sign of Jonas the
prophet: " declaring both that He should die ■*
for them, and that they would profit nothing;
for this He afterwards declared. Neverthe-
less, even with this knowledge He died: so
great was His tender care.

For to hinder thy supposing that the result
would be such with the Jews as with the
Ninevites; that they would be converted, and
that as in their case He established the totter-
ing city, and converted the barbarians, so
these too should turn unto Him after His
resurrection; hear how He declares altogether
the contrary. For that they should reap no
good from hence in respect of their own benefit,
but rather suffer incurable ills, this too He
went on to declare by the parable of the evil
spirit.

But for the present He is justifying their
future sufferings, signifying that they would

' Gal. vi. 14. [R. v. " Far be it from me to Rlc^ry." etc.]
2 .Tohn ii. 19. i Matt. ix. 15

4 [weiVfTat, " suffer," as it is rendered below. — R.]


suffer justly. For their calamities and their
desolation He represents by that similitude;
but up to this time He is indicating the jus-
tice of their having to suffer all these things:
which also in the Old Testament was His
wont. Thus when about to destroy Sodom,
He first defended Himself to Abraham, by
showing the desolation and rareness of vir-
tue, when indeed not even ten men were
found in so many cities, who had made it
their rule to live chastely. And to Lot also
in like manner, He first signifies their inhos-
pitality and their unnatural lusts, and then
He brings the fire on them. And with regard
to the deluge again He did the self-same
thing, by His acts excusing Himself to Noah.
And also to Ezekiel^ in like manner, when
He caused him dwelling in Babylon to see
men's evil deeds in Jerusalem. And yet
again to Jeremiah, when He said, "Pray
not," excusing Himself He added, " Seest
thou not what they do ? " ^ And everywhere
He doeth the selfsame thing, as here also.

For what saith He? " The men of Nine-
veh shall rise up,^ and shall condemn this
generation, because they repented at the
preaching of Jonas, and, behold, a greater
than Jonas is here." ^

For he was a servant, but I am the Master;
and he came forth from the whale, but I rose
from death; and he proclaimed destruction,
but I am come preaching the good tidings of
the kingdom. And they indeed believed
without a sign, but I have exhibited many
signs. And they indeed heard nothing more
than those words, but I have given a spring
to every kind of self-denial. And he came
being ministered unto, but I the very Master
and Lord of all am come not threatening, not
demanding an account, but bringing pardon.
And they were barbarians, but these have
conversed with unnumbered prophets. And
of him no man bad foretold, but of me all,
and the facts agreed with their words. And
he indeed, when he was to go forth, ran away
that he might not be ridiculed; but I, know-
ing that I am both to be crucified and
mocked, am come. And while he did not
endure so much as to be reproached for them
that were saved, I underwent even death, and
that the most shameful death, and after this
I sent others again. And he was a strange
sort of person, and an alien, and unknown;
but I a kinsman after the flesh, and of the
same forefathers. And many more topics too
might any one collect, were he to seek dili-
gently for more.

5 Ezek. viii. 5, etc. * Jer. vii. 16, 17.

7 [R. v., "stand up."]

8 Matt. xii. 41. [The citation is not verbally e.xact : some
phrases are omitted, and the order is varied. — R.]


I


Homily XLIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


^75


But He stops not even at this, but adds
also another example, saying,

"And the queen of the south shall rise up
in judgment' with this generation, and shall
condemn them, because slie came from the
uttermost parts ot the earth to hear the wis-
dom of Solomon, and behold a greater than
Solomon is here." -

Tiiis was more than the former. For
Jonah went unto them, but the queen of the
south waited not for Solomon to come to her,
but went herself unto him, although she was
both a woman, and a barbanian, and at so
great a distance, no threat laid upon her, nor
being in fear of death, but simply through the
love of wise words. "But behold even a
greater than Solomon is here." For in that
case the woman came, but here I have come.
And she indeed rose up from the uttermost
parts of the earth, but I go about cities and
villages. And his discourse was of trees and
various kinds of vvood, which could do no
great good to his visitor: but mine, of secret
things, and most awful mysteries. |

4. When therefore He had condemned
them, having proved most amply that they
were sinning inexcusably, and that their dis-
obedience arose from their own perverseness,
not from their Teacher's inability, and when
He had demonstrated this as well by many
other arguments, as also by the Ninevites,
and by the queen: then He speaks also of
the punishment that should overtake them,
darkly indeed, yet He doth speak of it, in- ;
terweaving an intense fear in His narration, j

" For when," saith He, " the unclean spirit
is gone out of the man, he walketh through
dry places, seeking rest; and finding none,
he saith, I will return to my house from
whence I came out; and when he is come, he
findeth it empty, and swept and garnished.
Then goeth he, and taketh with himself seven
other spirits more wicked than himself, and
they enter in and dwell there, and the last
state of that man is worse than the first.
Even so shall it be also unto this generation." ^

liy this He signifies, that not only in the
world to come, but liere too they should suf-
fer most grievously. For since He had said,
" The men of Nineveh shall rise up in judg-
ment, and siiall condemn this generation;"
lest, on account of the post])onement of the
time, they sliould despise and grow more
careless, l)y tliis He brings His terror close
upon them. Wherewith the propliet Hosea
likewise threatening them said, that tliey

" FR. v., " in the judKinent."'] » Matt. xii. 4a.

3 Alatt. xii. 41-4S- [" Kvil " i-tomitted in the trxt • in otlirr re-
spects the citaiion i» in nrinrdiim r with our |ir<sciit Grrrk trxt of
verses 4^-4;. Kvcn "and," which is iiisrrted ubuvc bcfurc
" swept,'' is omitted in some Mss of the Homily. — R.]


should be " even as the prophet that is beside
himself, the man that is carried away by a
spirit;" * that is to say, as the madmen, and
distracted by evil spirits, even the false pro-
phets. For here, by "a prophet tliat is be-
side himself," he means the false projjhet,
such as are the augurs. Much to the same
effect Christ also tells them, that they shall
suffer the utmost evils.

Seest thou how from everything He urges
them to attend to His sayings; from things
present, from things to come; by those who
had approved themselves (the Ninevites, I
mean, and that queen), and by the offending
Tyrians and Sodomites ? This did the pro-
phets likewise, bringing forward the sons of
the Rechabites,5 and the bride that forgetteth
not her proper ornament and her girdle,* and
" the ox that knoweth his owner, and the ass
that remembereth his crib." ' Even so here
too, when He had by a comparison set forth
their perverseness. He speaks afterwards of
their punishment also.

What then can the saying mean ? As the
possessed, saith He, when delivered from
that infirmity, should they be at all remiss,
draw upon themselves their delusion more
grievous than ever: even so is it with you.
For before also ye were possessed by a devil,
when ye were worshipping idols, and were
slaying your sons to the devils, exhibiting
great madness; nevertlieless I forsook you
not, but cast out that devil by the prophets;
and again in my own person I am come, will-
ing to cleanse you more entirely. Since then
you will not attend, but have wrecked your-
selves in greater wickedness (for to kill i)ro-
phets was a crime not nearly so great and
grievous as to slay Him); therefore your suf-
ferings will be more grievous than the former,
those at Babylon, I mean, and in Egypt, and
under the first Antiochus. Because what
things befell them in the time of Vespasian
and Titus, were very far more grievous tiian
those. Wherefore also He said, "There
shall be great tribulation, such as ne%''er was,
neither siiall be."* But not this only tloth
tlie illustration declare, but that they sluniid
be also utterly destitute of all virtue, and
more assailable by the power of the devils,
than at that time. For tlien even although
they sinned, yet were there also among them
sucli as acteil uprigiitly, and God's providence
was present with them, and tlie grace of the
Spirit, tending, correcting, fulfilling all its
part; but now of this guardianship too they
shall be utterly dei)rived; so He tells them;
so tliat there is now both a greater scarcity


4 Hnsea ix. 7, i.xx. 5

* Jcr. ii. 33, rrt)9oSt<rfiiio^. 7


let. XX
Is. i. J.


" Matt. xxiv. 31.


276


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLIII.


of virtue, and a more intense affliction, and a
more tyrannical operation of the devils.

Ye know accordingly even in our genera-
tion, when he who surpassed all in impiety,
I mean Julian, was transported with his fury,
how they ranged themselves with the heathens,
how they courted their party. So that, even
if they seem to be in some small degree
chastened now, the fear of the emperors
makes them quiet; since, if it were not for
that, far worse than the former had been their
daring. For in all their other evil works they
surpass their predecessors; sorceries, magic
arts, impurities, they exhibit in great excess.
And amongst the rest, moreover, strong as is
the curb which holds them down, they have
often made seditions, and risen up against
kings, which has resulted in their being
pierced through with the worst of evils.

Where now are they that seek after signs ?
Let them hear that a considerate mind is
needed, and if this be wanting, signs are of
no profit. See, for instance, how the Nine-
vites without signs believed, while these,
after so many miracles, grew worse, and
made themselves an habitation of innumera-
ble devils, and brought on themselves ten
thousand calamities; and very naturally.
For when a man, being once delivered from
his ills, fails to be corrected, he will suffer far
worse than before. Yea, therefore He said,
"he finds no rest," to indicate, that posi-
tively and of necessity such an one will be
overtaken by the ambush of the devils. Since
surely by these two things he ought to have
been sobered, by his former sufferings, and
by his deliverance; or rather a third thing
also is added, the threat of having still worse
to endure. But yet by none of these were
they made better.

5. All this might be seasonably said, not
of them only, but of us also, when after hav-
ing been enlightened,' and delivered from
our former ills, we again cleave unto the same
wickedness, for more grievous also thence-
forth will be the punishment of our subse-
quent sins. Therefore to the sick of the
palsy also Christ said, "Behold, thou art
made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing
come unto thee;"^ and this to a man who was
thirty-eight years in his infirmity. And what,
one might ask, was he to suffer worse than
this ? Something far worse, and more intol-
erable. For far be it from us, that we should
endure as much as we are capable of endur-
ing. For God is at no loss for inflictions.
For according to the greatness of His mercy,
so also is His wrath.


I Heb. vi. 4.


- John V. 14.


With this He charges Jerusalem also by
Ezekiel. " I saw thee," saith He, " polluted
in blood; and I washed thee, and anointed
thee; and thou hadst renown for thy beauty;
and thou pouredst out thy fornications," saith
He, " on those who dwell near thee," ^ where-
fore also the more grievous are His threaten-
ings to thee when thou sinnest.

But from hence infer not thy punishment
only, but also the boundless longsuffering of
God. How often at least have we put our
hands to the same evil deeds, and yet He
suffers long ! But let us not be sanguine,
but fear; since Pharaoh too, had he been
taught by the first plague, would not have
experienced the later ones; he would not
afterwards have been drowned, his host and
all together.

And this I say, because I know many, who
like Pharaoh are even now saying, "I know
not God," ^ and making those that are in their
power cleave to the clay and to the bricks.
How many, though God bids them assauge
their " threatening," = cannot bear so much
as to rela.x the toil !

' ' But we have no Red Sea now, to pass
through afterwards." But we have a sea of
fire, a sea not like that, either in kind or in
size, but far greater and fiercer, having its
waves of fire, of some strange and horrible
fire. A great abyss is there, of most intoler-
able flame. Since everywhere fire may be
seen roving quickly round, like some savage
wild beast. And if here this sensible and
material fire leaped like a wild beast out of
the furnace, and sprang upon those who were
sitting without,* what will not that other fire
do to such as have fallen into it?

Concerning that day, hear the prophets,
saying, "The day of the Lord is incurable,
full of anger and wrath." ^ For there will be
none to stand by, none to rescue, nowhere
the face of Christ, so mild and calm. But as
those who work in the mines are delivered
over to certain cruel men, and see none of
their friends, but those only that are set over
them; so will it be then also: or rather not
so, but even far more grievous. For here it
is possible to go unto the king, and entreat,
and free the condemned person: but there,
no longer; for He permits it not, but they
continue in the scorching torment,^ and in so
great anguish, as it is not possible for words
to tell. For if, when any are in flames here,
no speech can describe their sharp pangs,
much less theirs, who suffer it in that place:
since here indeed all is over in a brief point


3 Ezek. xvi. 6, 9, 14, 26.

5 Ephes. vi. g.

^ aTTorrjyai't^o/xei'Ot,


4 Exod. V. 2.
6 Dan. iii. 22.


7 Is. xiii. 9.


Homily XLIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


2/7


of time, but in that place there is burning
indeed, but what is burnt is not consumed.

What then shall we do there ? For to my
self also do I say these things.

6. " But if thou," saith one, " who art our
teacher, speakest so of thyself, I care no
more; for what wonder, should I be pun-
ished ? '' Nay, 1 entreat, let no man seek
this consolation; for this is no refreshment at
all. For tell me; was not the devil an incor-
poreal power? Was he not superior to men ?
Yet he fell away. Is there any one who will
derive consolation from being punished along
with him ? By no means. What of all who
were in Egypt? did they not see those also
punished who were in high places, and every
house in mourning ? Were they then hereby
refreshed, and comforted? No surely; and
it is manifest by what they did afterwards, as
men tortured by some kind of fire, rising up
together against the king, and compelling
him to cast out the people of the Hebrews.

Yea, and very unmeaning is this saying, to
suppose that it gives comfort to be punished
with all men, to say, "As all, so I too." For
why should I speak of hell ? Think, I pray
you, of those that are seized with gout, how,
when they are racked by sharp pain, though
you show them ten thousand suffering worse,
they do not so much as take it into their
mind. For the intensity of their anguish
allows not their reason any leisure for think-
ing of others, and so finding consolation.
Let us not then feed ourselves with these cold
hopes. For to receive consolation from the
ills of our neighbors, takes place in ordinary
sufferings; but when the torment is excessive,
and all our inward parts full of tempest, and
the soul is now come to be unable so much as
to know itself, whence shall it derive conso-
lation ? So that all these sayings are an
absurdity, and fables of foolish children.
For this, of which thou speakest, takes place
in dejection, and in moderate dejection, when
we are told, ''the same thing hath befallen
such an one;" but sometimes not even in
dejection: now if in that case it hath no
strength, much less in the anguish and l)ur-
den unspeakable, which " the gnashing of
teeth " indicates.

And I know that I am galling you, and giv-
ing you pain by these words; but what can I
do? For I would fain not speak thus, but be
conscious of virtue both in myself, and in all
of you; but since we are in sins, the more
part of us, who will grant me ability to pain
you indeed, and to penetrate the understand-
ing of tiiem that iiear me ? Then migiit I so be
at rest. But now I fear lest any despise my
sayings, and tlieir punishments l)e<:om(; the


greater for their indifferent way of hearing.
Since, when a master utters a threat, should
one of the fellow-servants hear and make light
of his menace, not without punishment would
he hasten by him, provoked as he is, but
rather it would be aground for increasing his
chastisement. Wherefore I entreat you, let us
pierce our own hearts, when we hear His
sayings regarding hell. For nothing is more
delightful than this discourse, by how much
nothing is more bitter than the reality. But
how delightful to be told of hell ? one may
ask. Because it were so far from delight to
fall into hell, which result, our words that
appear so galling, keep off. And before this
they furnisn another pleasure: in that they
brace up our souls, and make us more rever-
ent, and elevate the mind, and give wings to
the thoughts, and cast out the desires that
so mischievously beset us; and the thing be-
comes a cure.

7. Wherefore, to proceed, together with
the punishment let me speak also of the
shame. For as the Jews shall then be con-
demned by the Ninevites, so we too by many
tliat seem beneath us now.

Let us imagine then how great the mock-
ery, how great the condemnation; let us
imagine, and cast some foundation at length,
some door of repentance.

To myself I say these things, to myself
first I give this advice, and let no one be
angry, as though he were condemned. Let
us enter upon the narrow way. How long
shall it be lu.xury ? how long sloth ? Have
we not had enough of indolence, mirth, pro-
crastination ? Will it not be the same over
again, feasting, and surfeiting, and expense,
and wealth, and acquisitions, and buildings?
And what is the eml ? Death. What is the
end ? Ashes, and dust, and coffins, and
worms.

Let us show forth then a new kind of life.
Let us make earth, heaven; let us hereby
show the Greeks, of how great blessings they
are deprived. For when they behold in us
good conversation, ti^.ey will look upon tlie
very face of the kingdom of Heaven. Yea,
when they see us gentle, pure from wrath,
from evil desire, from envy, from covctous-
ness, rightly fulfilling all our other duties,
they will say, "If the Christians are become
angels here, what will they be after their de-
parture hence ? if where they are strangers
they shine so bright, how great will they be-
come when they shall have won tlicir native
land ! " Thus they too will be reformed, and
tiie word of godliness "will have free
course,"' not less than in the aposlits' times.

■ J 'I'hcM. iii. I.


2 78


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLIV.


For if they, being twelve, converted entire
cities and countries; were we all to become
teachers by our careful conduct, imagine how
high our cause will be exalted. For not
even a dead man raised so powerfully attracts
the Greek, as a person practising self-denial.
At that indeed he will be amazed, but by this
he will be profited. That is done, and is
past away; but this abides, and is constant
culture to his soul.

Let us take heed therefore to ourselves,
that we may gain them also. I say nothing
burdensome. I say not, do not marry. I
say not, forsake cities, and withdraw thyself
from public affairs; but being engaged in
them, show virtue. Yea, and such as are
busy in the midst of cities, I would fain have
more approved than such as have occupied
the mountains. Wherefore ? Because great
is the profit thence arising. "For no man
lighteth a candle, and setteth it under the
bushel." ' Therefore I would that all the
candles were set upon the candlestick, that
the light might wax great.

Let us kindle then His fire; let us cause
them that are sitting in darkness to be de-
livered from their error. And tell me not,
"I have a wife, and children belonging to
me, and am master of a household, and can-
not duly practise all this."


For though


I Matt. V. 15 ; Luke xi. 33.


thou hadst none of these, yet if thou be care-
less, all is lost; though thou art encompassed
with all these, yet if thou be earnest, thou
shalt attain unto virtue. For there is but
one thing that is wanted, the preparation of a
generous mind; and neither age, nor poverty,
nor wealth, nor reverse of fortune, nor any-
thing else, will be able to impede thee. Since
in fact both old and young, and men having
wives, and bringing up children, and working
at crafts, and serving as soldiers, have duly
performed all that is enjoined. For so Daniel
was young, and Joseph a slave, and Aquila
wrought at a craft, and the woman who sold
purple was over a workshop, and another was
the keeper of a prison, and another a centu-
rion, as Cornelius; and another in ill health,
as Timothy; and another a runaway, as
Onesimus; but nothing proved an hindrance
to any of these, but all were approved, both
men and women, both young and old, both
slaves and free, both soldiers and people.

Let us not then make vain pretexts, but let
us provide a thoroughly good mind, and
whatsoever we may be, we shall surely attain
to virtue, and arrive at the good things to
come; by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom be unto
the Father, together with the Holy Ghost,
glory, might, honor, now and ever, and wDrld
without end. Amen.


HOMILY XLIV.

Matt. XH. 46 — 49.


"While He yet talked to the people, behold, His mother and His brethren stood with-
out, desiring to speak with Him. Then one said unto Him, Behold, Thy mother and
Thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with Thee. But He answered and said
unto him that told Him, Who is my mother, and ' my brethren ? And He stretched
forth His hand towards His disciples, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren."


4

That which I was lately saying, that when
virtue is wanting all things are vain, this is
now also pointed out very abundantly. For
I indeed was saying, that age and nature, and
to dwell in the wilderness, and all such things,
are alike unprofitable, where there is not a
good mind; but to-day we learn in addition


I [In the text here nVts eitriV is omitted, but is inserted in the
comment. There is no Mss. authority for the omission in Matthew.
The other variations are slight. — R.]


another thing, that even to have borne Christ
in the womb, and to have brought forth that
marvellous birth, hath no profit, if there be
not virtue.

And this is hence especially manifest.
" For while He yet talked to the people," it
is said, "one told Him, Thy mother and
Thy brethren seek Thee. But He saith, who
is my mother, and who are my brethren ? "

And this He said, not as being ashamed of


HOMILV XLIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


79


His mother, nor denying her that bare Him;
for if He had been ashamed of her, He would
not have passed through that womb; but as
declaring that she hath no advantage from
this, unless she do all that is required to be
done. For in fact that which she had essayed
to do, was of superfluous vanity; in that she
wanted to show the people that she hath
power and authority over her Son, imagining
not as yet anything great concerning Him;
whence also her unseasonable approach. See
at all events both her self-confidence' and
theirs/ Since when they ought to have gone
in, and listened with the multitude; or if they
were not so minded, to have waited for His
bringing His discourse to an end, and then
to have come near; they call Him out, and
do this before all, evincing a superfluous
vanity, and wishing to make it appear, that
with much authority they enjoin Him. And
this too the evangelist shows that he is blam-
ing, for with this very allusion did he thus
express himself, " Wnile He yet talked to
the people; " as if he should say. What ? was
there no other opportunity ? Why, was it not
possible to speak with Him in private ?

And what was it they wished to say ? For
if it were touching the doctrines of the truth,
they ought to have propounded these things
publicly, and stated them before all, that the
rest also might have the benefit: but if about
other matters that concerned themselves,
they ought not to have been so urgent. For
if He suffered not the burial of a father, lest
the attendance on Him should be interrupted,
much less ought they to have stopped His dis-
course to the people, for things that were of
no importance. Whence it is clear, that
nothing but vainglory led them to do this;
which John too declares, by saying, " Neither
did His brethren believe on Him;"^ and

' aiTovoiov.

a " It sfiins to me that the person bringing the messaRe was
not simply dning so on occasion K'ven, but was layinj; a snare for
our Savi(ji]r, to see whether he would prefer flesh and blood to
His spiritual t.isk. Our Lord therefore did not think scorn to
come out, as disavowing mother and brethren, but He speaks as
answering one who was laying a snare for Him. . . . Not, as
Marcion and Manichxus siiy, did He deny His mother, that we
should esteem Him born of a phantom, but He preferred the
apostles to His kindred." St. Jer. in toe. "Some pestilent
heretics would maintain from this p.issagc, that our Lord had no
mother, and do not perceive that it follows, on comparison of an-
other text '■ (St. Matt, xxiii. <;*. "that neither have His disciples
fathers. Hecause, as He said Himself, "Who is my mother?"
so He taught them, saying, " Call no man your father on earth."
St. Aug. in I's. ix. sec. ii. [He speaks] "not as defrauding His
mother ol her due h<mor, but indicates for what kind of maternity
the \'irgin is pronounced to be blessed. I'or if he who hears llic
Word of Hod and keeps it is His brother, and sister, and moilu-r,
and ("hrist'smothrr had both these, evidently this was the mater-
nity in respect of which His mother was to be blessed. Lor lo
hear the Word of (lod and keep it belongs to a pure soul, liHiking
altogether towards G'*! And smce it was no ordiniiry woman
whom ( >od selected to become the mother of Christ, but her who
in virtues held a place higher than nil women, therefore Christ
also willed His mother to be called blessed from this virtue,
whereby she was de.-med worthy to become a virgin mother."
Ijuicst. ct Kesp. ad Orthod.ap. .St. tusl. M.irt p <Ht K.I \1..-
rell. \t\(k

3 Joiin vii. 5.


some sayings too of theirs he reports, full of
great folly; telling us that they were for drag-
ging Khm to Jerusalem, for no other purpose,
but that they themselves might reap glory
from His miracles. "For if thou do these
things," it is said, "show Thyself to the
world. For there is no man that doeth any-
thing in secret, and seeketh himself to be
manifest; " * when also He Himself rebuked
them, attributing it to their carnal mind.
That is, because the Jews were reproaching
Him, and saying, "Is not this the carpen-
ter's son, whose father and mother we know?
and His brethren, are not they with us?"^
they, willing to throw off the disparagement
caused by His birth, were calling Him to the
display of His miracles.

For this cause He quite repels them, being
minded to heal their infirmity; since surely,
had it been His will to denv His mother, He
would have denied her then, when the Jews
were reproaching Him. But as it is, we see
that He takes so great care of her, as even
at the very cross to commit her to the disciple
whom He loved most of all, and to give him
a great charge concerning her.

But now He doth not so, out of care for
her, and for His brethren. I mean, because
their regard for Him was as towards a mere
man, and they were vainglorious, He casts
out the disease, not insulting, liut correcting
them.

But do thou, I pray, examine not the words
only, which contain a moderate reprooi",
but also the unbecoming conduct of His
brethren, and the boldness wherewith they
had been bold and wiio was the person re-
proving it, no mere man, but the only-begotten
Son of God; and witli what puri)ose He re-
proved; that it was not with intent to drive
them to perplexity, but to deliver them from
the most tyrannical passion and to leaii them
on by little and little to the right iilea con-
cerning Himself, and to convince her that He
was not her Son only, but also her Lord: so
wilt thou perceive that the reproof is in the
highest degree both becoming Him and
profitable to her, and withal having in it much
geiuleiiess. I'or He saitl not, "Go tiiy way,
tell my mother, thou art not my mother," but
He addresses Himself to the person th«t
told Him; saying, "Who is my mother?"
together with the things that have been men-
tioned providing for another object also.
What then is that ? That neither they nor
others confiding in their kindrcil, should
neglect virtue. For if she is nothing profited


4 lohn vii. 4, ^aftpit tifai. r.


latter reading is (hat u( all uur uuU. K.J

*; Matt. xiii. 55, 56. [Corap. Murk vi. j. Uut the ci
freely made. — R.)


• irapiiiitftf «!fat. [The
tation is


28o


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLIV.


by being His mother, were it not for that
quality in her, hardly will any one else be
saved by his kindred. For there is oife only
nobleness, to do the will of God. This kind
of noble birth is better than the other, and
more real.

2. Knowing therefore these things, let us
neither pride ourselves on children that are
of good report, unless we have their virtue;
nor upon noble fathers, unless we be like
them in disposition. For it is possible, both
that he who begat a man should not be his
father, and that he who did not beget him
should be. Therefore in another place also,
when some woman had said, " Blessed is the
womb that bare Thee, and the paps which
Thou hast sucked;" He said not, "The
womb bare me not, neither did I suck the
paps," but this, " Yea rather, blessed are they
that do the will of my Father." ' Seest thou
how on every occasion He denies not the
afifinity by nature, but adds that by virtue ?
And His forerunner too, in saying, " O gen-
eration of vipers, think not to say, We have
Abraham to our father," ^ means not this,
that they were not naturally of Abraham, but
that it profits them nothing to be of Abra-
ham, unless they had the affinity by charac-
ter; which Christ also declared, when He
said, "If ye were Abraham's children, ye
would do the works of Abraham; " ^ ^ot de-
priving them of their kindred according to
the flesh, but teaching them to seek after that
afifinity which is greater than it, and more
real.

This then He establishes here also, but in
a manner less invidious, and more measured,
as became Him speaking to His mother.
For He said not at all, "She is not my
mother, nor are those my brethren, because
they do not my will;" neither did He de-
clare and pronounce judgment against them;
but He yet left in it their own power to
choose, speaking with the gentleness that be-
comes Him.

" For he that doeth," saith He, "the will
of my Father, this is my brother, and sister,
ind mother." *

Wherefore if they desire to be such, let
them come this way. And when the woman
again cried out, saying, " Blessed is the
womb that bare Thee," He said not, "She
is not my mother," but, "If she wishes to
be blessed, let her do the will of my Father.
For such a one is both brother, and sister,
and mother."

1 Luke xi. 27, 28. [According to many Harmonists this oc-
curred about the same time, probably as His mother was seen ap-
proaching.— R.]

2 Matt. iii. 7, 9. 3 John viii. 39.
4 Matt. xiii. 50. [Slightly altered.]


Oh honor ! oh virtue ! Unto what a height
doth she lead up him that follows after her !
How many women have blessed that holy
Virgin, and her womb, and prayed that they
might become such mothers, and give up all !
What then is there to hinder? For behold,
He hath marked out a spacious road for us;
and it is granted not to women only, but to
men also, to be of this rank, or rather of one
yet far higher. For this makes one His
mother much more, than those pangs did.
So that if that were a subject for blessing,
much more this, inasmuch as it is also more
real. Do not therefore merely desire, but
also in the way that leads thee to thy desire
walk thou with much diligence.

3. Having then said these words, "He
came out of the house," Seest thou, how
He both rebuked them, and did what they
desired ? Which He did also at the mar-
riage.^ For there too He at once reproved
her asking unseasonably, and nevertheless
did not gainsay her; by the former correct-
ing her weakness, by the latter showing His
kindly feeling toward His mother. So like-
wise on this occasion too, He both healed the
disease of vainglory, and rendered the due
honor to His mother, even though her re-
quest was unseasonable. For, " in the same
day," it is said, " went Jesus out of the house,
and sat by the sea side. " *

Why, if ye desire, saith He, to see and
hear, behold I come forth and discourse.
Thus having wrought many miracles, He
affords again the benefit of His doctrine.
And He " sits by the sea," fishing and get-
ting into His net them that are on the land.

But He "sat by the sea," not without a
purpose; and this very thing the evangelist
has darkly expressed. For to indicate that
the cause of His doing this was a desire to
order His auditory with exactness, and to
leave no one behind His back, but to have
all face to face,

"And great multitudes," saith He, "were
gathered together unto Him, so that He went
into a ship and sat, and the whole multitude
stood on the shore. "^

And having sat down there, He speaks by
parables.

"And He spake," it says, "many things
unto them in parables.''^

And yet on the mount, we know, He did
no such thing, neither did He weave His dis-
course with so many parables, for then there
were multitudes only, and a simple people;
but here are also Scribes and Pharisees.


5 John ii. i-ii.

6 Chap. xiii. i. [R. V.. " On that day," etc.]

7 Matt. xiii. 2. [R. V., " all the multitude stood on the
beach."] 8 jMatt. xiii. 3.


Homily XLIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


281


But do thou mark, I pray thee, what kind
of parable He speaks first, and how Matthew-
puts them in their order. Which then doth
He speak first ? That which it was most nec-
essary to speak first, that which makes the
hearer more attentive. For because He was
to discourse unto them in dark sayings, He
thoroughly rouses His hearers' mind first by
His parable. Therefore also another evan-
gelist saith that He reproved them, because
they do not understand; saying, " How knew
ye not the parable?"' But not for this
cause only doth He speak in parables, but
that He may also make His discourse more
vivid, and fix the memory of it in them more
perfectly, and bring tlie things before their
sight. In like manner do the prophets also.

4. What then is the parable ? " Behold,"
saith He, "a sower' went forth to sow."
Whence went He forth, who is present every-
where, who fills all things ? or how went He
forth ? Not in place, but in condition and
dispensation to usward, coming nearer to us
by His clothing Himself with flesh. For
because we could not enter, our sins fencing
us out from the entrance. He comes forth
unto us. And wherefore came He forth? to
destroy the ground teeming with thorns ? to
take vengeance upon the husbandmen ? By
no means; but to till and tend it, and to sow
the word of godliness. For by seed here He
means His doctrine, and by land, the souls of
men, and by the sower. Himself.

What then comes of this seed ? Three
parts perish, and one is saved.

"And when He sowed, some seeds fell,"
He saith, " by the way side; and the fowls
came and devoured them up." ^

He said not, ihat He cast them, but that
"they fell."

"And some upon the rock, where they
had not much earth; and fortlnvith they
sprang up, because they had no deepness of
earth; and when the sun was up, they were
scorched; and because they had no root, they
withered away. And some fell among the
thorns, and the thorns sprang up, and choked
them. B-ut others fell on the good ground,
and brought forth fruit, some an hundredfold,
some si.xtyfold, some thirtyfold. Who hath
ears to hear let him hear." *

A fcnirth part is saved; and not this all
alike, but even here great is tiie ditfercnce.

Now these things He said, manifesting that
He discoursed to all without grudging. For


« Mark iv. n. [Krccly cited.]

'fR. V..;'thc»owcr.'^]

J Nialt. xiii. 4. [K. V., ".Ami a.<i hr sowed," rti-.]

4 Malt. xiii. 5-y. [I'hc (Jrcek text here diflcrs slightly from
that of the N>-w I dtainrnt puniuiKe, as well a» from the accounts
of Mark and I.ukc.-K.]


as the sower makes no distinction in the land
submitted to him, but simply and indiffer-
ently casts his seed; so He Himself too
makes no distinction of rich and poor, of wise
and unwise, of slothful or diligent, of brave
or cowardly; but He discourses unto all, ful-
filling His part, although foreknowing the
results; that it may be in His power to say,
" What ought I to have done, that I have
not done ? " ^ And the prophets speak of the
people as of a vine; " For my beloved," it is
said, " had a vineyard; " * and, " He brought
a vine out of Egypt; "' but He, as of seed.
What could this be to show ? 'J'hat obedience
now will be quick and easier, and will pres-
ently yield its fruit.

But when thou hearest, "The sower went
forth to sow," think it not a needless rei)eti-
tion. For the sower frequently goes forth
for some other act also, either to plough, or
to cut out the evil herbs, or to pluck up
thorns, or to attend to some such matter;
but He went forth to sow.

Whence then, tell me, was the greater part
of the seed lost ? Not through the sower, but
through the ground that received it; that is,
the soul that did not hearken.

And wherefore doth He not say, Some the
careless received, and lost it; some the rich,
and choked it, and some the superficial, and
betrayed it? It is not His will to rebuke
them severely, lest He should cast them into
despair, but He leaves the reproof to the con-
science of His hearers.

And this was not the case with the seed
only, but also with the net; for that too pro-
duced many that were unprofitable.

5. But this parable He speaks, as anointing
His disciples, and to teach them, that even
though the lost be more than such as receive
the word yet they are not to despoml. For
this was the case even witli their Lord, and
He who fully foreknew that these things
should be, did not desist from sowing.

And how can it be reasonable, saith one, to
sow among the thorns, on the rock, on tlie
wayside ? With regard to the seeds and the
earth it cannot be reasonable; but in the
case of men's souls and their instructions, it
hath its praise, and that abundantly. For
the husbandman indeed woukl reasonably
be blamed for doing this; it being impossible
for tlie rock to become eartii, or the wayside
not to be a wayside, or tlie tiiorns, thorns;
but in the things that have reason it is not
so. TIrtc is sucli a tiling as the rock cliaiig-
ing, and becoming rich l.iiul; .iiul the way-
side being no longer trampleil on, nor lying


i U. V. 4.


* I». V. I.


Ps. Ixxs. 8.


282


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


.O....LV XLIV.


open to all that pass by, but that it may be a
fertile field; and the thorns may be destroyed,
and the seed enjoy full security. For had it
been impossible, this Sower would not have
sown. And if the change did not take place
in all, this is no fault of the Sower, but of
them who are unwilling to be changed: He
having done His part: and if they betrayed
what they received of Him, He is blameless,
the exhibitor of such love to man.

But do thou mark this, I pray thee; that
the way of destruction is not one only, but
there are differing ones, and wide apart from
one another. For they that are like the way-
side are the coarse-minded,' and indifferent,
and careless; but those on the rock such as
fail from weakness only.

For "that which is sown upon the stony
places," saith He, " the same is he that hear-
eth the word, and anon with joy receiveth it.
Yet hath he not root in himself, but dureth
for a while; but when tribulation or persecu-
tion ariseth because of the word, by and by
he is offended ! When any one," so He
saith, " heareth the word of truth and under-
standeth it not, then cometh the wicked one,
and catcheth that which was sown out of his
heart. This is he that is sown by the way-
side." =■

Now it is not the same thing for the doc-
trine to wither away, when no man is evil
entreating, or disturbing its foundations, as
when temptations press upon one. But they
that are likened to the thorns, are much more
inexcusable than these.

6. In order then that none of these things
may befall us, let us by zeal and continual
remembrance cover up the things that are
told us. For though the devil do catch them
away, yet it rests with us, whether they be
caught away; though the plants wither, yet it
is not from the heat this takes place (for He
did not say, because of the heat it withered,
but, "because it had no root"); although
His sayings are choked, it is not because of
the thorns, but of them who suffer them to
spring up. For there is a way, if thou wilt,
to check this evil growth, and to make the
right use of our wealth. Therefore He said
not, "the world," but "the care of the
world;" nor "riches,'' but "the deceitful-
ness of riches."

Let us not then blame the things, but tlie
corrupt mind. For it is possible to be rich
and not to be deceived; and to be in this
world, and not to be choked with its cares.
For indeed riches have two contrary disad-


I ^dvcLVO'Ol.

- INIatt. xiii. 20, 21, 19. [There are some variations in the Greek
text, not found in any New Testament mss. In verse 19 aArj^etas
is substituted for ^ao-iAeias. — R.]


vantages; one, care, wearing us out, and
bringing a darkness over us; the other,
luxury, making us effeminate.

And well hath He said, " The deceitfulness
of riches." For all that pertains to riches is
deceit; they are names only, not attached to
things. For so pleasure and glory, and
splendid array, and all these things, are a
sort of vain show, not a reality.

Having therefore spoken of the ways of
destruction, afterwards He mentions the good
ground, not suffering them to despair, but
giving a hope of repentance, and indicating
that it is possible to change from the things
before mentioned into this.

And yet if both the land be good, and the
Sower one, and the seed the same, wherefore
did one bear a hundred, one sixty, one thirty ?
Here again the difference is from the nature
of the ground, for even where the ground is
good, great even therein is the difference.
Seest thou, that not the husbandman is to be
blamed, nor the seed, but the land that re-
ceives it? not for its nature, but for its dis-
position. And herein too, great is His mercy
to man, that He doth not require one meas-
ure of virtue, but while He receives the first,
and casts not out the second, He gives also
a place to the third.

And these things He saith, l^st they that
followed Him should suppose that hearing is
sufficient for salvation. And wherefore, one
may say, did He not put the other vices also,
such as lust, vainglory ? In speaking of
"the care of this world, and the deceitful-
ness of riches," He set down all. Yea, both
vainglory and all the rest belong to this world,
and to the deceitfulness of riches; such as
pleasure, and gluttony, and envy, and vain-
glory, and all the like.

But He added also the "way" and the
"rock," signifying that it is not enough to
be freed from riches only, but we must cul-
tivate also the other parts of virtue. For what
if thou art free indeed from riches, yet are
soft and unmanly ? and what if thou art not
indeed unmanly, but art remiss and careless
about the hearing of the w^ord ? Nay, no one
part is sufficient for our salvation, but there is
required first a careful hearing, and a contin-
ual recollection; then fortitude, then con-
tempt of riches, and deliverance from all
worldly things.

In fact, His reason for putting this before
the other, is because the one is first required
(for " How shall they believe except they
hear ? " 3 just as we too, except we mind
what is said, shall not be able so much as to

3 Rom. X. 14.


Homily XLIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


28'


learn what we ought to do): after that, forti-
tude, and the contempt of things present.

7. Hearing therefore these things, let us
fortify ourselves on all sides, regarding His
instructions, and striking our roots deep, and
cleansing ourselves from all worldly things.
But if we do the one, neglecting the other,
we shall be nothing bettered; for though we
perish not in one way, yet shall we in some
other. For what signifies our not being
ruined by riches, if we are by indolence: or
not by indolence, if we are by softness. For
so the husbandman, whether this way or that
way he lose his crop, equally bewails himself.
Let us not then soothe* ourselves upon our
not perishing in all these ways, but let it be
our grief, in whichever way we are perishing.

And let us burn up the thorns, for they
choke the word. And this is known to those
rich men, who not for these matters alone,
but for others also prove unprofitable. For
having become slaves and captives of their
pleasures, they are useless even for civil
affairs, and if for them, much more for those
of Hfeaven. Yea, and in two ways hereby
our thoughts are corrupted; both by the
luxury, and by the anxiety too. For either
of these by itself were enough to overwhelm
the bark; but when even both concur, imag-
ine how high the billow swells.

And marvel not at His calling our luxury,
" thorns," For thou indeed art not aware of
it, being intoxicated with thy passion, but
they that are in sound health know that it
pricks sharper than any thorn, and that
luxury wastes the soul worse than care, and
causes more grievous pains both to body and
soul. For one is not so sorely smitten by
anxiety, as by surfeiting. Since when watch-
ings, and throbbings of the temples, and
heaviness in the head, and pangs of the
bowels, lay hold of such a man, you may
imagine how many thorns these surpass in
grievousness. And as the thorns, on wlhch-
ever side .they are laid hold of, draw blood
from the hands that seize them, just so doth
luxury plague both feet, and hands, and head,
and eyes, and in general all our members;
and it is withered also, and unfruitful, like
the thorn, and hurts much more tiian it, and
in our vitrd parts. Yea, it brings on prema-
ture old age, and dulls the senses, and dark-
ens our reasoning, and blinds tlie kccn-siglitcd
mind, and makes the boily tumiil," rendering
excessive the deposition of that which is cast
away, and gathering together a great accu-
mulation of evils; and it makes the burden too
great, and the load overwliclniing; whence


' iiKaiapov.


our fall^ are many and continual, and our
shipwrecks frequent.

For tell me, why pamper thy body ?
What? are we to slay thee in sacrifice, to set
thee on the table ? The birds it is well for
thee to pamper: or rather, not so well even
for them; for when they are fattened, they
are unprofitable for wholesome food. So
great an evil is luxury, that its mischief is
shown even in irrational beings. For even
them by luxury we make unprofitable, both to
themselves and to us. For their superlluous
flesh is indigestible, and the moister kind of
corruption is engendered by that kind of
fatness. Whereas the creatures that are not
so fed, but live, as one may say, in absti-
nence, and moderate diet, and in labor and
hardship, these are most serviceable both to
themselves and to others, as well for food, as
for everything else. Those, at any rate, who
live on them, are in better health; but such
as are fed on the others are' like them, grow-
ing dull and sickly, and rendering their chain
more grievous. For nothing is so hostile
and hurtful to the body, as luxury; nothing
so tears it in pieces, and overloads and cor-
rupts it, as intemperance.

Wherefore above all may this circumstance
make one amazed at them for their folly,
that not even so much care as others show
towards their wine skins, are these willing to
evince towards themselves. For those the
wine merchants do not allow to receive more
than is fit, lest they should burst; but to their
own wretched belly these men do not vouchsafe
even so much forethought, but when they
have stuffed it and distended it, they fill all,
up to the ears, up to the nostrils, to the very
throat itself, thereby pressing into half its
room the spirit, and the power that tlirects
the living being. What ? was thy throat given
thee for this end, that thou shouldest fill it
up to the very mouth, with wine turned sour,
and all other corruption ? Not for this, O
man, but that thou shouldest above all things
sing to God, and offer up the holy prayers,
and read out the divine laws, and give to thy
neighbors profitable counsel. But tluni, as if
thou hadst received it for this end. dost not
suffer it to have leisure for that ministry, so
much as for a short season, but for all tliy lite
subjectest it to this evil slavery. .\nd as if any
man having liad a lyre given him with golden
strings, and be;iutifully constructed, instead
of awakening with it the most harmonious
music, were to cover it over witii much dung
and clay; even so do these men. Now the
word, diuig, I use not of living, but of luxu-
rious living, antl of that great wantonness.
Because what is more than necessary is not


284


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLV.


nourishment, but merely injurious. ■ For in
truth the belly alone was made merely for the
reception of food; but the mouth, and the
throat, and tongue, for other things also, far
more necessary than these; or rather, not
even the belly for the reception of food sim-
ply, but for the reception of moderate food.
And this it makes manifest by crying out
loudly against us, when we tease it by this
greediness; nor doth it clamor against us
only, but also avenging that wrong exacts of
us the severest penalty. And first it pun-
ishes the feet, that bear and conduct us to
those wicked revels, then the hands that
minister to it, binding them together for hav-
ing brought unto it such quantities and kinds
of provisions; and many have distorted even
their very mouth, and eyes, and head. And
as a servant receiving an order beyond his


power, not seldom out of desperation be-
comes insolent to the giver of the order: so
the belly too, together with these members,
often ruins and destroys, from being over-
strained, the very brain itself. And this God
hath well ordered, that from excess so
much mischief should arise; that when of
thine own will thou dost not practise self-
restraint, at least against thy will, for fear of
so great ruin, thou mayest learn to be mode-
rate.

Knowing then these things, let us flee
luxury, let us study moderation, that we may
both enjoy health of body, and having deliv-
ered our soul from 'all infirmity, may attain
unto the good things to come, by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory and might forever
and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XLV.


Matt. XIII. 10, 11.


*'And the disciples came and said unto Him, Why speakest Thou unto them in parables?
He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you ' to know the mysteries
of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given."


We have good cause to admire the disci-
ples, how, longing as they do to learn, they
know when they ought to ask. For they do
it not before all: and this Matthew shows by
saying, "And they came." And, as to this
assertion not being conjecture, Mark hath
expressed it more distinctly, by saying, that
" they came to Him privately.''- This then
His brethren and His mother should also
have done, and not have called Him out, and
made a display.

But mark their kindly affection also, how
they have much regard for the others, and
seek their good first, and then their own.
" For why," it is said, " speakest Thou unto
them in parables?" They did not say, why
speakest thou unto us in parables ? Yea,
and on other occasions also their kindliness
towards men appears in many ways; as when
they say, " Send the multitude away; " ^ and,
" Knowest thou that they were offended ?" *

What then saith Christ? "Because it is


1 [R. v., " Unto you it is given," omitting " Because."]

2 Mark iv. lo, 3 Luke ix. 12. 4 Matt. xv. 12.


given unto you," so He speaks, "to know
the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but
to them it is not given." s But this He said,
not bringing in necessity, or any allotment*
made causelessly and at random, but imply-
ing them to be the authors of all their own
evils, and wishing to represent that the thing
is a gift, and a grace bestowed from above.

It by no means follows, however, because
it is a gift, that therefore free will is taken
away; and this is evident from what comes
after. To this purpose, in order that neither
the one sort may despair, nor the other grow
careless, upon being told that " it is given,"
He signifies the beginning to be with our-
selves.

" For whosoever hath, to him shall be
given, and he shall have more abundance;
but whosoever hath not, from him shall be
taken away, even that which he seemeth to
have." 7

5 Matt. xiii. 11. [R. V., " Unto you it is given," etc.]

6 a.iroK\ripio(Ti';.

7 Matt. xiii. 12. See Luke viii. 18. [SoKti is inserted from the
latter passage, and repeated in the comments.— R.]


Homily XLV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


285


And although the saying be full of much
obscurity, yet it indicates unspeakable jus-
tice. For what He saith is like this: When
any one hath forwardness and zeal, there
shall be given unto him all things on God's
part also: but if he be void of these, and
contribute not his own share, neither are
God's gifts bestowed. For even "what he
seemeth to have," so He saith, "shall be
taken away from him;" God not so much
taking it away, as counting him unworthy of
His gifts. This we also do; when we see
any one listening carelessly, and when with
much entreaty we cannot persuade him to
attend, it remains for us to be silent. For if
we are still to go on, his carelessness is ag-
gravated. But him that is striving to learn,
we lead on, and pour in much.

And well said He, " Even that which he
seemeth to have." For he hath not really
even this.

Then He also made what He had said more
distinct, pointing out the meaning of, "To
him that hath, shall be given, but from him
that hath not, even that which he seemeth to
have, shall be taken away,"

" Therefore," saith He, " speak I to them
in parables; because they seeing see not." '

"It were meet then," one may say, "to
have opened their eyes, if they see not."
Nay, if the blindness were natural, it were
meet to open them; but because it was a
voluntary and self-chosen blindness, therefore
He said not simjily, "They see not," but,
"seeing, they see not;'' so that the blind-
ness is of their own wickedness. For they
saw even devils cast out, and said, " By Beel-
zebub, prince of tiie devils, He casteth out the
devils." = They heard Him guiding them
unto God, and evincing His great unanimity
with Him, and they say, " This man is not of
God. "3 Since then the judgment they pro-
nounced was contrary both to their sight and
hearing, therefore, saith He, tlie very hearing
do I take away from them. For they derive
thence no advantage, l)ut rather greater con-
demnation. For they not only clisl)elieved,
but found fault also, and accused, and laid
snares. However, He saith not tliis, for it
is not Hib will to give disgust in accusing
them. Therefore neither at the beginning
did He so discourse to them, but with much
plainness; but because they perverted them-
selves, thenceforth He speaks in i)aral)les.

2. After this, lest any one shoukl suppose
His words to be a mere accusation, and lest
men should say, Being our enemy He is
bringing these ciiarges and calumnies against


■ Matt. xiii. ij.


^ .Matt. xii. J4.


3 John ix. 16.


us; He introduces the prophet also, pro-
nouncing the same judgment as Himself.

" For in them is fulfilled," saith He, " the
prophecy of Esaias, which saith. By hearing
ye shall hear, and shall not understand, and
seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive." •*

Seest thou the prophet likewise, accusing
them with this same accuracy ? for neither
did He say, Ye see not, but "Ye shall see
and not perceive; " nor again. Ye shall not
hear, but "Ye shall hear and not under-
stand." So that they first inflicted the loss
on themselves, by stopping their ears, by
closing their eyes, by making their heart fat.
For they not only failed to hear, but also
" heard heavily," and they did this. He saith,

" Lest at any time they should be con-
verted, and I should heal them; " ^ describing
their aggravated wickedness, and their de-
j termined defection from Him. And this He
I saith to draw them unto Him, and to provoke
them, and to signify that if they would con-
vert* He would heal them: much as if one
should say, " He would not look at me, and
I thank him; for if he had vouchsafed me
i this, I snould straightway have given in:"
and this he saith, to signify how he would
have been reconciled. Even so then here too
it is said, " Lest at any time they should con-
vert,'' and 1 should heal them;" implying
that both their conversion was possible, and
that upon their repentance they might be
saved, and that not for His own glory, but
for their salvation, He was doing all things.

For if it had not been His will that they
should hear and be saved. He ought to have
been silent, not to have spoken in parables;
but now by this very thing He stirs them up,
even by speaking under a veil. " For God
I willeth not the deatli of the sinner, but that
he should turn unto Him and live."*

For in proof that our sin belongs not to
nature, nor to necessity and compulsion, hear
what He saith to the apostles, " But blessed
are your eyes, for they see, and your ears,
for they hear;"' not meaning this kind of
sight nor hearing, but that of the miml.
For indeed these too were Jews, and brought
up in the same circumstances; but neverthe-
less they took no hurt from tlie j^rophecy,
because they had the root of His blessings
well settled in them, tlieir principle of choice,
I mean, and tlieiV judgment.

Scest thou tliat, "unto you it is given,"
was not of necessity? For neither wouUl

•4 Miiti. xiii. 14. Srr Is. vi. g, 10.

5 Mult xiii. IS. [The piuuuiKc is nbridt;cil. R. V., "should
turn iiKiiiii " (so in Isjiiah). Chrysostom ittke* it in this sense, iu>
llic context shows. —R.]

6 I •' turn attain."] " (to iwiffrpai^nvai.]
" K.iek. xviii. J3. [Krccly cited in the first |>urt. -R.J

V Mutt. xiii. 16.


286


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLV.


they have been blessed, unless the well-doing
had been their own. For tell me not this,
that it was spoken obscurely; for they might
have come and asked Him, as the disciples
did: but they would not, being careless and
supine. Why say I, they would not? nay,
they were doing the very opposite, not only
disbelieving, not only not hearkening, but
even waging war, and disposed to be very
bitter against all He said: which He brings
in the prophet laying to their charge, in the
words, " They heard heavily."

But not such were these; wherefore He
also blessed them. And in another way too
He assures them again, saying,

*' For verily I say unto you, many prophets
and righteous men have desired to see those
things which ye see, and have not seen them,
and to hear those things which ye hear, and
have not heard them;"^ my coming. He
means; my very miracles, my voice, my
teaching. For here He prefers them not to
these depraved only, but even to such as
have done virtuously; yea, and He affirms
them to be more blessed even than they.
Why can this be ? Because not only do these
see what the Jevvs saw not, but even what
those of old desired to see. For they indeed
beheld by faith only: but these by sight too,
and much more distinctly.

Seest thou how again He connects the old
dispensation with the new, signifying that
those of old not only knew the things to come,
but also greatly desired them ? But had they
pertained to some strange and opposing God,
they would never have desired them.

" Hear ye therefore the parable of the
sower," "^ saith He; and He speaks what we
before mentioned, of carelessness and atten-
tion, of cowardice and fortitude, of wealth
and voluntary poverty; pointing out the hurt
from the one, and the benefit from the other.

Then of virtue also He brings forward dif-
ferent forms. For being full of love to man,
He marked out not one only way, nor did
He say, " unless one bring forth an hundred,
he is an outcast; " but he that brings forth
sixty is saved also, and not he only, but also
the producer of thirty. And this He said,
making out salvation to be easy.

3. And thou then, art thou unable to prac-
tise virginity ? Be chaste in marriage. Art
thou unable to strip thyself of thy posses-
sions ? Give of thy substance. Canst thou
not bear that burden ? Share thy goods with
Christ. Art thou unwilling to yield Him up
all ? Give Him but the half, but the third
part. He is thy brother, and joint-heir, make


I Matt. xiii. 17.


2 Matt, xii


Him joint-heir with thee here too. Whatso-
ever thou givest Him, thou wilt give to thy-
self. Hearest thou not what saith the pro-
phet? " Them that pertain to thy seed thou
shalt not overlook." ^ But if we must not
overlook our kinsmen, much less our Lord,
having towards thee, together with His
authority as Lord, the claim also of kindred,
and many more besides. Yea, for He too
hath made thee a sharer in His goods, having
received nothing of thee, but having begun
with this unspeakable benefit. What then
can it be but extreme senselessness, not even
by this gift to be made kind towards men,
not even to give a return for a free gift, and
less things for greater ? Thus whereas He
hath made thee heir of Heaven, impartest
thou not to Him even of the things on earth ?
He, when thou hadst done no good work, but
wert even an enemy, reconciled thee: and
dost thou not requite Him, being even a
friend and benefactor ?

Yet surely, even antecedently to the king-
dom, and to all the rest, even for the very
fact of His giving, we ought to feel bound to
Him. For so servants too, when bidding
their masters to a meal, account themselves
not to be giving but receiving; but here the
contrary hath taken place: not the servant
the Lord, but the Lord hath first bidden the
servant unto His own table; and dost thou
not bid Him, no not even after this? He
first hath introduced thee under His own
roof; dost thou not take Him in, so much as
in the second place ? He clad thee, being
naked; and dost thou not even after this re-
ceive Him being a stranger ? He first gave
thee to drink out of His own cup, and dost
thou not impart to Him so much as cold
water ? He hath made thee drink of the
Holy Spirit, and dost thou not even soothe
His bodily thirst ? He hath made thee drink
of the Spirit, when thou wast deserving of
punishment; and dost thou neglect Him even
when thirsty, and this when it is out of His
own, that thou art to do all these things ?
Dost thou not then esteem it a great thing,
to hold the cup out of which Christ is to
drink, and to put it to His lips ? Seest thou
not that for the priest alone is it lawful * to
give the cup of His blood ? But I am by no
means strict about this, saith He; but though
thyself should give, I receive; though tliou
be a layman, I i-efuse it not. And I do not
require such as I have given: for not blood
do I seek, but cold water. Consider to whom
thou art giving drink, and tremble. Consid-
er, thou art become a priest of Christ, giv-


3 Isa. Iviii. 7, Lxx.


4 deju.i;.


Homily XLVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


2S7


ing with thine own hand, not flesh but bread,
not blood, but a cup of cold water. He
clothed thee with a garment of salvation, and
clothed thee by Himself; do thou at least by
thy servant clothe Him. He made thee
glorious in Heaven, do thou deliver Him
from shivering, and nakedness, and shame.
He made thee a fellow-citizen of angels, do
thou impart to Him at least of the covering
of thy roof, give house-room to Him at least
as to thine own servant. " I refuse not this
lodging and that, having opened to thee the
whole Heaven. I have delivered thee from a
most grievous prison; this I do not require
again, nor do I say, deliver me; but if thou
wouldest look upon me only, when I am bound,
this suffices me for refreshment. When thou
wert dead, I raised thee; I require not this
again of thee, but I say, visit me only when
sick."

Now when His gifts are so great, and His
demands exceeding easy, and we do not sup-
ply even these; what deep of hell must we
not deserve ? Justly shall we depart into the
fire that is prepared for the devil and his
angels, being more insensible than any rock.
For how great insensibility is it, tell me, for
us, who have received, and are to receive so
much, to be slaves of money, from which we
shall a little while hence be separated even
against our will ? And others indeed have
given up even their life, and shed their blood;
and dost thou not even give up thy superflui-


ties for Heaven's sake, for the sake of so
great crowns ?

And of what favor canst thou be worthy ?
of what justification ? who in thy sowing of
the earth, gladly pourest forth all, and in
lending to men at usury sparest nothing; but
in feeding thy Lord through His poor art
cruel and inhuman ?

I Having then considered all these things,
and calculated what we have received, what
we are to receive, what is required of us, let
us show forth all our diligence on the things

I spiritual. Let us become at length mild and
humane, that we may not draw down on our-
selves the intolerable punishment. For what
is there that hath not power to condemn us ?
Our having enjoyed so many and such great
benefits; our having no great thing required
of us; our having such things required, as we
shall leave here even against our will; our
exhibiting so much liberality in our worldly
matters. Why each one of these, even by
itself, were enough to condemn us; but when
they all meet together, what hope will there
be of salvation ?

In order then that we may escape all this
condemnation, let us show forth some bounty
towards those who are in need. For thus
shall we enjoy all the good things, both here,
and there; unto which may we all attain, by
the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might
forever and ever. Amen.


HOMILY XLVI.

Matt. XHL 24 — 30.

'Another parable put He forth unto them, saying. The Kingdom of Heaven is likened
unto a man which sowed good seed in his field. But while men slept, his enemy came
and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way. But when the blade was sprung
up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares. So the servants of the liouse-
holder came and said unto him, Sir, didst thou not sow good seed in tliy field? whence
then hath it tares ? He said unto them, An enemy hath done this, 'i'lie serwants said
unto him, Wilt thou then that we go and gather them up? But he said. Nay, lest while
ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them. Let both therefore grow
together until the liarvest."'


What is the difference between this, and them tiiat have not at all iiolden with Him,

the parable before it? There He speaks of but have startetl aside, and have thrown away

TT^TZ 7T i — ~r~[ Z '■ 77~T ^"^ the seed; but here He means the societies of

■ [ I he citation aKree<i exactly with the Kereivcd text ; ovv is | ',

however inserted in verse v'. ii«iiinst nnirly all our New the lieTCticS.
Tcstiiment authorities. In several minor variations the text differs
from that of Tischi-ndorf and other recent editors. — K.]


l*'or in order th.at not even this
might disturb His disciples, He foretells it


288


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLVI.


also, after having taught them why He speaks
in parables. The former parable then means
their not receiving Him; this, their receiving
corrupters. For indeed this also is a part of
the devil's craft, by the side of the truta
always to bring in error, painting thereon
many resemblances, so as easily to cheat the
deceivable. Therefore He calls it not any
other seed, but tares; which in appearance
are somewhat like wheat.

Then He mentions also the manner of his
device. For "while men slept,'' saith He.
It is no small danger, which He hereby sus-
pends over our rulers, to whom especially is
entrusted the keeping of the field; and not
the rulers only, but the subjects too.

And He signifies also that the error comes
after the truth, which the actual event testi-
fies. For so after the prophets, were tlie
false prophets; and after the apostles, the
false apostles; and after Christ, Antichrist.
For unless the devil see what to imitate, or
against whom to plot, he neither attempts,
nor knows how. Now then also, having seen
that "one brought forth a hundred, another
sixty, another thirty," he proceeds after that
another way. That is, not having been able
to carry away what had taken root, nor to
choke, nor to scorch it up, he conspires
against it by another craft, privily casting in
his own inventions.

And what difference is there, one may say,
between them that sleep, and them that re-
semble the wayside ? That in the latter case
he immediately caught it away; yea, he suf-
fered it not even to take root; but here more
of his craft was needed.

And these things Christ saith, instructing
us to be always wakeful. For, saith He,
though thou quite escape those harms, there
is yet another harm. For as in those in-
stances " the wayside," and " the rock," and
"the thorns,'' so here again sleep occasions
our ruin; so that there is need of continual
watchfulness. Wherefore He also said, " He
that endureth to the end, the same shall be
saved."'

Something like this took place even at the
beginning. Many of the prelates, I mean,
bringing into the churches wicked men, dis-
guised heresiarchs, gave great facility to the
laying that kind of snare. For the devil
needs not even to take any trouble, when he
hath once planted them among us.

And how is it possible not to sleep ? one
may say. Indeed, as to natural sleep, it is
not possible; but as to that of our moral
faculty, it is possible. Wherefore Paul also
said, " Watch ye, stand fast in the faith." ^


I Matt. X. 22.


I Cor. xvi. 13.


After this He points out the thing to be
superfluous too, not hurtful only; in that,
after the land hath been tilled, and theie is
no need of anything, then this enemy sows
again; as the heretics also do, who for no
other cause than vainglory inject their proper
venom.

And not by this only, but by what follows
likewise, He depicts exactly all their acting.
For, "When the blade was sprung up, saith
He, "and brought forth fruit, then appeared
the tares also; " which kind of thing these
men also do. For at the beginning they dis-
guise themselves; but when they have gained
much confidence, and some one imparts to
them the teaching of the word, then they
pour out their poison.

But wherefore doth He bring in the serv-
ants, telling what hath been done ? That
He may pronounce it wrong to slay them.

And He calls him " an enemy,'' because of
his harm done to men. For although the
despite is against us, in its origin it sprang
from his enmity, not to us, but to God.
Whence it is manifest, that God loves us more
than we love ourselves.

And see from another thing also, the
malicious craft of the devil. For he did not
sow before this, because he had nothing to
destroy, but when all had been fulfilled, that
he might defeat the diligence of the Husband-
man; in such enmity against Him did be
constantly act.

And mark also the affection of the servants.
I mean, what haste they are in at once to root
up the tares, even though they do it indis-
creetly; which shows their anxiety for the
crop, and that they are looking to one thing
only, not to the punishment of that enemy,
but to the preservation of the seed sown.
For of course this other is not the urgent
consideration.

Wherefore how they may for the present
extirpate the mischief, this is their object.
And not even this do they seek absolutely, for
they trust not themselves with it, but await
the Master's decision, saying, " Wilt Thou ? "

What then doth the Master? He forbids
them, saying, " Lest haply ye root up the
wheat with them.'' And this He said, to
hinder wars from arising, and blood and
slaughter. For it is not right to put a heretic
to death, since an implacable war would be
brought into the world. By these two reasons
then He restrains them; one, that the wheat
be not hurt; another, that punishment will
surely overtake them, if incurably diseased.
Wherefore, if thou wouldest have them pun-
ished, yet without harm to the wheat, I bid
thee wait for the proper season.


Homily XLVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


2S9


But what means, " Lest ye root up the
wheat with them?" Either He means this,
If ye are to take up arms, and to kill the
heretics, many of the saints also must needs
be overthrown with them; or that of tlie very
tares it is likely that many may change and
become wheat. If therefore ye root them up
beforehand, ye injure that which is to become
wheat, slaying some, in whom there is yet
room for change and improvement. He doth
not therefore forbid our checking heretics,
and stopping their mouths, and taking away
their freedom of speech, and breaking up
their assemblies and confederacies, but our
killing and slaying them.

But mark thou His gentleness, how He not
only gives sentence and forbids, but sets
down reasons.

What then, if the tares should remain until
the end ? " Then I will say to the reapers,
Gather ye together first the tares, and bind
them in bundles to burn them." ' He again
reminds them of John's words,- introducing
Him as judge; and He saith. So long as they
stand by the wheat, we must spare them, for
it is possible for them even to become wheat;
but when they have departed, having profited
nothing, then of necessity the inexorable
punishment will overtake them. " For I will
say to the reapers," saith He, "Gather ye
together first the tares." Why, "first?"
That these may not be alarmed, as though
the wheat were carried off with taem. "And
bind them in bundles to burn them, but
gather the wheat into my barn." ^

2. "Anotiier parable put He forth unto
them, saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is
like to a grain of mustard seed." *

That is, since He had said, that of the
crop three parts are lost, and but one saved,
and in the very part again which is saved so
great damage ensues; lest they should say,
"And who, and how many will be the faith-
ful?" this fear again H«e removes, by the
parable of the mustard seed leading them on
to belief, and signifying that in any case the
gospel 5 shall be spread a!)road.

Therefore He brought forward the simili-
tude of this lierb, which has a very strong re-
semblance to the siil)ject in hand; "Which
indeed is the least,'' He saith, "of all seeds,
but when it is grown, it is the greatest among
herbs, and becometh a tree, so that the birils
of the air come and lodge in the [)ranches
thereof."'


« Matt. xiii. 30. a Matt. iii. 13.

1 [mow is omitted from the text of the Homily. — R.]

* [Matt. xiii. 31. [K. V., " set he Ix-fore them," etc.]
5 Krjpvyna.

* Mntt. xiii. 31. V-'- [K. V.,"is less than all," " is irrcatcr
than."]

19


Thus He meant to set forth the most de-
cisive sign of its greatness. " Even so then
shall it be with respect to the gospel too,"
saith He. Yea, for His disciples were weak-
est of all, and least of all; but nevertheless,
because of th^ great power that was in them,
It hath been unfolded ' in every part of the
world.

After this He adds the leaven to this simili-
tude, saying,

"The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto
leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three
measures of meal, until the whole was
leavened." ^

For as this converts the large quantity of
meal into its own quality,' even so shall ye
convert the whole world.

And see His wisdom, in that He brings in
things natural, implying that as the one can-
not fail to take place, so neither the other.
For say not this to me: " What shall we be
able to do, twelve men, throwing ourselves
upon so vast a multitude?" Nay, for this
very thing most of all makes your miglit
conspicuous, that ye mix witli the multitude
and are not put to flight. As therefore the
leaven then leavens the lump when it comes
close to the meal, and not simply close, but
so as to be actually mixed with it (for He
said not, "put," simply, but "hid"); so
also ye, when ye cleave to your enemies, and
are made one with them, then shall ye get
the better of them. And as the leaven,
though it be buried, yet is not destroyed, but
l)y little and little transmutes all into its own
condition; of like sort will the event be here
also, with respect to the gospel. Fear ye
not then, because I said there would be much
injurious dealing: for even so shall ye siiine
forth, and get the better of all.

But by "three measures," here. He meant
many, for He is wont to take this number for
a multitude.

And marvel not, if discoursing about the
kingdom, He made mention of a little seed
an,d of leaven; for He was discoursing with
men inexperienced ami ignorant, and such
as needed to be led on by those means. For
so simple were they, that even after all this,
they required a good deal of e.xplanation.

\Vhere now are the children of the Greeks ?
Let them learn Christ's power, seeing tlie
verity of His deeds, and on either ground let
them ailore Him, that He both foretold so
great a thing, and fulfilled it. N'ea. for it is
He that put the power into the leaven. With

" M.iit. xiii. a. [iicpvilitv (see Ltilcc xiii. 21) is the reuding
here, utul in the cumincnt. Uur best New Testament MS.s. read
iviKpv<iitv. — R.)


290


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLVL


this intent He mingled also with the multitude
those who believe on Him, that we might im-
part unto the rest of our wisdom. Let no
one therefore reprove us for being few. For
great is the power of the gospel, and that
which hath been once leavened, becomes
leaven again for what remains. And as a
spark, when it hath caught in timber, makes
what hath been burnt up already increase the
flame, and so proceeds to the rest; even so
the gospel likewise. But He said not fire,
but ■" leaven." Why might this be? Be-
cause in that case the whole effect is not of
the fire, but partly of the timber too that is
kindled, but in this the leaven doth the whole
work by itself.

3. Now if twelve men leavened the whole
world, imagine how great our baseness, in
that when we being so many are not able to
amend them that remain; we, who ought to
be enough for ten thousand worlds, and to
become leaven to them. "But they," one
may say, " were apostles." And what then ?
Were they not partakers with thee? Were
they not brought up in cities ? Did they not
enjoy the same benefits ? Did they not prac-
tise trades ? What, were they angels ? What,
came they down from Heaven ?

" But they had signs," it will be said. It
was not the signs that made them admirable.
How long shall we use those miracles as
cloaks for our own remissness ? Beliold the
choir of the Saints, that they shone not by those
miracles.^ Why, many who had actually cast
out devils, because they wrought iniquity, in-
stead of being admired, did even incur pun-
ishment.

And what can it be then, he will say, that
showed them great ? Their contempt of
wealth, their despising glory, their freedom
from worldly things. Since surely, had they
wanted these qualities, and been slaves of
their passions, though they had raised ten
thousand dead, so far from doing any good,
they would even have been accounted de-
ceivers. Thus it is their life, so bright on all
sides, which also draws down the grace of the
Spirit.

What manner of miracle did John work,
that he fixed on himself the attention ^ of so
many cities? For as to the fact that he did
no wondrous works, hear the evangelist, say-
ing, " John did no miracle." ^ And whence
did Elias become admirable ? Was it not


1 This sentence is printed in italics, as not appearing in many
of the MSs. It is evidently a marginal note by some copyist. [It
is not found in any of the Mss. collated by Field, and was brack-
eted as doubtful by earlier editors. — R.]

2 ai'r)pT^<raTo.

3 John X. 41. [R. v., " sign," and so elsewhere in this edition
of the Homilies. The :<ame term (o-Tj/j-erov) occurs frequently in
the present context, and is uniformly rendered " miracle." — R.]


from his boldness towards the king? from
his zeal towards God ? from his voluntary
poverty ? from his garment of sheep's skin,
and his cave, and his mountains ? For his
miracles He did after all these. And as to
Job, what manner of miracle did he work in
sight of the devil, that he was amazed at him ?
No miracle indeed, but a life that shone and
displayed an endurance firmer than any
adamant. What manner of miracle did David,
yet being young, that God should say, " I
have found David the son of Jesse, a man
after mine own heart ? " " And Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, what dead body did they
raise ? what leper did they cleanse ? Knowest
thou not that the miracles, except we be sober,
do even harm in many cases ? Thus many of
the Corinthians were severed one from an-
other; thus many of the Romans were carried
away with pride; thus was Simon cast out.
Thus he, who at a certain time had a desire
to follow Christ, was rejected, when he had
been told, " The foxes have holes, and the
birds of the air nests." ^ For each of these,
one aiming at the wealth, another at the glory,
which the miracles bring, fell away and per-
ished. But care of practice, and love of vir-
tue, so far from generating such a desire,
doth even take it away when it exists.

And Himself too, when He was making
laws for His own disciples, what said He ?
" Do miracles, that men may see you '' ? By
no means. But what? "Let your light
shine before men, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your Father which is
in Heaven."* And to Peter again He said
not, *' If thou lovest me," " do miracles,'' but
" feed my sheep." ^ And whereas He every-
where distinguishes him with James and John
above all the rest, for what, I pray thee, did
He distinguish them ? For their miracles ?
Nay, all alike cleansed the lepers, and raised
the dead; and to all alike He gave that
authority. •

Whence then had these the advantage ?
From the virtue in their soul. Seest thou
how everywhere practice is required, and the
proof by works ? " For by their fruits," saith
He, "ye shall know them."* And what
commends our own life ? Is it indeed a dis-
play of miracles, or the perfection of an ex-
cellent conversation ? Very evidently it is
the second; but as to the miracles, they both
have their origin from hence, and terminate
herein. For both He that shows forth an
excellent life, draws to Himself this gift, and
he that receives the gift, receives it for this
end, that he may amend other men's lives.


4 Acts xlii. 22.
7 John xxi. if.


5 Matt. viii. 20.
8 Matt. vii. 16.


6 Matt. V. 16.


Homily XLVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


291


Since even Christ for this end wrought those '
miracles, that having made Himself thereby
credible, and drawn men unto Him, He might
bring virtue into our life. Wherefore also
He lays more stress of the two on this. For
He is not at all satisfied with the signs only,
but He also threatens hell, and promises a
kingdom, and lays down tliose startling laws,
and all things He orders to this end, that He
may make us equal to the angels.

And why say I, that Christ doth all for this
object? Why, even thou, should one give
thee thy choice, to raise dead men by His
name, or to die for His name; which I pray
thee, of the two wouldest thou rather accept ?
Is it not quite plain, the latter? and yet the
one is a miracle, the other but a work. And
what, if one offered thee to make grass gold,
or to be able to despise all wealth as grass,
wouldest tiiou not rather accept this latter ?
and very reasonably. For mankind would
be attracted by this more than any way. For
if they saw the grass changed into gold, they
would covet themselves also to acquire that
power, as Simon did, and the love of money
would be increased in them; but if they saw

and neirlectin": 2;old. as


us


all contemning


though it were grass, they would long ago
have been delivered from this disease.

4. Seest thou that our practice has more
power to do good ? By practice I mean, not
thy fasting, nor yet thy strewing sackcloth
and ashes under thee, but if thou despise
wealth, as it ought to be despised; if thou be
kindly affectioned, if thou give thy bread to
the hungry, if thou control anger, if thou cast
out vainglory, if thou put away envy. So He
Himself used to teach: for, " Learn of me," I
saith He, "for I am meek and lowly in
heart."' He did not say, "for I fasted,"
although surely He might have spoken of the
forty days, yet He saith not this; but, " I am
meek and lowly in heart." And again, when
sending them out, He said not, " Fast," but,
" Eat of all that is set before you." - With
regard to wealth, however. He required of
them great strictness, saying, '' I'rovide not
gold, or silver, or l)rass, in your purses." '

And all this I say, not to depreciate fast-
ing, (lod forbid, but rather highly to com-
mend it. lUit I grieve wlien other duties

■ Matt. xi. 39.

a I.uke X. 7, 8 ; compare i Cor. x. ij. ['I'hc two pu^isagcs are
combined. — R.]
1 .Matt. X. 9.


being neglected, ye think it enough for salva-
tion, having but the last place in the choir of
virtue. For the greatest thing is charity, and
moderation, and almsgiving; which hits a
higher mark even than virginity.

Wherefore, if thou desire to become equal
to the apostles, there is nothing to hinder
thee. For to have arrived at tliis virtue only
suffices for thy not at all falling short of them.
Let no one therefore wait for miracles.^ For
though the evil spirit is grieved, when he is
driven out of a body, yet much more so,
when he sees a soul delivered from sin. For
indeed this is his great power. ^ This power
caused Christ to die, that He might put an
end to it. Yea, for this brought in death;
by reason of this all things have been turned
upside down. If then thou remove this, thou
hast cut out the nerves of the devil, thou
hast "bruised his head,'' thou hast put an
end to all his might, thou hast scattered his
host, thou hast exhibited a sign greater than
all signs.

The saying is not mine, but the blessed
Paul's. For when he had said, "Covet
earnestly the best gifts, and yet show I unto
you a more excellent way;"* he did not
speak next of a sign, but of charity, the root
of all our good things. If then we practise
this, and all the self-denial that flows from it.
w^e shall have no need of signs; even as on
the other hand, if we do not practise it, we
shall gain nothing by the signs.

Bearing in mind then all this, let us imitate
those things whereby the apostles became
great. And whereby did they become great ?
Hear Peter, saying, " Behold we have for-
saken all, and followed Thee; what shall we
have therefore ?" ' Hear also Christ saying
to them. Ye shall sit upon twelve thrones,"
and, "everyone that hath forsaken houses,
or brethren, or fatlier, or mother, shall re-
ceive an hundredfold in this world, and shall
inherit everlasting life."* From all worUUy
things, therefore, let us withdraw ourselves,
and dedicate ourselves to Christ, that we may
both be made equal to the apostles according
to His declaration, ami may enjoy eternal life;
unto which may we all attain, by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ to whom be glory and might forever
and ever. Amen.


4 avafiaXX4aBia (k <rr)(i.ila. 5 Acta. viii. 10,

* I Cor. xii. 31. 7 Matt. xix. jj.

" Mutt. V. 39; compare Murk x. jo, I.uke viii. 30.


292


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLVII.


HOMILY XLVII.

Matt. XIII. 34, 35.

All these things spake Jesus unto the multitudes in parables, and without a parable spake
He not' unto them; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet,
saying, I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things that have been kept
secret^ from the foundation of the world.'' ^


But Mark saith, " As they were able to
hear it, He spake the word unto them in
parables." "

Then pointing out that He is not making a
new thing, He brings in the Prophet also, pro-
claiming beforehand this His manner of
teaching. And to teach us the purpose of
Christ, how He discoursed in this manner,
not that they might be ignorant, but that He
might lead them to inquiry, he added, " And
without a parable spake He nothing unto
them." Yet surely He did say many things
without a parable; but then nothing. And
for all this no man asked Him questions,
whereas the Prophets, we know, they were
often questioning: as Ezekiel,^ for instance;
as many others: but these did no such thing.
Yet surely His sayings were enough to cast
them into perplexity, and to stir them up to
the inquiry; for indeed a very sore punish-
ment was threatened by those parables: how-
ever, not even so were they moved.

Wherefore also He left them and went
away. For,

" Then," saith he, " Jesus sent the multi-
tudes away,^ and went into His house."'

And not one of the Scribes follows Him;
whence it is clear that for no other purpose
did they follow, than to take hold of Him.^
But when they marked not His sayings,
thenceforth He let them be.

" And His disciples come unto Him, ask-
ing Him concerning the parable of the
tares ; "' although at times wishing to learn,
and afraid '° to ask. Whence then arose their
confidence in this instance ? They had been
told, " To you it is given to know the mys-
teries of the kingdom of Heaven ; " and they
were emboldened. Wherefore also they ask


' [R. v., " nothing," following a reading accepted by Chrysos-
tom, both here and in the comments. The received text has "not."
-R.l

2[R. v., " things hidden."]

3 Comp. Ps. Ixxviii. 2. 4 Matt. iv. 33.

5 Ezek. xii. 9, xxiv. 19, xxxvii. 18.

6 I R. v., " he left the multitudes." Compare the previous sen-
tence. But Chrysostom, with the rec. text, inserts " Jesus." — R.]

7 \Iatt. xiii. 36, the house (rec. text). 8 lTri\a8e<T0ai..
9 [Matt. xiii. 36, freely cited.] lo Mark ix. 32.


in private; not as grudging the multitude,
but observing their Master's law. For, " To
these," saith He, " it is not given."

And why may it be that they let pass the
parable of the leaven, and of the mustard
seed, and inquire concerning this ? They let
those pass, as being plainer; but about this,
as having an affinity to that before spoken,
and as setting forth something more than it,
they are desirous to learn (since He would
not have spoken the same to them a second
time) ; for indeed they Saw how severe was
the threatening therein uttered." Wherefore
neither doth He blame them, but rather com-
pletes His previous statements.

And, as I am always saying, the parables
must not be explained throughout word for
word, since many absurdities will follow;
this even He Himself is teaching us here in
thus interpreting this parable. Thus He saith
not at all who the servants are that came to
Him, but, implying that He brought them in,
for the sake of some order, and to make up
the picture, He omits that part, and inter-
prets those that are most urgent and essential,
and for the sake of which the parable was
spoken; signifying Himself to be Judge and
Lord of all.

"And He answered," so it is said, "and
said unto them. He that soweth the good seed is
the Son of Man; the field is the world, the
good seed, these are the children of the king-
dom, but the tares are the children of the
wicked one; the enemy that soweth them is
the devil ; and the harvest is the end of the
world, and the reapers are angels. As there
fore the tares are gathered and burned in the
fire; so shall it be in the end of this world.
The Son of Man shall send His angels, and
they shall gather out of His kingdom all things
that offend, and them which do iniquity; " '^


'I This passage is translated according to a conjectural emen-
dation of Mr. Field. [The Greek text seems to be corrupt here.
The Mss. readings yield no intelligible sense that can be consid-
ered correct. — R.]

12 Or, "produce lawlessness," tou? TroioCrTas rriv avofiiav, in
which sense it seems more directly applicable to heretics, who


HOMTLY XLVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


293


and shall cast them into the furnace of fire,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Then shall the righteous shine forth as the
sun in the kingdom of their Father." '

For-whereas He Himself is the sower, and
that of His own field, and out of His own
kingdom He gathers, it is quite clear that the
present world also is His.

But mark His unspeakable love to man,
and His leaning to bounty, and His disinclina-
tion to punishment; in that, when He sows,
He sows in His own person, but when He
punishes, it is by others, that is, by the
angels.

"Then shall the righteous shine forth as
the sun in the kingdom of their Father."
Not because it will be just so much only, but
because this star is surpassed in brightness
by none that we know. He uses the compar-
isons that are known to us.

And yet surely elsewhere He saith, the
harvest is already come; as when He saith of
the Samaritans, " Lift up your eyes, and look
on the fields; for they are white already to
harvest " " And again, "The harvest truly
is plenteous, but the laborers are few." 3
How then saith He there, that the harvest i.§
already come, while here He said, it is yet to
be ? According to another signification.

And how having elsewhere said, "One
soweth, and another reapeth,"'' doth He
here say, it is Himself that soweth? Be-
cause there again, He was speaking, to dis-
tinguish the apostles, not from Himself, but
from the prophets, and that in the case of the
Jews and Samaritans. Since certainly it was
He who sowed through the prophets also.

And at times He calls this self-same thing
both harvest and sowing, naming it with re-
lation, now to one thing, now to another.
Thus when He is speaking of the conviction
and obedience of His converts, ' He calls the
thing "a harvest," as though He had accom-
plished all; but when He is seeking after the
fruit of their hearing. He calls it seed, and
the end, harvest.

And how saith He elsewhere, tliat " the
rigliteous are caught up first?"* Because
they are indeed caught up first, but Christ
being come, those otiiers are given over to
punishment, and then the former depart into
the kingdom of heaven. For because they
must be in heaven, but He Himself is to
come and judge all men here; having passed
sentence ujv^n these, like some king He rises


may not be vicious in their own lives, but produce a contempt of
God's law by their faUc diutriiK-s. t'ranil.

> .Matt. xiii. :}7-43. [ I'hc li)n>f citation present* few textual
variations of any Iciiid, none that affect the sense. — R.]

■ John iv. 35. 1 .Matt. ix. -^^ ; I.ukc x. j.

* John iv. 37. 5 iiiraxoi/aat^wf. '' Thess. iv. 17.


with His friends, leading them to that blessed
portion. Seest thou that the punishment is
twofold, first to be burnt up, and then to fall
from that glory?

2. But wherefore doth He still go on, when
the others have withdrawn, to speak to these
also in parables ? They had become wiser by
His sayings, so as even to understand. At
any rate, to them He saith afterwards,

"Have ye understood all these things?
They say unto Him, Yea, Lord." ' So com-
pletely, together with its other objects, did
the parable effect this too, that it made them
more clear sighted.

What then saith He again ?

"The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto
treasure hid in a field, the which when a man
hath found, he hideth, and for joy thereof
selleth all that he hath, and buyeth that field.
Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto
a merchant man seeking goodly pearls, who,
when he had found one pearl of great price,
went and sold all that he had, and bought
it."«

Much as in the other place, the mustard
seed and the leaven have but some little dif-
ference from each other, so here also these
two parables, that of the treasure and that of
the pearl. This being of course signified by
both, that we ought to value the gospel above
all things. And the former indeed, of the
leaven and of the mustard seed, was spoken
with a view to the power of the gospel, and
to its surely prevailing over the world; but
these declare its value, and great price. For
as it extends itself like mustard seed, and
prevails like leaven, so it is precious like a
pearl, and affords full abundance like a treas-
ure. We are then to learn not this only,
that we ought to strip ourselves of everything
else, and cling to the gospel, but also that we
are to do so with joy; and when a man is dis-
possessing himself of his goods, he is to know
that the transaction is gain, and not loss.

Seest thou how both the gospel is hid in
the world, and the good things in the gospel ?

Except thou sell all, thou buyest not; ex-
cept thou have such a soul, anxious and in-
quiring, thou findest not. Two things there-
fore are requisite, abstinence from worldly
matters, and watchfulness. For He saith
" One seeking goodly pearls, who when he
liad found one of great jirice, sold all and
bought it." I'Or the truth is one, and not in
many divisions.

And much as he that hath tlie pearl knows

7 Matt. xiii. SI- fR- v., omits " Lord," so the oldest MSS. and
the Viiljjate.— R.|

" Malt. xiii. 44-4'i. [Ilrrc also the C'.rcck text presents few
peculiarilirH ; Ty is omitted before aypy in vcnu: 44, a* in u few
M.ss. of the New Testament. — R.]


294


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLVII.


indeed himself that he is rich, but others
know not, many times, that he is holding it
in his hand (for there is no corporeal bulk);
just so also with the gospel, they that have
hold of it know that they are rich, but the
unbelievers, not knowing of this treasure, are
in igfnorance also of our wealth.

3. After this, that we may not be confident
in the gospel merely preached, nor think that
faith only suffices us for salvation, He utters
also another, an awful parable. Which then
is this ? That of the net.

" For the kingdom of Heaven is like unto
a net, that was cast into the sea, and gathered
of every kind; which, when it was full, they
drew to shore, and sat down, and gathered
the good into vessels, but cast the bad away." ^

And wherein doth this differ from the par-
able of the tares ? For there too the one are
saved, the other perish; but there, for choos-
ing of wicked doctrines; and those before this
again, for not giving heed to His sayings,
but these for wickedness of life; who are the
most wretched of all, having attained to His
knowledge, and being caught, but not even
so capable of being saved.

Yet surely He saith elsewhere, that the
shepherd Himself separates them, but here
He saith the angels do this; ^ and so with re-
spect to the tares. How then is it ? At one
time He discourses to them in a way more
suited to their dullness, ^ at another time in a
higher strain.

And this parable He interprets without so
much as being asked, but of His own motion
He explained it by one part of it, and in-
creased their awe. For lest, on being told,
"They cast the bad away," thou shouldest
suppose that ruin to be without danger; by
His interpretation He signified the punish-
ment, saying, " They will cast them into the
furnace. "'* And He declared the gnashing
of teeth, and the anguish, that it is unspeaka-
ble.

Seest thou how many are the ways of de-
struction ? By the rock, by the thorns, by
the wayside, by the tares, by the net. Not
without reason therefore did He say, " Broad
is the way that leadeth to destruction, and
many there be which go away ^ by it." *

4. Having then uttered all this, and con-
cluded His discourse in a tone to cause fear,
and signified that these are the majority of
cases (for He dwelt more on them). He saith,

" Have ye understood all these things?
They say unto Him, Yea, Lord."'

' Matt. xiii. 47, 48. [R. V., "which, when it was filled, they
drew up on the beach," etc.]

2 Matt. XXV. 32. 3 Tra)(vTepov. 4 Matt. xiii. 50.

5 aiTepxoiJievoi, Tec. text, ei<repxonei'oi. * Matt. vii. 13.

7 Matt. xiii. 51. [See note 7, p. 293. — R.]


Then because they understood, He again
praises them, saying,

" Therefore every Scribe, which is instructed
in the Kingdom of Heaven,® is like unto a
man that is an householder, which bringeth
forth out of his treasure things new and
old." 5

Wherefore elsewhere also He saith, *' I will
send you wise men and scribes."" Seest
thou how so far from excluding the Old
Testament, He even commends it, and speaks
publicly in favor of it, calling it " a treasure " ?

So that as many as are ignorant of the
divine Scriptures cannot be " householders; "
such as neither have of themselves, nor re-
ceive of others, but neglect their own case,
perishing ivith famine. And not these only,
but the heretics too," are excluded from this
blessing. For they bring not forth things
new and old. For they have not the old
things, wherefore neither have they the new;
even as they who have not the new, neither
have they the old, but are deprived of both.
For these are bound up and interwoven one
with another.

Let us then hear, as many of us as neglect
the reading of the Scriptures, to what harm
we are subjecting ourselves, to what poverty.
For when are we to apply ourselves to the
real practice of virtue, who do not so much
as know the very laws according to which our
practice should be guided ? But while the
rich, those who are mad about wealth, are
constantly shaking out their garments, that
they may not become moth-eaten; dost thou,
seeing forgetfulness worse than any moth
wasting thy soul, neglect conversing with
books ? dost thou not thrust away from thee
the pest, adorn thy soul, look continually
upon the image of virtue, and acquaint thy-
self with her members and her head ? For
she too hath a head and members more
seemly than any graceful and beautiful body.

What then, saith one, is the head of vir-
tue ? Humility. Wherefore Christ also be-
gins with it, saying, " Blessed are the poor.""
This head hath not locks and ringlets, but
beauty, such as to gain God's favor. For,
" Unto whom shall I look," saith He, "but
unto him that is meek and humble, and
trembleth at my words ?" '^ And, " Mine
eyes are upon the meek of the earth."'*
And, " The Lord is nigh unto them that are
of a contrite heart. "'= This head, instead of

8 [R. v., " hath been made a disciple to the Kingdom of Hea-
ven." Chrysostom reads «i', the received text has eis with the ac-
cusative.— R.]

9 iSIatt. xiii. 52. 10 Matt, xxiii. -(4.

II I.e. in particulartheManichaeans, and other sects which deny
the divinity of the Old Testament.

I- Matt. V. 3 ; Luke vi. 23. '3 Is. Ixvi. 2.

14 Ps. ci. 6, comp. Ps. Ixxvi. 9. '3 Ps. xxxiv. 18.


Homily XLVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


295


locks, and flowing hair, bears sacrifices ac-
ceptable to God. It is a golden altar, and a
spiritual place of sacrifice; ' " For a contrite
spirit is a sacrifice to God."= Tiiis is the
mother of wisdom. If a man have this, he
will have the rest also.

Hast thou seen a head sucli as thou hadst
never seen ? Wilt thou see the face too, or
rather mark it ? Mark then for the present
its color, how ruddy, and blooming, and very
engaging; and observe what are its ingredi-
ents. " Well, and what are they ?" Shame-
facedness and blushing. Wherefore also
someone saith, "Before a shamefaced man
shall go favor." 3 This sheds much beauty
over the other members also. Though thou
mix ten thousand colors, thou wilt not pro-
duce such a bloom.

And if thou wilt see the eyes also, behold
them exactly delineated with decency and
temperance. Wherefore they become also
so beautiful and sharpsighted, as to behold
even the Lord Himself. For, " Blessed," saith
He, " are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God."^

And her mouth is wisdom and understand-
ing, and the knowledge of spiritual hymns.
And her heart, acquaintance with Scripture,
and maintenance of sound doctrines, and
benevolence, and kindness. And as without
this last there is no living, so without that
other is never any salvation. Yea, for from
that all her excellencies have birth. She
hath also for feet and hands the manifesta-
tions of her good works. She hath a soul
too. "fodliness. She hath likewise a bosom of
gold, and firmer than adamant, even fortitude;
and all may be taken captive more easily than
that bosom may be riven asunder. And the
spirit that is in the brain and heart, is charity^

5. Wilt thou that in her actual deeds also I
show thee her image ? Consider, I pray thee,
this very evangelist: although we have not
his whole life in writing, nevertheless even
from a few facts one may see his image shine
forth.

First, as to his having been lowly and con-
trite, hear him, after his gospel, calling him-
self a publican; for his being also merciful,
see him stripping himself of all and following
Jesus; and as to his i^iety, it is evident from
his doctrines. And his wisdom again it is
easy to see from the gospel which he com-

• /3wfio«, ivtriaarfipKov. The<ie two words are commonly iisrH,
tlic former in 11 l>a(l, the other in n no<nl sense, of Hejilheii, and
Christian, or Jewish, altars respeitivcly. This seems lo \n- an in-
variahlc rule, as to the word ^uifxus, in the ( Ircek llihie, except
that it is used of the Jewish altar in the folliiwinK places of the
.\pocrypha: K.nlns. I. ij, 14; i Mncc. ii. 19 xiii. 8, which may
sufl'ue to show that it was occajtionally employed, lis by .St. Chry-
sostom here, with no unholy association.

^ I's. li. 17. 1 I'.ccliis. xxxii. 10.

4 Matt. V. 3. 5 [ayaiTf)]


posed, and his charity* (for he cared for the
whole world); and the manifestation of his
good works, from the throne on which he is
to sit; " and his courage too, " by his departing
with joy from the presence of the council." *

Let us imitate then this virtue, and most of
all his humility and almsgiving, without
which one cannot be saved. And this is
shown by the five virgins, and together with
them by the Pharisee. For without virginity
indeed it is possible to see the kingdom, but
without almsgiving it cannot be. For this
is among the things that are essential, and
hold all together. Not unnaturally then have
we called it the heart of virtue. But this
heart, unless it supply breath to all, is soon
extinguished. In the same way then as the
fountain also, if it confine its streams to it-
self, grows putrid; so it is with the rich also,
when they keep their possessions to them-
selves. Wherefore even in our common con-
versation we say, " great is the consumption '
of wealth with such a man;" instead of say-
ing) "great is the abundance, great the
treasure." For in truth there is a consump-
tion, not of the possessors only, but of the
riches themselves. Since both garments laid
by spoil, and gold is cankered, and corn is
eaten up, and the soul too of their owner is
more than they all cankered and corrupted
by the cares of them.

And if thou be willing to produce in the
midst a miser's soul; like a garment eaten by
inumerable worms, and not having any sound
part, even so wilt thou find it, perforated on
all sides by cares; rotted, cankered by sins.

But not such the poor man's soul, the soul
of him, I mean, that is voluntarily poor; but
it is resplendent as gold, it shines like a
pearl, and it blooms like a rose. For no
moth is there, no thief is there, no w(^rldly
care, but as angels converse, so do they.

Wouldest tliou see the lieauty of this soul ?
Wouldest thou acquaint thyself with the
riches of poverty? He commands not men,
but he commands evil spirits. He staiwls not
at a king's side, but lie hath taken his stand
near to Gotl. He is the comrade, not of
men, but of angels. He hath not chests, two,
or three, or twenty, but such an abundance as
to account the whole world as nothing. He
hath not a treasure, but heaven. He needs
not slaves, or rather hath his passions for
slaves, hath for slaves the motives"' that rule
■over kings. For that which commands liiin
who wears the purple, that motive shrinks
before him." .\nd royalty, and gold, and ill

6 [ayawi)!'.] 7 l.ukexxii. 30. "Acts. v. 41.

9 (T^iin, t\. d. " the wear and tear." '" AoYicffiowt.

" I I he tran-.l.iinr li. is omitted a clause : "and dares not fucc
him," «at ufTifJAei^at ov ToAfio. -K.}


296


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLVIII.


such things, he laughs at, as at children's
toys; and Hke hoops, and dice, and heads,
and balls, so doth he count all these to be
contemptible. For he hath an adorning,
which they who play with these things cannot
even see.

What then can be superior to this poor
man ? He hath at least heaven for his {pave-
ment; but if the pavement be like this,
imagine the roof ! But hath he not horses
and chariots ? Why, what need hath he of


these, who is to be borne upon the clouds,
and to be with Christ ?

Having these things then impressed on
our minds, let us, both men and women, seek
after that wealth, and the plenty that cannot
be rifled; that we may attain also unto the
kingdom of heaven, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and might forever and ever.
Amen.


HOMILY XLVIII.

Matt. XHI. 53.


'And it came to pass, that, when Jesus had finished these parables, He departed thence."


Wherefore said He, "these"? Because
He was to speak others besides. And where-
fore, again, doth He depart? Desiring to
sow the word everywhere.

"And when He was come into His own
country. He taught them in their syna-
gogue." '

And what doth he now call His country ?
As it seems to me, Nazareth. " For He did
not many mighty works there,'' " it is said,
but in Capernaum He did miracles: where-
fore He said also, "And thou, Capernaum,
which art exalted unto Heaven, shalt be
brought down to hell; for if the mighty
works, which have been done in thee, had
been done in Sodom, it would have remained
until this day," 3

But having come there, while He slackens
somewhat in His miracles; so as not to in-
flame them unto more envy, nor to condemn
them more grievously, by the aggravation of
their unbelief: He yet puts forth a doctrine,
having no less of wonder in it than the mira-
cles. For these utterly senseless men, when
they ought to have marvelled, and to have
been amazed at the power of His words, they
on the contrary hold Him cheap, because of
him who seemed to be His father; yet we
know they had many examples of these things
in the former times, and from fathers of no
note had seen illustrious children. For so
David was the son of a certain mean hus-
bandman, Jesse; and Amos, the child of a


» Matt. xiii. 54.


3 Matt. xiii. 58.


3 Matt. xi. 23.


goatherd, and himself a goatherd;* and
Moses too, the lawgiver, had a father very in-
ferior to himself. When they therefore, for
this especially, ought to adore and be amazed,
that being of such parents He spake such
things, it being quite manifest, that so it was
not of man's care, but of God's grace: yet
they, what things they should admire Him
for, for those they despise Him.

He is moreover continually frequenting the
synagogues, lest if He were always abiding
in the wilderness, they should the more ac-
cuse Him as making a schism, and fighting
against their polity.

Being amazed therefore, and in perplexity,
they said, "Whence hath this man this wis-
dom, and these powers ?" ^ either calling the
miracles powers, or even the wisdom itself.
"Is not this the carpenter's son ? " ^ The
greater then the marvel, and the more abun-
dant the ground of amaze. "Is not His
mother called Mary, and His brethren James,
and Joses,7 and Simon, and Judas ? and His
sisters, are they not all with us ? Whence
hath this man these things ? And they were
offended in Him."®

Seest thou that Nazareth was where He was
discoursing? "Are not his brethren," it is
said, " such a one, and such a one ? " And


4 Amos. vii. 14, 15.

5 Matt. xiii. 54. [R. V., margin, "Greek, powers."]

6 Matt. xiii. 55.

7 [R. v., " Joseph," following a reading better sjpported than
that of the recorded text, which agrees with that in the Homily.

8 Matt. xiii. 55, 56.


Homily XLVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


297


what of this ? Why, by this especially you
ought to have been led on to faith. But envy
you see is a poor base thing, and often falls
foul of itself. For what things were strange
and marvellous, and enough to have gained
them over, these offended them.

What then saith Christ unto them? "A
prophet." saith He, "is not without honor,
save in his own countrv, and in his own house:
and He did not,'' it is said, " many mighty
works, because of their unbelief." " But
Luke saith, "And He did not there many
miracles."' And yet it was to be expected
He should have done tliem. For if the feel-
ing of wonder towards Him was gaining
ground (for indeed even there He was mar-
velled at), wherefore did He not do them?
Because He looked not to the display of
Himself, but to their profit. Therefore when
this succeeded not, He overlooked what con-
cerned Himself, in order not to aggravate
their punishment.

And yet see after how long a time He came
to them, and after how great a display of mir-
acles: but not even so did they endure it, but
were inflamed again with envy.

Wherefore then did He yet do a few mira-
cles ? That they might not say, " Physician,
heal thyself. "3 That they might not say,
" He is a foe and an enemy to us, and over-
looks His own;" that they might not say,
"If miracles had been wrought, we also
should have believed." Therefore He both
wrought them, and stayed: the one, that He
might fulfill His own part; the other, that
He might not condemn them the more.

And consider thou the power of His
words, herein at least, that possessed as they
were by envy, they did yet admire. And as
with regard to His works, they do not find
fault with what is done, but feign causes
which have no existence, saying, " In Beelze-
])ub He casteth out the devils; '' even so here
too, they find no fault witii the teaching, but
take refuge in the meanness of His race.

But mark thou, I pray thee, the ALister's
gentleness, how He reviles them not, but
with great mildness saith, "A prophet is not
without honor, save in his own country."
And neither here did He stop, but added,
"And in his own house." To nie it appears,
that with covert reference to His very own
brethren. He made tiiis addition.

But in Luke He puts examples also of this,
saying, ttiat neitlicr did Elias come unto His
own, but to the stranger widow; neither by


' Malt. xiii. 57, 58. [Chry»o»tom omits " there."]
' Mark vi. 5. [<Tr\iitla, " ni^nH ;" but even in Mark this expres-
sion does not occur in this connection. — R.]
3 l.uke iv. 33.


Eliseus was any other leper healed, but the
stranger Naaman;^ and Israelites neither re-
ceived benefit, nor conferred benefit, but the
foreigners. And these things He saith, sig-
nifying in every instance their evil disposi-
tion, and that in His case nothing new is
taking place.

2. "At that time Herod the tetrarch heard
of the fame of Jesus." ^ For Herod the
king, this man's father, he that slew the chil-
dren, was dead.

But not without a purpose doth the evan-
gelist signify the time, but to make thee ob-
serv^e also the haughtiness of the tyrant, and his
thoughtlessness, in that not at the beginning
did he inform himself about Christ, but after
a very long time.* For such are they that
are in places of power, and are encompassed
with much pomp, they learn these things late,
because they do not make much account of
them.

I But mark thou, I pray thee, how great a
thing virtue is, that he was afraid of him even
when dead, and out of his fear he speaks
wisely even concerning a resurrection.

" For he said," it is mentioned, " unto his
servants. This is John, whom I slew, he is
risen from the dead, and therefore the mighty
powers do work in him."^ Seest thou the
intensity of his fear? for neither then did he
dare to publish it abroad, but he still speaks
but to his own servants.

But yet even this opinion savored of the
soldier, and was absurd. For many besides
had risen from the dead, and no one had
wrought anything of the kind. And his
words seem to me to be the language both of
vanity, and of fear. For such is ttie nature
of unreasonable souls, tliey admit often a
mixture of opposite passions.

But Luke affirms that the multitudes said,
" This is Elias, or Jeremias, or one of the
old prophets,'"* but he, as uttering forsooth
something wiser than the rest, made this as-
sertion.

But it is probable that before this, in an-
swer to tliem tiiat said He was John (for
many had said this too), lie liad ilenied it,
and said, " I slew him," priding himself and
glorying in it. For this both Mirk and Luke
report tluit he said, "John I beiieaded."'
But when tlie rumor prevaileil, then he too
saith the same as tiie people.

Then the evangelist relates to us also tlie
history. And what might his reason be for


4 I. like iv. 1^-tj.

5 Malt. xiv. 1. fR. v., "the report ccincernini; Jesus. "|

*>*' I'crsf'it uum est f>rir,iu at ioni-m Christi rti^fi munJi anjirt
MCvistiinns." St. Jerome, inJi'Hinn. c. iii.

? Matt. xiii. a. " l.uke ix. 8. Comp. .Malt. xvi. 14.

9 Murk vi. 16 ; l.uke ix. 9


298


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLVIII.


not introducing it as a subject by itself ? '
Because all their labor entirely was to tell
what related to Christ, and they made them-
selves no secondary work besides this, except
it were again to contribute to the same end.
Therefore neither now would they have men-
tioned the history were it not on Christ's ac-
count, and because Herod said, " John is


risen agani.


But Mark saith, that Herod exceedingly
honored the man, and this, when reproved.^
So great a thing is virtue.

Then his narrative proceeds thus: "For
Herod had laid hold on John, and bound
him, and put him in prison, for Herodias'
sake, his brother Philip's wife. For John
said unto him, It is not lawful for thee to
have her. And when he would have put him
to death, he feared the people, because they
counted him as a prophet," ^

And wherefore doth he not address his
discourse at all to her, but to the man ? Be-
cause it depended more on him.

But see how inoffensive he makes his ac-
cusation, as relating a history rather than
bringing a charge.

4. " But when Herod's birth-da)' was
kept," * saith he, " the daughter of Herodias
danced before tnem,^ and pleased Herod." ^
O diabolical revel ! O satanic spectacle ! O
lawless dancing ! and more lawless reward for
the dancing. For a murder more impious
than all murders was perpetrated, and he
that was worthy to be crowned and publicly
honored, was slain in the midst, and the tro-
phy of the devils was set on the table.

And the means too of the victory were
worthy of the deeds done. For,

" The daughter of Herodias," it is said,
"danced in the midst, and pleased Herod.
Whereupon he swore ^ with an oath to give
her whatsoever she would ask. And she
being before instructed of ^ her mother, said,
Give me here John Baptist's head in a
charger. "9

Her reproach is twofold; first, that she
danced, then that she pleased him, and so
pleased him, as to obtain even murder for her
reward.

Seest thou how savage he was ? how sense-
less ? how foolish ? in putting himself under
the obligation of an oath, while to her he
gives full power over her request.

But when he saw the evil actually ensuing,

I Trporj-you/iefu)?. 2 Mark vi. 20. 3 Matt. xiii. 3-5.

4 [R. v., "come;" rec. te.\t as in Homilv.]

5 [R. v., " in the midst ; " so Homilv, see below.— R.]
•5 Matt. xiii. 6.

7 [" Swore " is substituted for " promised ; " peculiar to Chry-
sostom, but probably borrowed from Mark vi. 23. — R.]
^ [R. v., " being put forward by."]
9 Matt. xiii. 6-8.


" he was sorry," '° it is said; and yet in the
first instance he had put him in bonds.
Wherefore then is he sorry ? Such is the
nature of virtue, even amongst the wicked
admiration and praises are its due. But alas
for her madness ! When she too ought to
admire, yea, to bow down to him, for trying
to redress her wrong, she on the contrary
even helps to arrange the plot, and lays a
snare, and asks a diabolical favor.

But he was afraid " for the oath's sake," it
is said, "and them that sat at meat with
him," And how didst thou not fear that
which is more grievous ? Surely if thou wast
afraid to have witnesses of thy perjury, much
more oughtest thou to fear having so many
witnesses of a murder so lawless.

But as I think many are ignorant of the
grievance itself, whence the murder had its
origin, I must declare this too, that ye may
learn the wisdom of the lawgiver. What
then was the ancient law, which Herod in-
deed trampled on, but John vindicated ? The
wife of him that died childless was to be given
to liis brother." For since death was an in-
curable ill, and all was contrived for life's
sake; He makes a law that the living brother
should marry her, and should call the child
that is born by the name of the dead, so that
his house should not utterly perish. For if
the dead were not so much as to leave chil-
dren, which is the greatest mitigation of death,
the sorrow would be without remedy. There-
fore you see, the lawgiver devised this re-
freshment for those who were by nature
deprived of children, and commanded the
issue to be reckoned as belonging to the
other.

But when there was a child, this marriage
was no longer permitted. "And wherefore ? "
one may say, " for if it was lawful for an-
other, much more for the brother." By no
means. For He will have men's consan-
guinity extended, and the sources multiplied
of our interest in each otlier.

Why then, in the case also of death with-
out offspring, did not another marry her ?
Because it would not so be accounted the
child of the departed; but now his brother
begetting it, the fiction oecame probable.
And besides, any other man had no constrain-
ing call to build up the house of the dead,
but this had incurred the claim by relation-
ship.

Forasmuch then as Herod had married his
brother's wife, when she had a child, there-
fore John blames him, and blames him with
moderation, showing together with his bold-
ness, his consideration also.


10 Matt. xiii. 9. [R. V., " was grieved."] " Deut. xxv. 5,


Homily XLVIII.J


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


299


But mark thou, I pray thee, how the whole
theatre was deviUsh. For first, it was made
up of drunkenness and hixury, whence noth-
ing healthful could come. Secondly, the
spectators in it were depraved, and he that
gave the banquet' the worst transgressor of
all. Thirdly, there was the irrational pleas-
ure. Fourthly, the damsel, because of whom
the marriage was illegal, who ought even to
have hid herself, as though her mother were
dishonored by iier, comes making a show,
and throwing into the shade all harlots, vir-
gin as she was.

And the time again contributes no little to
the reproof of this enormity. For when he
ought to be thanking God, that on that day
He had brought him to light, then he ven-
tures upon tliose lawless acts. When one in
chains ought to have been freed by him, then
he adds slaughter to bonds.

Hearken, ye virgins, or rather ye wives
also, as many as consent to such unseemliness
at other person's weddings, leaping, and
bounding, and disgracing our common
nature. Hearken, ye men too, as many as
follow after those banquets, full of expense
and drunkenness, and fear ye the gulf of the
evil one. For mdeed so mightily did he
seize upon that wretched person just then,
that he sware even to give the half of his
kingdojn: this being Mark's statement, " He
sware unto her, Whatsoever thou shalt ask of
me, I will give it thee, unto the half of my
kingdom." '

Such was the value he set upon his royal
power; so was he once for all made captive
by his passion, as to give up his kingdo/n for
a dance. -

And why marvel at these things so happen-
ing then, since even now, after the coming in
of so high a wisdom, for a dance' sake many
of these effeminate young men give up their
very souls, and that without constraint of any
oath ? For l)eing made captive by the pleas-
ure, they are led like sheep, wheresoever the
wolf may drag them; which was then the case
with that frenzied man, wlio was guilty of two
extreme acts of madness; first, in making it
depend on her that was so madtlened, and
intoxicated with her passion, and siirinking
from nothing; next, in making tiie deed fast
with tiie constraint of an o.'ith.

5. V)\\i albeit lie was so wicked, that base
woman was more wicked than all of them,
both the d.imsel and the tyrant. For she was
the very first contriver of all the mischiefs,
and the framer of the whole plot (she who

' Mark vi. 2^.

■J (4i' opxiff"' aiiT-^t irapa)(u>p^<rat, " to concede for the ukc of
her diincc.' --R.]


most of all ought to have been thankful to the
prophet); since it was in obedience to her
that her daughter both disgraced herself, and
danced, and sought the murder; and Herod
wjis entrapped by her.

Seest thou how justly Christ said, " He
that lovetli father or mother more than me,
is not worthy of me."^ For had she kept
this law, she would not have trangressed so
man}' laws, she would not have perpetrated
this foul murder.

For what could be worse than this brutal
fierceness ? to ask a murder by way of a
favor, a lawless murder, a murder in the
midst of a banquet, a murder publicly, and
without shame ? Since she went not unto
him privately to speak of these things, but
publicly, and with lier mask thrown off, bare-
faced, and having got the devil to plead with
her, in this guise she saith whatever siie saith.
Yea, and he it was that caused her at all to
get credit by her dancing, and to catch Herod
at that moment. For where dancing is,
there is the evil one. For neither did God
give us feet for this end, but that we may
walk orderly: not that we may behave our-
selves unseemly, not that we may jump like
camels (for even tl;ey too are disagreeable
when dancing, much more women), but that
we may join the choirs of angels.

For if the body is base, thus making itself
unseemly, much more the soul. Like this
is the dancing of tiie demons, like this, the
jesting of such as are servants of the demons.

And mark too the very mode of asking.
"Give me here John Baptist's head in a
charger." Dost thou see lier lost to all
shame, become altogether the ilevil's? Slie
mentions his very office, and not even so
does she hide her face, but as if it were some
viand she is speaking of, just so doth slie ask
for that sacred and blessed heail to be
brought in in a charger.

And she doth not so much as assign a
cause, for neither had she one to mention,
but she claims simply to be complimented
by the calamities of others. .And she said
not, " Bring him in here, and slay him," for
she could not have endured his bold language
even when he was about to die. Yea, and
she dreaded to hear his awful voice, even
wl'.en enduring slaughter; for not on the very
point of being beiicailed would he have kept
silence. Therefore she saith, " Give mc here
in a chnrger, " for " I long to see that tongue
silent: " lar object being, not simply to be rid
of iiis rcjiroofs, but also to trample upon
him, and (Icridc him when f;illi'n.

3 Matt. X. 37.


300


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLVIII.


Yet God endured it, and neither dis-
charged His thunderbolt from above to scorch
her shameless countenance, nor commanded
the earth to open, and receive that wicked
revel; at once both crowning the righteous
man more signally, and leaving much conso-
lation to them that hereafter suffer anything
unjustly.

6. Let us hearken therefore, as many as
suffer ill, living in virtue, at the hands of
wicked men. For then too God endured
that even he in the wilderness, he in the
leathern girdle, in the garment of hair, the
prophet, the man greater than all prophets,
who had no superior among those born of
women, should actually be murdered, and
that by an immodest damsel, and a corrupt
harlot, and all in vindicating the laws of God.
These things then let us consider, and bear
all nobly, whatever we may suffer.

For then too this bloodthirsty and lawless
woman, as far as she desired to take ven-
geance on him that had grieved her, so far did
she prevail, and satiated all her anger, and
God permitted it. And yet to her he had
said nothing, nor had he accused her, but he
found fault with the man only. But her con-
science was a bitter accuser. Wherefore also
she was led on in frenzy to greater evils,
being grieved, and stung, and she disgraced
all at once, herself, her daughter, her de-
parted husband, her living paramour, and
tried to surpass her former acts. For "if
thou art vexed," saith she, " at his commit-
ting adultery, I make him a murderer also,
and cause him to be the slayer of his re-
prover."

Hearken, as many as are unduly excited
about women.

Hearken, as many as proffer oaths about
things uncertain, and give others power for
your own destruction, and dig a pit for your
selves.

Yea, for so came this man's ruin. I mean,
he surely expected her to ask some request
suitable to the feast, and that being a damsel,
and asking a favor at a banquet, and revel,
and solemn assembly, she would ask some-
thing cheerful, and gracious, and surely not
a head; and he was deceived.

But nevertheless none of these things will
be a plea for him. And what if she had at-
tained the spirit of the men that fight with
wild beasts ? nevertheless he ought not to
have been deceived, nor to have ministered
to such tyrannical injunctions.

For, in the first place, who would not have
shuddered to see that sacred head, dropping
blood, set forth at the feast ? But not so the
lawless Herod, nor the woman more accursed


than he. For such is the nature of the un-
chaste among women; none so audacious and
so savage as they.

For if we shudder at hearing these things,
what must we suppose of the effect of that
sight at the time ? what of the feeling of those
who sat with him at meat, on seeing blood
dropping from a newly-severed head in the
midst of the revel ? But as for that blood-
thirsty woman, and fiercer than furies, she
had no feeling at that spectacle, but even took
delight in it, yet if nothing else, surely the
mere sight, it was to be expected, would
effectually turn her cold. But no such feel-
ing had she, the murderess, and full of thirst
after prophets' blood.

For such is the nature of whoredom. It
makes men not wanton only, but murderous
also. Those women at all events, who desire
to commit adultery, are prepared even for the
slaying of their injured husbands, and not
one only, nor two, but ten thousand murders
are they ready to venture upon. And of this
sort of tragic plots there are many witnesses.
Which thing she also did at that time,
looking to be concealed after this, and to hide
her crime. The very contrary whereunto
was the result; for John's cry was heard more
loudly after these things. But wickedness
looks to the present only, like fevered per-
sons unseasonably asking for cold - water.
For in fact, if she had not slain her accuser,

[ her crime would not have been so completely
discovered. His disciples at least, when she
had thrown him into prison, said nothing of
the kind; but when she had slain him, then
they were compelled to mention the cause
also. For willing as they were to have con-

[ cealed the adulteress, and not inclined to ex-
pose their neighbor's calamities; yet when

I they found themselves compelled to give an
account of it, then they tell the whole crime.
For lest any one should suspect that the cause
of his slaughter was a discreditable one, as
in the case of Theudas and Judas,' they are
constrained to tell the occasion also of the

j murder. So that the more thou wouldest
dissemble a sin in this way, so much the more
dost thou expose it. For sin is not hidden

I by the addition of sin, but by repentance and
confession.

7. But see the evangelist, how he relates
all without invidiousness, and as far as he
can, absolutely makes out an excuse. Thus
first in behalf of Herod he saith, " For the
oath's sake, and them which sat with him at
meat," and that " he was sorry; " then of the
damsel, " Being before instructed of her

I Acts V. 36. 37.


Homily XLVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


301


mother," and that " she brouglit the head to
her mother; " as though he had said, it was
her command that she was fulfilHng. Since
not for the sufferers but for the wrongdoers
do all righteous men grieve, since in fact
these are they who properly speaking suffer
ill. For neither was John injured, but these
the contrivers of such proceedings.

Them let us also imitate, and not trample
upon our neiglibors' sins, but so far as is
right, shadow them over. Let us take to
ourselves a soul severe in goodness. For so
the very evangelist, speaking of a harlot and
a blood-staineJ woman, avoided harshness, as
far as might be. For neither did he say,
"by the blood-stained and accursed woman,''
but " being before instructed of her mother," '
using such names as have rather an innocent
sound. I

But thou dost even insult and revile thy
neighbor, and couldest nevw endure to make
mention of a brother that had grieved thee in j
such terms, as he hath done of the harlot,
but with much brutal fierceness, and re-
proaches, calling him the wicked one, the
malefactor, the crafty, the fool, and many
other names more grievous than these. For
so we make ourselves more and more like!
wild beasts, and talk of him as of a man of |
monstrous origin,'' vilifying, reviling, insult-
ing. But not so the saints; they on the con-
trary mourn for such as sin, rather than curse
them. I

8. This then let us also do, and let us
weep for Herod ias, and for them that imitate j
her. For many such revels now also take I
place, and though John be not slain, yet the
members of Christ are, and in a far more
grievous way. For it is not a head in a
charger that the dancers of our time ask, but
the souls of them that sit at the feast. For
in making them slaves, and leading them to
unlawful loves, and besetting them with har- j
lots, they do not take off the head, but slay [
the soul, making them adulterers, and effem-
inate, and whoremongers.

For thou wilt not surely tell me, that wlien
full of wine, and drunken, antl looking at a
woman who is dancing and uttering base
words, thou dost not feel anything towards
her, neither art hurried on to i^rofligacy, over-
come by thy lust. Nay, that awful thing be-
falls thee, that thou " makest the members
of Ciirist members of an harlot."^ i

For tiiou;;h tlie d.mgliter of Herodias be
not present, yet the devil, who then danced


■ ^k V , "bciii){ put forwnrd by her iimtlicr. "
3 oAAoyeKoOf , which scciiih lo be op|Knied to ai)$iyti/ovf, "of
genuine origin."
3 I Cor. vi. 15.


in her person, in theirs also holds his choirs
now, and departs with the souls of those
guests taken captive.

But if ye are able to keep clear of drunken-
ness, yet are ye partakers of anotiier most
grievous sin; such revels being also full of
mucii rapine. For look not, I pray thee, on
the meats that are set before them, nor on
the cakes; but consider whence they are
gathered, and thou wilt see that it is of vexa-
tion, and covetousness, and violence, and
rapine.

"Nay, ours are not from such sources,"
one may say. God forbid they should be:
for neither do I desire it. Nevertheless,
although they be clear of these, not even so
are our costly feasts freed from blame.
Hear, at all events, how even apart from tliese
things the prophet finds fault with them,
thus speaking, " Woe to them that drink
wine racked off, and anoint themselves witli
the chief ointments."* Seest thou how He
censures lu.\ury too ? For it is not covetous-
ness which He here lays to their charge, but
prodigality only.

And thou eatest to excess, Christ not even
for need; thou various cakes. He not so much
as dry bread; thou drinkest Thasian wine,
but on Him thou hast not bestowed so much
as a cup of cold water in His thirst. Thou
art on a soft and embroidered bed, but He is
perishing with the cold.

Wherefore, though the banquets be clear
from covetousness, yet even so are they ac-
cursed, because, while for thy part thou doest
all in excess, to Him thou givest not even His
need; and that, living in luxury upon things
that belong to Him. Why, if thou wert
guardian to a child, and having taken posses-
sion of his goods, were to neglect him in ex-
tremities, thou wouldest have ten thousaml
accusers, and wouldest suffer the punishment
appointed by the laws; and now having taken
possession of the goods of Christ, and tiuis
consuming them for no purpose, dost thou
not think thou wilt have to give account ?

9. And these things I say not of those who
introduce harlots to their tables (for to them
I have nothing to say, even as neither have 1
to the ilogs), nor of those who cheat some,
and pamper others (for neither with them
have I anyliiing to do, even as I have not
with the swine and with the wolv<.-s); but of
those who enjoy indeed their own property,
but do lint impart thereof to otlieis; of tliose
wlio spend their patrimony at random. For
neither are these clear from repreliension.

l*"or l)ow, til! me, wilt thou escape reprov-


4 Amot vi. 6, LXX. [r&v tivXioinvitv o'ifov.]


302


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLVIII.


ing and blame, while thy parasite is pam-
pered, and the dog that stands by thee, but
Christ's worth appears to thee even not equal
to theirs ? when the one receives so much for
laughter's sake, but the other for the King-
dom of Heaven not so much as the smallest
fraction thereof. And while the parasite, on
saying something witty, goes away filled;
this Man, who hath taugnt us, what if we
had not learnt we should have been no better
than the dogs, — is He counted unworthy of
even the same treatment with such an one ?

Dost thou shudder at being told it ? Shud-
der then at the realities. Cast out the par-
asites, and make Christ to sit down to meat
with thee. " If He partake of thy salt, and of
thy table. He will be mild in judging thee:
He knows how to respect a man's table.'
Yea, if robbers know this, much more the
Lord. Think, for instance, of that harlot,
how at a table He justified her, and upbraids
Simon, saying, "Thou gavest me no kiss."^
I say, if He feed thee, not doing these things,
much more will He reward thee, doing them.
Look not at the poor man, that he comes to
thee filthy and squalid, but consider that
Christ by him is setting foot in thine house,
and cease from thy fierceness, and thy re-
lentless words, with which thou art even as-
persing such as come to thee, calling them
impostors, idle, and other names more griev-
ous than these.

And think, when thou art talking so, of
the parasites; what kind of works do they ac-
complish ? in what respect do they profit thine
house ? Do they really make thy dinner
pleasant to thee ? pleasant, by their being
beaten and saying foul words ? Nay, what
can be more unpleasing than this, when thou
smitest him that is made after God's likeness,
and from thine insolence to him gatherest en-
joyment for thyself, making thine house a
theatre, and filling thy banquet with stage-
players, thou who art well born and free imi-
tating the actors with their heads shaven ?3
For among them too is laughter, and rude
blows.

These things then dost thou call pleasure,
I pray thee, which are deserving of many
tears, of much mourning and lamentation ?
And when it were fit to urge them to a good
life, to give timely advice, dost thou lead
them on to perjuries, and disorderly language.


1 That is, to respect the obligation incurred by having been a
person's guest.

2 Luke vii. 54.

3 Comp. Homily XXXVII. 8. Of such parasites Juvenal says,
(Sat. V. 170,)

Omnia ferre
Si potes, et debes. Pulsandum Tertice raso
Praebebis quandoque caput, nee dura timebis
Flagra pati, his epulis et tali dignus amico.
See Mr. Field's note.


and call the thing a delight ? and that which
procures hell, dost thou account a subject of
pleasure ? Yea, and when they are at a loss
for witty sayings, they pay the whole reckon-
ing wita oaths and false swearing. Are these
things then worthy of laughter, and not of
lamentations and tears ? Nay, who would say
so, that hath understanding ?

And this I say, not forbidding them to be
fed, but not for such a purpose. Nay, let
their maintenance have the motive of kind-
ness, not of cruelty; let it be compassion, not
insolence. Because he is a poor man, feed
him; because Christ is fed, feed him; not for
introducing satanical sayings, and disgracing
his own life. Look not at him outwardly
laughing, but examine his conscience, and
then thou wilt see him uttering ten thousand
imprecations against himself, and groaning,
and wailing. And if he do not show it, this
also is due to th€e.

10. Let the companions of thy meals then
be men that are poor and free, not perjured
persons, nor stage-players. And if thou
must needs ask of them a requital for their
food, enjoin them, should they see anything
done that is amiss, to rebuke, to admonish,
to help thee in thy care over thine household,
in the government of thy servants. Hast
thou children ? Let these be joint fathers to
them, let them divide thy charge with thee,
let them yield thee such profits as God loveth.
Engage them in a spiritual traffic. And if
thou see one needing protection, bid them
succor, command them to minister. By
these do thou track the strangers out, by
these clothe the naked, by these send to the
prison, put an end to the distresses of others.

Let them give thee, for their food, this re-
quital, which profits both thee and them, and
carries with it no condemnation.

Hereby friendship also is more closely
riveted. For now, though they seem to be
loved, yet for all that they are ashamed, as
living without object in thy house; but if they
accomplish these purposes, both they will
be more pleasantly situated, and thou wilt
have more satisfaction in maintaining them,
as not spending thy money without fruit;
and they again will dwell with thee in bold-
ness and due freedom, and thy house, instead
of a theatre, will become to thee a church,
and tae devil will be put to flight, and Christ
will enter, and the choir of the angels. For
where Christ is, there are the angels too,
and where Christ and the angels are, there is
Heaven, there is a light more cheerful than
this of the sun.

And if thou wouldest reap yet another con-
solation through their means, command them,


Homily XLIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


303


when thou art at leisure, to take their books
and read the divine law. They will have
more pleasure in so ministering to you, than
in the other way. For these things add re-
spect both to thee and to them, but those
bring disgrace upon all together; upon thee
as an insolent person and a drunkard, upon
them as wretched and gluttonous. For if
thou feed in order to insult them, it is worse
than if thou hadst put them to death; but if
for their good and profit, it is more useful
again than if thou hadst brought them back
from their way to execution. And now in-
deed thou dost disgrace them more than thy
servants, and thy servants enjoy more liberty
of speech, and freedom of conscience, than
they do; but then thou wilt make them equal
to the angels.

Set free therefore both them and thine own
self, and take away the name of parasite, and
call them companions of thy meals;' cast
away the appellation of flatterers, and bestow
on them that of friends, "With this intent
indeed did God make our friendships, not for
evil to the i)eloved and loving, but for their
good and profit.

But these friendships are more grievous
than any enmity. For by our enemies, if we
will, we are even profited; "but by these we
must needs be harmed, no question of it.


Keep not then friends to teach thee harm;
keep not friends who are enamored rather of
thy table than of thy friendship. For all
such persons, if thou retrench thy good liv-
ing, retrench their friendship too; but they
that associate with thee for virtue's sake, re-
main continually, enduring every change.

And besides, the race of the parasites doth
often take revenge ui)on thee, and bring upon
thee an ill fame. Hence at least I know
many respectable persons to have got bad
characters, and some have been evil reported
of for sorceries, some for adulteries and cor-
rupting of youths. For whereas they have
no work to do, but spend their own life un-
profitably; their ministry is suspected by the
multitude as being the same with that of cor-
rupt youths.

Therefore, delivering ourselves both from
evil report, and above all from the hell that
is to come, and doing the things that are well-
pleasing to God, let us put an end to this
devilish custom, that " both eating and drink-
ing we may do all things to the glory of
God," - and enjoy the glory that cometh from
Him; unto which may we all attain, by the
grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might,
now and ever, and world without end.
Amen.

= I Cor. X. 31.


HOMILY XLIX.


Matt. XIV. 13.


" But when Jesus heard of it. He departed thence l)y ship into a desert place apart; and when
the multitudes had heard thereof, they followed Him on foot out of all tlie cities."


See Him on every occasion "departing,""
both when John was delivered up,' and when
he was slain, and wiien tlie Jews heard that
He was making more disciples.* For it is
His will ordinarily to conduct things after
the manner of a man, the time not yet calling
Him to reveal His Godhead |)lainly. \Vlicre-
fore also He bade His disciples " tell no man


« R. v., "from the citir« ; " the word "all" it not found in
the text of Matilirw, but in Mark vi. ) |.- K.]

' HO the k. V, pro|)crly render* avaxuiptiv.


» [ " withdrawing ; "
-R.l

3 Matt. iv. II.


4 John iv. 1-3.


I that He is the Christ; "^ for His will was
tliat this siiould be better known after His
resurrection. Wliercforc upon those of the

I Jews that were fora tune obstinate in their
unbelief He was not very severe, but even

idis|)Oseil to l)e indulgent to them.

And on retiring, He departs not into a city,
but into a wilderness, aiul in a vessel, so that

, no man shoiild follow.

j But do thou mark, I jtray thee, how the
disci|)les of John had now come to be more

I S Matt. svi. 90.


304


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLIX.


attached to Jesus. For it was they that told
Him of the event; for indeed they have left
all, and take refuge henceforth in Him.
Thus, besides their calamity, His provision
before made in that answer' did no small
good.

But wherefore did He not retire before they
brought Him the tidings, when yet He knew
the fact before they reported it ? To signify
all means the reality of His economy.^ For
not by His appearance only, but by His
actions He would have this confirmed, be-
cause He knew the devil's craft, and that he
would leave nothing undone to destroy this
doctrine.

He then for this end retires; but the multi-
tudes not even so withdraw themselves from
Him, but they follow, riveted to Him, and
not even John's tragical end alarmed them.
So great a thing is earnest desire, so great a
thing is love; in such wise doth it overcome
and dispel all dangers.

Therefore they straightway also received
their reward. For " Jesus," it is said, " went
forth, and saw a great multitude, and was
moved with compassion toward them, and He
healed their sick." ^

For great as their assiduity was, yet never-
theless His doings exceeded what any dili-
gence could earn. Wherefore He sets forth
also His motive for so healing them, His
mercy, intense mercy: and He healeth all.

And He requires not faith here. For both
by coming to Him, and by leaving their cities,
and by diligently seeking Him, and by abid-
ing with Him even when hunger was press-
ing, they display their own faith.

But He is about to feed them also. And
He doth not this of Himself, but waits to be
entreated; on every occasion, as I have said,
maintaining this rule, not to spring onward
to His miracles, preventing them, but upon
some call/

And why did none of the multitude come
near and speak for them ? They reverenced
Him exceedingly, and felt not even their
hunger, through their longing to stay with
Him. Neither indeed do His disciples, when
they were come to Him, say, " Feed them; "
for as yet they were rather in an imperfect
state; but what ?

"And when it was evening,' it is said,
"His disciples came to Him, saying. This is
a desert place, and the time is now passed;
send the multitude away, that they may go
and buy themselves victuals.'' ^

1 Matt. XI. 2.

2 oiKoro/uias, that is, of His incarnation and manhood.

3 Matt. xiv. 14.

4 [to /liT) TTpoTepos iniTT-qSav ToU 6avtia<Ti.v, aKKa. KoAov^iei'OS.]

5 Matt. xiv. 15.


For if even after the miracle they forgot
what had been done, and after the baskets,
supposed Him to be speaking of loaves, when
He gave the name of " leaven " to the doc-
trine of the Pharisees;* much less, when they
had never yet had experience of such a mira-
cle, would they have expected any such thing.
And yet He had made a beginning by actually
healing many sick; but nevertheless, not even
from this did they expect the miracle of the
loaves; so imperfct were they as yet.

But mark thou, I pray, the Teacher's skill,
how distinctly He summons them on towards
believing. For He said not at once, " I feed
them;" whicii indeed would not have been
easily received; but what?

"But Jesus," so it is written, "said unto
them, " They need not depart; give ye them
to eat. "7

He said not, "I give them," but, "Give
ye them;" for as yet their regard to Him
was as to a man. But they not even so are
awakened, but still reason as with a man,
saying,

" We have but five loaves, and two fishes. "^

Wherefore Mark also saith, " They under-
stood not the saying, for their heart was hard-
ened." ^

They continuing therefore to crawl on the
ground, then at length He brings in His own
part, and saith, " Bring them hither to me."
For although the place be desert, yet He that
feeds the world is here; and although the
time be now past, yet He that is not subject
to time is discoursing with you.

But John saith also, that they were "bar-
ley loaves," '° not mentioning it without ob-
ject, but teaching us to trample under foot
the pride of costly living. Such was the diet
of the prophets also."

2. " He took therefore the five loaves, and
the two fishes, and commanded the multi-
tude,'' it is said, " to sit down upon the grass,
and looking up to Heaven, He blessed, and
brake, and gave to His (lisciples, and the
disciples to the multitude." And they did all
eat and were filled, and they took up of the
fragments that remained twelve baskets full.
And they that had eaten were about five
thousand men, beside women and children."'^

Wherefore did He look up to Heaven, and
bless? It was to be believed of Him, both
that He is of the Father, and that He is equal
to Him. But the proofs of these things

6 Matt. xvi. 6. 7 Matt. xiv. 16. 8 Matt. xiv. 17.

9 Matt. vi. 52. [Slightly altered.] 1° John vi. g.

'' See 2 Kings iv. 42 ; v. 19-21.

^- [In verse 19 toCvvv is inserted ; the order of the clauses
changed, and Toiis apTou; omitted. — R.]

13 Verses 20, 21 are verbally e.xact. The R. V. renders more
accurately the last clause of ver. 20, " that which remained over
of the broken pieces, twelve baskets full." — R.]


Homily XLIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


305


seemed to oppose one another. For while
His equaUty was indicated by His doing all
with authority, of His origin from the Father
they could no otherwise be persuaded, than
by His doing all with great lowliness, and
with reference to Him, and invoking Him on
His works. Wherefore we see tnat He
neither did these actions only, nor those, that
both might be confirmed; and now He works
miracles with authority, now with prayer.

Then again, that what He did might not
seem an inconsistency, in the lesser things
He looks up to Heaven, but in the greater
doth all with authority; to teach thee in the
lesser also, that not as receiving power from
elsewhere, but as honoring Him that begat
Him, so He acts. For example: when He
forgave sins, and opened paradise, and
brought^n the thief, and most utterly set aside
the old law, and raised innumerable dead,
and bridled the sea, and reproved the un-
uttered thoughts of men, and created an eye;
— which are achievements of God only and of
none else; — we see Him in no instance pray-
ing: but when He provided for the loaves to
multiply themselves, a far less thing than all
these, then He looks up to Heaven; at once
establishing these truths which I have spoken
of, and instructing us not to touch a meal,
until we have given thanks to Him who giveth
us this food.

And why doth He not make it of things
that are not ? Stopping the mouth of Mar-
cion, and of Manichaeus, who alienate His
creation from Him, and teaching by His very
works, that even all the things that are seen
are His works and creatures, and signifying
that it is Himself who gives the fruits, who
said at the beginning, " Let the earth put
forth the herb of grass," and " Let the waters
bring forth things moving with living souls." '

For this is not at all a less work than the
other. For though those were made of things
that are not, yet nevertheless were they of
water; and it was no greater thing to produce
fruits out of the earth, and moving things
with life out of the water, than out of five
loaves to make so many; and of fishes again,
which was a sign that He was ruler lioth of
the earth antl of tlie sea.

Thus, since the sick were constantly the
subject of His miracles, Ho works also a
general benefit, that the many niiglit not be
spectators only of what befell oliicrs, but
themselves also partakers of the gift.

And that whicii in the wilderness seemed
to the Jews marvellous, (they said at least,
" Can He give bread also ? or prepare a ta!)le

' Gen. t. II, ao, [lxx., ipntra <pv\uiv <^w<rwi'.]
•it)


in the wilderness?)" - this He shows forth in
His works. With this view also He leads
them into the wilderness, that the miracle
might be very far beyond suspicion, and that
no one might think that any village lying
near contributed ought to the meal. For
this reason He mentions the hour also, not
the place only.

And another thing too we learn, the self-
restraint of the disciples which they practised
in necessary things, and how little they ac-
counted of food. For being twelve, they had
five loaves only and two fishes; so secondary
to them were the things of the body: so did
they cling to the things spiritual only.

And not even that little did they hold fast,
but gave up even it when asked. Whereby
we should be taught, that though we have but
little, this too we ought to give up to them
that are in need. Thus, when commanded
to bring the five loaves, they say not, " and
whence are we to have food ? wlience to ap-
pease our own hunger?" but they obey at
once.

And besides what I have mentioned, to this
end, as I at least think, He makes it out of
the materials which they had, namely, that
He might lead them to faith; for as yet they
were rather in a weak state. ^

Wherefore also " He looks up to Heaven."
For of the other miracles they had many ex-
amples, but of this none.^

3. " He took the loaves," therefore, "and
brake them, and gave them by His disciples,"
hereby to honor them; and not in honor to
them only, but also that, when the miracle
had been done they miglit not disbelieve it,
nor forget it when it had past, their own
hands bearing them witness.'

^Vherefore also He suffers the multitudes
first to have a sense of hunger, and waits for
these to come to Him first ami ask Him, and
by tiiem makes the people sit down, aiul by
them distributes; being minded by their own
confessions and actions to prepossess them
every one.'

Therefore also, from tiiem He receives the
loaves, that the testimonies of what was tloing
might be many, and that tiu'V might have
memorials of the miracle. For if even after
these occurrences they forgot,* wiiat would
not have baen their case, Jiad He omitteil
those provisions .■'

And He commands them to sit ilown on the
trampled grass, instructing the multitmles in
self-denial. For His will was not to feed

w - — — ^^^^^.— ^^^^^— ^^^^^— ^^.^^— ^— ^—

■• I's. Ixxviii, ao.

I In Ilirse unci otiirr plurcs of thi» }{(>inily there niuy be pcr-
hiips a liirit rrfrrcnic (o the Htily Kiii'liarist, luul tu tlir aptitnitc
• )f tlir niirarji- nf llir loavrH iiH 11 prr)>iir.iti(>M of ll>c a(Kistle» fur it.

4 .Mall. >> ^


;o6


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLIX.


their bodies only, but also to instruct their
souls. As well by the place therefore, as by
His giving them nothing more than loaves
and fishes, and by setting the same before
all, and making it common, and by affording
no one more than another, He was teaching
them humility, and temperance, and charity,
and to be of like mind one towards another,
and to account all things common.

"And He brake and gave to the disciples,
and the disciples to the multitude." The
five loaves He brake and gave, and the five
multiplied themselves in the hands of the
disciples. And not even here doth He stay
the miracle, but He made them even to ex-
ceed; to exceed, not as whole loaves, but as
fragments; to signify that of those loaves
these were remains, and in order that the
absent might learn what had been done.

For this purpose indeed He suffered the
multitudes to hunger, that no one might sup-
pose what took place to be illusion.

For this also He caused just twelve baskets
to remain over, that Judas also might bear
one. For He was able indeed to have ap-
peased their hunger, but the disciples would
not have known His power, since in Elijah's
case also this took place.'

At all events, so greatly were the Jews
amazed at Him for this, that they wished
even to make Him a king,= although with
regard to the other miracles they did not
so in any instance.

What reasoning now may set forth, how the
loaves multiplied 3 themselves; how they
flowed together in the wilderness; how they
were enough for so many (for there were
" five thousand men beside women and chil-
dren;" which was a very great commenda-
tion of the people, that both women and men
attended Him); how the remnants had their
being (for this again is not less than the
former), and became so abundant, that the
baskets were equal in number to the disci-
ples, and neither more nor less ?

Having then taken the fragments, He gave
them not to the multitudes, but to the disci-
ples, and that, because the multitudes were
in a more imperfect state than the disciples.

And, having wrought the miracle,
" straightway He constrained His disciples
to get into a ship, and to go before Him unto
the other side, while He sent the multitudes
away.""*

For even if He had seemed, when in sight,
to be presenting an illusion, and not to have
wrought a truth; yet surely not in His ab-
sence also. For this cause then, submitting

I Kings xvii i6. ^ John vi. 15. 3 eTTTJya^of.

4 Matt. xiv. 22. [R. v., ''till he should send," etc.]


His proceedings to an exact test. He com-
manded those that had got the memorials,
and the proof of the miracles, to depart from
Him.

And besides this, when He is doing great
works. He disposes elsewhere of the multi-
tudes and the disciples, instructing us in
nothing to follow after the glory that comes
from the people, nor to collect a crowd about
us.

Now by saying, " He constrained them,''
He indicates the very close attendance of the
disciples.

And His pretext indeed for dismissing them
was the multitude, but He was Himself
minded to go up into the mountain; and He
did this, instructing us neither to be always
in intercourse with multitudes, nor always to
fly from the crowd, but each of the two as
may be expedient, and giving each duly his
turn.

4. Let us learn therefore ourselves also to
wait upon Jesus; but not for His bounty in
things sensible, lest we be upbraided like the
Jews. For "ye seek me/' saith He, "not
because ye saw the miracles, s but because ye
did eat of the loaves, and were filled."*
Therefore neither doth He work this miracle
continually, but a second time only; that they
might be taught not to be slaves to their
belly, but to cling incessantly to the things of
the Spirit.

To these then let us also cling, and let us
seek the heavenly bread, and having received
it, let us cast away all worldly care. For if
those men left houses, and cities, and kins-
men, and all, and abode in the wilderness,
and when hunger was pressing, withdrew not;
much more ought we, when approaching such
a table, to show forth a more abundant self-
command, and to set our love on the things
of the Spirit, and to seek the things of sense
as secondary to these.

Since even they were blamed, not because
they sought Him for the bread, but because
it was for this only they sought Him, and for
this primarily. For should any one despise
the great gifts, but cling to the small, and to
those which the giver would have him despise.
He loses these latter too: as on the other
hand, if we love those. He adds these also.
For these are but an appendage to the others;
so vile are they and trifling, compared with
those, although they be great. Let us not
therefore spend our diligence on them, but
account both the acquisition and loss of them
alike indifferent, even as Job also neither
clung to them when present, nor sought them


5 [R. v., " ye saw signs."]


* John vi. 26.


Homily XLIX,]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


307


absent. For on this account, they are called
•/^fjrjixaza,^ not that \ve should bury them in tl\e
earth, but that we should use them aright.

And as of artisans every one hath his pecu-
liar skill, even so the rich man, as he knows
not how to work in brass, nor to frame ships,
nor to weave, nor to build houses, nor any
such thing; — let him learn then to use his
wealth aright, and to pity the poor; so shall
he know a better art than all those.

For indeed this is above all those arts. Its
workshop is builded in Heaven. It hath its
tools not of iron and brass, but of goodness
and of a right will. Of this art Christ is the
Teacher, and His Father. " For be ye mer-
ciful," saith He, "as your Father which is
in Heaven." '

And what is indeed marvellous, being so
much superior to the rest, it needs no labor,
no time for its perfection; it is enough to
have willed, and the whole is accomplished.

But let us see also the end thereof, what it
is. What then is the end of it ? Heaven,
the good things in the heavens, that un-
speakable glory, the spiritual bride-chambers,
the bright lamps, the abiding with the Bride-
groom; the other things, which no speech, nor
even understanding, is able to set forth.

So that herein likewise great is its differ-
ence from all others. For most of the arts
profit us for the present life, but this for the
life to come also.

5. But if it so far excels the arts that are
necessary to us for the present, as medicine,
for instance, and house-building, and all
others like them: much more the rest, which
if any one were nicely to examine, he would
not even allow them to be arts. Wherefore
I nt least would not call those others, as they
are unnecessary, so much as arts at all. For
wherein is delicate cookery and making
sauces profitable to us ? Nowhere: yea, they
are greatly unprofitable and hurtful, doing
harm both to body and soul, by bringing
upon us the parent of all diseases and suffer-
ings, luxury, together with great extrava-
gance.^

But not these only, but not even painting,
or embroidery, would I for one allow to be an
art, for they do but throw men into useless
expense. But the arts ought to be concerned
with things necessary and important to our
life, to supply and work them up. For to
this end (iotl gave us skill at all, that we
might invent methods, whereby to furnisli out
our life. But that there should be figures*
either on walls, or on garments, wherein is it

• Thnt ia, " lliiii^;* fur use."

'' I, like vi. 36. 1 </iiAoTi)jiuv.

4 ^uifiiuiv. Sec Herod, i. 70, and Schwcighicuscr's note, as
quoted lierc by .Mr. Field.


useful, I pray thee? For this same cause
the sandal-makers too, and the weavers,
should have great retrenchments made in
their art. For most things in it they have
carried into vulgar ostentation, s having cor-
rupted its necessary use, and mixed with an
I honest art an evil craft; which has been the
case with the art of building also. But even
as to this, so long as it builds houses and
not theatres, and labors upon things neces-
sary, and not superfluous, I give the name of
an art; so the business of weaving too, as
long as it makes clothes, and coverlids, but
does not imitate the spiders, and overwhelm
men with much absurdity, and unspeakable
effeminacy, so long I call it an art.

And the sandal-makers' trade, so long as it
makes sandals, I will not rob of the appella-
tion of art; but when it perverts men to the
gestures of women, and causes them by their
sandals to grow wanton and delicate, we will
set it amidst the things hurtful and superflu-
ous, and not so much as name it an art.

And I know well, that to many I seem
over-minute in busying myself about these
things; I shall not however refrain for this.
For the cause of all our evils is this, such
faults being at all counted trifling, and there-
fore disregarded.

And what sin, say you, can be of less ac-
count than this, of having an ornamented and
glittering sandal, which fits the foot; if in-
deed it seem right at all to denominate it a
sin ?

Will ye then that I let loose my tongue
upon it, and show its unseemliness, how great
it is ? and will ye not be angry ? Or rather,
though ye be angry, I care not much. Nay,
for yourselves are to blame for this folly, who
do not so much as think it is a sin, and here-
by constrain us to enter upon the reproof of
this extravagance. Come then, let us exam-
ine it, and let us see what sort of an evil it is.
For when the silken threads, which it is not
seemly should be even inwoven in your gar-
ments, these are sewn by you into your shoes,
wiiat reproach, what derision do these things
deserve ?

And if thou despise our judgments, hear
the voice of Paul, with great earnestness for-
bidding these tilings, and tlieii thou wilt jier-
ceive the absurtlity of them. What then
saith he? " Not with braided hair, or gold,
or pearls, or costly array."" Of what favor
then canst thou be wortiiy; when, in spite of
Paul's prohibiting the married woman to have
costly clothing, thou extendest this effeminacy
even to thy siioes, and hast no end oi contri-


S Tu fiavavaov.


^ I Tim. ii. 9,


3o8


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XLIX.


varices for the sake of this ridicule and re-
proach ? Yes: for first a ship is built, then
rowers are mustered, and a man for the prow,
and a helmsman, and a sail is spread, and an
ocean traversed, and, leaving wife and chil-
dren and country, the merchant commits his
very life to the waves, and comes to the land
of the barbarians, and undergoes innumerable
dangers for these threads, that after it all
thou mayest take them, and sew them into
thy shoes, and ornament the leather. And
what can be done worse than this folly ?

But the old ways are not like these, but
such as become men. Wherefore I for my part
expect that in process of time the young men
amongst us will wear even women's shoes,
and not be ashamed. And what is more
grievous, men's fathers seeing these things
are not much displeased, but do even ac-
count it an indifferent matter.

Would ye that I should add what is still more
grievous; that these things are done even
when there are many poor ? Would ye that I
bring before you Christ, an hungered, naked,
wandering everywhere, in chains ? And how
many thunderbolts must ye not deserve, over-
looking Him in want of necessary food, and
adorning these pieces of leather with so much
diligence ? And He indeed, when He was
giving law to His disciples, would not so
much as suffer them to have shoes at all, but
we cannot bear to walk, I say not barefooted,
but even with feet shod as they ought to be.

7. What then can be worse than this un-
seemliness, this absurdity? For the thing
marks a soul, in the first place effeminate,
then unfeeling and cruel, then curious and
idly busy. For when will he be able to at-
tend to any necessary matter, who is taken
up with these superfluous things ? when \vill
such a youth endure to take heed to his soul,
or to consider so much as that he hath a
soul ? Yes, he surely will be a trifler who
cannot help admiring such things; he cruel,
who for their sake neglects the poor; he void
of virtue, who spends all his diligence on
them.

For he that is curious about the beauty of
threads, and the bloom of colors, and the
tendrils made of such woven work, when will
he be able to look upon the heaven ? when
will he admire the beauty there, who is ex-
cited about a kind of beauty that belongs to
pieces of leather, and who is bending to the
earth ? And whereas God hath stretched out
the Heaven, and lighted up the sun, drawing
thy looks upwards; thou constrainest thyself
to look downwards, and to the earth, like the
swine, and obeyest the devil. For indeed
this wicked demon hath devised this unseem-


liness, to draw thee off from that beauty.
For this intent hath he drawn thee this way;
and God, showing Heaven, is outvied by a
devil showing certain skins, or rather not even
skins (for indeed these too are God's works),
but effeminacy and a bad kind of skill.

And the young man goes about bending down
towards the earth, he that is required to seek
wisdom concerning the things in Heaven;
priding himself more on these trifles than if
he had accomplished some great and good
work, and walking on tiptoe in the forum, and
hereby begetting to himself superfluous sor-
rows and distresses, lest he should stain them
with the mud when it is winter; lest he should
cover them with the dust, when summer is
come.

What sayest thou, O man ? Hast thou cast
thy whole soul into the mire through this ex-
travagance, and dost thou overlook it trailing
on the ground, and art thou so anxious about
a pair of shoes ? Mark their use, and respect
the verdict thou passest on them. For to
tread on mud and mire, and all the spots on
the pavement, for this were thy shoes made.
Or if thou canst not bear this, take and hang
them from thy neck, or put them on thy
head.

And ye indeed laugh at hearing this. But
I am inclined to weep for these men's mad-
ness, and their earnest care about these mat-
ters. For in truth they would rather stain
their body with mud, than those pieces of
leather.

Triflers then they become in this way, and
fond of money again in another way. For
he that has been used to be frantic and eager
upon such matters, requires also for his clothes
and for all other things much expense, and a
large income.

And if he have a munificent father, his
thraldom becomes worse, his absurd fancy
more intense; but if a parsimonious one, he is
driven to other unseemliness, by way of get-
ting together a little money for such ex-
penses.

Hence many young men have even sold
their manhood, and have become parasites to
the rich, and have undertaken other servile
offices, purchasing thereby the fulfillment of
such desires.

So then, that this man is sure to be at once
fond of money, and a trifler, and about im-
portant things the most indolent of all men,
and that he will be forced to commit many
sins, is hereby evident. And that he is cruel
and vainglorious, neither this will any one
gainsay: cruel, in that when he sees a poor
man, through the love of finery he makes as
though he did not even see him, but while he


Homily XLIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


309


is decking out these things with gold, over- What has been said therefore to the others;
looks him perishing of hunger; vainglorious, do ye account to have been said to you also,
since even in such little matters he trains that we may not repeat again the same


himself to hunt after the admiration of the
beholders. For I suppose no general prides


things.


For it is full time now to close our dis-


himself so much on his legions and trophies, ' course with prayer. All of you then pray
as our profligate youths on the decking out of with us, that the young men of the church
their shoes, on their trailing garments, on the above all things may be enabled to live
dressing of their hair; yet surely all these are orderly, and to attain an old age becoming
works of other persons, in their trades. But them. Since for those surely who do not so
if men do not cease from vain boasting in the live, it were well not to come to old age at
works of others, when will they cease from it all. But for them that have grown old even


in their own ?

8. Shall I mention yet other things more
grievous than these ? or are even these enough
for you? Well then; I must end my speech
here; since even this have I said, because of
the disputatious, who maintain the thing not
to be so very wrong.


in youth, I pray that they may attain also to
the very deep of gray .hairs, and become
fathers of approved children, and may be a
joy to them that gave them birth, and above
all surely to the God that made them, and
may exterminate every distempered fancy,
not that about their shoes, nor about their


And although I know that many of the ; clothes only, but every other kind also.


young will not so much as attend to what I
have said, being once for all intoxicated with
this fancy, I yet ought not therefore to keep
silence. For such fathers as have under-
standing, and are as yet sound, will be able to
force them, even against their will, to a be-
coming decency.

Say not then, " this is of no consequence,
that is of no consequence;" for this, this


For as untilled land, such is also youth
neglected, bringing forth many thorns from
many quarters. Let us then send forth on
them tlie tire of the Spirit, and burn up these
wicked desires, and let us break up our fields,
and make them ready for the reception of
the seed, and the young men amongst us let
us exhibit with soberer minds than the old
elsewhere. For this in fact is the marvellous


hath ruined all. For even hereby ought you ! thing, when temperance shines forth in
to train them, and by the things which seem j youth; since he surely that is temperate in
trifling to make them grave, great of soul, I old age cannot have a great reward, having in
superior to outward habiliments; so shall we . perfection the security from his age. But
find them approved in the great things also, what is wonderful, is to enjoy a calm amidst
For what is more ordinary than the learning ' waves, antl in a furnace not to be burnt, and
of letters ? nevertheless thereby do men be- in youth not to run wanton,
come rhetoricians," and sophists, and phil- With these things then in our minds, let us
osophers, and if they know not their letters, emulate that blessed Joseph, who shone
neither will they ever have that knowledge. through all these trials, that we may attain
And this we have spoken not to young men unto the same crowns with him; unto which
only, but to women also, and to young dam- 1 may we all attain, by the grace and love
sels. For these too are liable to the like | towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
charges, and much more, inasmuch as seem- i whom be glory unto the Father, together with
liness is a thing appropriate to a virgin. the Holy Ghost, now and always, and world

~^lpnr^i7] I without end. Amen.


lO


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily L.


HOMILY L.

Matt. XIV. 23, 24.

'And when He had sent the multitudes away. He went up into the mountain apart to pray:
and when the evening was come, He was there alone. But the ship was now in the
midst of the sea, tossed with waves:' for the wind was contrary."


For what purpose doth He go up into the
mountain ? To teach us, that loneliness and
retirement is good, when we are to pray to
God. With this view, you see, He is contin-
ually withdrawing into the wilderness, and
there often spends the whole night in prayer,
teaching us earnestly to seek such quietness
in our prayers, as the time and place may
confer. For the wilderness is the mother of
quiet; it is a calm and a harbor, delivering
us from all turmoils.

He Himself then went up thither with this
object, but the disciples are tossed with the
waves again, and undergo a storm, equal
even to the former. But whereas before they
had Him in the ship when this befell them,
^ow they were alone by themselves. Thus
gently and by degrees He excites and urges
them on for the better, even to the bearing
all nobly. Accordingly we see, that when
they were first near that danger, He was
present, though asleep, so as readily to give
them relief; but now leading them to a
greater degree of endurance, He doth not
even this, but departs, and in mid sea per-
mits the storm to arise, so that they might
not so much as look for a hope of preserva-
tion from any quarter; and He lets them be
tempest-tost all the night, thoroughly to
awaken, as I suppose, their hardened heart.

For such is the nature of the fear, which
the time concurs with the rough weather in
producing. And together with the compunc-
tion, He cast them also into a greater longing
for Himself, and a continual remembrance of
Him.

Accordingly, neither did He present Him-
self to them at once. For, "in the fourth
watch," so it is said, "of the night. He- went
unto them, walking upon the sea; " = instruct-
ing them not hastily to seek for deliverance
from their pressing dangers, but to bear all
occurrences manfully. At all events, when
they looked to be delivered, then was their
fear again heightened. For,

I [R, v., " distressed by the waves."] = Matt, xiv, 25.


"When the disciples," it is said, "saw
Him walking on the sea, they were troubled,
saying, It is a spirit: and they cried out for
fear. "3

Yea, and He constantly doth so; when He
is on the point of removing our terrors. He
brings upon us other worse things, and more
alarming: which we see took place then also.
For together with the storm, the sight too
troubled them, no less than the storm.
Therefore neither did He remove the dark-
ness, nor straightway make Himself manifest,
training them, as I said, by the continuance
of these fears, and instructing them to be
ready to endure.

This He did in the case of Job also; for
when He was on the point of removing the
terror and the temptation, then He suffered
the end to grow more grievous; I mean not
for his children's death, or the words of his
wife, but because of the reproaches, both of
his servants and of his friends. And when
He was about to rescue Jacob from his afflic-
tion in the strange land. He allowed his trou-
ble to be awakened and aggravated; in that
his father-in-law first overtook him and
threatened death, and then his brother com-
ing immediately after, suspended over him
the extremest danger.

For since one cannot be tempted both for
a long time and severely; when the righteous
are on the point of coming to an end of their
conflicts, He, willing them to gain the more,
enhances their struggles. Which He did in
the case of Abraham too, appointing for his
last conflict that about his child. For thus
even things intolerable will be tolerable, when
they are so brought upon us, as to have their
removal near, at the very doors.

So did Christ at that time also, and did not
discover Himself before they cried out. For
the more intense their alarm, the more did
they welcome His coming. Afterward when
they had exclaimed, it is said.


I Matt. xiv. 26. [R. v., " It is an apparition," but Chrysos-
has the indirect form, "saying that it is an apparition." The


3 :

torn has the indirect torm, "saying
Greek term is i^6.vra.<TiJ.a, not Tri/eOjua. — R.]


HOMILV L.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


J


I I


" Straightway Jesus spake unto them, say-
ing. Be of good cheer, it is I; be not
afraid."'

This word removed their fear, and caused
them to take confidence. For as they knew
Him not by sight, because of His marvellous
kind of motion, and because of the time, He
makes Himself manifest by His voice.

2. What then saith Peter, everywhere
ardent, and ever starting forward before the
rest?

" Lord, if it be Thou," saith he, "bid me
come unto Thee on the water." ^

He said not, "Pray and entreat," but,
" bid." Seest thou how great his ardor, how
great his faith ? Yet surely he is hereby often
in danger, by seeking things beyond his
measure. For so here too he required an
exceedingly great thing, for love only, not for
display. For neither did he say, " Bid me
walk on the water," but what? "Bid me
come unto Thee." For none so loved Jesus.

This he did also after the resurrection; he
endured not to come with the others, but
leapt forward. 3 And not love only, but faith
also doth he display. For he not only be-
lieved that He was able Himself to walk on
the sea, but that He could lead upon it
others also; and he longs to be quickly near
Him.

"And he said, Come. And when Peter
was come down out of the ship, he walked on
the water, and came ■'to Jesus. But when he
saw the wind boisterous, ^ he was afraid ; and
beginning to sink, he cried, saying. Lord,
save me. And immediately Jesus stretched
forth His hand and caught him, and saith
unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore
didst thou doubt ?'*^

This is more wonderful than the former.
Therefore this is done after that. For when
He had shown that He rules the sea, then
He carries on the sign to what is yet more
marvellous. Then He rebuked the winds
only; but now He both walks Himself, and
permits another to do so; which thing if He
had required to be done at tlie beginning,
Peter would not have so well received it, be-
cause he had not yet actjuired so great faith.

Wherefore then did Christ permit him ?
\Vhy, if He had said, " thou canst not," Peter
being ardent would have contradicted liini
again. Wherefore by the facts He convinces
him, that for tiie future he may be sohered.

But not even so doth he eiulure. There-
fore having come down, he becomes dizzy;


< Mat. xiv. 37.


' Matt. xiv. a8.


4 I So R. v. m;iri;in. The rer. trxt hastAtfciv.— K.]

5 [K. v. text, with It few i)( ihc nldrst utithuritic«, i


terous," laxvpov, which Chrysoatom ucccptn. — K,]
' Mutt. xiv. ay-ji.


3 John xxi. 7.

umits " bois-


for he was afraid. And this the surf caused,
but his fear was wrought by the wind.

But John saith, that " they willingly re-
ceived Him into the ship; and immediately
the ship was at the land whither they went," ^
relating this same circumstance. So that
when they were on the point of arriving at
the land. He entered the ship.

Peter then having come down from the ship
went unto Him, not rejoicmg so much in
walking on the water, as in coming unto Him.
And when he had prevailed over the greater,
he was on the point of suffering evil from the
less, from the violence of the wind, I mean,
not of the sea. For such a thing is human
nature; not seldom effecting great things, it
exposes itself in the less; as Elias felt toward
Jezebel, as Moses toward the Egyptian, as
David toward Bathsheba. Even so then this
man also; while their fear was yet at the
height, he took courage to walk upon the
water, but against the assault of the wind he
was no longer able to stand; and this, being
near Christ. So absolutely nothing doth it
avail to be near Christ, not being near Him
by faith.

And this also showed the difference be-
tween the IVLaster and the disciple, and
allayed the feelings of the others. For if in
the case of the two brethren they had indig-
nation, much more here; for they had not yet
the Spirit vouchsafed unto them.

But afterwards they were not like this. On
every occasion, for example, they give up
the first honors to Peter, and put him forward
in their addresses to the people, although of
a rougher vein than any of them.*

And wherefore did He not command the
winds to cease, but Himself stretched forth
His hand and took hold of liim ? Because in
him faith was required. For when our part
is wanting, then God's part also is at a stand.

Signifying therefore that not the assault of
the wind, but iiis want of faith had wrought
his overthrow. He saitli, " Wherefore didst
thou doubt, O thou of little faith ? " So that
if his faith had not been weak, he would liave
stood easily against tiie wind also. .\ik1 for
this reason, you see, even when He had
caught hold of Him, He suffers the wind to
blow, sliowing that no liurt comes thereby,
wiien faith is steadfast.

And as when a nestling has come out of
the nest before the time, ami is on tlie point
of falling, its mother bears it on her wings,
and brings it back to the nest; even so did
Christ.

7 lohnvi. ji. (R.V ," They wcrr willing' to receive him inloth-
bout': and !%truiK'htw.iy the bt>at v/ui ut the land whither ihcy
were KoiiiK-'"]

" Coni|>urc Act* iv, 13.


12


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily L.


"And when they were come into the ship,
then the wind ceased." '

Whereas before this they had said, " What
manner of man is this, that even the winds
and the sea obey Him ! " ^ now it is not so.
For '* they that were in the ship," it is said,
" came and worshipped Him, saying. Of a
truth Thou art Son of God."^ Seest thou,
how by degrees he was leading them all higher
and higher ? For both by His walking on the
sea, and by His commanding another to do
so, and preserving him in jeopardy; their
faith was henceforth great. For then indeed
He rebuked the sea, but now He rebukes it
not, in another way signifying His power
more abundantly. Wherefore also they said,
" Of a truth Thou art Son of God."

What then ? Did He rebuke them on their
so speaking? Nay, quite the contrary. He
rather confirmed what they said, with greater
authority healing such as approached Him,
and not as before.

"And when they were gone over,'' so it is
said, "they came into the land of Genne-
saret. And when the men of that place had
knowledge of Him, they sent out into all that
country round about, and brought unto Him
all that were diseased; and besought Him
that they might touch the hem of His gar-
ment; and as many as touched were made
perfectly whole." ^

For neither did they approach Him as be-
fore, dragging Him into their houses, and
seeking a touch of His hand, and directions
from Him in words; but in a far higher strain,
and with more of self-denial, and with a
more abundant faith did they try to win
themselves a cure; for she that had the issue
of blood taught them all to be severe in seek-
ing wisdom.

And the evangelist, implying also that at
long intervals He visited the several neigh-
borhoods, saith, *' The men of that place took
knowledge of Him, and sent out into the
country round about, and brought unto Him
them that were diseased." But yet the in-
terval, so far from abolishing their faith, made
it even greater, and preserved it in vigor.

3. Let us also then touch the hem of His
garment, or rather, if we be willing, we have
Him entire. For indeed His body is set be-
fore us now, not His garment only, but even
His body; not for us to touch it only, but
also to eat, and be filled. Let us now then
draw near with faith, every one that hath an
infirmity. For if they that touched the hem


I Matt. xiv. 32. 2 Matt. viii. 27. 3 Matt. xiv. 33.

4 Matt. xiv. 34-36. [In verse 34, R. V., following a differ-
ent reading, as: "to the land, unto Gennesaret." In verse
36, Chrysostom omits "only," and reads taiudr^irav for 6ie<rui-
6rt<Tav. — R.]


of His garment drew from Him so much vir-
tue, how much more they that possess Him
entire ? Now to draw near with faith is not
only to receive the offering, but also with a
pure heart to touch it; to be so minded, as
approaching Christ Himself. For what, if
thou hear no voice ? Yet thou seest Him
laid out; or rather thou dost also hear His
voice, while He is speaking by the evangel-
ists.

Believe, therefore, that even now it is that
supper, at which He Himself sat down. For
this is in no respect different from that.
For neither doth man make this and Himself
the other; but both this and that is His own
work. When therefore thou seest the priest
delivering it unto thee, account not that it is
the priest that doeth so, but that it is Christ's
hand that is stretched out.

Even as when he baptizes, not he doth
baptize thee, but it is God that possesses thy
head with invisible power, and neither angel
nor archangel nor any other dare draw nigh
and touch thee; even so' now also. For when
God begets, the gift is His only. Seest thou
not those who adopt to themselves sons here,
how they commit not the act to slaves, but
are themselves present at the judgment-seat?
Even so neither hath God committed His gift
to angels, but Himself is present, command-
ing and saying, " Call no man Father on
earth; "5 not that thou shouldest dishonor
them that gave thee birth, but that thou
shouldest prefer to all those Him that made
thee, and enrolled tl\ee amongst His own
children. For He that hath given the greater,
that is, hath set Himself before thee, much
more will He not think scorn to distribute
unto thee of His body. Let us hear there-
fore, both priests and subjects, what we have
had vouchsafed to us; let us hear and trem-
ble. Of His own holy flesh He hath granted
us our fill; He hath set before us Himself
sacrificed.

What excuse shall we have then, when feed-
ing on such food, we commit such sins ? when
eating a lamb, we become wolves ? when feed-
ing on a sheep, we spoil by violence like the
lions ?

For this mystery He directs to be always
clear, not from violence only, but even from
bare enmity. Yea, for this mystery is a
mystery of peace; it allows us not to cling to
wealth. For if He spared not Himself for
us, what must we deserve, sparing our wealth,
and being lavish of a soul, in behalf of which
He spared not Himself?

Now upon the Jews God every year bound

5 Matt, xxiii. 9.


Homily L.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


in their feasts a memorial of His peculiar
favors to them: but for thee, every day, as I
may say, through these mysteries.

Be not therefore ashamed of the cross: for
these are our venerable things, these our
mysteries; with this gift do we adorn our-
selves, with this we are beautified.

And if I say. He stretched out the heaven,
He spread out the earth and the sea. He sent
prophets and angels, I say nothing in com-
parison. Tor the sum of His benefits is this,
that "He spared not His own Son,"' in
order to save His alienated servants.

4. Let no Judas then approach this table,
no Simon; nay, for both these perished
through covetousness. Let us flee then from
this gulf; neither let us account it enough for
our salvation, if after we have stripped widows
and orphans, we offer for this table a gold
and jewelled cup. Nay, if thou desire to
honor the sacrifice, offer thy soul, for which
also it was slain; cause that to become
golden; but if that remain worse than lead or
potter's clay, while the' vessel is of gold, what
is the profit ?

Let not this therefore be our aim, to offer
golden vessels only, but to do so from honest
earnings likewise. For these are of the sort
that is more precious even than gold, these
that are without injuriousness. For the
church is not a gold foundry nor a workshop
for silver, but an assembly of angels. Where-
fore it is souls which we require, since in fact
God accepts these for the souls' sake.

That table at that time was not of silver,
nor that cup of gold, out of which Christ
gave His disciples His own blood; but prec-
ious was everything there, and awful, for that
they were full of the Spirit."

Wouldest thou do honor to Christ's body?
Neglect Him not when naked; do not,
while here thou honorest Him with silken
/ garments, neglect Him perishing without of
cold and nakedness. For He that said,
" Tliis is my body,'' and by His word con-
firmed the fact, "This same said, "Ye saw
me an hungered, and fed me not;" and,
" Inasmucli as ye did it not to one of the
least of these, ye did it not to me."^ For
This indeed needs not coverings, but a pure
soul; but tliat rc(juires rnucli attention.

Let us learn tiiercfore to be strict in life,
and to honor Christ as He Himself desires.
For to Him who is honored that honor is
most pleasing, which it is His own will to
have, not that which we account best. Since
Peter too thought to honor Him by forbid-
ding liiin to wash his feel, but iiis doing so
was not an honor, but the contrary. _

I Rom. viii. 3a. > Corop. Eph. v. 18. 1 Matt. xxv. 4a, 45.


Even so do thou honor Him with this
honor, which He ordained, spending thy
wealth on poor people. Since God hath no
need at all of golden vessels, but of golden
souls.

And these things I say, not forbidding such
offerings to be provided; but requiring you,
together with them, and before them, to give
alms. For He accepts indeed the former,
but much more the latter. For in the one
the offerer alone is profited, but in the other
the receiver also. Here the act seems to be
a ground even of ostentation; but there all is
mercifulness, and love to man.

For what is the profit, when His table in-
deed is full of golden cups, but He perishes
with hunger? First fill Him, being an hun-
gered, and then abundantly deck out His
table also. Dost thou make Him a cup of
gold, while thou givest Him not a cup of cold
water ? And what is the profit ? Dost thou
furnish His table with cloths bespangled with
gold, while to Himself thou affordest not
even the necessary covering? And what
good comes of it? For tell me, should you
see one at a loss for necessary food, and omit
appeasing his hunger, while you first overlaid
his table with silver; would he indeed thank
thee, and not rather be indignant? \Vhat,
again, if seeing one wrapped in rags, and stiff
with cold, thou shouldest neglect giving
him a garment, and build golden columns,
saying, " thou wert doing it to his honor,'*
would he not say that thou wert mocking, and
account it an insult, and that the most ex-
treme ?

Let this then be thy thought with regard
to Christ also, when He is going about a
wanderer, and a stranger, needing a roof to
cover Him; and thou, neglecting to receive
Him, deckest out a pavement, and walls,
and capitals of columns, and hangest up
silver chains by means of lamps, ^ but Him-
self bound in prison thou wilt not even look
upon.

5. And these things I say, not forbidding
munificence in these matters, but atlmonish-
ing you to do those other works togetiicr with
these, or rather even before these. Because
for not having done these no one was ever
blanieil, but for tiiose, hell is threatened, anil
unquenciia'jle fire, and the punishment with
evil spirits. Do not tlierefore while adorning
His house overlook thy brother in distress, for
he is more properly a temple than the other.

* St. Jerome (ad Kuntoch. F.p. if>fl «pc. v* -uivh, " let others
boast of flicir inonry, and ooin last into the trratiiry "f < lod,
/■uHiili/'usi/ur aurris </■'«<« ffH.itntut^ 'and of tlirir >;i(ls hunK-
iiiK upon ifoldcii Konccs,' or prrhapx bratkrtn for lain))", on wliirh
the Anallicnwtu, or votive i'lTerinjj*. were suspended." Sec
UinKh. 8, H, 1.


3H


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LI.


"The
me ye


And whereas these thy stores will be sub-
ject to alienation, both by unbelieving kings,
and tyrants, and robbers; whatever thou
mayest do for thy brother, being hungry, and
a stranger, and naked, not even the devil will
be able to despoil, but it will be laid up in an
inviolable treasure.

Why then doth He Himself say,
poor always ye have with you, but
have not always?"' Why, for this reason
most of all should we give alms, that we
have Him not always an hungered, but in the
present life only. But if thou art desirous to
learn also the whole meaning of the saying,
understand that this was said not with a view
to His disciples, although it seem so, but to
the woman's weakness. That is, her disposi-
tion being still rather imperfect, and they
doubting about her; to revive her He said
these things. For in proof that for her com-
fort He said it. He added, " Why trouble ye
the woman ? " ^ And with regard to our hav-
ing Him really always with us. He saith,
" Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the
end of the world." ^ From all which it is


I Matt. xxvi. ii; John xii. 8.
3 Matt, xxviii. 2^.


2 Matt. xxvi. lo.


evident, that for no other object was this said,
but that the rebuke of the disciples might
not wither the faith of the woman, just then
budding.

Let us not then bring forward these things
now, which were uttered because of some
economy, but let us read all the laws, those
in the New and those in the Old Testament,
that are set down about almsgiving, and let
us be very earnest about this matter. For
this cleanses from sin. For "give alms, and
all things will be clean unto you."'* This is
a greater thing than sacrifice. " For I will
have mercy, and not sacrifice." s This
opens the heavens. For "thy prayers and.
thine alms are come up for a memorial be-
fore God." ^ This is more indispensable than
virginity: for thus were those virgins cast out
of the bridechamber; thus were the others
brought in.

All which things let us consider, and sow
liberally, that we may reap in more ample
abundance, and attain unto the good things
to come, by the grace and love towards man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory-
forever. Amen.


4 Luke xi. 41.
6 Acts X. 4.


S Hosea vi. 6 ; Matt. ix. 18.


HOMILY LI.


Matt. XV. i.


"Then came to Jesus Scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, saying. Why do

Thy disciples," etc'


Then; when? when He had wrought
His countless miracles; when He had healed
the infirm by the touch of the hem of His
garment. For even with this intent doth the
evangelist mark the time, that He might sig-
nify their unspeakable wickedness, by noth-
ing repressed.

But what means, " The Scribes and Phari-
sees, which were of Jerusalem?"^ In every
one of the tribes were they scattered abroad,

1 In the Oxford edition verses 1-6 are printed here in full
from the A. V. But in the Greek text of the Homily only the
first part of ver. i appears. As the larger part of the other
verses is given below, and as several questions of text and inter-
pretation arise, the passage has been printed here to correspond
with the Greek.— R.]

2 [R. v., " from Jerusalem Pharisees and Scribes." But Chry-
sostom's text is as above, agreeing with the received. The omis-
sion of the article affects the sense, as indicated in the R. V. — R.]


and divided into twelve parts; but they who
occupied the chief city were worse than the
others, as both enjoying more honor, and
having contracted much haughtiness.

But mark, I pray thee, how even by the
question itself they are convicted; in not say-
ing, " Why do they transgress the law of
Moses," but, "the tradition of the elders."
Whence it is evident that the priests were in-
venting many novelties, although Moses, with
much terror and with much threatening, had
enjoined neither to add nor take away.
" For ye shall not add," saith he, " unto the
word which I command you this day, and ye
shall not take away from it. " ^

3 Deut. iv. 2,


Homily LI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


J'D


But not the less were they innovating; as
in this instance, tiiat one ought not to eat
with unwashen hands, that we must wash cups
and brazen vessels, that we must wash also
ourselves. Thus, when men were hence-
forth, as time advanced, to be freed from
their observances, at that very time they
bound them with the same in more and more
instances, fearing lest any one should take
away their power, and wishing to strike more
dread, as though they were themselves also
lawgivers. The thing in fact proceeded so '
far in enormity, that while their own com-
mandments were kept, those of God were
transgressed; and they so far prevailed, that
the matter had actually become a ground of
accusation. Which was a twofold charge
against them, in that they both invented
novelties, and were so strict exactors on their
own account, while of God they made no
reckoning.

And omitting to speak of the other things, \
the pots and the brazen vessels (for it was
too ridiculous), what seemed more reasonable
than the rest, that they bring forward, wish-
ing, as seems at least to me, in that way to
provoke Him to anger. Wherefore also they
made mention of the elders, in order that
He, as setting them at nought, might give
occasion against Himself.

But it were meet first to inquire, why the
disciples ate with unwashen hands. \\'here- ,
fore then did they so eat ? Not as making a |
point of it, but as overlooking henceforth the
things that are superfluous, and attending to
such as are necessary; having no law to wash
or not to wash, but doing either as it hap-
pened. For they that despised even their
own necessary food, how were they to hold
these things worth much consideration ?
This then having often happened uninten-
tionally,— for instance, when tliey ate in the
wilderness, when they plucked the ears of
corn, — is now put forward as a charge by
these persons, who are always transgressing in
the great things, and making much account
of the superfluous.

2. What then saith Christ? He did not
set Himself against it, neither made He any
defense, but straightway blames tiiem again,
plucking down their confidence, and signify-
ing tliat lie who commits great sins ought not
to be strict with others concerning small
matters. "What? when you ought to be
blamed,'' saitli He, " do ye even blame ? "

I5ut do tliou observe, how wlien it is His
will to set aside any of the things enjoined
by tlie law, He does it in the form of an
apology; and so He did in that case. For by
no means doth He proceed at once to trans-


gress it, nor doth He say, "It is nothing;"
for surely He would have made them more
audacious; but first He clean cuts away their
boldness, bringing forward the far heavier
charge, and directing it upon their head.
And He neither saith, " they do well in trans-
gressing it," lest He should give them a hold
on Him; nor doth He speak ill of their pro-
ceeding, lest He should confirm the law: nor
again, on the other hand, doth He blame the
elders, as lawless and unholy men; for doubt-
less they would have shunned Him as a re-
viler and injurious: but all these things He
gives up, and proceeds another way. And
He seems indeed to be rebuking the persons
themselves who had come to Him, but He is
reprehending them that enacted these laws;
nowhere indeed making mention of the elders,
but by His charge against the Scribes casting
down them also, and signifying that their sin
is twofold, first in disobeying God, ne.\t in
doing so on men's account; as though He
had said, "Why this, this hath ruined you,
your obeying the elders in all things."

Yet He saith not so, but this is just what
He intimates, by answering them as follows:

" \\'hy do ye also transgress the command-
ment of God by' your tradition? For God
commanded, saying, Honor thy father and
thy mother: and. He that curseth father or
mother, let him die the death. But ye say,
Whosoever shall say to his father or his
mother, It is a gift, by whatsoever thou
mightest be profited by me, and ^ honor not
his father or his mother' — . And ye have
made void the commandment-' of God by
your tr.idition. ^

And He said not, "the elders' tradition,"
but "your own." And, "ye say;" again
He said not, "the elders say:" in order to
make His speech less galling. That is, be-
cause they wanted to prove the disciples
transgressors of the law. He signifies that
they themselves are doing so, but tliat these
are free from blame. For of course that is
not a law, which is enjoined by men (where-
fore also He calls it " a tradition "), and es-
pecially by men that are transgressors of the
law.

And since this had no shade of contrariety
to the law, to coinnuuid nu-n to wash their
hands, He brings forwanl another tradition,
which is opposed to the law. And what He


" [R. v., " lircnimc of,"]

-■ (C'hrvsoNtiirn rcuils «ai, with the rcc. text. lhii» miikinv.' the
srntnuc l>r<-iik citT. \'\\r \. V. sii|>()llrs "he shall be free,' R.
v., oiiiiitiiiK '• ami." with ihc best uiiUioiiiirs, mulccs thia tluu»c
the tiiiii hisiiMi : " he sliall not himor," etc. — k.]

I 1 R. V. text omits " and his mother. ")

4 (So rer. text, but R. V. rrmU " word " in the text, with
" liiw " in tlic muri;in. — K.]

5 .Mult. XV. 3-6. [R. v., " because of your iruJilion. ]


i6


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LI.


saith is like this. " They taught the young,
under the garb of piety, to despise their
fathers," How, and in what way ? "If one
of their parents said to his child, Give me this
sheep that thou hast, or this calf, or any
such thing, they used to say, ' This is a gift
to God, whereby thou wouldest be profited by
me, and thou canst not have it.' And two
evils hence arose: on the one hand they did
not bring them to God, on the other they
defrauded their parents under the name of
the offering, alike insulting their parents for
God's sake, and God for their parents' sake."
But He doth not say this at once, but first
rehearses the law, by which He signifies His
earnest desire that parents should be honored.
For, "honor," saith He, "thy father and
thy mother, that thou mayest live long upon
the earth."' And again, "He that curseth
father or mother, let him die the death," =

But He, omitting the first, the reward ap-
pointed for them that honor their parents,
states that which is more awful, the punish-
ment, I mean, threatened to such as dishonor
them; desiring both to dismay them, and to
conciliate such as have understanding; and
He ifnplies them to be for this worthy of
death. For if he who dishonors them in
word is punished, much more ye, who do so
in deed, and who not only dishonor, but also
teach it to others. " Ye then who ought not
so much as to live, how find ye fault with the
disciples?"

"And what wonder is it, if ye offer such
insults to me, who am as yet unknown, when
even to the Father ye are found doing the
like ? " For everywhere He both asserts and
implies, that from Him they began with this
their arrogance.

But some do also otherwise interpret, " It
is a gift, by whatsoever thou mightest be
profited by me; " that is, I owe thee no
honor, but it is a free gift from me to thee, if
indeed I do honor thee. But Christ would
not have mentioned an insult of that sort.

And Mark again makes this plainer, by
saying, "It is Corban, by whatsoever thou
mightest be profited by me; " 3 which means,
not a gift and present, but properly an offer-


ing.


Having then signified that they who were
trampling on the law could not be justly en-
titled to blame men for transgressing a com-
mand of certain elders, He points out this
same thing again from the prophet likewise.
Thus, having once laid hold of them severely,
He proceeds further: as on every occasion
He doth, bringing forward the Scriptures, and


1 Exod. XX.

2 Exod. xxi.


12. See also Ephes. vi. i 2.


3 Mark vii. 11.


SO evincing Himself to be in accordance with
God.

And what saith the prophet? " This peo-
ple honoreth me with their lips, but their
heart is far from me. But in vain do they
worship me, teaching for doctrines the com-
mandments of men."'*

Seest thou a prophecy in exact accordance
with His sayings, and from the very first pro-
claiming beforehand their wickedness ? For
what Christ laid to their charge now, of this
Isaiah also spake from the very first; that the
words of God they despise, " for in vain do
they worship me," saith He; but of their own
they make much account, "teaching," saith
He, " for doctrines the commandments of
men." Therefore with reason the disciples
keep them not.

3. Having, you see, given them their mor-
tal blow; and from the facts first, then from
their own suffrage, then from the prophet
having aggravated the charge, with them in-
deed He discourses not at all, incorrigibly
disposed as they are now come to be, but
directs His speech to the multitudes, so as to
introduce His doctrine, great and high, and
full of much strictness; and taking occasion
from the former topic. He proceeds to insert
that which is greater, casting out also the
observance of meats.

But see when. When He had cleansed the
leper, when He had repealed the Sabbath,
when He had shown Himself King of earth
and sea, when He had made laws, when He
had remitted sins, when He had raised dead
men, when He had afforded them many
proofs of His Godhead, then He discourses
of meats.

For indeed all the religion of the Jews is
comprised in this; if thou take this away,
thou hast even taken away all. For hereby
He signifies, that circumcision too must be
abrogated. But of Himself He doth not
prominently introduce this (forasmuch as
that was older than the other commandments,
and had higher estimation), but He enacts it
by His disciples. For so great a thing was
it, that even the disciples after so long a time
being minded to do it away, first practise it,
and so put it down.^

But see how He introduces His law: how
"He called the multitude, and said unto
them. Hear and understand." ^

Thus He doth by no means simply reveal
it to them, but by respect and courtesy, first,
He makes His saying acceptable (for this
the evangelist declares by saying, " He called


4 Matt. XV. 8, g. See Is. xxix. 13.
i/ieir doctrines the precepts of men."]

5 Acts xvi. 3.


[R. v., " teaching as
6 Matt. XV. II.


Homily LI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


-1 T »-


them unto Him "): and secondly, by the time
also; in that after their refutation, and His
victory over them, and the accusation by the
prophet, then He begins His legislation, when
they too would more easily receive His say-
ings.

And He doth not merely call them unto
Him, but also makes them more attentive.
For "understand," saith He, that is, "con-
sider, rouse yourselves; for of that sort is tlie
law now about to be enacted. For if they set
flside the law, even unseasonably, for their
own tradition, and ye hearkened; much more
ought ye to hearken unto me, who at the pro-
per season am leading you unto a higher rule
of self restraint."

And He did not say, " The observance of
meats is nothing, neither that Moses had
given wrong injunctions, nor that of conde-
scension He did so;" but m the way of
admonition and counsel, and taking His tes-
timony from the nature of the things. He
saith: " Not the things that go into the
mouth, defile the man, but the things that go
out of the mouth; "' resorting to nature her-
self both in His enactment and in His demon-
stration. Yet they hearing all this, made no
reply, neither did they say, " What sayest
Thou ? \Mien God hath given charges with-
out number concerning the observance of
meats, dost thou make such laws ? " But
since He had utterly stopped their mouths,
not by refuting them only, but also by pub-
lishing their craft, and exposing what was
done by them in secret, and revealing the
secrets of their mind; their mouths were
stopped, and so they went away.

But mark, I pray thee, how He doth not
yet venture distinctly to set Himself vvith
boldness against the meats. Therefore neither
did He say "the meats," but, "the things
that enter in defile not the man; " which it
was natural for them to suspect concerning
the unwashen hands also. For He indeed
was speaking of meats, l)ut it would be un-
derstood of these matters too.

Wliy, so strong was the feeling of scruple
about the meats, that even after the resurrec-
tion Peter said, "Not so, Lord, for I have
never eaten anything common or unclean."^
For although it was for the sake of others
that He said this, and in order to leave Him-
self a justification against his censurers, bv
pointing out that he actually remonstrated,
and not even so was excused, nevertiieless it
impHcs the deptli of tlicir impression on that
point.

Wherefore you see He Himself also at the


' Matt. XV. 11.


' Acts X. 14.


beginning spake not openly concerning meats,
but, "The things that go into the mouth;"
and again, when He had seemed afterwards
to speak more plainly. He veiled it by
His conclusion, saying, " But to eat with un-
washen hands defileth not the man: "^ that
He might seem to have had His occasion
from thence, and to be still discoursing of
the same. Therefore He said not, "To eat
meats defileth not a man," but is as though
He were speaking on that other topic; that
they may have nothing to say against it.

4. When therefore they had heard these
things, "the Pharisees," it is said, "were
offended,"-* not the multitudes. For "His
disciples," so it is said, " came and said unto
Him, Knowest thou that the Pharisees were
offended, when they heard the saying?"
Yet surely nothing had been said unto them.

What then saith Christ? He did not re-
move the offense in respect of them, but re-
proved them, saying, '' Every plant which my
heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be
rooted up."^ For He is wont both to de-
spise offenses, and not to despise them.
Elsewhere, for example. He saith, " But lest
we should offend them, cast an hook into the
sea: "^ but here He saith, " Let them alone,
they be blind leaders of the blind: and if the
blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch." 7

But these things His disciples said, not as
grieving for those men only, but as being
themselves also slightly perplexed. But be-
cause they durst not say so in their own per-
son, they would fain learn it by their telling
Him of others. And as to its being so, hear
how after this the ardent and ever- forward
Peter came to Him, and saith, " Declare
unto us this parable,"® discovering the trou-
ble in his soul, and not indeed venturing to
say openly, "I am olTendcd," but retpiiring
that by His interpretation he should be freed
from his perplexity; wherefore also he was
reproved.

What then saith Christ? "Every plant
which my heavenly Father hath not planted,
shall be rooted up."

This, tiiey that arc diseased with the Man-
ichaian |iest affirm to be spoken of the law;
but their' mouths are stopped by what had
been said before. For if He was spi'aking of
the law, how ilotii He further back defend it,
and figlil for it, saying, " Why ilo ye trans-
gress the commandments of God for your
tradition?" And how doth He bring for-


.1 Mutt. XV. 30. * Mjiti. XV. la.

5 Midt. XV. I (. * Mutt. xvii. a;.

7 Miiii.xv.if. [S<) rrc. text. The R. \'. follows ■ brirfcr read-
ing, l><il pmiM-rly xubstitutcs " a pit " for " the ditch." — R.J

" .Mutt. XV. 15.


3i8


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LI.


ward the prophet ? But of themselves and of
their traditions He so speaks. For if God
said, " Honor thy father and thy mother,"
how is not that of God's planting, which was
spoken by God ?

And what follows also indicates, that of
themselves it was said, and of their traditions.
Thus He added, " They are blind leaders of
the blind." Whereas, had He spoken it of
the law, He would have said, "It is a blind
leader of the blind." But not so did He
speak, but, "They are blind leaders of the
blind: " freeing it from the blame, and bring-
ing it all round upon them.

Then to sever the people also from them,
as being on the point of falling into a pit by
their means. He saith, *' If the blind lead the
blind, both shall fall into the ditch."

It is a great evil merely to be blind, but to
be in such a case and have none to lead him,
nay, to occupy the place of a guide, is a
double and triple ground of censure. For if
it be a dangerous thing for the blind man not
to have a guide, much more so that he should
even desire to be guide to another.

What then saith Peter ? He saith not,
" What can this be which Thou hast said ? "
but as though it were full of obscurity, he
puts his question. And he saith not, "Why
hast thou spoken contrary to the law?" for
he was afraid, lest he should be thought to
have taken offense, but asserts it to be ob-
scure. However, that it was not obscure, but
that he was offended, is manifest, for it had
nothing of obscurity.

Wherefore also He rebukes him, saying,
"Are ye also yet without understanding?"^
For as to the multitude, they did not perhaps
so much as understand the saying; but them-
selves were the persons offended. Where-
fore, whereas at first, as though asking in be-
half of the Pharisees, they were desirous to
be told; when they heard Him denouncing a
great threat, and saying, " Every plant, which
my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall
be rooted up," and, "They are blind leaders
of the blind," they were silenced. But he,
always ardent, not even so endures to hold
his peace, but saith, " Declare unto us this
parable."^

What then saith Christ? With a sharp
rebuke "He answers, "Are ye also yet without
understanding ' Do ye not yet understand ? "

But these things He said, and reproved
them, in order to cast out their prejudice;
He stopped not however at this, but adds
other things also, saying,

" That whatsoever entereth in at the mouth


I Matt. XV. i6.


= Matt. XV. 15.


goeth into the belly, and is cast out into the
draught; but those things which proceed out
of the mouth come forth from the heart, and
they defile the man. For out of the heart
proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, blasphemies, false-wit-
nessings: and these are the things that defile
the man: but to eat with unwashen hands
defileth not the man." 3

Seest thou how sharply He deals with
them, and in the way of rebuke?

Then He establishes His saying by our
common nature, and with a view to their
cure. For when He saith, " It goeth into the
belly, and is cast out into the draught," he
is still answering according to the low views
of the Jews. For He saith, "it abides not,
but goes out:" and what if it abode? it
would not make one unclean. But not yet
were they able to hear this.

And one may remark, that because of this
the lawgiver allows just so much time, as it
may be remaining within one, but when it is
gone forth, no longer. For instance, at
evening He bids you wash yourself, and so
be clean; measuring the time of the diges-
tion, and of the excretion.'* But the things of
the heart. He saith, abide within, and when
they are gone forth they defile, and not when
abiding only. And first He puts our evil
thoughts, a kind of thing which belonged to
the Jews; and not as yet doth He make His
refutation from the nature of the things, but
from the manner of production from the belly
and the heart respectively, and from the fact
that the one sort remains, the other not; the
one entering in from without, and departing
again outwards, while the others are breds
within, and having gone forth they defile, and
then more so, when they are gone forth.
Because they were not yet able, as I said, to
be taught these things with all due strictness.

But Mark saith, that "cleansing the
meats, ""^ He spake this. He did not how-
ever express it, nor at all say, "but to eat
such and such meats defileth not the man,"
for neither could they endure to be told it
by Him thus distinctly. And accordingly


3 Matt. XV. 17-20. 4 Lev. xi. 24, 25.

5 [TiKTerat ; the Oxford edition has "bad," which is probably
a misprint for bred." — R.]

6 iMark vii. 19. Origen in his commentary on this passage of
St. Matthew, refers also to St. Mark, where he reads as St. Chry-
sostom here, KaOapC^uiv instead of Ka9api^ov. The word " cleans-
ing "or "purging" is therefore referred to our Lord, and our
Saviour's words will stand as a parenthesis. See Field in loc.
[The translator doubtless means that this view makes our Lord's
own words a parenthetical explanation of the evangelist. So the
R. v. gives the clause. That KaOapi^MV is the correct reading is
quite certain, but German commentators refer it to a<j>iopu)va, ac-
cepting a change of construction. The evangelist Mark rarely
inserts explanations. The citation from Origen will be found in
Tischendorf, VIIL, note on Mark vii. 19. Despite the authority
of Origen and Chrysostom, the rendering of the R. V. is of doubt-
ful propriety. — R.]


Homily LI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


19


His conclusion was, " But to eat with un-
washen hands defileth not the man." '

5. Let us learn then what are the things
that defile the man; let us learn, and let us
flee them. For even in the church we see such
a custom prevailing amongst the generality,
and men giving diligence to come in clean
garments, and to have their hands washed;
but how to present a clean soul to God, they
make no account.

And this I say, not forbidding them to
wash hands or mouth; but willing men so to
wash as is meet, not with water only, but in-
stead of water, with all virtues. For the filth
of the mouth is evil speaking, blasphemy,
reviling, angry words, filthy talking, laughter,
jesting: if then thou art conscious to thyself
of uttering none of them, neither of being
defiled with this filth, draw near with confi-
dence; but if thou hast times out of number
received these stains, why dost thou labor in
vain, washing thy tongue indeed with water,
but bearing about on it such deadly and hurt-
ful filth ? For tell me, hadst thou dung on
thy hands, and mire, wouldest thou indeed
venture to pray ? By no means. And yet
this were no hurt; but that is ruin. How
then art thou reverential in the different
things, but in the forbidden remiss ?

What then ? should not we pray ? saith
one. We should indeed, but not while de-
filed, and having upon us mire of that sort.

"What then, if I have been overtaken?"
saith one. Cleanse thyself. " How, and in
what way?'' Weep, groan, give alms, apol-
ogize to him that is affronted, reconcile him
to thyself hereby, wipe clean thy tongue, lest
thou provoke God more grievously. For so
if one had filled his hands with dung, and
then should lay hold of thy feet, entreating
thee, far from hearing him, thou wouldest
rather spurn him with thy foot; how then
durst thou in such sort draw nigh to God ?
Since in truth the tongue is the hand of them
that pray, and by it we lay hold on tlie knees
of God. Defile it not therefore, lest to thee
also He say, "Though ye make many
prayers, I will not hearken." ^ Yea, and " in
the power of the tongue are death and life; " '
and, " By thy words thou shalt be justified,
and by thy words tliou shalt be condemned.'' ■•

I bid thee tlien watch thy tongue more than
the ap[)le of thine eye. The tongue is a
royal steed. If then thou put a bridle on it,
and teach it to pace orderly, the King will
rest and take His seat thereon; but if thou
suffer it to rusii about unbridled and leap
wantonly, it becomes a beast for the devil and


• Matt. XV. 20.
3 Pros', xviii. 21.


» In. i. 15.

* Mittl. xii. 17.


bad spirits to ride on. And while thou, fresh
from the company of thine own wife, darest
not pray, although this is no blame at all;
dost thou lift up thine hands, fresii from re-
viling and insult, which brings after it no less
than hell, before thou hast well cleansed thy-
self? And how dost thou not shudder? tell
me. Hast thou not heard Paul, saying,
" ALarriage is honorable, and the bed unde-
filed ? " 5 But if on rising from the undefiled
bed, thou darest not draw nigh in prayer,
how dost thou coming from the bed of the
devil call on that awful and terrible name?
For it is truly the devil's bed, to wallow in
insults and reviling. And like some wicked
adulterer, wrath dallies with us in great
deliglit, casting into us deadly seed, and
making us give birth to diabolical enmity, and
doing all things in a way opposite to marriage.
For whereas marriage causes the two to be-
come one flesh, wrath severs into many parts
them that were united, and cleaves and cuts
in pieces the very soul.

That thou mayest therefore with confidence
draw nigh to God, receive not wrath, when it
comes in upon thee, and desires to be with
thee, but drive it away like a mad dog.

For so Paul too commanded: his phrase
being, " lifting up holy hands without wrath
and disputing."* Dishonor not then thy
tongue, for how will it entreat for thee, when
it hath lost its proper confidence ? but adorn
it with gentleness, with humility, make it
worthy of the God who is entreated, fill it
with blessing, with much almsdoing. For it
is possible even with words to do alms. '' For
a word is a better thing than a gift," " and
" answer the poor man peaceably with meek-
ness.''* And all the rest of thy time too
adorn it with the rehearsing of the laws of
God; "Yea, let all thy communication be in
the law of the Most High."'

Having thus adorneil ourselves, let us come
to our King, and fall at His knees,"' not with
the body only, but also with t!ie mind. Let
us consider whom we are approaching, and
on whose behalf, and what we would accom-
plish. We are drawing nigh unto lioil, whom
the seraphim behoUl and turn away their
faces, not bearing His briglUness; at sight of
whom the earth trembles. We draw nigh
unto God, " who dwelleth in tlic light, whicli
no man can ajiproach unto."" And we draw
nigh unto Him for deliverance from hell, for
remission of sins, for escape from those in-

! Heb. xiii. 4. * 1 Tim. ii. 8. 7 Ecclu*. xviii. 16.

" Efclii*. iv. 8. 9 F.cfliin. ix. 15.

'" [ninTutiitv «'■•« yovara, " full cm our knees" «cem» to be the
morr prulmlitr Hriinr, ii» the ciinlcxt indicates. Comjiarc the last
sentciiir in the pjiruKTuph. — K.]

" 1 I'ini. vi. I''.


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LI.


tolerable punishments, for attaining to tlie
Heavens, and to the good things that are
there. Let us, I say, fall down before Him
both in body and in mind, that He may raise
us up when we are down; let us converse
with all gentleness and meekness.

And who is so wretched and miserable, one
may say, as not to become gentle in prayer ?
He that prays with an imprecation, and fills
himself with wrath, and cries out against his
enemies.

6. Nay, if thou wilt accuse, accuse thyself.
If thou wilt whet and sharpen thy tongue, let
it be against thine own sins. And tell not
what evil another hath done to thee, but what
thou hast done to thyself; for this is most
truly an evil; since no other will really be
able to injure thee, unless thou injure thy-
self. Wherefore, if thou desire to be against
them that wrong thee, approach as against
thyself first; there is no one to hinder; since
by coming into court against another, thou
hast but the greater injury to go away with.

And what injury at all hast thou really to
mention ? That such an one insulted and
spoiled thee by violence, and encompassed
thee with dangers ? Nay, this is receiving
not injury, but if we be sober, the very
greatest benefit; the injured being he that
did such things, not he that suffered them.
And this is more than any one thing the
cause of all our evils, that we do not so much
as know at all who is the injured, and who
the injurious person. Since if we knew this
well, we should not ever injure ourselves, we
should not pray against another, having learnt
that it is impossible to suffer ill of another.
For not to be spoiled, but to spoil, is an evil.
Wherefore, if thou hast spoiled, accuse thy-
self; but if thou hast been spoiled, rather
pray for him that spoiled thee, because he
hath done thee the greatest good. For al-
though the intent of the doer was not such,
yet thou hast received the greatest benefit, if
thou hast endured it nobly. For him, both
men, and the laws of God declare to be
wretched, but thee, the injured party, they
crown, and proclaim thy praise.

For so if any one sick of a fever had vio-
lently taken from any other a vessel contain-
ing water, and had had his fill of his perni-
cious desire, we should not say that the de-
spoiled had been injured, but the spoiler; for
he has aggravated his fever, and made his
disease more grievous. Now in this way I
bid thee reason concerning: him also that


loves wealth and money. For he too, having
a far worse fever than the other, has by this
rapine fanned the flame in himself.

Again, were some madman to snatch a sword
from any one, and destroy himself, which
again is the injured ? He that hath been
robbed, or the robber ? It is quite clear, he
that did the robbery.

Well then, in the case of seizing, property
also, let us give the same suffrage. For
what a sword is to a madman, much the
same is wealth to a covetous man; nay, it is
even a worse thing. For the madman, when
he has taken the sword, and thrust it through
himself, is both delivered from his madness,
and hath no second blow to receive; but the
lover of money receives daily ten thousand
wounds more grievous than his, without de-
livering himself from his madness, but ag-
gravating it more exceedingly: and the more
wounds he receives, the more doth he give
occasion for other more grievous blows.

Reflecting then on these things, let us flee
this sword; let us flee the madness; though
late, let us become temperate For this vir-
tue too ought to be called temperance, not
less than that which is used to be so called
among all men. For whereas there the
dominion of one lust is to be struggled
against, here we have to master many lusts,
and those of all kinds.

Yea, nothing, nothing is more foolish ' than
the slave of wealth. He thinks he overcomes
when he is overcome. He thinks he is mas-
ter, when he is a slave, and putting bonds on
himself, he rejoices; making the wild beast
fiercer, he is pleased; and becoming a cap-
tive, he prides himself, and leaps for joy; and
seeing a dog rabid and flying at his soul,
when he ought to bind him and weaken him
by hunger, he actually supplies him with
abundance of food, that he may leap upon
him more fiercely, and be more formidable.

Reflecting then on all these things, let us
loose the bonds, let us slay the monster, let
us drive away the disease, let us cast out this
madness; that we may enjoy a calm and pure
health, and having with much pleasure sailed
into the serene haven, may attain unto the
eternal blessings; unto which may we all at-
tain, by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and
might, now and always, and world without
end. Amen.


I cKJipovecTTtpov opposed to <Tui(f)po<Tvi'ri.


Homily LII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


3^1


HOMILY LII.


Matt. XV. 21, 22.


"And Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon. And, behold, a
woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto Him,' saying, Have
mercy on me, O Lord, Thou Son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed with a
devil.''


But Mark saith, that *' He could not be
hid," - though He had entered into the house.

And why did He go at all into these parts ?
When He had set them free from the observ-
ance of meats, then to the Gentiles also He
goes on to open a door, proceeding in due
course; even as Peter, having been first
directed to annul this law, is sent to Corne-
lius.^

But if any one should say, '* How then,
while saying to His disciples, "Go not into
the way of the Gentiles,"'' doth He Himself
admit her?" first, this would be our reply,
that what He enjoined upon His disciples,
He was not Himself also tied to; secondly,
that not in order to preach did He depart;
which indeed Mark likewise intimating said,
He even hid Himself, yet was not concealed.

For as His not hastening to them first was
a part of the regular course of His proceed-
ings, so to drive them away when coming to
Him was unworthy of His love to man. For
if the flying ought to be pursued, much more
ought the pursuing not to be avoided.

See at any rate how worthy this woman is
of every benefit. For she durst not even
come to Jerusalem, fearing, and accounting
herself unwx^rthy. For were it not for this,
she would have come there, as is evident both
from her present earnestness, and from her
coming out of her own coasts.

And some also taking it as an allegory say,
that when Christ came out of Judea, then the
church ventured to approach Him, coming
out herself also from her own coasts. For it
is said, " Forget thine own peojile and thy
father's house." ^ For both Christ went out
of His borders, and the woman out of her
borders, and so it became possible for them
to f.ill in with each other; thus He saith,


» [R. v., "Anfl TcsuR went out thence and withdrew into the
part"»of Tyre and Sidon. And lirhold, u Canaiinltish wonuin lain'-
tint from those borders, and rrird." liiil (hrysostoni a(jrcrs with
the rcc. text, in addinii( " unto lliin." Thrrr is snmr doiilit as to
th<- rorrect form of the CirccU vcrl) rendered "cried,'" both in the
New I'estamcnt and in Chrysostom's text. -R.]

• Mark vii. 34. 3 Act* x. 1$, au.

4 .Matt. X. 5. [k. T. ",i«^ way."] S I'l. xlv. lu.

^1


" Behold a woman of Canaan coming out of
her own coasts.''

The evangelist speaks against the woman,
that he may show forth her marvellous act,
and celebrate her praise the more. For when
thou hearest of a Canaanitish woman, thou
shouldest call to mind those wicked nations,
who overset from their foundations the very
laws of nature. And being reminded of
these, consider also the power of Christ's
advent. For they who were cast out, that
they might not pervert any Jews, these ap-
peared so much better disposed than tlie Jews,
as even to come out of their coasts, and ap-
proach Christ; while those were driving Him
away, even on His coming unto them.

2. Having then come unto Him, she saith
nothing else, but " Have mercy on me," and
by her cry brings about them many specta-
tors. For indeed it was a pitiful spectacle to
see a woman crying aloud in so great afflic-
tion, and that woman a mother, and entreat-
ing for a daughter, and for a daughter in such
evil case: she not even venturing to bring into
the Master's sight her that was possessed,
but leaving her to lie at home, and herself
making the entreaty.

And she tells her affliction only, and adds
nothing more; neither doth she ilrag the
piiysician to her house, like that nobleman,
saying, " Come anil lay thy hanil upon her,"
and, " Come ilown ere my child die.''"

But having described both her calamity,
and the intensity of the disease, she pleads
the Lord's mercy, and cries aloud; and she
saith not, " Have mercy on my daughter,"
but, " Have mercy on me.'' For siie indceil
is inseiisil)le of her disease, but it is I that
suffer her innuinerable woes; my disease is
with consciousness, my madness with percep-
tion of itself.

2. " Ihit He answereil her not a word."'

What is this new and strange thing? tiie
Jews in their perverseness He leads on, and


«• See John iv. 49, and cump. .Mutt. ix. 18.
7 .Mntt. XV. jj.


122


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LII.


blaspheming He entreats them, and tempting
Him He dismisses them not; but to her, run-
ning unto Him, and entreating, and beseech-
ing Him, to her who had been educated
neither in the law, nor in the prophets, and
was exhibiting so great reverence; to her He
doth not vouchsafe so much as an answer.

Whom would not this have offended, seeing
the facts so opposite to the report ? For
whereas they had heard, that He went about
the villages healing, her, when she had come
to Him, He utterly repels. And who would
not have been moved by her affliction, and
by the supplication she made for her daugh-
ter in such evil case ? For not as one worthy,
nor as demanding a due, not so did she ap-
proach Him, but she entreated that she might
find mercy, and merely gave a lamentable
account of her own affliction; yet is she not
counted worthy of so much as an answer.

Perhaps many of the hearers were offended,
but she was not offended. And why say I,
of the hearers ? For I suppose that even the
very disciples must have been in some degree
affected at the woman's affliction, and have
been greatly troubled, and out of heart.

Nevertheless not even in this trouble did
they venture to say, " Grant her this favor,"
but, " His disciples came and besought Him,
saying. Send her away, for she crieth after
us." For we too, when we wish to persuade
any one, oftentimes say the contrary.

But Christ saith, " I am not sent, but unto
the lost sheep of the house of Israel."'

What then did the woman, after she heard
this? Was she silent, and did she desist? or
did she relax her earnestness ? By no means,
but she was the more instant. But it is not
so with us; rather, when we fail to obtain, we
desist; whereas it ought to make us the more
urgent.

And yet, who would not have been driven
to perplexity by the word which was then
spoken ? Why His silence were enough to
drive her to despair, but His answer did so
very much more. For together with herself,
to see them also in utter perplexity that were
pleading with her, and to hear that the thing is
even impossible to be done, was enough to
cast her into unspeakable perplexity.

Yet nevertheless the woman was not per-
plexed, but on seeing her advocates prevail
nothing, she made herself shameless with
a goodly shamelessness.

For whereas before this she had not ven-
tured so much as to come in sight (for " she
crieth," it is said, "after us "), when one
might expect that she should rather depart

I Matt. XV. 24.


further off in utter despair, at that very time
she comes nearer, and worships, saying,
" Lord, help me."""

What is this, O woman ? Hast thou then
greater confidence than the apostles ?
more abundant strength ? "Confidence and
strength," saith she, "by no means; nay, I
am even full of shame. Yet nevertheless my
very shamelessness do I put forward for en-
treaty; He will respect my confidence."
And what is this ? Heardest thou not Him
saying, " I am not sent but unto the lost
sheep of the house of Israel ? " "I heard,"
saith she, "but He Himself is Lord."
Wherefore neither did she say, " Entreat and
beseech," but, " Help me."

3. What then saith Christ ? Not even with
all this was He satisfied, but He makes her
perplexity yet more intense again, saying,

" It is not meet to take the children's bread
and to cast it to the dogs. "^

And when He vouchsafed her a word, then
He smote her more sharply than by His
silence. And no longer doth He refer the
cause to another, nor say, " I am not sent,"
but the more urgent she makes her entreaty,
so much the more doth He also urge His
denial. And He calls them no longer
" sheep," but " children," and her " a dog."

What then saith the woman ? Out of His
own very words she frames her plea. " Why,
though I be a dog," said she, " I am not an
alien."

Justly did Christ say, "For judgment am
I come." ^ The woman practises high self-
command, and shows forth all endurance and
faith, and this, receiving insult; but they,
courted and honored, requite it with the con-
trary.

For, " that food is necessary for the chil-
dren," saith she, "I also know; yet neither
am I forbidden, being a dog. For were it
unlawful to receive, neither would it be law-
ful to partake of the crumbs; but if, though in
scanty measure, they ought to be partakers,
neither am I forbidden, though I be a dog;
nay, rather on this ground am I most surely
a partaker, if I am a dog."

With this intent did Christ put her off, for
He knew she would say this; for this did He
deny the grant, that He might exhibit her
high self-command.

For if He had not meant to give, neither
would He have given afterwards, nor would
He have stopped her mouth again. But as
He doth in the case of the centurion, saying,
" I will come and heal him," ^ that we might
learn the godly fear of that man, and might


= Matt. XV. 25.
4 John ix. 32.


3 Matt. XV. 26.

5 Matt. viii. 7.


Homily LII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


^ O ^


hear him say, " I am not worthy that Thou
shouldest come under my roof; " ' and as He
doth in the case of her that had the issue of
blood, saying, '* I perceive that virtue hath
gone out of me,'"' that He might make her
faith manifest; and as in the case of the
Samaritan woman, that He might show how
not even upon reproof she desists: ^ so also
here, He would not that so great virtue in the
woman should be hid. Not in insult then
were His words spoken, but calling her forth,
and revealing the treasure laid up in her.

But do thou, I pray thee, together with
her faith see also her humility. For He had
called the Jews " children," but she was not
satisfied with this, but even called them
" masters; '' so far was she from grieving at
the praises of others.

" Why, the dogs also," * saith she, " eat of
the crumbs that fall from their master's
tablet's

Seest thou the woman's wisdom, how she
did not venture so much as to say a word
against it, nor was stung by other men's
praises, nor was indignant at the reproach ?
Seest thou her constancy? He said, " It is
not meet," and she said, "Truth, Lord;"
He called them " children," but she "mas-
ters;" He used the name of a dog, but she
added also the dog's act. Seest thou this
woman's humility?

Hear the proud language of the Jews.
" We be Abraham's seed, and were never in
bondage to any man; "* and, "We be born
of God."' But not so this woman, rather
she calls herself a dog, and them masters; so
for this she became a child.

What then saith Christ?

*' O woman, great is thy faith." ^

Yea, therefore did He put her off, that He
might proclaim aloud this saying, that He
might crown the woman.

" Be it unto thee even as thou wilt." Now
what He saith is like this: " Thy faith indeed
is able to effect even greater things than
these; nevertheless, Be it unto thee even as
thou wilt."

This was akin to that voice that said, '' Let
the Heaven be, and it was."'^

"And her daughter was made whole from
that very hour."

Seest thou how this woman too contributed
not a little to the healing of her daughter?
For to this purpose neither tlid Christ say,
" Let thy little daughter be made whole,"
but, " Great is thy faitii, be it unto thee even


' Matt.


4 Ik. v., "
* John viii.
B Matt. XV.


vill. 8. ' I.iikr viii. 46.

for even the duK"." <•'<' 1


II


3 John iv. 18.
5 Slatt. XV. a;.
7 John Viii. 41.
9 Gen. i. 3.


as thou wilt; " to teach thee that the words
were not used at random, nor were they flat-
tering words, but great was the power of her
faith.

The certain test, however, and demonstra-
tion thereof. He left to the issue of events.
Her daughter accordingly was straightway
I healed.

j But mark thou, I pray thee, how when the

[apostles had failed, and had not succeeded,

j this woman had success. So great a thing is

assiduity in prayer. Yea, He had even

rather be solicited by us, guilty as we are,

for those who belong to us, than by others in

our behalf. And yet they had more liberty

to speak; but she exhibited much endurance.

And by the issue He also excused Himself

to His disciples for the delay, and showed

that with reason He had not assented to their

request.

4. "And Jesus departed from thence, and
came nigh unto the sea of Galilee; and went
up into the mountain, and sat down there.
And great multitudes came unto Him, having
with them those that were lame, blind,
j maimed, dumb; and cast them '°at His feet;
j and He healed them, insomuch that the mul-
titudes wondered, when they saw the dumb to
speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to
walk, and the blind to see, and they glorified
the God of Israel.""

Now He goes about Himself, now sits
awaiting the diseased, and hath the lame
brought up unto the mountain. And no
longer do they touch so much as His gar-
ment, but advance a higher step, being cast at
His feet: and they showed their faith doubly,
first, by going up into the mountain though
lame, then by wanting nothing else but to be
cast at His feet only.

And great was the marvel and strange, to
see them that were carried walking, the blind
needing not any to lead them by the hand.
Yea, both the multitude of the healed, and
the facility of their cure amazed them.

Seest tiiou, how the woman indeed He

healed with so much delay, but these imme-

|diately? not because these are better than

I she is, but because she is more faithful than

they. Therefore, while in her case He defers

land delays, to manifest her constancy; on

'these He !)est()ws the gift immediately, stop-

l^ing the mouths of tiie unbelieving Jews, and

cutting away from them every plea. For the

greater favors one hath received, so much

the more is lie liable to |)unisiiment, if he be

insensible, antl the very honor make him no

10 f" cant them Jown."]

'« Nlutt, XV. j.;-)i. [Comp. the more exact rendering of the R.
v., " the dumb spealtinif," etc.]


324


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily Lll.


better. Therefore you see the rich also
proving wicked, are more punished than the
poor, for not being softened even by their
prosperity. For tell me not that they gave
alms. Since if they gave not in proportion
to their substance, not even so shall they
escape; our alms being judged not by the
measure of our gifts, but by the largeness ' of
our mind. But if these suffer punishment,
much more they that are eager about unnec-
essary things; who build houses of two and
three stories, but despise the hungry; who
give heed to covetousness, but neglect alms-
giving.

5. But since the discourse hath fallen on
almsgiving, come then, let us resume again
to-day that argument, which I was making
three days ago concerning benevolence, and
left unfinished. Ye remember, when lately
I was speaking of vanity about your shoes,
and of that empty trouble, and the luxury of
the young, that it was from almsgiving that
our discourse passed on to those charges
against you. What were the matters then at
that time brought forward ? That almsgiving
is a kind of art, having its workshop in
Heaven, and for its teacher, not man, but
God. Then inquiring what is an art, and
what not an art, we came upon fruitless
labors, and evil devices, amongst which we
made mention also of this art concerning
men's shoes.

Have ye then recalled it to mind ? Come
now, let us to-day also resume what we then
said, and let us show how almsgiving is an
art, and better than all arts. For if the
peculiarity of art is to issue in something use-
ful, and nothing is more useful than almsgiv-
ing, very evidently this is both an art, and
better than all arts. For it makes for us not
shoes, nor doth it weave garments, nor build
houses that are of clay; but it procures life
everlasting, and snatches us from the hands
of death, and in either life shows us glorious,
and builds the mansions that are in Heaven,
and those eternal tabernacles.

This suffers not our lamps to go out, nor
that we should appear at the marriage having
filthy garments, but washes them, and ren-
ders them purer than snow. " For though
your sins be as scarlet, I will make them
white as snow."* It suffers us not to fall,
where that rich man fell, nor to hear those
fearful words, but it leads us into the bosom
of Abraham.

And indeed of the arts of this life, each
severally takes and keeps one good work; as
agriculture the feeding us; weaving the cloth-


ing us; or rather not so much as this; for it
is in no wise sufficient alone to contribute to
us its own part. And, if thou wilt, let us try
agriculture first. Why, if it hath not the
smith's art, that it may borrow from it spade,
and ploughshare, and sickle, and axe, and
other things besides; and that of the carpen-
ter, so as both to frame a plough, and to pre-
pare a yoke and a cart to bruise the ears; and
the currier's, to make also the leathern har-
ness; and the builder's, to build a stable for
the bullocks that plough, and houses for the
husbandmen that sow; and the woodman's, to
cut wood; and the baker's after all these, it
is found nowhere.

So also the art of weaving, when it pro-
duces anything, calls many arts, together with
itself, to assist it in the works set before it;
I and if they be not present and stretch forth
1 the hand, this too stands, like the former, at
a loss. And indeed every one of the arts
stands in need of the other.

But when alms is to be given, we want
nothing else, but the disposition only is re-
quired. And if thou say that money is
needed, and houses and clothes and shoes;
read those words of Christ, which He spake
concerning the widow,^ and cease from this
anxiety. For though thou be exceedingly


poor,


and of them that


bee


if thou cast in


^ 6at/ftAeia,


2 Isaiah i. iS.


two mites, thou hast effected all; though thou
give but a barley cake, having only this, thou
art arrived at the end of the art.

This science then let us receive, and bring
to perfection. For truly it is a better thing
to know this, than to be a king, and to wear
a diadem. For this is not its only advantage,
that it needs not other things, but it is also
able to accomplish a variety of objects, both
many and of all kinds. Thus, it both builds
houses that continue forever in Heaven; and
teaches them that have brought it to per-
fection, how they may esc;ipe the never-dying
death; and bestows on thee treasures that
are never spent, but escape all injury, both
from robbers, and from worms, and from
moths, and from time.

And yet, were it but for the preservation
of wheat that any one had taught thee this,
what wouldest thou not have given, to be
able to preserve thy grain unconsumed for
many years? But behold, this teaches thee
the same not concerning wheat only, but
1 concerning all things, and shows how both
thy goods and thy soul and thy body may
remain unconsumed.

And why should we rehearse particularly
all the good effects of this art ? For this

3 Mark xii. 43 ; Luke xxi. 3, 4.


Homily LII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


325


teaches thee how thou mayest become Uke j
God, which is the sum of all good things
whatsoever. |

Seest thou how the work thereof is not one,
but many? Without needing any other art, ;
it builds houses, it weaves garments, it stores ,
up treasures which cannot be taken from us,
it makes us get the better of death, and pre- '■
vail over the devil; it renders us like God. j

What now can be more profitable than this
art ? For while the other arts, as well as what
I have mentioned, both end with our present
life, and when the artists are diseased, are
found nowhere; and their works have no
power to endure, and they need much labor
and time, and innumerable other things; this
one, when the world hath passed away, then
it becomes more than ever conspicuous; when
we are dead, then it shines out brighter than
ever, and exhibits the works which it hath |
accomplished. And neither time nor labor,
nor any such travail, doth it need; but is
active even in thy sickness, and in thine old
age, and migrates with thee into the life to
come, and never forsakes thee. This makes
thee to surpass in ability both sophists and
rhetoricians. For such as are approved in
those arts have many to envy them, but they
who shine in this have thousands to pray for
them. And those indeed stand at men's
judgment seat, pleading for them that are
wronged, and often too for them that do
wrong; but this virtue stands by the judgment
sent of Christ, not only pleading, but per-
suading the judge Himself to plead for him
that is judged, and to give sentence in his
favor: though his sins have been very many,
almsgiving doth both crown and proclaim
him. For "give alms, and all things shall
be clean '' '

And why do I speak of the things to come ?
Since in our present life, should we ask men
which they would rather, that there should
be many sophists and rhetoricians, or many
that give alms, and love their fellow men,
thou wilt hear them choose the latter; and
very reasonably. For if oratory were taken
away, our life will be nothing the worse; for
inileetl even Ijcfore this, it iiad continued a
long time; but if thou take away the showing
of mercy, all is lost and undone. And as
men couM not sail on the sea, if harbors and
roadsteads were l)Iocked up; so neither could
this life hold together, if thou take away
mercy, and compassion, and love to man.

6. Therefore (iod iiath not at all left them
to reasoning only, but many parts thereof He

' Luke xi. 41. [The vcr»c rcu(l<i: " Howbcit k'vc for iiIiiih
thiise (hin^H which arc within (or, yc can), and brhiild, all ihiuK''
ari?(lciin iintn you." 'Ihi- cminrctiun m iir> i-Iy warrants the un-
qualified use made of the pus-nage in the >luniily. — K.]


hath implanted by the absolute power of
nature herself. Thus do fathers pity chil-
dren, thus mothers, thus children parents;
and not in the case of men only, but of all
the brutes also; thus brothers pity brothers,
and kinsmen, and connexions; thus man
pities man. For we have somewhat even
from nature prone to mercy.

Therefore also we feel indignation in behalf
of them that are wronged, and seeing men
killed we are overcome, and beholding them
as they mourn, we weep. For because it is
God's will that it should be very perfectly
performed. He commanded nature to contri-
bute much hereunto, signifying that this is
exceedingly the object of His care.

Considering then these things, let us bring
both ourselves and our children and them that
pertain to us unto the school of mercy, and
this above all things let man learn, since
even this is man, " For a man is a great
thing, and a merciful man a precious thing;'' *
so that unless one hath this, one hath fallen
away even from being a man. This renders
them wise. And why marvel at this being
man? This is God. For, "be ye," saith
He, "merciful as your Father.'' ^

Let us learn therefore to be merciful on all
accounts, but chiefly, because we too need
much mercy. And let us reckon ourselves
as not even living, at such time as we are not
showing mercy. But by mercy, I mean that
which is free from covetousness. For if he
that is contented with his own, and imparts to
no man, is not merciful, how is he that takes
the goods of other men merciful, though he
give without limit ? For if merely to enjoy
one's own be inhumanity, much more to de-
fraud others. If they that have done no
wrong are punished, because they imparted
not, much more they, who even take what is
others.

Say not therefore this, "One is injured,
another receives mercy." For this is the
grievous thing. Since it were meet that the
injured siiould be the same with the receiver
of the mercy: but now, while wounding some,
thou art healing them whom thou hast not
wounded, when thou oughtest to heal the
same; or rather not so much as to wound
them. For he is not humane who smites and
I heals, but he tiuU heals such ns have been
smitten by others. Heal therefore thine own
evil acts, not another's; or rather tlo not
smite at all, nor cast down (for this is the
coiuluct of a mocker), but raise up them tlKtt
' are cast down
I I'fir neitlier is it jmssible by the same


a I'rov. XX. 6, Lxx.


i Luke vi. 36.


326


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LIII.


measure of almsgiving to cure the evil result
of covetousness. For if thou hast unjustly
gotten a farthing, it is not a farthing that thou
needest again for almsgiving, to remove the
sin that comes of "thine unjust gain, but
a talent. Therefore the thief being taken
pays fourfold, but he that spoils by violence
is worse than he that steals. And if this last
ought to give fourfold ' what he stole, the ex-
tortioner should give tenfold and much more;
and it is much if even so he can make atone-
ment for his injustice; for of almsgiving not
even then will he receive the reward. There-
fore saith Zacchffius, " I will restore what I
have taken by false accusation fourfold, and
the half of my goods I will give to the poor." ^
And if under the law one ought to give four-
fold, much more under grace; if he that
steals, much more he that spoils by violence.
For besides the damage, in this case the in-
sult too is great. So that even if thou give
an hundredfold, thou hast not yet given the
whole.

Seest thou how not without cause I said, If
thou take but a farthing by violence, and pay
back a talent, scarcely even so dost thou
remedy it? But if scarcely by doing this;
when thou reversest the order, and hast taken


1 Exod. xxii. I.

2 Luke xix. 8. [The future tense is given by Chrysostom, and
other variations made in the New Testament passage.— R.]


by violence whole fortunes, yet bestowest but
little, and not to them either that have been
wronged, but to others in their stead; what
kind of plea wilt thou have ? what favor ?
what hope of salvation ?

Wouldest thou learn how bad a deed thou
doest in so giving alms ? Hear the Scripture
that saith, "As one that killeth the son before
his father's eyes, so is he that bringeth a
sacrifice of the goods of the poor."^

This denunciation then let us write in our
minds before we depart, this let us write on
our walls, this on our hands, this in our con-
science, this everywhere; that at least the
fear of it being vigorous in our minds, may
restrain our hands from daily murders. For
extortion is a more grievous thing than mur-
der, consuming the poor man by little and
little.

In order then that we may be pure from
this pollution, let us exercise ourselves in
these thoughts, both by ourselves and to one
another. For so shall we both be more for-
ward to show mercy, and receive undimin-
ished the reward for it, and enjoy the eternal
good things, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ; to whom be
glory and might with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost, now and always, and world with-
out end. Amen.

3 Ecclus. xxxiv. 2o.


HOMILY LIII.


Matt. XV. 32.


But Jesus called His disciples unto Him, and said, I have compassion on the multitude,
because they continue with me now three days, and have nothing to eat: and I will'
not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way."


Both above, when going to do this mira-
cle, He first healed them that were maimed
in body, and here He doth the self-same
thing; from the healing of the blind and the
lame. He goes on to this again.

But why might it be, that then His disci-
ples said, " Send away the multitude," but
now they said not so; and this, though three
days had past ? Either being themselves im-
proved by this time, or seeing that the people


i[R. v., "would," fl€Aa>.]


had no great sense of hunger; for they were
glorifying God for the things that were done.

But see how in this instance too He doth
not proceed at once to the miracle, but calls
them forth thereunto. For the multitudes
indeed who had come out for healing durst
not ask for the loaves; but He, the benevo-
lent and provident one, gives even to them
that ask not, and saith unto His disciples, " I
have compassion, and will not send them
away fasting."

For lest they should say that they came


Homily LIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


127


having provisions for the way, He saith,
" They continue with me now three days;''
so that even if they came having any, it is all
spent. For therefore He Himself did not
this on the first and second day, but when
all had been consumed by them, in order that
having first been in want, they might more
eagerly accept His work.

Therefore He saith, "Lest they faint in
the way; " implying both their distance to be
great, and that they had nothing left.

"Then, if thou art not willing to send
them away fasting, wherefore dost thou not
work the miracle?" That by this question
and by their answer He might make the dis-
ciples more heedful, and that they might
show forth their faith, coming unto Him, and
saying, " IMake loaves.''

But not even so did they understand the
motive of His question; wherefore afterwards
He saith to them, as Mark relates, "Are
your hearts so hardened ? Having eyes, see
ye not? and having ears, hear ye not ?" '

Since, if this were not so, wherefore doth
He speak to the disciples, and signify the
multitude's worthiness to receive a benefit,
and add also the pity He Himself feels ?

But Matthew saith, that after this He also
rebuked them, saying, "O ye of little faith,
do ye not yet understand, nor remember the
five loaves of the five thousand, and how
many baskets ye took up? nor the seven
loaves of the four thousand, and how many
baskets ye took up?"=' So completely do
the evangelists harmonize one with another.

What then say the disciples ? Still they
creep on the ground, although He had done
so very many things in order that that mira-
cle might be kept in memory; as by His
question, and by the answer, and by making
tiiem minister herein, and by distributing the
baskets; but their state of mind was yet
rather imperfect.

Wherefore also they say to Him, " Whence
should we have so many loaves in tlie wilder-
ness ? " 3

Both before this, and now, tliey make
mention of the wilderness; themselves in a
weak way of argument so speaking, yet even
hereby putting the miracle above suspicion.
That is, lest any should affirm (as I have
indeed already said), tiiat they obtained it
from some neighboring village, the place is
acknowledged, that the miracle may be be-
lieved. With this view, botli tlu- former mir-
acle and this He works in a wilderness, al a
great distance from the villages.

The disciples, considering none of all this.


said, "Whence should we have so many
loaves in a wilderness ? " For they thought
verily He had said it as purposing next to
enjoin them to feed the people; most fool-
ishly; since with this intent He had said, and
that lately, " Give ye them to eat," * that He
, might bring them to an urgent need of en-
treating Him.

But now He saith not this, " Give ye them
to eat," but what? "I have compassion on
them, and will not send them away fasting;"
bringing the disciples nearer, and provoking
them more, and granting them clearer sight,
to ask these things of Him. For in truth
they were the words of one signifying that
He hath power not to send them away fast-
ing; of one manifesting His authority. For
the expression, "I will not," implies such a
purpose in Him.

2. Since however they still spake of the
multitude merely, and the place, and the wil-
derness (for "whence," it is said, "should
we have in a wilderness so many loaves, as to
fill so great a multitude " ?); and not even so
understood what He said, He proceeds to
contribute His own part, and saith unto
them,

"How many loaves have ye? And they
say. Seven, and a few little fishes." ^

And they no more say, " But what are
these among so many?"* as they had said
before. So that although they reached not
His whole meaning, yet nevertheless they
became higher by degrees. For so He too,
arousing their mind hereby, puts the question
much as He had done before, that by the
very form of the inquiry He might remind
them of the works already done.

But as thou hast seen their imperfection
hereby, so do thou observe the severity of
their spirit, and admire their love of truth,
how, writing themselves, they conceal not
their own defects, great as they were. For
it was no small blame to have presently for-
gotten this miracle, which had so recently
taken place; wherefore they arc also rebukeil.

And herewith consider also their strictness
in another matter, iiow they were conquerors
of tiieir appetite; how disci|)lined to make
little account of their diet. For being in the
wilderness aiul abiding there three days, they
had seven loaves.

Now all the rest He ilotli as on the former
occasion; thus He both makes them sit down
on tlie ground, and He makes the loaves
miiUiply themselves in tlu- hands of tin- disci-
ples.

l'"or, "He commanded," it is saiil, "the


" Mark viii. 17, 18. ■' Mutt. xvi. 8-10.

3 Matt. XV. 33. [K. v., " in u dcHcrt place"]


* Mutt, xiv. 16.


S Matt. XV. 34.


'' John vi. 9.


328


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LIII.


multitude to sit down on the ground. And
He took the seven loaves, and the fishes,
and gave thanks, and brake, and gave to His
disciples, and the disciples to the multi-
tude.'"

But when we come to the end, there is a
difference.

For, " they did all eat," so it is said, " and
were filled, and they took up of the broken
meat that was left,^ seven baskets full. And
they that did eat were four thousand men,
besides women and children. "^

But why at the former time, when there
were five thousand, did twelve baskets full
remain over and above, whereas here, when
there were four thousand, it was seven bas-
kets full ? For what purpose, I say, and by
what cause, were the remnants less, the
guests not being so many ?

Either then one may say this, that the bas-
kets on this last occasion ^ were greater than
those used before, ^ or if this were not so, lest
the equality of the miracle should again cast
them into forgetfulness. He rouses their
recollection by the difference, that by the
variation they might be reminded of both one
and the other. Accordingly, in that case,
He makes the baskets full of fragments equal
in number to His disciples, in this, the other
baskets equal to the loaves; indicating even
hereby His unspeakable power, and the ease
wherewith He exercised His authority, in
that it was possible for Him to work 'such
miracles, both in this way and in the other.
For neither was it of small power, to main-
tain the exact number, both then and now;
then when there were five thousand, now
when there were four thousand; and not suf-
fer the remnants to be more than the baskets
used on the one occasion or on the other,
although the number of the guests was differ-
ent.

And the end again was like the former.
For as then He left the multitude and with-
drew in a ship, so also now; and John also
saith this.* For since no sign did so work
upon them to follow Him, as the miracle of
the loaves; and they were minded not only to
follow Him, but also to make Him a king;^
avoiding all suspicion of usurping royalty, He
hastens away after this work of wonder: and
He doth not even go away afoot, lest they

I iSIatt. XV. 35, 36. [The imperfect eSiSou, "kept giving," is
found here, against the rec. text. — R.]

z [R. v., " that which remained over of the broken pieces."]

3 Matt. XV. 37, 38.

4 o-TTvpi'Ses. That the mrvpi<; was of large size would appear
from Acts ix. 25, where this word is again used. K6(t>i.vo^ is the
word commonly used by the lxx. for basket ; that it was in corn-
raon use among the Jews seems proved by the well-known line in
Juvenal, Sat. iii. 14. " Judseis, quorum cophinus fsenumque
suppellex." See also Sat. vi. 541, 542. Tr.

5 K64>ivoi. 6 John vi. 17. 7 John vi. 15.


should follow Him, but by entering into a
ship.

"And He sent away the multitudes," so it
saith, " and went on board the ship, and came
into the coasts of Magdala. "®

3. "And the Pharisees and Sadducees
came and' desired Him to show them a sign
from Heaven. But He saith. When it is
evening, ye say, Fair weather, for the sky is
red; and in the morning. Foul weather to-
day, for the sky is red and lowering. Ye can
discern the face of the sky, but can ye not
the signs of the times ? " A wicked and adul-
terous generation seeketh after a sign, and
there shall no sign be given unto it, but the
sign of the prophet Jonas. And He left
them, and departed.""

But Mark saith, that when they were come
unto Him, and were questioning with Him,
" He sighed deeply in His spirit, and saith.
Why doth this generation seek after a
sign ? " '"

And yet surely their inquiry was deserving
of anger and great displeasure; yet neverthe-
less the benevolent and provident One is not
angry, but pities and bewails them as incura-
bly diseased, and after so full a demonstra-
tion of His power, tempting Him.

For not in order to believe did they seek,
but to lay hold of Him. Since had they come
unto Him as ready to believe. He would have
given it. For He who said to the woman,
"It is not meet, '"3 and afterwards gave,
much more would He have shown His bounty
to these.

But since they did not seek to believe,
therefore He also calls them hypocrites, be-
cause in another place they said one thing,
and meant another. Yea, had they believed,
they would not even have asked. And from
another thing too it is evident that they be-
lieved not; that when reproved and exposed,
they abode not with Him, nor said, " We are
ignorant and seek to learn."

But for what sign from Heaven were they
asking ? Either that He should say the sun,
or curb the moon, or bring down thunder-
bolts, or work a change in the air, or some
other such thing.

What then saith He to all this ? "Ye can
discern the face of the sky, but can ye not
discern the signs of the times ? " '''

See His meekness and moderation. For

8 Matt. XV. 3q. [R. V., " Magadan,'' following a better sup-
ported reading ; so Jerome, Augustin, and others. — R.]

9 [" tempting him " is omitted.]

10 ["hypocrites " is omitted ; so R. V., "ye know how to dis-
cern the face of the heavens ; but ye cannot discern the signs of
the times." The last clause is not a question. — R.]

" Chap. xvi. 1-4. '^ Mark viii. 12. '3 Matt. xv. 26.

14 [See above, note 10. Were the sentence aquestion, it would im-
ply an affirmative answer, but it is plainly implied that they could
not discern the signs of the times. — R.]


Homily LI II. J


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


329


not even as before did He refuse merely, and
say, "There shall none be given them," but
He states also the cause why He gives it not,
even though they were not asking for infor-
mation.

What then was the cause? " Much as in
the sky," saith He, "one thing is a sign of
a storm, another of fair weather, and no one
when he saw the sign of foul weather would
seek for a calm, neither in calm and fair
weather for a storm; so should you reckon
with regard to me also. For this present
time of my coming, is different from that
which is to come. Now there is need of these
signs which are on the earth, but those in
Heaven are stored up against that time.
Now as a physician am I come, then I shall
be here as a judge; now to seek that w'hich
is gone astray, then to demand an account.
Therefore in a hidden manner am I come,
but then with much publicity, folding up the
heaven, hiding the sun, not suffering the
moon to give her light. Then ' the very
powers of the heavens shall be shaken,' '
and the manifestation of my coming shall
imitate lightning that appears at once to all.''
But not now is the time for these signs; for
I am come to die, and to suffer all extremi-
ties."

Heard ye not the prophet, saying, "He
shall not strive nor cry, neither shall His
voice be heard without?"^ and another
again, " He shall come down as rain upon a
fleece of wool ?"*

And if men speak of the signs in Pharaoh's
time, there was an enemy then from whom
deliverance was needed, and it all took place
in due course. But to Him that came among
friends there was no need of those signs.

"And besides, how shall I give the great
signs, when the little are not believed ? "
Little, I mean, as regards display, since in
power these latter were much greater than the
former. For what could be equal to remit-
ting sins, and raising the dead, and driving
away devils, and creating a body, and order-
ing all other things aright?

But do thou see their hardened heart, how
on being told, that " no sign should be given
them but the sign of the prophet Jonas,"
tliey do not ask. And yet, knowing botli tlie
j)ro|)het, and all that i)efell him, and having
been told tins a sec(;n(l time, tliey ought to
have inquired and learnt what the saying
could mean; l)nt, as I said, tliere is no desire
of information in these their doings. l'"or
this cause " He also left them, and de-
parted."


■ Matt, x.riv. 39.
3 Is. xlii. a.


J Matt. xxiv. 27.

4 t'l. Ixxii. 6. Ilxx.]


4. "And when His disciples," so it is said,
"were come to the other side, they forgot to
take bread. Then Jesus said unto them.
Take heed and beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees and of the Sadducees.''^

And why said He not plainly, Beware of
their teaching? His will is to remind them
of what had been done, for He knew they
had forgotten. But for accusing them at
once there seemed to be no reasonable ground,
but to take the occasion from themselves,
and so to reprove them, would make the
charge admissible. "And why did He not
then reprove them, when they said, ' ^^'ilence
should we have so many loaves in the wilder-
ness ? ' for it seemed a good time then to
say what He says here." That He might
not seem to rush hastily on the miracle.
And besides, He would not blame them be-
fore the multitude, nor seek honor in their
presence. And now too the accusation had
greater reason, for that after repetition of the
miracle they were so minded.

Wherefore also He works another miracle,
and then and not till then He reproves; I
mean. He brings forward what they were rea-
soning in their hearts. But what were their
reasonings? "Because," so it is said, "we
have taken no bread." * For as yet they were
full of trepidation about the purifications of
the Jews, and the observances of meats.

Wherefore on all accounts He attacks them
; even with severity, saying, " Why reason ye
I in yourselves. O ye of little faith, because ye
'have brought no bread ?' Perceive ve not
yet, neither understand? Have ye your
heart hardened ? Having eyes, see ye not ?
Having ears, hear ye not?* Do ye not re-
member the five loaves of the five thousand,
and how many baskets ye took up? neither
the seven loaves of the four thousand, and
how many baskets ye took up ?" '

Seest thou intense displeasure ? For no-
where else doth He appear to have so rebuked
them. Wherefore tlien doth He so? In
order again to cast out their prejudice about
the meats. I mean that with this view,
whereas then He had only said, '* Perceive
ye not, neither understand?" in this place,
and witli a strong rel)uke, He saitii, " O ye
of little faith.""'

For not everywhere is lenity a good tiling.
And as He used to allow them freedom of


5 Mutt. XVI. 5, 6.

<* Miitl. XVI. 7. [R. v., " Wr ttxik ni> brcnd ;" on liriii!.; rA-j-
tctntis.]

7 Matt. xiv. 8. [R. v., " bn-uusc yc havr no bread .' " Chry-
Hostoin ii^rrc* with the rcc. text. — R.]

" Murk viii. 17, iH. 0 Matt, xvi, .>, 10.

'"[Ilolh the cilatiuiiH arc fnmi Matthew, but iirnlMtlily the
former iiccasiun referred to i» that narrated in .Mali. .\v. 16, 17.
K.l


330


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LIIL


speech, so doth He also reprove, by this
variety providing for their salvation. And
mark thou at once His reproof, bow strong,
and His mildness. For all but excusing
Himself to them for His severe reproofs to
them, He saith, " Do ye not yet consider the
five loaves, and how many baskets ye took
up; and the seven loaves, and how many
baskets ye took up ? " And to this end He
sets down also the numbers, as well of the
persons fed as of the fragments, at once both
bringing them to recollection of the past, and
making them more attentive to the future.

And to teach thee how great the power of
His reproof, and how it roused up their
slumbering mind, hear what saith the evan-
gelist. For Jesus having said no more, but
having repro/ed them, and added this only,
" How is it that ye do not understand, that
I spake it not to you concerning bread that
ye should beware, but of the leaven of the
Pharisees and Sadducees;"' He subjoined,
saying, " Then understood they that He bade
them not beware of the leaven of bread, but
of the doctrine of the Pharisees and Saddu-
cees,"^ although He had not uttered that in-
terpretation.
• See how much good His reproof wrought.
For it both led them away from the Jewish
observances, and when they were remiss,
made them more heedful, and delivered them
from want of faith; ^ so that they were not
afraid nor in alarm, if at any time they
seemed to have few loaves; nor were they
careful about famine, but despised all these
things.

5. Neither let us then for our part be in all
ways flattering those under our charge, nor
seek to be flattered of them that have the rule
over us. Since, in truth, the soul of men
stands in need of medicines in both these
kinds. Therefore even in the whole world
we may see that God doth so order things,
now doing this, now the other, and permits
neither our good things to be permanent, nor
our adversities to be by themselves. Yea,
as now it is night, now day, and now winter,
now summer; so also within us, now pain,
now pleasure, now sickness, and now health.
Let us not then marvel when we are sick,
since rather when we are in health we should
marvel. Neither let us be troubled when we
are in sorrow, since when we are glad rather
it is reasonable to be troubled; all coming to
pass according to nature and in order.

And why marvel, if in thy case so it be,

1 Matt. xvi. II. [See R. V., for a different reading.]

2 Matt. xiv. 12.

3 [Some MSS. insert (f)L\oriixia<; Kal, " from ambition and want
of faith." It is lectio difficilior^ but not accepted by Field.


when even in regard of those saints one may
see this happening ?

And that thou mayest learn it, the life
which thou accountest to be most full of
pleasure and free from troubles, that let us
bring forward. Wilt thou that we examine
Abraham's life from the beginning? What
then at the very first was said to him ? " Get
thee out of thy country, and from thy kin-
dred."'* Didst thou see what a painful thing
is enjoined him ? But look also on the good
coming after it: "And come hither unto a
land tnat I will show thee, and I will make
thee a great nation."

What then ? after he had come to the land,
and reached the harbor, did his troubles
cease? By no means; but others again,
more grievous than the former, succeed, a
famine, and a removal, and a violent seizure
of his wife; and after these other prosperi-
ties befell him, the plague upon Pharaoh, and
her liberation, and the honor, and those many
gifts, and the return to his house. And the
subsequent events too all form the same kind
of chain, prosperities and troubles entwined
together.

And the like befell the apostles too.
Wherefore also Paul said, "Who comforteth
us in all our tribulation, that we may be able
to comfort them which are in any trouble," s

" What then is this to me," some one will
say, "who am always in sorrow?" Be not
uncandid, nor unthankful; nay, it is out of
the question for one to be in troubles always,
nature being unequal to it; but because we
want to be always in joy, therefore we account
ourselves always in sorrow. Not however on
this account alone, but because we presently
forget our advantages and blessings, but are
always remembering our troubles, therefore
we say we are in sorrow. Whereas it is im-
possible, being a man, to be always in sor-
row.

6. And if ye will, let us examine both the
life of luxury, so delicate and dissipated, and
the other, so grievous and galling, and pain-
ful. For we will show you that both the
former hath sorrows, and the latter refresh-
ments Nay, be not disturbed. Let there
be set before us a man who is in bonds, and
another who is a king, youthful, an orphan,
having succeeded to a great substance; and
let there also be set before us one toiling for
hire through the whole day, and another liv-
ing in luxury continually.

Wilt thou then that we tell first the vexa-
tions of that one, who lives in luxury ? Con-
sider how his mind must naturally be rocked


4 Gen. xii. i.


5 2 Cor. i. 4.


Homily LIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


OJ)


as with a tempest, when he longs for a glory
beyond him, when he is despised by his serv-
ants, when he is insulted by his inferiors,
when he hatn ten thousand to accuse him,
and to blame his costly living. And all the
rest too, which is likely to occur in such
wealth, one cannot even tell; the ve.\ations.
the affronts, the accusations, the losses, the
devices of the envious, who, because they
cannot transfer his wealth to themselves,
drag and tear in pieces the young man on
every side, and e.xcite against him storms with-
out end.

Wilt thou have me tell also of the pleasure
of this other, the hired laborer? From all
this he is free; though one insult him, he
grieves not, for he counts not himself greater
than any; he is not in fear about wealth, he
eats with pleasure, he sleeps with great com-
fort. Not so luxurious are the drinkers of
Thasian wine, as he in going to fountains,
and enjoying those springs. But the state of
the other is not such.

Now if what I have said suffice thee not,
to make my victory more complete, come let
us compare the king and the prisoner, and
thou wilt often see the latter in pleasure and
sporting and leaping, while the former with
his diadem and purple robe is in despair, and
hath innumerable cares, and is dead with fear.

For we may not, we may not find any one's
life without sorrow, nor again without its
share of pleasure; for our nature would not
have been equal to it, as I have already said.
But if one joys more, and another grieves
more, this is due to the person himself that
grieves, being mean of soul, not to the
nature of the case. For if we would rejoice
continually, we have many means thereto.

Since, had we once laid hold on virtue,
there would be nothing to grieve us any
more. For she suggests good hopes to them
that possess her, and makes them well pleas-
ing to God, and approved among men, and
infuses unspeakable delight. Yea, though
in doing right virtue hath toil, yet doth it fdl
the conscience with much gladness, and lays
up within so great pleasure, as no speech
shall be able to express.

For which of the things in our present life
seems to thee pleasant? A sumptuous table,
and health of body, and glory, and wcaltii ?
Nay, these delights, if thou set them by that
pleasure, will prove the bitterest of all things,
compared thereunto. For nothing is mi)re
pleasurable than a sound conscience, and a
good hope.

7. And if ye would learn tliis, let us in-
quire of him who is on tiie point of departing
hence, or of him that is grown old; and when


we have reminded him of sumptuous ban-
queting which he hath enjoyed, and of glory
and honor, and of good works which he hath
some time practised and wrought, let us ask
in which he exults the more; and we shall
see him for the other ashamed, and covering
his face, but for these soaring and leaping
with joy.

So Hezekiah, too, when he was sick, called
not to mind sumptuous feasting, nor glory,
nor royalty, but righteousness. For "re-
member," saith he, "how I walked before
Thee in an upright way." ' See Paul again
for these things leaping with joy, and saying,
" I have fought the good fight, I have finished
my course, I have kept the faith, ^' " " Why,
what had he to speak of besides ? " one may
say. IMany things, and more than these;
even the honors wherewith he was honored,
what attendance and great respect he had en-
joyed. Hearest thou not him saying. "Ye
received me as an angel of God, as Christ
Jesus " ? and, " If it were possible, ye would
have plucked out your eyes, and given them
to me"?' and that "Men had laid down
their neck for his life" ?■* But none of those
things doth he bring forward, but his labors,
and perils, and his crowns in requital for
them; and with much reason. For while the
one sort are left here, the other migrate with
us; and for those we shall give account, but
for these we shall ask reward.

Know ye not in the day of death how sins
make the soul shrink ? how they stir up the
heart from beneath ? At that time therefore,
when such things are happening, the remem-
brance of good works stands by us, like a
calm in a storm, and comforts the perturbed
soul.

For if we be wakeful, even during our life
this fear will be ever present with us; but,
insensible as we are, it will surely come upon
us when we are cast out from hence. Be-
cause the prisoner too is then most grieved,
when tliey are leading him out to the court;
then most trembles, when he is near the judg-
ment-seat, when he must give his account.
For the same kind of reason most persons
may be then heard relating horrors, and fear-
ful visions, the sight whereof they that are
departing may not endure, but often shake
their very bed with much vehemence, and
gaze fearfully on the bystanders, the soul
urging itself inwards, unwilling to be torn
away from the body, and not enduring the
sight of the coming angels. Since if human
beings that are awful strike terror into us
beholding them; when we see angels threat-


> a KinK» xx. 3.
3 (iiil. iv. 14, 15,


^ a 1 im. IV. 7.
4 Kuin. xvi, 4.


332


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LIV.


ening, and stern powers, among our visitors;
what shall we not suffer, the soul being
forced from the body, and dragged away,
and bewailing much, all in vain ? Since that
rich man too, after his departure, mourned
much, but derived no profit therefrom.

All these things then let us picture to our-
selves, and consider, lest we too suffer the
same, and thus let us keep the fear thence


arismg


^ in vigor; that we may escape the
actual punishment, and attain unto the eter-
nal blessings; unto which God grant we may
all attain, by the grace and love towards man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom be glory
unto the Father, together with the Holy and
Life-giving Spirit, now and ever, and world
without end. Amen.


HOMILY LIV.


Matt. XIV.


13.


*' Now when Jesus had gone forth into the coasts' of Caesarea Philippi, He asked His
disciples, saying. Whom do men say that I the Son of Man am ? " ^


Wherefore hath he mentioned the founder
of the city? Because there was another be-
sides, Caesarea Stratonis. But not in that,
but in this doth He ask them, leading them
far away from the Jews, so that being freed
from all alarm, they might speak with bold-
ness all that was in their mind.

And wherefore did He not ask them at
once their own opinion, but that of the peo-
ple ? In order that when they had told the
people's opinion, and then were asked, "But
whom 3 say ye that I am ? " by the manner of
His inquiry they might be led up to a sub-
limer notion, and not fall into the same low
view as the multitude. Accordingly He asks
them not at all in the beginning of His
preaching, but when He had done many mir-
acles, and had discoursed with them of many
and high doctrines, and had afforded so many
clear proofs of His Godhead, and of His un-
animity with the Father, then He puts this
question to them.

And He said not, " Whom say the Scribes
and Pharisees that I am?" often as these
had come unto Him, and discoursed with
Him; but, " Whom do men say that I am ?''
inquiring after the judgment of the people,
as unbiassed. For though it was far meaner
than it should be, yet was it free from malice,

I [R. v., " came into the parts," etc.]

2[R. v. text, " who do men say that the Son of Man is? " But
Chrysnstom. with therec. te.xt, reads |u.€. So R. V. margin, "that
I the Son of Man am," as in the parallel passages. — R.]

3 [The A. v. is ungrammatical ; " whom " is simply a transfer
of the Greek accusative (with the infinitive ni the passage) into
the English finite clause. — R.]


but the other was teeming with much wicked-
ness.

And signifying how earnestly He desires
His Economy* to be confessed, He saith,
" The Son of Man;" thereby denoting His
Godhead, which He doth also in many other
places. For He saith, " No man hath as-
cended up to Heaven, but the Son of Man,
which is in Heaven. "s And again, "But
when ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up,
where He was before.''*

Then, since they said, " Some John the
Baptist, some Elias, some Jeremias, or one
of the prophets," 7 and set forth their mis-
taken opinion. He next added, "But whom
say ye that I am ? " ^ calling them on by His
second inquiry to entertain some higher
imagination concerning Him, and indicating
that their former judgment falls exceedingly
short of His dignity. Wherefore He seeks
for another judgment from themselves, and
puts a second question, that th^y might not
fall in with the multitude, who, because they
saw His miracles greater than human, ac-
counted Him a man indeed, but one that had
appeared after a resurrection, as Herod also
said. 9 But He, to lead them away from this
notion, saith, "But whom say ye that I
am ? " that is, " ye that are with me always,
and see me working miracles, and have your-
selves done many mighty works byme."

2. What then saith the mouth of the apos-


4 /. e. His Incarnation.
7 Matt. xvi. 14.


5 John iii. 13.
8 5latt. xvi. 15.


6 John vi. 62.
9 Matt. xiy. 2.


Homily LIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


■^ '^ 'y

300


ties, Peter, the ever fervent, the leader of the
apostolic choir ? ' When all are asked, he an-
swers. And whereas when He asked the
opinion of the people, all replied to the ques-
tion; when He asked their own, Peter springs
forward, and anticipates them, and saith,
"Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living
God."'

What then saith Christ? "Blessed art
thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood
hath not revealed it unto thee." ^

Yet surely unless he had rightly confessed
Him, as begotten of the very Father Him-
self, this were no work of revelation; had he
accounted our Lord to be one of the many,
his saying was not worthy of a blessing.
Since before this also they said, " Truly He
is Son of God," * those, I mean, who were in
the vessel after the tempest, which they saw,
and were not blessed, although of course they
spake truly. For they confessed not such a
Sonship as Peter, but accounted Him to be
truly Son as one of the many, and though
peculiarly so beyond the many, yet not of
the same substance.

And Nathanael too said, " Rabbi, Thou
art the Son of God, Thou art the King of
Israel; "5 and so far from being blessed, he
is even reproved by Him, as having said what
was far short of the truth. He replied at
least, " Because I said unto thee, I saw thee
under the fig-tree, believest thou ? thou
shalt see greater things than these." ^

Why then is this man blessed ? Because
he acknowledged Him very Son. Wherefore
you see, that while in those former instances
He had said no such thing, in this case He
also signifies who had revealed it. That is,
lest his words might seem to the many (be-
cause he was an earnest lover of Christ) to be
words of friendship and flattery, and of a dis-
position to show favor to Him, he brings for-
ward the person who had made them ring' in
his soul; to inform thee that Peter indeed
si)ake, but the Father suggested, and that
thou mightest believe the saying to be no
longer a human opinion, but a divine doc-
trine.

And wherefore doth He not Himself declare
it, nor say, "I am the Clirist," but by His
, ([uestion establish this, l)ringing them in to
confess it ? Because so to do was both more
suitable to Him, yea necessary at that time,
and it drew them on the more to the belief
of the things that were said.

Seest thou how the Faiht-r reveals the Son,
how tlie Son the Father? For "neither


4 Matt. xiv. 33.
7 ivTixTidavTa.


■■> Matt. XVI. 16
i Julin i. 4;.


1 Matt. xvl. 17.
' Jnhn i. 511.


knoweth any man the Father," saith He,

! " save the Son, and he to whomsoever the

: Son will reveal Him."^ It cannot therefore
be that one should learn the Son of any other
than of the Father; neither that one should
learn the Father of any other than of the Son,

, So that even hereby, their sameness of honor

; and of substance is manifest.

I 3. What then saith Christ? "Thou art
Simon, the son of Jonas; thou shalt be called
Cephas." ^ " Tlius since thou hast pro-
claimed my Father, I too name him that
begat thee;" all but saying, "As thou art
son of Jonas, even so am I of my Father."
Else it were superfluous to say, "Thou art

I Son of Jonas; " but since he had said, " Son
of God," to point out that He is so Son of
God, as the other son of Jonas, of the same
substance with Him that begat Him, there-
fore He added this, "And I say unto thee,
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I
build my Church; " '° that is, on the faith of
his confession. Hereby He signifies that
many were now on the point of believing, and
raises his spirit, and makes him a shepherd.
"And the gates of hell " shall not prevail

I against it." "And if not against it, much
more not against me. So be not troubled

, because thou art shortly to hear that I shall
be betrayed and crucified."

Then He mentions also another honor.
"And I also" will give thee the keys of the
heavens." "3 But what is this, "And I also
will give thee?" "As the Father hath given
thee to know me, so will I also give thee.''

And He said not, " I will entreat the
Father" (altliough the manifestation of His
authority was great, and the largeness of the
gift unspeakable), but, "I will give thee."
What dost 'J'hou give ? tell me. *' The keys
of the heavens, that whatsoever thou shalt
bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, '••
antl whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth,
shall be loosed in Heaven." How then is
it not " His to give to sit on His right hand,
and on His left," '' when He saith, "I will
give thee " ?

Seest thou how He, His own self, leads
Peter on to high thoughts of Him, and re-
veals Himself, and iin|ilies that He is Son of
God by these two promises ? For those
things which are peculiar to God alone, (both
to absolve sins, and to make the cliurch in-

8 Matt. xi. 37 ; I.iiltc x. 93.

9 Mntt. xvi. 17, 18 ; .sec John i. tj. "> Matt. xvi. i8.
•■ fk. v.." Hadrs"!

'J [CliryMiitom rriids nai iyit it, prolmMy from verse 18, as
none of otir authorities have this fuller furui. — K.)

'1 Matt. xvi. ly. [The text ispeeiiluir in imiiltim; rijc 0a<riAria«.
The translaior ha.i here rendered t^i- oepoi-uji', " the he.ivens ; "
hut no' in all similar in«tanees 'I'he I'lnchsh vrritiuns i;<^"dtlly
di.sre^ard the plural form. K.]

'■I [roit ot>pa>'oi<.] IS Malt. XX. ai.


^34


od'


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LIV.


capable of overthrow in such assailing waves,
and to exhibit a man that is a fisher more
solid than any rock, while all the world is at
war with him), these He promises Himself
to give; as the Father, speaking to Jeremiah,
said, He would make him as " a brazen pillar,
and as a wall;" ' but him to one nation only,
this man in every part of the world.

I would fain inquire then of those who de-
sire to lessen the dignity of the Son, which
manner of gifts were greater, those which the
Father gave to Peter, or those which the Son
gave him ? For the Father gave to Peter the
revelation of the Son; but the Son gave him
to sow that of the Father and that of Himself
in every part of the world; and to a mortal
man He entrusted the authority over all things
in Heaven, giving him the keys; who ex-
tended the church to every part of the world,
and declared it to be stronger than heaven.
" For heaven and earth shall pass away, but
my word shall not pass away."^ How then
is He less, who hath given such gifts, hath
effected such things ?

And these things I say, not dividing the
works of Father and Son (" for all things
are made by Him, and without Him was
nothing made which was made"):^ but bri-
dling the shameless tongue of them that dare
so to speak.

But see, throughout all. His authority: "I
say unto thee, Thou art Peter; I will build
the Church; I will give thee the keys of
Heaven.""

4. And then, when He had so said, "He
charged them that they should tell no man
that He was the Christ. "^

And why did He charge them ? That when
the things which offend are taken out of the
way, and the cross is accomplished, and the
rest of His sufferings fulfilled, and when there
is nothing any more to interrupt and disturb
the faith of the people in Him, the right
opinion concerning Him may be engraven
pure and immovable in the mind of the hear-
ers. For, in truth. His power had not yet
clearly shone forth. Accordingly it was His
will then to be preached by them, when both
the plain truth of the facts, and the power of
His deeds were pleading in support of the as-
sertions of the apostles. For it was by no means
the same thing to see Him in Palestine, now
working miracles, and now insulted and per-
secuted (and especially when the very cross
was presently to follow the miracles that were


I Jer. i. 18. 2 Matt. xxiv. 35.

3 John i. 3. [The Greek text omits o yeyovev " which was
made."]

■* [The singular is retained here by the translator, though the
Greek form is the same, twv ovpavuiv. — R.]

5 Matt. xvi. 20.


happening); and to behold him everywhere
in the world, adored and believed, and no
more suffering anything, such as He had suf-
fered.

Therefore He bids them "tell no man."
For that which hath been once rooted and then
plucked up, would hardly, if planted, again
be retained among the many; but that which,
once fixed, hath remained immovable, and
hath suffered injury from no quarter, easily
mounts up, and advances to a greater growth.

And if they who had enjoyed the benefit
of many miracles, and had had part in so
many unutterable mysteries, were offended by
the mere hearing of it; or rather not these
only, but even the leader^ of them all, Peter;
consider what it was likely the common sort
should feel, being first told that He is the
Son of God, then seeing Him even crucified
and spit upon, and that without knowledge
of the secret of those mysteries, or participa-
tion in the gift of the Holy Ghost. For if to
His disciples He said, " I have many things
to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them
now; " 7 much more would the rest of the
people have utterly failed, had the chiefest
of these mysteries been revealed to them be-
fore the proper time. Accordingly He for-
bids them to tell.

And to instruct thee how great a thing it
was, their afterwards learning His doctrine
complete, when the things that offend had
passed by; learn it from this same leader of
theirs. For this very Peter, he who after so
many miracles proved so weak as even to
deny Him, and to be in fear of a mean dam-
sel; after the cross had come forth, and he
had received the certain proofs of the resur-
rection, and there was nothing more to offend
and trouble him, retained the teaching of the
Spirit so immovable, that more vehemently
than a lion he sprang upon the people of the
Jews, for all the dangers and innumerable
deaths which were threatened.

With reason then did He bid them not tell
the many before the crucifixion, since not
even to them that were to teach did He ven-
ture to commit all before the crucifixion.
" For I have many things to say unto you,"
saith He, "but ye cannot bear them now.''

And of the things too that He did say,
they do not understand many, which He did
not make plain before the crucifixion. At
least when He was risen from the dead, then
and not before they knew some of His say-


ings.


5. " From that time forth began He to
show unto them that He must suffer.^ From


6 6 Kopv^a.io<s


7 John xvi. 12.


8 Matt. xvi. 21.


1
i


Homily LIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


'^ -n rf

000


that time." What time? When He had
fixed the doctrine in them; when He had
brought in the beginning of the Gentiles.'

But not even so did they understand what
He said. " For the saying," it is said, " was
hid from them; " = and they were as in a kind
of perplexity, not knowing that He must rise
again. Therefore He rather dwells on the
difficulties, and enlarges His discourse, that
He may open their mind, and they may un-
derstand what it can be that He speaks of.

" But they understood not, but the saying
was hid from them, and they feared to ask
this; "3 not whether He should die, but how,
and in what manner, and what this mystery
could be. For they did not even know what
was this same rising again, and supposed it
much better not to die. Therefore, the rest
being troubled and in perplexity, Peter again,
in his ardor, alone ventures to discourse of
these things; and not even he openly, but
when he had taken Him apart; that is, having
separated himself from the rest of the dis-
ciples; and he saith, "Be it far from Thee,
Lord, this shall not be unto Thee."'* What
ever is this? He that obtained a revelation,
he that was blessed, hath he so soon fallen
away, and suffered overthrow, so as to fear
His passion? And what marvel, that one who
had not on these points received any revela-
tion, should have that feeling? Yea, to in-
form thee that not of himself did he speak
those other things either, see in these matters
that were not revealed to him how he is con-
founded and overthrown, and being told ten
thousand times, knows not what the saying
can mean.

For that He is Son of God he had learnt,
but what the mystery of the cross and of the
resurrection might be, was not yet manifest to
him: for "the saying,'' it is said, "was hid
from them."

Seest thou that with just cause He bade
them not declare it to tlie rest? For if it so
confounded them, who must needs be made
aware of it, what would not all others have
felt?

6. He however, to signify that He is far
from coming to the passion against His will,
both rebuked Peter, antl called him Satan.

Let them hear, as many as are ashamed of
the suffering of the cross of Christ. For if
tlie chief apostle, even before he had learnt
all distinctly, was called Satan for feeling this,
what excuse can they have, who after so
abundant proof deny His economy? I say,
when he who had been so blessed, who made

■ /. <"., the woman nf Canaan.

3 Luke xviii. ^4. 1 Luke ix. 41;.

4 Matt. xvi. .■-■. [K. v., "this shall never be unto thee.'']


such a confession, has such words addressed
to him; consider what they will suffer, who
after all this deny the mystery of the cross.

And He said not, " Satan spake by thee,*'
but, " Get thee behind me, Satan." ^ For in-
deed it was a desire of the adversary that
Christ should not suffer. Therefore with such
great severity did He rebuke him, as know-
ing that both he and the rest are especially
afraid of this, and will not easily receive it.

Therefore He also reveals the thoughts of
his mind, saying, "Thou savorest* not the
things that be of God, but those that be of
men."

But what means, " Thou savorest* not the
things that be of God, but those that be of
men"? Peter examining the matter by hu-
man and earthly reasoning, accounted it dis-
graceful to Him and an unmeet thing.
Touching him therefore sharply,' He saith,
" My passion is not an unmeet thing, but
thou givest this sentence with a carnal mind;
whereas if thou hadst hearkened to my say-
ings in a godly manner, disengaging thyself
from thy carnal understanding, thou wouldest
know that this of all things most becometh
me. For thou indeed supposes! that to suffer
is unworthy of me; but I say unto thee, that
for me not to suffer is of the devil's mind;''
by the contrary statements repressing his
alarm.

Thus as John, accounting it unworthy of
Christ to be baptized by him, was persuaded
of Christ to baptize Him, He saying, " Thus
it becometh us,"^ and this same Peter too,
forbidding Him to wash his feet, by the words,
'' Thou hast no part with me, unless I wash
thy feet; "» even so here too He restrained
him by the mention of the opposite, and by
the severity of the reproof repressed his fear
of suffering.

7. Let no man therefore be ashamed of the
honored symbols of our salvation, and of the
chiefest of all good things, whereby we even
live, and whereby we are; but as a crown, so
let us bear about the cross of Christ. Yea,
for by it all things arc wrought, that are
wrought among us. Whether one is to be
new-born, the cross is there; or to be nour-
ished with that mystical food, or to be or-
dained, or to do anything else, everywliere
our symbol of victory is present. 'I'herefore
both on house, and walls, and windows, and
upon our forehead, and upon our mind, we
inscribe it with much care.

For of the salvation wrought for us, and of
our common freedom, and of the goodness
of our Lord, this is the sign. " For as a

S Matt. xvi. 23. 6 FR. V., " mindest."! 7 <ia0u(rauM«t^K.

** Mutt. iii. IS. 9 John xiii. 8.


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LIV.


sheep was He led to the slaughter." ' When
therefore thou signest thyself, think of the
purpose of the cross, and quench anger, and
all the other passions. When thou signest
thyself, fill thy forehead with all courage,
make thy soul free. And ye know assuredly
what are the things that give freedom.
Wherefore also Paul leading us there, I mean
unto the freedom that beseems us, did on
this wise lead us unto it, having reminded us
of the cross and blood of our Lord. ** For
ye are bought," saith he, "with a price; be
not ye the servants of men."^ Consider,
saith he, the price that hath been paid for
thee, and thou wilt be a slave to no man; by
the price meaning the cross.

Since not merely by the fingers ought one
to engrave it, but before this by the purpose
of the heart with much faith. And if in this
way thou hast marked it on thy face, none of
the unclean spirits will be able to stand near
thee, seeing the blade whereby he received his
wound, seeing the sword which gave him his
mortal stroke. For if we, on seeing tne places
in which the criminals are beheaded, shudder;
think what the devil must endure, seeing the
weapon, whereby Christ put an end to all his
power, and cut off the head of the dragon.

Be not ashamed then of so great a blessing,
lest Christ be ashamed of thee, when He
comes with His glory, and the sign appears
before Him, shining beyond the very sun-
beam. ^ For indeed the cross cometh then,
uttering a voice by its appearance, and plead-
ing with the whole world for our Lord, and
signifying that no part hath failed of what
pertained to Him.

This sign, both in the days of our fore-
fathers and now, hath opened doors that were
shut up;'' this hath quenched poisonous
drugs; 5 this hath taken away the power of
hemlock; this hath healed bites of venomous
beasts. For if it opened the gates of hell,
and threw wide the archways of Heaven, and
made a new entrance into Paradise, and cut
away the nerves of the devil; what marvel, if
it prevailed over poisonous drugs, and ven-
omous beasts, and all other such things.

This therefore do thou engrave upon thy
mind, and embrace the salvation of our souls.
For this cross saved and converted the world,
drove away error, brought back truth, made
earth Heaven, fashioned men into angels.
Because of this, the devils are no longer ter
rible, but contemptible; neither is death,


' Isaiah liii. 7.

2 Cor. vii. 2^. [R.V., "become not bondservants of men."]

3 See S. Cyril, Catech. xiii. 41. Oxf. Trans, and the note there:
see also aspecially hereafter on S. Matth. xxiv. 30, Horn. LXXVI.

4 S. Oreg. Nyss. Life of S. Greg. Thaum. Works, t. iii. p. 573.
Paris, 1638.

5 Sim. Metaphr. Life of St. John, p. 47, etc. O.xon. 1597.


death, but a sleep; because of this, all that
warreth against us is cast to the ground, and
trodden under foot.

If any one therefore say to thee, Dost thou
worship the crucified ? say, with your voice
all joy, and your countenance gladdened, " I
do both worship Him, and will never cease
to worship." And if he laugh, weep for him,
because he is mad. Thank the Lord, that
He hath bestowed on us such benefits, as one
cannot so much as learn without His revela-
tion from above. Why, this is the very rea-
son of his laughing, that "the natural man
receiveth not the things of the Spirit.''* Since
our children too feel this, when they see any
of the great and marvellous things; and if
thou bring a child into the mysteries, he will
laugh. Now the heathen are like these chil-
dren; or rather they are more imperfect even
than these; wherefore also they are more
wretched, in that not in an immature age, but
when full grown, they have the feelings of
babes; wherefore neither are they worthy of
indulgence.

But let us with a clear voice, shouting both
loud and high, cry out and say (and should
all the heathen be present, so much the more
confidently), that the cross is our glory, and
the sum of all our blessings, and our confi-
dence, and all our crown. I would that also
with Paul I were able to say, " By which the
world is crucified unto me, and I unto the
world; " ^ but I cannot, restrained as I am by
various passions.

8. Wherefore I admonish both you, and
surely before you myself, to be crucified to
the world, and to have nothing in common
with the earth, but to set your love on your
country above, and the glory and the good
things that come from it. For indeed we are
soldiers of a heavenly King, and are clad
with spiritual arms. Why then take we upon
ourselves the life of traders, and mountebanks,
nay rather of worms ? For where the King is,
there should also the soldier be. Yea, we are
become soldiers, not of them that are far off,
but of them that are near. For the earthly
king indeed would not endure that all should
be in the royal courts, and at his own side,
but the King of the Heavens willeth all to be
near His'royal throne.

And how, one may say, is it possible for
us, being here, to stand by that throne ? Be-
cause Paul too being on earth was where
the seraphim, where the cherubim are; and
nearer to Christ, than these the body guards
to the king. For these turnabout their faces
in many directions, but him nothing beguiled


6 I Cor. ii. 14.


7 Gal. vi. 14.


Homily LIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


JO/


nor distracted, but he kept his whole mind
intent upon the king. So that if we would,
this is possible to us also.

For were He distant from us in place, thou
mightest well doubt, but if He is present
everywhere, to him that strives and is in ear-
nest He is near. Wherefore also the prophet
said, " I will fear no evil, for Thou art with
me;'" and God Himself again, "I am a God
nigh at hand, and not a God afar off." - Then
as our sins separate us from Him, so do our
righteousnesses draw us nigh unto Him.
" For while thou art yet speaking," it is said,
•'I will say. Here I am."^ What father
would ever be thus obedient to his offspring?
What mother is there, so ready, and continu-
ally standing, if haply her children call her?
There is not one, no father, no mother: but
God stands continually waiting, if any of his
servants should perchance call Him; and
never, when we have called as we ought, hath
He refused to hear. Therefore He saith,
" While thou art yet speaking," I do not wait
for thee to finish, and I straightway hearken.

9. Let us call Him therefore, as it is His
will to be called. But what is this His will ?
"Loose," saith He, "every band of ini-
quity, unloose the twisted knots of oppressive
covenants, tear in pieces every unjust con-
tract. Break thy bread to the hungry, and
bring in the poor that are cast out to thy
house. If thou seest one naked, cover him,
and them that belong to thy seed thou shalt
not overlook. Then shall thy light break
forth in the morning, and thine healings shall
spring forth speedily, and thy righteousness
shall go before thee, and the glory of the
Lord shall cover thee. Then thou shalt call
upon me, and I will give ear unto thee; whilst
thou art yet speaking, I will say, Lo! here I
am."*

And who is able to do all this? it may be
asked. Nay, who is unable, I pray thee? For
which is difiticult of the things I have men-
tioned ? Which is laborious ? Which not easy ?
. Wliy, so entirely are they not possible only,
but even easy, that many have actually over-
shot the measure of those sayings, not only
tearing in pieces unjust contracts, but even
stripping themselves of all their goods; mak-
ing the poor welcome not to roof and table,
but even to the sweat of their body, and
laboring in order to maintniii them; doing
good not to kinsmen only, but even to ene-
mies.

But what is there at all even hard in these


sayings ? For neither did He say, " Pass
over the mountain, go across the sea, dig
through so many acres of land, abide without
food, wrap thyself in sackcloth; " but, " Im-
part to the poor, 5 impart of thy bread, cancel
the contracts unjustly made."

What is more easy than this ? tell me. But
even if thou account it difficult, look, I pray
thee, at the rewards also, and it shall be easy
to thee.

For much as our emperors at the horse
races heap together before the combatants
crowns, and prizes, and garments, even so
Christ also sets His rewards in the midst of
His course, holding them out by the proph-
et's words, as it were by many hands. And
the emperors, although they be ten thousand
times emperors, yet as being men, and the
wealth which they have in a course of spend-
ing, and their munificence of exhaustion, are
ambitious of making the little appear much;
wherefore also they commit each thing sever-
ally into the hand of the several attendants,
and so bring it forward. But our King con-
trariwise, having heaped all together (because
He is very rich, and doeth nothing for dis-
play), He so brings it forward, and what He
so reaches out is indefinitely great, and will
need many hands to hold it. And to make
thee aware of this, examine each particular of
it carefully.

"Then," saith He, "shall thy light break
forth in the morning."* Doth not this gift
appear to thee as some one thing ? But it is
not one; nay, for it hath many things in it,
both prizes, and crowns, and other rewards.
And, if ye are minded, let us take it to pieces
and show all its wealth, as it shall be possible
for us to show it; only do not ye grow weary.

And first, let us learn the meaning of '' It
shall break forth." For He said not at all,
" shall appear," but " shall break forth; " de-
claring to u-s its quickness and plentifulness,
and how exceedingly He desires our salva-
tion, and how the good things themselves
travail to come forth, and ]iress on; and that
which would check their unspeakable force
siiall be nought; by all which He indicates
their plentifulness, and the infinity of His


• Ps. xxiii. 4. ' Jcrein. xxiii. 33.

1 \s. Iviii. 9, Ixv. 24. [The < iljitifin is from tlic forinrr |)a»sa(;<;:
but " I will say " frf)m llic liillrr is siihstitiitrd f<ir " he will nay '


So in the liist part of the lonjitrr citation below. — R.]
■t Is. Iviil. 6-9. [i.xx., sec note above.]

22


al)un{lance. But what is '* the morninsi,


It


means, " not after being in life's temptations,
neither after our t-vils have come upon us; "
nay, it is <piilc bcforchaml with tlicm. For
as in our fruits, we call that early, which has
shown itself before its season; so also here
again, declaring its rapidity, he has spoken


S froit oi«>ioi<, " thy kinjiinen," taken from Isa. Iviii. 7., i.xx.,
last clause (sec atxivr.l R.)

' |irpui/iui-, ex|ilainc(l below. Our versions render " n* the
morning." — R.]


338


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LV.


in this way, much as above He said, "Whilst
thou art yet speaking, I will say, Lo! here I
am."

But of what manner of light is He speak-
ing, and what can this light be ? Not this,
that is sensible; but another far better, which
shows us Heaven, the angels, the archangels,
the cherubim, the seraphim, the thrones, the
dominions, the principalities, the powers, the
whole host, the royal palaces, the tabernacles.
For shouldest thou be counted worthy of this
light, thou shalt both see these, and be deliv-
ered from hell, and from the venomous worm,
and from the gnashing of teeth, and from the
bonds that cannot be broken, and from the
anguish and the affliction, from the darkness
that hath no light, and from being cut asun-
der, and from the river of fire, and from the
curse, and from the abodes of sorrow; and
thou shalt depart, " where sorrow and woe are
fled away," ' where great is the joy, and the
peace, and the love, and the pleasure, and
the mirth; where is life eternal, and unspeak-
able glory, and inexpressible beauty; where
are eternal tabernacles, and the untold glory
of the King, and those good things, *' which

I Isaiah xxxv. lo.


eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man; " ^ where is
the spiritual bridechamber, and the apart-
ments of the heavens, and the virgins that
bear the bright lamps, and they who have the
marriage garment; where many are the pos-
sessions of our Lord, and the storehouses of
the King.

Seest thou how great the rewards, and how
many He hath set forth by one expression,
and how He brought all together ?

So also by unfolding each of the expres-
sions that follow, we shall find our abundance
great, and the ocean immense. Shall we
then still delay, I beg you; and be backward
to show mercy on them that are in need ?
Nay, I entreat, but though we must throw
away all, be cast into the fire, venture against
the sword, leap upon daggers, suffer what
you will; let us bear all easily, that we may
obtain the garment of the kingdom of
Heaven, and that untold glory; which may
we all attain, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory and might, world without end. Amen.


2 I Cor. ii. 9.


HOMILY LV.

Matt. XVL 24.


"Then said Jesus unto His disciples. If any man will come after me, let him renounce

himself,' and take up his cross and follow me.''


Then; when ? When Peter said, ' Be it
far from Thee, this shall not be unto Thee;
and was told, " Get thee behind me, Satan." "^
For He was by no means satisfied with the
mere rebuke, but, willing also more abun-
dantly to show both the extravagance of what
Peter had said, and the benefit of His pas-
sion. He saith, " Thy word to me is, " Be it
far from Thee, this shall not be unto Thee: "
but my word to thee is, " Not only is it hurt-
ful to thee, and destructive, to hinder me and
to be displeased at my Passion, but it will be
impossible for thee even to be saved, unless

I [R. v., " If any man would come after me, let him deny him-
self," etc. The Oxford translator substitutes ''renounce" to
bring out the distinction between a.irapv€la0ai and api/eicSat,
which is pointed out in the Homily, sec. 2. — R.]

- Matt. xvi. 22, 23.


thou thyself too be continually prepared for
death."

Thus, lest they should think His suffering
unworthy of Him, not by the former things
only, but also by the events that were coming
on. He teaches them the gain thereof. Thus in
John first, He saith, " Except the corn of wheat
fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone;
but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit; "^
but here more abundantly working it out, not
concerning Himself only doth He bring for-
ward the statement that it is meet to die, but
concerning them also. " For so great is the
profit thereof, that in your case also unwilling-
ness to die is grievous, but to be ready for it,
good."

3 John xii. 24.


Homily LV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


jo9


This however He makes clear by what fol-
lows, but for the present He works it out on
one side only. And see how He also makes
His discourse unexceptionable: not saying
at all. "whether you will, or no, you must
suffer this," but how? "If any man will
come after me." " I force not, I compel
not, but each one I make lord of his own
choice; wherefore also I say, 'If any man
will' For to good things do I call you, not
to things evil, or burdensome; not to punish-
ment and vengeance, that I should have to
compel. Nay, the nature of the thing is
alone sufficient to attract you."

Now, thus saying, He drew them unto Him
the more. For he indeed that uses compul-
sion oftens turns men away, but he that leaves
the hearer to choose attracts him more. For
soothing is a mightier thing than force.
Wherefore even He Himself said, " If any
man will." "For great," saith He, "are
the good things which I give you, and such
as for men even to run to them of their own
accord. For neither if one were giving gold,
and offering a treasure, would he invite with
force. And if that invitation be without com-
pulsion, much more this, to the good things
in the Heavens. Since if the nature of the
thing persuade thee not to run, thou art not
worthy to receive it at all, nor if thou should-
est receive it, wilt thou well know what thou
hast received."

Wherefore Christ compels not, but urges,
sparing us. For since they seemed to be
murmuring much, being secretly disturbed at
tlie saying. He saith, " No need of disturb-
ance or of trouble. If ye do not account
what I have mentioned to be a cause of in-
numerable blessings, even when befalling
yourselves, I use no force, nor do I compel,
but if any be willing to follow, him I call

" For do not by any means imagine that
this is your following of me; I mean, what ye
now do attending upon me. ^'e have need
of many toils, many dangers, if ye are to
come after me. For thou oughtest not, O
Peter, ])ecausethou hast confessed me Son of
Ciod, therefore only to expect crowns, and to
suppose this enough for tliy salvation, and
for tiie future to enjoy security, as having
d(jne all. l-'or altlioiigh it be in my jiower,
as Son of ("lod, to hinder thee from liaving
any trial at all of those hardships; yet such is
not my will, for thy sake, that thou mayest
thyself too contribute something, and be more
approved."

For so, if one were a judge at the games,
and had a friend in the lists, he would not
wish to crown him by favor only, but also for
his own toils; anil for this reason especially,


because he loves him. Even so Christ also;
whom He most loves, those He most of all
will have to approve themselves by their own
means also, and not from His help alone.

But see how at tiie same time He makes
His saying not a grievous one. For He doth
by no means compass them only with His
terror, but He also puts forth the doctrine
generally to the world, saying, " If any one
will," be it woman or man, ruler or subject,
let him come this way,

2. And though he seem to have spoken but
one single thing, yet His sayings are three,
" Let him renounce himself," and " Let him
bear his cross," and " Let him follow me;"
and two of them are joined together, but the
one is put by itself.

But let us see first what it can be to deny
one's self. Let us learn first what it is to
deny another, and then we shall know what
it may be to deny one's self. What then is it
to deny another? He that is denying an-
other,— for example, either brother, or serv-
I ant, or whom you will, — should he see him
I either beaten, or bound, or led to execution,
or whatever he may suffer, stands not by him,
doth not help him, is not moved, feels noth-
ing for him, as being once for all alienated
from him. Thus then He will have us disre-
gard our own body, so that whether men
scourge, or banish, or burn, or whatever they
do, we Hiay not spare it. For this is to spare
it. Since fathers too then spare their off-
spring, when committing them to teachers,
they command not to spare them.

So also Christ; He said not, " Let him not
spare himself," but very strictly, " Let him
renounce himself;" that is, let him have
nothing to do with himself, but give himself
up to all dangers and conflicts; and let him
so feel, as though another were suffering it all.

And He said not, " Let him deny," ' but
" Let him renounce;" ' even by this small ad-
dition intimating again, how very far it goes.
For this latter is more than the former.

"And let him take up his cross." This
arises out of the other. For to hinder thy
supi^osing that words, and insults, and re-
proaches are to be the limits of our self-re-
nunciation. He saith also how far one ought
to renounce one's self; that is, unto death,
and tliat a reproachful death. Therefore He
said not. " Let him renounce himself unto
death," but, "Let him take up his cross;"
setting forth the reproachful death; and that
not once, nor twice, but throughout all life
one ought so to do. " Yen," saith He, " bear
about this death continually, anil ilay by day


■ apin)<ra(r0w.


' anapmjvaaSu. [Comp. note, p. 338.]


340


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LV.


be ready for slaughter. For since many have
indeed contemned riches, and pleasure, and
glory, but death they despised not, but feared
dangers; I," saith He, "will that my cham-
pion should wrestle even unto blood, and that
the limits of his course should reach unto
slaughter; so that although one must undergo
death, death with reproach, the accursed
death, and that upon evil surmise, we are to
bear all things nobly, and rather to rejoice in
being suspected."

"And let him follow me." That is, it be-
ing possible for one to suffer, yet not to fol-
low Him, when one doth not suffer for Him
(for so robbers often suffer grievously, and
violaters of tombs, and sorcerers); to hinder
thy supposing that the mere nature of thy
calamities is sufficient. He adds the occasion
of these calamities.

And what is it ? In order that, so doing
and suffering, thou mayest follow Him; that
for Him thou mayest undergo all things; that
thou mayest possess the other virtues also.
For this too is expressed by " Let him follow
me; " so as to show forth not fortitude only,
such as is exercised in our calamities, but
temperance also, and moderation, and all self-
restraint. This being properly "to follow,"
the giving heed also to the other virtues, and
for His sake suffering all.

For there are who follow the devil even to
the endurance of all this, and for his sake give
up their own lives; but we for Christ, or
rather for our own sakes: they indeed to
harm themselves both here and there; but
we, that we may gain both lives.

How then is it not extreme dullness, not
to show forth even the same fortitude with
them that perish; and this, when we are to
reap from it so many crowns ? Yet with us
surely Christ Himself is present to be our
help, but with them no one.

Now He had indeed already spoken this
very injunction, when He sent them, saying,
" Go not into the way of the Gentiles " (for,
saitb He, " I send you as sheep in the midst
of wolves," and, " ye shall be brought before
kings and governors "),' but now with more
intensity and severity. For then He spake
of death only, but here He hath mentioned a
cross also, and a continual cross. For "let
him take up," saith He, " his cross; " that
is, " let him carry it continually and bear it."
And this He is wont to do in everything; not
in the first instance, nor from the beginning,
but quietly and gradually, bringing in the
greater commandments, that the hearers may
not count it strange.


I Matt. X. s, i6, i8.


3. Then, because the saying seemed to be
vehement, see how He softens it by what
follows, and sets down rewards surpassing our
toils; and not rewards only, but also the pen-
alties of vice: nay, on these last He dwells
more than on those, since not so much His
bestowing blessings, as His threat of severi-
ties, is wont to bring ordinary men to their
senses. See at least how He both begins here
from this, and ends in this.

" For whosoever will save his life shall lose
it," saith He, " but whosoever shall lose his
life for my sake, shall find it. For what is a
man profited,^ if he should gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul ? Or what shall
a man give in exchange for his soul ?" ^

Now what He saith is like this: "not as
unsparing towards you, but rather as exceed-
ingly sparing you, I enjoin these things. For
he who spares his child, ruins it; but he who
spares it not, preserves." To which effect
also a certain wise man said, " If thou beat
thy son with a rod, he shall not die, but thou
shalt deliver his soul from death." ^ And
again, " He that refresheth his son, shall
bind up his wounds." ^

This takes place in the camp also. For if
the general, sparing the soldiers, commands
them to remain within the place always, he
will destroy with them the inhabitants too.

" In order then that this may not happen
in your case also," saith He, "ye must be
arrayed against continual death. For now
too a grievous war is about to be kindled.
Sit not therefore within, but go forth and
fight; and shouldest thou fall in thy post,
then hast thou obtained life." For if in the
visible wars he that in his post meets slaughter,
is both more distinguished than the rest, and
more invincible, and more formidable to the
enemy; although we know that after death
the king, in behalf of whom he takes his sta-
tion, is not able to raise him up again: much
more in these wars, when there are such hopes
of resurrection besides, will he who exposes
his own life unto death, find it; in one sense,
because he will not be quickly taken; in a
second, because even though he. fall, God*
will lead his life on to a higher life.

4. Then, because he had said, "He who
will save shall lose it, but whosoever shall
lose shall save it," and on that side had set
salvation and destruction, and on this salva ■


2 [R. v., " shall a man be profited;" so the Homily here,
against rec. text. — R.]

3 Matt. xvi. 25. 26. [Chrysostom inserts virep, and lakes i/'t'x')
in ver. 26 as " soul," but in his comment in ver. 25 recognizes the
obvious contrast between lower and higher life. — R.]

4 Prov. xxiii. 13, 14. 5 Ecclus. xxx. 7.

6 [The word " God " is supplied by the translator, but this is
not necessarily the sense; the subject may be the man him-
self.—R.]


Homily LV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


;4i


tion and destruction; to prevent any one's
imagining the one destruction and salvation
to be all the same with the other, and to teach
thee plainly that the difference between this
salvation and that is as great as between de-
struction and salvation; from the contraries
also He makes an inference once for all to
establish these points. " For what is a man
profited," ' saith He, " if he gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul ? "

Seest thou how the wrongful preservation
of it is destruction, and worse than all de-
struction, as being even past remedy, from
the want of anything more to redeem it ? For
" teil me not this," saith He, ''that he that
hath escaped such dangers hath saved his
life; but together with his life put also the
whole world, yet what profit hath he thereby,
if the soul perish ? "

For tell me, shouldescthou see thy servants
in luxury, and thyself in extreme calamity,
wilt thou indeed profit aught by being mas-
ter ? By no means. Make this reckoning
then with regard to thy soul also, when the
flesh is in luxury and wealth, and she awaiting
the destruction to come.

"What shall a man give in exchange for
his soul?""

Again, He dwells upon the same point.
What? hast thou another soul to give for this
soul ? saith He. Why, shouldest thou lose
money, thou wilt be able to give money; or
be it house, or slaves, or any other kind of
possession, but for thy soul, if thou lose it,
thou wilt have no other soul to give: yea,
though thou hadst the world, though thou
wast king of the whole earth, thou wouldest
not l)e able, by paying down all earthly goods,
with the earth itself, to redeem but one soul.

And what marvel, if it be so with the soul ?
Since even in the body one may see that so
it turns out. Though thou wear ten thousand
diadems, but have a body sickly by nature,
and incurable, thou wilt not be able, not by
giving all thy kingdom, to recover this l)ody,
not though thou add innumerable persons,
and cities, and goods.

Now thus I bid thee reason with regard to
thy soul also; or rather even much more with
regard to the soul; and do thou, forsaking
all besides, sjiend all thy care upon it. Do
not then while taking thouglit about the
things of others, neglect thyself and thine
own things; which now all men do, resem-
bling them tliat w(jrk in the mines. For
neither do these receive any jirofit froni this
labor, nor from the wealth; but r.itlier great


■ Here the citation a)(ree« with the rec. text. — R.]
^ [Here i>ir<'p dues nut occur, the text uKrccin^ wiil\ the re-
ccivcij. — R.]


harm, both because they incur fruitless peril,
and incur it for other men, reaping no bene-
fit from such their toils and deaths. These
even now are objects of imitation to many,
who are digging up wealth for others; or rather
we are more wretched even than this, inas-
much as hell itself awaits us after these our
labors. For they indeed are staid from those
toils by death, but to us death proves a be-
ginning of innumerable evils.

But if thou say, thou hast in thy wealth
the fruit of thy toils: show me thy soul glad-
dened, and then I am persuaded. For of all
things in us the soul is chief. And if the
body be fattened, while she is pining away,
this prosi)erity is nothing to thee (even as
when the handmaiden is glad, the happiness
of the maidservant is nothing to her mistress
perishing, nor is the fair robe anything com-
pared with the weak flesh); but Christ will
say unto thee again, " What shall a man give
in exchange for his soul?" on every hand
commanding thee to be busied about that,
and to take account of it only.

5. Having alarmed them therefore hereby,
He comforts them also by His good things.

" For the Son of Man shall come," saith
He, "in the glory of His Father with His
holy angels, and then He shall reward every
man according to his works. "^

Seest thou how the glory of the Father and
of the Son is all one ? But if the glory be
one, it is quite evident that the substance
also is one. For if in one substance there be
a difference of glory (" for there is one glory
of the sun, and another glory of the moon,
and another glory of the stars; for one star
diftereth from another star in glory; "■' al-
though the substance be one), how may the
substance of those differ, whereof the glory
is one? For He said not at all, " In glory
such as the Father's," whereby thou miglit-
est suppose again some variation; but imply-
ing entire perfection, " In that same glory,"
saith He, "will He come;" for it to be
deemed one anil the same.

" Now, why fear, O Peter" (so He speaks),
"on being told of death? Wliy, then shalt
thou see me in the gU)ry of the Father. Ami
if I am in glory, so are ye; your interests are
no wise limited to the i^rcsent life, but an-
other sort of portion will take you up, a bet-
ter one.'' Nevertheless, when He had spoken
of the good things, He stayed not at this, l)Ut
mingled the fearful tilings also, bringing for-
waril tliat jiulgment-seat, and tlie inexorable
account, and the inflexible sentence, and the
judgment that cannot be deceived^

I Mitii. xvi. (7. (.Some MS.S. »)f the Homily omit ayimv, mni
read Tf)>' n^itfiy for Ta ipya (HWe note i, |i. 34J.). So K. V, — R.]
4 I liir. XV. ^1.


342


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LV.


He suffered not however His discourse to
appear only dismal, but tempered it also with
good hopes. For neither did He say, " then
shall He punish them that sinned," but,
" He shall reward every man according to his
doino-s." ' And this He said, reminding not
only the sinners of punishment, but also them
that have done well of prizes and crowns.

6. And He indeed spake it, in part to re-
fresh the good, but I ever shudder at hearing
it, for I am not of them that are crowned, and
I suppose that others also share with us in
our fear and anxiety. For whom is this say-
ing not enough to startle, when he hath en-
tered into his own conscience; and to make
him shudder, and convince him that we have
need of sackcloth, and of prolonged fasting,
more than the people of the Ninevites ? For
not for an overthrow of a city, and the com-
mon end, are we concerned, but for eternal
punishment, and the fire that is never
quenched.

Wherefore also I praise and admire the
monks that have occupied the desert places,
as for the rest, so for this saying. For they
after having made their dinners, or rather
after supper (for dinner they know not at
any time, because they know that the present
time is one of mourning and fasting); after
supper then, in saying certain hymns of
thanksgiving unto God, they make mention
of this expression also. And if ye would
hear the very hymns themselves, that ye too
may say them continually, I will rehearse to
you the whole of that sacred song. The words
of it then stand as follows: " Blessed God,
who feedest me from my youth up, who giv-
est food to all flesh; fill our hearts with joy
and gladness, that always having all suffi-
ciency we may abound unto every good work
in Christ Jesus our Lord; with whom be unto
Thee glory, honor and might, with the Holy
Spirit, forever. Amen. Glory to Thee, O
Lord, glory to Thee, O Holy One, glory to
Thee, O King, that Thou hast given us meat
to make us glad. Fill us with the Holy
Ghost, that we may be found well-pleasing
before Thee, not being ashamed, when Thou
renderest to every man according to his
works."

Now this hymn is in all parts worthy of ad-
miration, but especially the above ending of
it. That is, because meals and food are wont
to dissipate and weigh down, they put this
saying as a kind of bridle upon the soul, at
the time of indulgence reminding it of the
time of judgment. For they have learnt what
befell Israel through a costly table. "For

^[rriv npa^iv, the reading accepted in R. V. — R.]


my beloved," saith He, " ate, and waxed fat,
and kicked."' Wherefore also Moses said,
" When thou shalt have eaten and drunk and
art full, remember the Lord thy God."^

For after that feast, then they ventured on
those acts of lawless daring.

Do thou therefore also look to it, lest some-
thing like it befall thee. For though thou
sacrifice not to stone nor to gold, either sheep
or bullocks, see lest to wrath thou sacrifice
thine own soul, lest to whoredom or other
like passions, thou sacrifice thine own salva-
tion. Yea — on this account, you see, they
being afraid of these downfalls, when they
have enjoyed their. meal, or rather fasting
(for their meal is in fact fasting), remind
themselves of the terrible judgment-seat, and
of that day. And if they who correct them-
selves both with fasting, and with nights spent
on the ground, with watchings, and with
sackcloth, and with ten thousand means, do
yet require also this reminding, when will it
be possible for us to live virtuously; who set
forth tables loaded with innumerable wrecks,
and do not so much as pray at all, neither in
the beginning nor the end ?

7. Wherefore to put an end to these ship-
wrecks, let us bring before us that hymn and
unfold it all, that seeing the profit thereof,
we too may chant it constantly over our table,
and quell the rude motions of the belly, intro-
ducing both the manners and laws of those
angels into our houses. For you ought in-
deed to go there and reap these fruits; but
since ye are not willing, at least through our
words, hear this spiritual melody, and let
every one after his meal say these words, be-
ginning thus.

"Blessed God." For the apostolic law
they straightway fulfill, that commands,
" Whatsoever we do in word or in deed, that
we do it in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
giving thanks to God and the Father by
Him."^

Next, the thanksgiving takes place not for
that one day only, but for all their life.
For, "Who feedest me," it is said, "from
my youth up." And a lesson of self-com
mand is drawn thence, that when God feeds,
we must not take thought. For if upon a
king's promising thee to furnish thy daily
food out of his own stores, thou wouldest be
of good hope for the future; much more,
when God gives, and all things pour upon
thee as out of fountains, shouldest thou be
freed from all anxiety. Yea, and to this very
intent they so speak, that they may persuade


2 Deut. x.\xii. 15 [lxx.]
4 Colos. iii. 17.


3 Deat. vi. 11, 12.


Homily LV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


34:


both themselves, and those that are made
disciples by them, to put off all worldly care.

Then, not to have thee suppose that for
themselves only they offer up this thanksgiv-
ing, they further say, "Who givest food to
all flesh," giving thanks in behalf of all the
world; and as fathers of the whole earth, so
do they offer up their praises for all, and train
themselves to a sincere brotherly love. For
it is not even possible they should hate them,
in behalf of whom they thank God, that they
are fed.

Seest thou both charity introduced by
their thanksgiving, and worldly care cast out,
both by the preceding words, and by these ?
For if He feed all flesh, much more them that
are devoted to him; if them that are en-
tangled in worldly cares, much more them
that are freed from the same.

To establish this, Christ Himself said,
" How many sparrows do ye exceed in
value ? " ' And He said it, teaching them not
to put their confidence in wealth and land and
seeds: for it is not tliesethat feed us, but the
word of God.'

Hereby they stop the mouths, both of the
Manichaeans, and of them of Valentinus, and
of all that are diseased in their way. For
sure this Being is not evil, who sets his own
stores before all, even before them that blas-
pheme Him.

Then comes the petition: " Fill our hearts
with joy and gladness." With what manner
of joy then, doth it mean ? the joy of this
world? God forbid: for had they meant this,
they would not have occupied summits of
mountains, and deserts, nor wrapt themselves
in sackcloth; but that joy they mean, which
hath nothing in common with this present
life, the joy of angels, the joy above.

And they do not simply ask for it, but in
great excess; for they say not, "give,'' but,
"fill," and they say not "us," but "our
hearts." For this is especially a heart's joy;
" For the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy.


"3


peace

Thus, because sin brought in sorrow, they
request that through joy righteousness may
be implanted in them, for no otherwise might
joy be engendered.

"That, always having all sufficiency, we
may abound unto every good work."^ See
how they fulfill that word of the gospel wiucli
saith, "Give us this day our daily bread,"
and how tliey seek even this for spiritual
ends. l''or tiieir |)hrnse is, " Tliat we may
abound unto every good work." 'i'iiey said
not. " Tliat we may do our duty only," but


> Luke xii. 7. [Very freely cited.J
• Deut. viii. 3 ; Malt. iv. 4. 1 ( -n


•t -i Cor. ix. 8.


"even more than what is enjoined," for,
"that we may abound," means this. And
while of God they seek sufficiency in things
needful, themselves are willing to obey not in
sufficiency only, but with much abundance,
and in all tilings. This is the part of well-
disposed servants, this of men strict in good-
ness, to abound always, and in all things.

Then again reminding themselves of their
own weakness, and that without the influence
from above nothing noble can be done; hav-
ing said, "that we may abound unto every
good work," they add, "in Christ Jesus our
Lord, with whom unto Thee be glory, honor,
and might forever. Amen;" framing this
end like their commencement by a thread of
thanksgiving.

8. After this again, they seem to begin
afresh, but they are keeping to the same ar-
gument. As Paul also in the beginning of
an epistle, having closed with a doxology,
where he says, " According to the will of our
God and Father, to whom be glory forever.
Amen; "'5 begins the subject again on which
he was writing. And again in another place
when he had said, "They worshipped and
served the creature more than the Creator, who
is blessed forever: Amen;''^ he completed
not his discourse, but begins again.

Therefore neither let us blame these our
angels, as acting disorderly, for that having
closed with a doxology they begin again the
sacred hymns. For they follow apostolical
laws, beginning from a doxology, and ending
therein, and after that end making a com-
mencement again.

Wherefore they say, " Glory be to Thee, O
Lord; glory be to Thee, O Holy One; glory
be to Thee, O King; that Thou hast given us
food to make us glad."

Since not for the greater things only, but
also for the lesser, we ought to give thanks.
And they do give thanks for these also, put-
ting to shame the heresy of the Maniclixans,
and of as many as affirm our jiresent life to
I)e evil. For lest for their high self-command,
and contempt of the belly, thou shouldest sus-
pect them as abhorring tlie meat, like the here-
tics aforesaid, who clioke tliemsclvcs " to death;
they by their prayer teach thee, that not from
abhorrence of God's creatures they abstain
from most of them, but as exercising self-
restraint.

And see how after thanksgiving for His
past gifts, they are importunate also for the
greater things, and dwell not upon tlu- niat-

S OaI. i. 4, s. * Kum. 1. .'5

7 airay\o»'t^'dtTiuf, a KlroiiK finumtivc cxpre*iii>ii, us it arrms,

for the iiiihullowrd <>eU-t<iriiiei)tinK <>f the MiiniclKcaiiH. In Horn.

\ I.I I , the Word iHapplicd tu Saul, " chukiiiK with riivy " tuwurd*

Duvid.


344


o


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LV.


ters of this life, but mount above the heavens,
and say, ' ' Fill us with the Holy Ghost. ' ' For
it is not even possible to approve one's self as
one ought, not being filled with that grace;
as there is no doing anything noble or great,
without the benefit of Christ's influences.

As therefore when they had said, " That
we may abound unto every good work," they
added, " In Christ Jesus; " so here also they
say, " Fill us with the Holy Glftiost, that we
may be found to have been well-pleasing
before Thee." '

Seest thou how for the things of this life
they pray not, but give thanks only; but for
the things of the Spirit, they both give thanks
and pray. For, "seek ye," saith He, "the
kingdom of heaven, and all these things shall
be added unto you."^

And mark too another kind of severe good-
ness in them; their saying, namely, " That
we may be found to have been well-pleasing
in Thy sight, not being ashamed." For " we
care not," say they, " for the shame that pro-
ceeds from the many, but whatever men may
say of us, laughing, upbraiding, we do not so
much as regard it; but our whole endeavor
is not to be put to shame then." But in these
expressions, they bring in also the river of
fire, and the prizes, and the rewards.

They said not, " that we be not punished/'
but, "that we be not ashamed." ^ For this
is to us far more fearful than hell, to seem to
have offended our Lord."

But since the more part and the grosser sort
are not in fear of this, they add, "When
Thou renderest to every man according to
his works." Seest thou how greatly these
strangers and pilgrims have benefitted _ us,
these citizens of the wilderness, or rather citi-
zens of the Heavens ? For whereas we are
strangers to the Heavens, but citizens of the
earth, these are just the contrary.

And after this hymn, being filled with much
compunction, and with many and fervent tears,
so they proceed to sleep, snatching just so
much of it as a little to refresh themselves.
And again, the nights they make days, spend-
ing them in thanksgivings and in the singing
of psalms.


I [In some mss. the two paragraphs which follow are omitted,
" and not be ashamed " being joined with this clause. — R.]

- Matt. vi. 33. [Here, also, the peculiar reading " Kingdom of
Heaven" occurs. Comp. Homily XXII. 4. — R.]

3 [See above, note 1. — R.]


But not men only, but women also practise
this self-denial, overcoming the weakness of
their nature by the abundance of their zeal.

Let us be abashed then at their earnestness,
we who are men, let us cease to be fastened
to the things present, to shadow, to dreams,
to smoke. For the more part of our life is
passed in insensibility.

For both the first period of our life is full
of much folly, and that again which travels
on to old age, makes all the feeling that is in
us wither away, and small is the space be-
tween, that is able feelingly to enjoy pleasure;
or rather, not even that hath a pure participa-
tion thereof, by reason of innumerable cares
and toils, that harrass it.

Wherefore, I pray, let us seek the unmova-
ble and eternal goods, and the life that never
has old age.

For even one dwelling in a city may imitate
the self-denial of the monks; yea, one who
has a wife, and is busied in a household,
may pray, and fast, and learn compunction.
Since they also, who at the first were in-
structed by the apostles, though they dwelt
in cities, yet showed forth the piety of the
occupiers of the deserts: and others again
who had to rule over workshops, as Priscilla
and Aquila.

And the prophets too, all had both wives
and households, as Isaiah, as Ezekiel, as the
great Moses, and received no hurt therefrom
in regard of virtue.

These then let us also imitate, and continu-
ally offer thanksgiving to God, continually
sing hymns to Him; let us give heed to tem-
perance, and to all other virtues, and the self-
denial that is practised in the deserts, let us
bring into our cities; that we may appear both
well-pleasing V)efore God, and approved before
men, and attain unto the good things to come,
by the grace and love towards man of our
Lord Jesus Christ, through whom and with
whom be unto the Father, glory, honor, and
might, together with the holy and life-giving
Spirit, now and always and world without
end. Amen.*


4 The grace here commented on is in its commencement the
same with one still used before meat in collegiate bodies : e. g. in
Oriel College, Oxford. " Benedicte Dens qui pascis nos in
jtiventiite fiosira, et preebes cibuvi oinni carni : reple gaudio et
Icetitia corda nostra, ut nos affatiin quod satis est habentes,
abundemus ad omne opus bonum : Per Jesutn Christum Dom-
inum nostrum: Amen." The conclusion of St. Chrysostom's
grace seems to be referred to by St. Just. Mart. Apol. i. p. 83 C.
and p. 50 E. as quoted by Mr. Field here.


Homily LVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


040


HOMILY LVI,


Matt. XVI. 28.


Verily, verily, I say unto you. There are some of them that stand here, which shall not
taste of death, until they see the Son of Man coming in His kingdom."


Thus, inasmuch as He had discoursed much
of dangers and death, and of His own passion,
and of the slaughter of the disciples, and had
laid on them those severe injunctions; and
these were in the present life and at hand,
but the good things in hope and expectation:
— for example, "They save their life who
lose it; " " He is coming in the glory of His
Father;" "He renders His rewards:" — He
willing to assure their very sight, and to show
what kind of glory that is wherewith He is to
come, so far as it was possible for them to
learn it; even in their present life He shows
and reveals this; that they should not grieve
any more, either over their own death, or over
that of their Lord, and especially Peter in
His sorrow.

And see what He doth. Having discoursed
of hell," and of the kingdom (for as well by
saying, " He that findeth his life shall lose it,
and whosoever will lose it for my sake, shall
find it; " ^ as by saying, "He shall reward
every man according to his works," ^ He had
manifested both of these): having, I say,
spoken of both, the kingdom indeed He shows
in the vision, but hell not yet.

Why so? Because had they been another
kind of people, of a grosser sort, this too
would have been necessary; but since they
are approved and considerate, He leads them
on the gentler way. But not therefore only
doth He make this disclosure, but because to
Himself also it was far more suitable.

Not liowever that He passes over this sub-
ject either, iftjt in some places He almost
brings even before our eyes tlie very realities
of hell; as when He introduces llie picture of
Lazarus, and mentions liim that exacted the
hundred pence, and him that was clad in the
filthy garments, and others not a few.

2. ".And after six days He taketli with Him
Peter ami James and Jolin.^

Now another says, " after eight,"' not con-
tradicting this writer, but most fullv agreeing
with him. For the one expressed hoth tlie
very day on which He spake, and tliat on


» rv'^ct^^.l ... ' Matt. xvl. aj.

3 Matt. xvi. 37. [TTif npa(tf airrov.]

4 Matt. xvii. I. S Luke ix. 38.


which He led them up; but the other, the
days between them only.

But mark thou, I pray thee, the severe good-
ness of Matthew, not concealing those who
were preferred to himself. This John also
often doth, recording the peculiar praises of
Peter with great sincerity. For the choir of
these holy men was everywhere pure from
envy and vainglory.

Having taken therefore the leaders, " He
bringeth them up into a high mountain apart,
and was transfigured before them: and His
face did shine as the sun, and His raiment
was* white as the light. And there appeared
unto them Moses and Elias talking with Him.^

Wherefore doth He take with Him these
only ? Because these were superior to the
rest. And Peter indeed showed iiis superi-
ority by exceedingly loving Him; but John
by being exceedingly loved of Him; and
James again by his answer which he answered
with his brother, saying, "We are able to
drink the cup;* nor yet by his answer only,
but also by his works; both by the rest of
them, and by fulfilling, what he said. For
so earnest was he, and grievous to the Jews,
that Herod himself supposed that he had be-
stowed herein a very great favor on the Jews,
I mean in slaying him.

But wherefore doth He not lead them up
straightway? To spare the other disciples
any feeling of human weakness: for which
cause He omits also the names of them that
are to go up. And this, because the rest
would have desired exceetlingly to have fol-
lowed, being to see a pattern of that glory;
and would have been pained, as overlookeil.
VoT though it was somewhat in a corporeal
way that He made the tlisclosure, yet never-
theless the tiling l>ad nuuh in it to be desired.

Wherefore then doth He at all foretell it?
That they might be readier to seize the high
meaning, by His foretelling it; and l>eing filled
with the more vehement desire in that round
of d.'iys, might so be present with their mind
quite awake and full of care.


'fK. v., " hi* KTnicnts brcaiiic," etc.)

7 Rlutt. xvii. 3, 1. ■ " .Matt.


XX. 30, 33.


346


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LVI.


3. But wherefore doth He also bring for-
ward Moses and Elias ? One might mention
many reasons. And first of all this: because
the multitudes said He was, some Elias, some
Jeremias, some one of the old prophets, He
brings the leaders of His choir, that they might
see the difference even hereby between the
servants and the Lord; and that Peter was
rightly commended for confessing Him Son
of God.

But besides that, one may mention another
reason also: that because men were continu-
ally accusing Him of transgressing the law,
and accounting Him to be a blasphemer, as
appropriating to Himself a glory which be-
longed not to Him, even the Father's, and
were saying, " This Man is not of God, be-
cause He keepeth not the Sabbath day;"'
and again, " For a good work we stone Thee
not, but for blasphemy, and because that
Thou, being a man, makest Thyself God: " ^
that both the charges might be shown to
spring from envy, and He be proved not liable
to either; and that neither is His conduct a
transgression of the law, nor His calling Him-
self equal to the Father an appropriation of
glory not His own; He brings forward them
who had shone out in each of these respects:
Moses, because he gave the law, and the Jews
might infer that he would not have overlooked
its being trampled on, as they supposed, nor
have shown respect to the transgressor of it,
and the enemy of its founder: Elias too for
his part was jealous for the glory of God, and
were any man an adversary of God, and call-
ing himself God, making himself equal to the
Father, while he was not what he said, and
had no right to do so; he was not the person
to stand by, and hearken unto him.

And one may mention another reason also,
with those which have been spoken of. Of
what kind then is it? To inform them that
He hath power both of death and life, is
ruler both above and beneath. For this cause
He brings forward both him that had died,
and him that never yet suffered this.

But the fifth motive, (for it is a fifth, besides
those that have been mentioned), even the
evangelist himself hath revealed. Now what
was this ? To show the glory of the cross,
and to console Peter and the others in their
dread of the passion, and to raise up their
minds. Since having come, they by no
means held their peace, but " spake,^' it is
said, " of the glory^ which He was to accom-


1 John ix. 16. _ 2 John x. 33.

afidfai/ : in our copiesof St. Luke e^oSov, but St. Chrysostom's
reading is that of a good many mss. [None of the recent critical
editions of the New Testament refer to any Greek mss., uncial
or cursive, with this reading. Chrysostom alludes to it again in
Homily LVIII. i.— R.]


plish at Jerusalem;"*'' that is, of the passion,
and the cross; for so they call it always.

And not thus only did He cheer them, but
also by the excellency itself of the men, being
such as He was especially requiring from
themselves. I mean, that having said, " If
any man will come after me, let him take up
his cross, and follow me; " them that had died
ten thousand times for God's decrees, and the
people entrusted to them, these persons He
sets before them. Because each of these,
having lost his life, found it. For each of
them both spake boldly unto tyrants, the one
to the Egyptian, the other to Ahab; and in
behalf of heartless and disobedient men; and
by the very persons who were saved by them,
they were brought into extreme danger; and
each of them wishing to withdraw men from
idolatry; and each being unlearned; for the
one was of a " slow tongue," ^ and dull of
speech, and the other for his part also some-
what of the rudest in his bearing: and of vol-
untary poverty both were very strict observers;
for neither had Moses made any gain, nor
had Elias aught more than his sheepskin; and
this under the old law, and when they had not
received so great a gift of miracles. For
what if Moses clave a sea ? yet Peter walked
on the water, and was able to remove moun-
tains, and used to work cures of all manner
of bodily diseases, and to drive away savage
demons, and by the shadow of his body to
work those wonderful and great prodigies;
and changed the whole world. And if Elias
too raised a dead man, yet these raised ten
thousand; and this before the spirit was as yet
vouchsafed to them. He brings them forward
accordingly for this cause also. For He
would have them emulate their winning ways
toward the people, and their presence of
mind and inflexibility; and that they should
be meek like Moses, and jealous for God like
Elias, and full of tender care, as they were.
For the one endured a famine of three years
for the Jewish people; and the qther said, " If
thou wilt forgive them their sin, forgive; else
blot me too out of the book, which thou hast
written." ^ Now of all this He was reminding
them by the vision.

For He brought those in glory too, not that
these should stay where they were, but that
they might even surpass their limitary lines.
For example, when they said, "Should we
command fire to come down from heaven,"
and made mention of Elias as having done so,
He saith, "Ye know not what manner of
spirit ye are of; " ^ training them to forbear-
ance by the superiority in their gift.


4 Luke ix. 31 .
7 Luke ix. 54, 55.
' text.— R.]


5 Exod. iv. 10. * Exod. xxxii. 32.

[The latter clause is omitted in the R. V.


Homily LVl.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


347


And let none suppose us to condemn Elias
as imperfect; we say not this; for indeed lie
was exceedingly perfect, but in liis own times,
when the mind of men was in some degree
childish, and they needed this kind of school-
ing. Smce Moses too was in this respect
perfect; nevertheless these have more re-
quired of them than he. For " except your
righteousness shall exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no
case enter into the kingdom of Heaven.'"'
For not into Egypt did they enter, but into
the whole world, worse disposed than the
Egyptians; neither were they to speak with
Pharaoh, but to fight hand to hand with the
devil, the very prince of wickedness. Yea,
and their appointed struggle was, both to bind
him, and to spoil all his goods; and this they
did cleaving not the sea, but an abyss of un-
godliness, through the rod of Jesse, — an
abyss having waves far more grievous. See
at any rate how many things there were to
put the men in fear; death, poverty, dis-
honor, their innumerable sufferings; and at
these things they trembled more than the
Jews of old at that sea. But nevertheless
against all these things He persuaded them
boldly to venture, and to pass as along dry
ground with all security.

To train them therefore for all this, He
brought forward those who shone forth under
the old law.

4, What then saith the ardent Peter ? "It
is good for us to be here."' For because he
had heard that Christ was to go to Jerusalem
and to suffer, being in fear still and trembling
for Him, even after His reproof, he durst not
indeed approach and say the same thing again,
"Beit far from thee;^ but from that fear
obscurely intimates the same again in other
words. That is, when he saw a mountain,
and so great retirement and solitude, his
thought was, " He hath great security here,
even from the place; and not only from the
place, but also from His going away no more
unto Jerusalem." For he would have Him
be tiiere continually: wherefore also he speaks
of " tabernacles." For " if this may be,"
saith he, "we shall not go up to Jerusalem;
and if we go not up. He will not die, for
there He said the scribes would set upon
Him."

But thus indeed he durst not speak; but
desiring however to order things so, he said
undoubtingly, "It is good for us to be here,"
where Moses also is present, and l^lias; I'Jias
who brought down fire on the mountain, and
Moses who entered into the thick darkness,


» Matt. V. 30.


» Matt. xvi. 4.


3 Matt. xvi. 33.


and talked with God; and no one will even
know where we are."

Seest tiiou the ardent lover of Christ ? For
look not now at this, that the manner of his
exliortation was not well weighed, but see
how ardent he was, how burning his affection
to Christ. For in proof that not so much
out of fear for himself he said these things,
hear what he saith, when Christ was declaring
beforehand His future death, and the assault
upon Him: " I will lay down my life for Thy
sake.* Though I should die with Thee, yet
will I not deny Thee.^

And see how even in the very midst of the
actual dangers he counselled amiss" for him-
self. We know that when so great a multi-
tude encompassed them, so far from flying,
he even drew the sword, and cut off the ear
of the high priest's servant. To such a
degree did he disregard his own interest, and
fear for his Master. Then because he had
spoken as affirming a fact, he checks himself,
and thinking, what if he should be again
reproved, he saith, " If Thou wilt, let us
make' here three tabernacles, one for Thee
and one for Moses, and one for Elias."

What sayest thou, O Peter? didst thou not
a little while since distinguish Him from the
servants? Art thou again numbering Him
with the servants ? Seest thou how exceed-
ingly imperfect they were before the cruci-
fixion ? For although the Father had revealed
it to him, yet he did not always retain the
revelation, but was troubled by his alarm; not
this only, which I have mentioned, but an-
other also, arising from that sight. In fact,
the other evangelists, to declare this, and to
indicate that the confusion of his mind, with
which he spake these things, arose from that
alarm, said as follows; mark, " He wist not
what to say, for they were sore afraid; " * but
Luke after his saying, " Let us make three
tabernacles," added, "not knowing what he
said."' Then to siiow that he was hoKlen
with great fear, both he and the rest, he
saith, ''They were heavy with sleep, and
when they were awake they saw His glory; '' "
meaning by deep sleep here, the deep stupor
engendereil in them by that vision. For as
eyes are darkened l)y an excessive splendor,
so at tliat time also did tliey feel. For it
was not, I suppose, night, but ilay; and the
exceeding greatness of the light weighed
down the infirmity of their eyes.

5. W'iiat tlien ? Ih Himself speaks


* John xiii. 37. 5 Mnlt. xxvi. J5.

' irap<0ouAct'cTo. Coinp. Philip, ii. 30.

7(l\. v., "I will nijikc " (iroiijcruil, with llic eurlirst MSS.
Murl iiiiil l.iilir: " l.rt lis iiiukc." — k.]

" Murk ix. f>. t I.iikc ix. j).

'" l.iikc ix. j;;. [K. v., margin, " havinj; rciimiiici! iiw;ikc."]


48


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOAI.


[Homily LVI.


nothing, nor Moses, nor Elias, but He that is
greater than all, and more worthy of belief,
the Father, uttereth a voice out of the cloud.

Wherefore out of the cloud ? Thus doth
God ever appear. " For a cloud and dark-
ness are round about Him;^'' and, "He
sitteth on a light cloud;" ^ and again, " Who
maketh clouds His chariot;" ^ and, "A cloud
received Him out of their sight; " ■* and, "As
the Son of Man coming in the clouds." s

In order then that they might believe that
the voice proceeds from God, it comes from
thence.

And the cloud was bright. For " while he
yet spake, behold, a bright cloud over-
shadowed them; and, behold, a voice out of
the cloud, which said, This is My beloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased; hear ye Him."*

For as, when He threatens, He shows a
dark cloud; — as on Mount Sinai; for
" Moses," it is said, " entered into the cloud,
and into the thick darkness; and as a vapor,
so went up the smoke;" ^ and the prophet
said, when speaking of His threatening,
" Dark water in clouds of the air;" ® — so here,
because it was His desire not to alarm, but
to teach, it is a bright cloud.

And whereas Peter had said " Let us make
three tabernacles," He showed a tabernacle
not made with hands. Wherefore in that case
it was smoke, and vapor of a furnace; but in
this, light unspeakable and a voice.

Then, to signify that not merely concern-
ing some one of the three was it spoken, but
concerning Christ only; when the voice was
uttered, they were taken away. For by no
means, had it been spoken merely concerning
any one of them, would this man have re-
mained alone, the two being severed from
Him.

Why then did not the cloud likewise receive
Christ alone, but all of them together? If it
had received Christ alone, He would have
been thought to have Himself uttered the
voice. Wherefore also the evangelist, mak-
ing sure this same point, saith, that the voice
was from the cloud, that is, from God.

And what saith the voice? "This is my
beloved Son.'' Now if He is beloved, fear
not thou, O Peter. For thou oughtest indeed
to know His power already, and to be fully
assured touching His resurrection; but since
thou knowest not, at least from the voice of
the Father take courage. For if God be
mighty, as surely He is mighty, very evidently
the Son is so likewise. Be not afraid then of
those fearful things.


I Ps. xcvii.
4 Acts i. g.
7 Exod. XX.


2 Is. xix
5 Dan


21, XIX. l8.


I.
vii. 13.


3 Ps. civ. 3.
6 Matt. xvii. 5.
8 Ps. xviii. II.


But if as yet thou receive it not, consider at
least that other fact, that He is both a Son,
and is beloved. For " This," it is said, " is
My beloved Son. '^ Now if He is beloved,
fear not. For no one gives up one whom he
loves. Be not thou therefore confounded;
though thou lovest Him beyond measure,
thou lovest Him not as much as He that
begat Him. .

" In whom I am well pleased." For not
because He begat Him only, doth He love
Him, but because He is also equal to Him
in all respects, and of one mind with Him.
So that the charm of love is twofold, or rather
even threefold, because He is the Son, be-
cause He is beloved, because in Him He is
well pleased.

But what means, " In whom I am well
pleased ?" As though He had said," In whom
I am refreshed, in whom I take delight; "
because He is in all respects perfectly equal
with Himself, and there is but one will in
Him and in the Father, and though He con-
tinue a Son, He is in all respects one with
the Father.

"Hear ye Him." So that although He
choose to be crucified, you are not to oppose
Him.

6. "And when they heard it, they fell on
their face, and were sore afraid. And Jesus
came and touched them, and said. Arise, and
be not afraid. And when they lifted up their
eyes, they saw no man, save Jesus only." '

How was it that, when they heard these
words, they were dismayed ? And yet before
this also a like voice was uttered at Jordan,
and a multitude was present, and no one felt
anything of the kind; and afterwards again,
when also they said, "It thundered," '° yet
neither at that time did they experience any-
thing like this. How then did they fall down
in the mount ? Because there was solitude,
and height, and great quietness, and a trans-
figuration full of awe, and a pure light, and a
cloud stretched out; all which things put
them in great alarm. And the amazement
came thick on every side, and they fell down
both in fear at once and in adoration.

But that the fear abiding so long might not
drive out their recollection, presently He
puts an end to their alarm, and is seen Him-
self alone, and commands them to tell no man
this, until He is risen from the dead.

For " as they came down from the mount.
He charged them to tell the vision to no man,
until He were risen from the dead.""

For the greater the things spoken of Him,


9 Matt. xvii. 6-8. "= John xii. 28, 29.

II Matt. xvii. 9. [In the last clause " the Son of ]Man " is
omitted, and ava<TTfi is substituted for eyep0fj. The former is the
usual term in Mark, not in Matthew. — R.]


i


Homily LVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


349


the harder to be received by the generaUty
at that time; and the offense also from the
cross was the more increased thereby.

'J'herefore He bids them hold their peace;
and not merely so, but He again reminds
them of the passion, and all but tells them
also the cause, for which indeed He requires
them to keep silence. For He did not, you
see, command them never to tell any man,
but "until He were risen from the dead."
And saying nothing of the painful part, He
expresses the good only.

What then ? Would they not afterwards be
offended ? By no means. For the point re-
quired was the time before the crucifixion.
Since afterwards they both had the spirit
vouchsafed them, and the voice that proceeded
from the miracles pleading with them, and
whatsoever they said was thenceforth easy to
be received, the course of events proclaiming
His might more clearly than a trumpet, and
no offense of that sort interrupting' what they
were about.

7. Nothing then is more blessed than the
apostles, and especially the three, who even
in the cloud were counted worthy to be under
the same roof with the Lord.

But if we will, we also shall behold Christ,
not as they then on the mount, but in far
greater brightness. For not thus shall He
come hereafter. For whereas then, to spare
His disciples. He discovered so much only of
His brightness as they were able to bear;
hereafter He shall come in the very glory of
the Father, not with Moses and Elias only,
but with the infinite host of the angels, with
the archangels, with the cherubim, with those
infinite tribes, not having a cloud over His
head, but even heaven itself being folded up.

For as it is with the judges; when they
judge publicly, the attendants drawing back
the curtains show them to all; even so then
likewise all men shall see Him sitting, and
all the human race shall stand by, and He
will make answers to them by Himself; and
to some He will say, " Come, ye blessed of
my Father; for I was an luingered, and ye
gave me meat; "^ to others," Well done, thou
good and faithful servant, thou hast been
faithful over a few things, I will set thee over
many things.^

And again passing an opjijosite sentence, to
some He will answer, " Depart into the ever-
lasting fire, that is prepnretl for the devil and
his angels,"* and to others. " O thou wicked
and slothful servants." ' Anil some He will
"cut asunder," and "deliver to tlie tor-
mentors;" but others He will command to


" be bound hand and foot, and cast into outer
darkness.* And after the axe the furnace will
follow; and all out of the net, that is cast
away, will fall therein.

" Then shall the righteous shine forth as
the sun; '''or rather more than the sun.
But so much is said, not because their light
is to be so much and no more, but since we
know no other star brighter than this. He
chose by the known example to set forth the
future brightness of the saints.

Since on the mount too, when He says,
" He did shine as the sun,'' for the same cause
did He so speak. For that the comparison
did not come up to His light, the apostles
showed by falling down. For had the bright-
ness not been unalloyed, but comparable to
the sun; they would not have fallen, but would
easily have borne it.

The righteous therefore will shine as the
sun, and more than the sun in that time; but
the sinners shall suffer all extremities. Then
will there be no need of records, proofs, wit-
nesses.. For He who judges is Himself all,
both witness, and proof, and judge. For He
knows all things exactly; " For al! things are
naked and opened unto His eyes." ^

No man will there appear rich or poor,
mighty or weak, wise or unwise, bond or
free; but these masks will be dashed in
pieces, and the inquiry -will be into their
works only. For if in our courts, when any
one is tried for usurpation, or murder, what-
ever he may be, whether governor, or consul,
or what you will, all these dignities fleet
away, and he that is convicted suffers the
utmost penalty; much more will it be so
there.

8. Therefore that this may not be so, let
us lay aside our filthy garments, let us put on
the armor of light, and the glory of (iod will
wrap us around. For what is even grievous
in tiie injunctions ? or what is there not easy ?
Hear, for instance, the prophet speaking, and
then thou slialt know the easiness thereof.
" Neither though thou bow as a collar thy
neck, anil strew beneath thee sackcloth and
ashes, not even so shalt thou call a fast ac-
ceptable; but loose every bond of iniiiuity,
unloose the twisteil knots of oppressive
bargains.""

See a proi)het's wisdom, liow stating first
wliatever was irksome, and removing it, he
exhorts tliem to obtain salvation by the duties
that are easy; signifying, that Ciod needs not
toils, but obeilienie.

Then unpjying that virtue is easy, but vice
grievous and galling, he makes it out by the


' fittroAa^oOi^ot.
4 Matt. XXV. 41.


' Matt. XXV. 34, 35.
S Matt. XXV. 36.


1 .Matt. XJtv. 33,


A Matt. xxii. 13.
" Hcb. iv, 13.


7 Matt. xiii. 43.
9 U. Iviii. 6.


350


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LVI.


bare names; "For," saith he, "vice is a
bond," and " a twisted knot," but virtue is a
disengagement and release from all these.

" Tear in sunder every unjust compact;"
thus calling men's bills about the interest due
to them, and the sums they have lent.

"Set at liberty them that are bruised;"
them that are afiflicted. For such a being is
the debtor; when he sees his creditor, his
mind is broken, and he fears him more than
a wild beast.

" Bring in the poor that are cast out to thy
house; if thou seest one naked, clothe him,
and them that belong to thy seed thou shalt
not overlook." '

Now in our late discourse which we made
unto you when declaring the rewards, we
showed the wealth arisi,ng from these acts;
but now let us see if any of the injunctions be
grievous, and transcending our nature. Nay,
nothing of the kind shall we discover, but
quite the contrary; that while these courses
are very easy, those of vice are full of labor.
For what is more vexatious than to be lend-
ing, and taking thought about usuries and
bargains, and demanding sureties, and fear-
ing and trembling about securities, about the
principal, about the writings, about the inter-
est, about the bondsmen ?

For such is the nature of worldly things;
yea, nothing is so unsound and suspicious as
that which is accounted security, and con-
trived for that purpose; but to show mercy is
easy, and delivers from all anxiety.

Let us not then traffic in other men's
calamities, nor make a trade of our benevo-
lence. And I know indeed that many hear
these words with displeasure; but what is the
profit of silence ? For though I should hold
my peace, and give no trouble by my words,
I could not by this silence deliver you from
your punishment; rather it has altogether the
opposite result; the penalty is enhanced, and
not to you only, but to me also, doth such a
silence procure punishment. What then
signify our gracious words, when in our works
they help us not, but rather do harm ? What
is the good of delighting men in word, while
we vex them in deed, bringing pleasure to the
ears, and punishment to the soul ? Where-
fore I must needs make you sorry here, that
we may not suffer punishment there.

9. For indeed a dreadful disease, beloved,
dreadful and needing much attendance, hath
fallen on the church. Those, namely, who
are enjoined not even by honest labors to lay
up treasures, but to open their houses to the
needy, make a profit of other men's poverty.


I Is. Iviii. 7.


devising a specious robbery, a plausible
covetousness.

For tell me not of the laws that are without;
since even the publican fulfills the law that
is without, but nevertheless is punished:
which will be the case with us also, unless we
refrain from oppressing the poor, and from
using their need and necessity as an occasion
for shameless trafficking.

For to this intent thou hast wealth, to re-
lieve poverty, not to make a gain of poverty;
but thou with show of relief makest the
calamity greater, and sellest benevolence for
money.

Sell it, I forbid thee not, but for a heavenly
kingdom. Receive not a small price for so good
a deed, thy monthly one in the hundred,^ but
^ithat immortal life. Why art thou beggarly,
and poor, and mean, selling thy great things
for a little, even for goods that perish, when
it should be for an everlasting kingdom ?
Why dost thou leave God, and get human
gains ? Why dost thou pass by the wealthy
one, and trouble him that hath not ? and leav-
ing the sure paymaster make thy bargain with
the unthankful ? The other longs to repay,
but this even grudges in the act of repaying.
This hardly repays a hundredth part, but the
other "an hundredfold and eternal life."
This with insults and revilings, but the other
with praises and auspicious words. This
stirs up envy against thee, but the other even
weaves for thee crowns. This hardly here, but
the other both there and here.

Surely then is it not the utmost senseless-
ness, not so much as to know how to gain ?
How many have lost their very principal for
the interest's sake ? How many have fallen
into perils for usurious gains. How many
have involved both themselves and others in
extreme poverty through their unspeakable
covetousness !

For tell me not this, that he is pleased to
receive, and is thankful for the loan. Why,
this is a result of thy cruelty. Since Abra-
ham too, 3 contriving how his plan might take
with the barbarians, did himself give up his
wife to them; not however willingly, but
through fear of Pharaoh. So also the poor
man, because thou countest him not even
worth so much money, is actually compelled
to be thankful for cruelty.

And it seems to me as though, shouldest
thou deliver him from dangers, thou wouldest
exact of him a payment for this deliverance.
"Away," saith he; "let it not be." What
sayest thou ? Delivering him from the greater
evil, thou art unwilling to exact money, and

~ T0K05 eKaTOKTTialos , centesitna usura, i per cent, per month.
3 Gen. xii. 11, etc. ^


Homily LVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


351


for the lesser dost thou display so much in-
humanity ?

Seest thou not how great a punishment is
appointed for the deed ? hearest thou not that
even in the old law this is forbidden ? ' But
what is the plea of the many? "When I
have received the interest, I give to the
poor; " one tells me. Speak reverently, O
man; God desires not such sacrifices. Denl
not subtilly with the law. Better not give to
a poor man, than give from that source; for
the money that hath been collected by honest
labors, thou often makest to become unlawful
because of that wicked increase; as if one
should compel a fair womb to give birth to
scorpions.

And why do I speak of God's law ? Do not
even ye call it "filth"? But if ye, the
gainers, give your voice so, consider what
suffrage God will pass upon you.

And if thou wilt ask the Gentile lawgivers
too, thou wilt be told that even by them this
thing is deemed a proof of the most utter
shamelessness. Those, for example, who are
in offices of honor, and belong to the great
council, which they call the senate, may not
legally disgrace themselves with such gains;
there being a law among them which prohibits
the same.""

How then is it not a horrible thing, if thou
ascribe not even so much honor to the polity
of Heaven, as the legislators to the council of
the Romans; but Heaven is to obtain less than
earth, and thou art not ashamed even of the
very folly of the thing ? For what could be
more foolish than this, unless one without
land, rain, or plough, were to insist upon
sowing? 3 Tares therefore, to be committed
to the fire, do they reap, who have devised
this evil husbandry.

Why, are there not many honest trades ?
in the fields, the flocks, the herds, the breed-
ing of cattle, in handicrafts, in care of prop-
erty ? Why rave and be frantic, cultivating
thorns for no good ? \\'hat if the fruits of
the earth are subject to mischance; hail, and
blight, and excessive rain ? yet not to such an

' F.xod. xxii. 25 ; Lev. xxv. is, 36 : Dctit. xxiii. 19.

-■ Si-e iSinKhain, Antia. vi. ii. 6, who refers to a Law of Hon-
"■rius, A.I). 31^7. Cod. f/ifiui. lib. •_•, til. 3?, Ue usiiris, Icvj. 3;
and (liMxm, c. 44; who qiiutt-s sivrral of the Kathcrs to prove that
iill lending with interest was forhidden; but most or all of them
seem Co be speaking of exorbitant interest, or of lending to the
pocr.

I So St. liasil, as quoted below. "The huslMindiiian having
reaped the car, seeks nut an-'ii" 'he seed under the root. |!ut
thou havinK the fruits, still xivest riot up that of which they grew.
'I'hou plantcst without land, thou reapcst without seed."


extent as are money dealings. For in what-
soever cases of that sort occur, the damage of
course concerns the produce, but the principal
remains, I mean, the land. But herein many
often have suffered shipwreck in their princi-
pal; and before the loss too they are in con-
tinual dejection. For never doth the money-
lender enjoy his possessions, nor find pleasure
in them; but when the interest is brought, he
rejoices not that he hath received gain, but is
grieved that the interest hath not yet come
up to the principal. And before this evil
offspring is brought forth complete, he com-
pels it also to bring forth,'' making the interest
principal, and forcing it to bring forth its
untimely and abortive brood of vipers. For
of this nature are the gains of usury; more
than those wild creatures do they devour and
tear the souls of the wretched. = This " is
the bond of iniquity: " this " the twisted knot
of oppressive bargains."

Yea, " I give," he seems to say, '' not for
thee to receive, but that thou mayest repay
more." And whereas God commands not
even to receive what is given (for "give,"
saith He, " to them from whom ye look not
to receive "),* thou requirest even more than
is given, and what thou gavest not, this as a
debt, thou constrainest the receiver to pay.

And thou indeed supposest thy substance
to be increased hereby, but instead of sub-
stance thou art kindling the unquenchable
fire.

That this therefore may not be, let us cut
out the evil womb of usurious gains, let us
deaden these lawless travailings, let us dry
up this place of pernicious teeming, and let us
pursue the true and great gains only. " But
what are these ? " Hear Paul saying " God-
liness with contentment is great gain." '

Therefore in this wealth alone let us be
rich, that we may both here enjoy security,
and attain unto the good things to come, by
the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might
with the Father and the Holy Spirit, now and
always, and world without end. Amen.


■« St. Rasil, Hotn. iH Ps. 14 (15), c. 3. " Interest upon interest,
a bad offsprinj; of bad parents. I'hesc may be well called i» .<■»•«-
ifiition v/ Ti/'rrs, I mean what our usuries brin){ forth. Vipers,
they s.-iy, are yeaned, eatinK throuKh their mother's womb: and
thesu usurious gams devour the debtors' houses, and so have their
'.irth."

5 There is here and nflrrwards a play upon the word rditot,
gain, a.s a derisative of Ti<cr<c»', /i» /'riiig /ort/i^ whiih lau hardly
lie e.\pressed in Knijlish.

'' Luke vi. 35. [Cited very freely.] 7 1 Tim vi. 6.


03-


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LVII.


HOMILY LVII.


Matt. XVII. lo.


"And His disciples aslced Him, saying, Why then say the Scribes that EUas must first

come ? "


Not then from the Scriptures did they know
this^ but the Scribes used to explain them-
selves, and this saying was reported abroad
amongst the ignorant people; as about Christ
also.

Wherefore the Samaritan woman also said,
" Messiah cometh; when He is come, He will
tell us all things: ' ' ' and they themselves asked
John, " Art thou Elias, or the Prophet ?" -
For the saying, as I said, prevailed, both that
concerning the Christ and that concerning
Elias, not however rightly interpreted by
them.

For the Scriptures speak of two advents of
Christ, both this that is past, and that which
is to come; and declaring these Paul said,
" The grace of God, that bringeth salvation,
hath appeared, teaching us, that, denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, and righteously, and godly." ^ Be-
hold the one, hear how he declares the other
also; for having said these things, he added.
" Looking for the blessed hope and appearing
of our great God and Saviour Jesus Christ." "*
And the prophets too mention both; of the
one, however, that is, of the second, they
say Elias will be the forerunner. For of the
first, John was forerunner; whom Christ called
also Elias, not because he was Elias, but be-
cause he was fulfilling the ministry of that
prophet. For as the one shall be forerunner
of the second advent, so was the other too of
the first. But the Scribes, confusing these
things and perverting the people, made men-
tion of that other only to the people, the
second advent, and said, " If this man is the
Christ, Elias ought to have come before-
hand.'' Therefore the disciples too speak as
follows, " How then say the Scribes, Elias
must first come ? ''

Therefore also the Pharisees sent unto
John, and asked him, "Art thou Elias ?" ^
making no mention anywhere of the former
advent.

What then is the solution, which Christ al-


I John iv. 25.

3 Titus ii. II, 12.

4 Tit. ii. 13.


[.Tlie Homily omits


= John i. 21.
' to all men."]

5 John i. 21.


leged ? " Elias indeed cometh then, before my
second advent; and now too is Elias come; "
so calling John.

In this sense Elias is come: but if thou
wouldest seek the Tishbite, he is coming.
Wherefore also He said, " Elias truly cometh,
and shall restore all things."* All what
things ? Such as the Prophet Malachi spake
of; for " I will send you,'' saith He, " Elias
the Tishbite, who shall restore the heart of
father to son, lest I come and utterly smite
the earth. "7

Seest thou the accuracy of prophetical lan-
guage? how, because Christ called John,
Elias, by reasoning of their community of
office, lest thou shouldest suppose this to be
the meaning of the prophet too in this place,
He added His country also, saying, "the
Tishbite; " ^ whereas John was not a Tishbite.
And herewith He sets down another sign also,
saying, " Lest I come and utterly smite the
earth," signifying His second and dreadful
advent. For in the first He came not to smite
the earth. For, "I came not," saith He,
" to judge the world, but to save the world." »

To show therefore that the Tishbite comes
before that other advent, which hath the judg-
ment. He said this. And the reason too of
his coming He teaches withal. And what is
this reason ? That when He is come, he may
persuade the Jews to believe in Christ, and
that they may not all utterly perish at His
coming. Wherefore He too, guiding them
on to that remembrance, saith, "And he shall
restore all things;" that is, shall correct the
unbelief of the Jews that are then in being.

Hence the extreme accuracy of his expres-
sion; in that he said not, " He will restore
the heart of the son to the father,'' but "of
the father to the son.'''° For the Jews being
fathers of the apostles, his meaning is, that
he will restore to the doctrines of their sons,
that is, of the apostles, the hearts of the
fathers, that is, the Jewish people's mind."

6 Matt. xvii. 11. [R. V., " Elijah indeed cometh," etc.]

7 Mai. iv. 5, 6, Lxx.

8 [The Hebrew does not have this; the argument rests on the
inaccurate rendering of the lxx.]

9 John xii. 47. '° See lxx.
"As to Elijah's future coming, see St. Just. Mart. Dial. adv.


Homily LVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


'> z "^


" But I say unto you, that Elias is come
already, and they knew him not, but have
done unto him whatsoever they listed. Like-
wise shall also the Son of Man suffer of them.
Then they understood that He spake to them
of John.""

And yet neither the Scribes said this, nor
the Scriptures; but because now they were
sharper and more attentive to His sayings,
they quickly caught His meaning.

And whence did the disciples know this?
He had already told them, " He is Elias,
which was for to come; '" but here, that he
hath come; and again, that " Elias cometh
and will restore all things.'' But be not thou
troubled, nor imagine that His statement
wavers, though at one time He said, " he will
come," at another, "he hath come." For
all these things are true. Since when He
saith, " Elias indeed cometh, and will restore
all things," He means Elias himself, and the
conversion of the Jews which is then to take
place; but when He saith, "Which was for
to come," He calls John, Elias, with regard
to the manner of his administration. Yea,
and so the prophets used to call every one
of their approved kings, David; ' and the
Jews, "rulers of Sodom,"" and "sons of
Ethiopians; " 5 because of their ways. For
as the other shall be forerunner of the second
advent, so was this of the first.

2. And not for this only doth He call him
Elias everywhere, but to signify His perfect
agreement with the Old Testament, and that
this advent too is according to prophecy.

Wherefore also He adds again, " He came,
and they knew him not, but have done unto
him all things whatsoever they listed. "*
What means, "all things whatsoever they
listed?" They cast him into prison, they
used him despitefully, they slew him, they
brougut his head in a charger.

" Likewise shall also the Son of Man suffer
of them.*' Seest thou how again He in due
season reminds them of His passion, laying
up f(jr them great store of comfort from tlie
passion of John. And not in tliis way only,
but also by presently working great miracles.
Yea, and whensoever He speiks of His jias-
sion, presently He works mirricles, both after
those s.Tyings and before them; and in many'
places one may find H im to have kept this rule


7V)'/A. p. a68, ed. Paris, 1636: Tert. </<• Anini. 35; </<- Rriur.

Car n is, .■.■; Ori){en (more doubtfully) in St. Matt. torn. 13, iii,
J72; in St. Joan, fm. 3, iv. 03. St. Jcr. iii.St. Matt, xi, i<j,(t. 7, 70.
Vallars. 1771), but doul>tin>;Iy; in lOiO, p. 13J, more positively; Si.
Auk. '" •*>'■ /"'"'■ I r. iv. 5, 6. </<• Civ. Dei, 20, nf. who spraks
positively of his coming; to convert the Jews, as liriiiu "u must
common topic in the mouthii und heurts of the faithful."

■ Mutt. xvii. ij, 13. ^ .Mutt. xi. 14

3 This rrfers apparently to such texts lu Jcr. xxx. 1^; Kzck.
xxxiv. 33. '.'4, xxxvii. 34; Ho!t. iii. 5.

4 Isa. i. lu. S Amoit ix. 7. *> Matt. xvii. n.

28


" Then," for instance, it saith, " He began
to signify how that He must go unto Jerusa-
lem, and be killed, and suffer many things." '
"Then:" when? when He was confessed to
be Christ, and the Son of God.

Again on the mountain, when He had
shown tliem the mar\'ellous vision, and the
prophets had been discoursing of His glory,
He reminded them of His passion. For
having spoken of the histosy concerning
John, He added, " Likewise shall also the
Son of ^Lan suffer of them."

And after a little while again, when He had
cast out the devil, which His disciples were
not able to cast out; for then too, "As they
abode in Galilee," so it saith, "Jesus said
unto them, The Son of Man shall be betrayed
into the hands of sinful •* men, and they shall
kill Him, and the third day He shall rise
again." »

Now m doing this, He by the greatness of
the miracles was abating the excess of their
sorrow, and in every way consoling them;
even as here also, by the mention of John's
death. He afforded them mucii consolation.

But should any one say, " Wherefore did
He not even now raise up Elias and send
him, witnessing as He doth so great good of
his coming?" we should reply, that even as
it was, while thinking Christ to be Elias, they
did not believe Him. For " some say,'' such
are the words, "that Thou art Elias, and
others, Jeremias."'' And indeed between
John and Elias, there was no difference but
the time only. " Then how will they believe
at that time?" it may be said. AMiy, "he
will restore all things," not simply by being
recognized, but also because the glory of
Christ will have been growing more intense
up to that day, and will be among all clearer
than tlie sun. When therefore, preceded by
such an opinion and expectation, he comes
making tlie same i')roclamation as John, anil
himself also announcing Jesus, they will more
easily receive his sayings. But in saying,
"They knew him not," He is e.xcusing also
what was done in His own case."

.'Vnd not in this way only doth He console
them, but also by pointing out that John's
sufferings at tiieir hands, whatever they are.
are niuleservcd; and l)y His throwing into
the shade what would annoy them, by means
of two signs, the one on the mountain, the
other just about to take jiLice.

But wiien they heard these things, tiicy tlo
not ask Him when Elias cometh; being

7 Matt. xvi. 31.

"[".Sinful" (o/iapTwAuii'l is oiiiiltrd in loine Mss. m( the
lloiuily. It dor* not iki ur in \l.ili. .wii. .•.-, but is taken from
Luke x.xiv. 7. Comp. Homily l.Nlll.at the Ix-tiiiiuiUK'. K.J

V .Mult. xvii. jy I" Mult, xvi, 14. "« Ctimp. I.ukc xxiii. 34.


i54


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LVII,


straitened either by grief at His passion, or
by fear. For on many occasions, upon see-
ing Him unwilling to speak a thing clearly,
they are silent, and so an end. For instance,
when during their abode in Galilee He said,
" The Son of Man shall be betrayed, and
they shall kill Him;" ' it is added by Mark,
*' That they understood not the saying, and
were afraid to ask Him; " ^ by Luke, " That
it was hid from them, that they might not
perceive it, and they feared to ask Him of
that saying. "3

3. "And when they were come to the mul-
titude, there came to Him a man, kneeling
down to Him, and saying, Lord, have mercy
on my son, for he is lunatic, and sore vexed;''
for ofttimes he falleth into the fire, and oft
into the water. And I brought him unto Thy
disciples, and they could not cure him."5

This man the Scripture signifies to be ex-
ceedingly weak in faith; and this is many ways
evident; from Christ's saying, "All things
are possible to him that believeth;"^ from the
saying of the man himself that approached,
" Help Thou mine unbelief: ^'^ from Christ's
commanding the devil to " enter no more into
him;"^ and from the man's saying again to
Christ, "If Thou canst.''^ "Yet if his un-
belief was the cause," it may be said, "that
the devil went not out, why doth He blame
the disciples ? " Signifying, that even without
persons to bring the sick in faith, they might
in many instances work a cure. For as the
faith of the person presenting oftentimes
availed for receiving the cure, even from in-
ferior ministers; so the power of the doers
oftentimes sufificed, even without belief in
those who came to work the miracle.

And both these things are signified in the
Scripture. For both they of the company of
Cornelius by their faith drew unto themselves
the grace of the Spirit; and in the case of
Eliseus '° again, when none had believed, a
dead man rose again. For as to those that
cast him down, not for faith but for cowardice
did they cast him, unintentionally and by
chance, for fear of the band of robbers, and
so they fled: while the person himself that
was cast in was dead, yet by the mere virtue
of the holy body the dead man arose.

Whence it is clear in this case, that even
the disciples were weak; but not all; for the
pillars" were not present there. And see this
man's want of consideration, from another
circumstance again, how before the multitude
he pleads to Jesus against His disciples, say-

I Matt. xvii. 22, 23. - Mark ix. 32. 3 I.uke ix. 45.

4 [R. v., " for he is epileptic, and suffereth grievously."]

5 Matt. xvii. 14-16. 6 Mark ix. 23. 7 Mark ix. 24.


8 Mark ix. 25
" Gal. ii. 9.


9 Mark ix. 22.


'° 2 Kings xiii. 21.


ing, "I brought him to Thy disciples, and
they could not cure him."

But He, acquitting them of the charges
before the people, imputes the greater part
to him. For, "O faithless and perverse gen-
eration," these are His words, "how long
shall I be with you ? " '^ not aiming at his per-
son only, lest He should confound the man,
but also at all the Jews. For indeed many
of those present might probably be offended,
and have undue thoughts of them.

But when He said, " How long shall I be
with you," He indicates again death to be
welcome to Him, and the thing an object of
desire, and His departure longed for, and
that not crucifixion, but being with them, is
grievous.

He stopped not however at the accusations;
but what saith He? "Bring him hither to
me." '3 And Himself moreover asks him,
" how long time he is thus; " both making a
plea for His disciples, and leading the other
to a good hope, and that he might believe in
his attaining deliverance from the evil.

And He suffers him to be torn, not for dis-
play (accordingly, when a crowd began to
gather, He proceeded to rebuke him), but for
the father's own sake, that when he should
see the evil spirit disturbed at Christ's mere
call, so at least, if in no other way, he might
be led to believe the coming miracle.

And because he had said, "Of a child,"
and, " If thou canst help me," Christ saith,
" To him that believeth, all things are possi-
ble,"''* again giving the complaint a turn
And whereas when the leper
If Thou wilt. Thou canst make me
clean," '^ bearing witness to His authority
Christ commending him, and confirming His
words, said, " I will, be thou clean;" in this
man's case, upon his uttering a speech in no
way worthy of His power, — "If Thou canst,
help me," — see how He corrects it, as not
rightly spoken. For what saith He' "If
thou canst believe, all things are possible to
him that believeth." '* What He saith is like
this: " Such abundance of power is with me,
that I can even make others work these mira-
cles. So that if thou believe as one ought,
even thou tliyself art able," saith He, "to
heal both this one, and many others." And
having thus said, He set free the possessed
of the devil.

But do thou not only from this observe His
providence and His beneficence, but also from
that other time, during which He allowed the


against him
said, "


1^ Matt. xvii. 17. '3 Mark ix. 21.

14 Mark ix. 23. '5 Matt. viii. 2.

'6 Mark ix. 23. [The word iria-Tevaai is read here ; the R. V.
has a briefer reading. The entire passage in Mark shows many
variations of text. — R.]


Homily LVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


155


devil to be in him. Since surely, unless the
man had been favored with much providential
care even then, he would have perished long
ago; for " it cast him both into the fire/' so
it is said, "and into the water." And he
that dared this would assuredly have destroyed
the man too, unless even in so great madness
God had put on him His strong curb; as
indeed was "the case with those naked men
that were rurming in the deserts and cutting
themselves with stones. ;

And if he call him '" a lunatic," trouble j
not thyself at all, for it is the father of the i
possessed who speaks the word. How then
saitii the evangelist also, '' He healed many
that were lunatic?"' Denominating them
according to the impression of the multitude.
For the evil spirit, to bring a reproach upon
nature, "^ both attacks them that are seized,
and lets them go, according to the courses of
the moon; not as though that were the worker
of it; — away with the thought; — but himself
craftily doing this to bring a reproach on na-
ture. And an erroneous opinion hath gotten
gro'jnd among the simple, and by this name
do they call such evil spirits, being deceived;
for this is by no means true.

4. " Then came His disciples unto Him
apart, and asked Him, why they could not
themselves cast out the devil.'' ^ To me they
seem to l^e in anxiety and fear, lest haply
they had lost the grace, with which they had
been entrusted. For they received power
against unclean spirits.* Wherefore also they
ask, coming to Him apart; not out of shame
(for if the fact had gone abroad, and they
were convicted, it were supertluous after that
to be ashamed of confessing it in words); but
it was a secret and great matter they were
about to ask Him of. What then saith
Christ? "Because of your unbelief," saith
He; " for if ye have faith as a grain of mus-
tard seed, ye shall say unto this mountain.
Remove, and it shall remove; and nothing
shall be impossible unto you."s Now if you
say, " Where did they remove a mountain ? "
I would make this ruiswer, that they tlid far
greater things, having raised up innumerable
dead. For it is not at all the same thing, to
remove a mountain, and to remove death
from a body. And certain saints after them,
far inferior to them, are said actually to have
removed mountains, when necessity cnlled for
it.'"' Whureby we sec tliat tiicse aisc) would
have done tlie same, need calling on them.


' Matt. IV. 24. [(TfArtfta^o^ffout ; the utme term occur* here,
and is the Imsis of th<: cuiiimrni, K.]

=> Tou (TToix'^ov, the Kletnrnl. 1 M.itl. xvii. iq.

4 Sec Miitt. X. I. 1 Mutt. xvii. an.

*> St. Gretfury 'I'hauinalurKU!! : sec lii!i life by Nyiuicii.


But if there was then no need for it, do not
thou find fault. And besides, He Himself
said not, "ye shall surely remove it," but
"ye shall be able to do even this." And if
they did it not, it was not because they were
unable (how could this be, when they had
power to do the greater things ?), but because
they would not, there being no need.

And it is likely that this too may have been
done, and not have been written; for we know
that not all the miracles they wrought were
written. Then however they were in a state
by comparison very imperfect. What then ?
Had they not at that time so much as this
faith ? They had not, for neither were they
always the same men, since even Peter is now
pronounced blessed, now reproved; and the
rest also are mocked by Him for folly, when
they understood not His saying concerning
the leaven.' And so it was, that then also
the disciples were weak, for they were but
imperfectly minded before the cross.

But by faith here He means that which re-
lated to the miracles, and mentions a mustard
seed, to declare its unspeakable power. For
though in bulk the mustard seed seem to be
small, yet in power it is the strongest of all
things. To indicate therefore that even the
least degree of genuine faith can do great
things. He mentioned the mustard seed;
neither by any means did He stop at this only,
but added even mountains, and went on be-
yond that. " For nothing," saith He, "shall
be impossible to you."

But do thou herein also marvel at tlieir self-
denial, and the might of the Spirit; their self-
denial in not hiding their fault, and the might
of the Spirit in so leading on by degrees them
who had not so much as a grain of mustard
seed, that rivers and fountains of faith sprang
up within them.

" Howbeit, this kind goeth not out, but by
prayer and fasting; " " meaning the whole kind
of evil spirits, not tiiat of lunatics only.

Seest thou how He now proceeds to lay
beforehand in them the foimdation of His
iloctrine al)Out fasting? Nay, argue not with
me from rare cases, that some even witliout
fasting have cast them out. For although
one might say this, in one or two instances,
of them tliat rebuke the evil spirits, yet for
the |)atient it is a thing impossible, living
luxuriously, to be delivered from such mad-
ness: this thing being especially necessary for
him tiiat is diseased in that way.

"And yet, if faith be requisite," one may

7 Malt. xvi. 6-ii.

8 Mull. xvii. >\ fThin vrr^tc, whirh i» wantiiiK in scvcml i>(
the iildrst unil best N. T. Mss. (in Miitlhrwt, wa» uncbMihtedly «c-
(cptcd by Chryiumtnm, «nd by < )rii;rn before \\\m. Hut the Iculi-
iiiony from ihe cuiiunsuf KuMbiuaituKuinat its i^cnuiiieni^'u. — R.]


56


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LVII.


say, "what need of fasting?" Because, to-
gether with our faith, that also brings no
small power. For it both implants much
strictness, and of a man makes one an angel,
and fights against the incorporeal powers: yet
not by itself, but prayer too is needed, and
prayer must come first.

5. See, at any rate, how many blessings
spring from them both. For he that is pray-
ing as he ought, and fasting, hath not many
wants, and he that hath not many wants, can-
not be covetous; he that is not covetous, will
be also more disposed for almsgiving. He
that fasts is light, and winged, and prays with
wakefulness, and quenches his wicked lusts,
and propitiates God, and humbles his soul
when lifted up. Therefore even the apostles
were almost always fasting. He that prays
with fasting hath his wings double, and lighter
than the very winds. For neither doth he
gape, nor stretch himself, nor grow torpid in
prayer, as is the case with most men, but is
more vehement than fire, and rises above the
earth. Wherefore also such a one is most
especially a hater and an enemy to the evil
spirits. For nothing is mightier than a man
who prays sincerely. For if a woman ' had
power to prevail with a savage ruler, one
neither fearing God, nor regarding man;
much more will he prevail with God, who is
continually waiting upon Him, and controlling
the belly, and casting out luxury. But if thy
body be too weak to fast continually, still it
is not too weak for prayer, nor without vigor
for contempt of the l)elly. For although thou
canst not fast, yet canst thou avoid luxurious
living; and even this is no little thing, nor
far removed from fasting, but even this is
enough to plnck down the devil's madness.
For indeed nothing is so welcome to that evil
spirit, as luxury and drunkenness; since it is
both fountain and parent of all our evils.
Hereby, for example, of old he drove the
Israelites to idolatry;^ hereby he made the
Sodomites to burn in unlawful lust. For,
" this," it is said, " was the iniquity of Sodom;
in pride, and in fullness of bread, and in ban-
quetings they waxed wanton. '^3 Hereby he
hath destroyed ten thousand others, and de-
livered them to hell.

For what evil doth not luxury work ? It
makes swine of men, and worse than swine.
For whereas the sow wallows in the mire and
feeds on filth, this man lives on food more
abominable than that, devising forbidden in-
tercourse, and unlawful lusts.

Such an one is in no respect different from
a demoniac, for like him he is lost to shame,

I I,uke xviii. 1-5. 2 Exod. xxxii. 6.

3 Kzek. xvi. 49. [lxx., but freely cited.]


and raves. And the demoniac at any rate we
pity, but this man is the object of our aver-
sion and hatred. Why so ? Because he brings
upon himself a self-chosen madness, and
makes his mouth, and his eyes, and nostrils,
and all, in short, mere sewers.

But if thou wert to see what is within him
also, thou wilt behold his very soul as in a
kind of wintry frost, stiff and toVpid, and in
nothing able to help its vessel through the
excess of the storm.

I am ashamed to say how many ills men
and women suffer from luxury, but I leave it
to their own conscience, which knows it all
more perfectly. For what is viler than a
woman drunken, or at all led away* by wine ?
For the weaker the vessel, the more entire
the shipwreck, whether she be free or a slave.
For the free woman behaves herself unseemly
in the midst of her slaves as spectators, and
the slave again in like manner in the midst of
the slaves, and they cause the gifts of God to
be blasphemously spoken of by foolish men.

For instance, I hear many say, when these
excesses happen, " Would there were no
wine." O folly! O madness! When other
men sin, dost thou find fault with God's gifts ?
And what great madness is this ? What ? did
the wine, O man, produce this evil ? Not the
wine, but the intemperance of such as take
an evil delight in it. Say then, "Would
there were no drunkenness, no luxury; " but
if thou say, "Would there were no wine,"
thou wilt say, going on by degrees, "Would
there were no steel, because of the murderers;
no night, because of the thieves; no light,
because of the informers; no women, because
of adulteries;'' and, in a word, thou wilt de-
stroy all.

But do not so; for this is of a satanical
mind; do not find fault with the wine, but
with the drunkenness; and when thou hast
found this self-same man sober, sketch out
all his unseemliness, and say unto him, Wine
was given, that we might be cheerful, not that
we might behave ourselves unseemly; that we
might laugh, not tliat we might be a laughing-
stock; that we might be healthful, not that
we might be diseased; that we might correct
the weakness of our body, not cast down the
might of our soul.

God honored thee with the gift, why dis-
grace thyself with the excess thereof ? Hear
what Paul saith, " Use a little wine for thy
stomach's sake, and thine often infirmities " s
But if that saint, even when oppressed with
disease, and enduring successive sicknesses,
partook not of wine, until his Teacher suffered


4 napatj>epofj.€r7js.


5 I T


im. V. 23.


Homily LVII.l


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


oD/


him; what excuse shall we have, who are
drunken in health ? To him indeed He said,
" Use a little wine for thy stomach's sake;"
but to each of you wlio are drunken, He will
say, "Use little wine, for thy fornications,
thy frequent filthy talking, for the other
wicked desires to which drunkenness is wont
to give birth." But if ye are not willing, for
these reasons, to abstain; at least on account
of the despondencies which come of it, and
the vexations, do ye abstain. For wine was
given for gladness, " Yea, wine," so it is said,
" maketh glad the heart of man:"' but ye
mar even this excellence in it. For what kind
of gladness is it to be beside one's self, and
to have innunierai)le vexations, and to see all
things whirling round, and to be oppressed
with giddiness, and like those that have a
fever, to require some who may drench their
heads with oil ?^

6. These things are not said by me to all:
or rather they are said to all, not because all
are drunken, God forbid; but because they
who do not drink take no tliought of the
drunken. Therefore even against you do I
rather inveigh, that are in health; since the
physician too leaves the sick, and addresses
his discourse to tliem that are sitting by them.
To you therefore do I direct my speech, en-
treating you neither to be at any time over-
taken by this passion, antl to draw up^ as by
cords those who have been so overtaken, that
they be not found worse than the brutes. For
they indeed seek nothing more than what is
needful, but these have become even more
brutish than they, overpassing the boundaries
of moderation. For how much better is the
ass than these men ? how much better the
dog ! For indeed each of these animals, and
of all others, whether it need to eat, or to
drink, acknowledges sufficiency for a limit,
and goes not on beyond what it needs; and
though there are innumerable persons to con-
strain, it will not endure to go on to excess.

In tliis respect then we are worse even than
the brutes, by the judgment not of them that
are in healtii t>nly, but even by our own. For
that ye have judged yourselves to be baser
than both dogs and asses, ^ is evident from
thence: tliat these brutes thou dost not compel
to partake of food, beyond tlieir measure; and
should any one say, " Wherefore ?" " Lest I
stiould hurt them," thou wilt reply. lUit ui)()n
thyself tliou bcstowcst not so nuicli as this
forethought. Thus tliou accountest tiiyself

« I's. civ. 15.

» I.iKhlfoot, Karmony, A. r>., 41. I. I. p. ;{]t, necmil to nhow
from 'raliimclic wrilrrs, tliat iinoiiitinK wiis re>;iiljirly iinrd iiiiumjj
the Jnws, cither ii"t :i rriiircly ur u» u i harm, in rcim|i|iiiiitH of ihc
hrao rspri iaily ; und he UHrs the fact lu cxpluiii S(. Inmrn v. 15.

4 [The Oxford edition reads "ni>e»," nhvioimty u ly|><>t;raphicul
error. The CJrcck word is ucuk'. — K.J


viler even than they are, and permittest thy-
self to be continually tossed as with a tempest.

For neither in the day of thy drunkenness
only dost thou undergo the harm of drunken-
ness, but also after that day. And as when
a fever is passed by, the mischievous conse-
quences of the fever remain; so also when
drunkenness is past, the disturbance of intoxi-
cation is whirling round both the soul and
body; and while the wretched body lies para-
lyzed, like the hull of a vessel after a ship-
wreck, the soul yet more miserable than it,
even when this is ended, stirs up the storm,
and kindles the desire; and when one seems to
be sober, then most of all is he mad, imagin-
ing to himself wine and casks, cups and gob-
lets. And like as in a storm when the raging
of the waters hath ceased, the loss by reason
of the storm remains; so likewise hare too.
For as there of our freight, so here too is
there a casting away of nearly all our good
things. Whether it be temperance, or mod-
esty, or understanding, or meekness, or hu-
mility, which the drunkenness finds there, it
casts all away into the sea of inicjuity.

But in what follows there is no more any
likeness. Since there indeed upon the cast-
ing out the vessel is lightened, but here it is
weighed down the more. For in its former
place of weak hit takes on board sand, and
salt water, and all the accumulated filth of
drunkenness; enough to sink the vessel at
once, with tlie mariners and the pilot.

That we may not then suffer these things,
let us deliver ourselves from that tempest.
It is not possible with drunkenness to see the
kingdom of Heaven. " Be not deceived," it
is said, " no drunkards, no revilers, shall in-
herit the kingdom of God.''^ And why do I
speak of a kingdom ? ^Vhy, with drunkenness
one cannot see so much as the things present.
For in truth drunkenness makes the days
nights to us, and the light darkness. And
though their eyes be opened, the drunken
see not even what is close at hand.

And this is not the only frightful thing,
but with these things they suffer also another
most grievous punishment, continually under-
going unreasonable despondencies, madness,
infirmity, ridicule, refiroach.

What manner of excuse is there for them
that |)ierce tliemselves through with so many
evils ? Tliere is none-.

Let us tly then from that |iest, that we may
attain both unto the good things here, and
unto those to come, by tlie grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Glirist, to
whom l)e ghuy and miglit with llie Father and
the Holy Spirit, world without end. Amen.

S I Cur. vi. 9, 10.


358


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LVIII.


HOMILY LVIII.

Matt. XVII. 22, 23.

'And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said unto them, The Son of Man shall be be-
trayed into the hands of men, and they shall kill Him, and the third day He shall be
raised again. And they were exceeding sorry.''


That is, to hinder their saying, "where-
fore do we abide here continually," He speaks
to them again of the passion; on hearing
which they had no wish so much as to see
Jerusalem. And it is remarkable how, when
both Peter had been rebuked, and Moses and
Elias had discoursed concerning it, and had
called the thing glory, and the Father had
uttered a voice from above, and so many
miracles had been done, and the resurrection
was at the doors (for He said. He should by
no means abide any long time in death, but
should be raised the third day); not even so
did they endure it, but were sorry; and not
merely sorry, but exceeding sorry. .

Now this arose from their being ignorant
as yet of the force of His sayings. This
Mark and Luke indirectly expressing said,
the one, "They understood not the saying,
and were afraid to ask Him:"^ the other,
" It was hid from them, that they perceived
it not, and they feared to ask Him of that
saying." "^

And yet if they were ignorant, how were
they sorry ? Because they were not alto-
gether ignorant; that He was to die they
knew, continually hearing it, but what this
death might be, and that there would be a
speedy release from it, and that it would work
innumerable blessings, as yet they knew not
clearly; nor what this resurrection might be:
but they understood it not, wherefore they
grieved: for indeed they clung very earnestly
to their Master.

"And when they were come to Capernaum,
they that received the didrachma came to
Peter, and said, Doth not your Master pay
the didrachma? "^

And what is this "didrachma?" When
God had slain the firstborn of the Egyptians,
then He took the tribe of Levi in their stead.'*
Afterwards, because the number of the tribe
was less than of the firstborn among the Jews,

1 Mark ix. 32.

2 Luke ix. 45. [R. V. " It was concealed from them, that
they should not perceive it : and they were afraid to ask him
about this saying." Chrysostom reads, " the saying," and omits
" it " after " perceive.'"— R.]

3 Matt. xvii. 24. 4 Num. iii. 11-13, 41-45.


for them that are wanting to make up the
number. He commanded ^ a shekel to be
contributed: and moreover a custom came
thereby in force, that the firstborn should pay
this tribute.

Because then Christ was a firstborn child,
and Peter seemed to be first of the disciples,
to him they come: their way being, as I sup-
pose, to exact it in every city; wherefore also
in His native place they approached Him; for
Capernaum was accounted His native place.

And Him indeed they durst not approach,
but Peter; nor him either with much violence,
but rather gently. For not as blaming, but
as inquiring, they said, " Doth not your
Master pay the didrachma?" For the right
opinion of Him they had not as yet, but as
concerning a man, so did they feel; yet they
rendered Him some reverence and honor, be-
cause of the signs that went before.

2. What then saith Peter? "He saith,
Yea:" and to these indeed he said, that He
payeth, but to Him he said it not, blushing
perhaps to speak to Him of these things.
Wherefore that gentle one, well knowing as
He did all things, prevented him,* "saying,
What thinkest thou, Simon ? Of whom do
the kings of the earth take custom or tribute ?
of their own sons, or of strangers;" and
when he said "of strangers," He replied,
" Then are the sons free." ^

For lest Peter should suppose Him to say
so, being told it by the others. He prevents
him, partly indicating what hath been said,
partly giving him leave to speak freely, back-
ward as he was to speak first of these things.

And what He saith is like this, " I am in-
deed free from paying tribute. For if the
kings of the earth take it not of their sons,
but of their subjects; much more ought I to
be freed from this demand, I who am Son,
not of an earthly king, but of the King of
Heaven, and myself a King."

Seest thou how He hath distinguished the

5 Num. iii. 46-:;i ; xviii. 16.

6 [R. v., " spake first to him." This is the sense here, but the
citation begins at "saying," another Greek term than that of
Matthew being used here. — R.]

7 Matt. xvii. 25, 26.


Homily l.VIIl.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


359


sons from them that are not sons? And if
He were not a Son, to no purpose hath He
brought in the example also of the kings.
" Yea," one may say, " He is a Son, but not
truly begotten." Then is He not a Son; and
if not a Son, nor truly begotten, neither doth
He belong to God, but to some other. But
if He belong to anotlier, then neither hath
the comparison its proper force. For He is
discoursing not of the sons generally, but of
the genuine sons, men's very own; of them
that share the kingdom with their parents.

Wherefore also in contradistinction He
hath mentioned the "strangers;" meaning
by "strangers," such as are not born of
them, but by " their own," those whom they
have begotten of themselves.

And I would have thee mark this also; how
the high doctrine,' revealed to Peter, He doth
hereby again confirm. And neither at this
did He stop, but by His very condescension
declares this self-same truth; an instance of
exceeding wisdom.

For after thus speaking. He saith, " But
lest we should offend tliem. go thou and cast
an hook into the sea, and take up the fish
that first cometh up, and thou shalt find
therein a j^iece of money; ^ that take, and
give unto them for me and thee.'' ^

See how He neither declines the tribute,
nor simply commands to pay it, but having
first proved Himself not liable to it, then He
gives it: the one to save the people, the other,
those around Him, from offense. For He
gives it not at all as a debt, but as doing the
best* for their weakness. Elsewhere, how-
ever, He despises the offense, when He was
discoursing of meats, s teaching us to know at
what seasons we ought to consider them that
are offended, and at what to disregard them.

And indeed by the very mode of giving He
discloses Himself again. For wherefore doth
He not command him to give of what they
have laid up ? That, as I have said, herein
also He might signify Himself to be God of
all, and tlie sea also to be under His rule.
For He had indeed signified this even already,
by His rebuke, and by His commanding tiiis
same Peter to walk on tlie waves; but He
now again signifies the self-same thing, tliough
in another way, yet so as to cause herein great
amazement. For neither was it a small thing,
to foretell that tlie first, who out of those
depths should come in his way, would be the
fish that would pay tlie tril)Ute; and having
cast forth His commandment like a net into

» I.itrrally, a stutcr, = ^ druclimu.H. [K. V., " «hrkcl, Creek,
sUtcr."]

.1 Matt. xvii. 37. [SliKhtly abridged.]

4 JloptffV^O'Ot. S .Mutt. XV. II.


that abyss, to bring up the one that bore the
piece of money; but it was or a divine and
unutterable power, thus to make even the sea
bear gifts, and that its subjection to Him
should be shown on all hands, as well when
in its madness it was silent,* and when, though
fierce, it received its fellow sen'ant;' as now
again, when it makes payment in His behalf
to them that are demanding it.

"And give unto them,'' He saith, " for me
and tliee." Seest thou the exceeding great-
ness of the honor ? See also the self-command
of Peter's mind. For this point Mark, the
follower of this apostle, doth not appear to
have set down, because it indicated tlie great
honor paid to him; but while of the denial
he wrote as well as the rest, the things that
make him illustrious he hath passed over in
silence, his master perhaps entreating him
not to mention the great things about himself.
And He used the phrase, " for me and thee,"
because Peter too was a firstborn child.

Now as thou art amazed at Christ's power,
so I bid thee admire also the disciple's faith,
that to a thing beyond possibility he so gave
ear. For indeed it was very far beyond pos-
sibility by nature. Wherefore also in requital
for his faith. He joined him to Himself in
tiie payment of the tribute.

3. "In that hour came the disciples unto
Jesus, saying, Who then is the greatest in tiie
kingdom of heaven ? ''"

The disciples experienced some feeling of
human weakness; wherefore the evangelist
also adds this note, saying, "In that hour;"
when He had preferred him to all. For of
James too, and John, one was a firstborn son,
but no such thing as this had He done for
them.

Then, being ashamed to avow their feeling,
they say not indeed openly, " Wherefore hast
thou preferred Peter to us?" or, "Is he
greater than we are?" for they were
ashamed; but indefinitely they ask, "Who
then is greater?'' For wiien they saw the
' three preferred, they felt nothing of tlie kind;
but now that the honor had come round to
one, they were vexed. And not for this
only, but there were many other things whic'a
they put together to kindle that feeling. For
to him He had said, " I will give thee the
keys;"' to him, " P.lessed art thou, Simon
Piarjona; " to him here, "Give unto tiicni
for me and thee;" and seeing too in general
how freely he was allowed to sjieak, it some-
wh.it fretted them.

And if Mark saith,"' that tliey iliil not ask,

* Mutt. viii. a6. 1 Matt. xiv. ao.

« Miitl. xviii. I. fR. v., • U h.. tlirti i» ureutest ((.nrck,
jfrctttrrt." Ciimpure the comment. — K.]

t .Ntutt. xvi. ly. " Murk ix. .«<.


360


THE WG-RKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily I.VIII.


but reasoned in themselves, that is nothing
contrary to this. For it is hkely that they
did both the one and the other, and whereas
before, on another occasion, they had had
this feeling, both once and twice, that now
they did both declare it, and reason among
themselves.

But to thee I say, " Look not to the charge
against them only, but consider this too; first,
that they seek none of the things of this
world; next, that even this passion they after-
wards laid aside, and give up the first place
one to another." But we are not able to
attain so much as unto their faults, neither
do we seek, " who is greatest ' in the kingdom
of heaven;" but, who is greatest in the
earthly kingdom, who is wealthiest, who most
powerful.

What then saith Christ ? He unveils their
conscience, and replies to their feeling, not
merely to their words. " For He called a
little child unto Him," saith the Scripture,
"and said. Except ye be converted, and be-
come as this little child, ye shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven." ^ " Why, you,"
He saith, " inquire who is greatest, and are
contentious for first honors; but I pronounce
him, that is not become lowest of all, un-
worthy so much as to enter in thither."

And full well doth He both allege that pat-
tern, and not allege it only, but also set the
child in the midst, by the very sight abashing
them, and persuading them to be in like man-
ner lowly and artless. Since both from envy the
little child is pure, and from vainglory, and
from longing for the first place; and he is
possessed of the greatest of virtues, sim-
plicity, and whatever is artless and lowly.

Not courage then only is wanted, nor wis-
dom, but this virtue also, humility I mean,
and simplicity. Yea, and the things that
belong to our salvation halt even in the chief-
est point, if these be not with us.

The little child, whether it be insulted and
beaten, or honored and glorified, neither by
the one is it moved to impatience or envy,
nor by the other lifted up.

Seest thou how again He calls us on to all
natural excellencies, indicating that of free
choice it is possible to attain them, and so
silences the wicked frenzy of the Manichseans ?
For if nature be an evil thing, wherefore doth
He draw from hence His patterns of severe
goodness ?

And the child which He set in the midst I
suppose to have been a very young child in-


1 IfjLiL^iav " greater."]

2 [R. v., " Except ye turn, and become as little children,'
Chrysostom substitutes "this little child." — R.]

3 ]\Iatt. xviii. 2, 3.


but


deed, free from all these passions. For such
a little child is free from pride and the mad
desire of glory, and envy, and contentious-
ness, and all such passions, and having many
virtues, simplicity, humility, unworldliness,''
prides itself upon none of them; which is a
twofold severity of goodness; to have these
things, and not to be puffed up about them.

Wherefore He brought it in, and set it in
the midst; and not at this merely did He
conclude His discourse, but carries further
this admonition, saying, "And whoso shall
receive such a little child in my name, receiv-
eth me. "5

" For know," saith He, " that not only, if
ye yourselves become like this, shall ye re-
ceive a great reward; but also if for my sake
ye honor others who are such, even for your
honor to them do I appoint unto you a
kingdom as your recompence. " Or rather,
He sets down what is far greater, saying,
" he receiveth me." So exceedingly dear to
me is all that is lowly and artless." For by
"a little child," here, He means the men
that are thus simple and lowly, and abject
and contemptible in the judgment of the
common sort.

4. After this, to obtain yet more accept-
ance for His saying. He establishes it not by
the honor only, but also by the punishment,
going on to say, "And whoso shall offend
one of these little ones, it were better for him
that a millstone were hanged about his neck,
and that he were drowned in the depth of the


'> 6


sea.

" For as they, "saith He, " who honor these
for my sake, have heaven, or rather an honor
greater than the very kingdom; even so they
likewise who dishonor them (for this is to
offend them)^ shall suffer the extremity of
punishment. And marvel thou not at His
calling the affront "an offense; "^ for many
feeble-minded persons have suffered no ordi-
nary offense from being treated with sliglit
and insult. To heighten therefore and ag-
gravate the blame. He states the mischief
arising therefrom.

And He doth not go on to express the
punishment in the same way, but from the
things familiar to us. He indicates how intol-
erable it is. For when He would touch the
grosser sort most sharply, He brings sensible
images. Wherefore here also, meaning to


4 airpay^otTVVTjv.

5 Matt, xviii. 5. ["one such little child," rec. text.; so R. V.]

6 Matt, xviii. 6. [R. V., but whoso shall cause one of these little
ones which believe in me to stumble, it is profitable for him that a
great millstone (Greek, a millstone turned by an ass) should be
hanged about his neck, and that he should be sunk in the depth
of the sea." The Oreek text of Chrysostom arjrees very closely
with the received, but omits " which believe in me." — "..]

7 l<TKdvSa\ov, " stumbling block."]


Homily LVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


;6i


indicate the greatness of the punishment they
shall undergo, and to strike into the arro-
gance of those that despise them, He brought
forward a kind of sensible punishment, that
of the millstone, and of the drowning. Yet
surely it were suitable to what had gone be-
fore to have said, " He that receiveth not one
of these little ones, receiveth not me;" a
thing bitterer than any punishment; but since
the very unfeeling, and exceeding gross, were
not so much penetrated by this, terrible as it
is, He puts "a millstone," and "a drown-
ing." And He said not, *'A millstone shall
be hanged about his neck," but, " It were
better for him"' to undergo this; implying
that another evil, more grievous than this,
awaits him; and if this be unbearable, much
more that.

Seest thou how in both respects He made
His threat terrible, first by the comparison
with the known image rendering it more dis-
tinct, then by the excess on its side present-
ing it to the fancy as far greater than that
visible one. Seest thou how He plucks up by
the root the spirit of arrogance; how He
heals the ulcer of vainglory; how He instructs
us in nothing to set our heart on the first
honors; how He persuades such as covet
them in everything to follow after the lowest
place ?

5. For nothing is worse than arrogance.'
This even takes men out of their natural
senses, and brings upon them the character
of fools; or rather, it really makes them to be
utterly like idiots.

For like as, if any one, being three cubits
in stature, were to strive to be higher than
the mountains, or actually to think it, and
draw himself up, as overpassing their sum-
mits, we should seek no other proof of his
being out of his senses; so also when thou
seest a man arrogant, and thinking himself
superior to all, and accounting it a degrada-
tion to live with other people, seek not thou
after that to see any otlier i^roof of that man's
madness. Why, he is much more ridiculous
than any natural fool, inasmuch as he abso-
lutely creates this his disease on purpose.
And not in this only is lie wretclied, but be-
cause he doth without feeling it fall into the
very gulf of wickedness.

For when will such an one come to due
knowledge of any sin? when will he i^er-
ceive that he is offending? Nay, rather he
is as a vile and captive slave, whom the devil
having caught goes off with, and makes him
altogether a l^rcy, buffetting him on every
side, and encompassing liiin with ten tiiou-
sand insults.


I [av^iifuptl aiiTiZ, " it is profitable for him."] * iwovniat.


For unto such great folly doth he lead them
in the end, as to get them to be haughty
towards their children, and wives, and towards
their own forefathers. And others, on the
contrary, He causes to be puffed up by the
distinction of their ancestors. Now, what
can be more foolish than this? when from op-
posite causes people are alike puffed up, the
one sort because they had mean persons for
fathers, grandfathers, and ancestors; and the
other because theirs were glorious and dis-
tinguished ? How then may one abate in
each case the swelling sore ? By saying to
these last, " Go farther back than your grand-
father, and immediate ancestors, and you will
find perchance many cooks, and drivers of
asses, and shopkeepers:" but to the former,
that are puffed up by the meanness of t'aeir
forefathers, the contrary again; "And thou
again, if thou proceed farther up among thy
forefathers, wilt find many far more illustrious
than thou art."

For that nature hath this course, come let
me prove it to thee even from the Scriptures.
Solomon was son of a king, and of an illus-
trious king, but that king's father was one of
the vile and ignoble. And his grandfather
on his mother's side in like manner; for else
he would not have given his daughter to a
mere soldier. And if thou wert to go up
again higher from these mean persons, thou
wilt see the race more illustrious and royal.
So in Saul's case too, so in many others also,
one shall come to this result. Let us not
then pride ourselves herein. For what is
birth ? tell me. Nothing, but a name only
without a substance; and this ye will know
in thit day. But because that day is not yet
come, let us now even from the things jires-
ent persuade you, tiiat hence arises no super-
iority. For should war overtake us, sliould
famine, should anything else, all these in-
Hated conceits of noble birth are put to the
proof: should disease, should pestilence come
upon us, it knows not liow to distinguisli be-
tween the rich and the poor, the glorious and
inglorious, the high born and him that is not
such; neither doth tleath, nor the other re-
verses of fortune, but they all rise up alike
against all; and if 1 may say sometiiing that
is even marvellous, against the rich more of
tlie two. For by liow mucli they are less ex-
erciseil in these things, .so nuu:h the more do
they perish, when overtaken by them. And
the fear too is greater witli the ricii. For
none so tremble at princes as they; and at
multitudes, not less than at princes, yea ratiier.
much more; many such houses in fact have
been subverted .dike by the wrath of multi-
tudes anil the threatening of princes. But


362


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LVIII.


the poor man is exempt from both these kinds
of troubled waters.

6. Wherefore let alone this nobility, and if
thou wouldest show me that thou art noble,
show the freedom of thy soul, such as that
blessed man had (and he a poor man), who
said to Herod, "It is not lawful for thee to
have thy brother Philip's wife; " ' such as he
was possessed of, who before him was like
him, and after him shall be so again; who
said to Ahab, " I do not trouble Israel, but
thou, and thy father's house; ''^ such as the
prophets had, such as all the apostles.

But not like this are the souls of them that
are slaves to wealth, but as they that are
under ten thousand tutors, and taskmasters,
so these dare not so much as lift up their eye,
and speak boldly in behalf of virtue. For the
love of riches, and that of glory, and that of
other things, looking terribly on them, make
them slavish flatterers; there being nothing
which so takes away liberty, as entanglement
in worldly affairs, and the wearing what are
accounted marks of distinction. For such an
one hath not one master, nor two, nor three,
but ten thousand.

And if ye would fain even number them,
let us bring in some one of those that are in
honor in kings' courts, and let him have both
very much wealth, and great power, and a
birthplace excelling others, and distinction of
ancestry, and let him be looked up to by all
men. Now then let us see, if this be not the
very person to be more in slavery than all;
and let us set in comparison with him, not a
slave merely, but a slave's slave, for many
though servants have slaves. This slave's
slave then for his part hath but one master.
And what though that one be not a freeman ?
yet he is but one, and the other looks only to
his pleasure. For albeit his master's master
seem to have power over him, yet for the
present he obeys one only; and if matters
between them two are well, he will abide in
security all his life. But our man hath not
one or two only, but many, and more griev-
ous masters. And first he is in care about
the sovereign himself. And it is not the
same to have a mean person for a master, as
to have a king, whose ears are buzzed into by
many, and who becomes a property now to
this set and now to that.

Our man, though conscious of nothing,
suspects all; both his comrades and his sub-
ordinates; both his friends and his enemies.

But the other man too, you may say, fears

.his master. But how is it the same thing, to

have one or many, to make one timorous ?


I Mark vi. 18.


2 I Kings xviii. 18.


Or rather, if a man inquire carefully, he will
not find so much as one. How, and in what
sense ? Whereas that slave hath no one that
desires to put him out of that service of his,
and to introduce himself (whence heither
hath he any one to plot against him therein);
these have not even any other pursuit, but
to unsettle him that is more approved and
more beloved by their ruler. Wherefore also
he must needs flatter all, his superiors, his
equals, his friends. For where envy is, and
love of glory, there even sincere friendship
has no strength. For as those of the same
craft cannot love one another with a perfect
and genuine love, so is it with rivals in honor
also, and with them that long for the same
among worldly objects. Whence also great
is the war within.

Seest thou what a swarm of masters, and of
hard masters? Wilt thou that I show thee
yet another, more grievous than this ? They
that are behind him, all of them strive to get
before him: all that are before him, to hinder
him from coming nearer them, and passing
them by.

7. But O marvel ! I undertook indeed to
show you masters, but our discourse, we find,
coming on and waxing eager, hath performed
more than my undertaking, pointing out foes
instead of masters; or rather the same per-
sons both as foes and as masters. For while
they are courted like masters, they are terri-
ble as foes, and they plot against us as
enemies. When then any one hath the same
persons both as masters, and as enemies,
what can be worse than this calamity ? The
slave indeed, though he be subject to com-
mand, yet nevertheless hath the advantage of
care and good-will on the part of them who
give him orders; but these, while they receive
commands, are made enemies, and are set
one against another; and that so much more
grievously than those in battles, in that they
both wound secretly, and in the mask of
friends they treat men as their enemies would
do, and oftentimes make themselves credit
of the calamity of others.

But not such are our circumstances; rather
should another fare ill, there are many to
grieve with him: should he obtain distinction,
many to find pleasure with him. Not so
again the apostle: " For whether," saith he,
"one member suffer, all the members suffer
with it; or one member be honored, all the
members rejoice with it."^ And the words
of him who gives these admonitions, are at
one time, " What is my hope or joy ? are not
even ye ? " * at another, "Now we live, if ye


3 I Cor. xii. 26.


4 I Thes. ii. 19.


Homily LVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


Stand fast in the Lord; " ' at another, " Out of'
much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote i
unto you; '" " and, " Who is weak, and I am
not weak ? Who is offended, and I burn not ?" ^

Wiierefore then do we still endure the
tempest and the billows of the world without,
and not run to this calm haven, and leaving
the names of good things, go on to the very
things themselves? For glory, and dignity,
and wealth, and credit, and all such things,
are names with them, but with us realities;
just as the grievous things, death and dis-
honor and poverty, and whatever else is like
them, are names indeed with us, but realities
with them.

And, if thou wilt, let us first bring forward
glory, so lovely and desirable with all of
them. And I speak not of its being short-
lived, and soon put out, but when it is in its
bloom, then show it me. Take not away the
daubings and colored lines of the harlot, but
bring her forward decked out, and exhibit her
to us, for me thereupon to expose her de-
formity. Well then, of course thou wilt tell
of her array, and her many lictors, and the
heralds' voice, and the listening of all classes,
and the silence kept by the populace, and the
blows given to all that come in one's way,
and the universal gazing. Are not these her
splendors ? Come then, let us examine
whether these things be not vain, and a mere
unprofitable imagination. For wherein is the
person we speak of the better for these things,
either in body, or in soul ? for this constitutes
the man. Will he then be taller hereby, or
stronger, or healthier, or swifter, or will he
have his senses keener, and more piercing ?
Nay, no one could say this. Let us go then
to the soul, if haply we may find there any
advantage occurring herefrom. What then ?
Will such a one be more temperate, more
gentle, more prudent, through ttiat kind of
attendance ? Ky no means, but rather quite
the contrary. For not as in tiie body, so also
is the result here. For there the boily in-
deed gains nothing in rcsi')e(t of its projK-r
excellence; but here the mischief is not only
the soul's reaping no good fruit, but also its
actually receiving much evil tlierefrom: hur-
ried as it is by such means into haughtiness,
and vainglory, and folly, and wrath, aiul ten
thousand faults like them.

"Hut he rejoices," thou wilt say, '* and
exults in these things, and Ihcy brighten him
up." The crowning point* of his evils lies
in tliat word of thine, and the incurable |iart
of the disease. For he that rejoices in these
things, would be unwilling liowever easily to


> I Then. iii. 8.
3 1 Cor. xi. 3t).


' a Cor. ii. 4.

4 KoAo^iIii'a.


be released from that which is the ground of
his evils; yea, he hath blocked up against
himself the way of healing by this delight.
So that here most of all is the mischief, that
he is not even pained, but rather rejoices,
when the diseases are growing upon him.

For neither is rejoicing always a good
thing; since even thieves rejoice in stealing,
and an adulterer in defiling his neignbor's
marriage bed, and the covetous in spoiling by
violence, and the manslayer in murdering.
Let us not then look whether he rejoice, but
whether it be for something profitable, lest'
perchance we find his joy to be such as that
of the adulterer and the thief.

For wherefore, tell me, doth he rejoice ?
For his credit with the multitude, because he
can puff himself up, and be gazed upon?
Nay, what can be worse than this desire, and
this ill-placed fondness ? or if it be no bad
thing, ye must leave off deriding the vain-
glorious and aspersing them wiin continual
mockeries: ye must leave off uttering impre-
cations on the haughty and contemptuous.
But ye would not endure it. Well then, they
too deserve plenty of censure, though they
have plenty of lictors. And all this I have
said of the more tolerable sort of rulers; since
the greater part of them we shall find trans-
gressing more grievously than either robbers,
or murderers, or adulterers, or spoilers of
tombs, from not making a good use of their
power. For indeed bota their thefts are more
shameless, and their butcheries more hard-
ened, and their impurities far more enormous
than the others; and they dig through, not
one wall, but estates and houses without end,
their prerogative making it very easy to
them.

And they serve a most grievous servitude,
both stooping basely under their passions,*
and trembling at all their accomplices. For
he oidy is free, and he only a ruler, and more
kingly than all kings, who is delivereil from
his passions.

Knowing then these things, let us follow

after the true freedom, and deliver ourselves

from the evil slavery, and let us account

neitlier pomp of power nor dominion of

wealth, nor any otlier such thing, to be

blessed; but virtue only. For thus sljall we

both enjoy security here, and attain unto the

good things to come, by the grace and love

tow.'irds m:ui of our Lord Jesus Christ, to

whom be glory and might, with the Fatiier and

the Holy Spirit, world without end. Amen.
<

! [The Cirrric irxl ha% 6ia(Tif<liuint0a, which the tniii!tlulur hus
ignorrd ; " l.rt ii» rmiMiIrr wrll, lr>t," cti - K.l

'(S<>mc M«.s, innrrt hcrr : xai Tcii-t avi'ovXovf Ti«irTo»T«t
a^tiiwf, " itnil licuiiiik' ihc (rlU>w »rrvant* un--|>.irin);ly.' Hul it
is put III liriii'kct* liy Kicltl. — K.]


364


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LIX.


HOMILY LIX.


Matt. XVIII. 7.


*' Woe unto the world because of offenses:' for it must needs be that offenses come:

woe to that man by'' whom the offense cometh."


but


"And if ' it must needs be that offenses
come,' "(some one of our adversaries may
perchance say), "why doth He lament over the
world, when He ought rather to afford suc-
cor, and to stretch forth His hand in its be-
half? For this were the part of a physi-
cian, and a protector, whereas the other
might be looked for even from any ordinary
person."

What then could we possibly say, in answer
to so shameless a tongue ? nay what dost
thou seek for equal to this healing care of
His ? For indeed being God He became man
for thee, and took the form of a slave, and
underwent all extremities, and left undone
none of those things which it concerned Him
to do.- But inasmuch as unthankful men
were nothing the better for this, He laments
over them, for that after so much fostering
care they continued in their unsoundness.

It was like as if over the sick man, that had
had the advantage of much attendance, and
who had not been willing to obey the rules of
the physician, any one were to lament and
say, *' Woe to such a man from his infirmity,
which he has increased by his own remiss-
ness." But in that case indeed there is no
advantage from the bewailing, but here this
too is a kind of healing treatment to foretell
what would be, and to lament it. For many
oftentimes, though, when advised, they wei'e
nothing profited, yet, when mourned for, they
amended.

For which reason most of all He used the
word *' Woe," thoroughly to rouse them, and
to make them in earnest, and to work upon
them to be wakeful. And at the same time
He shows forth the good will He had towards
those very men and His own mildness, that
He mourns for them even when gainsaying,
not taking mere disgust at it, but correcting
them, both with the mourning, and with the
prediction, so as to win them over.

But how is this possible ? he may say.
For if " it must needs be that offenses
come,'' how is it possible to escape these?

1 [R. v., "occasions of stumbling," cr/cai'6aAu)i' ; see the corn-
men' below.]

2 [R. v., *' through."]


Because that the offenses come indeed must
needs be, but that men should perish is not
altogether of necessity. Like as though a
physician should say (for nothing hinders
our using the same illustration again), it
must needs be that this disease should come
on, but it is not a necessary consequence that
he who gives heed should be of course de-
stroyed by the disease. And this He said, as
I mentioned, to awaken together with the
others His disciples. For that they may not
slumber, as sent unto peace and unto un-
troubled life, He shows many wars close upon
them, from without, from within. Declaring
tliis, Paul said, "Without were fightings,
within were fears; " ^ and, " In perils among
false brethren;"'* and in his discourse to the
Milesians too He said, "Also of you shall
some arise speaking perverse things; "^ and
He Himself too said, " The man's foes shall
be they of his own household."* But when
He said, "It must needs be," it is not as
taking away the power of choosing for them-
selves, nor the freedom of the moral princi-
ple, nor as placing man's life under any abso-
lute constraint of circumstances, that He saith
these things, but He foretells what would
surely be; and this Luke hath set forth in
another form of expression, " It is impossible
but that offenses should come."^

But what are the offenses?^ The hin-
drances on the right way. Thus also do
those on the stage call them that are skilled
in those matters,them that distort their bodies.

It is not then His prediction that brings the
offenses; far from it; neither because He
foretold it, therefore doth it take place; but
because it surely was to be, therefore He
foretold it; since if those who bring in the
offenses had not been minded to do wickedly,
neither would the offenses have come; and if
they had not been to come, neither would
they have been foretold. But because those
men did evil, and were incurably diseased,
the offenses came, and He foretells that which
is to be.


3 2 Cor. vii. 5.
6 Matt. .X. 36.


4 2 Cor. xi. 26.
7 Luke xvii. i.


5 Acts XX. 30.
8 (TKdvSa\a.


Homily LIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


365


But if these men had been kept right, it
may be said, and there had been no one to
bring in an offense, would not this saying
have been convicted of falsehood ? By no
means, for neither would it have been spoken.
For if all were to have been kept right, He
would not have said, " it must needs be that
they come," but because He foreknew they
would be of themselves incorrigible, therefore
He said, the offenses will surely come.

And wherefore did He not take them out of
the way ? it may be said. Why, wherefore
should they have been taken out of the way ?
For the sake of them that are hurt? But not
thence is the ruin of them that are hurt, but
from their own remissness. And the virtuous
prove it, who, so far from being injured
thereby, are even in the greatest degree
profited, such as was Job, such as was Joseph,
such as were all the righteous, and the apos-
tles. But if many perish, it is from their
own slumbering. But if it were not so, but
the ruin was the effect of the offenses, all
must have perished. And if there are those
who escape, let him who doth not escape im-
pute it to himself. For the offenses, as I
have said, awaken, and render more quick-
sighted, and sharper, not only him that is
preserved; but even him that hath fallen into
them, if he rise up again quickly, for they
render him more safe, and make him more
difficult to overcome; so that if we be watch-
ful, no small profit do we reap from hence,
even to be continually awake. For if when
we have enemies, and when so many dangers
are pressing upon us, we sleej), what should
we be if living in security. Nay, if thou wilt,
look at the first man. For if having lived in
paradise a short time, perchance not so much
as a whole day, and having enjoyed delights,
he drove on to such a pitch of wickedness, as
even to imagine an equality with God, and to
account the deceiver a benefactor, and not
to keep to one commandment; if he had lived
the rest of his life also without affliction, what
would he not have done ?

2. P>ut when we say these things, they
make other objections again, asking, And
why did God make him such ? God did not
make him such, far from it, since then neither
would He have punished him. For if wc in
those matters in which we are the cause, do
not fuul fault with our servant, much more
will not the God of all. " But whence did
this come to pass ?" one may say. Of him-
self and his own remissness. " \Vhat means,
ofliimseif?" Ask thyself. For if it be not
of themselves the bad are bail, do not i)Uiiish
thy servant nor rcjirovc thy wife for wlint
errors s!ie may commit, neither licat thy son,


nor blame thy friend, nor hate thine enemy
that doth despite to thee: for all these de-
serve to be pitied, not to be punislied, unless
they offend of themselves. " But I am not
able to practise self-restraint," one may say.
And yet, when thou perceivest the cause not
to be with them, but of another necessity,
thou canst practise self-restraint. When at
least a s'ervant being taken with sickness doth
not the things enjoined him, so far from
blaming thou dost rather excuse him. Thus
thou art a witness, that the one thing is of
one's self, the other not of one's self. So
that here too, if thou knewest that he was
wicked from being born such, so far from
blaming, thou wouldest rather have shown
him indulgence. For surely, when thou
makest him allowance for his illness, it could
not be that thou wouldest have refused to
make allowance for God's act of creation, if
indeed he had been made such from the very
first.

And in another way too it is easy to stop
the mouths of such men, for great is the
abounding power of the truth. For where-
fore dost thou never find fault with thy serv-
ant, because he is not of a beautiful counte-
nance, that he is not of fine stature in his
body, that he is not able to fly ? Because
these things are natural. So then from blame
against his nature he is acquitted, and no
man gainsays it. When therefore thou
blamest, thou showest that the fault is not of
nature but of his choice. For if in those
things, which we do not blame, we bear wit-
ness that the whole is of nature, it is evident
that where we reprove, we declare that the
offense is of the choice.

Do not then bring forward, I beseech thee,
perverse reasonings, neither sophistries and
webs slighter than the spider's, but answer
me this again: Did God make all men? It
is surely plain to every man. How then are
not all etpial in respect of virtue anil vice?
whence are the good, and gentle, and meek ?
whence are the worthless and evil ? I'or if
these things do not reijnire any purpose, but
are of nature, how are the one this, the
others that ? For if by nature all were bad,
it were not possible for any one to be good ,
but if good by nature, then no one bad. For
if there were one nature of all men, they must
needs in this respect be all one, whether they
were to be this, or wiiether they were to be
that.

Hut if w<.' should say tiiat by nature tiic

one are good, the other bad, which would not

I l)e reasonable (as we have shown), these

things must be unchangeable, for the things

of natiin- are'uncliangeai)Ie. Nay, mark. All


366


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LIX.


mortals are also liable to suffering; and no
one is free from suffering, though he strive
without end. But now we see of good many
becoming worthless, and of worthless good,
the one through remissness, the other by
earnestness; which thing most of all indicates
that these things do not come of nature.

For the things of nature are _ neither
changed, nor do they need diligence for their
acquisition. For like as for seeing and hear-
ing we do not need labor, so neither should
we need toils in virtue, if it had been appor-
tioned by nature.

" But wherefore did He at all make worth-
less men, when He might have made all men
good? Whence then are the evil things?"
saith he. Ask thyself; for it is my part to
show they are not of nature, nor from God.

"Come they then of themselves?" he
saith. By no means. " But are they unorig-
inated ? " Speak reverently, O man, and
start back from this madness, honoring with
one honor God and the evil things, and that
honor the highest. For if they be unorig-
inate they are mighty, and cannot so much as
be plucked up, nor pass into annihilation.
For that what is unorigmate is imperishable,
is surely manifest to all.

3. And whence also are there so many
good, when evil hath such great power ? how
are they that have an origin stronger than
that which is unoriginate ?

" But God destroys these things," he saith.
When ? And how will He destroy what are
of equal honor, and of equal strength, and of
the same age, as one might say, with Him-
self?

Oh malice of the devil ! how great an evil
hath he invented ! With what blasphemy hath
he persuaded men to surround God ! with
what cloak of godliness hath he devised an-
other profane account ? For desiring to show,
that not of Him was the evil, they brought in
another evil doctrine, saying, that these things
are unoriginate.

"Whence then are evils?" one may say.
From willing and not willing. " But the very
thing of our willing and not willing, whence
is it? " From ourselves. But thou dost the
same in asking, as if when thou hadst asked,
whence is seeing and not seeing ? then when
I said, from closing the eyes or not closing
the eyes, thou wert to ask again; the very
closing the eyes or not, whence is it ? then
having heard that it was of ourselves, and
our will, thou wert to seek again another
cause.

For evil is nothing else than disobedience
to God. "Whence then," one may say,
" did man find this ?" " Why, was it a task


to find this? I pray thee." "Nay, neither
do I say this, that this thing is difficult; but
whence became he desirous to disobey."
" From remissness. For having power for
either, he inclined rather to this."

But if thou art perplexed yet and dizzy at
hearing this, I will ask thee nothing difficult
nor involved, but a simple and plain ques-
tion. Hast thou become some time bad ?
and hast thou become some time also good ?
What I mean, is like this. Didst thou pre-
vail some time over passion, and wast thou
taken again by passion ? Has thou been
overtaken by drunkenness, and hast thou
prevailed over drunkenness ? Wast thou once
moved to wrath, and again not moved to
wrath ? Didst thou overlook a poor man,
and not overlook him ? Didst thou commit
whoredom once ? and didst thou become
chaste again ? Whence then are all these
things ? tell me, whence ? Nay if thou thy-
self do not tell, I will say. Because at one
time thou didst restrain thyself and strive,
but after that thou becamest remiss and care-
less. For to those that are desperate, and
are continually in wickedness, and are in a
state of senselessness, and are mad, and who
are not willing so much as to hear what will
amend them, I will not even discourse of self
restraint; but to them that have been some-
times in the one, and sometimes in the other,
I will gladly speak. Didst thou once take by
violence the things that belonged not to thee;
and after this, subdued by pity, didst impart
even of thine unto him that was in need ?
Whence then this change ? Is it not quite
plain it is from the mind, and the choice of
will?

It is quite plain, and there is no one who
would not say this. Wherefore I entreat you
to be in earnest, and to cleave to virtue, and
ye will have no need of these questions. For
our evils are mere names, if we be willing.
Inquire not then whence are evils, neither
perplex thyself; but having found that they
are from remissness only, flee the evil deeds.

And if any one should say, that these
things come not from us; whenever thou seest
liim angry with his servants, and provoked
with his wife, and blaming a child, and con-
demning them who injure him, say to him,
how then saidst thou, that evils come not
from us ? For if they be not from us, where-
fore dost thou find fault? Say agam; is it of
thyself thou revilest, and insultest? For if it
be not of thyself, let no man be angry with
thee; but if it be of thyself, of thyself and of
thy remissness are thy evil deeds.

But what? thinkest thou there are some
good men ? For if indeed no man is good.


Homily LIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


367


whence hast thou this word ? whence are
])raises ? But if there are good men, it is
quite plain that they will also reprove the
bad. Yet if no one is voluntarily wicked, nor
of himself, the good will be found to be un-
justly reproving the bad, and they themselves
too will be in this way bad again. For what
can be worse than to subject the guiltless to
accusations ? But if they continue in our es-
timation good men, though reproving, and
this especially is a proof of their goodness,
even to the very fools it is hereby plain, that
no one is ever by necessity bad.

But if after all this thou wouldest still in-
quire, whence are evils? I would say, from
remissness, from idleness, from keeping com-
pany with the bad, from contempt of virtue;
hence are both the evils themselves, and the
fact that some inquire, whence are the evils.
Since of them surely who do right no one
inquires about these things, of them that are
purposed to live equitably and temperately;
but they, who dare to commit wicked acts,
and wish to devise some foolish comfort' to
themselves by these discussions, do weave
spiders' webs.

But let us tear these in pieces not by our
words only, but by our deeds too. For
neither are these things of necessity. For if
tiiey were of necessity. He would not have
said, " Woe to the man, by whom the offense
cometh."= For those only doth he bewail,
who are wicked by their choice.

And if He saith " by whom," ^ marvel not.
For not as though another were bringing in
it by him, doth He say this, but viewing him
as himself causing the whole. For the Scrip-
ture is wont to say, "by whom,*' for "of
whom; " * as when it saith, " I have gotten a
man by God, "^ putting not the second cause,
but the first; and again, " Is not the interpre-
tation of them by God," *-and, " God is faitii-
ful, by whom ye are called unto the fellow-
ship of His Son."'

4. And that thou mayest learn that it is
not of necessity, hear also what follows. For
after bew.-iiling them, He saith, " If thy hand,
or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and
cast tiiem from tiiec: for it is better for thee
to enter into life lialt or maimed, rather than
having two hands or feet to be cast into the
fire. And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck
It out; it is better for thee to enter into life
witii one eye, than having two eyes to be cast
into the furnace of fire;"* not saying these

« napaiivSiay, Field. ' Mult, xviii, 7. lit 06.

4 [4i" of and ix))' oi, i. f., "tlirtiiiKh whom" for "by whom,"
the latter nhranr referring to the |>rr««iiiul iiKent. k ]

5 (icn. IV. J, LXX. [iia Tou 0<oii.] ''(Jrn. xl. 8.

7 I Cor. i. y.

8 Matt, xviii. 8, q. [The variations from the received iixt ap-
pear in the Knylisli rcndcriiitj »» wivrn above. -K.]


things of limbs; far from it; but of friends,
of relations, whom we regard in the rank of
necessary members. Tliis He had both said
further back, and now He saith it. For
nothing is so hurtful as bad company. For
what things compulsion cannot, friendship can
often effect, both for hurt, and for profit.
Wherefore with much earnestness He com-
mands us to cut off them that hurt us, in-
timating these that bring the offenses.

Seest thou how He hath put away the mis-
chief that would result from the offenses ?
By foretelling that there surely will be
offenses, so that they might find no one in a
state of carelessness, but that looking for
them men might be watchful. By showing
the evils to be great (for He would not have
said without purpose, " Woe to the world be-
cause of the offenses," but to show that great
is the mischief therefrom), by lamenting
again in stronger terms over him that brings
them in. For the saying, " But woe to that
man," was that of one showing that great was
the punishment, but not this only, but also
by the comparison whicli He added He in-
creased the fear.

Then He is not satisfied with these things,
but He showeth also the way, by which one
may avoid the offenses.

But what is this? The wicked, saith He,
though they be exceeding dear friends to
thee, cut off from thy friendship.

And He giveth a reason that cannot be
gainsaid. For if they continue friends, thou
wilt not gain them, but thou wilt lose thyself
besides; but if thou shouldest cut them off,
thine own salvation at least thou wilt gain.
So that if any one's friendship harms thee,
cut it off from thee. For if of our own mem-
bers we often cut off many, when they are
both in an incurable state, and are ruining
the rest, much more ought one to do this in
the case of friends.

But if evils were by nature, superfluous
were all this admonition and advice, super-
fluous the jirecaiition by the means that have
been mentioned. But if it be not superflu-
ous, as surely it is not superfluous, it is cpiite
clear that wickedness is of the will.'

" Take heed that ) o despise not one of
these little ones; for I say unto you, that
their angels do always behold the face of my
Father wliich is in Heaven." ''

He c.iUeth little ones not tiiem that are
really little, but them that are so esteemed
by tlie multitude, the jioor, the olijects of
contempt, tlie unknown (for how should he
be little who is ecpial in value to tlie whole


V YiMUMtt.


"■ Matt, xviii. 10. [R. V., " Sec," etc.]


368


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LIX.


world; how should he be little, who is dear to
God?); but them who in the imagination of
the multitude are so esteemed.

And He speaks not of many only, but even
of one, even by this again warding off the
hurt of the many offenses. For even as to
flee the wicked, so also to honor the good,
hath very great gain, and would be a twofold
security to him who gives heed, the one by
rooting out the friendships with them that
offend, the other from regarding these saints
with respect and honor.

Then in another way also He makes them
objects of reverence, saying, " That their
angels do always behold the face of my
Father which is in Heaven."

Hence it is evident, that the saints have
angels, or even all men. For the apostle too
saith of the woman, " That she ought to have
power on her head because of the angels." '
And Moses, '* He set the bounds of the
nations according to the number of the
angels" of God.*' ^

But here He is discoursing not of angels
only, but rather of angels that are greater
than others. But when He saith, " The face
of my Father,"' He means nothing else than
their fuller confidence, and their great honor.

" For the Son of Man is come to save that
which was lost.''''

Again, He is putting another reason
stronger than the former, and connects with it
a parable, by which He brings in the Father
also as desiring these things. " For how
think ye?" saith He; "If a man have an
hundred sheep, and one of them be gone
astray, doth he not leave the ninety and nine,
and goeth into the mountains, and seeketh
that which is gone astray ? And if so be that
he find it,^ he rejoiceth over it more than
over the ninety and nine, which went not
astray. Even so it is not will before your
Father,'^ that one of these little ones should
perish. "7

Seest thou by how many things He is urg-
ing to the care of our mean brethren. Say
not then, " Such a one is a blacksmith, a
shoemaker, he is a ploughman, he is a fool,"
and so despise him. For in order that thou
shouldest not feel this, see by how many
motives He persuades thee to practise mode-
ration, and presses thee into a care for these.

He set a little child, and saith, " Be ye as

' I Cor. xi. lo.

2 A. V. " Children of Israel," al. " Sons of God," and hence
"Angels."

3 Deut. xxxii. 8.

4 Matt, xviii. ii. [This verse, which is passed over without
comment, is omitted in Matthew by some of the best mss. and
fathers. Probably taken from Luke xi.\. lo. — R.]

5 [" Verily I say unto you," omitted.]

^ [R.V., margin, Greek : " a thing willed before your Father."]
7 ftlatt. xviii. 12-14.


little children." And, " Whosoever receiveth
such a little child receiveth me;" and,
" Wnosoever shall offend," shall suffer the
utmost penalties. And He was not even sat-
isfied with the comparison of the "mill-
stone," but added also His " woe," and com-
manded us to cut off such, though they be in
the place of hands and eyes to us. And by
the angels again that are entrusted with these
same mean brethren. He makes them objects
of veneration, and from His own will and
passion (for when He said, " The Son of
Man is come to save that which was lost,''
He signifies even the cross, like as Paul
saith, speaking of a brother, "For whom
Christ died ") ; and from the Father, for that
neither to Him doth it seem good that one
should perish; and from common custom,
because the shepherd leaves them that are
safe, and seeks what is lost; and when he
hath found what was gone astray, he is greatly
delighted at the finding and the saving of
this.

5. If then God thus rejoices over the little
one that is found, how dost thou despise them
that are the objects of God's earnest care,
when one ought to give up even one's very
life for one of these little ones ? But is he
weak and mean ? Therefore for this very
cause most of all, one ought to do everything
in order to preserve him. For even He
Himself left the ninety and nine sheep, and
went after this, and the safety of so many
availed not to throw into the shade the loss
of one. But Luke saith, that He even
brought it on his shoulders, and that " There
was greater joy over one sinner that repent-
eth, than over ninety and nine just persons "^
And from His forsaking those that were saved
for it, and from His taking more pleasure in
this one. He showed His earnestness about it
to be great.

Let us not then be careless about such
souls as these. For all these things are said
for this object. For by threatening, that he
who has not become a little child should not
so much as at all set foot in the Heavens, and
speaking of "the millstone," He hath
brought down the haughtiness of the boastful;
for nothing is so hostile to love as pride; and
by saying, "It must needs be that offenses
come," He made them to be wakeful: and by
adding, " Woe unto him by whom the offense
Cometh,'' He hath caused each to endeavor
that it be not by him. And while by com-
manding to cut off them that offend He made
salvation easy; by enjoining not to despise
them, and not merely enjoining, but with


Luke .\v, 7.


Homily LIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


169


earnestness (for "take heed," saith He, '
"that ye despise not one of these Httle
ones "), and by saying, " Their angels behold
the face of my Father," and, " For this end
am I come," and "my Father willeth this,"
He hath made those who should take care of
them more diligent.

Seest thou what a wall He hath set around
them, and what earnest care He taketh of
them that are contemptible and perishing, at
once threatening incurable ills to them that
make them fall, and promising great blessings
to them that wait upon them, and take care
of them, and bringing an example from Him-
self again and from the Father?

Him let us also imitate, refusing none of
the tasks that seem lowly and troublesome
for our brethren's sake; but though we have
to do service, though he be small, though he
be mean for whom this is done, though the
work be laborious, though we must pass over
mountains and precipices, let all things be
held endurable for the salvation of our
brother. For a soul is an object of such
earnest care to God, that " He spared not
His own Son." '

Wherefore I entreat, when morning hath
appeared, straightway as we come out of our
house, let us have this one object in view,
this earnest care above all, to rescue him that
is in danger; I do not mean this danger only
that is known by sense, for this is not danger
at all, but the danger of the soul, that which
is brought upon men by the devil.

For the merciiant too, to increase his
wealth, crosses the sea; and the artisan, to
add to his substance, doeth all things. Let
us also then not be satisfied with our own
salvation only, since else we destroy even
this. For in a war too, and in an engage-
ment, the soldier who is looking to this only
how he may save himself by flight, destroys
the rest also with himself; much as on the
other hand the noble-minded one, and he who
stands in arms in defense of the others, with
the others preserves himself also. Since then
our state too is a war, and of all wars the bit-
terest, and an engagement and a battle, even
as our King commanded us, so let us set
ourselves in array in the engagement, prepared
for slaughter, and blood, and murders, look-
ing to salvation in behalf of all, and cheering
them that stand, and raising up them tliat are
down. For indeed many of our brethren lie
fallen in this conflict, having wounds, wallow-
ing in blooil, nnd there is none to lieal, not
any one of the people, not a priest, no one
else, no one to stand by, no friend, no

' Rom. viii. 33.
24


brother, but we look every man to his own
things.

By reason of this we maim our own inter-
ests also. For the greatest confidence and
means of approval is the not looking to our
own things.

Therefore I say, are we weak and easy to
be overcome both by men, and by the devil,
because we seek the opposite to this, and
lock not our shields one with another, neither
are fortified with godly love, but seek for
ourselves other motives of friendship, some
from relationship, some from long acquaint-
ance, some from community of interest, some
from neighborhood; and from every cause
rather are we friends, than from godliness,
when one's friendships ought to be formed
upon this only. But now the contrary is
done; with Jews and with Greeks = we some-
times become friends, rather than with the
children of the church.

6. Yes, saith he, because the one is worth-
less, but the other kind and gentle. What
sayest thou ? Dost thou call thy brother
worthless, who art commanded not to call him
so much as Raca ? And art thou not
ashamed, neither dost thou blush, at e.xposing
thy brother, thy fellow member, him that
hath shared in the same birth with thee, that
hath partaken of the same table ?

But if thou hast any brother after the flesh,
if he should perpetrate ten thousand evil
deeds, thou laborest to conceal him, and ac-
countest thyself also to partake of the shame,
when he is disgraced; but as to tliy spiritual
brother, when thou oughtest to free iiim from
calumny, thou dost rather encompass him
with ten thousand charges against him ?

" Why he is worthless and insufferable,"
thou mayest say. Nay then for tnis reason
become his friend, that thou mayest put ;in
end to his being such a one, that tliou mayest
convert him, that thou mayest lead him back
to virtue. —"But he obeys not," thou wilt
say, " neither doth lie bear advice." — Whence
knowest thou it? What, hast thou ailinon-
ished him, anil attempted to amend him ? —
" I have admonished him often," thou wilt
say. How many times ? — Oftentimes, both
once, and a second time. — Oli ! Is this
often ? Why, if thou hatlst done this
throughout all the time, oughtest thou to
grow wt-.iry, and to give it up? Seest thou
not how Goil is always admonishing us, by
the prophets, by the apostles, by the evangel-
ists ? What then? have we performed all?
and have we been obedient in all things ? By
no means. Did He then cease ailmonishing ?

=> /. /. Hcu(hcn>.


370


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LIX.


Did He hold His peace ? Doth He not say
each day, "Ye cannot serve God, and mam-
mon''' and with many, the superfluity and
the tyranny of wealth yet increases ? Doth
He not cry aloud each day, " Forgive, and
ye shall have forgiveness,''^ and we become
wild beasts more and more ? Doth He not
continually admonish to restrain desire, and to
keep the mastery over wicked lust, and many
wallow worse than swine in this sin ? But
nevertheless, He ceases not speaking.

Wherefore then do we not consider these
things with ourselves, and say that even with
us God reasons, and abstains not from doing
this, although we disobey Him in many
things ?

Therefore He said that, *' Few are the
saved. '^ 3 Yov if virtue in ourselves suffices
not for our salvation, but we must take with
us others too when we depart; when we have
saved neither ourselves, nor others, what
shall we suffer ? Whence shall we have any
more a hope of salvation ?

But why do I blame for these things, when
not even of them that dwell with us do we
take any account, of wife, and children, and
servants, but we have care of one thing in-
stead of another, like drunken men, that our
servants may be more in number, and may
serve us with much diligence, and that our
children may receive from us a large inheri-
tance, and that our wife may have ornaments
of gold, and costly garments, and wealth;
and we care not at all for themselves, but for
the things that belong to them. For neither
do we care for our own wife, nor provide for
her, but for the things that belong to the
wife; neither for the child, but for the things
of the child.

And we do the same as if any one seeing a
house in a bad state, and the walls giving way,
were to neglect to raise up these, and to make
up great fences round it without; or when a
body was diseased, were not to take care of
this, but were to weave for it gilded garments;
or when the mistress was ill, were to give
heed to the maidservants, and the looms, and
the vessels in the house, and mind other
things, leaving her to lie and moan.

For this is done even now, and when our
soul is in evil and wretched case, and angry,
and reviling, and lusting wrongly, and full of
vainglory, and at strife, and dragged down
to the earth, and torn by so many wild beasts,
we neglect to drive away the passions from
her, and are careful about house and serv-
ants. And while if a bear has escaped by
stealth, we shut up our houses, and run


» Matt. vi. 24.


2 Luke vi. 37. 3 See Luke xiii. 23.


along by the narrow passages, so as not to
fall in with the wild beast; now while not one
wild beast, but many such thoughts are tear-
ing in pieces the soul, we have not so much
as a feeling of it. And m the city we take so
much care, as to shut up the wild beasts in
solitary places and in cages, and neither at
the senate house of the city, nor at the courts
of justice, nor at the king's palace, but far
off somewhere at a distance do we keep them
chained; but in the case of the soul, where
the senate house is, where the King's palace,
where the court of justice is, the wild beasts
are let loose, crying and making a tumult
about the mind itself and the royal throne.
Therefore all things are turned upside
down, and all is full of disturbance, the
things within, the things without, and we are
in nothing different from a city thrown into
confusion from being overrun by barbarians;
and what takes place in us is as though a
serpent were setting on a brood of sparrows,
and the sparrows, with their feeble cries, were
flying about every way affrighted, and full of
trouble, without having any place whither to
go and end their consternation.

7. Wherefore I entreat, let us kill the ser-
pent, let us shut up the wild beasts, let us
stifle them, let us slay them, and these
wicked thoughts let us give over to the sword
of the Spirit, lest the prophet threaten us also
with such things as he threatened Judea,
that " The wild asses shall dance there, and
porcupines, and serpents.'*'*

For there are, there are even men worse
than wild asses, living as it were in the wilder-
ness, and kicking; yea the more part of the
youth amongst us is like this. For indeed
having wild lusts they thus leap, they kick,
going about unbridled, and spend their dili-
gence on no becoming object.

And the fathers are to blame, who while
they constrain the horsebreakers to discipline
their horses with much atiention, and suffer
not the youth of the colt to go on long un-
tamed, but put upon it both a rein, and all
the rest, from the beginning; but their own
young ones they overlook, going about for
a long season unbridled, and without temper-
ance; disgracing themselves, by fornications,
and gamings, and continuings in the wicked
theatres, when they ought before fornication
to give him to a wife, to a wife chaste, and
highly endued with wisdom; for she will both
bring off her husband from his most dis-
orderly course of life, and will be instead of
a rein to the colt.


4 Isaiah xiii. 21, 22. [The word Spa.KovTe<;, here rendered
"serpents," is not found in the i.xx ; nor does the prophecy-
refer to Judsea, but to Babylon. — R.]


Homily LIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


0/


For indeed fornications and adulteries come
not from any other cause, than from young-
men's being unrestrained. For if he have a
prudent wife, he will take care of house antl
honor and character. "But he is young,"
you say. I know it too. For if Isaac was
forty years old when he took his bride, pass-
ing all that time of his life in virginity, much
more ought young men under grace to prac-
tise this self-restraint. But oh what grief !
Ye do not endure to take care of their chas-
tity, but ye overlook their disgracing, defiling
themselves, becoming accursed; as though ye
knew not that the profit of marriage is to pre-
serve the body pure, and if this be not so,
there is no advantage of marriage. But ye
do the contrary; when they are filled with
countless stains, then ye bring them to mar-
riage without purpose and without fruit.

"Why I must wait," thou wilt say, "that
he may become approved, that he may dis-
tinguish himself in the affairs of the state;"
but of the soul ye have no consideration, but
ye overlook it as a cast-away. For this rea-
son all things are full of confusion, and dis-
order, and trouble, because this is made a
secondary matter, because necessary things
are neglected, but the unimportant obtain
much forethought.

Knowest thou not, that thou canst do no
such kindness to the youth, as to keep him
pure from whorish uncleannness ' For noth-
ing is equal to the soul. Because, " What is
a man profited," saith He, " if he shall gain
the whole world, but lose his own soul."'
But because the love of money hath over-
turned and cast down all, and hath thrust
aside the strict fear of God, having seized
upon the souls of men. like some rebel chief
upon a citadel; therefore we are careless both
of our children's salvation, and of our own,
looking to one object only, that having be-
come wealthier, we may leave riches to others,
and these again to others after them, and
they that follow these to their posterity, be-
coming rather a kind of passers on of our
possessions and of our money, i)ut not mas-
ters.


' Matt. xvi. a6.


Hence great is our folly; hence the free are
less esteemed than the slaves. For slaves
we reprove, if not for their sake, yet for our
own; but the free enjoy not the benefit even
of this care, but are more vile in our estima-
tion than these slaves. And why do I say,
than our slaves ? For our children are less
esteemed than cattle; and we take care of
horses and asses rather than of children.
And should one have a mule, great is his
anxiety to find the best groom, and not one
either harsh, or dishonest, or drunken, or
ignorant of his art; but if we have set a
tutor = over a cnild's soul, we take at once,
and at random, whoever comes in our way.
And yet than this art there is not another
greater. For what is equal to training the
soul, and. forming the mind of one that is
young? For he that hath this art, ought to
be more exactly observant than any painter
and any sculptor.^

But we take no account of this, but look
to one thing only, that he may be trained as
to his tongue. And to this again we have
directed our endeavors for money's sake.
For not that he may be able to speak, but
that he may get money, does he learn speak-
ing; since if it were possible to grow rich
even without this, we should have no care
even for this.

Seest thou how great is the tyranny of
riches ? how it has seized upon all things, and
having bound them like some slaves or cattle,
drags them where it will ?

But what are we advantaged by such accu-
sations against it ? For we indeed shoot at it
in words, but it jirevails over us in deeds.
Nevertheless, not even so shall we cease to
shoot at it with words from our tongue. For
if any advance is made, both we arc gainers
and you; but if you continue in the same
things, all our part at least hath been per-
formed.

But may God both deliver you from tiiis
disease, and cause us to glory in you, for to
Him be glory, and dominion, world without
eiul. Amen.


' irniXavoj'^'di-. a inan-srrviiiit who tfxik care of boys.
I [lii'ipiai'ToiroioO, " iiiaktT of statuary."]


172


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LX.


HOMILY LX.


Matt. XVIII. 15.


"If thy brother shall trespass- against thee, go and tell him his fault = between thee and
him alone. If he shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother."


For, since He had used vehement language
against them that cause offense, and on every
hand had moved them to fear; in order that
the offended might not in this way on the
other hand become supine, neither supposing
all to be cast upon others, should be led on
to another vice, soften in themselves, and
desiring to be humored in everything, and run
upon the shoal of pride; seest thou how He
again checks them also, and commands the
telling of the faults to be between the two
alone, lest by the testimony of the many he
should render his accusation heavier, and the
other, become excited to opposition, should
continue incorrigible.

Wherefore He saith, "Between thee and
him alone," and, " If he shall hear thee, thou
hast gained thy brother." What is, "If he
shall hear thee ? " If he shall condemn him-
self, if he shall be persuaded that he has done
wrong.

" Thou hast gained thy brother." He did
not say. Thou hast a sufficient revenge, but,
"Thou hast gained thy brother," to show
that there is a common loss from the enmity.
For He said not, " He hath gained himself
only," but, "thou too hast gained him,"
whereby He showed that both the one and
the other were losers before this, the one of
his brother, the other of his own salvation.

This, when He sat on the mount also, He
advised; at one time bringing him who has
given the pain to him that had been pained,
and saying, " Be reconciled to thy brother," ^
and at another commanding him that had
been wronged to forgive his neighbor. For
He taught men to say, "Forgive us our
debts, like as we forgive our debtors." "

But here He is devising another mode.
For not him that gave the pain, doth He
noiv call jipon,^ but him that was pained He
brings to this one. For because this who
hath done the wrong would not easily come


' [The form of the Greek verb here is peculiar to the text of
the Homily. R. V., "sin," for " trespass."— R.]

2 Lit. " reprove" or " convict him."

3 Matt. v. 24. [But the citation is fuller : " If thou art stand-
ing by the altar and rememberest that thy brother hath aught
against thee, go away, be reconciled," etc. — R.]

4 Matt. vi. 12. 5 [SuppUed by translator.]


to make excuse, out of shame, and confusion
of face, He draws that other to him, and
not merely so, but in such way as also to cor-
rect what hath been done. And He saith
not, "Accuse," nor "Charge him," nor
" Demand satisfaction, and an account," bu-,
" Tell him of his fault," " saith He. For he
is held in a kind of stupor through anger and
shame with which he is intoxicated; and thou,
who art in health, must go thy way to him
that is ill, and make the tribunal private, and
the remedy such as may be readily received.
For to say, " Tell him of his fault," is noth-
ing else than " Remind him of his error," tell
him what thou hast suffered at his hand,
which very thing, if it be done as it ought, is
the part of one making excuse for him, and
drawing him over earnestly to a reconcilia-
tion.

What then, if he should disobey, and be
disposed to abide in hardness ? " Take with
thyself yet one or two, that in the mouth of
two witnesses every word may be estab-
lished." ^ For the more he is shameless,
and bold, the more ought we to be active for
his cure, not in anger and indignation. For
the physician in like manner, when he sees
the malady obstinate, doth not give up nor
grow impatient, but then makes the more
preparation; which He commands us to do
in this case too.

For since thou appearedst to be too weak
alone, make thyself more powerful by this
addition. For surely the two are sufficient
to convict him that hath sinned. Seest thou
how He seeketh not the good of him that hath
been pained only, but of him also that hath
given the pain. For the person injured is
this one who is taken captive by his passion,
he it is that is diseased, and weak, and in-
firm. Wherefore He often sends the other to
this one, now alone, and now with others;
but if he continue in it, even with the church.
For, "Tell it," saith He, " to the Church." «


6 Or, " Convict him."

7 Matt, xviii. i6. [The words "or three" are omitted in the
Homily here, but not below. In both cases the form of the verb
is changed. — R.]

8 Matt, xviii. 17.


Homily LX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


For if He were seeking this one's advantage
only, He would not have commanded to
pardon, seventy times seven, one repenting.
He would not so often have set so many over
him to correct his passion; but if he had re-
mained incorrigible after the first conference,
would have let him be; but now once, and
twice, and thrice, He commands to attempt
his cure, and now alone and now with two,
now with more.

Wherefore, with respect to them that are
without He saith no such thing, but, " If any
one smite thee," He saith, "on thy right
cheek, turn to him the other also," ' but here
not in such wise. For what Paul meaneth,
saying, "What have I to do to judge them
also that are without ?" ' but the brethren he
commands both to tell of their faults, and to
avoid them, and to cut them off, not being
obedient, that they may be ashamed; this
Himself also doeth here, making these la\vs
about the brethren; and He sets three ^ over
him for teachers and judges, to teach him
the things that are done at the time of his
drunkenness. For though it be himself that
hath said and done all those unreasonable
things, yet he will need others to teach him
this, like as the drunken man. For anger
and sin is a more frantic thing* than any
drunkenness, and puts the soul in greater
distraction.

Who, for instance, was wiser than David ?
Yet for all that, when he had sinned he per-
ceived it not, his lust keeping in subjection
all his reasoning powers, and like some
smoke filling his soul. Therefore he stood
in need of a lantern from the prophet, and of
words calling to his mind what he had done.
Wherefore here also He brings these to him
that hath sinned, to reason with him about
the things lie had done.

2. P.ut for what reason doth He command
this one to tell him of his fault, and not an-
other? Because this man he would endure
more quietly, this, wiio hath been wronged,
who hath been pained, who hath been de-
spitefully used. For one ,doth not bear in
the same way being told by anottier of one's
fault concerning him that halh been insulted,
as by the insulted person himself, especially
when this i^erson is alone convicting him.
For when he who should demand justice
against him, even this one appears to be car-
ing for his salvation, this will have more
j)ower than anything in tiic world to shame
him.


» Matt. V. 39. 3 I Cor. v. u.

■1 (( )xford edition, " these," miiiprint, since the (IrrcL «iir<l i*
Tp«t?.— K.]

* iKtjrariKtjjTtpoi'.


Seest thou how this is done not for the sake
of just punishment, but of amendment?
Therefore He doth not at once command to
take with hirr the two, but when himself hath
failed; and not even then dotn He send forth
a multitude against him; but makes the ad-
dition no further tiian two, or even one; but
when he has contemned these too, then and
not till then He brings him out to the church.

So much earnestness doth He show, that
our neighbor's sins be not exposed by us.
And indeed He might have commanded this
from the first, but that this might not be, He
did not command it, but after a first and
second admonition He appoints this.

But what is, " In the mouth of two or three
witnesses every word shall be established?"
Thou hast a sufficient testimony. His mean-
ing is, that thou hast done all thy part, that
thou hast left undone none of the things
which it pertained to thee to do.

" But if he shall neglect to hear them also,
tell it to the church,'' that is, to the rulers of
it; " but if he neglect to hear the church, let
him be to thee as an heathen man and a pub-
lican." For after this such a one is incurably
diseased.

But mark thou, I pray thee, how every-
where He putteth the publican for an example
of the greatest wickedness. For above too
He saith, " Do not even the publicans the
same ? " '= And further on again, " Even the
publicans and the harlots shall go before you
into the Kingdom of Heaven,"* that is, they
who are utterly reprobated and condemned.
Let them hearken, who are rushing upon un-
just gains, who are counting up usuries upon
usuries.

But why did He set him with these ? To
soothe the person wronged, and to alarm him.
Is this only then the i')unishment ? Nay, but
hear also what follows. " \Vhatsoever ye
shall bintl on earth shall be bound in
Heaven."' And He did not say to the ruler
of the church, " Bind such a man," but, " If
thou bind," committing the whole matter to
the person himself, who is aggrieved, and the
bonds abide indissoluble. Therefore he will
suffer the utmost ills; but not he who hath
brought him to account is to blame, but he
who hath not been willing to be persuadetl.

Seest thou how He hath bound him down
with twofold constraint, both by the ven-
geance iiere, and by the punishment here-
after? But these things hath He tlireateneil,
that these circumstances may not arise, but
that fearing, at once the being cast out of the

i Malt. V. ^fi. * Mutt. xxi. 31.

7 Mutt, xviii. iH. [R. v., "What tliii)K« »o.\rr," etc. But
the kuiKulur prunuiin is sulntiiiuiril in the ic.\( o( the ilumily. — K.]


374


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LX.


church, and the danger from the bond, and
the being bound in Heaven, he may become
more gentle. And knowing these things, if
not at the beginning, at any rate in the mul-
titude of the tribunals he will put off his
anger. Wherefore, I tell you. He hath set
over him a first, and a second, and a third
court,' so that though he should neglect to
hear the first, he may yield to the second;
and even if he should reject that, he may fear
the third; and though he should make no
account of this, he may be dismayed at the
vengeance to come, and at the sentence and
judgment to proceed from God.

"And again I say unto you, that if two of
you shall agree on earth as touching anything
that they shall ask, it shall be done for them
of my Father which is in Heaven. For
where two or three are gathered together in
my name, there am I in the midst of them." ^

Seest thou how by another motive also He
puts down our enmities, and takes away our
petty dissensions, 3 and draws us one to an-
other, and this not from the punishment only
which hath been mentioned, but also from
the good things which spring from charity ?
For having denounced those threats against
contentiousness, He putteth here the great
rewards of concord, if at least they who are
of one accord do even- prevail with the Father,
as touching the things they ask, and have
Christ in the midst of them.

"Are there then indeed nowhere two of one
accord?" Nay, in many places, perchance
even everywhere. " How then do they not
obtain all things ? " Because many are the
causes of their failing. For either they
often ask things inexpedient. And why mar-
vellest thou, if this is the case with some
others, whereas it was so even with Paul,
when he heard. " My grace is sufficient for
thee; for my strength is perfected in weak-
ness." * Or they are unworthy to be reckoned
with them that heard these words, and con-
tribute not their own part, but He seeks for
such as are like them; therefore He saith
" of you," of the virtuous, of them that show
forth an angelic rule of life.= Or they pray
against them that have aggrieved them, seek-
ing for redress and vengeance; and this kind
of thing is forbidden, for, " Pray," saith He,
" for your enemies." ^ Or having sins unre-
pented they ask mercy, which thing it is im-
possible to receive, not only if themselves ask
it, but although others having much confi-


1 [A clause is omitted here, " and doth not straightway cut
him off."— R.]

2 Matt, xviii. 19, 20. 3 ju.iKpo>/;iixi'a9.

4 2 Cor. xii. 9. [R. V., " for tny power is made perfect in
weakness.']

5 TToAtTCtav. * Matt. v. 44.


dence towards God entreat for them, like as
even Jeremiah praying for the Jews did hear,
" Pray not thou for this people, because I will
not hear thee."''

But if all things are there, and thou ask
things expedient, and contribute all thine
own part, and exhibit an apostolical life, and
have concord and love towards thy neighbor,
thou wilt obtain on thy entreaty; for the
Lord is loving towards man.

3. Then because He had said, " Of my
Father," in order that He might show that it
is Himself that giveth, and not He who
begat Him only. He added, "For whereso-
ever two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them."

What then ? are there not two or three
gathered together in His name? There are
indeed, but rarely. For not merely of the
assembling doth He speak, neither this doth
He require only; but most surely, as I said
before also, the rest of virtue too together
with this, and besides, even this itself He re-
quires with great strictness. For what He
saith is like this, " If any holds me the prin-
cipal ground of his love to his neighbors, I
will be with Him, if he be a virtuous man in
other respects."

But now we see the more part having other
motives of friendship. For one loves, be-
cause he is loved, another because he hath
been honored, a third because such a one
has been useful to him in some other worldly
matter, a fourth for some other like cause;
but for Christ's sake it is a difficult thing to
find any one loving his neighbor sincerely,
and as he ought to love him. For the more
part are bound one to another by their
worldly affairs. But Paul did not love thus,
but for Christ's sake; wherefore even when
not loved in such wise as he loved, he did not
cease his love, because he had planted a
strong root of his affection; but not so our
present state, but on inquiry we shall find
with most men anything likely to produce
friendship rather than this. And if any one
bestowed on me power in so great a multitude
to make this inquiry, I would show the more
part bound one to another by worldly motives.

And this is evident from the causes that
work enmity. For because they are bound
one to another by these temporal ^ motives,
therefore they are neither fervent towards
one aiiother, nor constant, but insult, and
loss of money, and envy, and love of vain-
glory, and every such thing coming upon
them, severs the love-tie. For it finds not
the root spiritual. Since if indeed it were


7 Jer. xi, 14.


^ eiTiKrjptau,


Homily LXI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


v)/5


such, no worldly thing would dissolve things
spiritual. For love for Christ's sake is firm,
and not to be broken, and impregnable, and
nothing can tear it asunder; not calumnies,
not dangers, not death, no other thing of this
kind. For though he suffer ten thousand
things, who thus loves; looking to the ground
of his love, he will not desist. For he who
loves because of being loved, should he meet
with anything painful, puts an end to his
love; but he who is bound by this, will never
desist.

Wherefore Paul also said, " Charity never


faileth.


For what hast thou to say ? That


when honored he insults ? that receiving ben-
efits he was minded to slay thee? But even
this works upon thee to love more, if thou
lovest for Christ's sake. For what things are
in the rest subversive of love, these here be-
come apt to produce it. How ? First, be-
cause such a one is to thee a cause of rewards;
secondly, because he that is so disposed
stands in need of more succor, and much
attention. Therefore I say, he who thus
loves inquires not about race, nor country,
nor wealth, nor his love to himself, nor any
other such matter, but though he be hated,


• I Cor. xiii. 8. [R. V., " Ix)ve never faileth." The Greek
word is rendered " love" throughout this part of the Homily. — R.]


though he be insulted, though he be slain,
continues to love, having as a sufficient
ground for love, Christ; wherefore also he
stands steadfast, firm, not to be overthrown,
looking unto Him.

For Christ too so loved his enemies, having
loved the obstinate, the injurious, the blas-
phemers, them that hated Him, them that
would not so much as see Him; them that
were preferring wood and stones to Him, and
with the highest love beyond which one can-
not find another. " For greater love hath no
m.an than this," He saith, " that one lay
down his life for his friends." =

And those even that crucified Him, and
acted in so many instances with contumely
against Him, see how He continues to treat
with kindness. For even to His Father He
speaks for them, saying, " Forgive them, for
they know not what they do." ^ And He
sent His disciples moreover, after these
things, unto them.

This love then let us also imitate, unto this
let us look, that ]:»eing followers of Christ, we
may attain both unto the good things here,
and unto those to come, by the grace and
love towards man of our Lord Jesus Clirist,
to whom be glory and might world without
end. Amen.


2 John XV. 13.


3 Luke xjdii. 34.


HOMILY LXI.


Matt. XVHL 21,


" Then came Peter to Him, and said. Lord, how oft shall my brother sin against me, and I
forgive him? till seven times? Jesus saith unto him, I say not unto thee, Until seven
times, but, Until seventy times seven."'


Pktf.r supposed he was saying something
great, wherefore also as aiming at greatness
he added, "Until seven times'" For this
thing, saith he, which Thou hast commanded
to do, how often shall I do?" I'Or if lie for-
ever sins, but forever when reproved repents,
how often dost thou command us to l)ear
with this man ? For with regard to that
other who repents not, neither acknowledges


' [R. V. miiricin, "seventy time* nnci seven.'" There i« no
difference of rradinK, but one of inier|iretiilii>n. (.'omp, AutfUHtin,
vol. vi., p. 107, .\V<v»;<- ,111,1 l',isl Siifttf {■iithfrs. Chryitoiloni
docs not indicate which view he accepts. — k.]


his own faults. Thou hast set a limit, by say-
ing, " Let him l)e to thee as tlie heathen and
tlie publican;" but to tliis no longer so, but
Thou hast commanded to accept him.

How often then ouglu I to hear with him,
being tokl his faults, and repenting? Is it
enough for seven times?

Wiiat then saitli Christ, the good Cod, who
is loving towards man ? "I sav not unto
thee, until seven times, but, until srventy
times seven," not setting a number here, l)ut
wliat is infinite and perpetual and forever.
For even as ten thousand times signifies


3/6


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXI.


often, so here too. For by saying, "The
barren hath borne seven/' ' the Scripture
means many. So that He hath not limited
the forgiveness by a number, but hath de-
clared that it is to be perpetual and forever.

This at least He indicated by the parable
that is put after. For that He might not
seem to any to enjoin great things and hard
to bear, by saying, "Seventy times seven,"
He added this parable, at once both leading
them on to what He had said, and putting
down him who was priding himself upon this,
and showing the act was not grievous, but
rather very easy. Therefore let me add, He
brought forward His own love to man, that
by the comparison, as He saith, thou might-
est learn, that though thou forgive seventy
times seven, though thou continually pardon
thy neighbor for absolutely all his sins, as a
drop of water to an endless sea, so much, or
rather much more, doth thy love to man come
short in comparison of the boundless good-
ness of God, of which thou standest in need,
for that thou art to be judged, and to give an
account.

Wherefore also He went on to say, " The
Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a certain
king, which would take account of his serv-
ants.^ And when he had begun to reckon,
one was brought unto him, which owed him
ten thousand talents. But forasmuch as he
had not to pay,^ he commanded him to be
sold, and his wife, and his children, and all
that he had."-*

Then after this man had enjoyed the bene-
fit of mercy, he went out, and " took by the
throat his fellow-servant, which owed him an
hundred pence; ''^ and having by these doings
moved his lord, he caused him to cast him
again into prison, until he should pay off the
whole.

Seest thou how great the difference between
sins against man and against God ? As great
as between ten thousand talents, and a hun-
dred pence, or rather even much more. And
this arises both from the difference of the
persons, and the constant succession of our
sins. For when a man looks at us, we stand
off and shrink from sinning: but when God
sees us every day, we do not forbear, but do
and speak all things without fear.

But not hereby alone, but also from the
benefit and from the honor of which we have
partaken, our sins become more grievous.

And if ye are desirous to learn how our
sins against Him are ten thousand talents, or
rather even much more, I will try to show it

■ I Sam. ii. 5. - [R. V., " make a reckoning."]

3 [R. v., " wherewith to pay."]

4 Matt, xviii. 23-21;. [The textual variations are slight. — R.]

5 Matt, xviii. 28.


briefly. But I fear lest to them that are in-
clined to wickedness, and love continually to
sin, I should furnish still greater security, or
should drive the meeker sort to despair, and
they should repeat that saying of the disci-
ples, " who can be saved 7" ^

Nevertheless for all that I will speak, that
I may make those that attend more safe, and
more meek. For they that are incurably
diseased, and past feeling, even without these
words of mine, do not depart from their own
carelessness, and wickedness; and if even
from hence they derive greater occasion for
contempt, the fault is not in what is said, but
in their insensibility; since what is said surely
is enough both to restrain those that attend
to it, and to prick their hearts; and the
meeker sort, when they see on the one hand
the greatness of their sins, and learn also on
the other hand the power of repentance, will
cleave to it the more, wherefore it is needful
to speak.

I will speak then, and will set forth our
sins, both wherein we offend against God, and
wherein against men, and I will set forth not
each person's own, but what are common;
but his own let each one join to them after
that from his conscience.

And I will do this, having first set forth the
good deeds of God to us. What then are His
good deeds? He created us when we were
not, and made all things for our sakes that
are seen, Heaven, sea, air, all that in them
is, living creatures, plants, seeds; for we must
needs speak briefly lor the boundless ocean
of the works. Into us alone of all that are
on earth He breathed a living soul such as we
have. He planted a garden, He gave a help-
meet, He set us over all the brutes. He
crowned us with glory and honor.

After that, when man had been unthankful
towards his benefactor. He vouchsafed unto
him a greater gift.

2. For look not to this only, that He cast
him out of paradise, but mark also the gain
that arose from thence. For after having
cast him out of paradise, and having wrought
those countless good works, and having ac-
complished His various dispensations. He
sent even His own Son for the sake of them
that had been benefited by Him and were
hating Him, and opened Heaven to us, and
unfolded paradise itself, and made us sons,
the enemies, the unthankful.

Wherefore it were even seasonable now to
say, " O the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God ! ''^

And He gave us also a baptism of the re-


6 Matt. xix. 25. [Comp. Mark x. 26.]


7 Rom. xi. 33.


Homily LXI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


0/ /


mission of sins, and a deliverance from ven-
geance, and an inheritance of a kingdom, and
He promised numberless good tilings on our
doing what is right, and stretched forth His
hand, and shed abroad His Spirit into our
hearts.

What then ? After so many and such great
blessings, what ought to be our disposition;
should we indeed, even if each day we died
for Him who so loves us, make due recom-
pense, or rather should we repay the smallest
portion of the debt ? By no means, for more-
over even this again is turned to our advan-
tage.

How then are we disposed, whose disposi-
tion ought to be like this ? Each day we
insult His law. But be ye not angry, if I let
loose my tongue against them that sin, for
not you only will I accuse, but myself also.

Where then would ye that I should begin ?
With the slaves, or with the free ? with them
that serve in the army, or with private per-
sons ? with the rulers, or with the subjects?
with the women, or with the men ? with the
aged men, or with the young ? with what age ?
with what race ? with what rank ? with what
pursuit ?

Would ye then that I should make the
beginning with them that serve as soldiers ?
What sin then do not these commit every
day, insulting, reviling, frantic, making again
of other men's calamities, being like wolves,
never clear from offenses, unless one might
say the sea too was without waves. What
passion doth not trouble them ? what disease
doth not lay siege to their soul ?

For to their equals they show a jealous dis-
position, and they envy, and seek after vain-
glory; and to those that are sul)ject to them,
their disposition is covetous; but to them
that have suits, and run unto them as to a
harl)or, their conduct is that of enemies and
perjured persons. How many robberies are
there with them ! How many frauds ! How
m.iny false accusations, and meannesses !
how many servile flatteries!

Come then, let us apply in each case the
law of Christ. " He that sailh to his !)rother,
Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire."
He that hath looked on a woman to lust after
her, hath already committed adultery with
her.' I'nless one humi)lc himself as the little
child, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven." '

But these even study iiaughtiness, becom-
ing tow.'irds tliem that are subject to them,
and are delivered into their hands, 'ind who
tremble at them, and are afraid of them.


• Matt. V. J2

3 Matt, xviii. 3. [SliKhtly altered.]


» MilCI. V. jH.


more fierce than a wild beast; for Christ's
sake doing nothing, but all things for the
belly, for money, for vainglory.

Can one indeed reckon up in words the
trespass of their actions ? What should one
say of their derisions, their laughter, their
unseasonable discourses, their filthy lan-
guage? But about covetousness one cannot
so much as speak. For like as the monks on
the mountains know not even what covetous-
ness is, so neither do these; but in an oppo-
site way to them. For they indeed, because
of being far removed from the disease, know
not the passion, but these, by reason of being
exceedingly intoxicated with it, have not so
much as a perception how great the evil is.
For this vice hath' so thrust aside virtue and
tyrannises, that it is not accounted so much as
a heavy charge with those madmen.

But will ye, that we leave these, and go to
others of a gentler kind ? Come then, let us
examine the race of workmen and artisans.
For these above all seem to live by honest
labors, and the sweat of their own brow.
But these too, when they do not take heed to
themselves, gather to themselves many evils
from hence. For tiie dishonesty that arises
from buying and selling they bring into the
work of honest labor, and add oaths, and
perjuries, and falsehoods to their covetous-
ness often, and are taken up with worldly
things only, and continue riveted to the
earth; and while they do all things that they
may get money, they do not take much heed
that they may impart to the needy, being
always desirous to increase their goods. What
should one sa}'^ of the revilings that are
uttered touching such matters, the insults,
the loans, the usurious gains, t!ie bargains
full of much mean trafficking, the shameless
buyings and sellings.

3. But will ye that we leave these too, and
go to others who seem to be more just?
Who then are they ? They tliat are possessed
of lands, and reap the wealtii that springs
from the earth. .\nd what can be more un-
just than these? For if any t^ne were to ex-
amine how tliey tre.it their wretclied and toil-
worn laborers, he will see them to be more
cruel than savages. For upon them that are
pining with hunger, and toiling throughout
ail their life, they both impose constant and
intolerable payments, and Iny on them labo-
rious l)urdens, and hke asses or mules, or
rather like stones, do they treat tlicir bodies,
aljownig them not so much as to draw breath
a little, and when the earth yieUls, and when
it doth not yield, tiiey alike wc.ir them out,
and grant tiienj no indulgence. .\iul what
can be more pitiable tli.in this, when after


37^


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXI.


having labored throughout the whole winter,
and being consumed with frost and rain, and
watchings, they go away with their hands
empty, yea moreover in debt, and fearing
and dreading more than this famine and ship-
wreck, the torments of the overlookers/ and
their dragging them about, and their de-
mands, and their imprisonments, and the
services from which no entreaty can deliver
them !

Why should one speak of the merchandise
which they make of them, the sordid gains
which they gain by them, by their labors and
their sweat filling winepresses, and wine vats,
but not suffering them to take home so much
as a small measure, but draining off the en-
tire fruits into the casks of their wickedness,
and flinging to them for this a little money ?

And new kinds of usuries also do they
devise, and not lawful even according to the
laws of the heathens, and they frame con-
tracts for loans full of many a curse. For
not the hundredth part of the sum, but the
half of the sum they press for and exact; and
this when he of whom it is exacted has a wife,
is bringing up children, is a human being, and
is filling their threshing floor, and their wine-
press by his own toils.

But none of these things do they consider.
Wherefore now it were seasonable to bring
forward the prophet and say, " Be astonished,
O Heaven, and be horribly afraid, O earth, "^
to what great brutality hath the race of man
been madly carried away ! ^

But these things I say, not blaming crafts,
nor husbandr}'-, nor military service,* but our-
selves. Since Cornelius also was a centurion,
and Paul a worker in leather, and after his
preaching practised his craft, and David was
a king, and Job enjoyed the possession of
land and of large revenues, and there was no
hindrance hereby to any of these in the way
of virtue.

Bearing in mind all these things, and con-
sidering the ten thousand talents, let us at
least hence hasten to remit to our neighbors
their few and trifling debts. For we too have
an account to give of the commandments
wherewith we have been trusted, and we are
not able to pay all, no not whatever we may
do. Therefore God hath given us a way to
repayment both ready and easy, and which
is able to cancel all these things, I mean, not
to be revengeful.

In order then that we may learn this well,


I [cTTiTpoTriav, "stewards," answering here to "overseers," in
the worst sense. — R.]

= Jer. ii. 12. 3 e^efiaKxevBrj.

4 [ov^e dypous occurs here in the Greek, but is ij^jnored by the
translator; probably because the thought was implied in " hus-
bandry " (yeiiipyiav). — R.]


let us hear the whole parable, going on regu-
larly through it. "For there was brought
unto Him," it saith, "one which owed ten
thousand talents, and when he had not to
pay, He commanded him to be sold, and his
wife, and his children." Wherefore, I pray
thee ? Not of cruelty, nor of inhumanity
(for the loss came back again upon himself,
for she too was a slave), but of unspeakable
tenderness.

For it is His purpose to alarm him by this
threat, that He might bring him to supplica-
tion, not that he should be sold. For if He
had done it for this intent, He would not have
consented to his request, neither would He
have granted the favor.

Wherefore then did He not do this, nor
forgive the. debt before the account ? Desir-
ing to teach him, from how many obligations
He is delivering him, that in this way at least
he might become more mild towards his
fellow- servant. For even if when he had
learnt the weight of his debt, and the great-
ness of the forgiveness, he continued taking
his fellow-servant by the throat; if He had
not disciplined him beforehand with such
medicines, to what length of cruelty might
he not have gone ?

What then saith the other? "Have
patience with me, and I will pay thee all.
And his Lord s was moved with compassion,
and loosed him, and forgave him the debt.''^

Seest thou again surpassing benevolence ?
The servant asked only for delay and putting
off the time, but He gave more than he
asked, remission and forgiveness of the entire
debt. For it had been his will to give it even
from the first, but he did not desire the gift
to be his only, but also to come of this man's
entreaty, that he might not go away un-
crowned. For that the whole was of him,
although this other fell down to him and
prayed, the motive of the forgiveness showed,
for "moved with compassion" he forgave
him. But still even so he willed that other also
to seem to contribute something, that he
might not be exceedingly covered with shame,
and that he being schooled in his own calam-
ities, might be indulgent to his fellow-servant.

4. Up to this point then this man was good
and acceptable; for he confessed, and prom-
ised to pay the debt, and fell down before
him, and entreated, and condemned his own
sins, and knew the greatness of the debt.
But the sequel is unworthy of his former
deeds. For going out straightway, not after
a long time but straightway, having the bene-

5 [" The lord of that servant," according to our authorities;
the Homily varies. — R.]

6 Matt, xviii. 26, 27.


Homily LXI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


379


fit fresh ' upon him, he abused to wickedness
the gift, even the freedom bestowed on him
by his master.

For, " he found one of his fellow-servants,
which owed him an hundred pence, and took
him by the throaty saying, Pay me what thou
owest."^

Seest thou the master's benevolence ?
Seest thou the servant's cruelty? Hear, ye
who do these things for money. For if for
sins we must not do so, much more not for
money.

What then saith the other? "Have
patience with me, and I will pay thee all. "^
But he did not regard even the words by
which he had been saved (for he himself on
saying this was delivered from the ten thou-
sand talents), and did not recognize so much
as the harbor by which he escaped ship-
wreck; the gesture of supplication did not
remind him of his master's kindness, but he
put away from him all these things, from
covetousness and cruelty and revenge, and
was more fierce than any wild beast, seizing
his fellow-servant by the throat.

What doest thou, O man ? perceivest
thou not, thou art making the demand upon
thyself, thou art thrusting the sword into thy-
self, and revoking the sentence and the gift?
But none of these things did he consider,
neither did he remember his own state,
neither did he yield; although the entreaty
was not for equal objects.

For the one besought for ten thousand
talents, the other for a hundred pence; the
one his fellow-servant, the other his lord; the
one received entire forgiveness, the other
asked for delay, and not so much as this did
he give him, for " he cast him into prison."

" But when his fellow-servants saw it, they
accused him to their lord.'' Not even to
men is this well-pleasing, much less to Clod.
They therefore who did not owe, partook of
the grief.

Wliat then saith their lord? "O thou
wicked servant, I forgave thee all tliat del)t,
because thou desiredst* me; shouldest not
thou also have had compassion, even as I had
pity on thee ? "'

See again tiie lord's gentleness. He pleads
with him, and excuses himself, l)eing on the
point of revoking his gift; or ratlier, it was
not lie that revoked it, but the one who had
received it. Wherefore He saith, " I forgave


' Matt, xviii. aS.
in thi» vrrac, with thr


« (fauAof.

3 Miiit. xviii, an. TK.V. ipmim "nil
best iiutliiirillrs. I'roluilily tukcii from vcnc aO. — K.]

* \K. v., " l)c»<niKhtc«.t."]

5 Matt, xviii. ja. (k. V.,"h«vc had mrrcyonthy fellow nrrv-
nnl, cvrn us 1 had mm y cm thee." The verb i« the kumc in
both claiisr*. " < )n thy follow srrvnnt," t>mittrd here, in inserted
in the comment. — K.


thee all that debt, because thou desiredst me;
shouldest not thou also have had compassion
on thy fellow-servant?" For even if the
thing doth seem to thee hard; yet shouldest
thou have looked to the gain, which hath
been, which is to be. Even if the injunction
be galling, thou oughtest to consider the re-
ward; neither that he hath grieved thee, but
that thou hast provoked God, whom by mere
prayer thou hast reconciled. But if even so
it be a galling thing to thee to become friends
with him who hath grieved thee, to fall into
hell is far more grievous; and if thou hadst
set this against that, then thou wouldest have
known that to forgive is a much lighter thing.

And whereas, when he owed ten thousand
talents, he called him not wicked, neither
reproached him, but showed mercy on him;
when he had become harsh to his fellow-
servant, then he saith, " O thou wicked serv-
ant."

Let us hearken, the covetous, for even to
us is the word spoken. Let us hearken also,
the merciless, and the cruel, for not to others
are we cruel, but to ourselves. When then
thou art minded to be revengeful, consider
that against thyself art thou revengeful, not
against another; that thou art binding up
thine own sins, not thy neighbors. For as to
thee, whatsoever thou mayest do to this man,
thou doest as a man and in the present life,
but God not so, but more mightily will He
take vengeance on thee, and with the ven-
geance hereafter.

I " For He delivered him over till he should
[pay that which was due," that is, for ever;
for he will never repay. For since thou art
not become better by the kindness shown
thee, it remains that by vengeance thou be
corrected.

And yet, "The graces and the gifts are
witliout repentance,''* but wicketiness has
had such power as to set aside even this law.
What then can be a more grievous thing than
to be revengeful, when it appears to over-
tiirow such and so great a gift of God.

And he did not merely "deliver'' him. but
"was wroth." For when he commanded
him to be sold, his were not the wonls of
wr.ith (therefore neither did he do it), but a
very great occasion for benevolence; but now
the sentence is of much indignation, and ven-
geance, and punishment.

What tlien means the parable? "So like-
wise shall my I-'ather do also unto you," He
saith, "if ye from your hearts forgive not
every one his brother their tresfiassrs." '

4 Rom. si. »9. (Krecly cited. 1

7 Malt, xviii. ;(<[. (The bi»t New I rNlariw m niilluTilie* omit
"their lrr<ti>n»»ca, ' which was readily introduced from similar
, p*lxxjii;eH. k.]


o


80


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXI.


He saith not "your Father," but " my
Father." For it is not meet for God to be
called the Father of such a one, who is so
wicked and malicious.

5. Two things therefore doth He here re-
quire, both to condemn ourselves for our sins,
and to forgive others; and the former for the
sake of the latter, that this may become more
easy (for he who considers h's own sins is
more indulgent to his fellow-servant); and
not merely to forgive with the lips, but from
the heart.

Let us not then thrust the sword into our-
selves by being revengeful. For what grief
hath he who hath grieved thee inflicted upon
thee, like thou wilt work unto thyself by
keeping thine anger in mind, and drawing
upon thyself the sentence from God to con-
demn thee ? For if indeed thou art watchful,
and keepest thyself under control, the evil
will come round upon his head, and it will be
he that will suffer harm; but if thou should-
est continue indignant, and displeased, then
thyself wilt undergo the harm not from him,
but from thyself.

Say not then that he insulted thee, and
slandered thee, and did unto thee ills beyond
number; for the more thou tellest, so much
the more dost thou declare him a benefactor.
For he hath given thee an opportunity to
wash away thy sins; so that the greater the
injuries he hath done thee, so much more is
he become to thee a cause of a greater remis-
sion of sins.

For if we be willing, no one shall be able
to injure us, but even our enemies shall ad-
vantage us in the greatest degree. And why
do I speak of men ? For what can be more
wicked than the devil; yet nevertheless, even
hence have we a great opportunity of approv-
ing ourselves; and Job showeth it. But if
the devil hath become a cause of crowns, why
art thou afraid of a man as an enemy ?

See then how much thou gainest, bearing
meekly the spiteful acts of thine enemies.
First and greatest, deliverance from sins;
secondly, fortitude and patience; thirdly,
mildness and benevolence; for he that know-
eth not how to be angry with them that grieve
him, much more will he be ready to serve
them that love him. Fourthly, to be free
from anger continually, to which nothing can
be equal. For of him that is free from anger,
it is quite clear that he is delivered also from
the despondency hence arising, and will not
spend his life on vain labors and sorrows.
For he that knows not how to hate, neither
doth he know how to grieve, but will enjoy
pleasure, and ten thousand blessings.

So that we punish ourselves by hating


others, even as on the other hand we benefit
ourselves by loving them.

Besides all these things, thou wilt be an
object of veneration even to thy very ene-
mies, though they be devils; or rather, thou
wilt not so much as have an enemy whilst
thou art of such a disposition.

But what is greater than all, and first, thou
gainest the favor of God. Shouldest thou
have sinned, thou wilt obtain pardon; should-
est thou have done what is right, thou wilt
obtain a greater confidence. Let us accom-
plish therefore the hating no one, that God
also may love us, that, though we be in debt
for ten thousand talents, He may have com-
passion and pity us.

But hast thou been injured by him ? Pity
him then, do not hate him; weep and mourn,
do not turn away from him. For thou art
not the one that hath offended against God,
but he; but thou hast even approved thyself,
if thou endure it. Consider that Christ,
when about to be crucified, rejoiced for Him-
self, but wept for them that were crucifying
Him. This ought to be our disposition also;
and the more we are .injured, so r"uch the
more should we lament for them that are in-
juring us. For to us many are the benefits
hence arising, but to them the opposites.

But did he insult thee, and strike thee be-
fore all ? Then hath he disgraced and dis-
honored himself before all, and hath opened
the mouths of a thousand accusers, and for
thee hath he woven more crowns, and gath-
ered for thee many to publish thy forbear-
ance.

But did he slander thee to others ? And
what is this ? God is the one that is to
demand the account, not they that have heard
this. For to himself hath he added occasion
of punishment, so that not only for his own
sins he should give account, but also of what
he said of thee. And upon thee hath he
brought evil report with men, but he himself
hath incurred evil report with God.

And if these things are not sufficient for
thee, consider that even thy Lord ' was evil
reported of both by Satan and by men, and
that to those m.ost loved by Him; and His
Only-Begotten the same again. Wherefore
He said, " If they have called the Master of
the house Beelzebub, much more shall they
call them of His household."^

And that wicked demon did not only slan-
der Him, but was also believed, and slan-
dered Him not in ordinary matters, but with
the greatest reproaches and accusations. For
he affirmed Him to be possessed, and to be
a deceiver, and an adversary of God.


' Ae<7JroTJ)9.


2 Matt. X. 25.


Homily LXII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


;8i


But hast thou also done good, and received
evil ? Nay, in respect of this most of all
lament and grieve for him that hath done the
wrong, but for thyself rather rejoice, because
thou art become like God, " Who maketh the
sun to rise upon evil and good."'

But if to follow God is beyond thee,
although to him that watcheth not even this
is hard; yet nevertheless if this seem to thee
to be too great for thee, come let us bring
thee to thy fellow-servants, to Joseph, who
suffered countless things, and did good unto

' Matt. V. 45.


' his brethren; to Moses, who after their count-
less plots against him, prayed for them; to
the blessed Paul, who cannot so much as
number what he suffered from them, and is
willing to be accursed for them; to Stephen,

iwho is stoned, and entreating this sin may be
forgiven them. And having considered all
these things, cast away all anger, that God
may forgive us also all our trespasses by the
grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with whom to the Father and the Holy
Ghost be glory, might, honor, now and

[always, and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY LXII.


Matt. XIX. i.


"And it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these sayings. He departed from Gali-
lee, and came into the coasts of Judaja beyond Jordan."


Having constantly left Judaea on account
of the envy of those men, now He frequents
it from this time forth, because the passion
was to be nigh at hand; He goetli not up,
however, unto Jerusalem for a while, but
" into the coasts of Judaea."

"And," when He was come, " great multi-
tudes followed Him, and He healed them." '

For neither in the teaching by words doth
He continue always, nor in the wonderful
working of signs, but He doeth now one now
the other, variously working the salvation of
them that were waiting upon Him and follow-
ing Him, so as by the miracles to appear, in
what He said, a Teacher worthy of belief,
and by the teaching of His word to increase
the profit from the miracles; and this was to
lead them by the hand to the knowledge of
God.

pHit do thou mark, I pray thee, this too,
iiow the disciples p.iss over whole multitudes
with one word, not declaring by name each of
them that are healed. For they said not,
tiiat such a one, and such another, but that
many, teaching us to be unostentatious. But
Christ healed, benefitting both them, and by
ihem many otlicrs. For tlie healing of tliese
men's iiilirmity was to others a fcniiidatioii for
the knowledge of (iod.


« Matt. XIX. 3.


But not so to the Pharisees, but even for
this self-same thing they become more fierce,
and come unto Him tempting Him. For be-
cause they could not lay hold of the works
that were doing, they propose to Him ques-
tions. For they "came unto Him, and
tempting Him said. Is it lawful for a man to
put away his wife for every cause ? ''-

O folly ! They thought to silence Him by
their questions, although they liad already
received certain proof of this power in Him.
When at least they argued much about the
Sabbath, when they said. " He blasphemeth,''
wlien they said, "He iiath a devil," when
they found fault with His disciples as they
were walking in the corn fields, wiien they
argued about unwashen hands, on every oc-
casion having sewed fast their moutiis, and
shut up their shameless tongue, He thus sent
them away. Nevertheless, not even so do
they keep oh' from llim. For such is wick-
edness, such is envy, shameless ami bold;
though it be put to silence ten thousand limes,
ten thousand times doth it assault again.

But mark thou, I pray thee, their craft also
from the form of their (piestion. For neither
did they say unto Him, 'I'hou didst commanil
not to put aw.iy ;i wife, for intleeil He had
already discoursed about this law; but never-


' .Mull. »1X. J.


382


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXII.


theless they made no mention of those words;
but took occasion from hence, and thinking
to make their snare the greater, and being
minded to drive Him to a necessity of con-
tradicting the law, they say not, why didst
Thou enact this or that ? but as though noth-
ing had been said, they ask, "Is it lawful ?"
expecting that He had forgotten having said
it; and being ready if on the one hand He
said, "It is lawful to put away," to bring
against Him the things He Himself had
spoken, and to say, How then didst Thou
affirm the contrary ? but if the same things
now again as before, to bring against Him the
words of Moses.

What then said He? He said not, " Why
tempt ye me, ye hypocrites ? " although after-
wards He saith this, but here He speaks not
thus. Why can this be ? In order that to-
gether with His power He might show forth
His gentleness also. For He doth neither
always keep silence, lest they should suppose
they are hidden; nor doth He always reprove,
in order that He may instruct us to bear all
things with gentleness.

How then doth He answer them ? " Have
ye not read, that He which made them at'
the beginning, made them male and female,
and said. For this cause shall a man leave
his father and his mother, and shall cleave to
his wife; and they twain shall be^ one flesh?
So that they are no more twain but one flesh.
What therefore God hath joined together, let
not man put asunder." ^

See a teacher's wisdom. I mean, that
being asked, Is it la»vful ? He did not at
once say. It is not lawful, lest they should be
disturbed and put in disorder, but before the
decision by His argument He rendered this
manifest, showing that it is itself too the
commandment of His Father, and that not
in opposition to Moses did He enjoin these
things, but in full agreement with him.

But mark Him arguing strongly not from
the creation only, but also from His com-
mand. For He said not, that He made one
man and one woman only, but that He also
gave this command that the one man should
be joined to the one woman. But if it had
been His will that he should put this one
away, and bring in another, when He had
made one man, He would have formed many
women.

But now both by the manner of the crea-
tion, and by the manner of lawgiving. He
showed that one man must dwell with one
woman continually, arwd never break off from
her.


>[R. v., "from."]
3 Matt. xi.\. 4-6.


2[R. v., "become."]


And see how He saith, " He which made
them at the beginning, made them male and
female," that is, from one root they sprung,
and into one body came they together, " for
the twain shall be one flesh."

After this, to make it a fearful thing to find
fault with this lawgiving, and to confirm the
law. He said not, "Sever not therefore, nor
put asunder," but, "What God hath joined
together, let not man put asunder."

But if thou put forward Moses, I tell thee
of Moses' Lord, and together with this, I rely
upon the time also. For God at the begin-
nmg made them male and female; and this
law is older (though it seem to have been
now introduced by me), and with much ear-
nestness established. For not merely did He
bring the woman to the man, but also com-
manded to leave father and mother. And
neither did He make it a law for him merely
to come to the woman, but also "to cleave
to her," by the form of the language intimat-
ing that they might not be severed. And not
even with this was He satisfied, but sought
also for another greater union, "for the
twain," He saith, " shall be one flesh."

Then after He had recited the ancient law,
which was brought in both by deeds and by
words, and shown it to be worthy of respect
because of the giver, with authority after that
He Himself too interprets and gives the law,
saying, " So that they are no more twain, but
one flesh.'' Like then as to sever flesh is a
horrible thing," so also to divorce a wife is
unlawful. And He stayed not at this, but
brought in God also by saying, " What there-
fore God hath joined together, let not man
put asunder," showing that the act was both
against nature, and against law; against
nature, because one flesh is dissevered;
against law, because that when God hath
joined and commanded it not to be divided,
ye conspire to do this.

2. What then ought they to have done
after this ? Ought they not to have held their
peace, and to have commended the saying?
ought they not to have marvelled at His wis-
dom ? ought they not to have stood amazed
at His, accordance with the Father ? But none
of these things do they, but as though they
were contending for the law, they say, ' ' How
then did Moses command to give a writing
of divorcement, and to put her away?"5
And yet they ought not now to have
brought this forward, but rather He to them;
but nevertheless He doth not take advantage
of them, nor doth He say to them, "lam not
now bound by this," but He solves this too.


4 eVaye?.

5 Matt. xix. 7.


[" How " is substituted for " why."]


HOMII.Y LXII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW,


And indeed if He had been an alien from
the old covenant, He would not have striven
for Moses, neither would He have argued
positively from the things done once for all
at the beginning; He would not have studied
to show that His own precepts agreed with
those of old.

And indeed Moses had given many other
commandments besides, both those about
meats, and those about the Sabbath; where-
fore then do tkey nowhere bring him forward,
as here ? From a wish to enlist the multitude
of the husbands against him. For this was
considered a thing indifferent with the Jews,
and all used to do so much as this. Accord-
ingly it was for this reason that when so many
things had been said on the mount, they re-
membered this commandment only now.

Nevertheless, imspeakable wisdom maketh
a defense even for these things, and saith,
" Moses for the hardness of your hearts" thus
made the law. And not even him doth He
suffer to remain under accusation, forasmuch
as He had Himself given him the law; but
delivers him from the charge, and turns the
whole upon their head, as everywhere He
doth.

For again when they were blaming His
disciples for plucking the ears of corn. He
shows themselves to be guilty; and when they
were laying a trangression to their charge as
to their not washing their hands, He shows
themselves to be the transgressors, and touch-
ing the Sabbath also: both everywhere, and
here in like manner.

Then because the saying was hard to bear,
and brought on them much blame. He
quickly directs back His discourse to that
ancient law, saying as He had said before
also, "But in the beginning it was not so,''
that is, God by His acts at the beginning
ordained the contrary. For in order that
they may not say. Whence is it manifest, that
" for our hardness Moses said this ? " hereby
again He stoppeth their mouths. For if this
were the primary law, and for our good, that
other would not have been given at the be-
ginning; God in creating would not have so
created, He wf)ul(I not have said such things.

" liut I say unto you, Whosoever shall put
away his wife e.xcept it be for fornication, and
marry another, committeth adultery." ' For
since he had stopped their mouths, He then
gives tlie law with His own authority, like as
touching the meats, like as touching the Sab-
l)ath.

For with regard to the meats likewise, wlicn
He had overcome them, then, and not till

I [The citation Bjrree* with the briefer mdinK. accepted by
Tischendorf ; comp. k. V. margin.— R.]


then, He declared unto the multitude, that,
" Not that which goeth in defileth the man; ''-
and with regard to the Sabbath, when He had
stopped their mouths, He saith, " A\'herefore
it is lawful to do well on the Sabbath day; " ^
and here this self-same thing.

But what took place there, this happened
here also. For as there, when the Jews had
been put to silence the disciples were trou-
bled, and came unto Him with Peter and
said, " Declare unto us this parable; " ■• even
so now also they were troubled and said, " If
the case of the man be so, it is good not to
marry." ^

For now they understood the saying more
than before. Therefore then indeed they
held their peace, but now when there hath
been gainsaying, and answering, and ques-
tion, and learning by reply, and the law ap-
peared more clear, they ask Him. And
openly to contradict they do not dare, but
they bring forward what seemed to be a griev-
ous and galling result of it, saying, " If the
case of the man be so with his wife, it is not
good to marry." For indeed it seemed to
be a very hard thing to liave a wife full of
every bad quality, and to endure a wild beast
perpetually shut up with one in the house.
And that thou mayest learn that this greatly
troubled them, Alark said,* to show it, that
they spake to Him privately.

3. But what is, " If such be the case of a
man with his wife ? " That is, if to this end
he is joined with her, that they should be one,
or, on the other hand, if the man shall get to
himself blame for these tilings, and always
transgresses by putting away, it were easier
to fight against natural desire and against
one's self, than against a wicked woman.

What then saith Christ? He said not,
"yea, it is easier, and so ilo," lest they
should suppose that the thing is a law; but
He subjoined, " Not all men receive it. but
they to whom it is given," ' raising the thing,
and showing that it is great, ami in this way
drawing them on, and urging tliem.

But see herein a contradiction. For He
indeed saith this is a great thing; but they,
that it is easier. For it was meet that both
these things shoukl be done, and that it
should be at once acknowledged a great thing
by Him, that it miglit render them more for-
wartl, and by the things said by themselves it
should be shown to be easier, that on this
ground too they might the rather choose vir-
ginity and continence. For since to speak of


-> Matt. XV. II. 3 Nfalt. xii. la. * Matt. xv. 1^.

5 Miitl. xix. 10. [Compare the more exact citation which
(0II0W11.- R.l

'' .Murk X. 10. 7 Mull. xix. 11.


384


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXII.


virginity seemed to be grievous, by the con-
straint of this law He drove them to this
desire. Then to show the possibility of it,
He saith, " There are some eunuchs, who
were so born from their mother's womb, there
are some eunuchs which were made eunuchs
of men, and there be eunuchs which have
made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of
Heaven's sake,"' by these words secretly
leading them to choose tne thing, and estab-
lishing the possibility of this virtue, and all
but saying. Consider if thou wert in such
case by nature, or hadst endured this self-
same thing at the hands of those who inflict
such wanton injuries, what wouldest thou
have done, being deprived indeed of the en-
joyment, yet not having a reward ? Thank
God therefore now, for that with rewards and
crowns thou undergoest this, which those men
endure without crowns; or rather not even
this, but what is much lighter, being sup-
ported both by hope, and by the conscious-
ness of the good work, and not having the
desire so raging like waves within thee.

For the excision of a member is not able to
quell such waves, and to make a calm, like
the curb of reason; or rather, reason only
can do this.

For this intent therefore He brought in
those others, even that He might encourage
these, since if this was not what He was es-
tablishing, what means His saying concerning
the other eunuchs ? But when He saith, that
they made themselves eunuchs, He means
not the excision of the members, far from it,
but the putting away of wicked thoughts.
Since the man who hath mutilated himself, in
fact, is subject even to a curse, as Paul saith,
"I would they were even cut off^ which
trouble you.''^ And very reasonably. For
such a one is venturing on the deeds of mur-
derers, and giving occasion to them that
slander God's creation, and opens the mouths
of the Manichaeans, and is guilty of the same
unlawful acts as they that mutilate themselves
amongst the Greeks. For to cut off our
members hath been from the beginning a
work of demoniacal agency, and satanic de-
vice, that they may bring up a bad report
upon the work of God, that they "may mar
this living creature, that imputing all not to
the choice, but to the nature of our members,
the more part of them may sin in security,
as being irresponsible; and doubly harm this
living creature, both by mutilating the mem-

' Matt. xix. 12.

2 airo/coi|/ovTat, which may mean this. [R. V. margin, " muti-
late themselves.'']

3 Cial. V. 12. [Whatever be the meaning of the verb in Gala-
tians, there can be no question that the use here made of the pas-
sage is forced. — R.]


bers, and by impeding the forwardness of the
free choice in behalf of good deeds.

These are the ordinances of the devil,
bringing in, besides the things which we have
mentioned, another wicked doctrine also, and
making way beforehand for the arguments
concerning destiny and necessity even from
hence, and everywhere marring the freedom
given to us of God, and persuading us that
evil deeds are of nature, and hence secretly
implanting many other wicked doctrines,
although not openly. For such are the
devil's poisons.

Therefore I beseech you to flee from such
lawlessness. For together with the things I
have mentioned, neither doth the force of
lust become milder hereby, but even more
fierce. For from another origin hath the
seed that is in us its sources, and from an-
other cause do its waves swell. And some
say from the brain, some from the loins, this
violent impulse hath its birth; but I should
say from nothing else than from an ungov-
erned will and a neglected mind; if this be
temperate, there is no evil result from the
motions of nature.

Having spoken then of the eunuchs that
are eunuchs for nought and fruitlessly, unless
with the mind they too practise temperance,
and of those that are virgins for Heaven's
sake. He proceeds again to say, " He thst is
able to receive it, let him receive it," at once
making them more earnest by showing that
the good work is exceeding in greatness, and
not suffering the thing to be shut up in the
compulsion of a law, because of His unspeak-
able gentleness. And this He said, when He
showed it to be most possible, in order that
the emulation of the free choice might be
greater.

And if it is of free choice, one may say,
how doth He say, at the beginning, "All men
do not receive it, but they to whom it is
given?" That thou mightest learn that the
conflict is great, not that thou shouldest sus-
pect any compulsory allotments. For it is
given to those, even to the willing.

But He spake thus to show that much in-
fluence from above is needed by him who en-
tereth these lists, whereof He that is willing
shall surely partake. For it is customary for
Him to use this form of speech when the good
work done is great, as when He saith, '' To
you it is given to know the mysteries."

And that this is true, is manifest even from
the present instance. For if it be of the gift
from above only, and they that live as virgins
contribute nothing themselves, for nought did
He promise them the kingdom of Heaven,
and distinguish them from the other eunuchs.


Homily LXIL]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


;85


But mark thou, I pray, how from some
men's wicked doings, other men gain. I
mean, that the Jews went away having learnt
nothing, for neither did they ask with the
intent of learning, but the disciples gained
even from hence.

4. "Then were there brought unto Him
little children, that He should put His hands
on them, and pray: and the disciples rebuked 1
them. But He said unto them. Suffer the
little children to come unto me, for of such
is the kingdom of Heaven. And He laid
His hands on them, and departed thence.'"

And wherefore did the disciples repel the
little children ? For dignity. What then
doth He ? Teaching them to be lowly, and
to trample under foot worldly pride, He doth
receive them, and takes them in His arms,
and to such as them promises the kingdom;
which kind of thing He said before also.=

Let us also then, if we would be inheritors
of the Heavens, possess ourselves of this
virtue with much diligence. For this is the
limit of true wisdom; to be simple with un-
derstanding; this is angelic life; yes, for the
soul of a little child is pure from all the
passions. Towards them who have vexed
him he bears no resentment, but goes to them
as to friends, as if nothing had been done;
and how much soever he be beaten by his
mother, after her he seeks, and her doth he
prefer to all. Though thou show him the
queen with a diadem, he prefers her not to
his mother clad in rags, but would choose
rather to see her in these, than the queen in
splendor. For he useth to distinguish what
pertains to him and what is strange to him,
not by its poverty and wealth, but by friend-
ship. And nothing more than necessary
things doth he seek, but just to l)e satisfied
from the breast, and then he leaves sucking.
The young child is not grieved at what we
are grieved, as at loss of money and such
things as that, and he doth not rejoice again
at what we rejoice, namely, at these temporal
things, he is not eager about the beauty of
persons.

Therefore He said, " of such is the king-
dom of Heaven," tliat by choice we sliould
practise tiiese things, whicli young children
have by nature. For since the Pharisees
from notliing else so much as out of craft and
pride did what they did, tlierefore on every
hand He charges the disciples to be single
hearted, both darkly hinting at tlmse men,
and instructing these. For nothing so mucli
lifts up unto haughtiness, as power and pre-
cedence. Forasmuch tlien as the disciples


were to enjoy great honors tluoughout the
whole world, He preoccupies their mind, not
sutfering them to feel anything after the
manner of men, neither to demand honors
from the multitude, nor to have men clear
the way ^ before them.

For though these seem to be little things,
yet are they a cause of great evils. The
Pharisees at least being thus trained were
carried on into the very summit of evil, seek-
ing after the salutations, the first seats, the
middle places,^ for from these they were cast
upon the shoal of their mad desire of glory,
then from thence upon impiety. So there-
fore those men went away havuig drawn upon
themselves a curse by their tempting, but the
little children a blessing, as being freed from
all these.

Let us then also be like the little children,
and " in malice be we babes. "5 For it cannot
be, it cannot be for one otherwise to see
Heaven, but the crafty and wicked must
needs surely be cast into hell.

5. And before hell too, we shall here suf-
fer the utmost ills, " For if thou be evil," it
is said, "thou alone shalt endure the evil;
but if good, it is for thyself and for thy
neighbor."*' ^Lark, at any rate, how this took
place in the former instances also. For
neither was anything more wicked than Saul,
nor more simple and single-hearted than
David. Whicli therefore was the stronger ?
Did not David get him twice into his haniis.
and having the power to slay him, forebore ?
Had he not him shut up as in a net and
prison, and spared him ? And this when botii
others were urging him, and when he himself
was able to accuse him of countless charges;
but nevertheless he suffered him to go away
safe. And yet the other was pursuing him
with all his army, but he was, with a few
desperate fugitives, wandering :\\u\ changing
from place to place; nevertheless the fugitive
had the advantage of the king, forasmuch as
the one came to the conllict with simplicity,
the other witn wickedness.

For what could be more wickeil than that
man, who when he was leailing his armies,
and liringingall his wars to a successful issue,
and undergoing the labors of the victory ami
the trophies, but bringing the crowns to him,
assayed to slay him ?

6. Sucii is the nature of envy, it is ever
plotting against its own honors, ami wasting
him that hatli it, and encompassing him with
countless calamities. A\u\ that miserable
man, for instance, until David ilcparted,
burst not forth into that |)iteous cry, l)ewail-


' Matt. xix. 11-15.
25


•> Matt, xviii. 3, ^


1 aofitlv,

5 I Cor. xiv. 30.


* luaaotiovx.

* I'rov. ix. i», l.xx.


386


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXII.


ing himself and saying, " I am sore dis-
tressed, and the Philistines make war against
me, and the Lord is departed from me."'
Until he was separated from David, he fell
not in war, but was both in safety and in
glory; for indeed unto the king passed the
glory of the captain. For neither was the
man disposed to usurpation, nor did he assay
to depose the other from his throne, but for
him did he achieve all things, and was ear-
nestly attached to him, and this is evident
even from what followed afterwards. For
when indeed he was set under him, any one
of them who do not search carefully might
perhaps suppose these things to be by the
usual custom of a subject; but after he had
withdrawn himself out of Saul's kingdom,
what then was there to restrain him, and to
persuade to abstain from war against Saul;
or rather what was wanting that could provoke
him even to slay? Had not the other been
evil towards him once, twice, and often.? Was
it not after having received benefits from him?
Was it not having nothing whereof to accuse
him ? Was not Saul's kingdom and safety
danger and insecurity to himself ? must he not
needs wander and be a fugitive, and be in
trembling for fear of the utmost ills, while
the other is alive, and reigning ? Neverthe-
less none of these things constrained him to
stain his sword with blood, but when he saw
him asleep, and bound, and alone, and in the
midst of his own men, and had touched his
head, and when there were many rousing him
to it, and saying the opportunity thus favorable
was a judgment of God, he at once rebuked
those who were urging him on, and refrained
from the murder, and sent him away both
safe and well; and as though [le had been
rather a body guard of his, and a shield-
bearer, not an enemy, so did he chide the
host for their treachery towards the king.^

What could be equal to this soul ? What to
that mildness ? For this it is possible to see
even by the things that have been mentioned;
but much more by what are done now. For
when we have considered our vileness, then
we shall know more perfectly the virtue of
those saints. Wherefore I entreat you to
hasten towards the emulation of them.

For indeed if thou lovest glory, and for this
cause art plotting against thy neighbor, then
Shalt thou enjoy it more largely, when having
spurned it, thou wilt abstain from the plot-
ting. For like as to become rich ^ is contrary
to covetousness, so is the loving of glory to

' i.^^™; "^viii. 15. 2 I Sam. xxvi. 16.

3 Mss, "not to make money," and presently, "not to love
glory ; but Savile's reading is rightly adopted by Mr. Field,
with the Latin Translator.


the obtaining of glory. And if ye be minded,
let us inquire into each. For since we have
no fear of hell, nor much regard for the king-
dom, come and even from the things present
let us lead you on.

For who are they that are ridiculous ? Tell
me. Is it not they that are doing anything
for the sake of glory from the multitude ?
And who are the objects of praise ? Is it not
they who spurn the praise of the multitude ?
Therefore if the love of vainglory be matter
of reproach, and it cannot be concealed that
the vainglorious man loves it, he will assur-
edly be an object of reproach, and the love of
glory is become to him a cause of dishonor.
And not in this respect only doth he disgrace
himself, but also in that he is compelled to do
many things shameful, and teeming with the
utmost disgrace. And like as with respect to
their gains men are wont to suffer harm more
than anything from the disease of covetous-
ness (they become at least the subjects of
many tricks, and of small gains make great
losses, wherefore this saying hath prevailed
even to be a proverb); and as to the voluptu-
ous man likewise, his passion becomes a
hindrance to the enjoyment of his pleasure.
These at least that are exceedingly given up
thereto, and are the slaves of women, these
above all do women carry about as servants,
and will never vouchsafe to treat them as
men, buffeting, spurning them, leading, and
taking them about everywhere, and giving
themselves airs, and in everything merely
giving them orders.

Even so also than him that is arrogant and
mad about glory, and accounts himself to be
high, nothing is more base and dishonored.
For the race of man is fond of contention,
and against nothing else doth it set itself so
much, as against a boaster, and a contemptu-
ous man, and a slave of glory.

And he himself too, in order to maintain
the fashion of his pride, exhibits the conduct
of a slave to the common sort, flattering,
courting them, serving a servitude more griev-
ous than that of one bought for money.

Knowing then all these things, let us lay
down these passions, that we may not both
pay a penalty here, and there be punished
without end. Let us become lovers of virtue.
For so both before reaching the kingdom we
shall reap the greatest benefits here, and when
we are departed thither we shall partake of
the eternal blessings; unto which God grant
we may all attain by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and might world without end.
Amen.


HoMiLV LXIIL]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


HOMILY LXIII.


Matt. XIX. i6.


"And, behold, one came and said unto Him, Good Master, by doing what, shall I inherit

eternal life ? "


Some indeed accuse tliis young man, as one
dissembling and ill-minded, and coming with
a temptation to Jesus, but I, though I would
not say he was not fond of money, and under
subjection to his wealth, since Christ in fact
convicted him of being such a character, yet
a dissembler I would by no means call him,
both because it is not safe to venture on
thiriigs uncertain, and especially in blame, and
because Mark hath taken away this suspicion;
for he saith, that " having come running unto
Him, and kneeling to Him, he besought
Him," and that " Jesus beheld him, and loved
him." '

But great is the tyranny of wealth, and it
is manifest hence; I mean, that though we be
virtuous as to the rest, this ruins all besides.
With reason hath Paul also affirmed it to be
the root of all evils in general. "For the
love of money is the root of all evils," ^ he
saith.

Wherefore then doth Christ thus reply to
him, saying, "There is none good ?" ^ Be-
cause He came unto Him as a mere man, and
one of the common sort, and a Jewish teacher;
for this cause then as a man He discourses
with him. And indeed in many instances He
replies to the secret tlioughts of them that
come unto Him; as when He saith, " We
worship we know what;"* and, "If I bear
witness of myself, my witness is not true."'
When therefore He saith, " There is none
good;" not as putting Himself out from
being good doth He say this, far from it; for
he said not, " Why dost thou call me good ?
I am not good; " but, " tiiere is none good,*'
that is, none amongst men.

And when He saith this self-same thing.
He saith it not as depriving even men of
goodness, but in contradistinction to the
goodness of God. Wherefore also He added,
" But one, that is, God;" and He said not,

• Mark x. 17-ai.

' I Tim. vi. 10. [R. V., " a root of nil kind* of evil.'")

1 M.'itt. xix 17. [This <'liiu»c i» found in the rrr. text, but not
in the better Hupporled furin of the vente, which readit, " Why
askesl thou ine conrernin^' thai whirh i« Kood } One there i« who
i.i Kood." It \n probable, but not certain, that ('hrywniom ac-
cepted the other form of the text. Com|>. note on iloinily XXVII.
5., p. 186.- K.l

•• John iv. 33. s Iiibii V 1 1


" but my Father," that thou mightest learn
that He had not revealed Himself to the
young man. So also further back He called
men evil, saying, " If ye, being evil, know
how to give good gifts to your children."*
For indeed there too He called them evil,
not as condemning the whole race as evil
(for by ' ' ye, ' ' He means not ' ' ye men "), but
comparing the goodness that is in men with
the goodness of God, He thus named it;
therefore also He added, " How much more
shall your Father give good things to them
that ask Him ? " And what was there to urge
Him,^ or what the profit tliat He should an-
swer in tliis way? He leads him on by little
and little, and teaches him to be far from all
flattery, drawing him off from the things ujxjn
earth, and fastening him ujion God, and per-
suading him to seek after the things to come,
and to know that which is really good, and
the root and fountain of all things, and to
refer the honors to Him.

Since also when He saith, "Call no one
master upon earth,'' it is in contradistinction
to Himself He saith this, and that they might
learn what is the chief sovereignty over all
things that are. For neither was it a small
forwardness the young man iiad shown up to
this time in having fallen into such a ilesire;
and when of the rest some were tempting,
some were coming to Him for the cure of
diseases, eitiier tlieir own or others, he for
eternal life was botii coming to Him, and dis-
coursing with Him. For fertile was the land
and rich, but the multitude of tlie thorns
choked the seed. Mark at any rate how he
is prepared thus far for obedience to the com-
mandments. For " By doing what," he saith,
" shall I inlierit eternal life .'' " So ready was
he for the performance of the things that
should be toltl him. Hut if he had come
unto Him, tempting Him, tiie evangelist
would have declareii this also to us, as He
dotii also with regard to the others, as in the
case of the lawyer. .And thougli himself iiad
been silent, Christ could not have suffered


* Malt. vii. 1 1.

r [•Uifttiv, •' i.iir may »ay," occurs in the Greek here.— R.]


388


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXIII.


him to lie concealed, but would have convicted
him plainly, or at least would have intimated
it, so that he should not seem to have deceived
Him, and to be hidden, and thereby have
suffered hurt.

If he had come unto Him tempting, he
would not have departed sorrowing for what
he heard. This was not at any rate ever the
feeling of any of the Pharisees, but they grew
fierce when their mouths were stopped. But
not so this man; but he goeth away cast down,
which is no little sign that not with an evil
will he had come unto Him, but with one too
feeble, and that he did indeed desire life, but
was held in subjection by another and most
grievous feeling.

Therefore when Christ said, " If thou wilt
enter into life, keep the commandments," he
saith, "Which?" Not tempting, far from
it, but supposing there were some others
besides those of the law that should procure
him life, which was like one who was very de-
sirous. Then since Jesus mentioned those
out of the law, he saith, "All these things
have I kept from my youth up."' And
neither at this did he stop, but again asks,
" What lack I yet ?" which itself again was a
sign of his very earnest desire.^

What then saith Christ? Since He was
going to enjoin something great, He setteth
forth the recompenses, and saith, " If thou
wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast,
and give to the poor, and thou shalt have
treasure in Heaven: and come, and follow
me." 3

2. Seest thou how many prizes, how many
crowns, He appoints for this race ? If he had
been tempting. He would not have told him
these things. But now He both saith it,
and in order to draw him on. He also shows
him the reward to be great, and leaves it all
to his own will, by all means throwing into
the shade that which seemed to be grievous
in His advice. Wherefore even before men-
tioning the conflicts and the toil. He shows
him the prize, saying " If thou wilt be per-
fect," and then saith, "Sell that thou hast,
and give to the poor,'' and straightway again
the rewards, "Thou shalt have treasure in
Heaven; and come, and follow me." For
indeed to follow Him is a great recompense.
"And thou shalt have treasure in Heaven."

For since his discourse was of money, even
of all did He advise him to strip himself,
showing that he loses not what he hath, but
adds to his possessions. He gave him more

1 Matt. xix. 2o. [R. V. omits " from my youth up."]

2 [An important sentence is omitted here : " But that also was
not a Httle thing which he supposed he lacked, nor did he think
that what he had said sufficed forattainini; what he desired. ''--R.]

3 Matt xix. 21. [R. v., " H thou wouldest,"' etc.]


than He required him to give up; and not only
more, but also as much greater as Heaven is
greater than earth, and yet more so.

But He called it a treasure, showing the
plenteousness of the recompense, its perma-
nency, its security, so far as it was possible
by human similitudes to intimate it to the
hearer. It is not then enough to despise
wealth, but we must also maintain poor men,
and above all things follow Christ; that is,
do all the things that are ordered by Him, be
ready for slaughter and daily death, " For
if any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross, and follow
me." * So that to cast away one's money is a
much less thing than this last commandment,
to shed even one's very blood; yet not a little
doth our being freed from wealth contribute
towards this.

" But when the young man heard it, he
went away sorrowful." ^ After this the evan-
gelist, as it were to show that he hath not felt
anything it was unlikely he should feel, saith,
" For he had*^ great possessions." For they
that have little are not equally held in sub-
jection, as they that are overflowed with great
affluence, for then the love of it becomes more
tyrannical. Which thing I cease not always
saying, that the increase of acquisitions kin-
dles the flame more, and renders the getters
poorer, inasmuch as it puts them in greater
desire, and makes them have more feeling of
their want.

See, for example, even here what strength
did this passion exhibit. Him that had come
to Him with joy and forwardness, when
Christ commanded him to cast away his riches,
it so overwhelmed and weighed down, as not
to suffer him so much as to answer touching
these things, but silenced and become de-
jected and sullen to go away.

What then saith Christ? "How hardly
shall the rich enter into the kingdom of
Heaven! "7 blaming not riches, but them
that are held in subjection by them. But if
the rich man " hardly," much more the cov-
etous man. For if not to give one's own be
an hindrance to entering the kingdom, even
to take of other men's goods, think how much
fire it heapeth up.

Why can it have been, however, that He
said to His disciples, that " hardly shall a
rich man enter in," they being poor men, and
having no possessions ? Instructing them
not to be ashamed of their poverty, and, as

4 Matt. xvi. 24. 5 Matt. xix. 22.

6 [R. v., " he was one that had," etc.]

7 Matt. xix. 23. [The citation is a combination of this verse
and Mark x. 23. The influence of Mark's more striking account
is seen throughout the Homily. — R.]


Homily LXIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


89


it were, excusing Himself to them for suffer-
ing them to have nothing.

But having said it was hard; as He pro-
ceeds, He shows that it is even impossible,
and not merely impossible, but even in the
highest degree impossible; and this He
showed by the comparison concerning the
camel and the' needle.

"It is easier," saith He, " for a camel to
enter in by the eye of a needle, = than for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of Heav-
en. "^ Whence it is shown, that there is no
ordinary reward for them that are rich, and
are able to practise self command. Where-
fore also He affirmed it to l)e a work of God,
that He might show that great grace is needed
for him who is to achieve this. At least,
when the disciples were troubled, He said,
" With men this is impossible; but with God
all things are possible. "■♦

And wherefore are the disciples troubled,
being poor, yea, exceedingly poor.-' Where-
fore then are they confounded? Being in
pain about the salvation of the rest, and hav-
ing a great affection for all, and having al-
ready taken upon themselves the tender bowels
of teachers. They were at least in such trem-
bling and fear for the whole world from this
declaration, as to need much comfort.

Therefore, having first "beheld them. He
said unto them, The things which are impos-
sible with men, are possible with God.'' For
with a mild and meek look, having soothed
their shuddering mind, and having put an
end to their distress (for this the evangelist
signified by saying, " He beheld them "), then
by His words also He relieves them, bringing
before them God's power, and so making them
feel confidence.

But if thou wilt learn the manner of it like-
wise, and how what is impossil)le may become
possible, hear. Born eitlier for this end did
He say, " The things which are impossible
with men, are possible with God," that thou
shouldest give it up, and abstain, as from
things impossible; but that having considered
the greatness of the good work, tliou shouldest
hasten to it readily, and having besought God
to assist thee in these noble contests, should-
est attain unto life.

3. How then siiould this become possible?
If thou cast away what thou hast, if thou
empty tliyself of thy wealth, if tliou refrain
from the wicked desire. For in jiroof tliat
He does not refer it to God alone, liut that to
this end He said it, that thou shouldest know


'[R. v., with the same Greek text, rendeni, "to i(n through*
needle's eye." The vuriution in the KnKlioh alxive xeeins un-
nccrssiiry. R]

3 Matt. xix. .14. 4 Matt. xix. 16.


the vastness of the good work, hear what fol-
lows. For when Peter had said, "Behold,
we have forsaken all, and followed Thee,"
and had asked, "What shall we have there-
fore ? " having appointed the reward for them;
He added, "And every one who hath forsaken
houses, or lands, or brothers, or sisters, or
father, or mother, shall receive an hundred
fold, and shall inherit eternal life."5 Thus
that which is impossible l)ecometh possible.
But how may this very thing be done, one
may say, to forsake these ? how is it possible
for him that is once sunk in such lust of
wealth, to recover himself? If he begin to
empty himself of his possessions, and cut off
what are superfluous. For so shall he both
advance further, and shall run on his course
more easily afterwards.

Do not then seek all at once, but gently,
and by little and little, ascend this ladder,
that leads thee up to Heaven.* For like as
those in fevers having acrid bile abounding
within them, when they cast in thereon meats
and drinks, so far from quenching their thirst,
do even kindle the flame; so also the covet-
ous, when they cast in their wealth upon this
wicked lust more acrid than that bile, do
rather inflame it. For nothing so stays it
as to refrain for a time from the lust of gain,
like as acrid bile is stayed by abstinence and
evacuations.

But this itself, by what means will it be done ?
one may say. If thou consider, tiiat whilst
rich, thou wilt never cease thirsting, and pin-
ing with the lust of more; but being freed
from tliy possessions, thou wilt be able also
to stay this disease. Do not then encompass
thyself with more, lest thou follow after things
unattainable, and be incurable, and be more
miserable than all, being thus frantic.

For answer me, whom shall we affirm to lie
tormented and painetl ? him that longs after
costly meats and drinks, and is not able to
enjoy them as he will, or him that hath not
such a desire? It is quite clear one must
say, him that desires, but cannot obtain what
he desires. For this is so jiainful, to ilesire
and not to enjoy, to thirst and not to drink,
that Christ desiring to describe hell to us,
describeil it in this way, anil introihicctl the
rich man thus tormented. For longing for a
drop of water, and not enjoying it, this was
his punisliment. So then he that despises
wealtli cpiicts the desire, but he that desires
to be rich' hath inflamed it more, and not yet

S Miilt. xix. a7-jg. [The |Mixiticiii tif the wciril " luiuU " i»
peeuliur ; " or wile" is not fouiul here, but incur* in Homily
LXiy. I. — K.l

* ['I'hc following clause in omitted in the tninshition : " though
(or, if) MX a whgle i( sreniH dilTii ul( to tlirin." K.)

7 [The Cirrrk adds here, xai ircpi/JaAA«<;9at nAxw, "and to
p<iiuu-M liimiteU of more. — K.]


390


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXIII.


doth he stay; but though he have got ten
thousand talents, he desireth as much more;
though he obtain these, again he aims at
twice as much more, and going on he desires
even the mountains, and the earth, and the
sea, and all to become gold for him, being
mad with a kind of new and fearful madness,
and one that can never thus be extinguished.

And that thou mightest learn, that not by-
addition but by taking away this evil is stayed;
if thou hadst ever had an absurd desire to fly
and to be borne through the air, how wouldest
thou extinguish this unreasonable desire ? By
fashioning wings, and preparing other instru-
ments, or by convincing the mind that it is
desiring things impossible, and that one
should attempt none of these things ? It is
quite plain, that by convincing the mind.
But that, thou mayest say, is impossible. But
this again is more impossible, to find a limit
for this desire. For indeed it is more easy
for men to fly, than to make this lust cease
by an addition of more. For when the ob-
jects of desire are possible, one may be
soothed by the enjoyment of them, but when
they are impossible, one must labor for one
thing, to draw ourselves off from the desire,
as otherwise at least it is not possible to re-
cover the soul.

Therefore that we may not have superfluous
sorrows, let us forsake the love of money that
is ever paining, and never endures to hold its
peace, and let us remove ourselves to another
love, which both makes us happy, and hath
great facility, and let us long after the treas-
ures above. For neither is the labor here so
great, and the gain is unspeakable, and it is
not possible for him to fail of them who is
but in any wise watchful and sober, and de-
spises the things present; even as on the other
hand, as to him that is a slave to these last,
and is utterly given up to them, it as altogether
of necessity that he fail of those better riches,

4. Considermg then all these things, put
away the wicked desire of wealth. For neither
couldest thou say this, that it gives the things
present, though it deprive us of the things to
come, albeit even if this were so, this were
extreme punishment, and vengeance. But
now not even this may be. For besides hell,
and before that hell, even here it casts thee
into a more grievous punishment. For many
houses hath this lust overthrown, and fierce
wars hath it stirred up, and compelled men
to end their lives by a violent death; and
before these dangers it ruins the nobleness of
the soul, and is wont often to make him that
hath it cowardly, and unmanly, and rash, and
false, and calumnious, and ravenous, and
over-reaching, and all the worst things.


But seeing perhaps the brightness of the
silver, and the multitude of the servants, and
the beauty of the buildings, the court paid in
the market-place, art thou bewitched thereby ?
What remedy then may there be for this evil
wound ? If thou consider how these things
affect thy soul, how dark, and desolate, and
foul they render it, and how ugly; if thou
reckon with how many evils these things were
acquired, with how many labors they are kept,
with how many dangers: or rather they are
not kept unto the end, but when thou hast
escaped the attempts of all, death coming on
thee is often wont to remove these things into
the hand of thine enemies, and goeth and
taketh thee with him destitute, drawing after
thee none of these things, save the wounds
and the sores only, which the soul received
from these, before its departmg. When then
thou seest any one resplendent outwardly with
raiment and large attendance, lay^ open his
conscience, and thou shalt see many a col)-
web within, and much dust. Consider Paul,
Peter. Consider John, Elias, or rather the
Son of God Himself, who hath not where to
lay His head. Be an imitator of Him, and
of His servants, and imagine to thyself the
unspeakable riches of these.

But if having obtained a little sight by
these, thou shculdest be darkened again, as
in any shipwreck when a storm hath come on,
hear the declaration of Christ, which afiflrms,
that it is impossible " for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of Heaven." And against
this declaration set the mountains, and the
earth, and the sea; and all things, if thou
wilt, suppose' to be gold; for thou shalt see
nothing equal to the loss arising to thee from
thence. And thou indeed makest mention
of acres of land, so many and so many, and
of houses ten or twenty or even more, and of
baths as many, and of slaves a thousand, or
twice as many, and of chariots fastened with
silver and overlaid with gold; but I say this,
that if each one of you that are rich were to
leave this poverty (for these things are
poverty compared with what I am about to
say), and were possessed of a whole world,
and each of them had as many men as are
now everywhere on land and sea, and each a
world both sea and land, and everywhere
buildings, and cities, and nations, and from
every side instead of water, instead of foun-
tains, gold flowed up for him, I would not
say those who are thus rich are worth three
farthings, when they are cast out of the king-
dom

For if now aiming at riches that perish,

* Toi \6yio TTOLrnTOV,


Homily LXIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


;9i


when they miss them, they are tormented, if
they should obtain a perception of those un-
speakable blessings, what then will suffice for
consolation for them ? There is nothing.
Tell me not then of the abundance of their
possessions, but consider how great loss the
lovers of this abundance undergo in conse-
quence thereof, for these things losing Heav- '
en, and being in the same state, as if any one I
after being cast out of the highest honor in !
kings' courts, having a dung heap, were to •
pride himself on that. For the storing up of
money differs nothing from that, or rather
that is even the better. For that is service-
able both for husbandry, and for heating a
bath, and for other such uses, but the buried
gold for none of these things. And would it
were merely useless; but as it is, it kindles
moreover many furnaces for him that hath it,
unless he use it rightly; countless evils at
least spring therefrom.


Therefore they that are without used to
call the love of money the citadel' of evils;
but tlie blessed Paul spake much better, and
more vividly, pronouncing it " the root of all
evils. " =

Considering then all these things, let us
emulate the things worthy of emulation, not
gorgeous buildings, not costly estates, but the
men that have much confidence towards God,
those that have riches in Heaven, the owners
of those treasures, tliem that are really rich,
them that are poor for Christ's sake, that we
may attain unto the good things of eternity
by the grace and love towards man of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with whom be unto the
Father, together with the Holy Ghost, glory,
might, honor, now and always and world with-
out end. Amen.

> Mr. Field cites .Stobaeus, p. ijo, 52, of Bion, and Diog. I^ert.
vi. 50, of Diogenes the cynic, noting that both say fiijTpoTroAi? , not
axpoTroAiT. See Adnot. p. 133.

2 I Tim. vi. 10. [R. V., " a root of all kinds of evil."]


HOMILY LXIV.


Matt. XIX. 27.


"Then answered Peter, and said unto Him, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed

Thee; what shall we have therefore ? "


All which ? O blessed Peter; the rod ?
the net? the boat ? the craft ? These things
dost thou tell me of, as all ? Yea, saith he,
but not for display do I say these things, but
in order that by this question I may bring in
the multitude of the poor. For since the
Lord had said, " If thou wilt be perfect, sell
that ttiou hast, and give to the poor, and thou
shalt have treasure in Heaven;"' lest any
one of the poor should say, What then? if I
have no possessions, can I not be perfect ?
Peter asks, that tliou, the poor man, mayest
learn, that thou art made in no respect in-
ferior by this: Peter asks, that thou mayest
not learn from Peter, and doubt (for indeed
he was imperfect as yet, and void of the
Spirit), but that, having received the declara-
tion from Peter's Master, thou mayest be
confident.

For like as we do (we make thmgs our own
often when speaking of the concerns of

< Matt. xix. 31.


others), so did the apostle, when he put to
Him this question in behalf of all the world.
Since that at least he knew with certainty his
own portion, is manifest from what liatl been
said before; for lie that liail already receiveil
the keys of the Heavens, much more might
feel confidence about the things hereafter.

P.ut mark also how exactly his reply is ac-
cording to Christ's demand. For He had
required of the rich man these two things, to
give tiiat he had to the poor, and to follow
Him. Wherefore he also ex|)resses these two
things, to forsake, and to follow. " For be-
holcl we have forsaken all,'' saith he, " and
have followed Thee." For the forsaking
was done for the sake of following, anil the
following was rendered easier by the forsak-
ing, and made tlieni feel confidence ami joy
touching tile forsaking.

What then saith He? "Verily, I say unto
you, tliat ye which have followed me, in the
regeneration when the Son of Man shall sit
on the throne of His glory, ye also shall sit


392


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXIV.


upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes
of Israel." ' What then, one may say, shall
Judas sit there ? By no means. How, then,
doth He say, "Ye shall sit on twelve
thrones ? " how shall the terms of the promise
be fulfilled ?

Hear how, and on what principle. There
is a law ordained of God, recited by Jeremiah,
the prophet to the Jews, and in these words:
"At what instant I shall speak a sentence
concerning a nation and kingdom, to pluck
up and destroy; if that nation turn from their
evil deeds, I also will repent of the evils,
which I thought to do unto them. And at
what instant 1 shall speak concerning a nation
and kingdom to build and to plant it; and
if they do evil in my sight, that they obey not
my voice, I also will repent of the good,
which I said I would do unto them." ^

For the same custom do I observe with re-
spect to the good things as well, saith He.
For though I spake of building up, should
they show themselves unworthy of the prom-
ise, I will no longer do it. Which sort of
thing was done with respect to man upon his
creation, " For the dread of you," it is said,
"and the fear of you shall be on the wild
beasts, "3 and it cSime not to pass, for he
proved himself unworthy of the sovereignty,
even as did Judas also.

For in order that neither at the denuncia-
tions of punishment any men should despair,
and become more hardened, nor by the
promises of good things be rendered cause-
lessly more remiss. He remedies both these
evils, by that which I have before mentioned,
saying in this way: Though I should threaten,
do not despair; for thou art able to repent,
and to reverse the denunciation, like the
Ninevites. Though I should promise any
good thing, grow not remiss because of the
promise. For shouldest thou appear un-
worthy, the fact of my having promised will
not advantage thee, but will rather bring
punishment. For I promise thee being
worthy.

Therefore even then in His discourse with
His disciples He did not promise to them
simply, for neither did He say, " you," only,
but added, "which have followed me,'' that
He might both cast out Judas, and draw
towards Him those that should come after-
wards. For neither to them only was it said,
nor to Judas any more, when he had become
unworthy.

Now to the disciples He promised things
to come, saying, "Ye shall sit on twelve
thrones," for they were now of a higher


stamp, and sought after none of the things of
the present world, but to the rest He prom-
ises also what are here.

For "every one," He saith, "that hath
forsaken brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands, or
house, for my name's sake, shall receive an
hundredfold in this world, and shall inherit
eternal life." *

For lest any after having heard the word
"ye," should suppose this a thing peculiar to
the disciples (I mean now the enjoying the
greatest and first honors in the things to
come), He extended the word, and spread
the promise over the whole earth, and from
the things present establishes the things to
come also. And to the disciples also at the
beginning, when they were in a more imper-
fect state, He reasoned from the things pres-
ent. For when He drew them from the sea,
and took them from their trade, and com-
manded them to forsake the ships, He made
mention not of Heaven, not of thrones, but
of the things here, saying, " I will make you
fishers of men;" but when He had wrought
them to be of higher views, then after that
He discourses of the things to come also.

2. But what is, " Judging the twelve tribes
of Israel?" This is, "condemning them."
For they are not surely to sit as judges, but
like as He said the Queen of the South should
condemn that generation, and the Ninevites
shall condemn them; so now these also.
Therefore He said not, the nations, and the
world, but the tribes of Israel. For since
both the Jews alike and the apostles had been
brought up under the same laws, and customs,
and polity; when the Jews said, that for this
cause they could not believe in Christ, be-
cause the law forbade to receive His com-
mandments, by bringing forward these men,
who had received the same law, and yet had
believed. He condemns all those; like as
even already He had said, "therefore they
shall be your judges." 5

And what great thing doth He promise
them, it may be said, if what the Ninevites
have and the Queen of the South, this these
are to have also ? In the first place He had
promised them many other things before this,
and after this doth promise them, and this
alone is not their reward.

And besides even in this He intimated by
the way something more than these things.
For of those He simply said, The men of
Nineveh shall rise up and condemn this gen-


* Matt. xLx. 28.


' Jer. xviii. 7-10.


3 Gen. IX. 2.


5 Matt. xii. 27.


Homily LXIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW,


39:


eration," ' and, " The Queen of the South
shall condemn it; " but concerning these, not
merely thus, but how? "When the Son of
Man shall sit upon the throne of His glory,
then shall ye also sit upon twelve thrones,"
saith He, declaring, that they also shall reign
with Him, and partake of that glory. " For
if we suffer," it is said, "we shall also reign
with Him.'' ^ For neither do the thrones
signify a sitting (in judgment), for He alone
is the one that shall sit and judge, but honor
and glory unspeakable did He intimate by
the thrones.

To these then He spake of these things,
but to all the rest of eternal life and an hun-
dredfold here. But if to the rest, muc^
more to these too, both these things, and the
things in this life.

And this surely came to pass; for when
they had left a fishing rod and a net, they
possessed with authority the substances of
all, the prices of the houses and the lands,
and the very bodies of the believers. For
often did they choose even to be slain for
their sake, as Paul also bears witness to
many, when he saith, " If it had been possi-
ble ye would have plucked out your eyes, and
given them to me."^ But when He saith,
" Every one who hath forsaken wife," He
saith not this, for marriages to be broken
asunder for nought, but as He saith concern-
mg one's life, "He that loseth his life for
my sake shall find it," ■* not that we should
destroy ourselves, neither that while yet here
we should part it from ttie body, but that we
should prefer godliness to all things; this too
He saith also with respect to wife and brethren.

But He seems to me here to intimate also
the persecutions. For since there were many
instances both of fathers urging their sons to
ungodliness, and wives their husl)ands; when
they command these things, saith He, let
them be neither wives nor j)arerits, even as
Paul likewise said, " But if the unbelieving
depart, let him depart. "^

When He had then raised the spirit of all,
and had persuaded them to -feel confidence
both with respect to themselves and to all the
world. He added, that " Many that were first
shall be last, and last first."'' But this al-
though it be spoken also witliout distinction
concerning many otiiers likewise, it is spoken
also concerning tliese men and concerning
the Pharisees, who did not believe, even as
before also He had said, " Many shall come
from east and west and shall sit down with


" Matt. xii. 41. » J Tim. il. la.

1 (Jul. iv. 51. 4 Malt, X. iq. 5 t Cor. vii. 15.

<< Matt. xix. 30. [" wrrr'" is un rmrndution of the translator.
The Greek is that of ihr r<-i t.«i U.


Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob; but the chil-
dren of the kingdom shall be cast out." ^

Then He adds also a parable, as training
those who had fallen short to a great forward-
ness,

" For the kingdom of Heaven," He said,
" is like to a man that is an- householder,
whicl^ went out early in the morning to hire
laborers into his vineyard. And when he
had agreed with them for a penny a day, he
sent them into his vineyard."

*'And at the third hour he saw others
standing idle, and to them too he said, Go ye
also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right
I will give you. And about the sixth and
ninth hours he did likewise. And about the
eleventh hour, he saw others standing idle,
and saith unto them. Why stand ye here all
the day idle? But they say unto him. No
man hath hired us. He saith unto them.
Go ye also into my vineyard, and whatsoever
is right, ye shall receive."

" So when even was come, the lord of the
vineyard saith unto his steward, Call the
laborers, and give them their hire, beginning
from the last unto the first. And when they
came that were hired about the eleventh hour,
they received every man a penny. And the
first supposed that they should receive more,
and they received likewise every man a
penny. And wlien they had received it, they
murmured against the good man of the house,
saying. These last have wrought but one hour,
and thou hast made them equal unto us that
have borne the burden and heat of the day.
But he answered one of them, and said,
Friend, I do thee no wrong; didst thou not
agree with me for a penny? Take tliat thine
is, and go thy way; I will give unto tliis last
also, even as unto thee. Is it not lawful for
me to do what I will with mine own? Is
thine eye evil, because I am good ? Thus
the last shall be first, and the first last: for
many are called, but few chosen.""

3. What is to us the intent of this parable ?
For the beginning dotii not harinoni/e with
what is sa;d at the end, but intimates alto-
gether tiie contrary. For in the first jiart He
shows all enjoying the same, and not some
cast out, and some brouglit in; yet He Him-
self both before the parable ami after the
parable said tlie opposite thing. " Tli.it the
first shall be last, and the last first," that is,
before the very first, those not continuing
first, but having become last. For in proof
that this is His meaning. He atliled, " Slany
are called, but few cliosen," so as doubly

7 Matt. viii. 11', 13.

* Mult. XX. I, [This lonK [msmnur «k,'rcr5 cli><u-ly with the rcr.
trxt. Ill vrriws 5, li, tlir Nrw rrituiiinit narrative I'l ubriilgcil,
but there are vunrly any other |>ri.uliurilie<i. — K.]


594


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LX IV


both to sting the one, and to soothe and urge
on the other.

But the parable saith not this, but that they
shall be equal to them that are approved, and
have labored much. "For thou hast made
them equal unto us," it is said, "that have
borne the burden and heat of the day."

What then is the meaning of the parable ?
For it is necessary to make this first clear,
and then we shall clear up that other point.
By a vineyard He meaneth the injunctions of
God and His commandments: by the time of
laboring, the present life: by laborers, them
that in different ways are called to the fulfill-
ment of the injunctions: by early in the
morning, and about the third and ninth and
eleventh hours, them who at different ages
have drawn near to God, and approved them-
selves.

But the question is this, whether the first
having gloriously approved themselves, and
having pleased God, and having throughout
the whole day shone by their labors, are pos-
sessed by the basest feeling of vice, jealousy
and envy. For when they had seen them
enjoying the same rewards, they say, " These
last have wrought but one hour, and thou hast
made them equal unto us, that have borne
the burden and heat of the day." And in
these words, when they are to receive no
hurt, neither to suffer diminution as to their
own hire, they were indignant, and much dis-
pleased at the good of others, which was proof
of envy and jealousy. And what is yet more,
the good man of the house in justifying him-
self with respect to them, and in making his
defense to him that had said these things,
convicts him of wickedness and the basest
jealousy, saying, " Didst thou not agree with
me for a penny ? Take that thine is, and go
thy way; I will give unto the last even as
unto thee. Is thine eye evil, because I am
good?"

What then is it which is to be established
by these things ? For in other parables also
this self-same thing may be seen. For the
son who was approved is brought. in, as hav-
ing felt this self-same thing, when he saw his
prodigal brother enjoying much honor, even
more than himself. For like as these enjoyed
more by receiving first,, so he in a greater
degree was honored by the abundance of the
things given him; and to these things he thai;
was approved bears witness.

What then may we say ? There is no one
who is thus justifying himself, or blaming
others in the kingdom of Heaven; away with
the thought! for that place is pure from envy
and jealousy. For if when they are here the
saints give their very lives for sinners, much


more when they see them there in the enjoy-
ment of these things, do they rejoice and ac-
count these to be blessings of their own.

Wherefore then did He so frame His dis-
course ? The saying is a parable, wherefore
neither is it right to inquire curiously into all
things in parables word by word,' but when
we have learnt the object for which it was
composed, to reap this, and not to busy one's
self about anything further.

Wherefore then was this parable thus com-
posed ? what is its object to effect ? To render
more earnest them that are converted and be-
come better men in extreme old age, and not
to allow them to suppose they have a less
portion. So it is for this cause He introduces
also others displeased at their blessings, not
to represent those men as pining or vexed,
away with the thought ! but to teach us that
these have enjoyed such honor, as could even
have begotten envy in others. Which we
also often do, saying, "Such a one blamed
me, because I counted thee worthy of much
honor, ' ' neither having been blamed, nor wish-
ing to slander that other, but hereby to show
the greatness of the gift which this one en-
joyed.

But wherefore can it have been that He
did not hire all at once ? As far as concerned
Him, He did hire all; but if all did not
hearken at once, the difference was made by
the disposition of them that were called. For
this cause, some are called early in the morn-
ing, some at the third hour, some at the sixth,
some at the ninth, some at the eleventh, when
they would obey.

This Paul also declared when he said,
"When it pleased Him, who separated me
from my mother's womb.'"* When did it
please Him ? When he was ready to obey.
For He willed it even from the beginning,
but because he would not have yielded, then
it pleased Him, when Paul also was ready to
obey. Thus also did He call the thief, al-
though He was able to have called him even
before, but he would not have obeyed. For
if Paul at the beginning would not have
obeyed, much more the thief.

And if they say, "No man hath hired us,"
in the first place as I said we must not be
curious about all the points in the parables;
but here neither is the good man of the house
represented to say this, but they; but he doth
not convict them, that he might drive them
to perplexity, but might win them over. For
that He called all, as far as lay in Him, from
the first even the parable shows, saying, that
" He went out early in the morning to hire."


I Kara At^ti*.


2 Gal. i. 15.


Homily LXIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


;95


4. From everything then it is manifest to
us, that the parable is spoken with reference
to them who from earliest youth, and those
who in old age and more tardily, lay hold on
virtue; to the former, that they may not be
proud, neither reproach those called at the
eleventh hour; to the latter, that they may
learn that it is possible even in a short time
to recover all.

For since He had been speaking about
earnestness, and the casting away of riches,
and contempt of ail one's possessions, but
this needed much vigor of mind and youthful
ardor; in order to kindle in them a fire of
love, and to give vigor to clieir will. He shows
that it is possible even for men coming later
to receive the hire of the whole day.

But He doth not say it thus, lest again He
should make them proud, but he shows that
the whole is of His love to man, and because
of this they shall not fail, but shall themselves
enjoy the unspeakable blessings.

And this chiefly is what it is His will to
establish by this parable. And if He adds,
that, '• So the last shall be first and the first
last; for many are called, but few chosen,"
marvel not. For not as inferring it from the
parable doth He say this, but His meaning
is this, that like as this came to pass, so shall
that come to pass. ?"or here indeed the first
did not become last, but all received the same
contrary to hope and expectation. But as
this result took place contrary to hope and
contrary to expectation, and they that came
before were equalled by them that followed,
so shall that also come to pass which is more
than this, and more strange, I mean, that the
last should come to be even before the first,
and that the first should be after these. So
that that is one thing, and this another.

But He seems to me to say these things,
darkly hinting at the Jews, and amongst the
believers at those who at first shone forth,
but afterwards neglected virtue, and fell back;
and those others again that have risen from
vice, and have shot beyond many. For we
see such changes taking place both with re-
spect to faith and practice.

Wherefore I entreat you let us use much
diligence both to stand in the right faith, and
to show forth an excellent life. For unless
we add also a life suitable to our faith, we
shall suffer tlie extremest punishment.

And this the blessed Paul slunved even
from times of old, when he said, that " Tliey
(lid all eat tiic same spiritual meat, and did
all drink the same sjiiritual drink: " and added,
that they were not saved; " for they were
overthrown in the wilderness.'*' And Christ

« I Cor. X. 3, 4, 5.


declared it even in the evangelists, when He
brought in some that had cast out devils and
prophesied, and are led away to punishment.
And all His parables also, as that of the vir-
gins, that of the net, that of the thorns, that
of the tree not bringing forth fruit, demand
virtue in our works. For concerning doc-
trines He discourses seldom, for neither doth
the subject need labor, but of life often or
rather everywhere, for the war about this is
continual, wherefore also so is the labor.

And why do I speak of the whole code.
For even a part of it overlooked brings upon
one great evils; as, for instance, almsgiving
overlooked casts into hell them that have
come short in it; and yet this is not the whole
of virtue, but a part thereof. But neverthe-
less both the virgins were punished for not
having this, and the rich man was for this
cause tormented, and they that have not fed
the hungry, are for this condemned with the
devil. Again, not to revile is a very small
part of it, nevertheless this too casts out them
that have not attained to it. " For he that
saith to his brother, Thou fool, shall be in
danger of hell fire."'' Again, even conti-
nence itself is a part, but nevertheless, without
this no one shall see the Lord. For, " Fol-
low peace," it is said, "and holiness, ^with-
out which no man shall see the Lord."-* .\nd
humility too in like manner is a part of virtue;
but nevertheless though anyone should fulfill
other good works, but have not attained to
this, he is unclean with God. And this is
manifest from the Pharisee, who though
aboundmg with numberless good works, by
this lost all.

But I have also something more than these
things to say again. I mean, tiiat not only
one of them overlooked shuts Heaven against
us, but though it be done, yet not in due per-
fection and abundance, it produces the self-
same effect again. " For except your right-
eousness shall exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall not enter
into the kingdom of Heaven. ''^ So that
though thou give alms, but not more than
they, thou shalt not enter in.

And how much did they bestow in alms'
one may ask. For this very thing, I am
minded to say now, tliat they who do not
give may be roused to give, and they that
give m.'iy not pride themselves, but may
make inc rease of their gifts. What then di*l
they give ? A tenth of all their possessions,
and again another tenth, and after this a
third, so tliat they almost gave away the

» Miitt. V. ai.
I 3 ayiatr^bf , comp. I ThcM. IV. j. [R. V,, " «jinc«ific«iion."]
4 llrl). xii. 14. i .Mutl. viii. ao.


;96


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXIV.


third part, for three-tenths put together
make up this. And together with these, first
fruits, and first born, and other things besides,
as, for instance, the offerings for sins, those
for purification, those at feasts, those in the
jubilee,' those by the cancelling of debts, and
the dismissals of servants, and the lendings
that were clear of usury. But if he who gave
the third part of his goods, or rather the half
(for those being put together with these are
the half), if then he who is giving the half,
achieves no great thing, he who doth not be-
stow so much as the tenth, of what shall he
be worthy? With reason He said, "There
are few that be saved,"

5. Let us not, then, despise the care of
our life. For if one portion of it despised
brings so great a destruction, when on every
hand we are subject to the sentence of con-
demnation, how shall we escape the punish-
ment ? and what manner of penalty shall we
not suffer? and what manner of hope of sal-
vation have we, one may ask, if each of the
things we have numbered threatens us with
hell ? I too say this; nevertheless, if we give
heed we may be saved, preparing the medi-
cines of almsgiving, and attending to our
wounds.

For oil does not so strengthen a body, as
benevolence at once strengthens a soul, and
makes it invincible to all and impregnable to
the devil. For wheresoever he may seize us,
his hold then slips, this oil not suffering his
grasp to fix on our back.

With this oil therefore let us anoint our-
selves continually. For it is the cause of
health, and a supply of light, and a source of
cheerfulness. "But such a one," thou wilt
say, "hath talents of gold so many and so
many, and gives away nothing.^' And what
is that to thee? For thus shalt thou appear
more worthy of admiration, when in poverty
thou art more munificent than he. It was
on this ground Paul marvelled at the Mace-
donians, not because they gave, but because
even though they were in poverty they gave.^

Look not then at these, but at the common
Teacher of all, who " had not where to lay
His head." 3 And why, you say, doth not
this and that person do so ? Do not judge
another, but deliver thyself from the charge
against thee. Since the punishment is greater
when thou at the same time blamest others,
and thyself doest not, when judging other
men, thou art again thyself also subject to
the same judgment. For if even them who
<3o right He permits not to judge others,
much more will He not permit offenders.


^ 'Itu^TjAai'cu.


2 2 Cor. viii. i, 2, 3.


3 Matt. viii. 20.


Let us not therefore judge others, neither let
us look to others who are taking their ease,
but unto Jesus, and from thence let us draw
our examples.

Why! have I been thy benefactor? Why!
did I redeem thee, that thou lookest to me?
It is another who hath bestowed these things
on thee. Why dost thou let go thy Master,
and look unto thy fellow-servant? Heardest
thou not Him saying, " Learn of me, for I
am meek and lowly in heart?"'* And again,
" He that would be first amongst you. let him
be servant of all:" and again, " Even as the
Son of Man came not to be ministered unto,
but to minister." 5 And after these things
again, lest taking offense at them who are
remiss amongst thy fellow-servants, thou con-
tinue in contemptuousness; to draw thee off
from that. He saith, "I have made myself
an example to you, that as I have done, ye
should do also." * But hast thou no teacher
of virtue amongst those persons that are with
thee, neither such a one as to lead thee on to
these things ? More abundant then will be
the praise, the commendation greater, when
not even being supplied with teachers thou
hast become one to be marvelled at.

For this is possible, nay very easy, if we
be willing; and this they show, who first duly
performed these things, as for instance, Noah,
Abraham, Melchizedeck, Job, and all the
men like them. To them it is needful to look
every day, and not unto these, whom ye never
cease emulating, and passing about their
names in your assemblies. For nothing else
do I hear you saying everywhere, but such
words as these; " Such a one has bought so
many acres of land; such a one is rich, he is
building." Why dost thou stare, O man, at
what is without ? Why dost thou look to
others ? If thou art minded to look to others,
look to them that do their duty, to them that
approve themselves, to them that carefully
fulfill the law, not to those that have become
offenders, and are in dishonor. For if thou
look to these, thou wilt gather hence many
evil things, falling into remissness, into pride,
into condemnation of others; but if thou
reckon over them that do right, thou wilt
lead thyself on unto humility, unto diligence,
unto compunction, unto the blessings that are
beyond number.

Hear what the Pharisee suffered, because
he let pass them that do right, and looked to
him that had offended; hear and fear.

See how David became one to be marvelled
at, because he looked to his ancestors that
were noted for virtue. " For I am a


4 Matt. II. 29.


5 Matt. XX. 27, 28.


6 John xiii. 15.


Homily LXV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. xMATTHEW.


\97


stranger," saith he, "and a sojourner, as all
my fathers were."' For this man, and all
that are like him, let pass them that had
sinned, and thougut of those who had ap-
proved themselves.

This do thou also. For thou art not set to
judge of the negligences of which others have
been guilty, nor to inquire into the sins which
others are committing; thou art required to
do judgment on thyself, not on others. " For
if we judged ourselves," it is said, " we should
not be judged, but when we are judged, we
are chastened of the Lord.'' = But thou hast
reversed the order, of thyself requiring no
account of offenses great or small, but being
strict and curious about the offenses of others.

Let us no more do this, but leaving off
this disorderly way, let us set up a tribunal


' Ps. XXxLx. 12.


2 I Cor. xi. 31, 32.


in ourselves for the sins committed by our-
selves, becoming ourselves accusers, and
judges, and executioners for our offenses.

But if it be thy will to be busy about the
things of other men also, busy thyself about
their good works, not tneir sins, that both by
the memory of our negligences and by our
emulation for the good works they have done,
and by setting before ourselves the judgment-seat
from which no prayers can deliver , wounded
each day by our conscience as by a kind of goad,^
we may lead ourselves on to humility, and
a greater diligence, and attain unto the good
things to come, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ; with whom be
to the Father, together with the Hcly Ghost,
glory, might, honor, now and always, and
world without end. Amen.

3 The part in italics is omitted in two manuscripts.


HOMILY LXV.

Matt. XX. 17 — 19.

"And Jesus going up to Jerusalem took the twelve disciples apart in the way, and said
unto them. Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of ^Lln shall be betrayed
unto the chief priests and unto the Scribes, and they shall condemn Him to death,
and shall deliver Him to the Gentiles to mock,* and to scourge, ami to crucify Him;
and the third day He shall be raised."


He goeth not up at once to Jerusalem when
He is come out of Galilee, but having first
wrought miracles, and having stopped the
mouths of Pharisees, and having discoursed
with His disciples of renouncing possessions:
for, " if thou wilt be perfect," snith He. " sell [
that thou hast: " ' and of virginity, " He that 1
is able to receive, let him receive it:"' and |
of humility, " For except ye be converted, '
and become as little cluklren, ye shall not
enter into the kingdom of Heaven:"' and;
of a recomjiense of the things iiere, " For
whoso hath forsaken houses, or brctliren, or
sisters, shall receive an iiiimlredfold in tliis
world: " * and of rewards there, " For he sliall
also inlierit," it is said, "eternal life: " then
He assails tiie city ne.xt, and l)eing on tlie
point of going up, discourses again of His
passion. For since it was likely that they,


■ Mnlt. xix. 31.
5 Matt, xviii. 3.


'' Mutt. xix. 13.
4 Mutt. xix. 29.


because they were not willing this should
come to pass, would forget it, He is continu-
ally putting them in remembrance, exercising
their mind by the fretpiency with which He
reminded them, and diminishing their jiain.

But He speaks with them "apart," neces-
sarily; for it was not meet that His discourse
about these things siiould be published to
the many; neither that it siioulil be spoken
jilainly, for no adv;mtage arose from this.
For if the disciples were confounded at hear-
ing these things, much more the multitude of
the people.

\\'hat tlien ? was it not told to the people?
you may say. It w;is indeed told to the
people also, but not so plainly. For. " De-
str(>y," s;iith He, "this Temple, and in three
days I will raise it up;"' and, " Tins gener.i-
tion seeketh after a sign, and there shall no
sign be given it, but tiie sign of Jt)nas; " ' and


S loliii ii.


< Mull. xii. 3v


39«


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXV.


again, " Yet a little while am I with you, and
ye shall seek me, and shall not find me." '

But to the disciples not so, but as the other
things He spake unto them more plainly, so
also spake He this too. And for what pur-
pose, if the multitude understood not the force
of His sayings, were they spoken at all ? That
they might learn after these tnings, that fore-
knowing it, He came to His passion, and
willing it; not in ignorance, nor by constraint.
But to the disciples not for this cause only
did He foretell it; but, as I have said, in
order that having been exercised by the ex-
pectation, they might more easily endure the
passion, and that it might not confound them
by coming upon them without preparation.
So for this cause, while at the beginning He
spake of His death only, when they were
practised and trained to hear of it, He adds
the other circumstances also; as, for instance,
that they should deliver Him to the Gentiles,
that they should mock and scourge Him; as
well on this account, as in order that when
they saw the mournful events come to pass,
they might expect from this the resurrection
also. For He who had not cloaked from
them what would give pain, and what seemed
to be matter of reproach, would reasonably
be believed about good things too.

But mark, I pray thee, how with regard to
the time also He orders the thing wisely.
For neither at the beginning did He tell them,
lest He should disquiet them, neither at the
time itself, lest by this again He should con-
found them; but when they had received
sufficient proof of His power, when He had
given them promises that were very great con-
cerning life everlasting, then He introduces
also what He had to say concerning these
things, once and twice and often interweaving
it with His miracles and His instructions.

But another evangelist saith, that He
brought in the prophets also as witnesses;^
and another again saith, that even they them-
selves understood not His words, but the
saying was hid from them, and that they were
amazed as they followed Him.^

Surely then, one may say, the benefit of
the prediction is taken away. For if they
knew not what they were hearing, neither
could they look for the event, and not look-
ing for it, neither could they be exercised by
their expectations.

But I say another thing also more perplex-
ing than this; If they did not know, how were
they sorry. For another saith, they were
sorry. If therefore they knew it not, how
were they sorry ? How did Peter say, "Be

• John vii. 33, 34. 2 Luk-e xviii. 31.

3 Mark x. 32 ; comp. Mark ix. 32, and Luke xviii. 34.


it far from Thee, this shall not be unto
Thee?"^

What then may we say ? That He should
die indeed they knew, albeit they knew not
clearly the mystery of the Incarnation. s
Neither did they know clearly about the
resurrection, neither what He was to achieve;
and this was hid from them.

For this cause also they felt pain. For
some they had known to have been raised
again by other persons, but for any one to
have raised up himself again, and in such
wise to have raised himself as not to die any
more, they had never known.

This then they understood not, though
often said; nay nor of this self-same death
did they clearly know what it was, and how
it should come on Him. Wherefore also they
were amazed as they followed Him, but not
for this cause only; but to me at least He
seems even to amaze them by discoursing of
His passion.

2. Yet none of these things made them
take courage, and this when they were con-
tinually hearing about His resurrection. For
together with His death this also especially
troubled them, to hear that men should
" mock and scourge Him," and the like.
For when they considered His miracles, the
possessed persons whom He had delivered,
the dead whom He had raised, all the other
marvellous works which He was doing, and
then heard these things, they were amazed,
if He who doeth these works is thus to suffer.
Therefore they fell even into perplexity, and
now believed, now disbelieved, and could not
understand His sayings. So far at least were
they from understanding clearly what He
said, that the sons of Zebedee at the same
time came to Him, and spake to Him of pre-
cedence. " We desire, '' it is said, " that one
should sit on Thy right hand, and one on Thy
left " ^ How then doth this evangelist say,
that their mother came to Him ? It is proba-
ble both things were done. I mean, that they
took their mother with them, with the purpose
of making their entreaty stronger, and in this
way to prevail with Christ.

For in proof that this is true, as I say, and
the request was rather theirs, and that being
ashamed they put forward their mother, mark
how Christ directs His words to them.

But rather let us learn, first, what do they
ask, and with what disposition, and whence
they were moved to this ? Whence then were
they moved to this ? They saw themselves
honored above the rest, and expected from
that they should obtain this request also.


4 Matt. xvi. 22.

6 Matt. XX. 21. Comp. Mark x. 37.


S Lit., " economy."


Homily LXV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


399


But what can it be they ask ? Hear another
evangehst plainly declaring this. For, "Be-
cause He was nigh," it is said, "to Jerusa-
lem, and because they thought the kingdom
of God should immediately appear,"" they
asked these things. For they supposed that
this was at the doors, and visible, and that
having obtained what they asked, they would
undergo none of the painful things. For
neither for its own sake only did they seek
it, but as though they would also escape the
hardships.

^^'herefore also Christ in the first place leads
them off from these thoughts, commanding
them to await slaughter and dangers, and the
utmost tenors. For, "Are ye able," saith
He, " to drink of the cup that I drink of ? " =

But let no man be troubled at the apostles
being in such an imperfect state. For not
yet was the cross accomplished, not yet the
grace of the Spirit given. But if thou would-
est learn their virtue, notice them after these
things, and thou wilt see them superior to
every passion. For with this object He re-
veals their deficiencies, that after these things
thou mightest know what manner of men they
became by grace.

That then they were asking, in fact, for
nothing spiritual, neither had a thought of
the kingdom above, is manifest from hence.
But let us see also, how they come unto
Him, and what they say. "We would," it
is said, ''that whatsoever we shall desire of
Thee, Thou shouldest do it for us." '

And Christ saith to them, "What would
ye ? " * not being ignorant, but that He may
compel them to answer, and lay open the
wound, and so apply the medicine. But they
out of shame and confusion of face, l)ecause
under the influence of a human passion they
were come to do this, took Him privately
apart from the disciples, and asked Him.
For they went before, it is said, so that it
might not be observable to them, and so said
what they wished. For it was their desire,
as I suppose, because they heard, "Ye shall
sit on twelve thrones, to have the first place
of tliese seats. And that they had an ad-
vantage over tlie otiiers, they knew, but tiiey
were afraid of I'eter, anil say, " ('ommand,
that one sit on Thy rigiit hand, one on Thy
left;" and tliey urge Him, saying, "Com-
mand."

What then saith He? Showing, that tiiey
asked nothing spiritual, nintlier, if they liad
known again what they were asking, would
they have ventured to ask for so much, He
saith, " Ye know not wliat ye ask," how great.


■ I.ukc xix. II.
3 Mark x. 35.


' Mate. XX. 13.
4 Mark x. 36.


how marvellous, how surpassing even the
powers above. After that He adds, "Are ye
able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of,
and to be baptized with the baptism that I
am baptized with ? " ^ Seest thou, how He
straightway drew them off from their suspi-
cion, by framing His discourse from the con-
trary topics? For ye. He saith, talk to me
of honor and crowns, but I to you of conflicts
and labors. For this is not the season for
rewards, neither shall that glory of mine ap-
pear now, but the present time is one of
slaughter, and wars, and dangers

.\nd see how by the form of His question.
He both urges and attracts them. For He
said not, "Are ye able to be slain?" ".\re
ye able to pour forth your blood ? " but how ?
"Are ye able to drink of the cup?" Then
to attr^kct them to it. He saith, "Which I
shall drink of," that by their fellowship with
Him in it they might be made more ready.

And a baptism again calls He it; showing
that great was the cleansing the world was to
have from the things that were being done.

" They say unto Him, We are able." ' Out
of their forwardness they straightway under-
took it, not knowing even this which they
were saying, but looking to hear what they
had asked.

What then saith He ? " Ye shall drink in-
deed of my cup, and be baptized with the
baptism that I am baptized with."? Great
blessings did He foretell to them. His mean-
ing is, ye shall be counted worthy of martyr-
dom, and shall suffer these things which I
suffer; ye shall close your life by a violent
death, and in these things ye shall be par-
takers with me; "But to sit on my right
hand and on my left is not mine to give, but
it shall be given to them for whom it is pre-
pared of my Father."

3. Having first elevated their souls, and
made them of a higher character, and having
rendered them such as sorrow could not sub-
due, then He reproves their request.

liut what can be this |)resent saying? For
indeed there are two points that are subjects
of inquiry to many: one, if it be prepared for
any to sit on His riglit hand; and then, it
the Lord of all hath not power to bestow it
on them for whom it is prepared.

What tiien is the saying? If we solve the
former jioint, tiien the seconil also will be
clear to the iiupiirers. What tlien is this?
No one shall sit on His right iiand nor on His
left. For that throne is inaccessible to all, I


5 [Tlir lonurr rcndinR is here arccplrd. The K. V. follows M
brirfrr rnidini; lirrc uiiil in verse jj. K.]
<■ Mult. XX. ii.
7 Mutt. XX. 33. [The latter clause is omitted in the K. V.]


400


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXV.


do not say to men only, and saints, and
apostles, but even to angels, and archangels,
and to all the powers that are on high.

At least Paul puts it as a peculiar privilege
of the Only-Begotten, saying, " To which of
the angels said He at any time, Sit thou on
my right hand?' And of the angels He
saith, who maketh His angels spirits; " but
unto the Son, ' Thy throne, O God.' "'

How then saith He, " To sit on my right
hand and on my left is not mine to give,"
as though there are some that should sit
there ? Not as though there are; far from it;
but He makes answer to the thoughts of them
who ask the favor, condescending to their un-
derstanding. For neither did they know that
lofty throne, and His sitting at the right hand
of the Father; how should they, when even
the things that were much lower than these,
and were daily instilled into them, they un-
derstood not? but they sought one thing
only, to enjoy the first honors, and to stand
before the rest, and that no one should stand
before them with Him; even as I have already
said before, that, since they heard of twelve
thrones, in ignorance wnat the saying could
mean, they asked for the first place.

What therefore Christ saith is this: "Ye
shall die indeed for me, and shall be slain for
the sake of the gospel, and shall be partakers
with me, as far as regards the passion; but
this is not sufficient to secure you the enjoy-
ment of the first seat, and to cause that ye
should occupy the first place. For if any one
else should come, together with the martyr-
dom, possessed of all the other parts of virtue
far more fully than you, not because I love
you now, and prefer you to the rest, therefore
shall I set aside him that is distinguished by
his good works, and give the first honors to
you."

But thus indeed He did not say it, so as
not to pain them, but darkly He intimates
the self-same thing, saying, "Ye shall drink
indeed of my cup, and ye shall be baptized
with the baptism that I am baptized with; but
to sit on my right hand and on my left, this
is not mine to give, but it shall be given to
those for whom it is prepared."

But for whom is it prepared ? For them
who could become distinguished by their
works. Therefore He said not, It is not
mine to give, but my Father's, lest any
should say that He was too weak, or wanting
in vigor for their recompense; but how? It
is not mine, but of those for whom it is pre-
pared.

And in order that what I say may be more


I Heb. i. 13.


2 Heb. i. 7, 8.


plain, let us work it on an illustration, and
let us suppose there was some master of the
games, then that many excellent combatants
went down to the contest, and that some two
of the combatants that were most nearly con-
nected with the master of the games were to
come to him and say, "Cause us to be
crowned and proclaimed," confiding in their
good-will and friendship with him; and that
he were to say to them, " This is not mine to
give, but it shall be given to them for whom
it is prepared, by their labors, and their
toils; " should we indeed condemn him as
powerless ? By no means, but we should ap-
prove him for his justice, and for having no
respect of persons. Like then as we should
not say that he did not give the crown from
want of vigor, but as not wishing to corrupt
the law of the games, nor to disturb the order
of justice; in like manner now should I say
Christ said this, from every motive to compel
them, after the grace of God, to set their
hopes of salvation and approval on the proof
of their own good works.

Therefore He saith, " For whom it is pre-
pared." For what, saith He, if others should
appear better than you ? What, ■ if they
should do greater things ? For shall ye, be-
cause ye have become my disciples, therefore
enjoy the first honors, if ye yourselves should
not appear worthy of the choice ?

For that He Himself hath power over the
whole, is manifest from His having the entire
judgment. For to Peter too He speaks thus,
" I will give thee the keys of the Heavens." ^
And Paul also makes this clear where he
saith, " Henceforth is laid up for me the
crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the
righteous judge, will give me in that day;
and not to me only, but unto all them also
which have loved His appearing." ■• But the
appearing was of Christ. But that no one
will stand before Paul, is surely clear to every
one.

And if He hath expressed these things
somewhat obscurely, marvel not. For to lead
them on by hidden instruction, = not to be
rudely pressing Him without object or cause
for the first honors (for from a human pas-
sion they felt this), and not wishing to give
them pain, by the obscurity He effects both
these objects.

" Then were the ten moved with indignation
with respect to the two." Then. When?
When He had reproved them. So long as the
judgment was Christ's, they were not moved
with indignation; but seeing them preferred,

3 Matt. xvi. 19. [This peculisr reading and rendering is com-
mented on in the note on Homily LIV. 3. — R.]

4 2 Tim. iv. 8. 5 o'lKovofJiLKOJS.


Homily LXV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


40 r


they were contented, and held their peace,
out of reverence and honor to their Master.

And if they were vexed in mind, yet they
dared not utter this. And when they had
some feeling of human weakness towards
Peter, at the time that He gave the didrach-
mas, they did not give way to anger, l}ut
asked only, " Wlio then is greatest?" Buti
since here the request was the disciples', they i
are moved with indignation. And not even
here are they straightway moved with indig-
nation, when they asked, but when Christ had \
reproved them, and had said they should not
enjoy the first honors, unless they showed
themselves worthy of these.

4. Seest thou how they were all in an im-
perfect state, when both these were lifting
themselves up above the ten, and those envy-
ing the two ? But, as I said, show me them
after these things, and thou wilt see them j
delivered from all these passions. Hear at
least how this same John, iie who now came '
to Him for these things, everywhere gives up'
the first place to Peter, both in addressing the
people, and in working miracles, in the Acts
of the .Apostles.

And he conceals not Peter's good deeds,
but relates both the confession, which he
openly made when all were silent," and his
entering into the tomb,* and puts the apostle
before himself. For, because both continued
with Him at His crucifixion, taking away the
ground of his own commendation, he saith,
" That disciple was known unto the high
priest." ^

But James survived not a long time, but
from the beginning he was so greatly filled
with warmth, and so forsook all the things of
men, and mounted up to an height unuttera-
ble, as straightway to be slain. Thus, in all
respects, they after tiiese things became ex-
cellent.*

But then, "they were moved with indigna-
tion." What then saith Christ ? "He called
them unto Him, and said, The princes of
the Gentiles exercise dominion over them."'
For, as they were disturbed and troubled. He
soothes them l)y His call before His word,
and by drawing them near Him. l"'or tlie two
having separated tiiemselves from the com-
pany of the ten, had stood nearer Him,
pleading their own interests. Therefore He
brings near Him these also, by this very act,
and by exposing and revealing it before the
rest, soothing tue passion both of the one and
of tlie otlier.

And not as before, so now also doth He


' John vi. ^.8, 69.

3 John xviii. 15.

5 Malt. XX. 25. [" Ve know th.it " oinitird

'iO


' John XX. 6.

4 aicpoi.


check them. For whereas before He brings
little children into the midst, and commands
to imitate their simplicity and lowliness;
here He reproves tiiem in a sharper way from
the contrary side, spying, " The princes of
the Gentiles exercise dominion* over them,
and their great ones exercise authority upon
them, but it shall not be so among you;' but
he that will be great among you, let this man
be minister to all; and he that will be first, let
him be last of al!;"^ showing that such a
feeling as this is that of heatliens. I mean, to
love the first place. For the passion is tyran-
nical, and is continually hindering even great
men; therefore also it needs a severer stripe.
Whence He too strikes deeper into them, by
comparison with the Gentiles shaming their
inflamed soul, and removes the envy of the
one and the arrogance of the other, all but
saying, " Be not moved with indignation, as
insulted. For they harm and disgrace them-
selves most, who on this wise seek the first
places, for they are amongst the last. For
matters with us are not like matters without.
' For the princes of the Gentiles exercise
dominion over them,' but with me the last,
even he is first."

"And in proof that I say not these things
without cause, by the things which I do and
suffer, receive the proof of my sayings. For
I have myself done something even more.
For being King of the powers above, I was
willing to become man, and I submitted to be
despised, and despitefully entreated. And
not even with these things was I satisfied, but
even unto death did I come. Therefore,"
He saitli,

" Even as the Son of Man came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give
His life a ransom for many."' "For not
even at this did I stop," saith He, "but even
my life did I give a ransom; and for wliom .'
For enemies. But thou if thou art abased,
it is for thyself, but I for thee.'"

Be not then afraid, as tliough thine honor
were plucked down. For liow much soever
thou humblest tlivself, tliou canst not de-
scend so mucli as thy Lord. And yet His
descent iiatli become the ascent of all, and
hatii made His own <r|orv shine forth. For
before He was made man, He was known
amongst angels only; but after He was made
man and was crucified, so far from lessening
th.'it Kl*"'y» ''<-' ac:(juired other besides, even
that from the knowledge of the world.

«rR. v., "lord it."l

7 [The form of ihU iIhuhc in (irrck diflcni from (hat of iill our
New rr^tiiiiieiit MSS.--U.]


* Mtttt. XX. 35-»7. I The vuriiitionH in text, r«|>erla


17, are peculiar ; compare with the A. V. •nil K. \',
9 Mad. XX. -.18.


Illy tn ver


402


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXV.


Fear not then, as though thine honor were
put down, if thou shouldest abase thyself, for
in this way is thy glory mor.e exalted, in this
way it becomes greater. This is the door of
the kingdom. Let us not then go the oppo-
site way, neither let us war against ourselves.
For if we desire to appear great, we shall not
be great, but even the most dishonored of all.

Seest thou how everywhere He urges tnem
by the opposite things, giving them what
they desire ? For in the preceding parts also
we have shown this in many instances, and in
the cases of the covetous, and of the vain-
glorious. He did thus. For wherefore, He
saith, dost thou give alms before men ? That
thou mayest enjoy glory ? Thou must then
not do so, and thou shall surely enjoy it.
Wherefore dost thou lay up treasures ? That
thou mayest be rich ? Thou must then not
lay up treasures, and thou shalt be rich.
Even so here too, wherefore dost thou set thy
heart on the first places ? That thou mayest
be before others ? Choose then the last
place, and then thou wilt enjoy the first. So
that if it be thy will to become great, seek
not to become great, and then thou wilt be
great. For the other is to be little.

5. Seest thou how He drew them off from
the disease, by showing them both from
thence failing of their object, and from hence
gaining, that they might flee the one, and
follow after the other.

And of the Gentiles, too. He for this cause
reminded them, that in this way again He
might show the thing to be disgraceful and
to be abhorred.

For the arrogant is of necessity base, and,
on the contrary, the lowly-minded is high.
For this is the height that is true and genu-
ine, and exists not in name only, nor in man-
ner of address. And that which is from
without is of necessity and fear, but this is
like to God's. Such a one, though he be
admired by no one, continues high; even as
again the other, though he be courted by all,
is of all men the basest. And the one is an
honor rendered of necessity, whence also it
easily passes away; but the other is of princi-
ple, whence also it continues steadfast. Since
for this we admire the saints also, that being
greater than all, they humbled themselves
more than all. Wherefore even to this day
they continue to be high, and not even death
hath brought down that height.

And if ye be minded, let us by reasonings
also inquire into this very thing. Any one
is said to be high, either when he is so by
greatness of stature, or when he hath chanced
to be set on a high place, and low* in like
manner, from the opposite things.


Let us see then who is like this, the
boaster, or he that keeps within measure,
that thou mayest perceive that nothing is
higher than lowliness of mind, and nothing
lower than boastfulness.

The boaster then desires to be greater than
all, and affirms no one to be equal in worth
with him; and how much soever honor he
may obtain, he sets his heart on more and
claims it, and accounts himself to have ob-
tained none, and treats men with utter con-
tempt, and yet seeks after the honor that
comes from them; than which what can be
more unreasonable ? For this surely is like
an enigma. By those, whom he holds in no
esteem, he desires to be glorified.

Seest thou how he who desires to be exalted
falls down and is set on the ground ? For
that he accounts all men to be nothing com-
pared with himself, he himself declares, for
this is boasting. Why then dost cast thj'-self
upon him who is nothing ? why dost thou seek
honor of him ? Why dost thou lead about
with thee such great multitudes ?

Seest thou one low, and set on a low place.
Come then, let us inquire about the high man.
This one knows what man is, and that man
is a great thing, and that he himself is last of
all, and therefore whatever honor he may
enjoy, he reckons this great, so that this one
is consistent with himself and is high, and
shifts not his judgment; for whom he ac-
counts great, the honors that come from them
he esteems great also, though they should
chance to be small, because he accounts those
who bestow them to be great. But the boast-
ful man accounts them that give the honors
to be nothing, yet the honors bestowed by
them he reckons to be great.

Again, the lowly man is seized by no pas-
sion, no anger can much trouble this man, no
love of glory, no envy, no jealousy: and what
can be higher than the soul that is delivered
from these things ? But the boastful man is
held in subjection by all these things, like any
worm crawling in the mire, for jealousy and
envy and anger are forever troubling his soul.

Which then is high ? He that is superior
to his passions, or he that is their slave ? He
that trembles at them and is afraid of them,
or he that is unsubdued, and never taken by
them ? Which kind of bird should we say
flies higher? that which is higher than the
hands and the arrows of the hunter, or that
which does not even suffer the hunters to
need an arrow, from his flying along the
ground, and from not being able ever to
elevate himself? Is not then the arrogant
man like this ? for indeed every net readily
catches him as crawling on the ground.


Homily LXV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


403


6. But if thou wilt, even from that wicked
demon prove thou this. For what can be
baser than the devil, because he had e.xalted
himself; what higlier than the man who is
willing to abase himself ? For the former
crawls on the ground under our heel (For,
"ye tread," He saith,' "upon serpents and
scorpions"), but the latter is set with the
angels on high.

But if thou desirest to learn this from the
example of haugiu.y men also, consider that
barbarian king, that led so great an army,
who knew not so much as the things that are
manifest to all; as, for instance, that stone
was stone, and the images, images; where-
fore he was inferior even to these. But the
godly and faithful are raised even above the
sun; than whom what can be higher, who
rise above even the vaults of heaven, and
passing beyond angels, stand by the very
throne of the kino^.

And that thou mayest learn in another way
their vileness; who will be abased ? He who
has God for his ally, or he with whom God
is at war? It is quite plain that it is he with
whom He is at war. Hear then touching
either of these what saith the Scripture.
" God res steth the proud, but giveth grace
unto the humble." ''

Again, I will ask you another thing also.
Which is higher? He who acts as a priest
to God and offers sacrifice? or ne who is
somewhere far removed from confidence
towards Him ? And what manner of sacrifice
doth the lowly man offer ? one may say.
Hear David saying, " The sacrifice of God is
a contrite spirit; a contrite and humbled
heart God will not despise." ^

Seest thou the purity of this man ? Behold
also the uncleanness of the other; for " every
one that is proud in heart is unclean before
God."* Besides, the one hath God resting
upon him, {" For unto whom will I look,"
saith He, " but to him that is meek and cjuiet,
and trembleth at my words "),5 but the otiier
crawls with the devil, for he that is lifted up
with pride shall suffer tiie devil's punishment.
Wherefore Paul also said, " Lest, being lifted
up with pride, he should fall into the con-
demnation of the devil." *

And the thing op[)osite to what he wishes,
befalls him. For liis wish is to be arrogant,
that lie may be honored; but the most con-


> Luke X. 19. [Freely cited.]
1 I's. li. 17. [i.xx.]
S U. Ixvi. 3.


'■' Jumcs iv. 6.

4Vrov. xvi. 5. [lxx.]

^ I 'I'im. iii. 6.


temned of all is this character. For these
most of all are laughing stocks, foes and
enemies to all men, the most easy to be sub-
dued by their enemies, the men t'nat easily
fall into anger, the unclean before God.

What then can be worse than this, for this
is the extremity of evils ? And what is
sweeter than the lowly, what more blessed,
since they are longed after, and beloved of
God ? And the glory too that cometh of
men, these do most of all enjoy, and all
honor them as fathers, embrace them as
brothers, receive them as their own members.

Let us then become lowly, that we may be
high. For most utterly doth arrogance
abase. This abased Pharaoh. For, " I
know not," he saith, "the Lord," 'and he
became inferior to flies and frogs, and the
locusts, and after that with his very arms and
horses was he drowned in the sea. In direct
opposition to him, Abraham saith, " I am
dust and ashes,"* and prevailed over count-
less barbarians, and having fallen into the
midst of Egyptians, returned, bearing a
trophy more glorious than the former, and,
cleaving to this virtue, grew ever more high.
Therefore he is celebrated everywhere, there-
fore he is crowned and proclaimed; but
Pharaoh is both earth and ashes, and if there
is anything else more vile than these. For
nothing doth God so abhor as arrogance.
For this object hath He done all things from
the beginning, in order that He might root
out this passion. Because of this are we be-
come mortal, and are in sorrows, and waitings.
Because of this are we in toil, and sweat, and
in labor continual, and mingled with affliction.
For indeed out of arrogance did the first man
sin, looking for an equality with God.
Therefore, not even what tilings he hatl, did
he continue to possess, but lost even these.

For arrogance is like this, so far from add-
ing to us any improvement of our life, it sub-
tracts even what we have; as, on the con-
trary, humility, so far from subtracting from
what we have, adds to us also what we have
not.

This virtue then let us emulate, this let us
pursue, that we may both enjoy present
honor, and attain unto the glory to come, by
the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, with wliom be unto the Father
glory and might, togetiier with the Holy
Ghost, now and always, and world without
end. .\men.


7 Exod. V. 9.


I* Geo. xviit. aj.


404


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM


[Homily LXVI.


HOMILY LXVI.

Matt. XX. 29, 30.

"And as they departed from Jericho, great multitudes followed Him. And, behold, two
blind men sitting by the wayside, when they heard that Jesus passed by, cried out, sa}''-
ing. Have mercy on us, O Lord, Thou Son of David."


See whence He passed unto Jerusalem, and
where He abode before this, with regard to
which it seems to me especially worthy of
inquiry, wherefore He went not away even
long before this from thence unto Galilee,
but through Samaria. But this we will leave
to them that are fond of learning. For if
any one were disposed to search the matter
out carefully, he will find that John intimates
it well, and hath expressed the cause/

But let us keep to the things set before us,
and let us listen to these blind men, who
were better than many that see. For neither
having a g-uide, nor being able to see Him
when come near to them, nevertheless they
strove to come unto Him, and began to cry
with a loud voice, and when rebuked for
speaking, they cried the more. For such is
the nature of an enduring soul, by the very
things that hinder, it is borne up.

But Christ suffered them to be rebuked,
that their earnestness might the more appear,
and that thou mightest learn that worthily
they enjoy the benefits of their cure. There-
fore He doth not so much as ask, " Do ye
believe?" as He doth with many; for their
cry, and their coming unto Him, sufficed to
make their faith manifest.

Hence learn, O beloved, that though we be
very vile and outcast, but yet approach God
with earnestness, even by ourselves we shall
be able to effect whatsoever we ask. See, for
instance, these men, how, having none of the
apostles to plead with them, but rather many
to stop their mouths, they were able to pass
over the hindrances, and to come unto Jesus
Himself. And yet the evangelist bears wit-
ness to no confidence of life ^ in them, but
earnestness sufficed them instead of all.

These then let us also emulate. Though
God defer the gift, though there be many
withdrawing us, let us not desist from asking.
For in this way most of all shall we win God
to us. See at least even here, how not pov-
erty, not blindness, not their being unheard.


' John iv. I, and x. 40-42.

2 napprjaiav fiiov. Claim of access on account of good life.


not their being rebuked by the multitude, not
anything else, impeded their exceeding ear-
nestness. Such is the nature of a fervent
and toiling soul.

What then saith Christ ? "He called them,
and said, What will ye that I should do unto
you ? They say unto Him, Lord, that our
eyes may be opened. "^ Wherefore doth He
ask them ? Lest any one should think that
when they wish to receive one thing. He
giveth them another thing. For indeed it is
usual with Him on every occasion, first to
make manifest and discover to all the virtue
of those He is healing, and then to apply
the cure, for one reason, that He might lead
on the others likewise to emulation; and for
another, that He might show that they were
enjoying the gift worthily. This, for in-
stance. He did with respect to the Canaanitish
woman also, this too in the case of the cen-
turion, this again as to her that had the issue
of blood, or rather that marvellous woman
even anticipated the Lord's inquiry; but not
so did He pass her by, but even after the
cure makes her manifest. Such earnest care
had He on every occasion to proclaim the
good deeds of them that come to Him, and
to show them to be much greater than they
are,'' which He doth here also.

Then, when they said what they wished,
He had compassion on them, and touched
them. For this alone is the cause of their
cure, for which also He came into the world.
But nevertheless, althougn it be mercy and
grace, it seeks for the worthy.

But that they were worthy is manifest, both
from what they cried out, and from the fact
that, when they had received, they did not
hasten away, as many do, being ungrateful
after the benefits. Nay, they were not like
this, but were both persevering before the


3 Matt. x.x. 32, 33.

4 The words, " and to show them to be much greater than they
are," are rejected by Montfaucon on the authority of two mss., but
defended by Mr. Field. [I'hey are found in all the mss. collated
by the latter editor, with one exception. — K.] It seems to be true
that our Lord sometimes encouraged faith, and brought out good
example, by putting on an action a higher meaning and intention
than was at all fully formed in the mind of the doer.


Homily LXVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


405


gift, and after the gift grateful, for " they
followed Him."

"And when He drew nigh unto Jerusalem,
and was come to Bethphage, unto the Mount
of Olives, He sent two of His disciples, say-
ing, Go into the village over against you, and
3-e shall find an ass tied, and a celt with her:
loose them, and bring them unto me. And
if any man say aught unto you, ye shall say.
The Lord hath need of them; and straight-
way he sendeth them. And this was done,
that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
Zechariah the prophet, Tell ye the daughter
of Sion, Behold, thy King cometh to thee,
meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the
foal of an ass." '

And yet He had often entered Jerusalem
before, but never with so much circumstance.
"What then is the cause ? It was the begin-
ning then of the dispensation; and neither was
He very well known, nor the time of His pas-
sion near; wherefore He mixed with them
with less distinction, and more disguising
Himself. For He would not have been held
in admiration, had He so appeared, and He
would have e.xcited them to greater anger.
But when He had both given them sufiicient
proof of His power, and the cross was at the
doors, He makes Himself then more con-
spicuous, and doeth with greater circumstance
all the things that were likely to inflame
them. For it was indeed possible for this to
have been done at the beginning also; but it
was not profitable nor expedient it should be
so.

But do thou observe, I pray thee, how
many miracles are done, and how many pro-
phecies are fulfilled. He said, " Ye siiall
find an ass; " He foretold that no man should
hinder them, but that all, when they heard,
should hold their peace.

lUit this is no small condemnation of tlie
Jews, if them that were never known to Him,
neither had appeared before Him, He per-
suades to give up their own projierty, antl to
say nothing against it, and that l)y His disci-
ples, while these, being present with Him at
the working of His miracles, were not per-
suaded.

2. And do not account wliat was done to
be a small thing. For who persuaded them,
when their own i^roperty was taken from
them, and that, when they were perhaps poor
men and husbandmen, not to forbid it ? ^^'hy
say I not to forl)id it? not to ask, or even if
they asked, to hold their peace, and give it

■ Matt, xxi 1-5. [The tcxttml v:iri;itii>ii'» are rrproduiril m
the alKivr rendrrindT. The miijil intcrr<<tini{ variation inairoirTrAAii
(" he sendeth "), the rea<link; attested in Marie xi. \. It im|ilirs in
the latter pavi;i).;e the promise to send bark the colt to the owners.
-R.]


up. For indeed both things were alike mar-
vellous, as well, if they said nothing, when
their beasts were dragged away, or if having
spoken, and heard, " The Lord hath need of
them,'' they yielded and withstood not, and
this when they see not Him, but His disci-
ples.

By these things He teaches them, that it
was in His power to have entirely hindered
the Jews also, even against their will, when
they were proceeding to attack Him, and to
have made them speechless, but He would
not.

And another thing again together with these
doth He teach the disciples, to give whatever
He should ask; and, though he should re-
quire them to yield up their very life, to give
even this, and not to gainsay. For if even
strangers gave up to Him, much more ought
they to strip themselves of all things.

And besides what we have said. He was
fulfilling also another prophecy, one which
was twofold, one part in words, and another
in deeds. And that in deeds was, by the sit-
ting on the ass; and that by words, the pre-
diction of Zacharias; because he had said,
that the King should sit on an ass. And He,
having sat and having fulfilled it, gave to the
prophecy another beginning again, by what
He was doing typifying beforehand the
things to come.

How and in what manner ? He proclaimed
beforehand the calling of the unclean Gen-
tiles, and that He should rest upon them, and
that they should yield to Him and follow
Him, and prophecy succeeded to prophecy.

But to me He seemeth not for this object
only to sit on the ass, but also as affording
us a standard of self-denial. For not only
did He fulfill prophecies, nor did He only
plant the doctrines of the truth, but by these
very things He was correcting our practice
for us, everywhere setting us rules of neces-
sary use, and by all means amending our
life.

For this cause, I say, even when He was to
be born He sought not a splendid house, nor
a mother rich and distinguished, but a jioor
woman, and one tliat had a carpenter as her
betrothcil husb.uul; ami is born in a shed,
and laid in a manger: and choosing His dis-
ciples. He chose not orators and wise men,
not rich men and nobly born, but poor men,
antl of poor families, and in every way undis-
tinguished; and |)rovi(ling His tabic, atone
time He sets before Himself barley loaves,
antl at another at tiie very moment commands
the discijiles to buy at the market. And
making His couch. He makes it of gr.iss, ;ind
l)utting on raiment, He clothes Himself in


4o6


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXVI.


what is cheap, and in no respect different from
the common sort; and a house He did not so
much as possess. And if He had to go from
place to place. He did this travelling on foot,
and so travelling, as even to grow weary.
And sitting, He requires no throne nor pillow,
but sits on the ground, sometimes in the
mountain, and sometimes by the well, and
not merely by the well, but also alone, and
talks with a Samaritan woman.

Again, setting measures of sorrow, vvhen
He had need to mourn, He weeps moder-
ately, everywhere setting us rules, as I have
said, and limits how far one ought to proceed,
and not any further. So for this intent now
also, since it happens that some are weak and
have need of beasts to carry them, in this too
He fixes a measure, showing that one ought
not to yoke horses or mules to be borne by
them, but to use an ass, and not to proceed
further, and everywhere to be limited by the
want.

But let us look also at the prophecy, that
by words, that by acts. What then is the
prophecy? " Behold, thy King cometh to
thee, meek, and riding on an ass, and a
young colt;"' not driving chariots, like the
rest of the kings, not demanding tributes, not
thrusting men off, and leading about guards,
but displaying His great meekness even
hereby.

Ask then the Jew, what King came to
Jerusalem borne on an ass ? Nay, he could
not mention, but this alone.

But He did these things, as I said, signify-
ing beforehand the things to come. For here
the church is signified by the colt, and the
new people, which was once unclean, but
which, after Jesus sat on them, became clean.
And see the image preserved throughout.
I mean that the disciples loose the asses.
For by the apostles, both they and we were
called; by the apostles were we brought near.
But because our acceptance provoked them
also to emulation, therefore the ass appears
following the colt. For* after Christ hath sat
on the Gentiles, then shall they also come
moving us to emulation.^ And Paul declar-
ing this, said, "That blindness ^ in part is
happened to Israel, until the fullness of the
Gentiles be come in; and so all Israel shall be
saved." •♦ For that it was a prophecy is evi-
dent from what is said. For neither would
the prophet have cared to express with such
great exactness the age of the ass, unless this
had been so.

But not these things only are signified by
what is said, but also that the apostles should

' Zech. ix. 9. '' Or, "emulating us," wapa^jjAoCi'Tes.

3 R. v., "a hardening."] 4 Rom. xi. 25^ 26.


bring them with ease. For as here, no man
gainsaid them so as to keep the asses, so
neither with regard to the Gentiles was any
one able to prevent them, of those who were
before masters of them.

But He doth not sit on the bare colt, but
on the apostles' garments. For after they
had taken the colt, they then gave up all,
even as Paul also said, " I will very gladly
spend and be spent for your souls.'' ^

But mark how tractable the colt, how being
unbroken, and having never known the rein,
he was not restive, but went on orderly;
which thing itself was a prophecy of the
future, signifying the submissiveness of the
Gentiles, and their sudden conversion to
good order. For all things did that word
work, which said, " Loose him, and bring
him to me:" so that the unmanageable be-
came orderly, and the unclean thenceforth
clean.

3. But see the baseness of the Jews. He
had wrought so many miracles, and never
were they thus amazed at Him; but when
they saw a multitude running together, then
they marvel. " For all the city was moved,
saying. Who is this? But the multitudes
said, This is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth
of Galilee."* And when they thought they
were saying something great, even then were
their thoughts earthly, and low, and dragging
on the ground. 7

But these things He did, not as displaying
any pomp, but at once, as I have said, both
fulfilling a prophecy, and teaching self-denial,
and at the same time also comforting His
disciples, who were grieving for His death,
and showing them that He suffers all these
things willingly.

And mark thou, I pray thee, the accuracy
of the prophet, how he foretold all things.
And some things David, some things Zecha-
riah, had proclaimed beforehand. Let us
also do likewise, and let us sing hymns, and
give up our garments to them that bear Him.
For what should we deserve, when some
clothe the ass on which He was set, and others
strew the garments even under her feet; but
we, seeing him naked, and not being even
commanded to strip ourselves, but to spend
of what is laid by, not even so are liberal ?
And when they indeed attend upon Him
before and behind, but we, when He cometh
unto us, send Him away, and thrust Him off
and insult Him.

How sore a punishment do these things


5 2 Cor. xii. 15.

6 Matt. xxi. 10, II. [The Greek text agrees with that of the
received. — R.]

7 (reavp^cVij.


Homily LXVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


407


deserve, how great vengeance! Thy Lord
comeih unto thee in need, and thou art not
willing so much as to listen to His entreaty,
but thou blamest and rebukest Him, and this,
when thou hast heard such words as these.
But if in giving one loaf, and a little money,
thou art so mean,-*md haughty, and backward;
if thou hadst to empty out all, what wouldest
thou become ?

Seest tiiou not those that show their mag-
nificence in the theatre, how much they give
away to the harlots ? but thou givest not so
much as the half, nay often not the smallest
part. But the devil is exhorting to give to
whom it may chance, procuring us hell, and
thou givest; but Christ to the needy, promis-
ing a kingdom, and thou, far from giving,
dost rather insult them, and thou choosest
rather to obey the devil, that thou mightest
be punished, than to submit to Christ, and be
saved.

And what could be worse than this frenzy ?
One procures hell, the other a kingdom, and
ye leave the latter, and run unto the former.
And this ye send away, when He cometh unto
you, that when he is far off, ye call unto you.
And what you do is the same as if a king
bearing a royal robe, and offering a diadem,
did not win your choice, but a robber brand-
ishing a sword at you, and threatening death,
were to win it.

Considering these things then, beloved, let
us discern tlie truth at length though late, and
let us grow sober. For I am now ashamed
of speaking of almsgiving, because that hav-
ing often spoken on this subject, I have ef-
fected nothing worth the exhortation. For
some increase indeed hath there been, but not
so much as I wished. For I see you sowing,
but not with a liberal hand. Wherefore I
fear too lest ye also " reap sparingly." '

For in proof that we do sow sparingly, let
us inquire, if it seem good, which- are more
numerous in the city, poor or rich; and which
they, who are neither^ poor nor rich, but have
a middle place. As, for instance, a tentii
part is of rich, and a tenth of the poor that
have nothing at all, and the rest of the middle
sort.

Let us distribute then amongst tlie poor
the whole multitude of the city, and ye will
see the disgrace how great it is. For the
very ricli indeed are but few, l)ut those tliat
come next to them are many; again, the poor
are mucii fewer than these. Nevertiieless,
although tliere are so many that are able to
feed the hungry, many go to slee|) in their


• 2 Cnr. ix. fi.

^ [" who arc mi)rc ntimcroii<i.
that arc neither," etc. — k.l


" and who iirc they


hunger, not because those that have are not
able with ease to succor them, but because of
their great barbarity and inhumanity. For
if both the wealthy, and those next to them,
were to distribute amongst themselves those
who are in need of bread and raiment, scarcely
would one poor person fall to the share of
fifty men or even a hundred. Yet neverthe-
less, though in such great abundance of per-
sons to assist tiiem, they are wailing every
day. And that thou mayest learn the inhu-
manity of the others, when the church is pos-
sessed of a revenue of one of the lowest
among the wealthy, and not of the very rich,
consider how many widows it succors every
day, how many virgins; for indeed the list of
them hath already reached unto the number
of three thousand. Together with these, she
succors them that dwell in the prison, the
sick in the caravansera, the healthy, those
that are absent from their home, those that
are maimed in their bodies, tiiose that wait
upon the altar; and with respect to food and
raiment, them that casually come every day;
and her substance is in no respect diminished.
So that if ten men only were thus willing to
spend, there would be no poor.

4. And what, it will be said, are our chil-
dren to inherit ? The principal remains, and
the income again is become more abundant,
the goods being stored up for them in Heaven.

But are ye not willing to do tliis ? At least
do it by the half, at least by the tiiird part, at
least by the fourtli part, at least by the tenth.
For owing to God's favor, it were possible for
our city to nourish the poor of ten cities.

And if ye will, let us make some calcula-
tion ^ in proof of this; or rather tliere is no
need so much as of reckoning; for of itself
the easiness of the thing is discernible. See
at least, upon public occasions, how much
one house hath often not l)een backward to
spend, and hath not had so much as a little
feeling of tlie expense, which service if each
of the rich were willing to perform for the
poor, in a brief moment of time he would
iiave seized on Heaven.

Wiiat plea then will there be ? what sliadow
of defense, when not even of the things from
whicli we must assuredly be separated, when
taken away from iience, not even of these do
we impart to the needy with as miicli liberal-
ity as others to those on the stage, and this
when we are to reap so many benefits tiiere-
from ? For we ought indeed, even ttiough
we were always to be iiere, not even so to be
sparing of this good expenditure; but when
after a little time, we are to be removetl from

3 wAAoYKTMOf.


4o8


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXVI.


hence, and dragged away naked from all,
what kind of defense shall we have for not
even out of our income giving to the hungry
and distressed ? '

For neither do I constrain thee to lessen
thy possessions, not because I do not wish
it, but because I see thee very backward. It
is not then this I say, but spend of your fruits,
and treasure up nothing from these. It is
enough for thee to have the money of thine
income pouring in on thee as from a fountain;
make the poor sharers with thee, and become
a good steward of the things given thee of God.

But I pay tribute, one may say. For this
cause then dost thou despise, because in this
case no one demands it of thee ? And the
other, who, should the earth bear, or should
it not bear, takes by force, and extorts, thou
darest not gainsay; but Him that is so mild,
and then only demands, when the earth bears,
thou answerest not even to a word ? And who
will deliver thee from those intolerable pun-
ishments ? There is no one. For if, because
in the other case a very sore punishment will
ensue to thee for not giving, therefore thou
becomest diligent about the payment, consider
here too is one more sore; not to be bound,
neither to be cast into prison, but to depart
into the eternal fire.

For all reasons then let us pay these tributes
first: for great is the facility, and greater the
reward; and more abundant the gain, and
worse the punishments to us if we are ob-
stinate. For a punishment cometh upon us,
which hath no end.

But if thou tell me of the soldier's fighting
for thee with the barbarians, there is here too
a camp, that of the poor, and a war, which
the poor are waging for thee. For when they
receive, by praying they make God propitious;
and making Him propitious, they repulse, in-
stead of barbarians, the assaults of the devils;
they suffer not the evil one to be violent,
neither to attack us continually, but they re-
lax his might.

5. Seeing therefore these soldiers every
day fighting in thy behalf with the devil by
their supplications and prayers, demand of
thyself this good contribution, their nourish-
ment. For this King being mild hath not
assigned thee any to demand it of thee, but
desires thou shouldestgive it willingly; though
thou pay by little and little. He receives it;
though being in difiiculty, thou shouldest pay
after a long time. He doth not press him that
hath not.

Let us not then despise His long-suffering;
let us treasure up for ourselves, not wrath.


but salvation; not death, but life; not punish-
ment and vengeance, but honors and crowns.
There is no need in this case to pay a hire
for the conveyance of the things contributed;
there is no need in this case to labor in turn-
ing them into money. If thou givest them
up, the Lord Himself removes them into
Heaven; He Himself makes the traffic the
more gainful for thee.

There is no need here to find one to carry
in what thou hast contributed; contribute
only, and straightway it goeth up, not that
others may be maintained as soldiers, but
that it may remain for thee with great profit.
For here ^ whatsoever thou mayest have given,
it is not possible to recover; but there thou
wilt receive them again with much honor, and
shalt gain greater, and more spiritual gains.
Here the gifts are a demand; there a loan,
and money at interest, and a debt.

Yea farther, God hath given thee bonds.
For " he that showeth mercy to a poor man,"
it is said, '* lendeth to the Lord." ^ He gave
thee also an earnest, and bail, and this being
God ! What sort of earnest ? The things in
the present life, the visible, the spiritual
things, the foretaste of the things to come.

Why then dost thou delay, and why art
thou backward, having received so many
things already, looking for so many things ?

For what thou hast received are these: He
Himself made thee a body. He Himself put
in thee a soul. He honored with speech thee
alone of the things on the earth. He gave
thee the use of all the things that are seen.
He bestowed on thee the knowledge of Him-
self, He gave up His Son for thee, He gave
thee a baptism full of so many good things.
He gave thee a holy table, He promised a
kingdom, and the good things that cannot be
told.

Having then received so many good things,
having to receive so many, again I say the
same thing, art thou making petty reckoning
about perishing riches, and what excuse wilt
thou have ?

But art thou looking altogether at thy chil-
dren ? and dost draw back for the sake of
these ? Nay, rather teach them also to gain
such gains. For if thou hadst money lent
out and bearing interest, and thou hadst a
grateful debtor, thou wouldest ten thousand
times rather choose instead of the gold to
leave the bond to thy child, so that he should
have the large income from it, and not be
constrained to go about, and seek for others
to borrow it.


2 [The translation has been altered here to conform to the use
of " here ' and " there" in the original. — R]

3 Prov. xix. 17.


Homily LXVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


409


And now give this bond to thy children,
and leave God a debtor to them. Thou dost
not sell thy lands, and give to thy children,
but leavest them, that the income may remain,
and that they may have a greater increase of
riches from thence; but this bond, which is
more productive than any land or revenue,
and bears so many fruits, this art thou afraid
to leave to them ? What great folly must this
be, and frenzy. And this when thou knowest,
that though thou shouldest leave it to them,
thou thyself also shalt again take it away with
thee.


Of this nature are the things spiritual; they
have great munificence. Let us not then be
beggarly; neither be inhuman and savage
towards ourselves, but let us traffic in that
good merchandise; that we may both our-
selves take it away with us when we depart,
and leave it to our own children, and attain
to the good things to come, by the grace and
love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ,
with whom be unto the Fattier, together with
the Holy Ghost, glory, might, honor, now
and ever, and world without end. Amen.


HOMILY LXVII.


Matt. XXL 12, 13.


And Jesus went into the temple,' and cast out all them that sold and bought in the tem-
ple, and overthrow the tables of the money-changers and the seats of them that sold
doves, and saith unto them, It is written, my house shall be called a house of prayer;
but ye have made it a den of thieves." "


This John likewise saith, but he in the be-
ginning of his Gospel, this at the end.
Whence it is probable this was done twice,
and at different seasons.

And it is evident both from the times, and
from their reply. For there He came at the
very passover, but here much before. And
there the Jews say, " What sign showest thou
us?"- but here they hold their peace, al
though reproved, because He was now mar-
velled at amongst all men.

And this is a heavier charge against the
Jews, that when He had done this not once
only, but a second time, tliey continuetl in
their trafficking, antl said that He was an ad-
versary of God, when they ought even from
hence to have learnt His honor for His Father
and His own might. I-'or indeed He also
wrougiit miracles, and they saw His words
agreeing with His works.

But not even so were they persuaded, but
" were sore displeased," and tiiis while they
heard the proj^het crying aloud, and the
children in a manner beyond their age pro-
claiming Him. Wherefore also He Himself
sets up Isaiah against them as an aciciiser,

■ (Thr wnrda " of Ood " are omitted in the text here. So three
of our best (Jrrck M'^'-. .iiui K. V. inarxin. — k.]

» LK. v., " robbers."] 3 John ii. i8.


saying, " My house shall be called a house
of prayer.^

But not in this way only doth He siiow His
authority, but also by His iiealing divers in-
firmities. " For the blind and tlie lame
came unto Him, and He healed them," ^ and
His power and authority He indicates.

But they not even so would be persuaded,
but together with the rest of the miracles
hearing even the children proclaiming, were
ready to choke, and say, " Hearest thou not
what these say ?* And yet it was Christ's p;\rt
to have said this to them, " Hear ye not what
these say?" for the children were singing to
Him as to God.

What then saith He ? Since they were
speaking against things manifest. He applies
His correction more in the way of reproof,
saying, "Have ye never read, Out of the
mouths of bal)es and sucklings 'I'hou hast per-
fected praise ? " And well did He say. "■ Out
of tiie mouth." l*"or what was said was not of
their understanding, but of His power giving
articulation to their tongue yet immature.

Antl tiiis was also a tvpe of the Gentiles
lisping, and sounding forth at once great
tilings with understanding and faith.


4 U. Ivi. 7.

'• Miitl. xxi. i(\


[K. \'., "lire sayinic"!


f. Mult.


XXI. 14.


4IO


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXVII.


And for the apostles also there was from
hence no small consolation. For that they
might not be perplexed, how being unlearned
they should be able to publish the gospel, the
children anticipate them, and remove all their
anxiety, teaching them, that He would grant
them utterance, who made even these to sing
praises.

And not so only, but the miracle showed
that He is Creator even of nature. The chil-
dren then, although of age immature, uttered
things that had a clear meaning, and were in
accordance with those above, but the men
things teeming with frenzy and madness.
For such is the nature of wickedness.

Forasmuch then as tkere were many things
to provoke them, from the multitude, from the
casting out of the sellers, from the miracles,
from the children. He again leaves them,
giving room to the swelling passion, and not
willing to begin His teaching, lest boiling
with envy they should be the more displeased
at His sayings.

" Now in the morning as He returned into
the city, He was an hungered.''' How is He
an hungered in the morning? When He
permits the flesh, then it shows its feeling.
" And when He saw a fig tree in the way.
He came to it, and found nothing thereon,
but leaves only." ^ Another evangelist saith,
" The time of figs was not yet;" ^ but if it was
not time, how doth the other evangelist say,
" He came, if haply He might find fruit
thereon." Whence it is manifest that this
belongs to the suspicion of His disciples, who
were yet in a somewhat imperfect state. For
indeed the evangelists in many places record
the suspicions of the disciples.

Like as this then was their suspicion, so
also was it too to suppose it was cursed for
this cause, because of having no fruit.
Wherefore then was it cursed? For the dis-
ciples' sakes, that they might have confidence.
For because everywhere He conferred bene
fits, but punished no man; and it was needful
that He should afford them a demonstrative
proof of His power to take vengeance also,
that both the disciples might learn, and the
Jews, that being able to blast them that crucify
Him, of His own will He submits, and does
not blast them; and it was not His will to
show forth this upon men; upon the plant did
He furnish the proof of His might in taking
vengeance. But when unto places, or unto
plants, or unto brutes, any such thing as this
is done, be not curious, neither say, how was
the fig-tree justly dried up, if it was not the


' Matt. xxi. i8. 2 Matt. xxi. ig.

3 Mark xi. 13. [The passage is freely cited ; "of figs" is sup-
plied here and below by the translator. — R.]


time of figs; for this it is the utmost trifling
to say; but behold the miracle, and admire
and glorify the worker thereof.

Since in the case also of the swine that
were drowned, many have said this, working
out the argument of justice; but neither there
should one give heed, for these again are
brutes, even as that was a plant without life.

Wherefore then was the act invested with
such an appearance, and with this plea for a
curse ? As I said, this was the disciple's sus-
picion.

But if it was not yet time, vainly do
some say the law is here meant. For the
fruit of this' was faith, and then was the time
of this fruit, and it had indeed borne it;
"For already" are the fields white to har-
vest," saith He; and, "I sent you to reap
that whereon ye bestowed no labor." ^

2. Not any therefore of these things doth He
here intimate, but it is what I said. He dis-
plays His power to punish, and this is shown
by saying, " The time was not yet," making
it clear that of this special purpose He went,
and not for hunger, but for His disciples'
sake, who indeed marvelled exceedingly, al-
though many miracles had been done greater;
but, as I said, this was strange, for now first
He showed forth His power to take venge-
ance. Wherefore not in any other, but in
the moistest of all planted things did He work
the miracle, so that hence also the miracle
appeared greater.

And that thou mightest learn, that for their
sakes this was done, that He might train them
to feel confidence, hear what He saith after-
wards. But what saith He? " Ye also shall
do greater things, if ye are willing to believe
and to be confident in prayer." Seest thou
that all is done for their sake, so that they
might not be afraid and tremble at plots
against them ? Wherefore He saith this a
second time also, to make them cleave to
prayer and faith. For not this only shall ye
do, but also shall remove mountains; and
many more things shall ye do, being confi-
dent in faith and prayer."*

But the boastful and arrogant Jews, wishing
to interrupt His teaching, came unto Him,
and asked, " By what authority doest thou
these things?"' For since they could not
object against the miracles, they bring for-
ward against Him the correction of the traf-
fickers in the temple. And this in John also
they appear to ask, although not in these
words, but with the same intent. For there
too they say, "What sign showest thou unto
us ? seeing that thou doest these things."


4 John iv. 35.

6 Matt. xxi. 21, 22. [Paraphrased.]


5 John iv. 38.
7 Matt. xxi. 23.


Homily LXVII.J


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


411


But there He answers tiiem, saying, " De-
stroy this temple, and I in tliree days will
raise itup, "' whereas here He drives them
into a difficulty. Whence it is manifest, that
then indeed was the beginning and prelude
of the miracles, but here the end.

But what they say is this: Hast thou re- j
ceived the teacher's chair ? Hast thou been j
ordained a priest, that thou didst display such |
authority ? it is said. And yet He had done j
nothing implying arrogance, but had been
careful for the good order of the temple, yet |
nevertheless having nothing to say, they ob-
ject against this. And indeed when He cast
them out, they did not dare to say anything,
because of the miracles, but when He showed
Himself, then they find fault with Him.

What then saith He ? He doth not answer
them directly, to show that, if they had been
willing to see His authority, they could; but
He asks them again, saying, "The baptism
of John, whence is it ? From heaven, or of
men?"=

And what sort of inference is this ? The
greatest surely. For if they had said, from
heaven, He would have said unto them, why
then did ye not believe him .'' For if they had
believed, they would not have asked these
things. For of Him John had said, "lam
not worthy to loose the latchet of His shoe;
and, " Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh
away the sins of the world;" and, "This is
the Son of God;"- and, "He that cometh
from above is above all;"< and, " His fan is
in His hand, and He will thoroughly purge
His floor." 5 So that if they had believed
him, there was nothing to hinder them from
knowing by what authority Christ doeth these
things.

.\fter this, because they, dealing craftily,
said, " We know not," He said not, neither
know I, but what? "Neither tell I you.''*
For if indeed they had been ignorant it would
have been requisite for them to be instructed;
but since they were dealing craftily with good
reason He answers them nothing.

And how was it they did not say that the
baptism was of men? "They feared the
people"' it is said. Seest thou a perverse
heart? In every case they despise God and
do all things for the sake of men. For tliis
man too they feared for tiieir sakes not rev-
erencing the saint" but on account of men,''
and they were not willing to believe in Clirist,
because of men, and all their evils were en-
gendered to them from hence.

*• John ii. 18, 19. [The fmphntic iyJt >* inserted here.— R]
» ^Iatt. xxi. 25. ['' Is" substitulcd for " wus."— R.l


3 John i. 27, 29, 34. 4 John iv. 31

6 Matt. XXI. 17.

8 t6>> ay6pa, the (srcat) man.


i Mall. lii.

7 .Matt. xxi. j6.

9 ai'Spujrrovi,


After this. He saith, " What think ye ? A
man had two sons; and he saith to the first,
go, work to-day in the vineyard. But he an-
swered and said, I will not: but afterward he
repented, and went. And he came to the
second, and said likewise. And he answered
and said, I go sir: and went not. Whether
then of them twain did the will of his father?
They say, the first." '°

Again He convicts them by a parable, in-
timating both their unreasonable obstinacy,
and the submissiveness of those who were
utterly condemned by them. For these two
children declare what came to pass with re-
spect to both the Gentiles and the Jews.
For the former not having undertaken to
obey, neither having become hearers of the
law, showed forth their obedience in their
works; and the latter having said, "All that
the Lord shall speak, we will do, and will
hearken,"" in their works were disobedient.
And for this reason, let me add, that they
miijht not think the law would benefit them.
He shows that this self-same thing condemns
them, like as Paul also saith,'' Not the hearers
of the law are just before God, but t'ae doers
of the law shall be justified." '= For this in-
tent, that He might make them even self-
condemned. He causes the judgment to be
delivered by themselves, like as He does also
in the ensuing parable of the vineyard.

3. ^And that this might be done. He makes
trial of the accusation in the person of an
other. For since they were not willing to con-
fess directly. He by a j^arable drives them on
to what He desired.

But when, not understanding His sayings,
they had delivered the judgment. He unfolds
His concealed meaning after this, and saith,
'• Publicans and harlots go into the kingdom
of Heaven before you. For John came unto
you in the way of righteousness, and ye be-
lieved him not; but the publicans " believed
him; and ye, when ye had seen it, repenteil
not afterwards, that ye might believe him.'*

For if He had said sim|)ly, harlots go before
you, the word would have seemed to them to
be offensive; but now, being uttered after
their own iudgment it appears to be nv.it too
hard.

Therefore He adds also the accusation.
What tlien is this ? " John came," He saith,
" unto you," not unto them, and not this only,
but; also "in the way of righteousness." *' For
neitlier with this can ye find fault, that he was


>" .Matt. xxi. 38-31. L ' '><^''<^ '"'<^ " fcwsllKht variations fruni the
rccrivrd Irxt.]

" Kxod. xix. 8.

'-■ Koin. ii. 13. fThc article Is jfiven before vittov In both in-
"itaiu'rs ; aKaiiiHl thr best M--s. aiilhoi itirs in Kom. ii. i (. — K.]

M["and harlots" omitted here] '* .Mutt. xxi. 31, 32.


4 12


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXVII.


some careless one, and of no profit; but both
his life was irreprehensible, and his care for
jou great, and ye gave ho heed to him."

And with this there is another charge also,
that publicans gave heed; and with this, again
another, that "not even after them did ye.
For ye should have done so even before them,
but not to do it even after them was to be de-
prived of all excuse; " and unspeakable was
both the praise of the one, and the charge
against the other. " To you he came, and
ye accepted him not; he came not to them,
and they receive him, and not even them did
ye take for instructors."

See by how many things is shown the com-
mendation of those, and the charge against
these. To you he came, not to them. Ye
believed not, this offended not them. They
Relieved, this profited not you.

But the word, "go before you," is not as
though these were following, but as having
a hope, if they were willing. For nothing, so
much as jealousy, rouses the grosser sort.
Therefore He is ever saying, " The first shall
be last, and the last first." Therefore He
brought in both harlots and publicans, that
they might provoke them to jealousy.

For these two indeed are chief sins, en-
gendered of violent lust, the one of sexual
desire, the other of the desire of money.
And He indicates that this especially was
hearing the law of God, to believe John. For
it was not of grace only, that harlots entered
in, but also of righteousness. For not, as
continuing harlots, did they enter in, but
having obeyed and believed, and having been
purified and converted, so did they enter in.

Seest thou how He rendered His discourse
less offensive, and more penetrating, by the
parable, by His bringing in the harlots ? For
neither did He say at once, wherefore believed
ye not John ? but what was much more prick-
ing, when, He had put forward the publicans
and the harlots, then He added this, by the
order of their actions convicting their un-
pardonable conduct, and showing that for fear
of men they do all things, and for vainglory.
For they did not confess Christ for fear, lest
they should be put out of the synagogue;
and again, of John they dared not speak evil,
and not even this from reverence, but tor
fear. All which things He convicted by His
sayings, and with more severity afterwards
did He go on to inflict the blow, saying,
" But ye, when ye knew it, repented not after-
wards, that ye might believe him."

For an evil thing it is not at the first to
choose the good, but it is a heavier charge
not even to be brought round. For this
Jibove all maketh many wicked, which I see


to be the case with some now from extreme
insensibility.

But let no one be like this; but though he
be sunk down to the extremity of wickedness,
let him not despair of the change for the
better. For it is an easy thing to rise up out
of the very abysses of wickedness.

Heard ye not how that harlot, that went
beyond all in lasciviousness, outshone all in
godly reverence. Not the harlot in the gos-
pels do I mean, but the one in our generation,
who came from Phoenice, that most lawless
city. For she was once a harlot among us,
having the first honors on the stage, and great
was her name everywhere, not in our city
only, but even as far as the Cilicians and
Cappadocians. And many estates did she
ruin, and many orphans did she overthrow;
and many accused her of sorcery also, as
weaving such toils not by her beauty of person
only, but also by her drugs. This harlot once
won even the brother of the empress, for
mighty indeed was her tyranny.

But all at once, I know not how, or rather
I do know well, for it was being so minded,
and converting, and bringing down upon her-
self God's grace, she despised all those things,
and having cast away the arts of the devils,
mounted up to heaven.

And indeed nothing was more vile than she
was, when she was on the stage; nevertheless,
afterwards she outwent many in exceeding
continence, and having clad herself with
sackcloth, all her time she thus disciplined
herself. On the account of this woman both
the governor was stirred up, and soldiers
armed, yet they had not strength to carry her
off to the stage, nor to lead her away from the
virgins that had received her.

This woman having been counted worthy
of the unutterable mysteries, and having ex-
hibited a diligence proportionate to the grace
(given her) so ended her life, having washed
off all through grace, and after her baptism
having shown forth much self-restraint. For
not even a mere sight of herself did she allow
to those who were once her lovers, when they
had come for this, having shut herself up,
and having passed many years, as it were, in
a prison. Thus " shall the last be first, and
the first last;" thus do we in every case need
a fervent soul, and there is nothing to hinder
one from becoming great and admirable:

4. Let no man then of them that live in
vice despair; let no man who lives in virtue
slumber. Let neither this last be confident,
for often the harlot will pass him by; nor let
the other despair, for it is possible for him to
pass by even the first.

Hear what God saith unto Jerusalem, "I


Homily LXVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


41,


said, after she had committed all these whore-
doms, Turn thou unto me, and she returned
not.'' ' When we have come back unto the
earnest love of God, He remembers not the
former things. God is not as man, for He
reproaches us not with the past, neither doth
He say, Why wast thou absent so long a
time? when we repent; only let us approach
Him as we ought. Let us cleave to Him
earnestly, and rivet our hearts to His fear.

Such things have been done not under the
new covenant only, but even under the old.
For what was worse than Manasseh ? but he
was able to appease God. What more blessed
than Solomon ? but when he slumbered, he
fell. Or rather I can show even both things
to have taken place in one, in the father of
this man, for he the same person became at
different times both good and bad. W'hat
more blessed than Judas ? but he became a
traitor. What more wretched than ^Latthew ?
but he became an evangelist. What worse
than Paul ? but he became an apostle. What
more to be envied than Simon ? but he be-
came even himself the most wretched of all.

How many other such changes wouldest
thou see, both to have taken place of old,
and now taking place every day ? For this
reason then I say, Neither let him on the
stave despair, nor let him in the church be
confident. For to this last it is said, "Let
him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest
he fall;"' and to the other, " Sliall not he
that falleth arise ? " ^ and, " Lift up the hands
which hang down, and the feeble knees." ♦
Again, to these He saith, "Watcn;" but to
those, "Awake, thou that sleepest. and arise
from the dead."^ For these need to preserve
what they have, and those to become what
they are not; these to preserve their health,
those to be delivered from their infirmity, for
they are sick; but many even of the sick be-
come healthy, and of the healthy many by
remissness grow infirm.

To tile one then He saith, " Behold, thou
art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse
thing come unto thee; "' but to these, " Wilt
tiiou be made whole ? Arise, take up thy
bed, and go unto thine house.'"' For a
dre.-idful, dreadful palsy is sin, or rather it is
not palsy only, but also somewhat else more
grievous. I"(jr such a one is not only in in-
activity as to good works, but also in the
active doing of evil works. Hut nevertheless,
though thou be so disjioseti, and be willing
to rouse thyself a little, all tlie terrors are at
an end.


' Tcr. iii. 7. ' I Cor. x. la.

* Hi-b. xii. 13. ;; !■ ph. v. 14.

7 Jolm V. (^-8; comp. Malt. ix. 6.


3 Jrr. viii. 4.
* lolin V. 14.


Though thou hast been so " thirty and
eight years," and art earnest to become whole,
there is no one to hinder thee. Christ is
present now also, and saith, " Take up thy
bed," only be willing to rouse thyself, despair
not. Hast thou no man ? but thou hast God.
Hast thou no one to put thee into the pool ?
but thou hast Him who suffers thee not to
need the pool. Hast thou had no one to cast
thee in there ? but thou hast Him that com-
mands thee to take up thy bed.

Thou mayest not say, " While I am coming,
another steppeth down before me."* For if
it be thy will to go down into the fountain,
there is none to hinder thee. Grace is not
consumed, is not spent, it is a kind of foun-
tain springmg up constantly; by His fullness
j are we all healed both soul and body. Let
j us come unto it then even now. For Rahab
also was a harlot, yet was she saved; and the
thief was a murderer, yet he became a citizen
of paradise; and while Judas being vvith his
i Master perished, the thief being on a cross
became a disciple. Such are the wonderful
works of God. Thus the magi approved
themselves, thus the publican became an
evangelist, thus the blasphemer an apostle.

5, Look at tb.ese things, and never despair,
but be ever confident, and rouse thyself. Lay
hold only on the way that leads thither, and
thou wilt advance quickly. Shut not up the
doors, close not up the entrance. Short is
the present life, small the labor. But though
it were great, not even so ought one to de-
cline it. For if thou toil not at this most
glorious toil that is spent upon repentance
and virtue, in the world thou wilt assuredly
toil and weary thyself in other ways. But if
both in the one and the other there be labor,
why do we not choose that which hath its
fruit abundant, and its recompense greater.

Yet neither is this labor and that the same.
For in worldly ])ursuits are continual jierils,
and losses one upon another, and the hope
uncertain; great is the servility, anil the e.\-
penditure alike of wealth, and of bodies, and
of souls; and then the return of the fruits is
far below our expectation, if jierchance it
should grow uji.

For neither dotii^toil upon worklly matters
everywhere bear fruit; nay but even, when it
hath not failed, but has l)rought forth its
produce even abundantly, short is the time
wherein it continues.

For when thou art grown old, and hast no
loM;4cr after that the feeling of enjoyment in
perfection, then and not till then doth the
labor bear thee its recompense. .\iul whereas
the labor was with the l)ody in its vigor, the

" Jiihii V. 7.


414


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXVIII-


fruit and the enjoyment is with one grown
old and languid, when time has dulled even
the feeling, although if it had not dulled it,
the expectation of the end suffers us not to
find pleasure.

But in the other case not so, but the labor
is in corruption and a dying body, but the
crown in one incorruptible, and immortal, and
having no end. And the labor is both first
and short-lived; but the reward both subse-
quent and endless, that with security thou
mayest take thy rest after that, looking for
nothing unpleasant.

For neither mayest thou fear change any
more or loss as here. What sort of good
things, then, are these, which are both inse-
cure, and short-lived, and earthly, and van-
ishing before they have appeared, and ac-
quired with many toils ? And what good
things are equal to those, that are immov-
able, that grow not old, that have no toil,
that even at the time of the conflicts bring
thee crowns ?


For he that despises money even here
already receives his reward, being freed from
anxiety, from rivalry, from false accusation,
from plotting, from envy. He that is tem-
perate, and lives orderly, even before his
departure, is crowned and lives in pleasure,
being delivered from unseemliness, ridicule,
dangers of accusation,' and the other things
that are to be feared. All the remaining
parts of virtue likewise make us a return here
already.

In order therefore that we may attain unto
both the present and the future blessings, let
us flee from vice and choose virtue. For
thus shall we both enjoy delight, and obtain
the crowns to come, unto which God grant
we may all attain, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and might forever and ever.
Amen.


1 [The rendering above has been corrected to conform to the
punctuation of the Greek te.xt. — R.]


HOMILY LXVIII.

Matt. XXI. 33—44.

Hear another parable. There was a certain householder, which planted a vineyard, and
hedged it round about, and digged a winepress, and built a tower, and let it out to
husbandmen, and went into a far country.' And when the time of the fruit drew near,
he sent his servants to receive the fruits. And the husbandmen took the servants,
and beat some, and killed some, and stoned some. Again he sent other servants more
than the first: and they did unto them likewise. But last he sent unto them his son,
saying. It may be they will reverence my son. But when the husbandmen saw the son,
they said among themselves, This is the heir, come, let us kill him, and let us seize on
his inheritance. And they cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him. When the
Lord therefore of the vineyard cometh, what will he do to those husbandmen? They
say unto Him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vine-
yard to other husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their seasons. Jesus
saith unto them, Did* ye never read in the Scriptures, The Stone which the builders
rejected, the same is become the head of the corner? " ==


Many things doth He intimate by this
parable, God's providence, which had been

1 [R. v., "another country."]

2 [The Greek te.xt agrees, as a rule, with the received : but a
few peculiarities appear : avrov is omitted at the close of verse 34 ;
the close of verse 35 is altered ; lo-ios is inserted from Luke in
verse 37, and the beginning of verse 39 is abridged. The Oxford
edition adds verses 43. 44, which are not given in the Greek text
of the Homily in Migne, but added in Field's edition. — R.]


exercised towards them from the first; their
murderous disposition from the beginning;
that nothing had been omitted of whatever
pertained to a heedful care of them; that
even when prophets had been slain, He had
not turned away from them, but had sent His
very Son; that the God both of the New and


Homily LXVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


415


of tiie Old Testament was one and tae same;
that His death should effect great blessings;
that they were to endure extreme punishment
for the crucifixion, and their crime; the call-
ing of the Gentiles, the casting out of the
Jews.

Therefore He putteth it after the former
parable, that He may show even hereby the
charge to be greater, and highly unpardona-
ble. How, and in what way ? That although
they met with so much care, they were worse
than harlots and publicans, and by so much.

And observe also both His great care, and
the excessive idleness of these men. For
what pertained to the husbandmen. He Him-
self did, the hedging it round about, the
planting the vineyard, and all the rest, and
He left little for them to do; to take care of
what was there, and to preserve what was
given to them. For nothing was left undone,
but all accomplished; and not even so did
they gain, and this, when they had enjoyed
such great blessings from Him. For when
they had come forth out of Egypt, He gave
a law, and set up a city, and built a temple,
and prepared an altar.

"And went into a far country;" that is,
He bore long with them, not always bringing
the punishments close upon their sins; for by
His going into a far country,' He means His
great long-suffering.

And " He sent His servants," that is, the
prophets, "to receive the fruit;" that is,
their obedience, the proof of it by their works.
But they even here showed their wickedness,
not only by failing to give the fruit, after
having enjoyed so much care, which was the
sign of idleness, but also by showing anger
towards them that came For they that had
not to give when they owed, should not have
licen indignant, nor angry, but should have
entreated. But they not only were indig-
nant, but even filled their hands with blood,
and while deserving punishment, themselves
inflicted punishment.

Therefore He sent both a second, and a
third company, both that the wickedness of
these might l)e shown, and the love towards
man of Him who sent them.

And wherefore sent He not His Son imme-
diately ? In order that they might condemn
themselves for the tilings done to the others,
and leave off their wrath, and reverence Him
when He came. There are also other rea-
sons, but for the present let us go on to what
is next.

lUit what means, "It may be they will

' [The verb airti^tir)<rt mrnni " went into nnother rmintry."
But Chry»<)>ili>m here >|)raks of the iiTroJi)^ia>' uh tfji' iroAAi)i', (huK
agreemg with the interpretation i>f the A. \'.— K]


reverence ? " It is not the language of- one
ignorant, away with the thought ! but of one
desiring to show the sin to be great; and with-
out any excuse. Since Himself knowing that
they would slay Him, He sent Him. But
He saith, "They will reverence," declaring
what ought to have been done, that it was
their duty to have reverenced Him. Since
elsewhere also He saith, " if perchance they
will hear; ''- not in this case either bein^r isf-
norant, but lest any of the obstinate should
say, that His prediction was the thing that
necessitated their disoliedience, therefore He
frames His expressions in this way, saying,
"Whether they will," and, "It may be."
For though they had been obstinate towards
His servants, yet ought they to have rever-
enced the dignity of the Son.

What then do these ? When they ought to
have run unto Him, when they ought to have
asked pardon for their offenses, they even
persist more strongly in their former sins,
they proceed to add unto their pollutions, for-
ever throwing into the shade their former
offenses by their later; as also He Himself
declared when He said, " Fill ye up the meas-
ure of your fathers. "3 For from the first the
prophets used to charge them with these
things, saying, "Your hands are full of
blood;''* and, "They mingle blood with
blood; "5 and, "They build up Sion with
blood."*

But they did not learn self-restraint, albeit
they received this commandment first, " Thou
shalt not kill; " and had been commanded to
abstain from countless other things because of
this, and by many and various means urged
to the keeping of this commandment.

Yet, for all that, tliey put not away that
evil custom; but what say they, when they,
saw Him? Come, let us kill Him. With
what motive, and for what reason ? what of
any kind had they to lay to His charge, either
small or great ? Is it that He honored you,
and l)eing God became man for your sakes,
and wrought His countless miracles ? or that
He pardoned your sins.' or that He called
you unto a kingilom ?

But see together with their imjiiety great
was their folly, and the reason of His nuirtler
was full of much mailness. " For let us kill
Him," it is said, "ami the inheritance shall
be ours."

And where do they take counsel to kill
Him ? " Out of the vineyard."

2. Seest thou how He jirophesies even the
place where He was to be slain. "And they
cast Him out, and slew Him."


» F.relc. ii. 5.
< Himen iv. a.


.1 Matt, xxiii. 3a.
A Micah iii. 10.


* U. i. IS.


4i6


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXVIII.


And Luke indeed saith, that He declared
what these men should suffer; and they said,
"God forbid; " and He added the testimony
[of Scripture]. For "He beheld them, and
said, What is it then that is written ? The
stone which the builders rejected, the same
is become the head of the corner; and every
one that falleth upon it shall be broken."'
But Matthew, that they themselves delivered
the sentence. But this is not a contradic-
tion. For indeed both things were done,
both themselves passed the sentence against
themselves; and again, when they perceived
what they had said, they added, "God for-
bid;" and He set up the prophet against
them, persuading them that certainly this
would be.

Nevertheless, not even so did He plainly
reveal the Gentiles, that He might afford
them no handle, but signified it darkly by
saying. " He will give the vineyard to others."
For this purpose then did He speak by a
parable, that themselves might pass the sen-
tence, which was done in the case of David
also, when He passed judgment on the para-
ble of Nathan. But do thou mark, I pray
thee, even hereby how just is the sentence,
when the very persons that are to be punished
condemn themselves.

Then that they might learn that not only
the nature of justice requires these things,
but even from the beginning the grace of the
Spirit had foretold them, and God had so de-
creed, He both added a prophecy, and re-
proves them in a way to put them to shame,
saying, " Did ye never read. The stone which
the builders rejected, the same is become the
head of the corner? this is the Lord's doing,
and it is marvellous in our eyes; " by all things
showing, that they should be cast out for un-
belief, and the Gentiles brought in. This He
darkly intimated by the Canaanitish woman
also; this again by the ass, and by the cen-
turion, and by many other parables; this also
now.

Wherefore He added too, "This is the
Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our
eyes," declarmg beforehand that the believ-
ing Gentiles, and as many of the Jews as
should also themselves believe, shall be one,
although the difference between them had
been so great before

Then, that they might learn that nothing
was opposed to God's will of the things doing,
Init that the event was even highly acceptable,
and beyond expectation, and amazing every
one of the beholders (for indeed the miracle
was far beyond words), He added and said,

' Luke XX. 17, 18.


''It is the Lord's doing," And by the stone
He means Himself, and by builders the
teachers of the Jews; as Ezekiel also saith,
"They that build the wall, and daub it witii
untempered mortar."^ But how did they
reject Him? By saying, "This man is not
of God; 3 This man deceiveth the people; " ■*
and again, " Thou art a Samaritan, and hast
a devil. "5

Then, that they might know that the pen-
alty is not limited to their being cast out. He
added the punishments also, saying, " Every
one that falleth on this stone, shall be broken;
but upon whomsoever it shall fall, it shall
grind him to powder."* He speaks here of
two ways of destruction, one from stumbling
and being offended; for this is, " Whosoever
falleth on this stone: " but another from their
capture, and calamity, and utter destruction,
which also He clearly foretold, saying, " It
will grind him to powder." By these words
He darkly intimated His own resurrection
also.

Now the Prophet Isaiah saith, that He
blames the vineyard, but here He accuses in
particular the rulers of the people. And
there indeed He saith, "What ought I to
have done to my vineyard, that I did not; " '
and elsewhere again, "What transgression
have your fathers found in me ? '' ^ And again,
" O my people, what have I done unto thee ?
and wherein have I grieved thee?''' showing
their thankless disposition, and that when in
the enjoyment of all things, they requited it
by the contraries; but here He expresses it
with yet greater force. For He doth not
plead, Himself, saying, "What ought I to
have done that I have not done ?" but brings
in themselves to judge, that nothing hath
been wanting, and to condemn themselves.
For when they say, " He will miserably de-
stroy those wicked men, and will let out the
vineyard to other husbandmen,'' they say
nothing else than this, publishing their sen-,
tence with much greater force.

With this Stephen also upbraids them,
which thing most of all stung them, that havn
ing enjoyed always much providential care,
they requited their benefactor with the con-
traries, which very thing itself was a very
great sign, that not the punisher, but the
punished, were the cause of the vengeance
brought upon them.

This here likewise is shown, by the para-
ble, by the prophecy. For neither was He

2 Ezek. xiii. 10. 3 John ix. 16.

4 John vii. 12. 5 John viii. 48.

6 [R. v., "scatter him as dust." Chrysostom seems to accept
verse 44 as part of Matthew's account ; but as he has just cited the
parallel passage in I^nke (where this occurs), it is not certain that
he refers to I\Iatthe\v's here. — R."]

7 Is. V. 4. 8 Jer. ii. 5. 9 Micah vi. 3.


Homily LXVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


417


satisfied with a parable only, but added also
a twofold prophecy, one David's, the others
from Himself.

What then ought they to have done on
hearing these things ? ought they not to have
adored, to have marvelled at the tender care,
that shown before, that afterwards? But if
by none of these things they were made better,
by the fear of punishment at any rate ought
they not to have been rendered more tem-
perate ?

But they did not become so, but what do
they after these things? "When they had
heard it," it is said, " they perceived that He
spake of them. And when they sought to
lay hands on Him, they were afraid because
of the multitudes, for they took Him for a
prophet."' For they felt afterwards that
they themselves were intimated. Sometimes
indeed, when being seized, He withdraws
through the midst of them, and is not seen;
and sometimes while appearing to them He
lays a check upon their laboring eagerness;
at which indeed men marveled, and said,
" Is not this Jesus ? Lo, He speaketh boldly,
and they say nothing unto Him."- But in
this instance, forasmuch as they were held
in restraint by the fear of the multitude. He
is satisfied with this, and doth not work
miracles, as before, withdrawing through the
midst, and not appearing. For it was not
His desire to do all things in a superhuman
way, in order that the Dispensation ^ might
be believed.

But they, neither by the multitude, nor by
what had been said, were brought to a sound
mind; they regarded not the prophet's testi-
mony, nor their own sentence, nor the dis-
position of tlie people; so entirely had the
love of power and the lust of vainglory blinded
them, together with the pursuit of thmgs tem-
poral.

3. For nothing so urges men headlong and
drives them down precipices, notiiing so
makes them fail of the tilings to come, as
their being riveted to tliese decaying things.
Nothing so surely makes them enjoy both
the one and the other, as their esteeming the
things to come above all. For, "Seek ye,"
saith Christ, '* the kingdom of Ciod, antl all
these things shall be added unto you." * And
indeed, even if this were not joined, not even
in tliat c.-ise ouglit we to aim at tliem. But
now in obtaining ti>e others, we may obtain
these two; and not even so are some per-

' Matt. xxi. 45, 46. [" because of " (ii<i) i« prculiur to this
ritation. -R.]

' [John vii. :^. a6.]

1 (ir. otKOvoma, i. <■., ihc verily nf tlir Iiuuriiutiiin.

■•Matt. vi. )i. ("first" i» omitted; inserted l>y the Oxford
tr.inslator, uvMni^t the (ireck text. — K.J


suaded, but are like senseless stones, and
pursue shadows of pleasure. For what is
pleasant of the things in this present life?
what is delightful ? For with greater freedom
do I desire to discourse with you to-day; but
suffer it, that ye may learn that this life which
seems to you to be a galling and wearisome
life, I mean that of the monks and of them
that are crucified, is far sweeter, and more to
be desired than that which seems to be easy,
and more delicate.

And of this ye are witnesses, who often
have asked for death, in the reverses and de-
spondencies that have overtaken you, and
have accounted happy them that are in moun-
tains, them that are in caves, them that have
not married, them that live the unworldly life;
ye that are engaged in crafts, ye that are in
military services, ye that live without object
or rules, and pass your days at the theatres
and orchestras. For of these, although num-
berless fountains of pleasures and mirth seem
to spring up, yet are countless darts still more
bitter brought forth.

For if any one be seized with a passion for
one of the damsels that dance there, beyond
ten thousand marches, beyond ten thousand
journeys from home, will he undergo a torture
more grievous, being in a more miserable state
than any besieged city.

However, not to inquire into those things
for the present, having left them to tlie con-
science of those that have been taken cap-
tive, come let us discourse of the life of the
common sort of men, and we shall find the
difference between either of these kinds of
life as great as between a harbor, and a sea
continually beaten about with winds.

And ol)serve from their retreats at once the
first signs of their tranquillity. For they have
fled from market plnces, and cities, and the
tumults amidst men, and have chosen ttie life
in mountains, that which liath nothing in
common witli the things present, that which
undergoes none of the ills of man, no worldly
sorrows, no grief, no care so great, no dan-
gers, no plots, no envy, no jealousy, no law-
less lusts, nor any other thing of this kind.

Here already tliey meditnte upon the things
of tiie kingdom, holdinj; converse witii groves,
and mountains, and springs, and witli great
quietness, anil solitude, and before all these,
with Clod. .And from all turmoil is their cell
pure, and from every passion and tlisease is
their soul free, refined and light, and fnr
purer than the finest air.

And their work is what wns .\dam's also at
ttie l)eginning and before his sin, when he was
clotlied \vitli the gl<iry, and conversed freely
with (iod, and dwelt in that place that was


4iS


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXVIII.


full of great blessedness. For in what respect
are they in a worse state than he, when before
his disobedience he was set to till the garden ?
Had he no worldly care ? But neither have
these. Did he talk to God with a pure con-
science ? this also do these; or rather they
have a greater confidence than he, inasmuch
as they enjoy even greater grace by the supply
of the Spirit.

Now ye ought indeed by the sight to take
in these things; but forasmuch as ye are not
willing, but pass your time in turmoils and
in markets, by word at least let us teach you,
taking one part of their way of living (for it
is not possible to go over their whole life).
These that are the lights of the world, as soon
as the sun is up, or rather even long before
its rise, rise up from their bed, healthy, and
wakeful, and sober (for neither doth any
sorrow and care, nor headache, and toil, and
multitude of business, nor any other such
thing trouble them, but as angels live they
in Heaven); having risen then straightway
from their bed cheerful and glad, and having
made one choir, with their conscience bright,
with one voice all, like as out of one mouth,
they sing hymns unto the God of all, honor-
ing Him and thanking Him for all His bene-
fits, both particular, and common.'

So that if it seem good, let us leave Adam,
and inquire what is the difference between
the angels and this company of them who
on earth sing and say, " Glory to God in the
highest, and on earth peace, good will towards
men.""

And their dress is suitable to their manli-
ness. For not indeed, like those with trail-
ing garments, the enervated and mincing, are
they dressed, but like those blessed angels,
Elijah, Elisha, John, like the apostles; their
garments being made for them, for some of
goat's hair, for some of camel's hair, and
there are some for whom skins suffice alone,
and these long worn.

Then, after they have said those songs,
they bow their knees, and entreat the God
who was the object of their hymns for things,
to the very thought of which some do not
easily arrive. For they ask nothing of things
present, for they have no regard for these,
but that they may stand with boldness before
the fearful judgment-seat, when the Only-
Begotten Son of God is come to judge quick
and dead, and that no one may hear the tear-
ful voice that saith, " I know you not," and
that with a pure conscience and many good

1 " For all Thy goodness and loving kindness to us, and to all
Tnen" Thanksgiving Prayer. See the Morning Thanksgiving;
Const. Apost. viii. 38, and the Eucharistic Prayer, ib. c. 12.

2 [Luke ii. 14, as in the received text. But " among men " is
the only possible rendering, whichever reading he accepted. — R.]


deeds they may pass through this toilsome
life, and sail over the angry sea with a favor-
able wind. And he leads them in their pray-
ers, who is their Father, and their ruler.

After this, when the)' have risen up and
finished those holy and continual prayers, the
sun being risen, they depart each one to their
work, gathering thence a large supply for the
needy.

4. Where now are they who give themselves
to devilish choirs, and harlot's songs, and sit
in theatres ? For I am indeed ashamed to
make mention of them; nevertheless, because
of your infirmity it is needful to do even
this. For Paul too saith, " Like as ye have
yielded your members servants to unclean-
ness, even so now yield your members serv-
ants to righteousness unto holiness. ^

Come let us also therefore compare the
company that is made up of harlot women,
and prostituted youths on the stage, and th's
same that consists of these blessed ones in
regard of pleasure, for which most of all,
many of the careless youths are taken in their
snares. For we shall find the difference as
great as if any one heard angels singing
above that all-harmonious melody of theirs,
and dogs and swine howling and grunting on
the dunghill. For by the mouths of these
Christ speaketh, by their tongues " the devil.

But is the sound of pipes joined to them
with unmeaning noise, and unpleasing show,
when cheeks are puffed out, and their strings
stretched to breaking ? But here the grace of
the Spirit pours forth a sound, using, instead
of flute or lyre or pipes, the lips of the saints.

Or rather, whatever we may say, it is not
possible to set forth the pleasure thereof, be-
cause of them that are riveted to their clay,
and their brick-making? Therefore I would
even wish to take one of those who are mad
about these matters, and to lead him off
there, and to show him the choir of those
saints, and I should have no more need for
these words. Nevertheless, though we speak
unto miry ones, we will try, though by word,
still by little and little, to draw them out of
the slime and the fens. For there the hearer
receives straightway the fire of illicit love; for
as though the sight of the harlot were not
enough to set the mind on fire, they add the
mischief also from the voice; but here even
should the soul have any such thing, it lays
it aside straightway. But not their voice
only, nor their countenance, but even their
clothes do more than these confound the be-
holders. And should it be some poor man

3 Rom. vi. 19. [R. v., "sanctification."]

4 ["by the tongues of those;" there being a contrast in the
Greek, which is obscured in the English rendering.— R.]


Homily LXVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


419


of the grosser and heedless sort, from the
sight he will cry out ten thousand times in
bitter despair, and will say to himself, " The
harlot, and the prostituted boy, children of
cooks and cobblers, and often even of slaves,
live in such delicacy, and I a freeman, and
born of freemen, choosing honest labor, am
not able so much as to imagine these things
in a dream; " and thus he will go his way in-
flamed with discontent.

But in the case of the monks there is no
such result, but rather the contrary altogether.
For when he shall see children of rich men
and descendants of illustrious ancestors
clothed in such garments as not even the
lowest of the poor, and rejoicing in this, con-
sider how great a consolation against poverty
he will receive as he goes away. And should
he be rich, he returns sobered, become a
better man. Again in the theatre, when they
see the harlot clothed with golden ornaments,
while the poor man will lament, and bemoan,
seeing his own wife having nothing of the
kind, the rich will in consequence of this
spectacle contemn and despise the partners
of their home. For when the harlot present
to the beholders garb and look, and voice and
step, all luxurious, they depart set on fire,
and enter into their own houses, thenceforth
captives.

Hence the insults, and the affronts, hence
the enmities, the wars, the daily deaths;
hence to them that are taken captive, life is
insupportable, and the partner of their home
thenceforth unpleasing, and their children not
as much objects of affection, and all things in
their houses turned upside down, and after
that they seem to be thrown into disorder by
the very sunbeam.

But not from these choirs does any such
dissatisfaction arise, but the wife will receive
her husl)and quiet and meek, freed from all
unlawful lust, and will find him more gentle
to her than before this. Such evil things doth
that choir bring fortii, but this good things,
the one making wolves of sheep, this lambs
of wolves. But as yet we have perhaps said
notliing hitherto toucliing the j^leasure.

And what could be more pleasant than not
to be troubled or grieved in mind, neither to
despond and groan ' Nevertheless, let us
carry on our discourse still further, and ex-
amine the enjoyment of eitlier kind of song
and spectacle; and we shall see the one
indeed continuing until evening, so long as
the spectator sits in the theatre, but after this
paining him more grievously than any sting;
but in tlie other case forever vigorous in tiie
souls of them that have beheld it. For as
well tlie fasliion of the men, and the deligiU-


fulness of the place, and the sweetness of
their manner of life, and the purity, of their
rule, and the grace of that most beautiful and
spiritual song they have for ever infixed in
them. They at least who are in continual
enjoyment of those havens, thenceforth flee
as from a tempest, from the tumults of the
multitude.

But not when singing only, and praying,
but also when riveted to their books, they are
a pleasing spectacle to the beholders. For
after they have ended the choir, one takes
Isaiah and discourses with him, another con-
verses with the apostles, and another goes
over the labors of other men, and seeks wis-
dom concerning God, concerning this uni-
verse, concerning the things that are seen,
concerning the things that are not seen, con-
cerning the objects of sense, and the objects
of intellect, concerning the vileness of this
present life, and the greatness of that to come.

5. And they are fed on a food most excel-
lent, not setting before themselves cooked
flesh of beasts; but oracles of God, beyond
honey and the honey comb, a honey mar\'el-
lous, and far superior to that whereon John
fed of old in the wilderness. For this honey
no wild bees collect, settling on the flowers,
neither do lay it up in hives digesting the
dew, but the grace of the Spirit forming it,
layeth it up in the souls of the saints, in the
place of honeycombs, and hives, and pipes,
so that he that will may eat thereof continu-
ally in security. These bees then they also
imitate, and hover around the honeycombs
of those holy books, reaping therefrom great
pleasure.

And if thou desirest to learn about their
table, be near it, and thou shalt see them
bursting forth' with such things, all gentle
and sweet, and full of a spiritual fragrance.
No foul word can those spiritual mouths bring
forth, nothing of foolish jesting, nothing
liarsh, but all worthy of Heaven. One would
not be wrong in comparing the mouths of
' them that crawl about in tlie market iilaces,
and are mad after worldly things, to ditches
of some mire; but the lips of these to foun-
tains flowing witli honey, and pouring forth
pure streams.

But if any felt displeased that I have called
the mouths of the multitude ditches of some
mire, let him know that I liave saiil it, spar-
ing tiiem very much. For Scripture hath not
used this measure, but a comi^arison far
stronger. '* For adder's poison," it is said,
" is under their lips,' and their throat is an
o[ien sepulclire '' But theirs are not so, but
full of much fragrance.


■ tfuvyontt^vt.


» P«. cxl. 3 and v. 9.


420


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXIX.


And their state here is like this, but that
hereafter what speech can set before us ? what
thought shall conceive ? the portion of angels,
the blessedness unspeakable, the good things
untold ?

Perchance some are warmed now, and have
been moved to a longing after this good rule
of life. But what is the profit, when whilst
ye are here only, ye have this fire; but when
ye have gone forth, ye extinguish the flame,
and this desire fades. How then, in order
that this may not be ? While this desire is
warm in you, go your way unto those angels,
kindle it more. For the account that we
give will not be able to set thee on fire, like
as the sight of the things. Say not, I will
speak with my wife, and I will settle my
affairs first. This delay is the beginning of
remissness. Hear, how one desired to bid
farewell to them at his house,' and the prophet
suffered him not. And why do I say, to bid
farewell ? The disciple desired to bury his
father,^ and Christ allowed not so much as
this. And yet what thing seems to thee to
be so necessary as the funeral of a father ?
but not even this did He permit.

Why could this have been ? Because the
devil is at hand fierce, desiring to find some
secret approach; and though it be but a little
hindrance or delay he takes hold of, he works
a great remissness.

Therefore one adviseth, " Put not off from


I I Kings xix. 20.


* Matt. viii. 21, 22.


day to day." 3 For thus shalt thou be able
to succeed in most things, thus also shall the
things in thine house be well ordered for
thee. " For seek ye," it is said, " the king-
dom of God, and all these things shall be
added unto you."'* For if we establish in
great security them that overlook their own
interests, and prefer the care of ours, much
more doth God, who even without these things
hath a care for us, and provides for us.

Be not thoughtful then about thine inter-
ests, but leave them to God. For if thou art
thoughtful about them, thou art thoughtful as
a man; but if God provide, He provides as
God. Be not so thoughtful about them as
to let go the greater things, since then He
will not mucn provide for them. In order
therefore that He may fully provide for them,
leave them to Him alone. For if thou also
thyself takest them in hand, having let go the
things spiritual, He will not make much pro-
vision for them.

In order then that both these things may
be well disposed for thee, and that thou may-
est be freed from all anxiety, cleave to the
things spiritual, overlook the things of the
world; for in this way thou shalt have earth
also with heaven, and shalt attain unto the
good things to come, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and might world without end.
Amen.


3 Ecclus, V. 7.


4 Matt. vi. 33.


HOMILY LXIX.

Matt. XXII. 1—14.

"And Jesus answered and spake again' in parables. The kingdom of Heaven is like
unto a certain king, which made a marriage^ for his son; and sent forth his servants to
call them which were bidden to the wedding; and they would not come. Again, he
sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden, I have prepared my
dinner; my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready; come unto the
marriage. But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another
to his merchandise: and the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully,
and slew them." ^


Seest thou both in the former parable and
in this the difference between the Son and

1 [The order here is slightly varied, and " unto them " omitted'
With these exceptions the entire passage is in verbal agreement
with the received text. — R.]

2 fR. v., " marriage feast."]

3 [Verses 7-14 do not appear in the Greek text of Migne's


the servants ? Seest thou at once the great
afifinity between both parables, and the great
difference also ? For this also indicates God's


edition, but are added in the Oxford 'translation, and in Field's
Greek text.— R.]


Homily LXIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


421


long-suffering, and His great providential
care, and the Jews' ingratitude.

But this parable hath something also more
than the other. For it proclaims beforehand
both the casting out of the Jews, and the
calling of the Gentiles; and it indicates to-
gether with this also the strictness of the life
required, and how great the punishment ap-
pointed for the careless.

And well is this placed after the other.
For since He had said, " It shall be given to
a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof,"
He declares next to what kind of nation; and
not this only, but He also again sets forth
His providential care towards the Jews as
past utterance. For there He appears before
His crucifixion bidding them; but here even
after He is slain. He still urges them, striving
to win them over. And when they deserved
to have suffered the most grievous punish-
ment, then He both presses tliem to the mar-
riage, and honors them with the highest honor.
And see how both there He calls not the
Gentiles first, but the Jews, and here again.
But as there, when they would not receive
Him, but even slew Him when He was come,
then He gave away the vineyard; thus liere
too, when they were not willing to be present
at the marriage, then He called others.

What then could be more ungrateful than
they, when being bidden to a marriage tliey
rush away ? For who would not choose to
come to a marriage, and that a King's mar-
riage, and of a King making a marriage for
a Son ?

And wherefore is it called a marriage ? one
may say. That thou mightest learn God's
tender care. His yearning towards us, the
cheerfulness of the state of things, that there
is nothing sorrowful there, nor sad, but all
things are full of spiritual joy. Therefore
also John calls Him a t)ridegroom, therefore
Paul again saith, " For I have espoused you
to one husband;"' and, "This is a great
mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and
the Church." '

Why then is not the bride said to be
espoused to Him, but to the Son? Because
she that is espoused to the Son, is espoused
to the Father. For it is indifferent in Scrij)-
ture that the one or the other should be saiil,
because of the identity ' of the substance.

Hereby He proclaimed the resurrection
also. For since in what went before He had
spoken of the death, He sliows that even after
the death, then is the marriage, then the
bridegroom.

But not even so do these become better


> 3 Cor. XI. 3,


» Eph. V. 33.


3 dirapaAA<ucroi>.


men, nor more gentle, than which what can
be worse ? For this again is a third accusa-
tion. The first that they killed the prophets;
then the son; afterwards that even when they
had slain Him, and were bidden unto the
marriage of Him that was slain, by the very
one that was slain, they come not, but feign
excuses, yokes of oxen, and pieces of ground,
and wives. And yet the excuses seem to be
reasonable; but hence w'e learn, though the
thmgs which hinder us be necessary, to set
the things spiritual at a higher price than all.

And He not suddenly, but a long time
before. For, "Tell," He saith, "them
that are bidden;" and again, "Call them
that were bidden;" which circumstance makes
the charge against them heavier. And when
were they bidden ? By all the prophets; by
John again; for unto Christ he would pass all
on, saying, " He must increase, I must de-
crease;" •» by the Son Himself again, "Come
unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden,
and I will refresh you;"^ and again, " If any
man thirst, let him come unto me, and
drink."*

But not by words only, but also by actions
did He bid them, after His ascension by
Peter, and those with him. " For He that
wrought effectually in Peter, " it is said, "to
the apostleship of the circumcision, was
mighty also in me towards ttie Gentiles."'

.For since on seeing the Son, they were
wroth and slew Him, He bids them again by
His servants. And unto what doth He bid
them? Unto labors, and toils, and sweat?
Nay but unto pleasure. For, " My oxen,"
He saith, " and my fatlings are killed." See
how complete His banquet," how great His
munificence.

And not even this shamed them, but the
more long-suffering He showed, so much the
more were they hardened. For not for press
of business, but from "making light of it,"
they did not come.

" How then do some bring fonvaril mar-
riages, others yokes of oxen ? these things
surely are of want of leisure."

By no means, for when spiritual things call
us, there is no press of business that has the
power of necessity.

And to me they seem moreover to make
use of these excuses, putting forward these
things as cloke for their negligence. And not
this only is the grievous thing, that they came
not, but also that which is a far more violent

•« Icihn iii. 30.

5 Slmt. xi. 38. ["Refresh" in the rcndcrinu nf the Greek
term iiiKWcriiiK to "give rest " in the KiiKlish venions.- R.)

'■ John vii. 37.

7 i iiil. ii, H. I k. v., " wrmijfht for " twice ; the Clrcck verb is
the juiinr in lH)lh (latiitea. — R.]

** notrtj T} wayiamia.


422


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXIX.


and furious act, to have even beaten them that
came, and to have used them despitefully/
and to have slain them; this is worse than the
former. For those others came, demanding
produce and fruits, and were slain; but these,
bidding them to the marriage of Him that had
been slain by them, and these again are
murdered.

What is equal to this madness ? This Paul
also was laying to their charge, when he said,
" Who both killed the Lord, and their own
prophets, and- have persecuted us."'

Moreover, that they may not say, " He is
an adversary of God, and therefore we do not
come," hear what they say who are bidding
them; that it is the father who is making the
marriage, and that it is He who is bidding
them.

What then did He after these things ?
Since they were not willing to come, yea and
also slew those that came unto them; He
burns up their cities, and sent His armies and
slew them.

And these things He saith, declaring be-
forehand the things that took place under
Vespasian and Titus, and that they provoked
the father also, by not believing in Him; it is
the father at any rate who was avenging.

And for this reason let me add, not
straightway after Christ was slain did the
capture take place, but after forty years, that
He might show His long-suffering, when they
had slain Stephen, when they had put James
to death, when they had spitefully entreated
the apostles.

Seest thou the truth of the event, and its
quickness ? For while John was yet living,
and many other of them that were with Christ,
these things came to pass, and they that had
heard these words were witnesses of the
events.

See then care utterable. He had planted
a vineyard; He had done all things, and
finished; when His servants had been put to
death, He sent other servants; when those
had been slain. He sent the son; and when
He was put to death, He bids them to the
marriage. They would not come. After this
He sends other servants, and they slew these
also.

Then upon this He slays them, as being
incurably diseased. For that they were in-
curably diseased, was proved not by their
acts only, but by the fact, that even when
harlots and publicans had believed, they did
these things. So that, not by their own
crimes alone, but also from what others were
able to do aright, these men are condemned.


» I Thess ii. 15. [R. V., " and drove out us."]


But if any one should say, that not then
were they out of the Gentiles called, I mean,
when the apostles had been beaten and had
suffered ten thousand things, but straightway
after the resurrection (for then He said to
them, " Go ye and make disciples of all
nations."^) We would say, that both before
the crucifixion, and after the crucifixion, they
addressed themselves to them first. For both
before the crucifixion. He saith to them,
"Go to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel; "3 and after the crucifixion, so far
from forbidding. He even commanded them
to address themselves to the Jews. For
though He said, " Make disciples of all
nations," yet when on the point of ascending
into Heaven, He declared that unto those first
they were to address themselves; For, "ye
shall receive power," saith He, "after that
the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye
shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem,
and in all Judaea, and unto the uttermost part
of the earth;"* and Paul again, "He that
wrought effectually in Peter to the apostleship
of the circumcision, was mighty in me also
toward the Gentiles." ^ Therefore the apostles
also went first unto the Jews, and when they
had tarried a long time in Jerusalem, and then
had been driven away by them, in this way
they were scattered abroad unto the Gentiles.

2. And see thou even herein His bounty;
" As many as ye shall find,'* saith He, " bid
to the marriage. For before this, as I said,
they addressed themselves both to Jews and
Greeks, tarrying for the most part in Judaea;
but since they continued to lay plots against
them, hear Paul interpreting this parable,
and saying thus, ''It was necessary that the
word of God should first have been spoken to
you, but since ye judge yourselves unworthy,
lo, we turn to the Gentiles.*

Therefore Christ also saith, " The wedding
is ready, but they which were bidden were
not worthy."

He knew this indeed even before, but that
He might leave them no pretext of a shame-
less sort of contradiction, although He knew
it, to them first He both came and sent, both
stopping their mouths, and teaching us to
fulfill all our parts, though no one should
derive any profit.

Since then they were not worthy, go ye,
saith He, into the highways, and as many as
ye shall find, bid; both the common sort,
and the outcasts. For because He had said
in every way,' " The harlots and publicans
shall inherit heaven;'' and, "The first shall


z Matt.

5 Gal.

6 Acts xili. 46. [slightly abridged."]

7 Or," repeatedly."


xxviii. 19. 3 Matt. X.

li. 8. [Comp. note 7, p. 421.


4 Acts i.


Homily LXIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


4


be last, and the last first;" He shows that
justly do these things come to pass; which
more than anything stung the Jews, and
goaded them far more grievously than their
overthrow, to see those from the Gentiles
brought into their privileges, and into far
greater than theirs.

Then in order that not even these should
put confidence in their faith alone, He dis-
courses unto them also concerning the judg-
ment to be passed upon wicked actions; to
them that have not yet believed, of coming
unto Him by faith, and to them that have
believed, of care with respect to their life.
For the garment is life and practice.

And yet the calling was of grace; where-
fore then doth He take a strict account?
Because although to be called and to be
cleansed was of grace, yet, when called and
clothed in clean garments, to continue keep-
ing them so, this is of the diligence of them
that are called.

The being called was not'of merit, but of
grace. It was fit therefore to make a return
for the grace, and not to show forth such
great wickedness after the honor. " But I
have not enjoyed,'' one may say, " so much
advantage as the Jews." Nay, but thou hast
enjoyed far greater benefits. For what things
were being prepared for them throughout all
their time, these thou hast received at once,
not being worthy. Wherefore Paul also saith,
" And that the Gentiles might glorify God
for His mercy." ' For what things were due
to them, these thou hast received.

Wherefore also great is the punishment ap-
pointed for them that have been remiss. For
as they did despite by not coming, so also thou
by thus sitting down with a corrupt life. For
to come in with filthy garments is this,
namely, to depart hence having one's life im-
j)ure; wherefore also he was speecliless.

Seest thou how, altiiough the fact was so
manifest. He doth not punish at once, until
he himself, who has sinned, has passed the
sentence ? For by having nothing to reply
he condemned himself, and so is taken away
to the unutterable torments.

For do not now, on hearing of darkness,
suppose he is punished by tliis, by sending
into a place where there is no liglit only, but
wliere " there is " also " weeping and gnashing
of teeth." ^ And this He saith, indicating
tlie intolerable pains.

Hear ye, as many as having partaken of
the mysteries, and having been prcs.-nt at the
marriage, clotlie your souls witii filthy deeds
Hear whence ys were called.


' Kom. XV. 9.


' Mult. xxii. 13.


From the highway. Being what ? Lame
and halt in soul, which is a much more griev-
ous thing than the mutilation of the body.
Reverence the love of Him, who called you,
and let no one continue to have filthy gar-
ments, but let each of you busy himself about
the clothing of your soul.

Hear, ye women; hear, ye men; we need
not these garments that are bespangled with
gold, Ma/ adorn our outward parts, ^ but those
others, that adorn the inward. Whilst we
have these former, it is difiicult to put on
those latter. It is not possible at the same
time to deck both soul and body. It is not
possible at the same time both to serve mam-
mon, and to obey Christ as we ought.

Let us put off us therefore this grievous
tyranny. For neither if any one were to adorn
thy house by hanging it with golden curtains,
and were to make thee sit there in rags,
naked, wouldest thou endure it with meek-
ness. But lo, now thou doest this to thyself,
decking the house of thy soul, I mean the
body, with curtains beyond number, but leav-
ing the soul itself to sit in rags. Knowest
thou not that tl)e king ought to be adorned
more than the city ? so therefore while for
the city hangings are prepared of linen, for
the king there is a purple robe and a diadem.
Even so do thou wrap the body with a muc'i
meaner dress, but the mind do thou clothe in
purple, and put a crown on it, and set it on a
high and conspicuous chariot. For now tlioii
art doing tlie opposite, decking the city in
various ways, but suffering the king, the mind,
to be dragged bound after the brute passions.

Rememberest thou not, that thou art
bidden to a marriage, and to God's marriage ?
Considerest thou not how tlie soul tliat is
bidden ought to enter into those chambers,
clad, and decked with fringes of gold.

3. Wilt thou that I show thee them that
are clad thus, them that have on a marriage
garment ?

Call to mind those holy persons, of whom
I discoursed to you of late, them that wear
garments of hair, tiiem that dwell in the
deserts. 'I'hese above all are the wearers of
the garments of that wedding; tliis is eviiient
from hence, that how many soever purple
robes thou wert to give them, they would not
choose to receive tliem; but much as a king,
if any one were to take the beggar's rags,
and exhort liim to put them on, woukl .iblior
the clothing, so woukl those persons also his
purple robe. And from no otlicr cause have*
they tiiis feeling, but because of knowing the
beauty of their own raiment. Therefore even

3 [The clause in italics it not found in the mss. collated b/
FicicT, Init occurs in the Benedictine edition.— R.]


424


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXIX-


that purple robe they spurn like the spider's
web. For these things hath their sackcloth
taught them; for indeed they are far more
exalted and more glorious than the very king
who reigns.

And if thou wert able to open the doors of
the mind, and to look upon their soul, and all
their ornaments within, surely thou wouldest
fall down upon the earth, not bearing the
glory of their beauty, and the splendor of
those garments, and the lightning brightness
of their conscience.

For we could tell also of men of old, great
and to be admired; but since visible examples
lead on more those of grosser souls, therefore
do I send you even to the tabernacles of those
holy persons. For they have nothing sorrow-
ful, but as if in heaven they had pitched their
tents, even so are they encamped far off the
wearisome things of this present life, in cam-
paign against the devils; and as in choirs, so
do they war against him. Therefore I say,
they have fixed their tents, and have fled from
cities, and markets, and houses. For he that
warreth cannot sit in a house, but he must
make his habitation of a temporary kind, as
on the point of removing straightway, and so
dwell. Such are all those persons, contrary
to us. For we indeed live not as in a camp,
but as in a city at peace.

For who in a camp ever lays foundation,
and builds himself a house, which he is soon
after to leave ? There is not one; but should
any one attempt it, he is put to death as a
traitor. Who in a camp buys acres of land,
and makes for himself trades ? There is not
one, and very reasonably. " For thou art
come here," they would say, "to fight, not
to traffic; why then dost thou trouble thyself
about the place, which in a little time thou
wilt leave ? When we arc gone away to our
country, do these things."

The same do I now say to thee also. When
v/e have removed to the city that is above, do
these things: or rather thou wilt have no need
of labors there; after that the king will do
all things for thee. But here it is enough to
dig a ditch round only, and to fix a palisade,
but of building houses there is no need.

Hear what was the life of the Scythians,
that lived in their wagons, such, as they say,
are the habits of the shepherd tribes. So
©ught Christians to live; to go about the
world, warring against the devil, rescuing the
captives held in subjection by him, and to be
in freedom from all worldly things.

Why preparest thou a house, O man, that
thou mayest bind thyself more? Why dost
thou bury a treasure, and invite the enemy
against thyself? Why dost thou compass


thyself with walls, and prepare a prison for
thyself?

But if these things seem to thee to be hard,
let us go away unto the tents of those men,
that by their deeds we may learn the easiness
thereof. For they having set up huts, if
they must depart from these, depart like as
soldiers, having left their camp in peace.
For so likewise are they encamped, or rather
even much more beautifully.

For indeed it is more pleasant to behold a
desert containing huts of monks in close suc-
cession, than soldiers stretching the canvas
in a camp, and fixing spears, and suspending
from the point of the spears saffron garments, '
and a multitude of men having heads of
brass, and the bosses of the shields glistening
much, and men armed all throughout with
steel, and royal courts hastily made, and
ground levelled far, and men dining and pip-
ing. For neither is this spectacle so delight-
ful as that of which I now speak.

For if we were to go away into the wilder-
ness, and look at the tents of Christ's soldiers,
we shall see not canvas stretched, neither
points of spears, nor golden garments making
a royal pavilion; but like as if any one upon
an earth much larger than this earth, yea in-
finite, had stretched out many heavens, strange
and awful would be the sight he showed; even
so may one see here.

For in nothing are their lodging-places in a
condition inferior to the heavens; for the
angels lodge with them, and the Lord of the
angels. For if they came to Abraham, a man
having a wife, and bringing up children, be-
cause they saw him hospitable; when they
find much more abundant virtue, and a man
delivered from the body, and in the flesh dis-
regarding the flesh, much more do they tarry
there, and celebrate the choral feast that be-
comes them. For there is moreover a table
amongst them pure from all covetousness, and
full of self-denial.

No streams of blood are amongst them, nor
cutting up of flesh, nor heaviness of head,
nor dainty cooking, neither are there unpleas-
ing smells of meat amongst them, nor dis-
agreeable smoke, neither runnings and
tumults, and disturbances, and wearisome
clamors; but bread and water, the latter from
a pure fountain, the former from honest labor.
But if any time they should be minded to feast
more sumptuously, their sumptuousness con-
sists of fruits, and greater is the pleasure there
than at royal tables. There is no fear there,
or trembling; no ruler accuses, no wife pro-
vokes, no child casts into sadness, no dis-

' <i>6.pr] KpoKurd.


Homily LXIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


4^5


orderly mirth dissipates, no multitude of
flatterers puffs up; but the table is an angel's
table free from all such turmoil

And for a couch they have grass only
beneath them, like as Christ did when making
a dinner in the wilderness. And many of
them do this, not being even under shelter,
but for a roof they have heaven, and the
moon instead of the light of a candle, not
wanting oil, nor one to attend to it; on them
alone does it shine worthily from on high.

4. This table even angels from heaven be-
holding are delighted and pleased. For if
over one sinner that repenteth they rejoice,
over so many just men imitating them, what
will they not do ? There are not master and
slave; all are slaves, all free men. And do
not think the saying to be a dark proverb, for
they are indeed slaves one of another, and
masters one of another.

They have no occasion to be in sadness
when evening has overtaken them, as many
men feel, revolving the an.xious thoughts that
spring from the evils of the day. They have
no occasion after their supper to be careful
about robbers, and to shut the doors, and to
put bars against them, neither to dread the
other ills, of which many are afraid, extin-
guishing their candles with strict care, lest a
spark anywhere should set the house on fire.

And their conversation again is full of the
same calm. For they talk not of these things,
whereof we discourse, that are nothing to us;
such a one is made governor, such a one has
ceased to be governor; such a one is dead,
and another has succeeded to the inheritance,
and all such like, but always about the things
to come do they speak, and seek wisdom; and
as though dwelling in another world, as though
they had migrated unto heaven itself, as liv-
ing there, even so all their conversation is
about the things there, about Abraliam's
bosom, about the crowns of the saints, about
the choiring with Christ; and of things present
they have neither any memory nor thought,
but like as we should not deign to speak at
all of what the ants do in their holes and
clefts; so neither do they of what we do; but
about the King that is al)Ove, about the war in
which they are engaged, about the devil's
crafts, about the good deeds which the saints
have achieved.

Wherein theref(jre are we dirtercnt from
ants, when compared with them ? For like
as they care for the things of the body, so
also do we; and would it were for these alone;
but now it is even for tilings far worse. For
not for necessary things only do we care like
them, but also for tilings superfluous. For
those insects pursue a business free from all


I blame, but we follow after all covetousness,
and not even the ways of ants do we imitate,
but the ways of wolves, but the ways of
leopards, or rather we are even worse than
these. For to them nature has assigned that
they should be thus fed, but us God hath
honored with speech, and a sense of equity,'
and we are become worse than the wild beasts.

And whereas we are worse than the brutes,
those men are equal to the angels, being
strangers and pilgrims as to the things here;
and all things in tliem are made different from
us, clothing, and food, and house, and shoes,
and speech. And if any one were to hear
them conversing and us, then he would know
full well, how they indeed are citizens of
heaven, but we are not worthy so much as of
the earth.

So that therefore, when any one invested
with rank is come unto them, then is all in-
flated pride found utterly vain. For the
laborer there, and he that hath no experience
of worldly affairs, sits near him that is a com-
mander of troops, and prides himself on his
authority, upon the grass, upon a mean
cushion. For there are none to extol him,
none to puff him up; but the same result
takes place, as if any one were to go to a
goldsmith, and a garden of roses, for he re-
ceives some brightness from the gold and from
the roses; so they too, gaining a little from
the splendor of these, are delivered from their
former arrogance. And like as if any were to
go upon a high place, though he be exceed-
ingly short, he appears high; so these too,
coming unto their exalted minds, appear like
them, so long as they abide there, but when
they are gone down are abased again, on de-
scending from thnt height.
. A king is nothing amongst them, a gover-
nor is nothing; but like as we, when children
are playing at these things, laugh; so do they
also utterly spurn the inflamed pride of them
who strut without. And this is evident from
hence, that if any one would give them a
kingdom to possess in security, they would
never take it; yet they would take it, unless
their thotights were upon what is greater than
it, unless they accounted the thing to be but
for a season.

What then ? Shall we not go over unto
blcsseilness so great? Shall we not come
unto these angels; shall we not receive clean
garments, and join in the ceremonies of this
wediling feast; but shall we continue begging,
in no resjicct in a better condition tlian the
poor in the streets, or rather in a state far
worse and more wretched ? For much worse


426


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXX.


than these are they that are rich in evil ways,
and it is better to beg than to spoil, for the
one hath excuse, but the other brings punish-
ment; and the beggar 'in no degree offends
God, but this other both men and God; and
undergoes the labors of rapine, but all the
enjoyment thereof other men often reap.

Knowing then these things, let us lay aside
all covetousness, and covet the things above,
with


great earnestness


" taking the


kingdom


cannot be, it cannot be
is remiss should enter


by force."' For it
that any one who
therein.

But God grant that we all having become
earnest, and watchful, may attain thereto, by
the grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and might,
world without end. Amen.

I Matt. xi. 12.


HOMILY LXX.

Matt. XXII. 15.
" Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might entangle Him in His talk.


Then. When ? When most of all they
ought to have been moved to compunction,
when they should have been amazed at His
love to man, when they should have feared
the things to come, when from the past they
ought to have believed touching the future
also. For indeed the things that had been
said cried aloud in actual fulfillment. I mean,
that publicans and harlots believed, and pro-
phets and righteous men were slain, and from
these things they ought not to have gainsaid
touching their own destruction, but even to
believe and to be sobered.

But nevertheless not even so do their wicked
acts cease, but travail and proceed further..
And forasmuch as they could not lay hands
on Him (for they feared the multitude), they
took another way with the intention of bring-
ing Him into danger, and making Him guilty
of crimes against the state.

For "they sent out unto Him their disci-
ples with the Herodians saying, Master, we
know that thou art true, and teachest the way
of God in truth, neither carest thou for any
man; for thou regardest not the person of
men. Tell us therefore, What thinkest
thou ? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar
or not ? '

For they were now tributaries, their state
having passed under the rule of the Romans.
Forasmuch then as they saw that Theudas
and Judas^ with their companies for this cause
were put to death, as having prepared for a


I Matt, x.xii. i6, 17.


2 Acts V. 36, 37.


revolt, they were minded to bring Him too
by these words into such a suspicion. There-
fore they sent both their own disciples, and
Herod's soldiers, digging, as they thought, a
precipice on either side, and in every direction
setting the snare, so that, whatever He should
say, they might lay hold of it; and if He
should answer in favor of the Herodians,
themselves might find fault with Him, but if
in their favor, the others should accuse Him.
And yet He had given the didrachmas,^ but
they knew not that.

And in either way indeed they expected
to lay hold of Him; but they desired rather
that He should say something against the
Herodians. Wherefore they send their dis-
ciples also to urge Him thereto by their
presence, that they might deliver Him to the
governor as an usurper. For this Luke also
intimates and shows, by saying, that they
asked also in the presence of the multitude,
so that the testimony should be the stronger.

But the result was altogether opposite; for
in a larger body of spectators they afforded
the demonstration of their folly.

And see their flattery, and their hidden
craft. "We know," their words are, "that
Thou art true." How said ye then, '* He is
a deceiver,^' and " deceiveth the people," and
" hath a devil," and " is not of God ?"* how a
little while before did ye devise to slay Him ?

But they are at everything, whatsoever their
craft against Him may suggest. For since,


3 Matt. xvii. 24, 25-27.


4 John vii. 12 ; viii. 48 ; ix. 16.


Homily LXX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


427


when a little before they had said in self
will, " By what authority doest Thou these
things ? " ' they did not meet with an answer
to the question, they look to puff Him up by
their flattery, and to persuade Him to say
something against the established laws, and
opposed to the prevailing government.

Wherefore also they testify the truth unto
Him, confessing what was really so, neverthe-
less, not with an upright mind, nor willingly;
nnd add thereto, saying, " Thou carest not
for any man." See how plainly they are de-
siring to urge Him to these sayings, that
would make Him both offend Herod, and
incur the suspicion of being an usurper, as
standing up against the laws, so that they
might punish Him, as a mover of sedition,
and an usurper. For in saying, "Thou
carest r;pt for any man," and, "Thou re-
gardest not the person of man," they were
hinting at Herod and Caesar.

" Tell us therefore, what thinkest Thou ?"
Now ye honor Him, and esteem Him a
Teacher, having despised and insulted Him
oftentimes, when He was discoursing of the
things that concern your salvation. \Vhence
also they are become confederates.

And see their craftiness. They say not.
Tell us what is good, what is e.xpedient, what
is lawful ? but, " What thinkest Thou ? " So
much did they look to this one object, to be-
tray Him, and to set Him at enmity with the
rulers. And Mark declaring this, and more
plainly discovering their self-will, and their
murderous disposition, afifirms them to have
said, "Shall we give Caesar tribute, or shall
we not give ?" "^ So that they were breathing
anger, and travailing with a plot against Him,
yet they feigned respect.

What then saith He ? " Why tempt ye me,
ye hypocrites?" Seest thou how He talks
with them with more than usual severity ?
For since their wickedness was now complete
and manifest. He cuts the deeper, first con-
founding and silencing them, by publishing
their secret thoughts, and making it manifest
to all with what kind of intent tliey are com-
ing unto Him.

And these things He did, repulsing their
wickedness, so that they might not suffer hurt
in attempting the same tilings again. And
yet their words were full of much respect, for
they both called Him Master, and bore wit-
ness to His truth, and tli.-it He wns no re
specter of persons; but being (iod, He was
deceived by none of these things. Wherefore
they also ought to have conjectured, that the
reluike was not the result of conjecture, but
a_signj)f His knowing their secret thoughts.

' Matt. xxi. 33. ' Murk xii. 15.


2. He Stopped not, however, at the rebuke,
although it was enough merely to have con-
victed them of their purpose, and to have put
them to shame for their wickedness; but He
stoppetn not at this, but in another way closes
their mouths; for, "Shew me," saith He,
"the tribute money." And when they had
shown it, as He ever doth, by their tongue
He brings out the decision, and causes them
to decide, that it is lawful; which was a clear
and plain victory. So that, when He asks,
not from ignorance doth He ask, but because
it is His will to cause them to be bound by
their own answers. For when, on being
asked, "Whose is the image?" they said,
"Caesar's;" He saith, " Render unto Caisar
the things that are Caesar's." ^ for this is
not to give but to render, and this He shows
both by tlie image, and by the superscription.

Then that they might not say, Thou art
subjecting us to men, He added, "And unto
God the things tliat are God's." For it is
possible both to fulfill to men their claims,
and to give unto God the things that are due
to God from us. Wherefore Paul also saith,
" Render unto all their dues; tribute to whom
tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear
to whom fear.'' ■»

But thou, when thou hearest, " Render
unto Caesar the things which are Cresar's,"
know that He is speaking only of those things,
which are no detriment to godliness; since if
it be any such thing as this, such a thing is
no longer Caesar's tribute, but the devil's.

When they heard these things, their mouths
were stopped, and they "marvelled " at His
wisdom. Ought they not then to have be-
lieved, ought tiiey not to have been amazed.
For indeed, He gave them proof of His God-
liead, by revealing the secrets of their hearts,
and witii gentleness did He silence them.

What then ? did they believe ? By no means,
but they "left Him, and went their way;"
and after them, " c;ime to Him the Saddu-
cees."

O folly ! When the others had been put
to silence, these made tiie attack, when tliey
ought to have been the more backward. But
such is the nature of rashness, shameless,
and importunate, and attempting things im-
possible. Therefore the evangelist also,
amazed at their folly, signified this very
thing, by saying, *' (^n that day came to
Him." 5 On that ilay. On wliat day? In
which He had convicted their craftiness, and
jnit them to slinme.

But who are these ? A sect of tlic Jews dif-


1 Matl. xxii. »o, ai. f Ahridk'<-<l 1 * Mom. xiii. 7.

5 Matt. xxii. ji, a). [The urtulc may not form part of the
citiiirt'ii. It diK-H not occur in the Now TMlamcnt paMaKC— R.)


428


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXX.


ferent from the Pharisees, and much worse
than they, who said, " that there is no resur-
rection, nor angel, nor spirit."' For these
were some of a grosser sort, and eager after
the things of the body. For there were many
sects even amongst the Jews. Wherefore
Paul also saith, "I am a Pharisee, of the
strictest sect amongst us." ^

And they say nothing indeed directly about
a resurrection; but they feign a story, and
make up a case, which, as I suppose, never so
much as had an existence; thinking to drive
Him to perplexity, and desiring to overthrow
both things, both the existence of a resurrec-
tion, and of such a resurrection.

And again, these too attack Him with a
show of moderation, saying, " Master, Moses
said, If a man die, not having children, his
brother shall marry his wife, and raise up
seed unto his brother. Now there were with
us seven brethren: and the first, when he had
married a wife, deceased; and, having no
issue,3 left his wife unto his brother. Like-
wise the second also, and the third, unto the
seventh. And last of all the woman died
also. Therefore, in the resurrection, whose
wife shall she be of the seven ?''* ■

See Him answering these like a teacher.
For though out of craft they came unto Him,
yet was their question rather one of ignorance.
Therefore neither doth He say unto them,
" Ye hypocrites."

Moreover, in order that He might not
blame, saying, "Wherefore had seven one
wife?" they add the authority of Moses; al-
though, as I have said before, it was a fiction,
in my judgment at least. For the third would
not have taken her, when he saw the two
bridegrooms dead; or if the third, yet not the
fourth or the fifth; and if even these, much
more the sixth or the seventh would not have
come unto the woman, but have shrunk from
her. For such is the nature of the Jews,
For if now many have this feeling, much more
then had they; when at least, even without
this, they often avoided marrying in this way,
and that when the law was constraining them.
Thus, at any rate, Ruth, that Moabitish
woman, was thrust off to him that was further
off from her kindred; and Tamar too was
thus compelled to obtain, by stealth, seed
from her husband's kinsman.

And wherefore did they not feign two or
three, but seven ? In order the more abun-
dantly to bring derision, as they thought,
upon the resurrection. Wherefore they further


' Acts xxiii. 8. = Acts xxiii. 6, and xxvi. s.

3[R. v., "seed."]

4 Matt. xxii. 24-28. [With the trifling variations the Greek of
these verses agrees with the received text.— R.]


say, " they all had her," as driving Him into
some difficulty.

What then saith Christ ? He repl-ies unto
both, as taking His stand not against the
words, but the purpose, and on every occa-
sion revealing the secrets of their hearts; and
at one time exposing them, at another time
leaving the refutation of them that question
Him to their conscience. See, at any rate
here, how He proves both points, as well that
there will be a resurrection, as that it will not
be such a resurrection as they suspect.

For what saith He? "Ye do err, not know-
ing the Scriptures, nor the power of God. "s
For since, as if they knew them, they put
forward Moses and the law. He shows that
this question is that of men very ignorant of
the Scriptures. For hence also arose their
tempting Him, from their being igqorant of
the Scriptures, and from their not knowing
the power of God as they ought.

"For what marvel then is it," He saith,
"if ye tempt me, who am as yet unknown to
you, when at least ye know not so much as
the power of God, of which ye have had s©
much experience, and neither from common
sense nor from the Scriptures have become
acquainted with it;" if indeed even common
sense causes us to know this, that to God all
things are possible. And in the first place
He answers to the question asked. For since
this was the cause for their not believing a
resurrection, that they think the order of
things is like this, He cures the cause, then
the symptom also (for thence arose the dis-
ease too), and shows the manner of the resur-
rection. " For in the resurrection," saith
He, "they neither marry, nor are given in
marriage, but are as angels of God in Heav-
en."* But Luke saith, "As Sons of God." '

If then they marry not, the question is
vain. But not because they do not marry,
therefore are they angels, but because they
are as angels, therefore they do not marry.
By this He removed many other difficulties
also, all which things Paul intimated by one
word, saying, " For the fashion of this world
passeth away." ^

And by these words He declared how great
a thing the resurrection is; and that moreover
there is a resurrection. He proves. And
indeed this too was demonstrated at the same
time by what He had said, nevertheless over
and above He adds again to His word by
what He saith now. For neither at their
question only did He stop, but at their


5 Matt. xxii. 29.

6 Matt. xxii. 30. [The second verb is peculiar, but conveys the
same sense as the received text. — R.7

7 Luke XX. 36. 8 I Cor. vii. 31.


Homily LXX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


4-9


thought. Thus when they are not deahng
with great craft, but are asking in ignorance,
He teaches even over and above, but when it
is of wickedness only, not even to their ques-
tion doth He answer.

And again by Moses doth He stop their
moutlis, since they too had brought forward
Moses; and He saith, " But as touching the
resurrection of the dead, have ye not read,
I am the God of Abraliam, and the God of
Isaac, and tlie God of Jacob ? He is not the
God of the dead, but of the living."' Not
of them that are not. His meaning is, and
that are utterly blotted out, and are to rise
no more. For He said not, I was, but, I
am; of them that are, and them that live.
For like as Adam, although he lived on the
day that he ate of the tree, died in the sen-
tence; even so also these, although they had
died, lived in the promise of the resurrection.

How then doth He say elsewhere, "That
He might be Lord both of the dead and of
the living?"^ But this is not contrary to
that. For here He speaks of the dead, who
are also themselves to live. And moreover
too, " I am the God of Abraham," is another
thing from, " That He miglu be Lord both
of the dead and of the livmg." He knew of
another death too, concerning which He
saith, " Let the dead bury their dead."^

*'And when the multitudes heard this, they
were astonished at His doctrine." •• Yet not
even here tiie Sadducees; but these go away
defeated, while the impartial multitude reap
tlie benefit.

Since then the resurrection is like this,
come let us do all things, that we may obtain
the first honors there. But, if ye will, let us
show you some even before the resurrection
here pursuing and reaping these blessings,
again having made our resort to the deserts.
For again will I enter upon the same dis-
course, since I see you listening with more
pleasure.

Let us behold then to-day also the spiritual
camps, let us beiiold their pleasure unalloyed
witii fear. For not with spears are they en-
camped like the soldiers, for at this point I
lately ended my discourse, neither with shiekis
and breastplates; but bare of all these wilt
thou see them, yet achieving such things, as
not even with arms do they.

And if thou art able to observe, come and
stretch forth thy hand to me, and let us go
unto this war, both of us, and let us see their
battle array. For these too fight every day,

' Mntt. xxii. ii, 32. fin tlir Iii«t claiiiw the trxt dilTrrs from
the rccrivrcl, o 9to« Ix-inj; uniitlrd (so ri<u'liriul<irf). I lir K. V.
follow* n »liKhlly clifFcrcnt rriiclinK : " CukI i« Jnut the («<kI," etc.

' Kum. xiv. a. 3 Mutt. viii. as.


* .Mutt. xxii. 11.


and slay their adversaries, and conquer all
the lusts that are plotting against us; and
thou wilt see these cast out on the ground,
I and not able so much as to struggle, but
I proving by very deed that saying of tne apos-
tle, "They that are Christ's have crucified
the flesh with the affections and lusts, "s

Seest thou a multitude of dead lying //icre,
slain by the sword of the Spirit? Therefore
in that place is no drunkenness nor gluttony.
And their table proves it, and the trophy that
is set thereon. For drunkenness and gluttony
lie dead, put to the rout by the drinking of
water, though this be multiform, and a many-
headed monster. For like as in the fabled
Scylla and Hydra, so in drunkenness may one
see many heads, on one side fornication grow-
ing up, on another wrath; on one hand sloth,
on another lawless lusts; but all these things
are taken away. And yet all those other
armies, though they get the better in ten
thousand wars, are taken captive by these;
and neither arms, nor spears, nor whatever
else there may be, is able to stand against
these phalanxes; but the very giants, the
heroes, those that do countless brave deeds,
thou wilt find without bonds bound by
sleep and drunkenness, without slaughter or
wounds lying like the wounded, or rather in
more grievous case. For those at least strug-
gle; but these do not even this, but straight-
way give up.

Seest thou that this host is greater and
more to be admired ? For the ene'mies that
got the better of the others it destroys by its
mere will. For they do so weaken the mother
of all their evils, that she cannot even trouble
them any more; and the leader being over-
thrown, and the head removed, the rest of
the body also lies still.

And this victory one may see each of them,
that abide there, aciiieving. For it is not as
in these wars of ours, where, if any enemy
hath received a blow from one, he is no more
grievous to another, having been once over-
thrown; but it is necessary for all to smite
this monster; and he that hath not smitten
and (H'ertlirown her, is surely troubled by her.

Seest tiiou a glorious victory ? For such a
trophy as the hosts in all parts of the world
having met together have not power to erect,
this each one of those men erects; and all
things that from the army of ilrunkenness
lie mingled together wounded, delirious
words of frenzy, insane tlioughts, unpleasing
haughtiness. Aiu\ they imit.Uc tlieir own
Lord, at wliom the Scripture marvelling saitii,
" He sliall drink of the !)r()ok in the w.iy,
therefore shall He lift up the head.'**


S C.il.


^^^


6 P«. ex. 7.


430


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXX.


Would ye see also another multitude of
dead ? Let us see the lusts that arise from
luxurious living, those that are cherished by
the makers of sauces, by the cooks, the fur-
nishers of feasts, the confectioners. For I
am ashamed indeed to speak of all; however,
I will tell of the birds from Phasis, the soups
that are mixed from various things: the
moist, the dry dishes, the laws made about
these things. For like as if ordering some
city and marshalling hosts, even so these
too make laws, and ordain such a thing first,
and such a thing second, and some bring in
first birds roasted on the embers, filled within
with fish; and others make of other material
the beginnings of these unlawful feasts; and
there is much rivalry about these things,
about quality, and about order, and about
quantity; and they take a pride in the things,
for which they ought to bury themselves for
shame; some saying that they have spent the
half of the day, some all of it, some that they
have added the night too. Behold, O wretched
man, the measure of thy belly, and be ashamed
of thy unmeasured earnestness !

But there is nothing like this amongst those
angels; but all these desires also are dead.
For their meals are not unto fullness, and
unto luxurious living, but unto necessity.
No bird hunters are there, no fishermen, but
bread and water. But this confusion, and
the disturbance, and the turmoils, are all re-
moved from thence, alike from the house and
from the body, and great is the haven, but
amongst these great the tempest.

Burst open now in thought the belly of
them who feed on such things, and thou wilt
see the vast refuse, and the unclean channel,
and the whited sepulchre.

But what come after these I am even
ashamed to tell, the disagreeable eructations,
the vomitings, the discharges downwards and
upwards.

But go and see even these desires dead
there, and those more violent lusts that spring
from these; I mean, those of impurity. For
these too thou wilt see all overthrown, with
their horses, with their beasts of burden.
For the beast of burden, and the weapon, and
the horse of a filthy deed, is a filthy word.
But thou wilt see such like horse and rider
together, and their weapons thrown down;
but here quite the contrary, and souls cast
down dead. But not at their meal only is
the victory of these holy men glorious, but
in the other things also, in money, in glory,
in envy, in all diseases of the soul.

Surely does not this host seem to thee
mightier than that, and the meal better ? Nay,
who will gainsay it .'' None, not even of those


persons themselves, though he be very mad.
For this guides us on to Heaven, that drags
to hell; this the devil lays out, that Christ;
for this luxury gives laws, and intemperance,
for that self-denial and sobriety, here Christ
is present, there the devil. For where there
is drunkenness, the devil is there; where
there are filthy words, where there is surfeit-
ing, there the devils hold their choirs. Such
a table had that rich man, therefore not eve-n
of a drop of water was he master.

But these have not such a table, but they
already practise the ways of the angels. They
marry not, they are not given in marriage,
neither do they sleep excessively, nor live
luxuriously, but except a few things they are
even bodiless.

Now who is there that so easily overcomes
his enemies as he that sets up a trophy while
at his dinner? Therefore also the prophet
saith, *' Thou hast prepared a table before
me, in the presence of them that trouble
me." ' One could not be wrong in repeating
this oracle about this table. For nothing so
troubles a soul as disorderly concupiscence,
and luxury, and drunkenness, and the evils
that spring from these; and this they know
full well who have had experience thereof.

And if thou wast to learn also, whence this
table is procured, and whence that; then thou
wouldest see well the difference between each.
Whence then is this procured. From count-
less tears, from widows defrauded, from or-
phans despoiled; but the other from honest
labor. And this table is like to a fair and
well-favored woman, needing nothing ex-
ternal, but having her beauty from nature;
but that to some ugly and ill-favored harlot,
wearing much paint, but not able to disguise
her deformity, but the nearer she is, the
more convicted. For this too, when it is
nearer to him that is at it, then shows its
ugliness more. For look not I tell thee, at
the banqueters, as they come only, but also
as they go away, and then thou wilt see its
ugliness. For that, as being free, suffers
them that come unto it to say nothing shame-
ful; but this nothing seemly, as being a har-
lot, and dishonored. This seeks the profit
of him that is at it, that the hurt. And one
permits not to offend God, the other permits
not but that we must offend Him.

Let us go away therefore unto those men.
Thence we shall learn with how many bonds
we are encompassed. Thence shall we learn
to set before ourselves a table full of count-
less blessings, most sweet, without cost, de-
livered from care, free from envy and jeal-

• Ps. xxiii. 5. [lxx.]


Homily LXXI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


431


ousy and every disease, and full of good hope,
and having its many trophies. No turmoil of
soul there, no sorrow, no wrath; all is calm, !
all is peace. ]

For tell me not of the silence of them that
serve in the houses of the rich, but of the
clamor of them that dine; I mean, not that
which they make one to another (for this too
is worthy of derision), but that within, that
in the soul, that brings on them a great cap-
tivity, the tumults of the thoughts, the sleet, j
the darkness, the tempest, by which all things j
are mingled and confused, and are like to


some night battle. But not in the monks'
tents are such things as these; but great is
the calm, great the quietness. And that
table is succeeded by a sleep that is like
death, but this by sobriety and wakefulness;
that by punishment, this by the kingdom of
heaven, and the immortal rewards.

This then let us follow, that we may enjoy
also the fruits thereof; unto which God grant
we may all attain, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory and might world without end.
Amen.


HOMILY LXXI.

Matt. XXH. 34—36.

*' But when the Pharisees had heard that He had put the Sadducees to silence, they
were gathered together; and one of them, which was a lawyer, asked Him a ques-
tion, tempting Him, and saying, Master, which is the great commandment in the law?"


Again doth the evangelist express the
cause, for which they ought to have held their
peace, and marks their boldness by this also.
How and in what way ? Because when those
others were put to silence, these again assail
Him. For when they ought even for this to
hold their peace, they strive to urge further
their former endeavors,' and put forward the
lawyer, not desiring to learn, but making a
trial of Him, and ask, " What is the first
commandment ? "

For since the first commandment was this,
"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God," think-
ing that He would afford them some handle,
as though He would amend it, for the sake
of sliowing that Himself too was God, they
propose the question. What then saith
Christ? Indicating from what they were led
to this; from having no charity, from i")ining
witli envy, from being seized by jealousy. He
saith, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God.
This is the first and great commandment.'
And the second is like unto tins,' Thou shalt
love thy neighbor as thyself."*

lUit wherefore *' like unto this ? " Because


I this makes the way for that, and by it is
again established; " For every one that doeth
evil hateth the light, neither cometh to the
light;''' and again, "The fool hath said in
his heart, There is no God." And what in
consequence of this? "They are corrupt,
and become abominable in their ways."*
And again, "The love of money is the root
of all evils; which while some coveted after,
they have erred from the faith; " ' and, "He
that loveth me, will keep my command-
ments.'"*

But His commandments, and the sum of
them, are, "Thou shalt love the Loril thy
God, and thy neighbor a.s thyself." If there-
fore to love God is to love one's neighbor,
"For if thou lovest me,'' He saith, "O
Peter, feed my sheep,"" but to love one's
neiglibor worketh a kecpnig of the comni.Tiul-
nients, with reason doth lie say, "On these
hang all the law and the prophets." "

So therefore wliat He did before, this He
dotli here also. I mean, tiiat both tliere,
wlu-n asked about the manner of the resurrec-
tion, He also taught a resurrection, instriict-


I lohn iii. ao.
' John xiv. IS


6P». liii. I.


» f K. v., Ii)lli)win){ « difprcnt rcndinjj, " RT"" nnd fi"'"! "John xiv. t%. (The pnruphrasc ^ivcn nlxnc (unfmiisl

3 [I'hc text varies from the received slightly, us well as from , rendrriiii; of the k. V., " If yc love nic, ye will keep my lomiitaii
the rending accepted in the R. V. — R.J I ments." — R.]

4 Matt. xxii. 37-59. I ' John xxi. 16, 17


7 I Tim. vi. 10.

he
inand-


"> Mult. xxii. 40.


432


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXI.


ing them beyond what they inquired; and
here, being asked the first commandment,
He rehearses the second also, which is not
much inferior to that (for though second, it
is like that), intimating to them, whence the
question had arisen, that it was from hatred.
"For charity envieth not."' By this He
shows Himself to be submissive both to the
law and to the prophets.

But wherefore doth Matthew say that he
asked, tempting Him, but Mark the contrary ?
"For when Jesus," he saith, "saw that he
answered discreetly. He said unto him. Thou
art not far from the kingdom of God." ^

They are not contradicting each other, but
indeed fully agreeing. For he asked indeed,
tempting, at the beginning, but being bene-
fitted by the answer, was commended. For
not at the beginning did He commend him,
but when he had said, " That to love his
neighbor is more than whole burnt sacri-
fices," then He saith, " Thou art not far
from the kingdom; " because he overlooked
low things, and embraced the first principle
of virtue. For indeed all those are for the
sake of this, as well the Sabbath as the rest.

And not even so did He make His com-
mendation perfect, but yet deficient. For
His saying, " Thou art not far off," indicates
that he is yet falling short, that he might
seek after what was deficient.

But if, when He said, " There is one God,
and there is none other but He," He com-
mended him, wonder not, but by this too
observe, how He answers according to the
opinion of them that come unto Him. For
although men say ten thousand things about
C^hrist unworthy of His glory, yet this at any
rate they will not dare to say, that He is not
God at all. Wherefore then doth He praise
him that said, that beside the Father, there
is no other God ?

Not excepting Himself from being God;
away with the thought; but since it was not
yet time to disclose His Godhead, He suffers
him to remain in the former doctrine, and
praises him for knowing well the ancient prin-
ciples, so as to make him fit for the doctrine
of the New Testament, which He is brinsfins:
in Its season.

And besides, the saying, "There is one
God, and there is none other but He," both
in the Old Testament, and everywhere, is
spoken not to the rejection of the Son, but
to make the distinction from idols. So that
when praising this man also, who had thus
spoken, He praises him in this mind.

Then since He had answered, He asks also


* 1 Cor. xiii. 4.


2 Mark xii. 34.


in turn, " What think ye of Christ, whose Son
is He ? They say unto Him, The Son of
David." 3

See after how many miracles, after how
many signs, after how many questions, after
how great a display of His unanimity with the
Father, as well in words, as in deeds; after
having praised this man that said, that there
is one God, He asks the question, that they
may not be able to say, that He did miracles
indeed, yet was an adversary to the law, and
a foe to God.

Therefore, after so many things. He asks
these questions, secretly leading them on to
confess Him also to be God. And the disci-
ples He asked first what the others say, and
then themselves; but these not so; for surely
they would have said a deceiver, and a wicked
one, as speaking all things without fear. So
for this cause He inquires for the opinion of
these men themselves.

For since He was now about to go on to
His passion. He sees forth the prophecy that
plainly proclaims Him to be Lord; and not
as having come to do this without occasion,
nor as having made this His aim, but from a
reasonable cause.

For having asked them first, since they an-
swered not the truth concerning Him (for
they said He was a mere man), to overthrow
their mistaken opinion, He thus introduces
David proclaiming His Godhead. For they
indeed supposed that He was a mere man,
wherefore also they said, "the Son of
David :""* but He to correct this brings in
the prophet witnessing to His being Lord,
and the genuineness of His Sonship, and His
equality in honor with His Father.

And not even at this doth He stop, but in
order to move them to fear, He adds what
followeth also, saying, " Till I make Thine
enemies Thy footstool; "^ that at least in this
way He might gain them over.

And that they may not say, that it was in
flattery he so called Him, and that this was
a human judgment, see what He saith,
"How then doth David in spirit call Him
Lord ? " See how submissively He intro-
duces the sentence and judgment concerning
Himself. First. He had said, " What think
ye? Whose Son is He?" so by a question
to bring them to an answer. Then since they
said, "the Son of David," He said not,
"And yet David saith these things," but
again in this order of a question, " How then

3 Matt. xxii. 42. [R. v., "the Christ."]

4 It may be in this view that it is said of St. Paul, immediately
on his conversion, that " he preached Christ in the synagogues,
that He is the Son of God." Acts ix. 20.

5 Matt. xxii. 43. [The form is that of the received text. R.
v., following strongly preponderant authority, "underneath thy
feet."— R.]


Homily LXXI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


433


doth David in spirit call Him Lord ?" in order
that the sayings might not give offense to
them. Wherefore neither did He say, What
think ye of me, but of Christ, For this rea-
son the apostles also reasoned submissively,
saying, " Let us speak freely of the Patriarch
David, that he is both dead and buried." '

And He Himself too in like manner for this
cause introduces the doctrine in the way of
question and inference, saying, " How then
doth David in spirit call Him Lord, saying,
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on
m}' right hand, until I make Thy foes Thy
footstool;''- and again, "If David then call
Him Lord, how is He then his Son,"^ not
taking away the fact that He is his Son, away
with the thought; for He would not then have
reproved Peter for this,-» but to correct their
secret thoughts. So that when He saith,
" How is He his Son?" He meaneth this,
not so as ye say. For they said, that He is
Son only, and not also Lord. And this after
the testimony, and then submissively, " If
David then call Him Lord, how is He his
Son?"

But, nevertheless, even when they had
heard these things, they answered nothing,
for neither did they wish to learn any of the
things that were needful. Wherefore He
Himself addeth and saith, that " He is his
Lord." Or rather not even this very thing
doth He say without support, but having
taken the prophet with Him, because of His
being exceedingly distrusted by them, and
evil reported of amongst them. To which
fact we ought to have especial regard, and if
anything be said by Him that is lowly and
submissive, not to be offended, for the cause
is this, with many other things also, tliat He
talks with them in condescension.

Wherefore now also He delivers His doc-
trine in the manner of question and answer;
but He darkly intimates even in this way His
dignity. For it was not as much to be called
Lord of the Jews, as of David.

But mark thou also, I pray thee, how sea-
sonable it is. I"'nr when He had said,
"There is one Lord," then He spake of
Himself that He is Lord, and showed it by
prophecy, no more by His works only. And
He showeth the Fatl\er Himself taking ven-
geance upon them in His behalf, for He saith,
" Until I make Tliine enemies Thy foot-
stool," and great unanimity even hereby on
the part of Him that begat Him towards
Himself, and honor. And upon His reason-
ings with them He doth set this end high and

« Acts ii. 79. » Malt. xxii. 4^. 1 Matt. xxii. 4^.

* Kcir bcinK unwiitiiiK toudiiiit wliut bclonKcd to ili» lluimiiiily;
Matt. xvi. 33, -.13.


great, and sufficient to close fast their
mouths.

For they were silent from thenceforth, not
willingly, but from their having nothing to
say; and they recei/ed so deadly a blow, as
no longer to dare to attempt the same things
any more. For, " no one," it is said, '* durst
from that day forth ask Him any more ques-
tions." s

And this was no little advantage to the
multitude.*^ Therefore also unto them doth
He henceforth direct His word, having re-
moved the wolves, and having repulsed their
plots.

For those men gained nothing, taken cap-
tive by vainglory, and having fallen upon this
terrible passion. For terrible is this passion
and many-headed, for some set their heart
upon power for the sake of this, some on
wealth, some on strength. But proceedmg in
order it goes on unto almsgiving also, and
fasting, and prayers, and teaching, and many
are the heads of this monster.

But to be vainglorious indeed about those
other things is nothing wonderful; but to be
so about fasting and prayer, this is strange
and lamentable.

But that we may not again blame only,
come and let us tell the means, by which we
shall avoid this. Against whom shall we pre-
pare to contend first, against those tiiat are
vainglorious of money, or those of dress, or
those of places of power, or those of sciences,
or tliose of art, or those of their person, or
those of beauty, or those of ornaments, or
those of cruelty, or those of humanity and
almsgiving, or those of wickedness, or those
of death, or those after tleath ? For indeed,
as I have said, this passion hath many links, ^
and goes on beyond our life. For such a
one, it is said, is dead, and that he may be
held in admiration, hath charged that such
and such things be done; and therefore such
a one is poor, such a one rich.

For the grievous thing is this, that even of
opposite things is it made up.

Against wliom then sliall we stand, and
let ourselves in array first ? For one and the
same discourse suffices not against all. \\"ill
ye then that it be against tliem that are vain-
glorious about almsgiving?

To me at least it seems well; for exceed-
ingly do I love this thing, ami am pained at
seeing it marred, and vainglory plotting
ag.iinst it, like a pandering nurse .igainst

some royal damsel. For she feeds her in-

- — -

5 Mall. xxii. 46.

* Sec the luirullrl nlnre, Mark xii. 37, where il i« added, '" The
romnioii iiriipir heard Ilim i;Udlv." (iv. V., m.»rv;in, "or, the
(jrriiC iniilliliulc," eti.]

7 frA«KTa»'a(


434


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[IIOMILY LXXI.


deed, but for disgrace and mischief, prosti-
tuting her and commanding her to despise
her father; but to deck herself to please un-
holy and often despicable men; and invests
her with such a dress, as strangers wish, dis-
graceful, and dishonorable, not such as the
father.

Come now, then, let us take our aim against
these; and let there be an almsgiving made
in abundance for display to the multitude.
Surely then, first vainglory leads her out of
her Father's chamber. And whereas her
Father requires not to appear so much as to
the left hand/ she displays her to the slaves,
and to the vulgar, that have not even known
her.

Seest thou a harlot, and pander, casting
her into the love of foolish men, that accord-
ing as they require, so she may order herself ?
Dost thou desire to see how it renders such a
soul not a harlot only, but insane also?

Mark then her mind. For when she lets
go heaven and runs after fugitives and menial
slaves, pursuing through streets and lanes
them that hate her, the ugly and deformed,
them that are not willing so much as to look
at her, them that, when she burns with love
towards them, hate her, what can be more
insane than this ? For no one do the multi-
tude hate so much, as those that want the
glory they have to bestow. Countless accu-
sations at least do they frame against them,
and the result is the same, as if any one were
to bring down a virgin daughter of the king
from the royal throne, and to require her to
prostitute herself to gladiators, who abhorred
her. These then, as much as thou pursuest
them, so much do they turn away from thee;
but God, if thou seek the glory that cometh
from Him, so much the more both draws thee
unto Himself, and commends thee, and great
is the reward He renders unto thee.

But if thou art minded in another way also
to discern the mischief thereof, when thou
givest for display and ostentation, consider
how great the sorrow that then comes upon
thee, and how continual the desponding, while
Christ's voice is heard in thine ears, saying,^
"Thou hast lost all thy reward." For in
every matter indeed vainglory is a bad thing,
yet most of all in beneficence, for it is the
utmost cruelty, making a show of the calami-
ties ot others, and all but upbraiding those in
poverty. For if to mention one's own good
actions is to upbraid, what dost thou think
it is to publish them even to many others.

How then shall we escape the danger ? If
we learn how to give alms, if we see after


• Matt. vi. 3.


2 Matt. vi. I.


whose good report we are to seek. For tell
me, who has the skill of almsgiving ? Plainly,
it is God, who hath made known the thing,
who best of all knows it, and practises it
without limit. What then ? If thou art
learning to be a wrestler, to whom dost thou
look ? or to whom dost thou display thy
doings in the wrestling school, to the seller
of herbs, and of fish, or to the trainer ? And
ye they are many, and he is one. What then,
if while the admires thee, others deride thee,
wilt thou not with him deride them ?

What, if thou art learning to box, wilt thou
not look in like manner to him who knows
how to teach this ?

And if thou art practising oratory, wilt thou
not accept the praise of the teacher of rhet-
oric, and despise the rest.

How then is it other than absurd, in other
arts to look to the teacher only, but here to
do the contrary ? although the loss be not
equal. For there, if you wrestle according to
the opinion of the multitude, and not that of
the teacher, the loss is in the wrestling; but
here it is in eternal life. Thou art become
like to God in giving alms; be thou then like
Him in not making a display. For even He
said, when healing, that they should tell no
man.

But dost thou desire to be called merciful
amongst men ? And what is the gain ? The
gain is nothing; but the loss infinite. For
these very persons, whom thou callest to be
witnesses, become robbers of thy treasures
that are in the heavens; or rather not these,
but ourselves, who spoil our own possessions,
and scatter what we have laid up above.

O new calamity ! this strange passion.
Where moth corrupteth not, nor thief break-
eth through, vainglory scattereth. This is
the moth of those treasures there; this the
thief of our wealth in heaven; this steals away
the riches that cannot be spoiled; this mars
and corrupts all. For because the devil saw
that that place is impregnable to thieves and
to the worm, and the other plots against
them, he by vainglory steals away the wealth.

But dost thou desire glory ? Doth not
then that suffice thee which is given by the
receiver himself, that from our gracious God,
but dost thou set thine heart on that from
men also ? Take heed, lest thou undergo
the contrary, lest some condemn thee as not
showing mercy, but making a display, and
seeking honor, as making a show of the
calamities of others.

For indeed the showing of mercy is a mys-
tery. Shut therefore the doors, that none
may see what it is not pious to display. For
our mysteries too are above all things, a


Homily LXXII.l


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


435


showing of God's mercy and loving-kindness.
According to His great mercy, He liad mercy
on us being disobedient.

And the first prayer too is full of mercy,
when we entreat for the energumens; and the
second again, for others under penance seek-
ing for much mercy; and the third also for
ourselves, and this puts forward the innocent
children of the people entreating God for
mercy. For since we condemn ourselves for
sins, for them that have sinned much and
deserve to be blamed we ourselves cry; but
for ourselves the children; for the imitators
of whose simplicity the kingdom of heaven is
reserved. For this image shows this, that
they who are like those children, lowly and
simple, these above all men are able to deliver
the guilty by their prayers.

But the mystery itself, of how much mercy,
of how much love to man it is full, the initi-
ated know.

Do thou then, when according to thy power
thou art showing mercy to a man, shut the
doors, let the object of thy mercy see it only;
but if it be possible, not even he. But if thou
set them open, thou art profanely exposing
thy mystery.

Consider that the very person, whose praise
thou seekest, even himself will condemn thee;


and if he be a friend, will accuse thee to him-
self; but if an enemy, he will deride thee unto
others also. And thou wilt undergo the op-
posite of what thou desirest. For thou in-
deed desirest that he should call thee the
merciful man; but he will not call thee this,
but the vainglorious, the man-pleaser, and
other names far more grievous than these.

But if thou shouldest hide it, he will call
thee all that is opposite to this; the merciful,
the kind. For God suffers it not to be hid-
den; but if thou conceal it, the other will
make it known, and greater will 1)e the ad-
miration, and more abundant the gain. So
that even for this very object of bemg glori-
fied, to make a display is against us; for with
respect to the thing unto which we most has-
ten and press, as to this most especially is
this thing against us. For so far from ob-
taining the credit of being merciful, we obtain
even the contrary, and besides this, great is
the loss we undergo.

For every motive then let us abstain from
this, and set our love on God's praise alone.
For thus shall we both attain to honor here,
and enjoy the eternal blessings, by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory and might world
without end. Amen.


HOMILY LXXII.

Matt. XXHL 1—3.

Then spake Jesus to the multitudes and to His disciples, saying. The Scribes and the
Pharisees sit in Moses* seat: all therefore whatsoever they bid you do, that do;' but
do not after their works."


Then. When? When He had said these
things, when He had stopped their mouths;
when He had brought them that they should
no more dare to tempt Him; when He had
shown their state incurable.

And since He had made mention of " the
Lord " and " my Lord," -' Me recurs again to
the law. And yet the law said nothing of
this kind, but, "The Lord thy (iod is one

' ['I'hr C'.rrek trxt in thi« clause differ* sumcwhiit ImiiH from
the rrcrivcd ;inil from that followed in the R. V. — k.]

2 [xuptou Kai Kupiov, rrfcrrin>,' to thr two iisrs of the word in '
the f )1<I Tcstunicnt |ju!1!ui|{c tiled in Mutt. xxii. 44, but not in pre-
cise terms. — K.] I


Lord." ^ lUit Scripture calls the whole Old
Testament the law.

But these things He saith, showing by all
tilings His full agreement with Him that
begat Him. For if He were opposed, He
would have said the- opposite about the law;
but now He commands so great reverence to
be shown towards it, that, even when they
that teach it are depraved, He charges them
to hold to it.

Ihit here He is discoursing about their life

3 Deut. vi. 4.


436


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXII.


and morals, since this was chiefly the cause
of their unbelief, their depraved life, and the
love of glory. To amend therefore His
hearers; that which in the first place most
contributes to salvation, not to despise our
teachers, neither to rise up against our priests,
this doth He command with superabundant
earnestness. But He does not only command
it, but also Himself doth it. For though
they were depraved, He doth not depose
them from their dignity; to them rendering
their condemnation heavier, and to His dis-
ciples leaving no cloke for disobedience.

I mean, that lest any one should say, that
because my teacher is bad, therefore am I
become more remiss, He takes away even this
pretext. So much at any rate did He estab-
lish their authority, although they were
wicked men, as even after so heavy an accu-
sation to say, "All whatsoever they command
you to do, do." For they speak not their
own words, but God's, what He appointed for
laws by Moses. And mark how much honor
He showed towards Moses, again showing
His agreement with the Old Testament, since
indeed even by this doth He make them ob-
jects of reverence. "For they sit," He
saith, "on Moses' seat." For because He
was not able to make them out worthy of
credit by their life. He doth it from the
grounds that were open to Him, from their
seat, and their succession from him. But
when thou hearest all, do not understand all
the law, as, for instance, the ordinances about
meats, those about sacrifices, and the like;
for hovv was He to say so of these things,
which He had taken away beforehand ? but
He meant all things that correct the moral
principle, and amend the disposition, and
agree with the laws of the New Testament,
and suffer them not any more to be under the
yoke of tlie law.

Wherefore then doth He give these things
divine authority, not from the law of grace,
but from Moses ? Because it was not yet
time, before the crucifixion, for these things
to be plamly declared.

But to me He seems, in addition to what
has been said, to be providing for another
object, in saying these things. For since He
was on the point of accusing them, that He
might not seem in the sight of the foolish to
set His heart on this authority of theirs, or
for enmity to be doing these things, first He
removed this thought, and having set himself
clear from suspicion, then begins His accu
sation. And for what intent doth He convict
them, and run out into a long discourse
against them ? To set the multitude on their
guard, so that they might not fall into the


same sins. For neither is dissuading like
pointing out those that have ofifended; much
as recommending what is right, is not like
bringing forward those that have done well.
For this cause also He is beforehand in say-
ing, "Do not after their works." For, lest
they should suppose, because of their listen-
ing to them, they ought also to imitate them.
He uses this means of correction, and makes
what seems to be their dignity a charge
against them. For what can be more
wretched than a teacher, when the preserva-
tion of his disciples is, not to give heed to his
life ? So that what seemeth to be their dig-
nity is a most heavy charge against them,
when they are shown to live such a life, as
they that imitate are ruined.

For this cause He also falls upon His
accusations against them, but not for this
only, but that He might show, that both their
former unbelief wherewith they had not be-
lieved, and the crucifixion after this, which
they dared to perpetrate, were not a charge
against Him who was crucified and disbe-
lieved, but against their perverseness.

But see whence He begins, and whence He
aggravates His blame of them. " For they
say," He saith, and do not." For every one
is worthy of blame in transgressing the law,
but especially he that bears the authority of
teaching, for doubly and triply doth he de-
serve to be condemned. For one cause, be-
cause he transgresses; for another, that as he
ought to amend others, and then halteth, he
is worthy of a double punishment, because of
his dignity; and in the third place, that he
even corrupts the more, as committing such
transgression in a teacher's place.

And together with these He mentions also
another charge against them, that they are
harsh to those accountable to them.

" For they bind heavy burdens, and griev-
ous to be borne, and lay them on men's
shoulders, but they will not move them with
their finger," ' He mentions here a twofold
wickedness, their requiring great and extreme
strictness of life, without any indulgence,
from those over whom they rule, and their
allowing to themselves great security; the
opposite to which the truly good ruler ought
to hold; in what concerns himself, to be an
unpardoning and severe judge, but in the
matters of those whom he rules, to be gentle
and ready to make allowances; the contrary
to which was the conduct of these men.

2. For such are all they who practise self
restraint in mere words, unpardoning and
grievous to bear as having no experience of


' Matt, xxiii. 4. [" For," as in rec. text.]


Homily LXXII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


437


the difficulty in actions. And this itself too
is no small fault, and in no ordinary way in-
creases the former charge.

But do thou mark, I pray thee, how He
aggravates this accusation also. For He did
not say, "they cannot," but, "they will
not." And He did not say, "to bear," but,
"to move with a finger," that is, not even
to come near them, nor to touch them.

But wherein are they earnest, and vigor-
ous ? In the thin<rs forbidden. For, "all
their works they do," He saith, "to be seen
of men."' These things He saith, accusing
them in respect of vainglory, which kind of
thing was their ruin. For the things before
were signs of harshness and remissness, but
these of the mad desire of glory. This drew
them off from God, this caused them to strive
before other spectators, and ruined them.
For whatever kind of spectators any one may
have, since it hath become his study to please
these, sucii also are the contests he exhibits
And he that wrestles among the noble, such
also are the conflicts he takes in hand, but he
among the cold and supine, himself also be-
comes more remiss. For instance, hath any
one a beholder that delights in ridicule? he
himself too becomes a mover of ridicule, that
he may delight the spectator: hath another
one who is earnest minded, and practises self-
government ? he endeavors himself to be such
as he is, since such is the disposition of him
who praises him.

But see again that here too the charge is
with aggravation. For neither is it that they
do some things in this way, some in another
way, but all things absolutely this way.

Then, having blamed them for vainglory.
He shows that it is not even about great and
necessary things they are vainglorious (for
neither liad they these, but were destitute of
good works), but for things without warmth
or worth, and such as were certain proofs of
their baseness, the phylacteries, the borders
of their garments. " For they make broad
their piiylacteries," He saith, "and enlarge
the borders of their garments." '

And what are these phylacteries, and these
borders? Since they were continually forget-
ting God's benefits. He commnnded His
marvellous works to be inscribed on little
tablets, and that these should be suspended
from their hands (wherefore also He said,
" They shall be immoveable in thine eyes"'),'
which they called phylacteries; as many of
our women now wear Gospels hung from their
necks.

And in order that by another thing again

' Matt, xxiii. 5.

=> I>cut. vi. 8; so Lxx. A. V. "as frontlets between."


they may be reminded, like as many often
do, binding round their finger with a piece of
linen or a thread, as being likely to forget,
this God enjoined them as children to do,
" to sew a ribbon of blue on their trarments,
upon the fringe that hung round tneir feet,
that they might look at it, and remember the
commandments; "3 ^nj they were called
"borders."

In these things then they were diligent,
making ivide the strips of the tablets, and
enlarging the borders of their garments;
which was a sign of the most extreme vanity.
For wherefore art thou vainglorious, and dost
make these wide ? what, is this thy good
work ? what doth it profit thee at all, if thou
gain not the good results from them. For
God seeks not the enlarging of these and
making them wide, but our remembering His
benefits. But if for almsgiving and prayer,
although they be attended with labor, and be
good deeds on our parts, we must not seek
vainglory, how dost thou, O Jew, pride thy-
self in these things, which most of all convict
thy remissness.

But they not in these only, but in other
little things, suffered from this disease.

For, "they love," He saith, "the upper-
most rooms ■* at feasts,and the chief seats in the
synagogues, and greetings in the markets, and
to be called of men. Rabbi. "^ For these
things, although one may think them small,
yet are tiiey a cause of great evils. These
things have overthrown both cities and
churches.

And it comes upon me now even to weep,
when I hear of the first seats, and the greet-
ings, and consider how many ills were hence
engendered to the churches of God, which it
is not necessary to publish to you now; nay
rather as many as are aged men do not even
need to learn these things from us.*

But mark thou, I pray thee, how vainglory
prevailed; when they were commanded not to
be vainglorious, even in the synagogues,
where they had entered to discijiline others.

For to have this feeling at feasts, to how-
soever great a degree, doth not seem to be so
dreadful a thing; although even tliere the
teachers ought to be held in reverence, and
not in the church only, but everywhere.
And like as a man, wherever he may ajipear,
is manifestly distingiiished from the brutes;
so also ought the teacher, both speaking and

1 Numb. XV. 38, 39. [The pnssii>;e is freely k'^'*"" ff'"" 'he
i.xx.l

*\\i. v., •' the rhirf place."]

■; With the r.ldrst Nrw Testament M-.";. the word " Rabbi " is
not rriwiitrd. K |

'' I hi» |>asHai.'r has afTordrd grounds for a conjntiire as to the
date of the lloinily. but ilir lanKoaKe is tiK> (jriier.il to prove any-
thing ; sec Munlfaiicon's Preface.


438


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXII.


holding his peace, and dining, and doing
whatever it may be, to be distinguished as
well by his gait, as by his look, and by his
garb, and by all things generally. But they
were on every account objects of ridicule,
and in every respect disgraced themselves,
making it their study to follow what they
ought to flee. For they love them, it is said;
but if the loving them be a matter of blame,
what a thing must the doing them be; and to
hunt and strive after them, how great an evil.

3. The other things then He carried no
further than to accuse them, as being small
and trifling, and as though His disciples
needed not at all to be corrected about these
matters; but what was a cause of all the evils,
even ambition, and the violent seizing of the
teacher's chair, this He brings forward, and
corrects with diligence, touching this vehe-
mently and earnestly charging them.

For what saith He ? " But be not ye called
Rabbi." Then follows the cause also; " For
one is your master, and all ye are brethren; " '
and one hath nothing more than another, in
respect of his knowing nothing from himself.
Wherefore Paul also saith, " For who is Paul,
and who is Apollos, but ministers?"^ He
said not masters. And again, "'Call not,
father, "3 not that they should not call, but
they may know whom they ought to call
Father, in the highest sense. For like as the
master is not a master principally; so neither
is the father. For He is cause of all, both
of the masters, and of the fathers.

And again He adds, " Neither be ye called
guides, for one is your guide, even Christ; " *
and He said not, I. For like as above He
said, "What think ye of Christ ?''s and He
said not, " of me," so here too.

But I should be glad to ask here, what they
would say, who are repeatedly applying the
term one, one, to the Father alone, to the
rejection of the Only-begotten. Is the Father
guide ? All would declare it, and none would
gainsay it. And yet "one," He saith, "is
your guide, even Christ." For like as
Christ, being called the one guide, casts not
out the Father from being guide; even so the
Father, being called Master, doth not cast
out the Son from being Master. For the
expression, one, one, is spoken in contradis-
tinction to men, and the rest of the creation.

Having warned them therefore against this
grievous pest, and amended them, He in-
structs also how they may escape it; by


I Matt, xxiii. 8. ^ i Cor. iii. 5. 3 Matt, xxiii. 9.

4 Matt, xxiii. 10. [The word Ka0r)7r;T^s is rendered " Master"
in our English versions, but "guide" is more literal; "the
Christ" (R. v.), is preferable, especially in view of the context
here.- R.]

5 Matt. xxii. 42. [R. V., "the Christ."]


humility. Wherefore He adds also, " He
that is greatest among you shall be your serv-
ant. For whosoever shall exalt himself shall
be abased, and whosoever shall abase himself
shall be exalted."*

For nothing is equal to the practice of
modesty, wherefore He is continually re-
minding them of this virtue, both when He
brought the children into the midst, and now.
And, when on the mount, beginning the be-
atitudes. He began from hence. And in this
place. He plucks it up by the roots hereby,
saying, "He that abaseth himself shall be
exalted."

Seest thou how He draws off the hearer
right over to the contrary thing. For not
only doth He forbid him to set his heart upon
the first place, but requires him to follow
after the last. For so shalt thou obtain thy
desire, He saith. Wherefore he that pursues
his desire for the first, must folllow after the
last place. " For he that abaseth himself
shall be exalted."

And where shall we find this humility ?
Will ye that we go again to the city of virtue,
the tents of the holy men, the mountains. I
mean, and the groves ? For there too shall
we see this height of humility.

For men, some illustrious from their rank
in the world, some from their wealth, in every
way put themselves down, by their vesture,
by their dwelling, by those to whom they
minister; and, as in written characters, they
throughout all things inscribe humility.

And the things that are incentives of arro-
gance, as to dress well, and to build houses
splendidly, and to have many servants, things
which often drive men even against their will
to arrogance; these are all taken away. For
they themselves light their fire, they them-
selves cleave the logs, themselves cook, them-
selves minister to those that come there.

No one can be heard insulting there, nor
seen insulted, nor commanded, nor giving
commands; but all are devoted to those that
are waited on, and every one washes the
strangers' feet, and there is much contention
about this. And he doeth it, not inquiring
who it is, neither if he be a slave, nor if he
be free; but in the case of every one fulfills
this service. No man there is great nor
mean. What then? Is there confusion?
Far from it, but the highest order. For if
any one be mean, he that is great seeth not
this, but hath accounted himself again to be
inferior even to him, and so becomes great.

There is one table for all, both for them
that are served, and for them that serve; the

6 Matt, xxiii. 11,12. [R. V. "humbled," and "humble."
The A. V. here uses both "abase " and " humble. — R.J


Homily LXXII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


439


same food, the same clothes, the same dwell-
ings, the same manner of life. He is great
there, who eagerly seizes the mean task.
There is not mine and thine, but this expres-
sion is exterminated, that is a cause of count-
less wars.


And that man gives heed only to the wilder-
ness, and sees birds flying, and trees waving,
and a breeze blowing, and streams rushing
through glens. Whence then should he be
lifted up who dwells in solitude so great?

Not however that therefore we have from


4. And why dost thou marvel, if there be this an excuse, in that we are proud when


one manner of life and table and dress for
all, since indeed there is even one soul to all,
not in substance only (for this is with all
men also), but in love ? how then should it
ever be lifted up itself against itself? There
is no wealth and poverty there, honor and
dishonor; how then should haughtiness and
arrogance find an entrance ? For they are
indeed little and great in respect of their vir-
tue; but, as I have said, no one seeth this.
He that is little, feels not pain, as despised;
for neither is there any one to despise him;
and should any one spurn him, this above
all are thej' taught, to be despised, to be
spurned, to be set at nought, in word and in
deed. And with the poor and maimed do
they associate, and their tables are full of
these guests; so that for this are they worthy of
the heavens. And one tends the wounds of the
mutilated, another leads the blind by the hand,
a third bears him that is lamed of his leg.

There is no multitude of flatterers or para-
sites there; or rather they know not even
what flattery is; whence then could they be
lifted up at any time ? For there is great
equality amongst them, ivherefore also there
is much facility for virtue.

For by these are they of an inferior sort
better instructed, than if they were compelled
to give up the first place to them.

For like as the impetuous man derives in-
struction from him that is smitten, and sub-
mits to it; so the ambitious from him tliat
claims not glory, but despises it. This they
do there abundantly, and as the strife is great
with us to oi)tain the first place, so great is it
with them not to ol)taiii it, but utterly to re-
fuse it; and great is their earnest desire who
shall have the advantage in honoring, not in
being honored.

And besides, even their very employments
persuade them to jjractise moderation, and
not to be high-swollen. I''or who, I pray
thee, digging in the earth, and watering, and
plnnting, or making baskets, or weaving sack-
cloth, or practising any otlier handy works,
will ever be |)rond ? Who dwelling in poverty
and wrestling witli hunger, will ever be sick
of tiiis disease ? There is not one. 'I'here-
fore humility is e.Tsy to them. And like as
here, it is a hard thing to be lowly minded,
for the multitude of them wl\o npplniid and
admire us, s(j there it is exceedingly easy.


living in the midst of men. For surely
Abraham, when amidst Canaanites, said, " I
am but dust and ashes; " ' and David, when
in the midst of camps,' " I am a worm, and
no man; "3 and the apostle, in the midst of
the world, " I am not meet to be called an
apostle." ■* What comfort shall we have then;
what plea, when even, having such great ex-
amples, we do not practise moderation ? For
even as they are worthy of countless crowns,
having been the first that went the way of
virtue, even so are we deserving of countless
punishments, who not even after those that
are departed, and are set before us in books,
no nor even after these that are living:, and
held in admiration through their deeds, are
drawn on to the like emulation.

For what couldest thou say, for not being
amended? Art thou ignorant of letters, and
hast not looked into the Scriptures that thou
mightest learn the virtues of them of old ? To
say the truth, this is itself blameworthy, when
the church is constantly standing open, not to
enter in, and partake of those sacred streams.

However, although thou know not the de-
parted by the Scriptures, these living men
thou oughtest to see. But is there no one to
lead thee? Come to me, and I will show
thee the places of refuge of these holy men;
come and learn thou of them something use-
ful. Shining lamps are these in every part of
the earth; as walls are they set about tlie
cities. For this cause have they occupied
the deserts, that they may instruct thee to
despise tlie tumults in the midst of the world.

For they, as being strong, are able even in
tiie midst of the raging of the waters to
enjoy a calm; hut thou, who art leaky on
every side, hast need of tranquility, and to
take breath a little, after the successive
waves. Go then there continually, that, hav-
ing purged away tlie abiding stain by tiieir
prayers and admonitions, thou mayest botii
pass in the best manner the |)resent life, and
attain unto the good things to come, by the
grace and love towards man of our I.oril Jesus
Ghrist, by whom and with whom, be unto the
Father, together with the Holy Ciliost, glory,
miglit, honor, now and ever, and worki witli-
out end. Amen.

• Cen. xviii. 97

' ( )r, "ciilirts." f (TTpaTotrcioK ; in rarlirr C.rrrlt "(amps,"
bul ill Ity/.iiuiiic tircck iipplicd to the suite of thr Kiiiprnir. — R.]
I I's. x.xii. 6. 4 I (.'iir. xv. 9.


440


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXIII.


HOMILY LXXIII.

Matt. XXIII. 14.

"Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye devour widows' houses, and
for a pretense make long prayers: therefore ye shall receive greater damnation."


After this, next He derides them for glut-
tony: and the grievous thing was, that not
from rich men's goods, but from the poor
they indulged their own belly, and aggravated
their poverty, which they should have re-
lieved. For neither did they merely eat, but
devoured.

Moreover also the manner of their over-
reaching was yet more grievous, " for a pre-
tense making long prayers."

For every one is worthy of vengeance who
doeth any evil thing; but he that is deriving
even the reason for so doing from godliness,
and is using this cloke for his wickedness, is
justly liable to a far more grievous punish-
ment. And wherefore did He not depose
them ? Because the time suffered it not as
yet. So therefore He lets them alone for a
time, but by His sayings, He secures that the
people be not deceived, lest, through the dig-
n'.ty of those men, they be drawn on to the
same emulation.

For as He had said, " Whatsoever they bid
you do, that do;" He shows how many
things they do amiss, lest from thence He
should be supposed amongst the unwise to
commit all to them.

"Woe unto you, for ye shut up the king-
dom against men; for ye neither go in your-
selves, neither suffer ye them that are enter-
ing to go in." ^ But if to profit no one be a
charge against a man, even to hurt and
hinder, what plea hath that? But what
means, " them that are entering in ? " Them
that are fit for it. For when they were to
lay injunctions on others, they used to make
the burdens intolerable, but when they them-
selves were to do any of the things required,
on the contrary, so far from doing anything,
they went much beyond this in wickedness,
they even used to corrupt others. These
are they that are called pests, ^ who make
their employment the ruin of others, standing

■ [This verse is omitted in the best authorities, and its posi-
tion varies in the later mss. and versions which give it. In this
Homily it is placed before our verse 13. It is vvfell attested in
Mark xii. 40, and I-uke x.x. 47. — R.]

^Matt. xxiii. 13. [See note i. " Of heaven " is omitted here,
but in none of our New Testament authorities. — R.]

3 Aoifxoi.


right contrary to teachers. For if it be the
part of a teacher to save that which is per-
ishing, to destroy that which is on the point
of being saved is that of a destroyer.

After this, again another charge: "Ye
compass sea and land to make one proselyte,
and when he is made, ye make him twofold
more the child of hell than yourselves;""
that is, not even the fact that hardly ye have
taken him, and with endless toils, induces
you to be sparing towards him, although of
the things we have hardly acquired, we are
more sparing, but you not even this renders
more gentle.

Here He lays to their charge two things;
one, that they are unprofitable for the salva-
tion of the many, and need much toil in order
to win over even one; another, that they were
remiss in the preservation of him whom they
had gained, or rather that they were not only
careless, but even traitors, by their wicked-
ness in their life corrupting him, and making
him worse. For when the disciple sees his
teachers to be such as these, he becomes
worse than they. For he stops not at his
teacher's wickedness; but as when his teacher
is virtuous, he imitates him, so when he is
bad, he even goes beyond him, by reason of
our proneness to what is evil.

And He calls him " a child of hell," that
is, a very hell. And He said " twofold more
than you,'' that He might both alarm those,
and make these feel the more severely, be-
cause they are teachers of wickedness. And
not this only, but because they labor to instill
into their disciples a greater wickedness,
hardening them to a much greater depravity
than they have, and this is above all a mark
of a depraved soul.

Then He derides them for folly also, be-
cause they bade them disregard the greater
commandments. And yet before He had
said the opposite, chat "they bind heavy
burdens, and grievous to be borne." But
these things too they did again and were
doing everything for the corruption of those


4 Matt, xxiii. 15. [R. V., " a son of hell," with the margin,
Greek, Gehenna."]


Homily LXXIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


441


who were subject to them, in httle things
requiring strictness, and despising the great.

"For ye pay tithe," He saith, "of mint
and anise, and have omitted ' the weightier
matters of the law, judgment, and mercy, and
faith. These ought ye to have done, and not
to leave the others undone."''

Here then He naturally saith it, where it
is tithe and almsgiving, for what doth it hurt
to give alms? But not to keep the law; for
neither doth it say thus. Therefore here in-
deed He saith, " These ought ye to have
done;" but where He is speaking about clean
and unclean, He no longer adds this, but
makes a distinction, and shows that the in-
ward purity is necessarily followed by the
outward, but the converse is no longer so.

For where there is a plea of love to man,
He passes it over lightly, for this very reason,
and because it was not yet time expressly
and plainly to revoke the things of the law.
But where it is an observance of bodily purifi-
cation, He overthrows it more plainly.

So, therefore, while with respect to alms
He saith, " These ought ye to have done,
and not to leave the others undone," touch-
ing purifications He speaks not on this wise,
but what? "Ye make clean," He saith,
" the outside of the cup and the platter, but
within they are full of extortion, and injus-
tice. Clermse that whic'ti is within the cup,
that the outside maybe clean also."^ And
He took it from a thing confessed and mani-
fest, from a cup and platter.

2. Then, to show that there is no harm
arising from despising bodily cleansings, but
very great vengeance from not regarding the
purifications of the soul, which is virtue. He
called these *' a gnat," for they are small and
nothing, but those other a camel, for they
were beyond what men coidd bear. Where-
fore also He saith, " Straining at the gnat,
and swallowing the camel."'* For indeed the
one were enacted for the sake of the other,
I m.ean of mercy and judgment; so that not
even then did they profit being done alona.
For whereas the little things were mentioned
for the sake of the great, and after that these
last were neglected, and labor was spent on
those alone, nothing was gained even then by
this. For the greater followed not the lesser,
but the lesser were sure to follow tliese
greater.

But these things He saith to show, that
even before ^t.kc wis (onie, these were not

' rK. v., " have left undone."]

-Mati. xxiii. ai. [R. V., '• lo hove left the othetn undone."
" And niiiimin " isomitlcd. — K.]

f M.Ttt. xxiii 1^. ^(k (The minor textual variations appear in
the above Kiiv,'lish reiidrrin^;.!

4 [Matt, xxiii. ;j4. K. V., correctly, "ntrain out the Knat/'ctc.]


among the principal things, or amongst those
upon which men should spend their labor,
but the matters required were different. But
if before tne grace they were so, much more
when high commandments had come, were
these things unprofitable, and it was not meet
to practise them at all.

In every case then is vice a grievous thing,
but especially when it does not so much as
think it needs amendment; and it is yet more
grievous, when it thinks itself sufficient even
to amend others; to express which Christ
calls them "blind guides." For if for a
blind man not to think he needs a guide be
extreme misery and wretchedness; when he
wishes himself to guide others, see to what a
gulf it leads.

But these things He said, by all intimating
their mad desire of glory, and their exceeding
frenzy concerning this pest. For this became
a cause to them of aU their evils, namely,
that they did all things for display. Tliis
both led them away from the faith, and
caused them to neglect what really is virtue,
and induced them to busy themselves about
bodily purifyings only, neglecting the purifi-
cations of the soul. So therefore to lead
them into what really is virtue, and to the
purifyings of the soul. He makes mention of
mercy, and judgment, and faith. For these
are the things that comprise our life, these
are what purify the soul, justice, love to man,
truth; the one inclining us to pardon ^ and
not suffering us to be excessively severe and
unforgiving to them that sin (for then shall
we gain doubly, both becoming kind to man,
and hence meeting also ourselves with much
kindness from the God of all), and causing us
both to sympathize with them that are de-
spitefully entreated, and to assist them; the
other not suffering them to be deceitful, and
crafty.

But neither when He saith, " These ought
ye to have done, and not to leave the others
undone," doth He say it as introducing a
legal obser\'ance; away with the thought;*
neither with regard to the platter and the
cup, when He said, "Cleanse that which is
within the cup and platter, that the outside
of them may be clean also," doth He bring
us unto the old regard for little things, but
on the contrary indeed, He doth all tilings to
show it to be superlluous. For He said not.
Cleanse the outside of them also, but that
which is within, ami the outside is sure to
follow.


5 [The Oxford edition has " candor," probably a niinpnnt,
since the (ircrk term i» avyyvu>tir\v- K.]

'' (1 he clause, " for this we showed before," is omitted by the
translator.— R.J


442


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXIII-


And besides, neither is it concerning a cup
and platter he is speaking, but of soul and
body, by the outside meaning the body, by
the inside the soul. But if with regard to
the platter there be need of that which is
within much more with regard to thee.

But ye do the contrary, saith He, observ-
ing things trifling and external, ye neglect
what are great and inward; whence very great
mischief arises, for that thinking ye have duly
performed all, ye despise the other things;
and despising them, ye do not so much as
strive or attempt to perform them.

After this. He again derides them for vain-
glory, calling them "waited sepulchres,'"'
and unto all adding, " ye hypocrites; " which
thing is the cause of all their evils, and the
origin of their ruin. And He did not merely
call them whited sepulchres, but said, that
they were full of uncleanness and hypocrisy.
And these things He spake, indicating the
cause wherefore they did not believe, be-
cause they were full of hypocrisy and in-
iquity.

But these things not Christ only, but the
prophets also constantly lay to their charge,
that they spoil, that their rulers judge not ac-
cording to the rule of justice, and every
where you may find the sacrifices indeed re-
fused, but these things required. So that
there is nothing strange, nothing new, neither
in the lawgiving, nor in the accusation, nay
not even in the comparison of the sepulchre.
For the prophet makes mention thereof,
neither did he call them merely a sepulchre,
*' but their throat an open sepulchre." '^

Such are many men now also, decking
themselves indeed outwardly, but full of iniq-
uity within. For now too there is many a
mode, and many a care for outward purifica-
tions, but of those in the soul not so much as
one. But if indeed any one should tear open
each man's conscience, many worms and
much corruption would he find, and an ill
savor beyond utterance; unreasonable and
wicked lusts I mean, which are more unclean
than worms.

3. But that " they'' should be such persons
is not " so" dreadful a thing (although it be
dreadful), but that " you," that have been
counted worthy to become temples of God,
should of a sudden have become sepulchres,
having as much ill savor, this is extreme
wretchedness. He in whom Christ dwells,
and the Holy Spirit hath worked, and such
great mysteries, that this man should be a
sepulchre, what wretchedness is this ? What
mournings and lamentations doth this call


I Matt, xxiii. 27.


2 Ps. V.


for, when the members of Christ have become
a tomb of uncleanness ? Consider how thou
ivast born, of what things thou hast been
counted worthy, what manner of garment
thou hast received, how thou wast built a
temple without a breach! how fair I not
adorned with gold, neither with pearls, but
with the spirit that is more precious than
these.

Consider that no sepulchre is made in a
city, so then neither shalt thou be able to ap-
pear in the city above. For if here this is
forbidden, much more there. Or rather even
here thou art an object of scorn to all, bear-
ing about a dead soul, and not to be scorned
only, but also to be shunned. For tell me,
if any one were to go round, bearing about a
dead body, would not all have rushed away?
would not all have fled ? Think this now
likewise. For thou goest about, bearing a
spectacle far more grievous than this, a soul
deadened by sins, a soul paralyzed.

Who now will pity such a one ? For when
thou dost not pity thine own soul, how shall
another pity him that is so cruel, such an
enemy to himself P^ If any one, where thou
didst sleep and eat, had buried a dead body,
what wouldest thou not have done ? but thou
art burying a dead soul, not where thou
dinest, nor where thou sleepest, but in the
members of Christ: and art thou not afraid
lest a thousand lightnings and thunderbolts
be hurled from above upon thine head ?

And how dost thou even dare to set foot
in the churches of God, and in holy temples,
having within thee the savor of so much
abomination ? For if one bearing a dead
body into the king's courts and burying it
would have suffered the utmost punishment,
thou setting thy foot in the sacred courts,
and filling the house with so much ill savor,
consider what a punishment thou wilt under-
go-

Imitate that harlot who anointed with oint-
ment the feet of Christ, and filled the whole
house with the odor, the opposite to which
thou doest to His house ! For what though
thou be not sensible of the ill savor? For
this most of all is the grievous part of the
disease; wherefore also thou art incurably
diseased, and more grievously than they that
are maimed in their bodies, and become fetid.
For that disease indeed is both felt by the
sick and is without any blame, nay even is
deserving of pity; but this of hatred and pun-
ishment.

Since then both in this respect it is more
grievous, and from the sick not being sensi-


Homily LXXIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


443


ble of it as he ought to be; come, give thyself
to my words, that I may teach thee plainly
the mischief of it.

But first listen to what thou sayest in the
Psalm, " Let my prayer be set forth in Thy
sight as incense."' When then not incense,
but a stinking smoke arises from thee, and
from thy deeds, what punishment dost thou
not deserve to undergo ?

What then is the stinking smoke ? Many
come in gazing about at the beauty of women;
others curious about the blooming youth of
boys. After this, dost thou not marvel, how
bolts are not launched, and all things are not
plucked up from their foundations? For
worthy both of thunderbolts and hell are the
things that are done; but God, who is long-
suffering, and of great mercy, forbears awhile
His wrath, calling thee to repentance and
amendment.

What doest thou, O man ? Art thou curi-
ously looking after women's beauty, and dost
thou not shudder at thus doing despite unto
the temple of God ? Doth the church seem
to thee a brothel, and less honorable than the '
market-place. For in a market-place indeed I
thou art afraid and ashamed to appear to be
looking after any woman, but in God's tem-
ple, when God Himself is discoursing unto
thee, and threatening about these things,
thou art committing whoredom and adultery
at the very time in which thou art bemg told
not to do this. And dost thou not shudder,
nor stand amazed ?

These things do the spectacles of wanton-
ness teach you, the pest that is so hard to put
down, the deleterious sorceries, the grievous
snares of the thoughtless, the pleasurable
destruction of the uncuaste

Therefore the prophet also blaming thee,
said, "Thine eyes are not good, neither is
thine heart." '

It were better for such men to be blind; it
were better to be diseased, than to abuse
thine eyes for these purposes.

It were meet indeed that ye had within you
the wall to part you from the women; but
since ye are not so minded, our fathers
thought it necessary ny these boards' to wall
you off; since I hear from the elder ones,
that of old there were not so much as these
partitions; " For m Christ Jesus there is
neither male nor female."* .And in tl>e apos-
tle's time also both men and women were
together, l^ecause tlie men were men, and
the women women, but now altogether the

• Ps. cxii. a. _ » Jcr. xxii. 17, l.xx. 1 oaviai.

* C.al. ill. aS. [The pauaKC is inexactly cited, the form brin)f
altered to c/irrcspond with the previous iiart of the verse. Comp.
R. V.-R.] "^


contrary; the women have urged themselves
into the manners of courtezans, but the men
are in no better state than frantic horses.

Heard ye not, that tne men and women
were gathered t(>gether in the upper room,
and that congregation was worthy of the
heavens ? And very reasonably. For even
women then practised much self-denial, and
the men gravity and chastity. Hear, for
instance, the seller of purple saying, " If ye
have judged me to be faithful to the Lord,
come in, and abide with me.''^ Hear the
women, who went about with the apostles,
having taken unto themselves manly courage,
Priscilla, Persis, and the rest; from whom
our present women are as far removed as
our men from their men.

4. For then indeed even travelling into
far countries women brought not on them-
selves evil report; but now even though
brought up in a chamber, they hardly escape
this suspicion. But these things arise from
their decking of themselves, and their lu.x-
ury. Then the business of those women was
to spread the word; but now to appear beau-
teous, and fair, and comely in countenance.
This is glory to them, this salvation; but of
lofty and great works they do not even
dream.

What woman exerts herself to make her
husband better? what man hath taken to
himself this care to amend his wife? There
is not one: but the woman's whole study is
upon the care of ornaments of gold, and rai-
ment, and the other adornments of the per-
son, and how to increase their substance; but
the man's both this, and others more than
this, all however worldly.

Wiio, wiien about to marry, inquires about
the disposition and nurture of the damsel ?
No one; but straightway about money, and
possessions, and measures of property of
various and different kinds; like as if he
were about to buy something, or to settle
some common contract.

Therefore tliey do even so call marriage.
For I have heard many say, such a man has
contracted with such a woman, that is, has
married. And they offer insult to the gifts
of Goil, and as though buying and selling, so
do they marry, and are giveii in marriage.

.And writings there are, requiring greater
security than those about buying and selling.
Learn how those of old married, and imitate
them. How then did they marry ? They in-
(juired about ways of life, and morals, and
virtue of tlie soul. Therefore they iiad no
need of writings, nor of security by parch-


SActHKvi. It,. [Two Mss. have a rriiiliii>; ninrc exactly a
in>: with the New T r>tainriit text. — K )


grcc-


444


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[HUMILY LXXIII-


ment and ink; for the bride's disposition suf-
ficed them in the place of all.

I therefore entreat you likewise not to seek
after wealth and affluence, but a good dispo-
sition, and gentleness. Seek for a pious and
self-denying damsel, and these will be to thee
better than countless treasures. If thou seek
the things of God, these others will come
also; but if thou pass by those, and hasten
unto these, neither will these follow.

But such a man, one will say, became rich
by his wife ! Art thou not ashamed of bring-
ing forward such examples ? I had ten
thousand times sooner become a poor man,
as I have heard many say, than gain wealth
from a wife. For what can be more unpleas-
ing than that wealth? What more painful
than the abundance ? What more shameful
than to be notorious from thence, and for it
to be said by all, such a man became rich by
a wife? For the domestic discomforts I pass
by, all that must needs result from hence,
the wife's pride, the servility, the strifes, the
reproaches of tne servants. " The beggar,"
"the ragged one," "the base one, and
sprung of base." "Why, what had he when
he came in?" "Do not all things belong to
our mistress ? " But thou dost not care at all
about these sayings, for neither art thou a
freeman. Since the parasites likewise hear
worse things than these, and are not pained
wherefore neither are these, but rather pride
themselves in their disgrace; and when we tell
them of these things, "Let me have," saith one
of them, " something pleasant and sweet, and
let it choke me." Alas! the devil, what proverbs
hath he brought into the world, of power to
overturn the whole life of such persons. See
at least this self-same devilish and pernicious
saying; of how much ruin it is full. For it
means nothing else than these words. Have
thou no regard to what is honorable; have
thou no regard to what is just; let all those
things be cast aside, seek one thing alone,


pleasure. Though the thing stifle thee, let it
be thy choice; though all that meet thee
spurn thee, thougn they smear thy face with
mire, though they drive thee away as a dog,
bear all. And what else would swine say, if
they had a voice? What else would filthy
dogs ? But perhaps not even they would have
said such things, as the devil hath persuaded
men to rave.

Wherefore I entreat you, being conscious
of the senselessness of such words as these,
to flee such proverbs, and to choose out those
in the Scriptures that are contrary to them.

But what are these ? " Go not," it is said,
"after thy lusts, and refrain thyself from
thine appetites." ' And, touching an harlot
again, it is said in opposition to this proverb,
" Give not heed to a bad woman: for honey
droppeth from the lips of a woman that is an
harlot, which, for a season, is luscious unto
thy throat; but afterwards thou shalt find it
more bitter than gall, and sharper than a two-
edged sword." ^ Unto these last then let us
listen, not unto those. For hence indeed
spring our mean, hence our slavish thoughts,
hence men become brutes, because in every-
thing they will follow after pleasure according
to this proverb, which, even without argu-
ments of ours, is of itself ridiculous. For
after one is choked, what is the gain of
sweetness ?

Cease, therefore, to set up such great ab-
surdity, and to kindle hell and unquenchable
fire; and let us look steadfastly (at length
though late) as we ought, unto the things to
come, having put away the film on our eyes,
that we may both pass tlie present life
honestly, and with much reverence and godly
fear, and attain unto the good things to
come, by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
world without end. Amen.


I Ecclus. xviii. 30.


2 Prov. V. 2-4, Lxx.


Homily LXXIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


445


HOMILY LXXIV.

Matt. XXIII. 29, 30.

Woe unto you, because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and garnish their sepulchres,'
and say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers
with them in the blood of the prophets."


Not because they build, nor because they
blame the others, doth He say, woe, but be-
cause, while both thus, and by what they say,
they are pretending to condemn their fathers,
they do worse. For in proof that the con-
demnation was a pretense, Luke saith, ye do
allow because ye build; for, "Woe unto
you," saith He, " for ye build the sepulchres
of the prophets, and your fathers killed them.
Truly ye bearwntness, and ye allow the deeds
of your fathers, for they indeed killed them,
and ye build their sepulchres."^ For here
He reproves their purpose, wherewith they
built, that it was not for the honoring of
them that were slain, but as making a show
of the murders, and afraid, lest, when the
tombs had perished by time, tiie proof and
memory of such daring sliould fade away,
setting ui) these glorious buildings, as a kind
of trophy, and pritling tliemselves in the
daring deeds of those men, and displaying
them.

For the things that ye now dare to do, show
that ye do these things also in this spirit.
For, though ye speak the contrary, saith He,
as condemning them, as, for instance, " Wc
should not, if we had been in their days,
have been partakers with them; " yet the dis-
position is evident wherewith ye say these
things. Wherefore also unfokling it, though
darkly, still He hath expressed it. For when
He had said, ye say, " If we had been in the
days of our fathers, we should not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the pro-
phets;" He added, "Wherefore ye be wit-
nesses unto yourselves, that ye art* the ciiil- !
dren of them that slew the prophets." And I
what blame is it to be a murderer's son, if'
one partake not in the mind of one's father?'
None. Whence it is evident, that for this
same thing He brings it forward against |
them, hinting at tlieir affinity in wickedness. '

And this is manifest too by wliat comes
after; He adds at least, " Ye serpents, ye
generation of vipers. "^ For as those beasts

' [^Thrrc arc two varialions in thr tr-Kt of vrrsr jiy : tlic oniiiuiion
of " Scribes and I'hariscrs. hyiiix rilrn !" unci the HtiliH(itutiun of
" their " for " of the rightcoim. ' — R.]

J l.uUc xi. 47, 48. 1 Matt, xxiii. 33.


are like their parents, in the destructiveness
of their venom, so also are ye like your
fathers in murderousness.

Then, because He was searching their
temper of mind, which is to the more part
obscure, He doth, from those things also
which they were about to perpetrate, which
would be manifest to all, establish His words.
For, because He had said, "Wherefore ye
be witnesses unto yourselves that ye are the
children of them which killed the prophets,"
making it evident, that of their afilinity in
wickedness He is speaking, and that it was a
pretense to say, " We should not have been
partakers with them," He added, "Fill ye
up therefore the measure of your fathers,"^
not commanding, but declaring beforehand,
what was to be, that is, His own murder.

Therefore, having brought in their refuta-
tion, and having shown that they were pre-
tenses which they said in their own defense,
as, for instance, " We would not have been
partakers with them,'' (for they who refrain
not from the Lord, how should they have
refrained from the servants), He makes after
tills His language more condemnatory. ^ call-
ing them " serpents, and generation . of
vipers," and saying. " How siiall ye escape
the damnation of hell," " at once perpetrating
such things, and denying them, and dissem-
bling your purpose ?

Then rebuking them more exxeedingly
from another cause also, He saith, " I will
send unto you i")rophets, and wise men, and
scribes, an(l some of them sliall ye kill and
crucify, and some of them shall ye scourge in
your synagogues. "7 For that they should
not say, " Though we crucified the Lord, yet
from the servants we sliould hnve refrained,
if we hnd been tlicn; " " JU'hold," lie sai:li,
"I send servants also to you, prophets like-
wise themselves, and neither will ye spare
them." l?ut these things He sriitli, showing
that it wns nothing strange, that He should

4 Miitl. xxiii. 31. 5 KaTaifroptKi(>T<f>y.

* Mali, xxiii. 3j. fR. V.. "judgment of hell. C.rcrk, (\e-
hcnna."]

7 Matt, xxiii. -f^. ( Thcrcadinit " will si-nd " i« peculiar ; in the
nrxt ritation of the pas.<uiKe " ^cnd " occum, u* in our New Icsta*
nirnt authorities. — K.]


446


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXIV.


be murdered by those sons, being both mur-
derous and deceitful, and having much guile,
and surpassing their fathers in their outrages.

And besides what hath been said, He shows
them to be also exceedingly vainglorious.
For when they say, " If we had been in the
days of our fathers, we should not have been
partakers with them,'' they spake out of vain-
glory, and were practising virtue in words
only, but in their works doing the contrary.

Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, that
is, wicked sons of wicked men, and more
wicked than those who begat them. For He
showeth that they are committing greater
crimes, both by their committing them after
those others, and by their doing much more
grievous things than they, and this, while
positively affirming that they never would
have fallen into the same. For they add that
which is both the end and the crown of their
evil deeds. For the others slew them that
came to the vineyard, but these, both the
son, and them that were bidding them to the
wedding.

But these things He saith, to separate
them off from the affinity to Abraham, and to
show that they had no advantage from thence,
unless they followed his works; wherefore
also He adds, " How can ye flee' from the
damnation of hell,'' when following them that
have committed such acts ?

And here He recalls to their remembrance
John's accusation, for he too called them by
this name, and reminded them of the judg-
ment to come. Then, because they are noth-
ing alarmed by judgment and hell, by reason
of their not believing them, and because the
thing is future. He awes them by the things
present, and saith, "Wherefore, behold, I
send unto you prophets and scribes: and
some of them shall ye kill and crucify, and
scourge;^ that upon you may come all the
righteous blood shed upon the earth, from
the blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood
of Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom ye
slew between tlie temple ^ and the altar.
Yerily I say unto you, that all these things
shall come upon this generation."''

2, See by how many things He has warned
them. He said, Ye condemn your fathers,
in that ye say, " We would not have been
partakers with them; " and this is no little
thing to shame them. He said. While ye
condemn them, ye do worse things, even ye
yourselves; and this is sufficient to cover
them with disgrace. He said. These things
shall not be without punishment; and hence

'["escape," as before, the verb being the same, though the
tense is changed ; see note 6, p. 445. — R.j


• [The close of verse 34 is abridged. — R.]
I [R. v., "sanctuary."] 4]


Matt, xxiii. 34-36.


he implants in them fear beyond words. He
hath reminded them at least of hell. Then
because that was to come. He brought home
to them the terrors as even present. "For
all these things shall come,'' He saith, " upon
this generation."

He added also unspeakable severity to the
vengeance, saying, that they shall suffer more
grievous things than all; yet by none of these
things did they become better. But if any
one say. And why do they suffer more griev-
ously than all ? we would say. Because they
have first committed more grievous things
than all, and by none of the things that have
been done to them have they been brought to
a sound mind.

Heardest thou not Lamech saying, " Of
Lamech vengeance shall be taken seventy
times sevenfold; " ^ that is, " I am deserving
of more punishment than Cain." Why
could this be ? Yet he did not slay his
brother; but because not even by his example
was he brought to a better mind. And this
is what God saith elsewhere, " Requiting the
sins of fathers upon children for the third
and fourth generation of them that hate me." ^
Not as though one were to suffer punishment
for the crimes committed by others, but inas-
much as they who, after many sin and have
been punished, yet have not grown better, but
have committed the same offenses, are justly
worthy to suffer their punishments also.

But see how seasonably he also mentioned
Abel, indicating that this murder likewise is
of envy. What then have ye to say ? Know
ye not what Cain suffered ? Did God hold
His peace at his deeds? Did He not exact
the severest penalty ? Heard ye not what
things your fathers suffered, when they slew
the prophets; were they not delivered over to
punishments, and inflictions of vengeance
without number ? How then did ye not be-
come better ? And why do I speak of the
punishments of your fathers, and what they
suffered ? Thou who thyself condemnest thy
fathers, how is it thou doest worse ? For
moreover even ve yourselves have declared
that " He will miserably destroy those wicked
men. "7 What favor then will ye have after
this, committing such things after such a
sentence ?

But who is this Zacharias? Some say, the
father of John; some, the prophet; some, a
priest with two different names, whom the
Scripture also calls, the son of Jehoiada.^

5 Gen. iv. 24.

6 Exod. XX. 5. [The Lxx. reads tio9, which is here altered to
eTi. The rendering above is not literal : " upon children, upon a
third and fourth generation to them that hate me." — R.]

7 Matt. xxi. 41.

^ Or, " calls Jehoiada." 2 Chron. xxiv. 21. The name being
indeclinable, may be read in the nominative or genitive.


Homily LXXTV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


447


But do thou mark this, that the outrage
was twofold. For not only did they slay
holy men, but also in a holy place. And
saying these things, He did not only alarm
them, but also comfort His disciples, show- j
ing that the righteous men also who were be-
fore them suffered these things. But these
He alarmed, foretelling that like as they paid
their penalty, even so should these too suffer
the utmost extremities. Therefore He calls
them' "prophets, and wise men, and
scribes," even hereby again taking away
every plea of theirs. " For ye cannot say,"
He sailh, " Thou didst send from among the
Gentiles, and therefore we were offended;^'
but they were led on unto this by being mur-
derous, and thirsting for blood. Wherefore
He also said beforenand, " For this cause do
1 send prophets and scribes." This did the
prophets also lay to their charge, saying,
''They mingle blood with blood/' = and that
they are men of blood. Therefore also did
He command the blood to be offered to Him,
showing that if in a brute it be thus precious,
much more in a man. Which He saith to
Noah likewise, *'I will require all l)lood that
is shed."- And ten thousand other such
things might one find Him enjoining with
regard to their not committing murder;
wherefore He commanded them not even to
eat that which was strangled.

Oh the love of God towards man ! that
though He foreknew they would profit noth-
ing, He still doeth His part. For I will send.
He saith, and this knowing they would be
slain. So that even hereby they were con-
victed of saying vainly, " We should not have
been partakers with our fathers." For these
too slew prophets even in their synagogues,
and reverenced neither the place, nor the
dignity of the persons. For not merely ordi-
nary persons did they slay, but prophets and
wise men, such that they had nothmg to lay
to their charge. And by these He meaneth
the apostles, and those after tliem, for, in-
deed, many prophesied. Then, willing to
aggravate their fears. He saith, " Verily,
verily I say unto you, All these things shall
come upon this generation;" that is, I will
bring all upon your heads, and will make the
vengeance sore. For he that knew many to
have sinned, and was not sobered, Init him-
self hath committed the same sins again, and
not the same only, l)ut also far more griev-
ous, would justly deserve to suffer a far more
grievous punishment tiian they, l-'or like as,
if he had been minded, he would have gained
greatly, had he grown l)etter by their e.vam-


■ [That is, " Hi« diKiplei."]
3 (Jen. ix. s.


» Ho«ca iv. a, i.xx.


pies, even so, since he continued without
amendment, he is liable to a heavier ven-
geance, as having had the benefit of more
warning by them who had sinned before and
been punished, and having reaped no advan-
tage.

3. Then He directs His speech unto the
city, in this way too being minded to correct
His hearers, and saith, " O Jerusalem, Jeru-
salem !" * What meaneth the repetition?
this is the manner of one pitying her, and be-
moaning her, and greatly loving her. For, like
as unto a woman beloved, herself indeed ever
loved, but who had despised Him that loved
her, and therefore on tlie point of being pun-
ished. He pleads, being now about to inflict
the punishment. Which He doth in the pro-
phets also, using these words, " I said. Turn
thou unto me, and she returned not."^

Then having called her, He tells also her
blood-stained deeds, "Thou that killest* the
prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto
thee, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, and ye would not," in this
way also pleading for His own dealings; not
even with these things hast thou turned me
aside, nor withdrawn me from my great affec-
tion toward thee, but it was my desire even
so, not once or twice, but often to draw tliee
unto me. "For how often would I have
gathered your children together, even as a
hen gathereth her chickens, and ye would
not," ' And this He saith, to show that they
were ever scattering themselves by their sins.
And His affection He indicates by the simili-
tude; for indeed the creature is warm in its
love towards its brood. And everywhere in
the prophets is this same image of the wings,
and in the song of Moses and in the Psalms,
indicating His great jirotection and care.

" But ye would not," He saith. " Behold
your house is left desolate,"^ stripped of the
succor which cometh from me. Surely it was
the same, who also was before protecting
them, and hokling them together, and pre-
serving them; surely it was He who was ever
chastening tiiem. .And He appoints a imn-
ishment, which they had ever dreaded ex-
ceedingly; for it declared the entire overthrow
of their polity. " For I say unto you, \c
shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say.
Blessed is He that cometh in the name of tiie
Lord."' And tliis is the language of one
that loves earnestly, earnestly drawing them
unto Him by the things to come, not merely

4 Mntt. xxiii. y. 5 Jer. iii. 7.

* ( I'lir form <i| thr Crcrk iMinicipIe Viiric* in the Mss. of the
Homily, us in those of the New Tcsliiment. -R.]

7 [This I iiiition in accurate ; compurc the previous abridKement
of the srntrncr. — K.]

" Mult, xxiii. 38. 9 Mutt, xxiii. 39.


448


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXIV.


warning them by the past; for of the future
day of His second coming doth He here
speak.

What then ? Did they not see Him from
that time ? But it is not that hour which He
meaneth in saying, Henceforth, but the time
up to His crucifixion.

For since they were forever accusing Him
of this, that He was a kind of rival God, and
a foe to God, He moves them to love Him
by this, namely, by showing Himself to be of
one accord with His Father; and He indi-
cates Himself to be the same that was in the
prophets. Wherefore also He uses the same
words as did the prophets.

And by these He intimated both His res-
urrection, and His second coming, and made
it plain even to the utterly unbelieving, that
then most surely they should worship Him.
And how did He make this plain ? By speak-
ing of many things that were first to be, that
He should send prophets, that they should
kill them; that it should be in the syna-
gogues; that they should suffer the utmost
extremities; that their house should be left
desolate; that they should undergo things
more grievous than any, and such as never
were undergone before. For all these things
are enough to furnish even to the most sense-
less and contentious a clear proof of that
which should come to pass at His coming.

For I will ask them, Did He send the pro-
phets and wise men ? Did they slay them in
their synagogue ? Was their house left deso-
late ? Did all the vengeance come upon that
generation? It is quite plain that it was so,
and no man gainsays it. As then all these
things came to pass, so shall those also come
to pass, and most surely they shall submit
then.

But they shall derive thence no advantage
in the way of defense, as neither will they
who repent of their course of life then.

Wherefore let us, while it is time, practise
what is good. . For like as they henceforth
derived no advantage from their knowledge,
even so neither shall we ourselves from our
repentance for our wickedness. For neither
to the pilot, when the bark is sunk in the sea
from his remissness, will there remain any-
thing more; nor to the physician, when the
sick man is gone; but each of these must
before the end devise, and execute all things,
so as to be involved in no danger, nor shame;
but after this, all is unprofitable.

Let us also then, while in sickness, send
for physicians, and lay out money, and exert
unceasing diligence, that having risen up
from our affliction, we may depart hence in
health.


And as much care as we exert about our
servants, when their bodies are sick, so much
let us show forth upon ourselves, when our
soul is diseased. And indeed we are nearer
to ourselves than our servants, and our souls
are more necessary than those bodies, but
nevertheless it were well if we exert at least
an equal diligence. For if we do not this
now, when gone, thenceforth we may obtain
nothing more in the way of plea.

4. Who is so wretched, one may say, as
not to show even as much thought as this ?
Why this is the marvellous thing, that we are
held in so little esteem with our ownselves,
that we despise ourselves more than our serv-
ants. For when our servants are sick of a
fever, we send for physicians, and make a
separation in the house, and compel them to
obey the laws of that art; and if these are
neglected, we are displeased with them, rind
set persons to watch them, who will not, even
should they wish them, suffer them to satiate
their desire; and if they who have the care of
these persons should say, that medicines
must be procured at great cost, we yield; and
whatsoever they may enjoin, we obey, and
we pay them hire for these injunctions.

But when we are sick (or rather there is
no time when we are not sick), we do not so
much as call in the physician, we do not lay
out money, but as though some ruffian,' and
enemy, and foe, were concerned, so do we
disregard our soul. And these things I say,
not finding fault with our attention towards
our servants, but thinking it meet to take at
least as much care of our souls. And how-
should we do ? one may say. Show it to Paul
when ill; call in Matthew; let John sit by it.
Hear from them, what we ought to do that is
thus ill, they will surely tell, and will not
conceal. For they are not dead, but live and
speak. But doth the soul take no heed to
them, being weighed down by the fever?
Do thou compel it, and awaken its reasoning
power. Call in the prophets. There is no
need to pay money to these physicians, for
neither do they themselves demand hire for
themselves, nor for the medicines which they
prepare do they drive thee to the necessity
of expense, except for almsgiving; but in
everything else they even add to thy posses-
sions; as, for instance, when they require
thee to be temperate, they deliver thee from
unseasonable and wrong expenses; when they
tell thee to abstain from drunkenness, they
make thee wealthier. Seest thou the skill of
physicians, who besides health, are supplying
thee also with riches ? Sit down therefore by


I Lit.,


executioner.


Homily LXXIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


449


them, and learn of them the nature of thy
disease. For instance, dost thou love wealth,
and greedy gain, like as the fevered love
water ? Listen at any rate to their admoni-
tions. For like as the physician saith to
thee, If thou wilt gratify thy desire, thou wilt
perish, and undergo this or that; even so also
Paul: " They that will be rich, fall into temp-
tation, and a snare of the devil, and into
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in
destruction and perdition."'

But art thou impatient ? Hear him saying,
" Yet a little while, and He that cometh will
come, and will not tarry.- The Lord is at
hand, be careful for nothing; " ^ and again,
" The fashion of this world passeth away."*

For neither doth he command only, but
also soothes, as a physician should. And
like as they devise some other things in the
place of cold thmgs, so doth this man draw
off 5 the desire another way. Dost thou wish
to be rich, saith he; let it be "in good
works." Dost thou desire to lay up treas-
ure ? I forbid it not at all; only let it be in
Heaven.

And like as the physician saith, that what
is cold is hurtful to teeth, to nerves, to bones;
so he too, more briefly indeed, as heedful of
brevity, yet far more, clearly and more power-
fully, saith, " For the love of money is the
root of all evils.*'*

Of what then should one make use ? He
tells this also: of contentedness instead of
covetousness. " For contentment," he saith,
*' with godliness is great gain." ' But if thou
art dissatisfied, and desirest more, and art
not yet equal to cast away nil superfluous
things, he tells also him that is thus diseased,
how he ought to handle these things too.
" That they that rejoice in wealth, be as
though they rejoiced not; and they that have,
as though they possessed not; and they that
use this world, as not ai)using it."*

Seest thou what manner of things he en-
joins ? Wilt thou thou call in also another
physician besides? To me at least it seems
well. For neitlier are these physicians like
those of the body, who often, while vying one
with another, overwhelm tlie sick man. But
not so these, for they hnve regard to the
healtli of tlie sick, not to their own vainglory.
Be not then afraid of the number of them;
one Master speaks in all, tlint is, Ciirist.

5. See, for instance, another again entering
in, and saying severe things concerning this
disease, or rather it is the Master by him;''
" For ye cannot serve God and mammon.'""


■ I Tim. vi. 9.
4 I Cor. vii. 31.
7 I 'l"im. V. fi.
9 /. <•., l>y Miitthcw.

2U


» Heb. X 37.

S HtTOX*TfVtl.

* I Cor. vii. 30, 31.


J Phil. iv. 5. 6.
* I I'im. vi. 10.

«" Mutt. vi. 34.


Yea, saith he, and how will these things be ?
how shall we cease from the desire ? Hence
may we learn this also. And how shall we
know ? Hear him saying this too: " Lay not
up for yourselves treasures upon the earth,
where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where
thieves break through and steal.""

Seest thou how by tlie place, by the things
that waste there, He draws men off from this
desire that is here, and rivets them to
Heaven, where all things are impregnable ?
For if ye transfer your wealth there where
neither rust nor moth corrupts, nor thieves
break through and steal, ye will both expel
this disease, and establish your soul in the
greatest abundance.

And together with what we have said. He
brings forward an example also to teach thee
moderation. And like as the physician, to
alarm the sick man saith, that such a one died
from the use of cold water; so doth He also
bring in the rich man,'=' laboring indeed, and
longing for life and health, but not able to
attain thereto, because of having set his heart
on covetousness, but going away empty.
And besides this man, another is shown to
thee again by another evangelist, he that was
in torment, '3 and was not master so much as
of a drop of water. Then showing tnat His
injunctions are easy, He saith, '* Behold the
fowls of the air." '* But being compassionate.
He suffers not even the rich to desixair.
" For the things which are impossible with
men, are possible with God,"'- saith He.
For though thou be rich, the physician is able
to cure thee. For neither was it wealth that
He took away, but to be slave of riclies, and
a lover of greedy gain.

How then is it possible for the ricli man to
be saved. By possessing his goods in com-
mon with them that are in need, being such
as Job was, and externiinnting out of liis soul
the desire of more, and in no points going
beyond real need.

He shows theg together with these tliis self-
same publican also, that w:is grievously op-
pressed by the fever of covetousness, quickly
set free from it. For what more sordid tlian
a pulilican? Nevertheless, the man became
indifferent to wealtii from obeying tiie laws of
the physician. For indeed He hath for His
disciples sucli persons as tliese, that were sick
of tlie s.'ime diseases as wi- are, and have re-
covered their lienlth tpiickly. AntI He shows
us each, in order wc may not de.spair. See
at least this |)ul)li(-an. Mark ag-iin anotluT,
a chief of the publicans, who promised four-
fold indeed for all that he had extorted, .iiul


• ■ Mutt. vi. w-
>4 Mutt. vi. a6.


>a .Mutt \iv 1'
'5 I, like xviii. J-J.


■3 l.ulcc xvi. a4-a6.


450


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXV,


the half of all that he possessed, that he
might receive Jesus.

But art thou on fire with exceeding desire
for riches. Have the possessions of all men
instead of thine own. For indeed I give
thee, He saith, more than thou seekest, in
opening to thee the houses of the wealthy
throughout the world. " For whosoever hath
forsaken father or mother, or lands, or house,
shall receive an hundredfold.'" Thus wilt
thou not enjoy more abundant possessions
only, but thou wilt even remove this grievous
thirst altogether, and wilt endure all things
easily, so far from desiring more, not seeking
often even necessary things. Thus doth
Paul suffer hunger, and is held in honor more
than when he ate. Forasmuch as a wrestler


I Matt. XIX. 29.


wmnmg


crowns.


also, when striving, and
would not choose to give up and to be in re-
pose; and a merchant who hath entered on
sea voyages would not desire to be afterwards
in idleness.

And we therefore, if we should taste as we
ought of spiritual fruits, shall thenceforth
not even account the things present to be
anything, being seized by the desire of the
things to come as with some most noble in-
toxication.

Let us taste of them, therefore, that we
may both be delivered from the turmoil of
the things present, and may attain the good
things to come, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
the glory and the might, now and ever, and
world without end. Amen.


HOMILY LXXV.


Matt. XXIV. 1, 2.


'And Jesus went out from the temple, and departed.' And His disciples came to Him to
show Him the buildings of the temple. And He answered and said unto them, See
ye not all these things ? Verily I say unto you, there shall not be left here one stone
upon another, that shall not be thrown down."


For inasmuch as He said, "Your house is
left desolate," and had previously forewarned
them of many grievous things; therefore the
disciples having heard these things, as though
marvelling at it, came unto Him, showing the
beauty of the temple, and wondering, if so
much beauty was to be destroyed, and
materials so costly, and variety of workman-
ship past utterance; He no longer thenceforth
talks to them of desolation merely, but fore-
tells an entire destruction. "See ye not all
these things," saith He, and do ye marvel,
and are ye amazed ? " There shall not re-
main one stone upon another." How then
did it remain? one may say. But what is
this? For neither so hath the prediction
fallen to the ground. For He said these
things either indicating its entire desolation,
or at that spot where He was. For there are
parts of it destroyed unto the foundations.

And together with its we would say an-
other thing also, that from what hath been

I [R. v., " and was going on his way," to bring out the force
of the imperfect tense. — -R.]


done, even the most contentious ought to be-
lieve concerning the remains, that they are
utterly to be destroyed.

"And as He sat upon the mount of Olives,
the disciples came unto Him privately, say-
ing. Tell us when shall these things be ? and
what shall be the sign of Thy coming, and of
the end of the world ? " ^

Therefore did they come unto Him pri-
vately, as it was of such matters they meant
to inquire. For they were in travail to know
the day of His coming, because of their eager
desire to behold that glory, which is the cause
of countless blessings And these two things
do they ask him, when shall these things be ?
that is, the overthrow of the temple; and,
what is the sign of thy coming? But Luke
saith, 3 the question was one concerning Jeru-
salem, as though they were supposmg that
then is His coming. And Mark saith, that
neither did all of them ask concerning the
end of Jerusalem, but Peter and John,"* as
having greater freedom of speech.


2 Matt. xxiv. 3. 3 Luke xxi. 6, 7.


4 See Mark xiii. 3.


Homily LXXV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


451


What then saith He? "Take heed that
no man deceive you. For man}' shall come
in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall
deceive many.' And ye shall hear of wars
and rumors of wars. See that ye be not
troubled; for all these things must come to
pass, but the end is not yet." -

For since they felt as being told of ven-
geance falling on others when hearing of that
which was to be brought upon Jerusalem,
and as ttiough they were to be out of the tur-
moils, and were dreaming of good things only,
and looked for these to befall them quite im-
mediately; for this cause He again foretells
to them grievous things, making them ear-
nest, and commanding them on two grounds
to watch, so as neither to be seduced by the
deceit of them that would beguile them, nor
to be overpowered by the violence of ills that
should overtake them.

For the war, saith He, shall be twofold,
that of the deceivers, and that of the enemies,
but the former far more grievous, as coming
upon them in tlie confusion and turmoils,
and when men were terrified and troubled.
For indeed great was the storm then, when the
Roman power was beginning to flourish, and
cities were taken, and camps and weapons
were set in motion, and many were readily
believed.

But of wars in Jerusalem is He speaking;
for it is not surely of those without, and
everywhere in the world; for what did they
care for these? And besides. He would thus
say nothing new, if He were speaking of the
calamities of the world at large, which are
happening always. For before this, were
wars, and tumults, and fightings; but He
speaks of the Jewish wars coming upon them
at no great distance, for henceforth the
Roman arms were a matter of anxiety. Since
then these things also were sufficient to con-
found them, He foretells them all.

Then to show that He Himself also will
assail the Jews with them, and war on them.
He speaks not of battles only, but also of
plagues sent from (iod, famines, and pesti-
lences, and earthquakes, showing tiial the
wars also He Himself permitted to come upon
them, and that these things do not happen
for no purpose accortling to what has been
before the accustomed course of things
amongst men, but proceed from tlie wrath on
nigh.

Therefore He saith, they sliall come not
by ttiemselves or at once, but with signs.
For tiiat the Jews may not say, that they who
then believed were the authors of these evils,

I [R. v., " lead you astray," and "shall lead many astray."]
» NIatt. XXIV. 4-6.


therefore hath He told them also of the cause
of their coming upon them. " For verily I
say unto you," He said before, "all these
thmgs shall come upon this generation,''
having made mention of the stain of blood on
them.

Then lest on hearing of the showers of
evils, they should suppose the gospel to be
broken through. He added, " See,^ be not
troubled, for all things must come to pass,"
i.c which I foretold, and the approach of the
temptations will set aside none of the things
which I have said; but there shall indeed be
tumults and confusion, but nothing shall
shake my predictions.

Then since He had said to the Jews, " Ye
shall not see me, till ye shall say, Blessed is
He that cometh in the name of the Lord;''
and the disciples supposed that together with
the destruction would be the end also; to set
right this secret thought of theirs, He said,
'' But the end is not yet." For that they did
suspect even as I said, you may learn from
their question. For, what did they ask ?
When shall these things be? i.e. when shall
Jerusalem be destroyed ? And what is the
sign of Thy coming, and of the end of the
world ?

But He answered nothing directly to this
question, but first speaks of those other
things that are urgent, and which it was need-
ful for them to learn first. For neither con-
cerning Jerusalem straightway, nor of His
own second coming, did He speak, but touch-
ing the ills that were to meet them at the
doors. Wherefore also He makes them ear-
nest in their exertions, by saying, " Take
heed that no man deceive you;* for many
shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ."

Afterwards, when He hath roused them to
listen about these things (for, "take heed,"
saith He, " that no man deceive you ");•♦ and
having made them energetic, and prepared
them to be watchful, and hath s])oken first of
the false Christs, then He speaks of the ills
of Jerusalem, assuring them ever by the
things alreaily past, foolish and contentious
though they were, of those which were yet to
come.

2. But by " wars and rumors of wars," He
meaneth, what I before said, the troubles
coming upon them. After this, because, as
I have already said, tliey supposed after that
war the end would lome, see how He warns
them, saying, " But the end is not yet. For
nation," He saith, "shall rise against nation,
and kingdom against kingdom." ^ Of the

3 ['I'lie Oxford tninslutor rrndrrs " Tiikc hrcd," but opar* is
rendered "Sec' nlK)Vc ; so A. V. and K. V. — K.]

4 [k. v., " lead you astray."] 5 Matt. xxiv. 7.


452


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXV.


preludes to the ills of the Jews doth He speak.
"All these are the beginning of sorrows," '
that is, of those that befall them. "Then
shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and
shall kill you."^

In good season did He introduce their ills,
having a consolation from the common miser-
ies; and not in this way only, but also by His
adding, that it is " for my name's sake. For
ye shall be hated," He saith, " of all men for
my name's sake. Then shall many be
offended, and shall betray one another, and
many false Christs and false prophets shall
arise, and shall deceive many. And because
iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall
wax cold; but he that shall endure unto the
end, the same shall be saved." ^

This is the greater evil, when the war is
intestine too, for there were many false
brethren. Seest thou the war to be three-
fold ? from the deceivers, from the enemies,
from the false brethren. See Paul too lament-
ing over the same things, and saying, " With-
out were fightings, within were fears; " ^ and,
" perils among false brethren," s and again,
" For such are false apostles, deceitful work-
ers, transforming themselves into the apos-
tles of Christ. "«

After this again, what is more grievous
than all, they shall not have so much as the
consolation from love. Then indicating, that
these things will in no degree harm the noble
and the firm. He saith, Fear not, neither be
troubled. For if ye show forth the patience
that becomes you, the dangers will not pre-
vail over you. And it is a plain proof of this,
that the word shall surely be preached every-
where in the world, so much shall ye be above
the things that alarm you. For, that they
may not say, how then shall we live ? He
said more. Ye shall both live and preach
everywhere. Therefore He added moreover,
"And this gospel shall be preached in the
whole world for a witness to all nations, and
then shall the end come,"' of the downfall of
Jerusalem.

For in proof that He meant this, and that
before the taking of Jerusalem the gospel
was preached, hear what Paul saith, " Their
sound went into all the earth; "* and again,
"The gospel which was preached to every
creature which is under Heaven." « And
seest thou him running from Jerusalem unto


[R. v., "travail," birth pangs.— R.|
[R. v., " unto tribulation."]


1 Matt. xxiv. 8.

2 Matt. xxiv. 9. _ .

3 Matt. xxiv. 9-13. [In verse 9, "all ;;?<>« "'is substituted for
" all the nations" (rdv iOvuiv omitted); in verse 11 " many false
Christs and " occurs (taken from verse 24). The R. V. represents,
in other details, the (Ireek text of the Homily. In verse 12, "the
many " is the necessary rendering. — R.]

4 2 Cor. vii. 5. 5 2 Cor. xi. 26. 6 2 Cor. xi. 13.

7 Matt. xxiv. 14. [" Of the kingdom " omitted.]

8 Rom. x. 18. 9 Col. i. 23.


Spain ? And if one took so large a portion,
consider what the rest also wrought. For
writing to others also, Paul again saith con-
cerning the gospel, that " it is bringing forth
fruit, and growing up in every creature which
is under Heaven.""

But what meaneth, " For a witness to all
nations?" Forasmuch as though it was
everywhere preached, yet it was not every-
where believed. It v/as for a witness, He
saith, to them that were disbelieving, that is,
for conviction, for accusation, for a testimony;
for they that believed will bear witness against
them that believed not, and will condemn
them. And for this cause, after the gospel
is preached in every part of the world, Jeru-
salem is destroyed, that they may not have
so much as a shadow of an excuse for their
perverseness. For they that saw His power
shine throughout every place, and in an in-
stant take the world captive, what excuse
could they then have for continuing in the
same perverseness .? For in proof that it was
everywhere preached at that time, hear what
Paul saith, " of the gospel which was preached
to every creature which is under Heaven.""

Which also is a very great sign of Christ's
power, that in twenty or at most thirt}'' years
the word had reached the ends of the world.
"After this therefore,'' saith He, " shall come
the end of Jerusalem." For that He inti-
mates this was manifested by what follows.

For He brought in also a prophecy, to con-
firm their desolation, saying, " But when ye
shall see the abomination of desolation,
spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing in
the holy place, let him that readeth under-
stand." '^ He referred them to Daniel. And
by " abomination" He meaneth the statue of
him who then took the city, which he who des-
olated the city and the temple placed within
the temple, wherefore Christ calleth it, "of
desolation." Moreover, in order that they
might learn that these things will be while
some of them are alive, therefore He said,
' ' When ye see the abomination of desolation. "

3. Whence one may most marvel at Christ's
power, and their courage, for that they
preached in such times, in which most espec-
ially the Jewish state was warred against, in
which most especially men regarded them
as movers of sedition, when Caesar com-
manded all of them to be driven away.'^ And
the result was the sam.e as if any one (when
the sea was stirred up on every side, and
darkness was filling all the air, and successive
shipwrecks taking place, and when all their

I" Col. i. 6. [Combined with Col. i. 2^.'] " Col. i. 23.

1= Matt. xxiv. 15. [Instead of ovv the particle 5e' (as in Mark
and "ke) is found here.]
^3 Acts .\viii. 2.


Homily LXXV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


453


fellow-sailors were at strife above, and mon-
sters were rising up from beneath, and with
the waves devouring the mariners, and thun-
derbolts falling, and their being pirates, and
those in the vessel plotting one against an-
other), were to command men inexperienced
in sailing, and who had not so much as seen
the sea to sit at the rudder, and to guide and
fight the vessel, and when an immense fleet
was coming against them with a great array,
making use of a single bark, with her crew in
this disturl^ed state, to sink and subdue the
fleet. For indeed by the heathens they were
hated as Jews, and by the Jews were stoned,
as waging war against their laws; and no-
where could they stand.

Tiuis were all things, precipices, and reefs,
and rocks, the things in the cities, the things
in the fields, the things in the houses, and
every single person was at war with them;
generals and rulers, and private persons, and
all nations, and all people, and a turmoil
which cannot be set forth by words. For the
Jewish race was exceedingly detestable to the
government of the Romans, as having occa-
sioned them endless trouble; and not even
from this did the preaching of the word take
hurt; but the city was stormed and set on
fire, and involved its inhabitants in countless
evils; but the apostles that came from thence,
introducing new laws, prevailed even over the
Romans.

O strange and wonderful facts ! Countless
myriads of Jews did the Romans then sub-
due, and they did not prevail over twelve
men fighting against them naked and un-
armed. What language can set forth tills
miracle ? For they that teach need to have
these two things, to be worthy of credit, and
to be beloved by them whom they are in-
structing; and together with these, and be-
sides them, that their sayings should be easy
of reception, and the time should be free
from trouble and tumults.

But then were all the contraries to these.
For while they did not seem worthy of credit,
they were withdrawing from such as did seem
worthy of it, those who had been deceived by
them. So far from being loved, they were
even hated, and were taking men away from
what they loved, both habits, and hereditary
customs, and laws.

Again, their injunctions Imd great diffi-
culty; but the tilings, from wiiich they were
withdrawing men, much pleasure. And many
were the perils, many tlie deatlis, both them-
selves and they that obeyed them underwent,
and together with all tliis, the time also occa-
sioned them much difficulty, teeming with
wars, tumults, disturbance, so that, even if


there had been none of the things we have
mentioned, it would have quite thrown all
things into confusion.

We have good occasion to say, " Who shall
tell the mighty works of the Lord, and make
all His praises to be heard." ' For if his own
people amid signs hearkened not to Moses,
because of the clay only, and the bricks; who
persuaded these that every day were beaten
and slain, and were suffering incurable evils,
to leave a quiet life, and to prefer thereto
this which was teeming with blood and death,
and that when they who preached it were
strangers to them, and very hostile in every
way ? For I say not unto nations and cities
and people, but into a small house let one
bring in him that is hated of all that are in
the house, and by him endeavor to bring
them away from those whom they love, from
father, and wife, and child, will he not surely
be seen torn in pieces, before he hath opened
his mouth ? And if there be added moreover
a tumult and strife of husband and wife in
the house, will they not stone him to death
before he steps on the threshold ? And if he
also be one whom they may readily despise,
and wlio enjoins galling things, and com-
mands them who are living in luxury to prac-
tise self restraint, and together with this the
conflict be against those who are far more in
numbers and who excel him, is it not quite
manifest that he will be utterly destroyed ?
Yet nevertheless, this, which is impossible to
be done in one house, this hath Christ ac-
complished in all the world, through preci-
pices and furnaces, and ravines, and rocks,
and land and sea at war with Him, bringing
in the healers of the world.

And if thou art minded to learn these
things more distinctly, I mean, the famines,
the pestilences, the earthquakes, the other
calamities, peruse the liistory about these
things composed by Josephus, and thou wilt
know all accurately. Therefore Himself too
said, "Be not troubled, for all must be;"
and, " He that enduretli to the end, the same
shall be saved;" and, ''The gospel stiall
surely be preached in all the world.'" For
when weakened and faint at the fear of what
liad been said. He braces them up by saying,
Though ten thousand things be done, the
gosjiel must be preached in every part of the
world, and tlien shall tlie enti come.

4. Seest thou in what a state things were
then, and how manifold was the war? And
this is the beginning, when each of the things
to be ellecled most rec|uired (jiiiet. In wh.it
state then were they? for nothing liinders us

■ Ps. cvi. 3.


454


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXV.


from resuming the same things again. The
first war was that of the deceivers; " For there
shall come/' He saith, " false Christs and false
prophets:" the second, that of the Romans,
" For ye shall hear," He saith, " of wars: "
the third, that which bringeth on the " fam-
ines:" the fourth, "the pestilences" and
"the earthquakes:" the fifth, "they shall
deliver you into afflictions:'' the sixth, "ye
shall be hated of all men:" the seventh,
"They shall betray one another, and hate
one another" (an intestine war doth He here
make known); then, "false Christs," and
false brethren; then, "the love of the most'
shall wax cold," which is the cause of all the
ills.

Seest thou numberless kinds of war, new
and strange ? Yet nevertheless in the midst
of these things, and much more (for with
the intestine wars was mingled also that of
kinsmen), the gospel prevailed over the whole
earth. " For the gospel," He saith, " shall
be preached in the whole world."

Where then are they who set up the power
of a nativity and the cycle of times against
the doctrines of the church ? For who has
ever recorded that another Christ appeared;
that such a thing took place ? Although they
falsely affirm other things, that ten myriads
of years passed, yet this they cannot even
feign. Of what kind of cycle then would ye
speak? For there was never another Sodom,
nor another Gomorrah, nor another flood.
How long do ye trifle, talkmg of a cycle and
nativity ?

How then, it is said, do many of the things
they say come to pass ? Because thou hast
bereaved thyself of the help God bestows,
and didst betray thyself, and didst place thy-
self without His providence; therefore doth
the evil spirit turn and twist about thy mat-
ters as he will.

But not so among the saints, or rather not
even amongst us sinners, who utterly de-
spise it. For although our practice is beyond
endurance, yet because by God's grace we
cling with much exactness to the doctrines of
the truth, we are above the malice of the evil
spirits.

And altogether, what is a nativity ? nothing
else than injustice, and confusion, and that
all things are borne along at random; or
rather not at random only; but more than
this, with folly.

"And if there is not any nativity, whence


I [Only one MS. inserts tCjv TroAAwr here. Field rejects it. If
accepted, it should be rendered " of the many," as in the R. V.
But internal reasons are against it. It would naturally be supplied
from the New Testament passage. Moreover, the briefer reading
yields a better sense : " Love shall wax cold, the cause of all these
ills."— R.]


is such a one rich ? whence is such a one
poor?"

I know not: for in this way I will for a
time reason with thee, instructing thee not to
be curious about all things; neither in conse-
quence of this to go on at random and rashly.
For neither because thou art ignorant of this,
oughtest thou to feign the things that are
not. It is better to be ignorant well, than to
learn ill. For he that knoweth not the cause,
will come soon to the right one; but he who
because he does not know the real cause,
feigns one that is untrue, will not be able
easily to receive the real; but he needs more
both of labors and toil, in order to take away
the former. For indeed on a tablet, if it
have been wiped smooth, any one may easily
write what he will, but when it is written
upon, no longer in the same way, for we must
first wipe out what has been ill written. And
amongst physicians again, he that applies
nothing, is far better than he that applies
hurtful things; and he who builds unsoundly,
is worse than he who doth not so much as
build at all; like as the land is far better that
bears nothing, than that which bears thorns.

Let us not then be impatient to learn all
things, but let us endure to be even ignorant
of some things, that when we have found a
teacher, we may not afford him double toil.
Or rather many oftentimes have remained
even incurably diseased, by carelessly entang-
ling themselves in evil opinions. For neither
is the toil the same to pluck up first what
hath taken root amiss, and then to sow, as to
plant a clear ground. For in that case, he
must overthrow first, and then put in other
things; but in this, the hearing is ready.

Whence then is such a one rich? I will
say, now; many acquire wealth, by God's
gift; and many by His permission. For this
is the short and simple account.

What then? it is said, doth He make the
whoremongers to be rich, and the adulterers,
and him that hath abused himself with man-
kind, and him that hath made a bad use of
his possessions ? He doth not make them,
but permits'them to be rich; and great is the
difference, and quite infinite between making
and permitting. But wherefore doth He
suffer it at all ? Because it is not yet the time
for judgment, that every one may receive ac-
cording to his merits.

For what more worthless than that rich
man, who giveth not to Lazarus so much as
of his crumbs ? Nevertheless, he was more
wretched than all, for he came to be pos-
sessed not even of a drop of water, and for
this very cause most especially, that being
rich he was cruel. For if there are two


Homily LXXV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


455


wicked men, who have not had the same por-
tion here, but one in wealth, the other in pov-
erty, they will not be similarly punished
there, but the wealthier more grievously.

5. Dost thou not see at least even this
man, suffering more fearfully because he had
" received his good things ? " Do thou also
therefore, when thou seest in prosperity one
who is become rich by injustice, groan, weep;
for indeed this wealth is to him an addition
of punishment. For like as they who sin
much, and are not minded to repent, treasure
up to themselves a treasure of wrath; even so
they, who, besides not being punished, are
even enjoying prosperity, will undergo the
greater punishment.

And the proof of this, if thou wilt, I will
show thee, not from the things to come only,
but also from the j^resent life. For the
blessed David, when he sinned that sin of
Bathsheba, and was convicted by the prophet,
for this cause most of all was he more
severely reproved, that even when he had en-
joyed such security, he was like this. Hear
at least God upbraiding him with this espec-
ially. " Did not 1 anoint thee for a king, and
delivered thee from the hand of Saul, and
give thee all that pertained to thy master, and
all the house of Israel and Judah, and if it
had been little for thee, I would have added
thus and thus; and wherefore hast thou done
that which was evil in my sight ? " ' For not
for all sins are there the same punishments,
but many and diverse, according to the times,
according to the persons, according to their
rank, according to their understanding, ac-
cording to other things besides. And that
what I say may be more clear, let one sin be
set fortli, fornication; and mark how many
different punishments I find not from myself,
but from the divine Scriptures. Did any one
commit fornication before the law, he is dif-
ferently punislied; and this Paul showeth,
" For as many as have sinned witliout law,
shall also perish without law," " Did any one
commit fornication after tiie law? He shall
suffer more grievous things. " For as many
as have sinned in the law shall be judged by
the law. ''3 Did any one commit fornication
being a priest, he receives from his dignity a
very great addition to his |)un:sl)ment. So
for this cause, whereas the other women were
slain for fornication, tlie daughters of the
priests were l)iiriit; the lawgiver showing the
more amply, how great punishment await the
priest if he commits this sin. For if on the


' 2 Sam. xii. 7-'i. » Rom. ii. la.

1 Rom. ii. ij. [The arliilr docs n<it t)cciir, rithrr hrrc or in the
text of the New 'I'cstainciit. R. V., "under luw " and " bv
Uw."-K.]


daughter he inflicts a greater punishment,
because of her being a priest's daughter,
much more on the man himself who bears the
priest's office. Was fornication committed

, with any violence ? she is even freed from

1 punishment. Did one play the harlot being
rich, and another being poor? Here again
also is a difference. And this is evident from
what we have said before concerning David,
as any one guilty of fornication after Christ's
coming? Should he depart uninitiated, he
will suffer a punishment more sore than all
those. Was any guilty of fornication after
the laver ? in this case not even a consolation
is left for tlie sin any more. And this self-
same thing Paul declared when he said, " He

i that despised Moses' law dieth without mercy,
under two or three witnesses: of how much
sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be

j counted worthy, who hath trodden underfoot

I the Son of God, and hath counted the blood
of tlie covenant an unholy thing, and hath
done despite to the grace of the Spirit?''^
Hath any been guilty of fornication, bearing
the priest's office now ? this above all is the
crown of the evil deeds.

Seest thou of one sin how many different
forms ? one that before the law, another tliat
after the law, another that of him wlio bears
the priest's office; that of the rich woman,
and that of the poor woman, of her that is a
catechumen, and of the believing woman, of
the daughter of the priest.

And from the knowledge again great is tlie
difference; " For he which knew his Lord's
will, and did it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes." 5 And to sin after examples bring-

I eth greater vengeance. Therefore He saith,

' " But ye, wlien ye had seen it, repented not
afterwards," * though ye had had the advan-
tage of much care. Therefore He upbraids

j Jerusalem likewise with this saying, "How
often would I have gathered thy children
togetiier, and ye woukl not ! " '

j And to sin being in lu.xury, this
by the history of Lazarus. And
place also tlie sin becomes more
wliich He Himself indicated when
'* Between the temple and tiie altar,

And from the equality of the offenses tliem-
selves, " It is not marvellous if one be taken
stealing; "9 and again, " 'I'hou didst slay thy
sons and thy dauglitcr.s; this is bevonil all tiiy
whoredoms, and ihine abominations." '

! And from the persons again: " If one

I 4 Heb. X. 38, aq. [The lust phriise is iiltcrcd, u indicated in
the above rendering.-- R.]

5 t.iikr xii. 47. *Miitl. xxi. i3.

7 I. tike xiii. 34. " Mull, xxiii. ^j.

9 I'rov, vi. 30. [Mont editors supply the remainder o{ the
verse.— R.]

•" K/ek. xvi. ao, 31. l.x\.


is shown
from the
grievous.
He said,

>• 8


456


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXVI.


man sin against anotiier, they shall pray for
him; but if he sin against God, wiio shali
entreat for him ? " '

And when any one surpasses in negligence
those who are far inferior; wherewith in Eze-
kiel He doth charge them, saying, " Not
even according to the judgments of the
nations hast thou done." ^

And when one is not sobered even by the
examples of others, " She saw her sister," it
is said, "and justified her."^

And when one has had the advantage of
more abundant care; "For if," He saith,
"these mighty works had been done in Tyre
and Sidon, they would have repented long
ago; but it shall be more tolerable for Tyre
and Sidon than for that city." ■•

1 I Sam. ii. 25. [lxx. The Hebrew differs : for the clause
"they shall pray for him," the R. V. has, "God shall judge
him.'^— R.]

2 Ezek. V. 7. 3 Ezek. xvi. 51. [First half freely cited.]
4 Matt. xi. 21, 22.


Seest thou perfect exactness, and that all
for the same sins are not paying the same
penalty? For moreover when we have had
the benefit of long-suffering, and profit noth-
ing, we shall endure worse things. And this
Paul shows, where he says, "But after thy
hardness and impenitent heart, thou treas-
urest up for thyself wrath." s

Knowing then these things, let us not be
offended, neither let us be confounded at any
of the things that happen, nor bring in upon
us the storm of thought, but giving place to
God's providence, let us give heed to virtue,
and flee vice, that we may also attain to the
good things to come, by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom and with whom be glory unto the
Father together with the Holy Spirit, now and
always, and world without end. Amen.

5 Rom. ii. 5.


HOMILY LXXVI.


Matt. XXIV. i6— 18.


*' Then let them which be in Judaea flee into the mountains. And let him that is on the
housetop not come down to take anything out of his house. Neither let him which is in
his field return back to take his clothes." '


Having spoken of the ills that were to
overtake the city, and of the trials of the
apostles, and that they should remain unsub-
dued, and should overrun the whole world,
He mentions again the Jews' calamities,
showing, that when the one should be glori-
ous, having taught the whole world, the others
should be in calamity.

And see how He relates the war, by the
things that seem to be small setting forth how
intolerable it was to be. For, " Then," saith
He, " let them which be in Judaea flee into
the mountains.'' Then. When? When these
things should be, "when the abomination of
desolation should stand in the holy place."
AVhence he seems to me to be speaking of the
armies. Flee therefore then, saith He, for
thenceforth there is no hope of safety for
you.

For since it had fallen out, that they often

' [In minor details the Greek text agrees with the received
against that of our oldest Mss. authorities. — R.]


had recovered themselves in grievous wars,
as under Sennacherib, under Antiochus again
(for when at that time also, armies had come
in upon them, and the temple had been seized
beforehand, the Maccabees rallying gave
their affairs an opposite turn); in order then
that they might not now also suspect this,
that there would be any such change. He
forbids them all thought of the kind. For it
were well, saith He, to escape henceforth
with one's naked body. Therefore them also
that are on the housetop, He suffers not to
enter into the house to take their clothes, in-
dicating the evils to be inevitable, and the
calamity without end, and that it must needs
be that he that was involved therein should
surely perish. Therefore He adds also, him
that is in the field, saying, neither let this
man turn back to take his clothes. For if
they that are in doors flee, much more they
that are out of doors ought not to take refuge
within.


Homily LXXVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


457


"Woe unto them that are with child, and
to them that give suck," ' to the one because
of their greater inertness, and because they
cannot flee easily, being weighed down by the
burden of their pregnancy; to the other, be-
cause they are held by the tie of feeling for
their children, and cannot save their suck-
lings. For money it is a light thing to de-
spise, and an easy thing to provide, and
clothes; but the bonds of nature how could
any one escape ? how could the pregnant
woman become active ? how could she that
gives suck be able to overlook that which she
had borne ?

Then, to show again the greatness of the
calamity. He saith, " Pray ye that your flight
be not in the winter, neither on the Sabbath
day. For then shall be great tribulation,
such as was not since the beginning of the
world until now, neither shall be."^

Seest thou that His discourse is addressed
to the Jews, and that He is speaking of the
ills that should overtake them ? For the
apostles surely were not to keep the Sabbath
day, neither to be there, when Vespasian did
those things. For indeed the most part of
them were already departed this life. And
if any was left, he was dwelling then in other
parts of the world.

But wherefore neither " in the winter, nor
on the Sabbath day ? " ^ Not in the winter,
because of the difficulty arising from the
season; not on the Sabbath day, because of
the absolute autnority exercised by the law.
For since they had need of flight, and of the
swiftest flight, but neither would the Jews
dare to flee on the Sabbath day, because of
the law, neither in winter was such a thing
easy; therefore, " Pray ye," saitii He; " for
then shall be tribulation, such as never was,
neither shall be."

And let not any man suppose this to have
been spoken hyperbolically; but let him study
the writings of Josephus, and learn the truth
of the sayings. For neitner can any one say,
that the man being a believer, in oriler to
estal)lish Christ's words, liath exaggerated the
tragical history. For indeed He was both a
Jew, and a determined Jew, and very /e.iloiis,
and among them that lived after Cliri.st's
coming.

What then saith this man ? Tliat those
terrors surpassed all tragedy, and that no
such had ever overtaken tlie nation. For so
great was the famine, tliat the very motliers
fought about the devouring of their children.


■ Matt. xxiv. 19. * Matt. xxiv. ao, ai.

3 I'lhert- isa curinu<i vnriaton in thcdrcck text hrrc < )iir llr^t
New Testamrnt Mss. rcatlH aa^fiarif) ; iiImivc ihr Mnmily hiis •i-
(Ta/30dTo>, but here <ra/30aToi/, withniil iiny |ir<-|>i>Kiii<>ii. — K.]


and that there were wars about this; and he
saith that many when they were dead had
their bellies ripped up.

I should therefore be glad to inquire of the
Jews. Whence came there thus upon them
wrath from God intolerable, and more sore
than all that had befallen aforetime, not in
Judaea only, but in any part of tlie world ? Is
it not quite clear, that it was for the deed of
the cross, and for this rejection? All would
say it, and with all and before all the truth of
tlie facts itself.

But mark, I pray thee, the exceeding great-
ness of the ills, when not only compared with
the time before, they appear more grievous,
but also with all the time to come. For not
in all the world, neither in all time that is
past, and that is to come, shall any one be
able to say such ills have been. And very
naturally; for neither had any man perpe-
trated, not of those that ever have been, nor
of those to come hereafter, a deed so wicked
and horrible. Therefore He saith, " there
shall be tribulation such as never was, nor
shall be."

"And except those days should be short-
ened, there should no flesh be saved; but for
the elect's sake those days shall be short-
ened."* By these things He shows them to
be deserving of a more grievous punishment
than, had been mentioned, speaking now of
the days of the war and of that siege. But
what He saith is like this. If, saitii He, the
war of the Romans against the city had pre-
vailed further, all the Jews had perished (for
by "no flesh" here. He meaneth no Jewish
flesh), both those abroad, and those at home.
For not only against those in Judaea did they
war, but also those that were dispersed every-
where they outlawed and banislied, because
of their hatred agamst the former.

2. But whom doth He here mean by the
elect? Tue believers that were shut up in
the midst of them. For that Jews may not
say that because of ttie gospel, and the wor-
ship of Christ, these ills took place, He sliow-
eth, that so far from the believers being the
cause, if it had not been for them, all had
perished utterly. For if God hail [permitted
tiie war to be protracted, not so much as a
remnant of the Jews had remained, but lest
tliose of them who had become believers
should perish together with the unbelieving
Jews, He quickly put down the figliting, and
gave nn end to the war. Tiierefore He saith,
" But for tlie elect's sake tliey sliall be short-
eneil." P.ut these tilings He said to. leave an
encouragement to those of tliem wlio were

* Matt. xxiv. n. [R. v., " And except tho»c day* had been

shortened, no (Irsh would luivc lu-rn s.ivc<l : Init," etc.]


458


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXVI.


shut up in the midst of them, and to allow
them to take breath, that they might not be
in fear, as tnough they were to perish with
them. And if here so great is His care for
them, that for their sakes others also are
saved, and that for the sake of Christians
remnants were left of the Jews, how great will
be their honor in the time for their crowns ?

By this He also encouraged them not to
be distressed at their own dangers, since
these others are suffering such things, and
for no profit, but for evil upon their own
head.

But He not only encouraged them, but also
led them off secretly and unsuspectedly from
the customs of the Jews. For if there is not
to be a change afterwards, and the temple is
not to stand, it is quite evident that the law
also shall be made to cease.

However, He spake not this openly, but by
their entire destruction He darkly intimated
it. But He spake it not openly, lest He
should startle them before the time. Where-
fore neither at the beginning did He of Him-
self fall into discourse touching these things;
but having first lamented over the city, He
constrained them to show Him the stones,
and question Him, in order that as it were
in answering them their question. He might
declare to them beforehand all the things to
come.

But mark thou, I pray thee, the dispensa-
tion of the Spirit, that John wrote none of
these things, lest he should seem to write
from the very history of the things done (for
indeed he lived a long time after the taking
of the city), but they, who died before the
taking, and had seen none of these things,
they write it, in order that every way the
power of the prediction should clearly shine
forth.

" Then, if any man shall say unto you,
Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not:
for there shall arise false Christs, and false
prophets, and shall show signs and wonders,
so as to deceive, if possible, the very elect.
Behold, I have told you before.' Wherefore
if they shall say unto you. Behold, He is in
the desert, go not forth; behold. He is in
the secret chambers, believe it not. For as
the lightning cometh out of the east, and
shineth even unto the west, so shall also the
coming of the Son of Man be. For whereso-
ever the carcase is, there shall the eagles be
gathered together."^

Having finished what concerned Jerusalem,


1 [R. v., " to lead astray, if possible, even the elect. Behold,
I have told you beforehand."]

2 Matt, x.xiv. 23-28. [The citation is in verbal agreement with
the received te.xt. — R.]


He passes on to His own coming, and tells
the signs of it, not for their use only, but for
us also, and for all that shall come after us.

"Then." When? Here, as I have often
said, the word, " then,'^ relates not to the
connection in order of time with the things
before mentioned. At least, when He was
minded to express the connection of time. He
added, " Immediately after the tribulation of
those days," 3 but here not so, but, "then,"
not meaning what should follow straightway
after these things, but what should be in the
time, when these things were to be done, of
which He was about to speak. So also when
it is said, " In those days cometh John the
Baptist," ^ he is not speaking of the time that
should straightway follow, but that many
years after, and that in which these things
were done, of which He was about to speak.
For, in fact, having spoken of the birth of
Jesus, and of the coming of the magi, and of
the death of Herod, He at once saith, " In
those days cometh John the Baptist;"
although thirty years had intervened. But
this is customary in the Scripture, I mean, to
use this manner of narration. So then here
also, having passed over all the intermediate
time from the taking of Jerusalem unto the
preludes of the consummation. He speaketh
of the time just before the consummation.
"Then," He saith therefore, "if any man
shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or
there, believe it not."

Awhile He secures them by the place,
mentioning the distinguishing marks of His
second coming, and the indications of the
deceivers. For not, as when at His former
coming He appeared in Bethlehem, and in a
small corner of the world, and no one knew
Him at the beginning, so doth He say it
shall be then too; but openly and with all
circumstance, and so as not to need one to
tell these things. And this is no small sign
that He will not come secretly.

But mark how here He saith nothing of
war (for He is interpreting the doctrine con-
cerning His advent), but of them that attempt
to deceive. For some in the days of the
apostles deceived the multitude, " for they
shall come," saith He, "and shall deceive
many; "5 and others shall do so before His
second coming, who shall also be more griev-
ous than the former. "For they shall
show," He saith, "signs and wonders, so as
to deceive if possible the very elect: "^ here
He is speaking of Antichrist, and indicates
that some also shall minister to him. Of him


3 Matt. xxiv. 2Q.

4 Matt. iii. i. See the comment on that place.

5 Matt. .\xiv. IT. 6 Matt. xxiv. 24.


HoMiLV LXXVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


459


Paul too speaks on this wise. Having called
him "man of sm," and "son of perdition,"
He added, *' Whose coming is after the work-
ing of Satan, with all power and signs and
lying wonders; and with all deceivableness
of unrighteousness in them that perish." '

And see how He secures them; "Go not
forth into the deserts, enter not into the
secret chambers." He did not say, "Go,
and do not believe;" but, "Go not forth,
neither depart thither." For great then will
be the deceiving, because that even deceiving
miracles are wrought.

3. Having told them how Antichrist com-
eth, as, for instance, that it will be in a place;
He saith how Himself also cometh. How-
then doth He Himself come ? "As the light-
ning cometh out of the east, and shineth even
unto the west, so shall also the coming of the
Son of Man be. For wheresoever the carcase
is, there also will the eagles be gathered to-
gether." ^

How then shineth the lightning? It needs
not one to talk of it, it needs not a herald,
but even to them that sit in houses, and
to them in chambers it shows itself in an
instant of time throughout the whole world.
So shall that coming be, showing itself at
once everywhere by reason of the shining
forth of His glory. But He mentions also
another sign, " where the carcase is, there also
shall the eagles be; " meaning the multitude
of the angels, of the martyrs, of all the saints.

Then He tells of fearful prodigies. What
are these prodigies? "Immediately after
the tribulation of those days," saith He,
"the sun shall be darkened. "^ Of the tribu-
lation of what days doth He speak ? Of those
of Antichrist and of the false prophets? For
there shall be great trii)ulation, there being
so many deceivers. But it is not protracted
to a length of time. For if the Jewish war
was shortened for the elect's sake, much more
shall this temptation be limited for these
same's sake. Therefore, He said not, "after
the tribulation," but immkdiati'.i.v "after the
tribulation of those days shall the sun be
darkened," for almost at the same time all
things come to pass. For the false propiiets
and false Christs shall come and cause con-
fusion, and immediately He Himself will be
here. Because no small turmoil is tiien to
prevail over the world.

But how doth He come? The very crea-
tion being then transfigured, for " the sun
shall be darkened," not destroyed, but over-
come by the liglit of His jjresence; and the
stars shall fall, for what shall be the need of

•

« a Thcss. ii. g, to. » Mntt. xxiv. 37, 38. 3 Matt. xxiv. ao.


them thenceforth, there being no night ? and
"the powers of Heaven shall be shaken,"
and in all likelihood, seeing so great a change
come to pass. For if when the stars were
made, they trembled and marvelled ("for
when the stars were made, all angels," it is
said, "praised Me with a loud voice");*
much more seeing all things in course of
change, and their fellow ser\'ants giving ac-
count, and the whole world standing by that
awful judgment-seat, and those who have
lived from Adam unto His coming, having
an account demanded of them of all that they
did, how shall they but tremble, and be
shaken ?

" Then shall appear the sign of the Son of
Man in Heaven; "5 that is, the cross being
brighter than the sun, since this last will be
darkened, and hide himself, and that will ap-
pear when it would not appear, unless it were
far brighter than the beams of the sun. But
wherefore doth the sign appear? In order
that the shamelessness of the Jews may be
more abundantly silenced. For having the
cross as the greatest plea, Christ thus cometh
to that judgment-seat, showing not His
wounds only, but also the death of reproach.
"Then shall the tribes mourn," for there
shall be no need of an accusation, when thev
see the cross; and they shall mourn, that by
His death they are nothing benefited; because
they crucified Him whom they ought to have
adored.

Seest thou how fearfully He has pictured
His coming? how He has stirred up the
spirits of His disciples? For this reason, let
me add. He puts the mournful things first,
and then the good things, that in this way
also He may comfort and refresh them. And
of His passion He suggests to them tlie re-
membrance, and of His resurrection, and with
a display of glory," He mentions His cross,
so tiiat they may not be asiiamed nc^ grieve,
whereas indeed He cometh then setting it
forth for His sign. And anotlier saith,
"They shall look on Him wliom they
pierced." Therefore it is that they sliall
mourn, when they see that this is He.

And forasmiicii as He had made mention
of the cross, He added, " They sliall see the
Son of Man coming,'' no longer on the cross,
but "in the clouds of Heaven, with power
and great glory." '

I'or tiunk not. He meaneth, be(\ause thou
hearest of the cross, that it is again anything

* Jill) xxxviii. 7, I.XX. [The l xx. i* nmirBtcly riled. A« tliin
point thrrr is ii urent viiriiiliini in the rrjiilinijs of the Ms>. <•( the
rioiDJIieH, whii h iiiuy be due to the variiitinii Imm the Hetirew.


Mn». x>


* Mn». xxiv. 30.
7 Mutt. xxiv. 30.


' ^(Ta Aa^'pou Tai> oxi^fiaros-


460


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXVI.


mournful, for He shall come with power and
^reat glory. But He bringeth it, that their
sin may be self-condemned, as if any one
who had been struck by a stone, were to
show the stone itself, or his garments stained
with blood. And He cometh in a cloud as
He was taken up, and the tribes seeing these
things mourn. Not however that the terrors
shall with them proceed no further than
mournings; but the mourning shall be, that
they may bring forth their sentence from
within, and condemn themselves

And then again, " He will send His angels
with a great trumpet,' and they shall gather
the elect from the four winds, from one end
of Heaven to the other." ^

But when thou hast heard of this, consider
the punishment of them that remain. For
neither shall they suffer that former penalty
only, but this too. And as above He said,
that they should say, " Blessed is He that
cometh in the name of the Lord,"^ so here,
that they shall mourn. For since He had
spoken unto them of grievous wars, that they
might learn, that together with the fearful
things here, the torments there also await
them. He brings them in mourning and sepa-
rated from the elect, and consigned to hell;
by this ngain rousing the disciples, and indi-
cating from how many evils they should be
delivered, and how many good things they
shall enjoy.

5. And why now doth He call them by
angels, if He comes thus openly ? To honor
them in this way also. But Paul saith, that
they " shall be caught up in clouds.'" And
He said this also, when He was speaking
concerning a resurrection. " For'' the Lord
Himself," it is said, " shall descend from
Heaven with a shout, with the voice of an
archangel." So that when risen again, the
angels shall gather them together, when
gathered together the clouds shall catch them
up; and all these things are done in a
moment, in an instant. For it is not that He
abiding above calleth them, but He Himself
€ometh with the sound of a trumpet. And
what mean the trumpets and the sound ?
They are for arousing, for gladness, to set
forth the amazing nature of the things then
doing, for grief to them that are left.

Woe is me for that fearful day ! For
though we ought to rejoice when we hear
these things, we feel pain, and are dejected,
and our countenance is sad. Or is it I only
that feel thus, and do ye rejoice at hearing
of these things ? For upon me at least there
comes a kind of shudder when these things


1 [So Tischendorf, and R. V. marsrin.— R.]

2 Matt. xxiv. 31. 3 Matt. xxii. 39.


4 I Thess. iv. 16.


are said, and I lament bitterly, and groan
from the very depth of my heart. For I have
no part in these things, but in those that are
spoken afterwards, that are said unto the vir-
gins, unto him tiiat buried the talents he had
received, unto the wicked servant. For this
cause I weep, to think from what glory we
are to be cast out, from what hope of bless-
ings, and this perpetually, and forever, to
spare ourselves a little labor. For if indeed
this were a great toil, and a grievous law, we
ought even so to do all things; nevertheless
many of the remiss would seem to have at
least some pretext, a poor pretext indeed, yet
would they seem to have some, that the toil
was great, and the time endless, and the bur-
den intolerable; but now we can put forward
no such objection; which circumstance most
of all will gnaw^ us no less than hell at that
time, when for want of a slight endeavor, and
a little toil, we shall have lost Heaven, and
the unspeakable blessings. For both the
time is short, and the labor small, and yet
we faint and are supine. Thou strivest on
earth, and the crown is in Heaven; thou art
punished of men, and art honored of God;
the race is for two days, and the reward for
endless ages; the struggle is a corruptible
body, and the rewards in an incorruptible.

And apart from these things, we should
consider another point also, that even if we
do not choose to suffer any of the things that
are painful for Christ's sake, we must in other
ways most assuredly endure them. For
neither, though thou shouldest not have died
for Christ, wilt thou be immortal; neither
though thou shouldest not have cast away
thy riches for Christ, wilt thou go away hence
with them. These things He requires of
thee, which although He should not require
them, thou wilt have to give up, because
thou art mortal; He willeth thee to do these
by thy choice, which thou must do by neces-
sity. So much only He requires to be added,
that it be done for His sake; since that these
things befall men and pass away, cometh to
pass of natural necessity. Seest thou how
easy the conflict ? What it is altogether nec-
essary for thee to suffer, that choose to suffer
for my sake; let this only be added, and I
have sufficient obedience. The gold which
thou intendest to lend to another, this lend to
me, both at more profit, and in greater
security. Thy body, wherewith thou art
going to warfare for another, make it to war
for me, for indeed I surpass thy toils with
recompenses in the most abundant excess.
Yet thou in all other matters preferrest him

— m

5 hiarpuiy^iv.


Homily LXXVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


461


that giveth thee more as well in loans, as in
marketing and in warfare; but Christ alone,
when giving more, and infinitely more than
all, thou dost not receive. And what is this
so great hostility? Waat is this so great
enmity? Where will there be any excuse or
defense left for thee, when the reasons for
which thou prefer rest man to man avail not
to induce thee to prefer God to man ?

Why dost thou commit thy treasure to the
earth? "Give it into my hand," He saith.
Doth not the earth's Lord seem to thee more
worthy of trust than the earth ? Tliis indeed
restoreth that which thou laidest in it, though
oftentimes not even this, but He gives thee
also recompense for His keeping of it ? For
indeed He doth exceedingly love us. There-
fore if thou shouldest wish to lend, He stands
ready; or to sow, He receives it; or if thou
shouldest wish to build, He draws thee unto
Himself, saying, Build in my regions. Why
runnest thou unto poor, unto beggarly men,
who also for little gains occasion thee great
trouble ? Nevertheless, not even on hearing
these things, do we make up our minds to it,
but where are fightings and wars, and wild
struggles,' and trials and suits of law, and
false accusations, thither do we hasten.

5. Doth He not justly turn away from us,
and punish us, when He is giving up Himself
unto us for all things, and we are resisting
Him? It is surely plain to all. For whether
thou art desirous to adorn thyself, "Let it.
He saith, be with my ornaments; " or to arm
thyself, "with my arms,'' or to clothe thy-
self, "with my raiment;" or to feed thyself,
"at my table;" or to journey, "on my
way;" or to inherit, " my inheritance; '' or
to enter into a country, " the city of which I
am i)uilder and maker; " or to l^uild a house,
*' amongst my tabernacles." " For I, so far
from asking thee for a recompense of the
things that I give thee, to even make myself
owe thee a recompense for this very thing, if
thou be willing to use all I have." What
can be equal to this munificence, " I am
Father, I am brother, I am bridegroom, I am
dwelling place, I am food, I am raiment, I
am root, I am foundation, all whatsoever
thou wiliest, I am.'' " Be thou in need of
nothing, I will be even a servant, for I came
to minister, not to be ministered unto; I am
friend, and member, and heail, and brother,
and sister, and mother; I am all; only cling
thou closely' to me. I was poor for thee, and
a wanderer for thee, on the cross for thee,
in the tomb for thee, above I intercede for
thee to the Father; on earth I am come for


thy sake am ambassador from my Father.
Thou art all things to me, brother, and jomt
heir, and friend, and member." What
wouldest thou more ? Why dost thou turn
away from Him, who loveth thee? Wiiy dost
^ thou labor for the world ? Why dost thou
draw water into a broken cistern? For it is
this to labor for the present life. Why dost
thou comb wool into the fire ? Why dost thou
" beat the air?"^ Whv dost thou "run in


vain


? " 4


< itayKparia.


3 OiiCfttuf <x*-


Hath not every art an end ? It is surely
plain to every one. Do thou also show the
end of thy worldly eagerness. But thou
canst not; for, " vanity of vanities, all is
vanity." ^ Let us go to the tombs; show me
thy father; show me thy wife. Where is he
that was clad in raiment of gold ? he that rode
in the chariot ? he that had armies, that had
the girdle,* that had the heralds? he that was
slaying tiiese. and casting those into prison ?
he that put to death whom he would, and set
free whom he was minded ? I see nothing
but bones, and a worm, and a spider's web;
all those things are earth, all those a fable,
all a dream, and a shadow, and a bare rela-
tion, and a picture, or rather not so much as
a picture. For the picture we see at least in
a likeness, but here not so much as a likeness.

And would that the evils stop with this.
For now the honor, and the luxury, and the
distinction, end with a shadow, with words;
but the consequences of them, are no longer
limited to a shadow and to words, but con-
tinue, and will pass over with us elsewhere,
and will be manifest to all, the rapine, the
covetousness, the fornications, the adulteries,
the dreadful things beyond number; these
not in similitude, neither in aslies, but writ-
ten above, both words and deeds.

With what eyes then shall we behold Christ ?
For if any one could not bear to see his
father, when conscious to himself that he had
sinned against him, upon Him who infinitely
exceeds a father in forbearance how shall we
then look ? how shall we bear it ? For indeed
we shall stand at Christ's judgment-seat, and
there will be a strict inquiry into all things.

But if any man disbelieve the judgments to
come, let him look at the things here, at
those in the prisons, those in the mines, those
on the dunghills, the possessed, tlie frantic,
them that are struggling with incur.ible dis-
eases, those that are figliting against contin-
ual poverty, them that live in famine, them
that are pierced witli irrt-medinble woes, tliose
in captivity. Fur these persons wouki not
suffer these things here, unless vengeance and

i I Cor. ix. 9«. 4 Gal. 11. a. S Eccl. i. a.

*> Sec On Stat. Ifom. III. p. 39, • badt:c of military rank.


462


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXVII.


punishments were to await all the others also
that have committed such sins. And if the
rest have undergone nothuig here, you ought
to regard this very fact as a sign that there is
surely something to follow after our departure
here. For the self-same God of all would not


take


vengeance


on some, and leave others


unpunished, who have committed the same
or more grievous offenses, unless He designed
to bring some punishments upon them there.


By these arguments then and these exam-
ples let us also humble ourselves; and let
them who are obstinate unbelievers of the
judgment^ believe it henceforth, and become
better men; that having lived here in a man-
ner worthy of the kingdom, we may attain
unto the good things to come, by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory forever and ever.
Amen.


HOMILY LXXVII.


Matt,


XXIV. 32, 33.


Now learn a parable of the fig tree; when his branch is yet tender, and putteth forth
leaves, ye know that summer is nigh: so likewise ye, when ye shall see all these things,
know that it is near, even at the doors.'' '


Forasmuch as He had said, " Immediately
after the tribulation of those days; " but they
sought of this, after how long a time it
should be, and desired to know in particular
the very day, therefore He puts also the
similitude of the fig tree, indicating that the
interval was not great, but that in quick
succession would occur His advent also.
And this He declared not by the parable
alone, but by the words that follow, saying,
" know that it is near, even at the doors." '

Whereby He foretells another thing also,
a spiritual summer, and a calm that should
be on that day (after the present tempest) for
the righteous; but to the sinners the contrary,
winter after summer, which He declares in
what follows, saying, that the day shall come
upon them, when they are living in luxury

But not for this intent only did He put
forward this about tl e fig tree, in order to
declare the interval; for it was possible to
have set this before them in other ways as
well; but that he might hereby also confirm
His saying, as assuredly thus to come to
pass. For as this 0/ the fig tree is of neces-
sity, so that too. For thus, wherever He is
minded to speak of that which will assuredly
come to pass, He brings forward the neces-

1 [R. v., " Now from the fig-tree learn her parable : when her
branch is now become tender, and putteth forth its leaves, ye know
that the summer is nigh ; even so ye also, when ye see ali these
things, know ye that he (or, it) is nigh, e^'en at the doors "]

2 [The comment seems to imply a preference for the interpre-
tation : "it is nigh," i. e., the day of the Lord's coming. — R.]


sary courses of nature, both Himself, and the
blessed Paul imitating Him. Therefore also
when speaking of His resurrection. He saith,
"When the corn of wneat hath fallen into
the earth, except it die, it abideth alone; but
if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit." ^
Whereby also the blessed Paul being in-
structed uses the same similitude, '* "Thou
fool," he saith, "that which thou sowest is
not quickened, except it die." s

After this, that they might not straightway
return to it again, and say, "When?" he
brings to their remembrance the things that
had been said, saying, "Verily I say unto
you. This generation shall not pass, till all
these things be fulfilled ! " * All these things.
What things ? I pray thee. Those about
Jerusalem, those about the wars, about the
famines, about the pestilences, about the
earthquakes, about the false Christs, about
the false prophets, about the sowing of the
gospel everywhere, the seditions, the tumults,
all the other things, which we said were to
occur until His coming. How then, one may
ask, did He say, "This generation?"
Speaking not of the generation then living,
but of that of the believers. For He is wont
to distinguish a generation not by times only.


3 John xii. 24.

4 [A clause is omitted here : " reasoning with the Corinthians
about the resurrection. — R."]

5 I Cor. XV. 36.

* Matt. xxiv. 34. [R. V., " pass away " and " accomplished."]


Homily LXXVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


V^3


but also by the mode of religious service, and
practice; as when He saith, "This is the
generation of them that seek the Lord." '

For what He said above, "All these must
come to pass,'^" and again, '* the gospel shall
be preached," ^ this He declares here also,
saying, All these tilings shall surely come to
pass, and the generation of the faithful shall
remain, cut off by none of the things that
have been mentioned. For both Jerusalem
shall perish, and the more part of the Jews
shall be destroyed, but over this generation
shall nothing prevail, not famine, not pesti-
lence, not earthquake, nor the tumults of
wars, not false Christs, not false prophets,
not deceivers, not traitors, not those that
cause to offend, not the false brethren, nor
any other such like temptation whatever.

Then to lead them on more in faith, He
saith, " Heaven and earth shall pass away,
but my words shall not pass away; " * that is,
it were more easy for these firm, fixed, and
immoveable bodies to be blotted out, than for
ought of my words to fall to the ground.
And he who gainsays these things, let him
test His sayings, and when he hath found
them true (for so he surely will find them)
from what is past, let him believe also the
things to come, and let him search out all
things with diligence, and he will see the
actual events bearing witness to the truth of
the prophecy. And the elements He hath
brought forward, at once to declare, that the
church is of more honor than Heaven and
earth, and at the same time to indicate Him-
self by this also to be maker of all. For since
He was speaking of the end, a thing disbe-
lieved by many. He brought forward Heaven
and earth, indicating His unspeakable power,
and showing with great authority, that He is
Lord of all, and by these things rendering
His sayings deserving of credit, even with
those who are mucli given to doubt.

" But of that day and hour knoweth no
man, no, not the angels of Heaven,' neither
the Son,* but the Father." By saying, not
the angels, He stopped their moutlis, that
they should not seek to learn what these
angels know not; and by saying, " ncitlier
the Son," forbids them not only to learn,
but even to inquire. For in proof tliat there-
fore He said this, see after His resurrection,
when He saw they were become over curious,


' Ps. xxiv. 6. » Matt. xxlv. 6.

1 Matt. xxiv. 14. 4 .\liitt. xxiv. 35.

^ [ R. v., " no man, nut even thr anf(cl<i of hr«vcn."|

<• Nialt. xxiv. \ft. Cotnp. Mark xiii. (3. [ Tlit: rnrivccl trxt
(and A. V.)omit " nciihrr the .Son " in Matthew, hut not in Mark.
The k. v., with our best mss., insrrlH the phrair in Matthew.
'I'hc lathers vary, hut C!hr>"«wloni a< irpt* it and (ninnuiiii mxin
it. Still the laHt claiiHc, an ^iven alM>ve, a^rrcH exactly with Niark
xiii. 32, and diltcr* from Matt, xxiv, jd. - K.]


how He stopped their mouths more decidedly.
For now indeed He hath mentioned infallible
signs, many and endless; but then He saith
merely, " It is not for you to know times or
seasons." And then that they might not say,
we are driven to perplexity, we are utterly
scorned, we are not held worthy so much as
ot this, He says, " which the Father hath put
in His own power." ' And this, because He
was exceedingly careful to honor them, and
to conceal nothing from them. Therefore
He refers it to His Father, both to make the
thing awful, and to exclude that of which He
had spoken from their incpiiry. Since if it be
not this, but He is ignorant of it, when will
He know it ? Will it be together with us ?
But who would say this ? And the Father He
knoweth clearly, even as clearly as He know-
eth the Son; and of the day is He ignorant?
i Moreover, "the Spirit indeed searcheth even
the deep things of God,'' ^ and doth not He
know so much as the time of the judgment ?
But how He ought to judge He knoweth, and
of the secrets of each He hath a full percep-
tion; and wb.at is far more common than that,
of this could He be ignorant? And how, if
" all things were made by Him, and without
Him was not even one thing made, "'was He
ignorant of the day ? For He who made the
worlds,'" it is quite plain that He made the
times also; and if the times, even that day.
How then is He ignorant of that which He
made ?

2. And ye indeed say that ye know even
His substance," but that the Son not even the
day, the Son, who is always in the bosom of
the Father; and yet His substance is much
greater than the days, even infinitely greater.
How then, while assigning to yourselves the
greater things, do you not allow even tlie less
to the Son, " in whom are hid all tlie treas-
ures of wisdom and knowledge."" But
neither do you know what Ciod is in His sub-
stance, though ten thousand times ye talk
thus madly, neitiier is the Son ignorant of
the day, but is even in full certainty tliereof.

P'or this cause, I say, when He had told
all things, both the times and tlie seasons,
and hatl l)roiight it to the very doors ('' for
it is near," He saith, "even at the iloors "),
He was silent as to the day. For if thou
seek after the day nnd hour, thou shalt not
hear them of me, saich He; but if of times
and preludes, without hilling anything, 1 will
tell thee all exactly.


7 Ann i. 7, [R. v., " »rt within his own authority."]
* I lor ii. lo. ' John i. 3. [l.iterully rendered.]

to atiai'ai.

<■ .Arians ['I'he word oi/atav, here used, wiu the current term
in the .Arian cunlroversy. — K.]
'J Col. ii. J,


464


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXVII.


For that indeed I am not ignorant of it, I
have shown by many things; having men-
tioned intervals, and all the things that are
to occur, and how short from this present
time until the day itself (for this did the
parable of the fig tree indicate), and I lead
thee to the very vestibule; and if I do not
open unto thee the doors, this also I do for
your good.

And that thou mayest learn by another
thing also, that the silence is not a mark of
ignorance on His part, see, together with
what we have mentioned, how He sets forth
another sign also. "But as in the days of
Noe they were eating and drinking, marrying
and giving in marriage, until the day that
the flood came, and took all away; so shall
also the coming of the Son of Man be."'
And these things He spake, showing that He
should come on a sudden, and unexpectedly,
and when the more part were living luxuri-
ously. For Paul too saith this, writing on
this wise, "When they shall speak of peace
and safety, then sudden destruction cometh
upon them;" and to show how unexpected.
He said, "as travail upon a woman with
child." ^ How then doth He say, " after the
tribulation of those days ? " For if there be
luxury then, and peace, and safety, as Paul
saith, how doth He say, "after the tribula-
tion of those days?" If there be luxury,
how is there tribulation ? Luxury for them
that are in a state of insensibility and peace.
Therefore He said not, when there is peace,
but "when they speak of peace and safety,"
indicating their insensibility to be such as of
those in Noah's time, for that amid such evils
they lived in luxury.

But not so the righteous, but they were
passing their time in tribulation and dejec-
tion. Whereby He shows, that when Anti-
christ is come, the pursuit of unlawful pleas-
ures shall be more eager among the trans-
gressors, and those that have learnt to de-
spair of the'r own salvation. Then shall be
gluttony, then revellings, and drunkenness.
Wherefore also most of all He puts forth an
example corresponding to the thing For
like as when the ark was making, they be-
lieved not, saith He; but while it was set in
the midst of them, proclaiming beforehand
the evils that are to come, they, when they
saw it, lived in pleasure, just as though noth-
ing dreadful were about to take place; so also
now. Antichrist indeed shall appear, after
whom is the end, and the punishments at the
end, and vengeance intolerable; but they
that are held by the intoxication of wicked-


1 Matt. xxiv. 38, 39. [The passage is abridged.]

2 I Thess. V, 3.


ness shall not so much as perceive the dread-
ful nature of the things that are on the point
of being done. Wherefore also Paul saith,
" as travail upon a woman with child," even
so shall those fearful and incurable evils come
upon them.

And wherefore did He not speak of the ills
in Sodom ? It was His will to introduce an
example embracing all men,^ and disbelieved
after it was foretold. So therefore, as by the
more part the things to come are disbelieved,
He confirms those things by the past, terrify-
ing their minds. And together with the
points I have mentioned, He shows this also,
that of the former things also He was the
doer. Then again He sets another sign, by
all which things He makes it evident, that
He is not ignorant of the day. And what is
the sign? "Then shall two be in the field;
one shall be taken, and one left. Two
women shall be grinding at the mill, one
shall be taken, and one left. Watch there-
fore, for ye know not what hour your Lord
doth come."* And all these things are both
proofs that He knew, and calculated to turn
them from their inquiry. So for this cause
He spake also of the days of Noe, for this
cause He said too, "Two shall be on the
bed," signifying this, that He should come
upon them thus unexpectedly, when they
were thus without thought, and " two women
grinding at the mill," which also of itself is
not the employment of them that are taking
thought.

And together with this. He declares that as
well servants as masters should be both taken
and left, both those who are at ease, and
those in toil, as well from the one rank as
from the other; even as in the Old Testament
He saith, " From him that sitteth upon the
throne to the captive woman that is at tne
mill. "5 For since He had said, that hardly
are the rich saved. He shows that not even
these are altogether lost, neither are the poor
saved all of them, but both out of these and
out of those are men saved, and lost.

And to me He seems to declare, that at
night will be the advent. For this Luke too
saith,* Seest thou how accurately He knows
all things ?

After this again, that they may not ask
about it. He added, "Watch therefore, for
ye know not what hour your Lord doth
come."'' He said not, "I know not," but,
" ye know not." For when He had brought


3 KaOoKiKov.

4 Matt. xxiv. 40-42. [The citation agrees with the received
text, except in the omission of the articles in verse 40. R. V., " is
taken," " is left," in verses 40, 41. — R.]

5 Exod. XI. 5. [lxx., both altered and abridged.]

* Luke xvii. 34. 7 Matt. xxiv. 42.


Homily LXXVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


465


them well nigh to the very hour, and had
placed them there, again He deters them
from the inquiry, from a desire that they
should be striving always. Therefore He
saith, "Watch," showing that for the sake
of this, He did not tell it.

" But know this, that if the good man of
the house had known in what watch the thief
would come, he would have watched, and
would not have suffered his house to be
broken up. Therefore be ye also ready, for
in such an hour as ye think not the Son of
Man cometh.^' '

For this intent He tells them not, in order
that they may watch, that they may be always
ready; therefore He saith, When ye look not
for it, then He will come, desiring that they
should be ainxiously waiting, and continually
in virtuous action.

But His meaning is like this: if the com-
mon sort of men knew when they were to
die, they would surely strive earnestly at that
hour.

3. In order therefore that they may strive,
not at that hour only, therefore He tells them
not either the common hour, or the hour of
each, desiring them to be ever looking for
this, that they may be always striving.
Wherefore He made the end of each man's
life also uncertain.

After this, He openly calls Himself Lord,
having nowhere spoken so distinctly. But
here He seems to me also to put to shame tlie
careless, that not even as much care as they
that expect a thief have taken for their
money, not even this much do these take for
their own soul. For they indeed, when they
expect it, watch, and suffer none of the things
in their house to be carried off; but ye,
although knowing that He will come, and
come assuredly, continue not watching, saith
He, and ready so as not to be carried away
hence unprepared. So that the day cometli
unto destruction for them that sleep. For
as that man, if he had known, would have
escaped, so also ye, if ye be ready, escape free.

Then, as He had fallen upon tlie mention
of the judgment. He directs His discourse
to the teachers next, speaking of punishment
and honors; and having put first them that
do right. He ends with them tliat continue in
sin, making His discourse to close with that
which is alarming.

Wherefore He first saith this, "Who then
is the faithful and wise servant, wliom his
Lord shall set over' His household to give

' Matt. xxiv. 41, 44. [R. V,. " if thr mnntpr of the hmiir Imd
known in what watch the thirf wan cnniini;. ... to lir broLc-n
throuifh .... in an hour yc think ni>l,"ric.l

3 [The fnttirr tentc is peculiar tu thiii citation, alio the addition
of "their."— K.]
30


them their meat in their ^ due season?
Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when
He Cometh shall find so doing. Verily I say
unto you, that He shall make him ruler over
all His goods."*

Tell me, is this too the language of one
who is in ignorance ? For if because He said,
"neither doth the Son know," thou sayest
He is ignorant of it; as He saith, "who
then?" what wilt thou say? Wilt thou say
He is ignorant of this too ? Away with the
thought. For not even one of tliem that are
frantic would say this. And yet in the
former case one might assign a cause; but
here not even this. And what when He said,
"Peter, lovest thou me?"^ asking it, knew
He not so much as this ? nor when He said,
" Where have ye laid Him ? " *

And the Father too will be found to be say-
ing such things. For He Himself likewise
saith, "Adam, where art thou ? " ' and, " The
cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is waxed great
before me. I will go down t!ierefore, and
see whether their doings be according to their
cry which cometh unto me, and if not, I will
know." * And elsewhere He saitii, " Wliether
they will hear, whether they will under-
stand."' And in the gospel too, "It may
be they will reverence my Son: " " all whicli
are expressions of ignorance. But not in
ignorance did He say these things, but as
compassing objects such as became Him: in
the case of Adam, that He miglit drive him
to make an excuse for his sin: in that of the
Sodomites, that He might teacli us never to
be positive, till we are present at the very
deeds; in that of the prophet, that the pre-
diction mght not anpear in the judgment of
the foolish a kind of compulsion to disol.edi-
ence; and in the ixarabie in the gospel, that
He might show that they ought to have done
this, and to have reverencetl the Son: but
here, as well that they may not be curious,
nor over busy again, as that He might indi-
cate that this was a rare and precious thing.
And see of what great ignorance this saying
is indicative, if at least He know not even
him that is set over. For He blesses him
indeed, "For blessed," saith He, "is that
servant;" but He saith not who tliis is.
" For who is he," He saith, " whom His Lord
shall set over?" and, " Blessed is he whom
He shall find so doing."

But these things are spoken not of money

J See la«t note.

4 Mull, xxiv. 4S-47. [R. v., " that hr will srl him over all that
he hath." The Iranslutor ho* made a itimilar chun|{c in verse 45.

5 |ohn xxi. 16. * John xi. 34. 7 Clen. ui. y.
" I'len. xviii. ao, ji. 0 V./ek. ii. s.

■" I like XX. I]. [In Momily I. Will. lUi* fonn of the wiyinK
U cited ait occurrinx in Matthew (xxi. 37).— K ]


466


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXVII.


only, but also of speech, and of power, and
of gifts, and of every stewardship, wherewith
each is entrusted. This parable would suit
rulers in the state also, for every one is bound
to make full use of what he hath for the com-
mon advantage. If it be wisdom thou hast,
if power, if wealth, if what it may, let it not
be for the hurt of thy fellow-servants, neither
for thine own ruin. For this cause, there-
fore. He requires both things of him, wisdom,
and fidelity: for sin arises from folly also.
He calls him faithful then, because he hath
purloined nothing, neither mispent his Lord's
goods without aim or fruit; and wise, because
he knew how to dispense the things given
him, according as was fit. For indeed we
have need of both things, as well not to pur-
loin the goods of our Master, as also to dis-
pense them as is fit. But if the one be want-
ing, the other halteth. For if he be faithful
and steal not, yet were to waste and to spend
upon that which concerned him not, great
were the blame; and if he should know how
to dispense it well, yet were to purloin, again
there is no common charge against him.

And let us also that have money listen to
these things. For not unto teachers only
<ioth He discourse, but also unto the rich.
For either sort were entrusted with riches;
those that teach with the more necessary
wealth, ye with what is inferior. When then
at the time that the teachers are scattering
abroad the greater, ye are not willing to show
forth your liberality even in the less, or rather
not liberality but honesty (for ye give the
things of another), what excuse will you
have? But now, before the punishment of
them that do the contrary things, let us hear
the honor of him that approveth himself.
" For verily I say unto you, He will set him
over all His goods."

What can be equal to this honor? what
manner of speech will be able to set forth
the dignity, the blessedness, when the King
of Heaven, He that possesseth all things, is
about to seta man over "all His goods?"
Wherefore also He calleth him wise, because
he knew, not to give up great things for
small, but having been temperate here, hath
attained to Heaven.

4. After this, as He ever doth, not by the
honor only laid up for the good, but also by
the punishment threatened against the wicked,
doth He correct the hearers. Wherefore also
He added, " But and if the evil servant say
in his heart, my Lord delayeth His coming;
and shall begin to smite his fellow servants,
and shall eat and drink with the drunken: the
Lord of that servant shall come in a day when
he looketh not for Him, and in an hour that


he is not aware of,' and shall cut him asun-
der,= and shall appoint him his portion with
the hypocrites: there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth." ^

But if any one should say, " Seest thou
what a thought hath entered into his mind,
because of the day's not being known, "my
Lord,'' he saith, "delayeth His coming?"
we should affirm, that it was not because the
day is not known, but because the servant is
evil. Else wherefore came not this thought
into the heart of the faithful and wise serv-
ant. For what, even though the Lord tarry,
O wretched man, surely thou lookest that He
will come. Why then dost thou not take
care ?

Hence then we learn, that He doth not so
much as tarry. For this judgment is not the
Lord's, but that of the evil servant's mind,
wherefore also he is blamed for this. For in
proof that He doth not tarry, hear Paul say-
ing, "The Lord is at hand, be careful for
nothing;"" and, " He that cometh will come,
and will not tarry. ''^

But do thou hear also what followeth, and
learn how continually He reminds them of
their ignorance of the day, showing that this
is profitable to the servants, and fitted to
waken and thoroughly to rouse them. For
what though some gained nothing hereby ?
For neither by other things profitable for
them were some profited, but nevertheless He
ceaseth not to do His part.

What then is the purport of that which fol-
loweth ? " For He shall come in a day when
he looketh not for Him, and in an hour that
he is not aware of;"* and shall inflict upon
him extreme punishment. Seest thou how
even everywhere He puts this, the fact of
their ignorance, indicating that it was profita-
ble, and by this making them always earnest
minded ? For this is the point at which He
labors, that we should be always on the
watch; and since it is always in luxury that
we are supine, but in afflictions we are braced
up, therefore everywhere He saith this, that
when there is relaxation, then come the ter-
rors. And as further back He showed this
by the example of Noah, even so here He
saith it is, when that servant is drunken, when
he is beating, and that his punishment shall
be intolerable.

But let us not regard only the punishment
appointed for him, but let us look to this
other point too, lest we ourselves also be un-

i[R. v., "when he expecteth not, and in an hour when he
knoweth not."]

2 [R. v. margin, "severely scourge him."]

3 Matt. .xxiv. 48-51. [The textual variations are slight, and are
indicated in the emendations of the A. V. appearing in the above
rendering.— R.]

4 Phii. iv. 5, 6. 5 Heb. x. 37. ^ Matt. xxiv. 50.


Homily LXXVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


467


awares to ourselves doing the same things.
For to this servant are they like, who have
money, and give not to the needy. For thou
too art steward of thine own possessions, not
less than he who dispenses the alms of the
church. As then he has not a right to squan-
der at random and at hazard the things given |
by you for the poor, since they were given '
for the maintenance of the poor; even so
neither mayest thou squander thine own.
For even though thou hast received an inher-
itance from thy father, and hast in this way
all thou possesses!: even thus all are God's.
And then thou for thy part desirest that what
thou hast given should be thus carefully dis-
pensed, and thinkest thou not that God will
require His own of us witli greater strictness,
or that He suffers them to be wasted at ran-
dom ? These things are not, they are not so.
Because for this end. He left these things in
thine hand, in order " to give them their meat
in due season." But what meaneth, " in due
season ? " To the needy, to the hungry.
For like as thou gavest to thy fellow-servant
to dispense, even so doth the Lord will thee
too to spend these things on what is needful.
Therefore though He was able to take them
away from thee, He left them, that thou
mightest have opportunity to show forth vir-
tue; that bringing us into need one of an-
other, He might make our love for one an-
other more fervent.

But thou, when thou hast received, so far
from giving, dost even beat. And yet if not
to give be blame, what excuse is there for
beating? But this, it seems to me, He
speaks, hinting at the insolent, and the covet-
ous, and indicating the charge to be heavy,
Avhen they beat them, whom tiiey were com-
manded to feed.

5. But He seemeth to be here hinting also
at those that live in luxury, since for luxury
too there is laid up a great punisliment.
" For He eateth and drinketh, it is said, " with
the drunken, pointing at gluttony. For not
for this purpose didst thou receive, tliat thou
should spend it on luxury, but tiiat thou
shouldest lay it out on alms. What! are they
thine own things which tliou hast? With the
goods of ihe poor hast thou been entrusted,
though tliou be possessed of them by honest
labor, or though it be by inheritance from thy
father. Wliat, could not Goil have taken
away these things from thee? But He cloth
not tliis, to give tliee power to be liberal to
the poor.

But mark thou, I pray thee, how througii-
out all the parables He punishes them tliat
lay not out their money upon tlie needy.
For neither had the virgins robbed other


men's goods, but they had not given their
own; neither had he that buried the one
talent embezzled, but he had not doubled;
neither are they that overlooked the hungry
punished, because they seized the possessions
of others, but because they did not lay out
their own, like as also this servant.

Let us hearken, as many as please the
belly, as many as lay out on costly banquets
the riches that pertain not at jill to us, but
belong to the needy. For do not, because
out of great love to man thou art commanded
to give as of thine, therefore suppose these
things to be indeed thine own. He lent them
to thee, that thou mightest be able to approve
thyself. Do not then suppose them to be
thine, when giving Him His own. For
neither, if thou hadst lent to any one, that he
might go and be able to find means of gain,
wouldest thou say the money was his. To
thee then also hath God given, that thou
mightest traffic for Heaven. Make not then
the exceeding greatness of His love to man a
cause of ingratitude.

Consider of what prayer it were a worthy
object, to be able to find after baptism a way
to do away one's sins. If He had not said
this, Give alms, how many would have said.
Would it were possible to give money, and so
be freed from the ills to come ! But since
this hath become possible, again are they
become supine.

" But I give," thou sayest. And what is
this ? Thou hast not yet given as much as
she, who cast in the two mites; or rather not
so much as the half, nor a very small part of
what she gave, but thou layest out the greater
part on useless expenses, on banquets, and
drunkenness, and extreme extravagance; now
bidding, now bidden; now spending, now
constraining others to spend; so that the
punishment is even rendered twofokl for thee,
both from what thyself doest, and what tiiou
movest others to do. See at any rate how
He Himself blames His servant for this.
*' For he eateth," He saith, " and drinketh
with the drunken." For not the drunken
only, but those that are with them, doth He
punish, and very fitly, because (together with
corrupting their own selves) they make light
also ot the salvation of otliers. But nothing
does so much provoke God, as for us to be
inciinrd to overlook tlie things that concern
( our neighltor. Wherefore showing His anger,
I He commands him to be cut asunder.
Therefore He also aftirnu-d love to be a dis-
tinguishing mark of His disciples, since it is
altogether necessary that lie who loveth
should take thought for the things of his be-
loved.


468


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXVII.


To this way then let us hold, for this is
especially the way that leads up to Heaven,
which renders men followers of Christ, which
makes them, as far as possible, like God.
See at any rate how these virtues are more
needful, which have their dwelling by this
way. And, if ye will, let us make an inquiry
into them, and let us bring forth the sen-
tences from the judgment of God.

Let there be then two ways of most holy
life, and let the one secure the goodness of
him that practises it, but the other of his
neighbor also. Let us see whether is the
more approved and leads us to the summit of
virtue. Surely he, who seeks his own things
only, will receive even from Paul endless
blame, and when I say from Paul, I mean
from Christ, but the other commendations
and crowns. Whence is this evident ? Hear
what His language is to one, what to the
other. " Let no man seek his own, but every
man another^s wealth." ' Seest thou he re-
jects the one, and brings in the other ?
Again, "Let every one of you please his
neighbor for good to edification.^' Then
comes also the praise beyond words with an
admonition, " For even Christ pleased not
Himself."^

Even these judgments then are sufficient to
show the victory; but that this may be done
even superabundantly, let us see amongst
good works, which are confined to ourselves,
and which pass over from us to others also.
Fasting then, and lying on the bare ground,
and keeping virginity, and a self-denying
life, these things bring their advantage to
the persons themselves who do them; but
those that pass from ourselves to our neigh-
bors are almsgiving, teaching, charity. Hear
then Paul in this matter also saying, " Though
I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and
though I give my body to be burned, and
have not charity, I am nothing profited." ^

6. Seest thou it in itself gloriously cele-
brated, and crowned ?

But if ye be willing, from a third point also
let us compare them; and let the one fast,
and deny himself, and be a martyr, and be
burnt to death, but let another delay his mar-
tyrdom for his neighbor's edification; and let
him not only delay it, but let him even depart
without martyrdom; who will be the more
approved after his removal hence ? We need
not have many words, nor a long circumlocu-
tion. For the blessed Paul is at hand, giving
his judgment, and saying, " To depart and to
be with Christ is better, nevertheless to abide
in the flesh is more needful for you;"** even


' I Cor. X. 24.
3 I Cor. xiii. 3.


' Rom. XV. 2, 3.
4 Philip, i. 23, 24.


to his removal unto Christ did he prefer his
neighbor's edification. For this is in the
highest sense to be with Christ, even to be
doing His will, but nothing is so much His
will, as that which is for one's neighbor's
good.

Wilt thou that I tell thee a fourth proof
also of these things? "Peter, lovest thou
me," saith He; "Feed my sheep: " ^ and
having asked him a third time, declared this
to be an infallible proof of love. But not to
priests only is this said, but to every one of
us also, who are also entrusted with a little
flock. For do not despise it, because it is a
little flock: For "my Father," He saith,
" hath pleasure in them.'' ^ Each of us hath
a sheep, let him lead that to the proper pas-
tures. And let the man, as soon as he has
risen from his bed, seek after nothing else,
but how He may do and say something
whereby he may render his whole house more
reverent. The woman again, let her be in-
deed a good housekeeper; but before attend-
ing to this, let her have another more need-
ful care, that the whole household may work
the works of Heaven. For if in worldly mat-
ters, before attending to the affairs of our
household, we labor diligently to pay public
dues, that we may not for our undutifulness in
these matters be beaten and dragged to the
market places, and suffer ten thousand un-
seemly things; much more ought we to do this
in things spiritual, and to render what is due
to God, the King of all, first, that we may not
come to that place, "where is gnashing of
teeth."

And after these virtues let us seek, which
together with our own salvation will be able
in the greatest degree to profit our neighbor.
Such is almsgiving, such is prayer, or rather
even this latter is by the former made effica-
cious, and furnished with wings, " For thy
prayers," it is said, " and thine alms are come
up for a memorial before God."'' But not
prayers only, but fasting also hath its strengtu
from hence. Shouldest thou fast without
almsgiving; the act is not so much as counted
for fasting; but such a one is worse than a
gluttonous man and a drunkard; and so much
worse, as cruelty is a more grievous thing
than lu.xury. And why do I speak of fasting ?
Though thou practise self-denial, though thou
practise virginity, thou art set without the
bridechamber, if thou hast not almsgiving.
And yet what is equal to virginity, which not
even in the new dispensation hath come
under the compulsion of law, on account of
its high excellence ? but nevertheless it is cast


S John x.xi. 15-17.


6 Luke xii. 32.


7 Acts X. 4.


r


Homily LXXVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


469


out, when it hath not almsgiving. But if
virgins are cast out, because they have not
this in due abundance, who will be able with-
out this to obtain pardon ? There is no man,
but he must quite of necessity perish, who
hath not this.

For, if in worldly matters no man lives for
himself, but artisan, and soldier, and hus-
bandman, and merchant, all of them contrib-
ute to the common good, and to their neigh
bor's advantage; much more ought we to do
this in things spiritual. For this is most
properly to live: since he at least who is liv-
ing for himself only, and overlooking all
others, is useless, and is not so much as a
human being, nor of our race.

What then, thou wouldest say, if I neglect
my own interests, while seeking after the
good of the rest ? It is not possible, for one !
who seeks after the good of the rest to over-
look his own; for he who seeks after the good
of the rest pains no man, but pities all, helps
them to the utmost of his powers; will rob no


man, will covet the goods of no man, will not
steal, will not bear false witness; will abstain
from all wickedness, will apply himself to all
virtue, and will pray for his enemies, and do
good to them that plot against him, and will
neither revile any, nor speak ill of them,
though he hear from them ten thousand evil
things; but will sj^eak the words of the apos-
tle: " Who is weak, and I am not weak? who
is offended, and I burn not?"' But when
looking to our own good, it is not quite sure
that the good of the rest will follow.

By all which things being persuaded that it
is not possible for one to be saved, who hath
not looked to the common good, and seeing
this man that was cut asunder, and him that
buried his talent, let us choose this way, that
we may also attain unto eternal life, unto
which God grant we may all attain, by the
grace and love towards man of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be glory, world with-
out end. Amen.

' 2 Cor. xi. 29.


HOMILY LXXVIII.


Matt. XXV. 1—30.'

' Then shall the kingdom of Heaven," He saith, " be likened unto ten virgins, which took
their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom. But five of them were wise, and
the other five foolish, which took not," He saith, "oil."

' Then, while the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept. And at midniglit
there was a cry made. Behold, the bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet Him. .\nd
the five arose, and being in perplexity, said to the wise. Give us of your oil. l^ut they
consented not, saying, Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you; go to them
that sell, and buy."

'And while they were gone for this, the bridegroom came, antl those went in; but these
came afterwartls, saying. Lord, Lord, open to us. lUit He answered and said, Verily
I say unto you, I know you not. Watch therefore, for ye know not the day, nor the
hour."

'Then He spake again another parable. A man travelling into a far country, called his
own servants, and delivered unto them his goods; to one five talents, to another two,
to another one, to every man according to his several ability, and took his journey.
Then, when the two had brought him the doul)Ie, he that had l)een entrusted with the
one talent brought it alone, and being blamed saith, 1 knew that thou art a hard man,
reaping where thou hast not sown, and gathering where thou hast not strawed; and I


■ [Thr |>mw(tr, a« here niven, roircupondH with thnt prefixed iinnolate il tn iiny extent, ninre the varintmnH «|i|>enr in the ren-
to the Unniily in Kield's text. There urr >uiiiie iiiniMi<>n«, iiiul <lrrini{. In Mii{nr'« edition, the •ilution end» with the words,
some vnriiitions fnun ihr received text. Il sennrd iinnec-emuiry to , " while the brideifriMim Iwrried." — R.)


470


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXVIII.


was afraid, and hid thy talent; lo ! there thou hast that is thine. His Lord answered
and said, Thou wicked servant, thou knewest that I reap where I have not sown, and
gather where I have not strawed: thou oughtest therefore to have put my money to
the exchangers, and then at my coming I might have received mine own with usury.
Take therefore the talent from him, and give it to him that hath ten talents. For to
him that hath shall be given, and he shall have more abundantly; but from him that
hath not, shall be taken away even that which he hath. And cast ye the unprofitable
servant into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth."


These parables are like the former parable
of the faithful servant, and of him that was
ungrateful and devoured his Lord's goods.
For there are four in all, in different ways
admonishing us about the same things, I
mean about diligence in almsgiving, and
about helping our neighbor by all means
which we are able to use, since it is not pos-
sible to be saved in another way. But there
He speaks more generally of all assistance
which should be rendered to one's neighbor;
but as to the virgins, he speaketh particularly
of mercifulness in alms, and more strongly
than in the former parable. For there He
punishes him that beats, and is drunken, and
scatters and wastes his lord's goods, but here
even him that doth not help, nor spends
abundantly his goods upon the needy. For
they. had oil indeed, but not in abundance,
wherefore also they are punished.

But wherefore doth He set forth this para-
ble in the person of the virgins, and doth not
merely suppose any person whatever ? Great
things had He spoken of virginity, saying,
" There are eunuchs, who have made them-
selves eunuchs for the kingdom of Heaven's
sake; " and, " He that is able to receive, let
him receive it."' He knew also that the
generality of men would have "a great opinion
of it. For indeed the work is by nature
great, and is shown so by this, that neither
under the old dispensation was it fulfilled by
these ancient and holy men, nor under the
new was it brought under the compulsion of
the law. For He did not command this, but
left it to the choice of his hearers. Where-
fore Paul also said " Now, concerning virgins
I have no commandment of the Lord."^
" For though I praise him that attains there-
to, yet I constrain not him that is not willing,
neither do I make the thing an injunction."
Since then the thing is both great in itself
and hath great honor with the multitude, lest
any one attaining to this should feel as
though he had attained to all, and should be
careless about the rest, He putteth forth this

parable sufficient to persuade them, that vir-
ginity, though it should have everything else.


I Matt. xix. 12.


2 I Cor. vii. 25.


if destitute of the good things arising out of
almsgiving, is cast out with the harlots, and
He sets the inhuman and merciless with
them. And most reasonably, for the one was
overcome by the love of carnal pleasure, but
these 3 of money. But the love of carnal
pleasure and' of money are not equal, but that
of carnal pleasure is far keener and m^ore
tyrannical. And the weaker the antagonist,
the less excusable are these* that are over-
come thereby. Therefore also He calls them
foolish, for that having undergone the greater
labor, they have betrayed all for want of the
less. But by lamps here. He meaneth the
gift itself of virginity, the purity of holiness;
and by oil, humanity, almsgiving, succor to
them that are in need.

" Then, while the bridegroom tarried, they
all slumbered and slept." He shows that
the time intervening will not be short, leading
His disciples away from the expectation that
His kingdom was quite immediately to ap-
pear. For this indeed they hoped, therefore
He is continually holding them back from
this hope. And at the same time He inti-
mates this too, that death is a sleep. For
they slept, He saith.

"And about midnight there was a cry
made." Either He was continuing the para-
ble, or again He shows that the resurrection
will be at night. But the cry Paul also indi-
cates, saying, "With a shout, with a voice of
an archangel, with the last trump. He shall
come down from Heaven. "^ And what
mean the trumpets, and what saith the cry ?
" The bridegroom cometh." When there-
fore they had trimmed their lamps, the fool-
ish say unto the wise, "Give us of your oil."
Again He calls them foolish, showing that
nothing can be more foolish than they who
are wealthy here, and depart naked thither,
where most of all we have need of humanity,
where we want much oil. But not in this
respect only were they foolish, but also be-
cause they looked to receive it there, and
sought it out of season; and yet nothing
could be more humane than those virgins.


3 at Se.

5 1 Thess. iv. 16 (comp. i Cor. xv. 52).


4 ai vi.Kr)del<rai„


HoMiLV LXXVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


471


who for this especially were approved.
Neither do they seek for it all, for, "Give
us," they say, "of your oil;" and the
urgency of tiieir need is indicated; " for our
lamps,'' they say, "are going out." But
even so tiiey failed, and neither the humanity
of those wiiom they asked, nor the easiness
of their request, nor their necessity and want,
made them obtain.

But what now do we learn from hence ?
That no man can protect us there, if we are
betrayed by our works, not because he will
not, but because he cannot. For these too
take refuge in the impossibility. This the
blessed Abraham also indicated, saying,
*' Between us and you there is a great gulf," '
so that not even when willing is it permitted
them to pass it.

" But go to them that sell, and buy. " And
who are they that sell ? The poor. And
where are these ? Here, and then should
they have sought them, not at that time,

2. Seest thou what great profit arises to us
from the poor ? shouldest thou take them
away, thou wouldest take away the great hope
of our salvation. Wherefore here must we
get together the oil, that it may be useful to
us there, when the time calls us. For that
is not the time of collecting it, but this.
Spend not then your goods for nought in lux-
ury and vainglory. For thou wilt have need
of much oil there.

Having heard these things, those virgins
went their way; but they profited nothing.
And this He saith, either pursuing the para-
ble, and working it up; or also by these
things showing, .that though we should be-
come humane after our departure, we shall
gain nothing from thence towards our escape.
Therefore neither did their forwardness avail
these virgins, because they went to them that
sell not here, but there; nor the rich man,
when he became so cliaritable, as even to be
an.xious about his relations. For he that was
passing by him that was laid at the gate, is
eager to rescue from perils and from hell
tiiem whom lie did not so much as see, anil
entreats that some be sent to tell them these
tilings. But nevertheless, he derived no ben-
efit from thence, as ncitiier did these virgins.
For when they having heard these things
went their way, the liridegroom came, and
they that were ready went in with Him, l)i;t
the otliers were siiut out. After their many
labors, after their innumerable toils, and that
intolerable figlit, and those tropliies which
tiiey had set up over the madness of natural
appetite, disgraced, and with their lamps

' I.uke xvi. ift.


gone out, they withdrew, bending down their
faces to the earth. For nothing is more
sullied than virginity not having mercy; so
that even the multitude are wont to call the

J unmerciful dark. Where then was the profit
of virginity, when they saw not tiie bride-

! groom ? and not even when they had knocked
did they obtain, but they heard that fearful
saying, "Depart, I know you not.''* And
when He hath said this, nothing else but hell
is left, and that intolerable punishment; or
rather, this word is more grievous even than
hell. This word He speaks to them also
that work iniquity.-

" Watch therefore, for ye know not the day
nor the hour."-* Seest thou how continually
He adds this, showing how awful our igno-
ance concerning our departure hence ? Where
now are they, who throughout all their life
are remiss, but when they are blamed by us,
are saying. At the time of my death, I shall
leave money to tlie poor. Let them listen to
these words, and be amended. For indeed
at. that time many have failed of this, having
been snatched away at once, and not per-
mitted so much as to give charge to their
relations touching what they wished to be
done.

This parable was spoken with respect to
mercy in alms; but the one that conies after
this, to them that neither in money, nor in
word, nor in protection, nor in any other
things whatever, are willing to assist their
neighbors, but withhold all.

And wherefore can it be that this parable
brings forward a king, but that a bridegroom ?
That thou migluest learn how close Clirist is
joined unto the virgins that strip themselves
of their possessions; for this indeeil is vir-
ginity. Wherefore Paul also makes tiiis as
a definition of the tiling. " The unmarried
woman careth for the things of the Lord; "s
such are his words: and, " For that which is
comely, and that ye may attend upon the
Lord without distraction. These tilings we
advise," he saith.

And if in Luke the parable of the talents

I is otherwise |)ut, this is to be said, that the

One is really ilifferent from tlie other. For
in that, from the one capital different degrees
of increase were made, for from one pound
one brought five, another ten; wherefore
neitlie: did tiiey obtain the same recompense;
but here, it is the contrary, and the crown is
accoriliiij;ly e<|ual. l*"or he tliat received two
gave two, and he that had received the five
again in like manner; but there since from
the same beginning one made the greater,


■ Matt. XXV. la.
4 M.iii. XXV. I].


3 See Matt. vii. 93.
S I Cor. vii. 34, 35.


4/2


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXVIII.


one the less, increase; as might be expected,
in the rewards also, they do not enjoy the
same.

But see Him everywhere, not requiring it
again immediately. For in the case of the
vineyard, He let it out to husbandmen, and
went into a far country; and here He com-
mitted 'to them the talents, and took His
journey, that thou mightest learn His long-
suffering. And to me He seems to say these
things, to intimate the resurrection. But here
it is no more a vineyard and husbandmen,
but all servants. For not to rulers only, nor
to Jews, but to all, doth He address His dis-
course. And they who bring a return unto
Him confess frankly, both what is their own,
and what their Master's. And the one saith.
Lord, "Thou gavest me five talents;" and
the other saith, "two," indicating that from
Him they received the source of their gain,
and they are very thankful, and reckon all to
Him.

What then saith the Master? "Well
done, thou good" (for this is goodness to
look to one's neighbor) "and faithful serv-
ant; thou wast faithful over few things, I will
set thee over many things: enter thou into
the joy of thy Lord," ^ meaning by this ex-
pression all blessedness.

But not so that other one, but how? "I
knew that thou art a hard man, reaping where
thou sowedst not, and gathering where thou
strawedst not: and I was afraid, and hid thy
talent: lo, there thou hast that is thine. ^'^
What then the Master? " Thou oughtest to
have put my money to the exchangers,'' ^ that
is, "that oughtest to have spoken, to have
admonished, to have advised." But are they
disobedient? Yet this is nought to thee.

What could be more gentle than this ? For
men indeed do not so, but him that hath put
out the money at usury, even him do they
make also responsible to require it again.
But He not so; but, Thou oughtest, He saith,
to have put it out, and to have committed the
requiring of it again to me. And I should
have required it with increase; by increase
upon the hearing, meaning the showing forth
of the works. Thou oughtest to have done
that which is easier, and to have left to me
what is more difficult. Forasmuch then as
he did not this, "Take," saith He, "the
talent from him, and give it to him that hath
ten talents.'* For unto every one that hath
shall be given, and he shall have abundance;
but from him that hath not shall be taken
away even that which he hath.''^ What then


* Matt. XXV. 23.
3 Matt. XXV. 77.


[R. v., "bankers."]


4 [R. v., "the ten talents."]


2 Matt. XXV. 24, 25.
5 Matt. XXV. 28, 29.


is this ? He that hath a gift of word and
teaching to profit thereby, and useth it not,
will lose the gift also; but he that giveth dili-
gence, will gain to himself the gift in more
abundance; even as the other loseth what he
had received. But not to this is the penalty
limited for him that is slothful, but even in-
tolerable is the punishment, and with the
punishment the sentence, which is full of a
heavy accusation. For " cast ye," saith He,
"the unprofitable servant into outer dark-
ness: there shall be weeping and gnashing ot
teeth," * Seest thou how not only the spoiler,
and the covetous, nor only the doer of evil
things, but also he that doeth not good things,
is punished with extreme punishment.

Let us hearken then to these words. As
we have opportunity, let us help on our sal-
vation, let us get oil for our lamps, let us
labor to add to our talent. For if we be
backward, and spend our time in sloth here,
no one will pity us any tnore hereafter,
though we should wail ten thousand times.
He also that had on the filthy garments con-
demned himself, and profited nothing. He
also that had the one talent restored that
which was committed to his charge, and yet
was condemned. The virgins again en-
treated, and came unto Him and knocked,
and all in vain, and without effect.

Knowing then these things, let us contrib-
ute alike wealth, and diligence, and protec-
tion,' and all things for our neighbor's ad-
vantage. For the talents here are each per-
son's ability, whether in the way of protec-
tion, or in money, or in teaching, or in what
thing soever of the kind. I^t no man say, I
have but one talent, and can do nothing; for
thou canst even by one approve thyself.
For thou art not poorer than that widow;
thou art not more uninstructed than Peter
and John, who were both "unlearned and
ignorant men;"^ but nevertheless, since they
showed forth a zeal, and did all things for
the common good, they attained to Heaven.
For nothing is so pleasing to God, as to live
for the common advantage.

For this end God gave us speech, and
hands, and feet, and strength of body, and
mind, and understanding, that we might use
all these things, both for our own salvation,
and for our neighbor's advantage. For not
for hymns only and thanksgivings is our
speech serviceable to us, but it is profitable
also for instruction and admonition. And if
indeed we used it to this end, we should be
imitating our Master; but if for the opposite
ends, the devil. Since Peter also, when he


6 Matt. XXV. 30.

7 Trpoaraaiav^


[R. v., " cast ye out," etc.]


8 Acts iv. 13.


Homily LXXVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


4


/ o


confessed the Christ, was blessed, as having
spoken the words of the Father; but when
he refused the cross, and dissuaded it, he was
severely reproved, as savoring the things of
the devil. But if where the saying was of
ignorance, so heavy is the blame, when we of
our own will commit many sins, what favor
shall we have ?

Such things then let us speak, that of
themselves they may be evidently the words
of Christ. For not only if I should say,
"Arise, and walk; " ' neither if I should say,
" Tabitha, arise,"'' then only do I speak
Christ's words, but much more if being re-
viled I l)less, if being desjMtefully used I
pray for him that doeth despite to me.
Lately indeed I said, that our tongue is a
hand laying hold on the feet of God; but
now much more do I say, that our tongue is
a tongue imitating the tongue of Christ, if it
show forth the strictness that becometh us,
if we speak those things which He wills. But
what are the things which He wills us to
speak? Words full of gentleness and meek-
ness, even as also He Himself used to speak,
saying to them that were insulting Him, "I
have not a devil; ''^ and again, "If I have
spoken evil, bear witness of the evil.'' •* If
thou also speak in this way; if thou speak for
thy neighbor's amendment, thou wilt obtain
a tongue like that tongue. And these things
God Himself saith; "For he that bringeth
out the precious from the vile, shall be as my
mouth; "5 such are His words.

When therefore thy tongue is as Christ's
tongue, and thy mouth is become the mouth
of the Father, and thou art a temple of the
Holy Ghost, then what kind of honor could
be equal to this ? For not even if thy mouth
were made of gold, no nor even of precious
stones, would it shine like as now, when lit
up with the ornament of meekness. For
what is more lovely than a mouth that know-
eth not how to insult, but is used to bless
and gh'e good words i Hut if thou canst
not bear to bless him that curses thee, hold
thy peace, and accomplish but this for the
time; and proceeding in order, and striving
as thou ougluest, thou wilt attain to that
other point also, and wilt acquire such a
mouth, as we have spoken of.

4. And do not account the saying to I)e
rash. For the Lord is loving to man, and
the gift cometh of His goodness. It is rash
to have a mouth like the devil, to have a
tongue resembling that of an evil demon,
especially for him that partakes of such mys-

« Matt. ix. 5. » Act» ix. 40.

1 lohn viii, 49. [Greek, "demon."]

4 John xviii jx. 5 Jcr. XV. ly.


teries, and communicates of the very flesh of
the Lord. Reflecting then on these things,
become like Him, to the utmost of thy power.
No longer then will the devil be able so much
as to look thee in the face, when thou art
become such a one as this. For indeed he
recognizes the image of the King, he knows
the weapons of Christ, whereby he was
worsted. And what are these ? Gentleness
and meekness. For when on the mountain
Christ overthrew and laid low the devil who
was assaulting him, it was not by making it
known that He was Christ, but He entrapped
him by these sayings. He took him by gentle-
ness, he turned him to flight by meekness.
Thou also must do this; shouldest thou see
a man become a devil, and coming against
thee, even so do thou likewise overcome.
Christ gave thee also power to become like
Him, so far as thy ability extends. Be not
afraid at hearing this. The fear is not to be
like Him. Speak then after His manner, and
thou art become in this respect such as He,
so far as it is possible for one who is a man
to become so.

Wherefore greater is he that thus speaks,
than he that prophecies. For this is entirely
a gift, but in the other is also thy labor and
toil. Teach thy soul to frame thee a mouth
like to Christ's mouth. For it can create
such things, if it will; it knows the art, if it
be not remiss. And how is such a mouth
made .'' one may ask. By what kind of color-
ings? by what kind of material? By no
colorings, indeed, or material; but by virtue
only, and meekness, and humility.

Let us see also how a devil's mouth is
made; that we may never frame that. How
then is it matie ? By curses, by insults, by
envy, by perjury. For when any one speaks
his words, he takes his tongue. What kind
of excuse then siiall \ve have; or rather, what
manner of punishment shall we not undergo;
when this our tongue, wherewith wc are
allowed to taste of the Lonl's flesh, when
this, I say, we overlook, speaking the devil's
words ?

Let us not overlook it, but let us use all
diligence, in order to train it to imitate its
Lord. For if we train it to this, it will i^iace
us with great confidence at Christ's judgment
seat, llnless any one know how to speak
thus, the judge will not so much as hear him.
For like as when the judge chances to be a
Roman, he will not hear the defense of one
who knows not how to speak thus; so likewise
Christ, unless thou speak after His fashion,
will not hear thee, nor give heed.

Let us Icarn therefore to s|)eak in such
wise as our Judge is wont to hear; let it be


474


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXIX.


our endeavor to imitate that tongue. And
shouldest thou fall into grief, take heed lest
the tyranny of despondency pervert thy
tongue, but that thou soeak like Christ. For
He too mourned for Lazarus and Judas.
Shouldest thou fall into fear, seek again to
speak even as He. For He Himself fell into
fear for thy sake, with regard to His man-
hood.' Do thou also say, " Nevertheless,
not as I will, but as Thou wilt."^

And if thou shouldest lament, weep calmly
as He. Shouldest thou fall into plots and
sorrows, treat these too as Christ. For in-
deed He had plots laid against Him, and was
in sorrow, and saith, " My soul is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death." ^ And all the
examples He presented to thee, in order that
thou shouldest continually observe the same
measures, and not destroy the rules that have
been given thee. So shalt thou be able to
have a mouth like His mouth, so while tread-
ing on the earth, thou wilt show forth a
tongue like to that of Him who sits on high;
thou wilt maintain the limits He observed in
despondency, in anger, in suffering, in agony.

How many are they of you that desire to
see His form ? Behold, it is possible, not to


I Kara rhv T>js ocKo^o/ui'as \6yov.
3 Matt. xxvi. 38.


2 Luke xxii. 42.


see Him only, but also to become like Him;
if we are in earnest.

Let us not delay then. He doth not so
readily accept prophets' lips, as those of
meek and forbearing men. " For many will
say unto me," He saith, " Have we not pro-
phesied in Thy name ? And I will say unto
them, I know you not.''^

But the lips of Moses, because he was ex-
ceeding gentle and meek (" for Moses," it is
said, "was a meek man above all the men
which were upon the face of the earth "^), He
so accepted and loved, as to say, "Face to
face, mouth to mouth, did He speak, as a
man speaketh unto his friend."*

Thou wilt not command devils now, but
thou shalt then command the fire of hell, if
thou keep thy mouth like to Christ's mouth.
Thou shalt command the abyss of fire, and
shalt say unto it, "Peace, be still, ^' ' and
with great confidence shalt set foot in the
Heavens, and enjoy the kingdom; unto which
God grant all of us to attain, by the grace
and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with whom, be unto the Father, to-
gether with the Holy Ghost, glory, might,
honor, now and always, and world without
end. Amen.


4 Matt. vii. 22, 23.

6 Exod. xxxiii. 11 ; Numb. xii. 8.


5 Numb. xii. 3,
7 Mark iv. 39.


HOMILY LXXIX.

Matt. XXV. 31 — 41.

When the Son of Man shall come in the glory of His Father, and all the holy angels
with Him, then shall He sit," saith He, " upon the throne of His glory, and He shall
divide the sheep from the kids;"' [and the one He will accept, because they fed
Him, when an hungered, and gave Him drink when thirsty, and took Him in when a
stranger, and clothed Him when naked, and visited Him when sick, and came to see
Him when in- prison: and He will give the kingdom to them. But the others, accus-
ing them for the opposite things. He will send into the eternal fire, prepared for the
devil and his angels.]^


Unto this most delightful portion of Scrip-
ture, which we do not cease continually re-
volving, let us now listen with all earnest-
ness and compunction, this wherewith His

' [So R. v. margin.]

2 [The Greek text condenses the narrative of the Gospel, alter-
ing the form in some places, as appears from the rendering given
above. — R.]


discourse ended, even as the last thing, rea-
sonably; for great indeed was His regard for
philanthropy and mercy. Wherefore in what
precedes He had discoursed concerning this
in a different way; and here now in some re-
spects more clearly, and more earnestly, not
forth two nor three nor five persons,


setting


Homily LXXIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


475


but the whole world; although most assuredly
the former places,, which speak of two per-
sons, meant not two persons, but two portions
of mankind, one of them that disobey, the
other of the obedient. But here He handleth
tne word more fearfully, and with fuller light.
Wherefore neither doth He say, " The king-
dom is likened," any more, but openly shows
Himself, saying, " When the Son of Man
shall come in His glory.'' For now is He
come in dishonor, now in affronts and re-
proaches; but then shall He sit upon the
throne of His glory.

And continually doth He make mention of
glory. For since tne cross was near, a thmg
that seemed to be matter of reproach, for this
cause He raises up the hearer; and brings
before his sight the judgment seat, and set-
teth round him all the world.

And not in this way only doth He make
His discourse awful, but also by showing the
Heavens oi'jened. For all the angels will be
present with Him, He saith, themselves also
to bear witness, in how many things they had
ministered, when sent by the Lord for the
salvation of men.

And everything will help to render that day
fearful. Then, " shall be gathered together,"
He saitii, "all nations," that is, the whole
race of men. "And He shall separate them
one from another, as the shepherd his sheep."
For now they are not separated, but all min-
gled together, but the division then shall be
made with all exactness. And for a while it
is by their place that He divides them, and
makes them manifest; afterwards by the
names He indicates the dispositions of each,
calling the one kids,' the other sheep, that
He might indicate the unfruitfulness of the
one, for no fruit will come from kids; and the
great profit from the other, for indeed from
sheep great is the profit, as well from the
milk, as from the wool, and from the young,
of all which things the kid " is destitute.

But while the brutes have fro"i nature
tlieir unfruitfulness, and fruitfulness, these
have it from choice, wherefore some are pun-
ished, and the others crowned. And He doth
not punish them, until He hath pleaded with
them; wherefore also, when He hath put them
in their place, He mentions the charges
against them. And they speak with meek-
ness, but they have no advantage from it
now; and very reasonably, l)ecause they
l^assed l)y a work so mucii to be desired.
For indeed the prophets are everywhere say-
ing this, " I will have mercy and not sacri-
fice,"^ and the lawgiver by all means urged

' «pii<>ia, /iiriiot, not cn/>rat : St. Jrromr. -■ e'oM.'iix.

3 Hosea vi. 6.


them to this, both by words, and by works;
and nature herself taught it.

But mark them, how they are destitute not
of one or two things only, but of all. For
not only did they fail to feed the hungry, or
clothe the naked; but not even did they visit

j the sick, which was an easier thing.

And mark how easy are His injunctions.
He said not, " I was in prison, and ye set me
free; I was sick, and ye raised me up again; "
but, "ye visited me," and, "ye came unto
me." And neither in hunger is the thing
commanded grievous. For no costly table
did He seek, but what is needful only, and
His necessary food, and He sought in a sup-
pliant's garb, so that all things were enougii
to bring punishment on them; the easiness
of the request, for it was bread; the pitiable
character of Him that requesteth, for He was
poor; the sympathy of nature, for He was a
man; the desirableness of the promise, for
He promised a kingdom; the fearfulness of
the punishment, for He threatened hell.
The dignity of the one receiving, for it was
God, who was receiving by the poor; the sur-
passing nature of the honor, that He vouch-
safed to condescend so far; His just claim
for what they bestowed, for of His own was
He receiving. But against all these things
covetousness once for all blinded them that
were seized by it; and this though so great
a threat was set against it.

For further back also He saith, that they
who receive not such as these shall suffer
more grievous things than Sodom; and here
He saith, " Inasmuch as ye did it not unto

j one of the least of these my brethren, ye did
it not unto me."* What sayest Thou ? they
are Thy brethren; and how dost Thou call
them least. Why, for this reason they are
brethren, because they are lowly, because
they are poor, because they are outcast. For
such doth He most invite to brotherhood, the
unknown, the contemptible, not meaning by
these the monks only, and them that have
occupied the mountains, but every believer;
though he be a secular person, yet if he be
hungry, and famisiiing, and naked, and a
stranger, His will is he should have tlie bene-
fit of all this care. For baptism renders a
man a brother, and tlie partaking of the
divine mysteries.

2. Then, in order that thou mayest see in
another way also the justice of the sentence,
He first praises them that have done right,
ami saith, "Come, ye blessetl of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you, before

•4 \tnlt. XXV. 45; comp. vrrne 40. [" My l>rrlhrcn" i« mldrd
lipfc fnim vrrte 40. 'I'lic order of wonU v.mrs fnun tluit dmiul in
that vcr«e. — k.]


476


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXIX.


the foundation of the world. For I was an
hungered, and ye gave me meat," and all
that follows.' For that they may not say,
we had it not, He condemns them by their
fellow-servants; like as the virgins by the vir-
gins, and the servant that was drunken and
gluttonous by the faithful servant, and him
that buried his talent, by them that brought
the two, and each one of them that continue
in sin, by them that have done right.

And this comparison is som.etimes made in
the case of an equal, as here, and in the in-
stance of the virgins, sometimes of him that
hath advantage, as when he said, " The men
of Nineveh shall rise up and shall condemn
this generation, because they believed at the
preaching of Jonas; and, behold, a greater
than Jonas is here; " and, " The queen of the
south shall condemn this generation, because
she came to hear the wisdom of Solomon; " *
and of an equal again, " They shall be your
judges; "3 and again of one at advantage,
" Know ye not, that we shall judge angels,
how much more things that pertain to this
life?"*

And here, however, it is of an equal; for
he compares rich with rich, and poor with
poor. And not in this way only doth He
show the sentence justly passed, by their
fellow-servants having done what was right
when in the same circumstances, but also by
their not being obedient so much as in these
things in which poverty was no hindrance; as,
for instance, in giving drink to the thirsty,
in looking upon him that is in bonds, in visit-
ing the sick. And when He. had commended
them that had done right, He shows how
great was originally His bond of love towards
them. For, " Come," saith He, " ye blessed
of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world.''
To how many good things is this same equiv-
alent, to be blessed, and blessed of the
Father? And wherefore were they counted
worthy of such great honors ? What is the
cause? "I was an hungered, and ye gave
me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink;" and what follows.

Of what honor, of what blessedness are
these words ? And He said not, Take, but,
'* Inherit," as one's own, as your Father's,
as yours, as due to you from the first. For,
before you were, saith He, these things had
been prepared, and made ready for you, for-
asmuch as I knew you would be such as you
are.

And in return for what do they receive such
things ? For the covering of a roof, for a


^ Matt. XXV. 34-40.
3 Matt. xii. 27.


2 Matt. xii. 41, 42.
4 I Cor. vi. 3.


garment, for bread, for cold water, for visit-
ing, for going into the prison. For indeed
in every case it is for what is needed; and
sometimes not even for that. For surely, as
I have said, the sick and he that is in bonds
seeks not for this only, but the one to be
loosed, the other to be delivered from his in-
firmity. But He, being gracious, requires
only what is within our power, or rather even
less than what is within our power, leaving to
us to exert our generosity in doing more.

But to tiie others He saith, " Depart from
me, ye cursed," (no longer of the Father; for
not He laid the curse upon them, but their
own works), "into the everlasting fire, pre-
pared," not for you, but " for the devil and
his angels.'' For concerning the kingdom
indeed, when He had said, "Come, inherit
the kingdom," He added, " prepared for you
before the foundation of the world; " but con-
cerning the fire, no longer so, but, " pre-
pared for the devil." I, saith He, prepared
the kingdom for you, but the fire no more
for you, but " for the devil and his angels; "
but since ye cast yourselves therein, impute
it to yourselves. And not in this way only,
but by what follows also, like as though He
were excusing Himself to them, He sets forth
the causes.

" For I was an hungered, and ye gave me
no meat." For though He that came to thee
had been thine enemy, were not His suffer-
ings enough to have overcome and subdued
even the merciless ? hunger, and cold, and
bonds, and nakedness, and sickness, and to
wander everywhere houseless ? These things
are sufficient even to destroy enmity. But
ye did not these things even to a friend,
being at once friend, and benefactor, and
Lord. Though it be a dog we see hungry,
often we are overcome; and though we be-
hold a wild beast, we are subdued; but seeing
the Lord, art thou not subdued ? And where-
in are these things worthy of defense ?

For if it were this only, were it not suffi-
cient for a recompense ? (I speak not of
hearing such a voice, in the presence of the
world, from Him that sitteth on the Father's
throne, and of obtaining the kingdom), but
were not the very doing it sufficient for a
reward ? But now even in the presence of
the world, and at the appearing of that un-
speakable glory, He proclaims and crowns
thee, and acknowledges thee as His sustainer
and host, and is not ashamed of saying such
things, that He may make the crown brighter
for thee.

So for this cause, while the one are pun-
ished justly, the others are crowned by grace.
For though they had done ten thousand


Homily LXXIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


4/ /


things, the munificence were of grace, that
in return for services so small and cheap,
such a heaven, and a kingdom, and so great
honor, should be given them.

"And it came to pass, when Jesus had fin-
ished these sayings,' He said unto His disci-
ples, Ye know that after two days is the pass-
over, and the Son of Man is betrayed to be
crucified."- In good season again doth He
speak of the passion, when He had reminded
them of the kingdom, and of the recompense
there, and of the deathless punishment; as
though He liad said, Why are ye afraid at the
dangers that are for a season, when such
good things await you ?

3. But mark thou, I pray thee, how He
hath in all His first sayings after a new man-
ner worked up and thrown into tlie shade
what was most painful to them. For He
said not. Ye know that after two days I am
betrayed, but, " Ye know that after two days
is the passover," ^ to show that what is done
is a mystery, and that a feast and celebration
is being kept for the salvation of the world,
and that with foreknowledge He suffered all.
So then, as though this were sufficient conso-
lation for them. He did not even say anything
to them now about a resurrection ; for it was
superfluous, after having discoursed so much
about it, to speak of it again. And more-
over, as I said. He shows tliat even His very
passion is a deliverance from countless evils,
having by the passover reminded them of the
ancient benefits in Egypt,

" Then were assembled together the chief
priests, and ti^ scribes, and the elders of the
people, in the palace of the high priest, who
was called Caiaphas, and consulted that they
might take Jesus by sul)tlety, and kill Him,
But they said, Not on the feast day, lest there
be an uproar among the people." ■•

Seest thou the unspeakable corruption of
the Jewish state? Attempting unlawful acts,
they come to the high priest, desiring to
obtain their authority from that quarter,
whence they <;ught to have found hindrance.

And how many high priests were there ?
For the law wills tiiere should be one, l)ut
then there were many. \\'henre it is mani-
fest, that the Jewish constitution had begun


' FR. v., " word'^ ;•• the
2 Nliitt. xxvi. I, 1.


word " nil " it omitted.— R.]


t [A clause is omitted here : " nnd then He brini;s in ' in deliv-
ered up to be crucified.' " Itiil s<iine editors mid : " ' Anil I lie Son
of Man is delivered up,' and lh>-ei He brin^is in ' to Ik- cruci-
fied.' " For the latter rcadint: there is no »f<M)d authority. — K.)

4 Matt. xxvi. 3-5. [Thii pavsmje contain* sonic peculiar varia-
tionii: in verse 1, " in the palace " (court I is (ulntitiiir<| for " un-
to ;" in verse 4, the more prolmhle reading should lie rendered,
" were Cf^nHultint; " (or. taking iminsel totjellier). Verse s shows
no variations, luit should hr renilereil us in the K. V.. " Vol diir-
inK the fc.ist, lest a luiiiull arise ainoukt the people." The com-
nirnts show that Chrysostoin understood the verse ai referring to
the entire festivuj. — k.]


to dissolve. For Moses, as I said, com-
manded there should be one, and that when
he was dead there should be another, and by
the life of this person He measured the ban-
ishment of them that had involuntarily com-
mitted manslaughter. How then were there
at that time many high priests? They were
afterwards made for a year. And this the
evangelist declared, when he was speaking of
Zacharias, saying, that he was of the course
of Abia. Those therefore doth he here call
high priests, who had been high priests.

What did they consult together ? That
they might seize Him secretly, or that they
might put Him to death? Both; for they
feared the people. Wherefore also they
waited for the feast to be past; for " thev
said. Not on the feast day.''5 For the devil,
lest he should make the passion conspicuous,
was not willing it should take place at the
passover; but they, lest there should be an
uproar. Mark them then ever fearing, not
the ills from God, neither lest any greater
pollution should arise to them from the sea-
son, but in every case the ills from men.

Yet for all this, boiling with anger, they
changed their purpose again. For though
they had said, " Not nt the feast time; " when
they found the traitor, they waited not for
I the time, but slew Him at the feast. But
why did they take Him then? They were
boiling with rage, as I said; and they ex-
pected then to find Him, and all things they
did as blinded. For though He Himself
made the greatest use of their wickedness for
His own dispensation, they were not surely
for this guiltless, but deserving of inflictions
without numiier for their temper of mind.
At least when all should be set free, even tlie
guilty, then these men slew the guiltless,
Him that had conferred on them countless
benefits, and who for a time had neglected
the Gentiles for their sake. But O loving-
kindness ! them that were thus depraved,
tliem tiiat were thus frmvarJ, and'' full of
countless evils. He again saves, and sends
the apostles to be slain in their behalf, and
by the apostles makes entreaty. " For we
are ambassadors for Christ." '

Having then such patterns as these, I say
not, let us die for our enemies, for we ought
to do even this; but since we are too feeble
for this, I say for the present, at least let us
not look witli an evil eye upon our friends,
let us not envy our benefactors. I sav not
for the present, let us do good to them that
evil entreat us, for I desire even this; but


Fiel


f" Not during the fcnsl."]
'I'hc Words in italics arc not sustained by the mss. collated by
, R.l


(."or. V.


[R. v., " on behalf ..( Christ."]


478


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXIX.


since you are too gross for this, at least
avenge not yourselves. What is our condi-
tion, a scene, and acting? Wherefore can it
be that ye set yourselves directly against the
acts enjoined ? It is not for nought that all
else hath been written and how many things
He did at the very cross sufficient to recall
them to Him; but that thou mightest imitate
His goodness, that thou mightest emulate
His lovingkindness. For indeed He cast
them to the ground, and restored the serv-
ant's ear, and discoursed with forbearance;
and great miracles did He show forth, when
lifted up, turning aside the sunbeams, burst-
ing the rocks, raising the dead, frightening
by dreams the wife of him that was judging
Him, at the very judgment showing forth all
meekness (which was of power not less than
miracles to gain them over), forewarning
them of countless things in the judgment
hall; on the very cross crying aloud, " Father,
forgive them their sin." ' And when buried,
how many things did He show forth for their
salvation ? And having risen again, did he
not straightway call the Jews ? did He not
give them remission of sins ? did He not set
before them countless blessings ? What can
be more strange than this ? They that cru-
cified Him, and were breathing murder, after
they crucified Him, became sons of God.

What can be equal to this tenderness?
On hearing these things let us hide our faces,
to think that we are so far removed from
Him whom we are commanded to imitate.
Let us at least see how great the distance,
that we may at any rate condemn ourselves,
for warring with these, in behalf of whom
Christ gave His life, and not being willing to
be reconciled to them, whom that He might
reconcile He refused not even to be slain;
unless this too be some expense, and outlay
of money, which ye object in almsgiving.

4. Consider of how many things thou art
guilty; and so far from being backward to
forgive them that have injured thee, thou wilt
even run unto them that have grieved thee,
in order that thou mayest have a ground for
pardon, that thou mayest find a remedy for
thine own evil deeds.

The sons of the Greeks, who look for noth-
ing great, have often shown self-command
toward these: and thou who art to depart
hence with such hopes, shrinkest, and art
slow to act; and that which time effects, this
thou endurest not to do before the time for
God's law, but wiliest this passion to be
quenched without reward, rather than for a
reward? For neither, if this should have


arisen from the time, wilt thou have any ad-
vantage, but rather great will be the punish-
ment, because, what time hath effected, this
the law of God persuaded thee not to do.

But if thou sayest that thou burnest with
the memory of the insult; call to mind if any
good hath been done thee by him that hath
offended thee, and how many ills thou hast
occasioned to others.

Hath he spoken ill of thee, ana aisgracea
thee? Consider also that thou hast spoken
thus of others. How then wilt thou obtain
pardon, which thou bestowest not on others ?
But hast thou spoken ill of no one? But
thou hast heard men so speaking, and allowed
it. Neither is this guiltless.

Wilt thou learn how good a thing it is not
to remember injuries, and how this more than
anything pleases God ? Them that exult over
persons, justly chastised by Himself, He
punishes. And yet they are justly chastised;
but thou shouldest not rejoice over them. So
the prophet having brought many accusations,
added this also, saying, " They felt nothing
for the affliction of Joseph;"^ and again,
" She that inhabiteth Enan, came not forth
to lament for the place near her." ^ And yet
both Joseph (that is, the tribes that were
sprung from him), and the neighbors of these
others, were punished according to the pur-
pose of God; nevertheless, it is His will that
we sympathize even with these. For if we,
being evil, when we are punishing a servant,
if we should see one of his fellow slaves
laughing, we at the same time are provoked
the more, and turn our anger against him;
much more will God punish them that exult
over those whom He chastises. But if upon
them that are chastised by God it is not right
to trample, but to grieve with them, much
more with them that have sinned against us.
For this is love's sign; love God prefers to
all things. For as in the royal purple, those
are precious amongst the flowers and dyes,
which make up this robing; so here too, these
virtues are the precious ones, which preserve
love. But nothing maintains love so much
as the not remembering them that have sinned
against us.

"Why? did not God guard the other side
also ? Why ? did He not drive him that hath
done the wrong to him that is wronged ?
Doth He not send him from the altar to the
other, and so after the reconciliation invite
him to the table?" But do not therefore
wait for the other to come, since thus thou
hast lost all. For to this intent most espec-
ially doth He appoint unto thee an unspeaka-


' Luke xxiii. 34. [Freely cited.]


2 Amos vi. 6.


3 Micah i. 11, lxx.


Homily LXXIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


479


ble reward, that thou mayest prevent the
other, since, if thou art reconciled by his en-
treaties, the amity is no longer the result of
the divine command, but of the other party's
diligence. Wherefore also thou goest away
uncrowned, while he receives the rewards.

What sayest thou ? Hast thou an enemy,
and art thou not ashamed ' Why is not the
devil enough for us, that we bring upon our-
selves those of our own race also ? Would
that not even he had been minded to war
against us; would that not even he were a
devil !

Knowest thou not how great the pleasure
after reconciliation ? For what, though in
our enmity it appear not great ? For that it
is sweeter to love him that doth us wrong
than to hate him, after the enmity is done
away thou shalt be able to learn full well.

5. Why then do we imitate the mad, de-
vouring one another, warring against our own
flesh ?

Hear even under the Old Testament, how
great regard there was for this, "The ways
of revengeful men are unto death.' One
man keepeth anger against another, and doth
he seek healing of GodP''^* "And yet He
allowed, ' eye for eye,' and ' tooth for tooth,'
how then doth He find fault?" Because He
allowed even those things, not that we should
do them one to another, but that through the
fear of suifering, we might abstain from the
commission of crime. And besides, those
acts are the fruits of a short-lived anger, but
to remember injuries is th'e part of a soul that
practises itself in evil.

But hast thou suffered evil ? yet nothing so
great, as thou wilt do to thyself by remem-
bering injuries. And besides, it is not so
much as possible for a good man to suffer
any evil. For suppose there to be any man,
having both children and a wife, and let him
practise virtue, and let him have moreover
many occasions of being injured, as well
abundance of possessions, as sovereign power,
and many friends, and let him enjoy honor;
only let him practisj virtue, for this must be
added, and let us in supposition lay plagues
upon him. And let some wicked man come
unto him, and involve him in losses. Wliat


« Prov. xii. 38, Lxx.


' Ecclus, xxviii, 3,


then is that to him who accounts money
nothing ? Let him kill his children. What
this to him, who learns to be wise touching
the resurrection ? Let him slay his wife;
what is this to him who is instructed not to
sorrow for them that are fallen asleep ? let
him cast him into dishonor. ' What this to
him who accounts the things present, the
flower of the grass ? If thou wilt, let him
also torture his body, and cast him into
prison, what this to him that hath learnt,
"Though our outward man perish, yet the
inward man is renewed; "^ and that "tribu-
lation worketh approval ? " -•

Now I had undertaken that he should re-
ceive no harm; but the account as it pro-
ceeded hath shown that he is even advantaged,
being renewed, and becoming approved.

Let us not then vex ourselves with others,
injuring ourselves, and rendering our soul
weak. For the vexation is not so much from
our neighbors' wickedness, as from our weak-
ness. Because of this, should any one insult
us, we weep, and frown; should any one rob
us, we suffer the same like those little chil-
dren, which the more clever of their compan-
ions provoke for nothing, grieving them for
small causes; but nevertheless these too, if
they should see them vexed, continue to
tease them, but if laughing, they on the con-
trary leave off. But we are more foolish even
than these, lamenting for tliese things, about
which we ought to laugh.

Wherefore I entreat, let us let go chis child-
ish mind, and lay hold of Heaven. For in-
deed, Christ willeth us to be men, perfect
men. On this wise did Paul also command,
"Brethren, be not children in understand-
ing," he saith, " howbeit in malice be ye
children. "5

Let us therefore be children* in malice,
and flee wickedness, and lay hold on virtue,
that we may attain also to the good things
eternal, by the grace and love towards man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
and might, world without end. Amen.

3 a Cor. iv. 16. [R. V.. "our outwurd man is drciiyinK.* ]

4 Ruin. V. 4. [R. v., pmlwlit'n ;" 4o«i>iiji' iiiniml l>c accu-
rately rendered by any single Knulish term. — K.]

5 I Cor. xiv. 30. f K. v., " be not children in mind ; howbeit in
malice l>e ye babes. "j

* L" babes."]


48o


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXX.


HOMILY LXXX.

» Matt. XXVI. 6, 7.

"Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, there came unto
Him a woman having an alabaster box of very precious ointment, and poured it on
His head, as He sat at meat."


This woman seems indeed to be one and
the same with all the evangelists, yet she is
not so; but though with the three she doth
seem to me to be one and the same,' yet
not so with John, but another person, one
much to be admired, the sister of Lazarus.

But not without purpose did the evangelist
mention the leprosy of Simon, but in order
that He might show whence the woman took
confidence, and came unto Him. For inas-
much as the leprosy seemed a most unclean
disease, and to be abhorred, and yet she saw
Jesus had both healed the man (for else He
would not have chosen to have tarried with
a leper), and had gone into his house; she
grew confident, that He would also easily wipe
off the uncleanness of her soul. And not
for nought doth He name the city also,
Bethany, but that thou mightest learn, that
of His own will He cometh to His passion.
For He who before this was fleeing through
the midst of them; then, at the time when
their envy was most kindled, comes near
within about fifteen furlongs; so completely
was His former withdrawing Himself a part
of a dispensation. ="

The woman therefore having seen Him,
and having taken confidence from thence,
came unto Him. For if she that had the
issue of blood, although conscious to herself
of nothing like this, yet because of that
natural seeming uncleanness, approached
Him trembling and in fear; much more was
it likely this woman should be slow, and
shrink back because of her evil conscience.


I St. Augustin, on St. John, Horn. XLIX. sec. 3, speaks of the
identity as doubtful. See also Greswell, vol. ii., Diss. XVII., and
vol. iii. Diss. III. It seems that the (7(rt-rt.r/V)« recorded in Luke
vii. 37 must have been different, whether the person were the same
or not. St. Chrysostom supposes /wo unctions a:* j^if/Artwr. See
note at the end of " Sermons preached at St. Saviour's Church,
Leeds." [Augustin discusses the question more fully in his Har-
mony of the Gospels, see Niccne Fathers, vol. vi. pp. 173, 174.
He holds that there were two occasions, one named by Luke, and
the other by Matthew, Mark and John, but that Mary was the
person anointing on both occasions. This leads to the identifica-
tion of Mary, the sister of Lazarus, with Mary Magdalene. Hut
there is no proof that Luke refers to the latter. The opinion of
Chrysostom seems to be that Matthew, Mark and Luke refer to
the same person, and John to another on a different occasion.
But to this there are insufferable objections. — R.]

= Lit., an economy.


Wherefore also it is after many women, the
Samaritan, the Canaanite, her that had the
issue of blood, and other besides, that she
cometh unto Him, being conscious to her-
self of much impurity; and then not publicly
but in a house. And whereas all the others
were coming unto Him for the healing of the
body alone, she came unto Him by way of
honor only, and for the amendment of the
soul. For neither was she at all afflicted in
body, so that for this most especially one
might marvel at her.

And not as to a mere man did she come
unto Him; for then she would not have wiped
His feet with her hair, but as to one greater
than man can be. Therefore that which is
the most honorable member of the whole
body, this she laid at Christ's feet, even her
own head.

" But when His disciples saw it, they had
indignation," such are the words, "saying,
To what purpose rs this waste? For this
ointment might have been sold for much, and
given to the poor. But when Jesus under-
stood it. He said, Why trouble ye the
woman ? for she hath wrought a good work
upon me ? For ye have the poor always with
you, but me ye have not always. For in that
she hath poured this ointment on my body,
she did it for my burial. Verily I say unto
you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be
preached in the whole world, there shall also
this, that this woman hath done, be told for a
memorial of her. "^

And whence had they this thought ? They
used to hear their Master saying, "I will
have mercy, and not sacrifice," '^ and blaming
the Jews, because they omitted the weightier
matters, judgment, and mercy, and faith, and
discoursing much on the mount concerning
almsgiving, and from these things they in-
ferred with themselves, and reasoned, that if
He accepts not whole burnt offerings, neither


3 Matt. xxvi. 8-13. [The Greek te.xt agrees with the received
with the exception of a change of order in the first clause of verse
II. In verse 12, the R. V. renders, "to prepare me for burial,"
and in verse 12, " be spoken of " for " be told." — R.]

4 See ix, 13, and xii. 7.


Homily LXXX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


481


the ancient worship, much more will He not
accept the anointing of oil.

But though they thus thought, He know-
ing her intention suffers her. For indeed
great was her reverence, and unspeakal^le her
zeal; wherefore of this exceeding condescen-
sion, He permitted the oil to be poured even
on His head.

For if He refused not to become man, and
to be borne in the womb, and to be fed at the
breast, why marvellest thou, if He dotli not
utterly reject this ? For like as the Father
suffered a savor of meat, and smoke, even so
did He the harlot, accepting, as I have
already said, her intention. For Jacob too
anointed a pillar to God, and oil was offered
in the sacrifices, and the priests were anointed
with ointment.

But the disciples not knowing her purpose
found fault unseasonably, and by the things
they laid to her charge, they show the woman's
munificence. For saying, that it might have
been sold for three hundred pence, they
showed how much this woman had spent on
the ointment, and how great generosity she
had manifested. Wherefore He also rebuked
them, saying, " Why trouble ye the woman ? "
And He adds a reason, as it was His will
again to put them in mind of His passion,
" For she did it," He said, " for my burial."
And another reason, " For ye have the poor
always with you, hut me ye have not always; "
and, "Wheresoever the gospel sliall be
preached, that shall be told also which this
woman hath done.''

Seest thou how again He declares before-
hand the going forth unto the Gentiles, in
this way also consoling them for His death,
if after the cross His power was so to shine
forth, that the gospel sliould be spread abroad
in every part of the earth.

Who then is so wretched as to set his face
against so much truth ? ¥ot Io ! what He
said is come to pass, and to whatever part of
the earth thou mayest go, thou wilt see her
celebrated.

And yet neither was the person that did it
distinguished, nor had what was done many
witnesses, neither was it in a theatre, but in
a house, that it took place, and tins a house of
some leper, the disciples only being present.

2. Who then proclaimed it, and caused it
to be spread abroad ? It was the power of
Him who is speaking these words. And
while of countless kings and generals the
noble exploits even of those whose memorials
remain have sunk into silence; and liaving
overthrown cities, and encompassed them witli
walls,' and set up trophies, and enslaved

« [A clause is omitlcd here : "and conquered in want." — k,]
81


many nations, they are not known so much
as by hearsay, nor by name, tiiough they nave
both setup statues, and established laws; yet
that a woman who was a liarlot poured out
oil in the house of some leper, in the pres-
ence of ten men, this all nien celebrate
throughout the world; and so great a time
has passed, and yet the memory of that which
was done hath not faded away, but alike
Persians and Indians, Sc)'thians and Thra-
cians, and Sarmatians, and tiie race of the
Moors, and they tiiat dwell in tiie British
Islands, spread abroad that which was done
I secretly in a house by a woman that had been
a harlot. -

Great is the loving-kindness of the Lord.
He endureth an harlot, an harlot kissing his
feet, and moistening them with oil, and wip-
ing them with her hair, and He receives lier,
and reproves them that blame her. For
neither was it right that for so much zeal the
woman should be driven to despair.

But mark thou tliis too, how far they were
now raised up above the world, and forward
in almsgiving. And why was it He tlid not
merely say, " She hath wrought a good work,"
but before this, "Why trouble ye the
woman ? '' That they might learn not at the
beginning to require too higli principles of
the weaker sort. Therefore neither dotii He
examine the act merely itself by itself, but
taking into account tlie person of the woman.
And indeed if He had been making a law.
He would not have brought in the woman,
but that tliou mightest learn that for her sake
these tilings were said, that tiiey migiit not
mar her budding faitii, but rather cherisli it,
therefore He saitii it, teaching us wnatever
good thing may be done by any man. though
it be not quite perfect, to receive il, and en-
courage it, and advance it, and not to seek
all perfection at the beginning. For, that at
least He Himself would rather have desired
this, is manifest from tiie fact, that He re-
quired a bag to be l)orne, who had not where
to lay His head. But then the time dc-
maiuled not this, that He should correct the
deed, but that He slunild accept it only.
For even as, if any one asked Him, witliout
the woman's having done it. He would not
have ap|)r()ved tiiis; so, after she hail done it.
He looks to one thing only, that she he not
driven to perplexity by tlie reproof of the
disciples, but tliat she should go from His
care, having been made more cheerful and
better, l-'or imleed after the o\\ had been


•' fThi« iicrord* with the nMtimed idenlily with the womnn
Hpiiken €if in I. like vii. Hut thrrc srrni* t" l>r no prcMif that Chry-
lunliini identilird thr woniun with .Miiry Mncilulrne. Coni(wirr p.
41, Homily VI. 8. — k.)


482


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXX,


poured out, their rebuke had no seasonable-
ness.

Do thou then likewise, if thou shouldest
see any one provide sacred vessels and offer
them, and loving to labor upon any other
ornament of the church, about its walls or
floor; do not command what has been made
to be sold, or overthrown, lest thou spoil his
zeal. But if, before he had provided them,
he were to tell thee of it, command it to be
given to the poor; forasmuch as He also did
this not to spoil the spirit of the woman, and
as many things as He says. He speaks for
her comfort.

Then because He had said, ' She hath
done it for my burial; " that He might not
seem to perplex the woman, by making men-
tion of such a thing as this, His burial and
death, I mean; see how by that which follows
He recovers her, saying, "What she hath
done shall be spoken of in the whole world."

And this was at once consolation to His
disciples, and comfort and praise to her.
For all men, He saith, shall celebrate her
hereafter; and now too hath she announced
beforehand my passion, by bringing unto me
what was needed for a funeral, let not there-
fore any man reprove her. For I am so far
from condemning her as having done amiss,
or from blaming her as having not acted
rightly, that I will not suffer what hath been
done to lie hid, but the world shall know that
which has been done in a house, and in
secret. For in truth the deed came of a
reverential mind, and fervent faith, and a
contrite soul.

And wherefore did He promise the woman
nothing spiritual; but the perpetual memory ?
From this He is causing her to feel a confi-
dence about the other things also. For if she
hath wrought a good work, it is quite evident
she shall receive a due reward.

" Then went one of the twelve, he that was
called Judas Iscariot, unto the chief priests,
and said unto them, What will ye give me,
and I will deliver Him unto you?"' Then.
When ? When these things were spoken,
when He had said, it is for my burial, and
not even thereby was he moved to compunc-
tion, neither when he heard that the Gospel
should be preached everywhere did he fear
(and yet it was the language of unspeakable
power), but when women showed so much
honor, and women that had been harlots, then
he wrought the devil's works.

But what can be the reason they mention
his surname ? Because there was also another


I Matt. xxvi. 14, 15. [R. v., " Then one of the twelve, who
was called Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief priests, and said.
What are ye willing to give me," etc.]


Judas. And they do not shrink from saying.
He was of the twelve; so entirely do they
hide none of those things which seem to be
matters of reproach. And yet they might
have said merely this, that he was one of the
disciples, for there were others besides. But
now they add, of the twelve, as though they
had said, of the first company of those
selected as the best, of them with Peter and
John. Because for one thing did they care,
for truth alone, not for concealing what things
were done.

For this cause many of the signs they pass
by, but of the things that appear to be mat-
ters of reproach they conceal nothing; but
though it be word, though it be deed, though
it be what you will of this kind, they pro-
claim it with confidence.

3. And not these only, but even John him-
self, who utters the higher doctrines. For he
most of all tells us of the affronts and the
reproachful things that were done unto Him.

And see how great is the wickedness of
Judas, in that he comes unto them of his own
accord, in that he does this for money, and
for such a sum of money.

But Luke saith, that he conferred with the
chief captains. '^ For after that the Jews be-
came seditious, the Romans set over them
those that should provide for their good
order For their government had now under-
gone a change according to the prophecy.

To these then he went and said, "What
will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto
you. And they covenanted with him for
thirty pieces of silver. And from that time
he sought opportunity to betray Him. " ^ For
indeed he was afraid of. the multitude, and
desired to seize him alone.

Oh madness ! how did covetousness alto-
gether blind him ! For he that had often
seen Him when He went through the midst,
and was not seized, and when He afforded
many demonstrations of His Godhead and
power, looked to lay hold on Him; and this
while He was using like a charm for him so
many, both awful and soothing words, to put
an end to this evil thouglit. For not even
at the supper did He forbear from this care
of him, but unto the last day discoursed to
him of these things. But he profited nothing.
Yet not for that did the Lord cease to do
His part.

Knowing this, then, let us also not intermit


- Luke xxii. 4. [The explanation is untenable. The " cap-
tains " (cTTpa-Triyols) were not " chiliarchs," but the officers of the
temple guard ; comp. Luke xxii. 52, where the same word occurs.
— R.]

3 Matt. xxvi. 15, 16. [R. V., "And they weighed unto him
thirty," etc. . . "to deliver Him unto ikem." The same word
as in verse 15. — R.]


Homily LXXX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


48


to do all things unto them that sin and are
remiss, warning, teaching, exhorting, admon-
ishing, advising, though we profit nothing.
For Christ indeed foreknew that the traitor
was incorrigible, yet nevertheless He ceased
not to supply what could be done by Him-
self, as well admonisaing as threatening and
bewailing over him, and nowhere plainly, nor [
oi^enly, but in a concealed way. And at the 1
very time of the betrayal, He allowed him
even to kiss Him, but this benefited him
nothing. So great an evil is covetousness,
this made him both a traitor, and a sacrile-
gious robber.

Hearken, all ye covetous, ye that have the
disease of Judas; hearken, and beware of the
calamity. For if he that was with Christ,
and wrought signs, and had the benefit of so
much instruction, because he was not freed
from the disease, was sunk into such a gulf;
how much more shall ve, who do not so much
as listen to the Scripture, who are constantly
riveted to the things present, become an easy
prey to this calamity, unless ye have the ad-
vantage of constant care. Every day was
that man with Him, who had not where to lay
His head, and every day was he instructed
by deeds, and by words, not to have gold,
nor silver, nor two coats; and yet he was not
taught self restraint; and how dost thou ex-
pect to escape the disease, if thou hast not
the benefit of earnest attention, and dost not
use much diligence? For terrible, terrible is
the monster, yet nevertheless, if thou be will-
ing, thou wilt easily get the better of him.
For the desire is not natural; and this is
manifest from them that are free from it.
For natural things are com"mon to all; but
this desire has its origin from remissness
alone; hence it takes its birth, hence it derives
its increase, and when it has seized upon those
who look greedily after it, it makes them live
contrary to nature. For when they regard
not their fellow countrymen, tiieir friends,
their brethren.' in a word all men, and with
these even themselves, this is to live against
nature. Whence it is evident that the vice
and disease of covetousness, wherein Judas,
being entangled, became a traitor, is contrary
to nature. And how did he become such a
one, you may say, having been called by
Christ? Because God's call is not compul-
sory, neither does it force the will of liiem
who are not minded to choose virtue, but ad-
monishes indeed, and advises, and does and
manages all things, so as to persuade men
to become good; but if some endure not, it
does not compel. But if thou wouldest learn

■ [The words " their kinsmen " should be inserted here — R.]


from what cause he became such as he was,
thou wilt find hitn to have been ruined by
covetousnes.s.

And how was he taken by this calamity?
one may say. Because he grew lemiss. For
hence arise such changes, as on the other
hand, those for the better from diligence.
How many for instance that were violent, are
now more gentle than lambs ? how many las-
civious persons have become afterwards con-
tinent ? how many, heretofore covetous, yet
now have cast away even their own posses-
sions ? And the contrary again has been the
result of remissness. For Gehazi also lived
with a holy man, and he too became depraved
from the same disease. For tins calamity is
the most grievous of all. Hence come rob-
bers of tombs, hence menslayers, hence wars
and fightings, and whatsoever evil thou mav-
est mention, it cometh hence. And in every
respect is such a one useless, whether it be re-
quisite to lead an army or to guide a people:
or rather not in public matters only, but also
in private. If he is to marry a wife, he will
not take the virtuous woman, but the vilest
of all; if he have to buy a house, not that
which becomes a free man, but what can
bring much rent; if he is to buy slaves, or
what else it may be, he will take the worst.

And why do I speak of leading an army,
and guiding a people, and managing house-
holds; for should he be a king, he is the most
wretched of all men, and a pest to the world,
and the poorest of all men. For he will feel
like one of the common sort, not accounting
all men's possessions to be his, but himself
to be one of all; and when spoiling all men's
goods, thinks himself to have less than any.
For measuring the things present by his de-
sire for those wiiereof he is not yet possessed,
he will account the former nothing compared
to the latter. Wherefore also one saith,
" Tliere is not a more wicked thing than a
covetous man.'' "

4. For such a one both setteth himself to
sale, and goeth about, a common enemy of tlie
world, grieving t'.iat the earth tloth not bear
gold instead of the corn, ami the fountains
instead of streams, and the mountains instead
of stones; vexeil at the fruittiihiess of the
seasons, troubled at common benefits; shun-
ning every means whence one cannot obtain
money; undergoing all things whence one> can
scrape togctlier so much as two farthings;
hating all men, the poor and the rich; the
poor, lest tiiey should come ami beg of him;
the rich, because he hath not their [wsses-
sions. .\11 men he accounts to be possessed

> Ecctut. X. 9.


484


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXX.


of what is his, and as though he had been in-
jured by all, so is he displeased with all. He
knows not plenty, he has no experience of
satiety, he is more wretched than any, even
as, on the other hand, he that is freed from
these things, and practises self-restraint, is
the most enviable. For the virtuous man,
though he be a servant, though a prisoner, is
the most happy of all men. For no one shall
do him ill, no not though all men should
come together out of the world, setting in
motion arms ana camps, and warring with
him. But he that is depraved and vile, and
such as we have described, though he be a
king, though he have on a thousand diadems,
will suffer the utmost extremities, even from
a common hand. So feeble is vice, so strong
is virtue.

Why then dost thou mourn, being in a state
of poverty. Why wailest thou keeping a
feast, for indeed it is an occasion of feasting.
Why weepest thou, for poverty is a festival,
if thou be wise. Why lamentest thou, thou
little child; for such a one we should call a
little child. Did such a person strike thee }
What is this, he made thee more able to en-
dure ? But did he take away thy money ?
He hath removed the greater part of thy
burden. But hath he cut off thine honor?
Again thou tellest me of another kind of free-
dom. Hear even those without teaching wis-
dom touching these things, and saying,
"Thou hast suffered no ill, if thou show no
regard to it." But hath he taken away that
great house of thine, which hath enclosures
about it ? But behold the whole earth is be-
fore thee, the public buildings, whether thou
wouldest have them for delight, or for use.
And what is more pleasing or more beautiful
than the firmament of Heaven.

How long are ye poor and needy ? It is
not possible for him to be rich, who is not
wealthy in his soul; like as it is not possible
for him to'be poor, who hath not the poverty
in his mind. For if the soul is a nobler
thing than the body, the less noble parts have
not power to affect it after themselves; but
the noble part draws over unto herself, and
changes those that are not so noble. For so
the heart, when it has received any hurt,
affects the whole body accordingly; if its tem-
perament be disordered, it mars all, if it be
rightly tempered, it profits all. And if any of
the remaining parts should have become cor-
rupt, while this remains sound, it easily shakes
off what is evil in them also.

And that I may further make what I say
more plain, what is the use, I pray thee, oi


verdant branches, when the root is withering ?
and what is the harm of the leaves being with-
ered above, while this is sound ? So also
here there is no use of money, while the soul
is poor; neither harm from poverty, when the
soul is rich. And how can a soul, one may
say, be rich, being in want of money ? Then
above all times might this be; for then also is
it wont to be rich.

For if, as we have often shown, this is a
sure proof of being rich, to despise wealth,
and to want nothing; and of poverty again, to
want, and any one would more easily despise
money in poverty than in wealth, it is quite
evident that to be in poverty rather makes one
to be rich. For indeed that the rich man
sets his heart on money more than the poor
man, is surely plain to every one; like as the
drunken man is thirsty, rather than he that
hath partaken of drink sufficiently. For
neither is his desire such as to be quenched
by too much; but, on the contrary, it is its
nature to be inflamed by this. For fire like-
wise, when it has received more food, then
most of all waxes fierce; and the tyranny of
wealth, when thou hast cast into it more gold,
then most especially is increased.

If then the desiring more be a mark of pov-
erty; and he that is in the possession of riches
is like this; he is especially in poverty. Seest
thou that the soul then most of all is poor,
when it is rich; and then is rich, when it is
in poverty ?

And if thou wilt, let us exercise our reason-
ing in persons also, and let there be two, the
one having ten thousand talents, the other
ten, and from both let us take away these
things. Who then will grieve the most ? He
that hath lost the ten thousand. But he
would not have grieved more, unless he had
loved it more; but if he loves more, he desires
more; but if he desires more, he is more in
poverty. For this do we most desire, of
which we are most in want, for desire is from
want. For where there is satiety, there can-
not be desire. For then are we most thirsty,
when we have most need of drink.

And all these things have I said, to show
that if we be vigilant, no one shall harm us;
and that the harm arises not from poverty but
from ourselves. Wherefore I beseech you
with all diligence to put away the pest of
covetousness, that we may both be wealthy
here, and enjoy the good things eternal, unto
which God grant we may all attain, by the
grace and love towards man of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory world without end.
Amen.


Homily LXXXI.J


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


485


HOMILY LXXXI.


Matt. XXVI.


17, 18.


*' Now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying,
Where wilt Thou that we prepare for Thee to eat the Passover ? And He said, Go into
the city to such a man, and say unto him, The Master saith, My time is at hand; I
will keep the Passover at thy house with My disciples."


By the first day of the feast of unleavened
bread, he means the day before tiiat feast;
for they are accustomed always to reckon the
day from the ev^ening, and he makes mention
of this in which in the evening the passover
must be killed;' for on the fifth day of the
week they came unto Him, And this one -
calls the day before the feast of unleavened
bread,' speaking of the time when they came
to Him, and another saith on this wise,
" Then came the day of unleavened bread,
when the passover must be killed; "■* by the
word " came," meaning this, it was nigh, it
was at the doors, making mention plainly of
that evening. For they began with the even-
ing, wherefore also each adds, when the pass-
over was killed.

And they say, "Where wilt Thou that we
prepare for Thee to eat the passover ? " So
even from this it is manifest, that He had no
house, no place of sojourning; and I suppose
neither had they. For surely they would
have entreated him to come there. But
neither had they any, having now parted with
all things.

But wherefore did He keep the passover ?
To indicate by all things unto the last day,
that He is not opposed to the law.

And for what possible reason doth He send
them to an unknown person ? To show by
this also that He miglit have avoided suffer-
ing. For He wiio prevailed over this man's
mind, so that lie received them, and that by
words; what would He not liave done witli
them that crucified Him, if it liad l)een His
will not to suffer? And what He did aljout
the ass, this He did here also. For there


• John xiii. i.
» rlliit John d
3 I. like xxii. 7.


I does not call il the day before. — K.]

4 [The; laiik'ii.itie in somewhat ol«riire. But it would vcm
from this pas^tKc that thrysoHioin hclirvrd mir lA>T<i atr tlir luiu-
over nt the regular tiinr. In Homily I.XXX I V., he !*|>eak» of the
chief priests an ncKlcctint; to rat it in Ihrir hate aKsinst our Lord,
explaininK in this way the diflinilty arising.' from thr slalemrnt in
Jonn xviii. 28. Hut in llomily I. XXXIII. i, on the ('.i«|>cl of
John, he presents Ixith views, nlher that the whnle frast is meant,
or that our Lord had aiilicipaled the olniervai.cc of the LaMihul
•upper. — K.]


too He saith, "If any man say aught unto
you, ye shall say, that the Lord hath need of
them; " ^ and so likewise here, " The Master
saith, Lwill keep the passover at thy house."
But I marvel not at this only, that he received
Him, being unknown, but that expecting to
bring upon himself such enmity and implac-
able hostility, he despised the enmity of the
multitude.

After this, because they knew him not, He

gave them a sign, like as the prophet touching

Saul, saying, "Thou shalt find one going up

and carrying a bottle; " * and here, " carrying

a pitcher." And see again the display of his

power. For He did not only say, " I will

keep the passover," but He adds another

thing also, " My time is at hand." And this

' He did, at once continually reminding His

I disciples of the passion, so that exercised by

the frequency of the prediction, they should

he prepared for what was to take place; and

at ihe same time to show to themselves, and

, to him that was receiving Him, and to all tlie

i Jews, which I have olten mentioned, that not

involuntarily doth He come to His passion.

I And He adds, " with my disciples," in order

I that both the preparation sliould be sufficient,

and that the man should not suppose tiuit He

was concealing Himself.

" Now when the even was come, He sat
tlown with the twelve disciples."' Oh the
shamelessness of Judas! For he too was
I present there, and came to partake botli of the
mysteries, and of the meal,^ and is convicteil
at tlie very table, when although he had been
a wild beast, he would have bfcome tame.

For this cause the evangelist also signifies,
that while they are eating, Christ speaks of
His betrayal, that both by the time anil by
the table he might sliow the wickedness of the
traitor.


! Matt. xxi. 3. * J Sam. x. 3.

7 Matt. xxvi. »o. [R. V.," wasaittint; at meal with the twelve
disriples." The ree. text omits " dis<iple«," as does one Mss. of
ihe llomilies here. Comp. K. V. niartiin. Ilclow it i» omitted by
I'lirysotiiom also. — K.]

*■ Lit., salt.


486


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXI.


For when the disciples had done, as Jesus
had appointed them, "when the even was
come, He sat down with the twelve.' And as
they did eat, He said," we are told, " Verily,
I say unto you, that one of you shall betray
me."^ And before the supper. He had even
washed his feet. And see how He spares the
traitor. For He said not, such a one shall
betray me; but, "one of you," so as again to
give him power of repentance by concealment.
And He chooseth to alarm all, for the sake of
saving this man. Of you, the twelve, saith
He, that are everywhere present with me,
whose feet I washed, to whom I promised so
many things.

Intolerable sorrow thereupon seized that
holy company. And John indeed saith, they
"were in doubt, and looked one upon an-
other," ^ and each of them asked in fear con-
cerning himself, although conscious to them-
selves of no such thing. But this evangelist
saith, that " being exceeding sorrowful, they
began every one of them to say unto Him, Is
it I, Lord?'* And He answered and said, He
it is, to whom I shall give a sop, when I have
dipped it." 5

Mark at what time He discovered him. It
was when it was His will to deliver the rest
from this trouble, for they were even dead
with the fear, wherefore also they were in-
stant with their questions. But not only as
desiring to deliver them from their distress
He did this, but also as willing to amend the
traitor. For since after having often heard
it generally, he continued incorrigible, being
past feeling. He being minded to make him
feel more, takes off his mask.

For when being sorrowful they began to
say, " Is it I, Lord ? He answered and said,
He that dippeth^with me in the dish, the
same shall betray me. The Son of Man go-
eth, as it is written of Him, but woe to the
man by^ whom the Son of Man is betrayed.
It had been good for that man ,if he had not
been born." ^

Now some say that he was so bold as not
to honor his Master, but to dip with Him:
but to me Christ seems to have done this too,
to shame him the more, and bring him over
to a better disposition. For this act again
has something fhore in it.

2. But these things we ought not to pass
by at random, but they should be infixed in


1 [See note 7, p. 485.]

2 Matt. xxvi. 21. [R. V., " were eating."]

3 John xiii. 22. [Freely cited.] 4 Matt. xxvi. 22.

5 John xiii. 26. [This verse is abridged in the Homily. " To
whom, having dipped the sop, I will give it," is an exact render-
ing. " He it is " is supplied above. — R.]

6 [The words " his hand " are omitted.]

7 [R. v., " through ;" " that " is omitted.]

8 Matt. xxvi. 23, 24. [R. V., " good were it," etc.]


our minds, and wrath would find no place at
any time.

For who, bearing in mind that supper, and
the traitor sitting at meat with the Saviour of
all, and Him who was to be betrayed thus
meekly reasoning, would not put away all
venom of wrath and anger ? See at any rate
how meekly He conducts Himself towards
him, " The Son of Man goeth, as it is written
of Him."

And these things again He said, both to
restore the disciples, that they migkt not think
the thing was a sign of weakness, and to
amend the traitor.

" But woe unto that 5 man by whom the Son
of Man is betrayed! it had been good for that
man if he had not been born." See again in
His rebukes His unspeakable meekness.
For not even here with invective, but more in
the way of compassion, doth He apply what
He saith, but in a disguised way again; and
yet not his former senselessness only, but his
subsequent shamelessness was deserving of
the utmost indignation. For after this con-
viction he saith, "Is it I, Lord ? " '° Oh in-
sensibility ! He inquires, when conscious to
himself of such things. For the evangelist
too, marvelling at his boldness, saith this.
What then saith the most mild and gentle
Jesus? "Thou sayest." And yet He might
have said, O thou unholy, thou all unholy
one; accursed, and profane; so long a time
in travail with mischief, who hast gone thy
way, and made satanical compacts, and hast
agreed to receive money, and hast been con-
victed by me too, dost thou yet dare to ask ?
But none of these things did He say; but
how? " Thou sayest?" fixing for us bounds
and rules of long suffering.

But some one will say. Yet if it was writ-
ten that He was to suffer these things, where-
fore is Judas blamed, for he did the things
that were written ? But not with this intent,
but from wickedness. For if thou inquire
not concerning the motive, thou wilt deliver
even the devil from the charges against him.
But these things are not, they are not so.
For both the one and the other are deserving
of countless punishments, although the world
was saved. For neither did the treason of
Judas work out salvation for us, but the wis-
dom of Christ, and the good contrivance of
His fair skill, using the wickednesses of others
for our advantage.

' ' What then," one may say, ' ' though Judas
had not betrayed Him, would not another
have betrayed Him ? " And what has this to

9 [Here " that " is given, as in the received text. — R.]

10 Matt. xxvi. 25. [R. V., " Rabbi ;" but this change of title is
first noticed below. — R.]


Homily LXXXI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


487


do with the question ? '' Because if Christ
must needs be crucified, it must be by the
means of some one, and if by someone, sure-
ly by such a person as this. But if all had
been good, the dispensation in our behalf had
been impeded.'' Not so. For the Allwise
knows how He shall bring about our benefits,
even had this happened. For His wisdom is
rich in contrivance, and incomprehensible.
So for this reason, that no one might suppose
that Judas had become a minister of the dis-
pensation, He declares the wretchedness of
the man. But some one will say again, "And
if it had been good if he had never been
born, wherefore did He suffer both this man,
and all the wicked, to come into the world ?"
When thou oughtest to blame the wicked, for
that having the power not to become such as
they are, they have become wicked, thou
leavest this, and busiest thyself, and art curi-
ous about the things of God; although know-
ing that it is not by necessity that any one is
wicked.

" But the good only should be born," he
would say, " and there were no need of hell,
nor punishment, nor vengeance, nor trace of
vice, but the wicked should either not be born
at all, or being born should straightway de-
part."

First then, it were well to repeat to thee the
saying of the apostle, " Nay but, O man,
who art thou that repliest against God ? Shall
the thing formed say to Him that formed it.
Why hast Thou made me thus ? " '

But if thou still demandesc reasons, we
would say this, that the good are more ad-
mired for being among the bad; because their
long-suffering and great self-command is
then most shown. But thou takest away the
occasion of their wrestlings, and conflicts, by
saying these things. "What then, in order
that these may appear good, are others pun-
ished ? " saith he. God forbid, but for their
own wickedness. For neither because tiiey
were brought into tlie world did they become
wicked, but on account of their own wicked-
ness; wlierefore also they are i^unished. For
how sliould they fail to be deserving of pun-
ishment, seeing they have so many teachers
of virtue, and gain nothing therefrom. For
like as the noble and good are worthy of
double honor, because they botti i)ecame
good, and took no hurt from the wicked; so
also the worthless deserve twofold punisli-
ment, botli because they became wickeil, when
they might have become good (they show it
wlio have become such), and because tliey
gained nothing from the good.

' Rom. ix. 2ri. [K. v., " Why didst thou make mc thuii ? "]


But let us see what saith this wretched
man, when convicted by his Master. What
then saith he? " Is it I, Rabbi ? " => And why
did he not ask this from the beginning? He
^ thought to escape knowledge by its being
said, " one of you; " but when He had made
him manifest, he ventured again to ask, con-
fiding in the clemency of his Master, that He
would not convict him.^

I 3. O blindness ! Whereunto hath it led
him ? Such is covetousness, it renders men
; fools and senseless, yea reckless, and dogs in-
! stead of men, or rather even more fierce than
dogs, and devils after being dogs. This man
'at least received unto him the devil even
; when plotting against him, but Jesus, even
I when doing him good, he betrayed, having al-
ready become a devil in will. For such doth
the insatiable desire of gain make men, out
I of their mind, frenzy-srhitten, altogether given
up to gain, as was the case even with Judas.

But how do Matthew and the other evan-
gelists say, that, when he made the agree-
ment touching the treason, then the devil
seized him; but John, that "after the sop
Satan entered into him. " •* And John himself
knew this, for further back he saith, " The
devil having now put into the heart of Judas,
that he should betray Him."5 How then
doth he say, "After the sop Satan entered
into him ? " Because he enters not in sud-
denly, nor at once, but makes much trial first,
wliich accordingly was done here also. For
after having tried him in the beginning, and
assailed him quietly, after that he saw him
prepared to receive hmi, he thenceforth
wholly breathed himself into him, and com-
pletely got the better of him.

But how, if they were eating the passover,
did tiiey eat it contrary to the law? For they
should not have eaten it, sitting down to their
meat.* What then can be said ? That after
eating it, tiiey then sat down to the banquet.
But another evangelist saith, that on that
evening He not only ate the passover, but
also said, " With desire I have desired to eat
this passover with you,"'tliat is, on that year.
For what reason ? Because then the salvation
of the world was to be brought about, and
the mysteries to be delivered, and the su'.i-
jects of sorrow to be done away with by His
death; so welcome was the cross to Him.
But nothing softened the savage monster, nor

■• Mull. xxvi. an.

JlA Hcntcnce U omitted here: "On this nccouni, therefore,
he niHo ciiIIh Mini ' Rabbi' "— R.]

* John xiii. tj.

■; Jnliii .\iii. J. (The C.rrrl; tr.vi ••{ the clliiiimis l>et;ii>-« »iih the
Wdnln. Aniri'iii' ytvofitvov. " supprr briiin rtulnl " (.\.\'.l. Iliil the
bfiirr iillriird text rcudu Y'»''''"*'°''i " '''"'"'K *ii|*l'^fi 'R' ^'■•'
'Ihr I'laiKr i« omitted by the trunslutur, for what rrumiii doe* not
appriir. I< ]

* K.xikI. xii. n. 7 l.ulce xxii. 15.


488


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXI.


moved, nor shamed him. He pronounced
him wretched, saying, "Woe to that man."
He alarmed him again, saying, " It were good
for him if he had not been born." He put
him to shame, saying, " To whom I shall
give a sop, when I have dipped it." And
none of these things checked him, but he was
seized by covetousness, as by some madness,
or rather by a more grievous disease. For
indeed this is the more grievous madness.

For what would the madman do like this ?
He poured not forth foam out of his mouth,
but he poured forth the murder of his Lord.
He distorted not his hands, but stretched
them out for the price of precious blood.
Wherefore his madness was greater, because
he was mad being in health.

But he doth not utter sayest thoii-^ sounds
without meaning. And what is more with-
out meaning than this language. " What will
ye give me, and I will deliver Him unto
you ? " ' "I will deliver," the devil spake by
that mouth. But he did not smite the ground
with his feet struggling? Nay, how much
better so to struggle, than thus to stand up-
right. But sayest thou, he did not cut him-
self with stones ? Yet how much better, than
to do such things as these!

Will ye, that we bring forward the possessed
and the covetous, and make a comparison
between the two. But let no one account
what is done a reproach to himself. For
we do not reproach the nature, but we lament
the act. The possessed was never clad with
garments, cutting himself with stones, and
running, he rushes over rough paths, driven
headlong of the devil. Do not these things
seem to be dreadful ? What then, if I shall
show the covetous doing more grievous things
than these to their own soul, and to such a
degree more grievous, that these are consid-
ered child's play compared with those. Will
you indeed shun the pest? Come then, let
us see if they are in any respect in a more
tolerable state than they. In none, but even
in a more grievous condition; for indeed they
are more objects of shame than ten thousand
naked persons. For it were far better to be
naked as to clothing, than being clad with
the fruits of covetousness, to go about like
them that celebrate the orgies for Bacchus.
For like as they have on madmen's masks and
clothes, so have these also. And much as
the nakedness of the possessed is caused by
madness, so doth madness produce this cloth-
ing, and the clothing is more miserable than
the nakedness.

And this I will hereby endeavor to prove.

I Matt. xxvi. 15.


For whom should we say was more mad,
amongst madmen themselves; one who should
cut himself, or one who together with himself
should hurt those who met him ? It is quite
clear that it is this last. The madmen then
strip themselves of their clothing, but these
all that meet them. " But these tear their
clothes to pieces." And how readily would
every one of those that are injured consent
that his garment should be torn, rather than
be stripped of all his substance ?

" But those do not aim blows at the face."
In the first place, the covetous do even this,
and if not all, yet do all inflict by famine and
penury more grievous pains on the belly.

"But those bite not with the teeth."
Would that it were with teeth, and not with
the darts of covetousness fiercer than teeth.
" For their teeth are weapons and darts." ^
For who will feel most pained, he that was
bitten once, and straightway healed, or he
that is for ever eaten up by the teeth of pen-
ury ? For penury when involuntary is more
grievous than furnace or wild beast.

" But those rush not into the deserts like
the possessed of devils." Would it were the
deserts, and not the cities, that they overran,
and so all in the cities enjoyed security.
For now in this respect again, they are more
intolerable than all the insane, because they
do in the cities these things which the others
do in the deserts, making the cities deserts,
and like as in a desert, where there is none
to hinder, so plundering the goods of all men.

"But they do not pelt with stones them
that meet them." And what is this? Of
stones it were easy to beware; but of the
wounds which by paper and ink they work to
the wretched poor (framing writings full of
blows without number), who, out of those
that fall in with them, can ever easily be-
ware ?

4. And let us see also what they do to
themselves. They walk naked up and down
the city, for they have no garment of virtue.
But if this doth not seem to them to be a dis-
grace, this again is of their exceeding mad-
ness, for that they have no feeling of the un-
seemliness, but while they are ashamed of
having their body naked, they bear about the
soul naked, and glory in it. And if you wish,
j I will tell you also the cause of their insensi-
bility. What then is the cause ? They are
naked amongst many that are thus naked,
wherefore neither are they ashamed, like as
neither are we in the baths. So that if in-
deed there were many clothed with virtue,
then would their shame appear more. But

2 Ps. Ivii. 4.


Homily LXXXI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


489


now this above all is a worthy subject for
many tears, that because the bad are many,
bad things are not even esteemed as a dis-
grace. For besides the rest, the devil hath
brought about this too, not to allow them to
obtain even a sense of their evil deeds, but
by the multitude of them that practise wick-
edness, to throw a shade over their disgrace;
since if it came to pass that he was in the
midst of a multitude of persons practising
self-restraint, such a one would see his naked-
ness more.

That they are more naked than the pos-
sessed is evident from these things; and that
they go into the deserts, neitiier this again
could any one gainsay. For the wide and
broad way is more desert than any desert.
For though it have many that journey on it,
yet none from amongst men, but serpents,
scorpions, wolves, adders, and asps. Such
are they that practise wickedness. And
this way is not only desert, but much more
rugged than that of the mad. And this is
hereby evident. For stones and ravines and
crags do not so wound those that mount them,
as robbery and covetousness the souls that
practise<them.

And that they live by the tombs, like the
possessed, or rather that they themselves are
tombs, is plain by this. What is a tomb ? A
stone having a dead body lying in it. Where-
in then do these men's bodies differ from
those s'-ones ? or rather, they are more miser-
able e\^a than they. For it is not a stone
containing a dead body, but a body more in-
sensible than stones, bearing about a dead
soul. Wherefore one would not be wrong in
calling them tombs. For so did our Lord
too call the Jews, for this reason most espe-
cially; He went on at least to say, " Tiieir
inward parts are full of ravening and covetous-
ness. '

Would ye that I show next, how they also
cut tiieir heads with stones ? Whence then
first, I pray thee, wilt thou learn this? From
the things here, or from the things to come ?
But of the things to come they have not
much regard; we must s|)cak then of the
things here. For are not anxieties more
grievous than many stones, not wounding
heads, but consuming a soul. For they arc
afraid, lest tiiose things sliould justly go fortli
out of their liouse, which have come unto tliem
unjustly; they tremble in fear of the utmost
ills, arc angry, are provoked, against tiiosc
of their own house, against strangers; and
now dcsi)ondcncy, now fear, now wratli, comes
upon them in succession, and they are as if


they were crossing precipice after precipice,
; and they are earnestly looking day by day lor
I what they have not yet acquired. Wherefore
neither do they feel pleasure in the things they
1 have, both by reason of not feeling confidence
about the security of them, and because with
their whole mind they are intent upon what
they have not yet seized. And like as one
continually thirsting, though he should drink
up ten thousand fountains, feeleth not the
pleasure, because he is not satisfied; so also
these, so far from feeling pleasure, are even
tormented, the more they heap around them-
selves; from their not feeling any limit to
such desire.

And things here are like this; but let us
speak also of the day to come. For though
they give not heed, yet it is necessary for us
to speak. In tlie day to come then, one will
see everywhere sucn men as these undergoing
punishment. For when He saith, " I was an
hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; " " He is
punishing these; and when He saith, "De-
part into the eternal fire prepared for the
devil," He is sending thither them tliat
make a bad use of ricnes. And the wicked
servant, who gives not to his fellow-servants
tne goods of his I^ord, is of the number of
these men, and he tliat buried his talent, and
the five virgins.

And whitiiersoever thou shalt go, thou wilt
see the covetous punished. And now they
will hear, " There is a void between us and
you; '"3 now, " Depart from me into the fire
that is prepared."-* And now being cut asun-
der, they will go away, where there is gnasli-
ing of teeth, and from every place one may
see them driven, and finding a place nowhere,
but gathered in hell alone.

5. What then is tiie use of the rigiit faith
to us for salvation, when we hear these things?
There, gnaslung of teetli, and outer tlark-
ness, and the fire prepared for the devil, and
to be cut asunder, and to be driven away;
here, enmities, evil speakings, slaiulcrs, perils,
cares, plots, to be hated of all, to be abiiorred
of all, even of tlie very i)ersons that seem to
(latter us. For as good men are admireil not
by the good only l)ut even by the wicked; so
bad men, not the good only, but also tiie
worthless, hate. And in proof tiiat this is
true, I would glaiUy ask of tiie covetous,
whether they do not feel painfully one toward
another; and account such more their enemies
than those that liave done them the greatest
wrong; whether they do not also accuse tiiem-
selves, whether they tlo not account the thing


« Matt, xxiii. 25, and coiiip. vcr»c 27.


» Miilt. XXV. 4«.
4 Mutt. XXV. 41.


3 l.ulcc xvi. j6. (Krcrly 1 itrd ]


490


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXI.


an affront, if any one brings this reproach
upon them. For indeed this is an extreme
reproach, and a sure proof of much wiclced-
ness; for if thou dost not endure to despise
wealth, of what wilt thou ever get the better ?
of lust, or of the mad desire of glory, or
anger, or of wrath ? And how would any be
persuaded of it ? For as to lust, and anger,
and wrath, many impute it even to the tem-
perament of the flesh, and to this do students
of medicine refer the excesses thereof; and
him that is of a more hot and languid temper-
ament, they afifirm to be more lustful; but
him that runs out into a drier kind of ill tem-
perament, eager, and irritable, and wrathful.
But with respect to covetousness, no one ever
heard of their having said any such thing.
So entirely is the pest the effect of mere re-
missness, and of a soul past feeling.

Tlierefore, I beseech you, let us give dili-
gence to amend all such things, and to give
an opposite direction to the passions that
come upon us in every age. But if in every
part of our life we sail past the labors of vir-
tue, everywhere undergoing sliipwrecks; when
we have arrived at the harbor destitute, of
spiritual freight, we shall undergo extreme
punishment. For our present life is an out
stretched ocean. And as in the sea here,
there are different bays exposed to different
tempests, and the ^gean is difficult because
of the winds, the Tyrrhenian strait because of
the confined space, the Charybdis that is by
Africa because of the shallows, the Propontis,
which is without the Euxine sea, on account
of its violence and currents, the parts without
Cadiz because of the desolation, and track-
lessness, and unexplored places therein, and
other portions for other causes; so also is it
in our life.

And the first sea to view is that of our
childish days, having much tempestuousness,
because of its folly, its facility, because it is
not steadfast. Therefore also we set over it


guides and teachers, by our diligence adding
what is wanting to nature, even as there by
the pilot's skill.

After this age succeeds the sea of the
youth, where the winds are violent as in the
^gean, lust increasing upon us. And this
age especially is destitute of correction; not
only because he is beset more fiercely, but
also because his faults are not reproved, for
both teacher and guide after that withdraw.
When therefore the winds blow more fiercely,
and the pilot is more feeble, and there is no
helper, consider the greatness of the tem-
pest.

After this there is again another period of
life, that of men, in which the cares of the
household press upon us, when there is a wife,
and marriage, and begetting of children, and
ruling of a. house, and thick falling showers
of cares. Then especially both covetousness
flourishes and envy.

When then we pass each part of our life
with shipwrecks, how shall we suffice for the
present life ? how shall we escape future pun-
ishment. For when first in the earliest age
we learn nothing healthful, and then in youth
we do not practise sobriety, and when grown
to manhood do not get the better of covetous-
ness, coming to old age as to a hold full of
bilgewater, and as having made the barque of
the soul weak by all these shocks, the planks
being separated, we shall arrive at that har-
bor, bearing raiich filth instead of spiritual
merchandise, and to the devil we shall fur-
nish laughter, but lamentation to ourselves,
and bring upon ourselves the intolerable pun-
ishments.

That these things may not be, let us brace
ourselves up on every side, and, withstanding
all our passions, let us cast out the lust of
wealth, that we may also attain unto the good
things to come, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory forever and ever. Amen.


Homily LXXXII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


491


HOMILY LXXXII.

Matt. XXVI. 26—28.

"And as they were eating, Jesus took bread^ and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave' it to

the disciples, and said. Take, eat; This is my body."
"And He took a cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying. Drink ye all of it;

This is my blood oS the New Testament, Which is shed for many, for the remission

of sins.'"


Ah! how great is the blindness of the
traitor! Even partaking of the mysteries,
he remained the same; and admitted to the
most holy "I table, he changed not. And this
Luke shows by saying, that after this Satan
entered ■• into him, not as despising the Lord's
body, but thenceforth laughing to scorn the
traitor's shamelessness. For indeed his sin
became greater from both causes, as well in
that he came to the mysteries with such a
disposition, as that having approaclied them,
he did not become better, either from fear,
or from the benefit, or from the honor. But
Christ forbad him not, although He knew all
things, that thou mightest learn that He
omits none of the things that pertain to cor-
rection. Wherefore both before this, and
after this, He continually admonished him,
and checked him, both by deeds, and by
words; both by fear, and by kindness; both
by threatening, and by honor. But none of
these things withdrew him from that grievous
pest.

Wherefore thencefortti He leaves him,
and by the mysteries again reminds the dis-
ciples of His being slain, and in the midst of
the meal His discourse is of the cross, by
the continual repeating of the jirediction,
making His passion easy to receive. For if,
when so many tilings had been done and fore-
told, they were troubled; if they had iieard
none of these things, what would they not
have felt ?

"And as they were eating. He took l)read,
and brake it."' Why can it liavc l)ecn that
He ordained this sacrament then, at the time
of the passover? That thou mightest learn

' |^<ux<>p«7T>)(raf (from verse 27) i« Huhmitutrd for tv\oyti<iaf ■
and «Auj««i' (frotn ihr tuiinc vcriirl fur i&tSov (rcc. lexl) i>r iout, of
the more ancient authorities. — R.]

» (^The text ajfr'Ts rxiiitly willi the received ; except in the
substitution of vntp for ir«pi. 'I'lm K. V. fotlowinK the older aii-
thoritii-s, omit* " new," alv> rendering 8ta0i)<ri)t " covenant " in
the text. — k.]

3 [<,^pl«ll>^«<TToTT)^, " most awful ;" litemlly, " mi«t terrifying,"
but applied to religious awe. -K.]

4 Luke xxii. 3 ; see also John xiii. 17.


from everything, both that He is the lawgiver
of the Old Testament, and that the things
therein are foreshadowed because of these
things. Therefore, I say, where the type is,
there He puts the truth.

But the evening is a sure sign of the full-
ness of times, and that the things were now
come to the very end.

And He gives thanks, to teach us how we
ought to celebrate this sacrament, and to
show tiiat not unwillingly (.loth He come to
the passion, and to teach us whatever we may
suffer to bear it thankfullv, thence also suir-
gesting good hopes. For if the type was a
deliverance from such bondage, how much
more will the truth set free the world, and
will He be delivered up for the benefit of our
race. Wherefore, I would add, neither did
He appoint the sacrament before this, but
when henceforth the rites of the law were to
cease. And thus the very chief of the feasts
He brings to an end, removing them to an-
other most awful taiile, and He saith, "Take,
eat, This is my body, ^\'lliGJl Is broken for
many."

And how were they not confounded at hear-
ing this ? Because He had before told unto
them many and great things touching this.
Wherefore that He establishes no more, for
they had heard it sutiliciently, but he speaks
of the cause of His passion, namely, the tak-
ing away of sins. And He calls it blood of a
New Testament, that of the undertaking, the
promise, the new law. For this He under-
took .-il.so of old, and this comprises ttie Tes-
tament that is in the new law. Ant! like as
the Old Testament had sheep and bullocks,
so this has the Lord's blood. Hence also
He sliows tiiat He is soon to die, wtierefore
also He made mention of a Testament, and
He reminds tliem also of the former Testa-
ment, for tliat also was dedicated with blood.
.And again He tells the cause of His death,
"which is shed for manv for the remission of


492


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXII.


sins;" and He saith, "Do this in remem-
brance of me." Seest thou how He removes
and draws them off from Jewish customs.
For Hke as ye did that, He saith, in remem-
brance of the miracles in Egypt, so do this
likewise in remembrance of me. That was
shed for the preservation of the firstborn,
this for the remission of the sins of the whole
world. For, "This," saith He, "is my
blood, which is shed for the remission of
sins."

But this He said, indicating thereby, that
His passion and His cross are a mystery, by
this too again comforting His disciples.
And like as Moses saith, "This shall be to
you for an everlasting memorial,"^ so He
too, " in remembrance of me," until I come.''
Therefore also He saith, " With desire I have
desired to eat this passover," ^ that is, to de-
liver you the new rites, and to give a pass-
over, by which I am to make you spiritual.

And He Himself drank of it. For lest on
hearing this, they should say, What then ? do
we drink blood, and eat flesh ? and then be
perplexed (for when He began to discourse
concerning these things, even at the very say-
ings many were offended)," therefore lest they
should be troubled then likewise. He first
did this Himself, leading them to the calm
participation of the mysteries. Therefore
He Himself drank His own blood. What
then must we observe that other ancient rite
also? some one may say. By no means.
For on this account He said, " Do this," that
He might withdraw them from the other.
For if this worketh remission of sins, as it
surely doth work it, the other is now super-
fluous.

As then in the case of the Jews, so here
also He hath bound up the memorial of the
benefit with the mystery, by this again stop-
ping the mouths of heretics. For when they
say. Whence is it manifest that Christ was
sacrificed ? together with the other arguments
we stop their mouths from the mysteries also.
For if Jesus did not die, of what are the rites
the symbols ?

2. Seest thou how much diligence hath
been used, that it should be ever borne in
mind that He died for us ? For since the
Marcionists, and Valentinians, and Mani-
chseans were to arise, denying this dispensa-
tion, He continually reminds us of the passion
even by the mysteries, (so that no man should
be deceived); at once saving, and at the same


1 Exod. xii. 14.

2 See I Cor. xi. 26, and St. Chrys. on the place, Horn. XXVII.
on I Cor., where he attributes the words " until He come," ex-
pressly to St. Paul. Various early writers attribute them to our
Lord.

3 Luke xxii. 15. 4 John vi. 60, 61, 66.


time teaching by means of that sacred table.
For this is the chief of the blessings; where-
fore Paul also is in every way pressing this.

Then, when He had delivered it. He saith,
" I will not drink of the fruit of this wine,
until that day when I drink it new with you
in my Father's kingdom. "^ For because He
had discoursed with them concerning passion
and cross. He again introduces what He has
to say of His resurrection, having made men-
tion of a kingdom before them,* and so call-
ing His own resurrection.

And wherefore did He drink after He was
risen again ? Lest the grosser sort. might sup-
pose the resurrection was an appearance. For
the common sort made this an infallible test
of His having risen again. Wherefore also
the apostles also persuading them concerning
the resurrection say this, "We who did eat
and drink with Him. ' ' ^

To show therefore that they should see
Him manifestly risen, again, and that He
should be with them once more, and that they
themselves shall be witnesses to the things
that are done, both by sight, and by act. He
saith, " Until I drink it new with you," you
bearing witness. For you shall see me risen
again.

But what is "new.'' In a new, that is, a
strange manner, not having a passible body,
but now immortal and incorruptible, and not
needing food.

It was not then for want that He both ate
and drank after the resurrection, for neither
did His body need these things any more,
but for the full assurance of His resurrection.

And wherefore did He not drink water
after He was risen again, but wine. To
pluck up by the roots another wicked heresy.
For since there are certain who use water in
the mysteries; to show that both when He
delivered the mysteries He had given wine,
and that when He had risen and was setting
before them a mere meal without mysteries,
He used wine, " of the fruit," He saith, " of
the vine." But a vine produces wine, not
water.

"And when they had sung an hymn, they
went out unto the Mount of Olives." ^ Let
them hear this, as many as, like swine eating
at random, rudely spurn the natural' table,
and rise up in drunkenness, whereas it were
meet to give thanks, and end with an hymn

Hear this, as many as wait not again for
the last prayer of the mysteries, for this is a


5 Matt. xxvi. 2q. [The word " henceforth " is omitted ; "this"
is jomed with " vine," and " new " is in a different position in the
Greek. All these are variations from the received text, which is
also followed in the R. V.— R.]


€1? Hi<JOV.


s Matt. xxvi. 30.


7 Acts X. 41,
9 a.l<T8yiTT)V.


HoMiLV LXXXIL]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


493


symbol of that. He gave thanks before He
gave it to His disciples^ that we also may give
thanks. He gave thanks, and sang an hymn
after the giving, that we also may do this self-
same thing.

But for what reason doth He go forth unto
the mountain? Making Himself manifest,
that He may be taken, in order not to seem
to hide himself. For He hastened to go to
the place which was also known to Judas.

Then "He saith unto them, All ye shall
be offended in me."' After this He men-
tions also a prophecy, " For it is written, I
will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall
be scattered abroad:"- at once persuading
them ever to give heed to the things tiiat are
written, and at same time making it plain
that He was crucified, according to God's
purpose; and by everything showing He was
no alien from the old covenant, nor from the
God preached therein, but that what is done
is a dispensation, 3 and that the prophets all
proclaimed all things beforehand from the
beginning that are comprised in the matter,
so that they be quite confident about the
better things also.

And He teaches us to know what the dis-
ciples were before the crucifixion, what after
the crucifixion. For indeed they wiio, when
He was crucified, were not able so much as
to stand their ground, these after His death
were mighty, and stronger than adamant.

And this self-same thing is a demonstration
of His death, the fright and cowardice, I
mean, of His disciples. For if when so many
things have been both done and said, still
some are shameless, and say that He was not
crucified; if none of these things had come
to pass, to what pitch of wickedness would
they not have proceeded ? So for this reason,
not by His own sufferings only, but by what
took place with respect to the disciples, He
confirms the word concerning His deatli, and
by the mysteries also, in every way confound-
ing those that are diseased with the pest of
Marcion. For this reason He suffers even
the chief apostle to deny Him. lUit if He
was not bound nor crucified, whence sprung
the fear to Peter, and to the rest of the apos-
tles.

He suffers them not however, on the other
hand, to wait until the sorrows, but what saith
He? " Put after I am rism again, I will go
before you into Galilee."* l-'or not from
Heaven doth He appear at once, neitlier will
He depart into any distant country, but in

' Mntt. xxvi. -fi.

■•Sec Zcch. xiii. 7. [The words " nf the fl<>ck " iirc omitted, ■>
in Mark aiv. 37, '1 hey do not occur in the pttMWKc in /echanah.

-•*•!. ....

3 otKOfOMio- * Malt. xxvi. yj, [K. V., " iiiK mikcd up. ]


the same nation, in which He had also been
crucified, nearly in the same place, so as
hereby again to assure them that He that was
crucified was the very same that rose again,
and in this way to comfort them more abun-
dantly when in sorrow. Therefore also He
said " in Galilee," that being freed from the
fears of the Jews they might believe His say-
ing. For wnich cause indeed He appeared
there.

" But Peter answered and said, Though all
men should be offended because of Thee, yet
will I never be offended." 5

3. What sayest thou, O Peter? the prophet
said, " The sheep shall be scattered; " Christ
hath confirmed the saying, and sayest thou.
No ? Is not what passed before enough, when
Thou saidst, "Far be it from Thee."* and
thy mouth was stopped ? For this then He
suffers him to fall, teaching him thereby to
believe Christ in all things, and to account
His declaration more trustworthy tiian one's
own conscience. And the rest too reaped no
small benefit from his denial, having come to
know man's weakness, and God's truth. For
when He foretells anything, we must no
longer be subtle, nor lift up ourselves above
the common sort. For, "thy rejoicing," it
is said, "thou shalt have in thyself, and not
in another. "7 For where he should have
prayed, and have said. Help us, that we be
not cut off, he is confident in himself^ and
saith, "Though all men sliould be ofleniled
in Thee, yet will I never; " though all should
undergo this, I shall not undergo it, wiiich led
him on by little and little to self-confidence.
Christ then, out of a desire to put down this,
permitted his denial. For since he neither
submitted, to Him nor the prophet (and yet
for this intent He brought in the prophet be
sides, that they may not gainsay), but never-
theless since he submitted not to His words,
he IS instructed by deeds.

For in proof that for this intent He per-
mitted it, that He miglit amend this in him,
hear wiiat He saith, " I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith fail not."* For this He said
sharply reproving him, and showing that his
fall was more grievous than the rest, and
needed more help. For the matters of blame
were two; both that he gainsaid; and, that
he set himself before the other; or ratlier a
third too, namely, that he attributed all to
himself.

To cure these things then, He suffered tlie
fall to take place, and for this cause also


S Matt, xxvi, 13. [The word aAAa is in«crted, as in Ntnrk xiv,
29.-K.]

« Matt. xvi. »a. ; fial. vi. 4. [R. V, " KloryinK'."]

** l.uke xxii, 33. [R. V., " made kupplicjttioii. "]


494


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXII.


leaves the others, and addresses Himself
earnestly to him. For, "Simon," ' saith He,
" Simon, behold Satan hath desired to have
you that he may sift you as wheat; " that is,
that he may trouble, confound, tempt you;
but "I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
fail not."

And why, if Satan desired all, did He not
say concerning all, I have prayed for you ?
Is it not quite plain that it is this, which I
have mentioned before, that it is as reproving
him, and showing that his fall was more griev-
ous than the rest, that He directs His words
to him ?

And wherefore said He not, But I did not
suffer it, rather than, " I have prayed ? " He
speaks from this time lowly things, on His
way to His passion, that He may show His
humanity. For He that has built His church
upon Peter's confession, and has so fortified
it, that ten thousand dangeis and deaths are
not to prevail over it; He that hath given him
the keys of Heaven, and hath put him in pos-
session of so much authority, and in no man-
ner needed a prayer for these ends (for neither
did He say, I have prayed, but with His own
authority, " I will build my church, and I will
give thee the keys of Heaven "), how should
He need to pray, that He might brace up
the shaken soul of a single man ? Wherefore
then did He speak in this way? For the
cause which I mentioned, and because of their
weakness, for they had not as yet the be-
coming view of Him.

How then was it that He denied ? he said
not, that thou mayest not deny, but that thy
faith fail not, that thou perish not utterly.
For this came from His care.

For indeed fear had driven out all else, for
it was beyond measure, and it became beyond
measure, since God had to an exceeding de-
cree deprived him of His help, and He did
exceedingly deprive him thereof, because
there was to an exceeding degree in him the
passion of self-will and contradiction. In
order then that He might pluck it up by the
roots, therefore He suffered the terror to
overtake him.

For in proof that this passion was grievous
in him, he was not content with his former
words, gainsaying both prophet and Christ,
but also after these things when Christ had
said unto him, "Verily I say unto thee, that
this night,'' before the cock crow, thou shalt
deny me thrice," he replieth, "Though I
should die with Thee, I will not deny Thee


1 Luke xxii. 31. [R. V., "Satan asked;"' margin, "Or, ob-
tained you by asking."]

2 [The preposition iv is omitted from the Greek text. — R.]


in any wise.'' ^ And Luke signifies moreover,
that the more Christ warned him, so much
the more did Peter exceedingly oppose Him.

What mean these things, O Peter? When
He was saying, "One of you shall betray
me," thou didst fear lest thou shouldest be
the traitor, and didst constrain the disciple to
ask, although conscious to thyself of no such
thing; but now, when He is plainly crying
out, and saying, *' All shall be offended," art
thou gainsaying it, and not once only, but
twice and often ? For this is what Luke saith.

Whence then did this come to him ? From
much love, from much pleasure. I mean,
that after that he was delivered from that dis-
tressing fear about the betrayal, and knew the
traitor, he then spoke confidently, and lifted
himself up over the rest, saying, " Though all
men shall be offended, yet will I not be
offended."* And in some degree too his
conduct sprung from jealousy, for at supper
they reasoned "which of them is the greater," ^
to such a degree did this passion trouble
them. Therefore He checked him, not com-
pelling him to the denial, God forbid! but
leaving him destitute of His help, and con-
victing human nature.

See at any rate after these things how he
was subdued. For after the resurrection,
when he had said, " And what shall this man
do?"^ and was silenced, he ventured no more
to gainsay as here, but held his peace. Again,
towards the assumption,' when he heard,
" It is not for you to know times or seasons," ^
again he holds his peace, and contradicts not.
After these things, on the house, and by the
sheet, when he heard a voice saying to him,
" What God hath cleansed, call not thou com-
mon,"' even though he knew not for the time
what the saying could be, he is quiet, and
strives not.

4. All these things did that fall effect, and
whereas before that he attributes all to him-
self, saying, " Though all men shall be
offended, yet will I not be offended;" and,
"If I should die, I will not deny Thee"
(when he should have said. If I receive the
assistance from Thee); — yet after these things
altogether the contrary, " Why do ye give
heed to us, as though by our own power or
holiness we had made him to walk ? " '°

Hence we learn a great doctrine, that a
man's willingness is not sufficient, unless any
one receive the succor from above; and that
again we shall gain nothing by the succor


[R. v., " If I must die with thee, yei will


3 Matt. xxvi. 34, 35
I not deny thee.' ]

4 Matt. xxvi. 33. [Slightly changed.]

5 Luke xxii. 24. * John xxi. 21.
8 Acts i. 7. 9 Acts X. 15.

10 Acts iii. 12. [Slightly altered.]


7 /. ^., the Ascension.


Homily LXXXII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


495


from above, if there be not a willingness.
And botii these things do Judas and Peter
show; for the one, though he had received
much help, was profited nothing, because he
was not willing, neither contributed his part;
but this one, tnough he was ready in mind,
because he received no assistance, fell. For
indeed of these two things is virtue's web
woven.

Wherefore I entreat you neither (when you
have cast all upon God) to sleep yourselves,
nor, when laboring earnestly, to think to ac-
complish all by your own toils. For neither
is it God's will that we should be supine our-
selves, therefore He worketh it not all Him-
self; nor yet boasters, therefore He did not
give all to us; but having removed what was
hurtful in eitner way, left that which is useful
for us. Therefore He suffered even the chief
apostle to fall, both rendering him more
humbled in mind, and training him thence-
forth to greater love. " For to whom more
is forgiven," it is said, " he loveth more.'''

Let us then in everything believe God, and
gainsay Him in nothing, though what is said
seem to be contrary to our thoughts and
senses, but let His word be of higher author-
ity than both reasonings and sight. Thus let
us do in the mysteries also, not looking at
the things set before us, but keeping in mind
His sayings.

For His word cannot deceive, but our
senses are easily beguiled. That hath never
failed, but this in most things goeth wrong.
Since then the word saith, " This is my body,"
let us both be persuaded and believe, and look
at it with the eyes of the mind.

For Christ hath given nothing sensible, but.
though in things sensible yet all to be per-
ceived by the mind. So also in baptism, the
gift is bestowed by a sensible thing, that is,
by water; but that which is done is perceived
by the mind, the birth, I mean, and tlie re-
newal. For if thou hadst been incorporeal,
He would have delivered thee the incorporeal
gi''ts bare; but because the soul hatii been
locked up in a body. He delivers thee the
things that the mind perceives, in things sen-
sible.

How many now say, I would wish to see His
form, tlie mark, His clothes, His shoes. Lo !
thou seest Him, Tliou touchest Him, thou
eatest Him. And thou indeed desirest to see
His clothes, but He giveth Himself to thee
not to see only, but also to touch and eat and
receive within thee.

Let then no one approach it with indilfer-
ence, no one faint-hearted, but all with burn-

« Luke vii. 47.


ing hearts, all fervent, all aroused. For if
Jews standing, and having on their shoes and
their staves in their hands, ate with haste,
much more oughtest thou to be watchful.
For they indeed were to go forth to Pales-
tine, wherefore also they had the garb of pil-
grims, but thou art about to remove unto
Heaven.

5. Wherefore it is needful in all respects to
be vigilant, for indeed no small punishment
is appointed to them that partake unworthily.

Consider how indignant thou art against
the traitor, against them that crucified Him.
Look therefore, lest thou also thyself become
guilty of the body and blood of Christ. They
slaughtered the all-holy body, but thou receiv-
est it in a filthy soul after such great benefits.
For neither was it enough for Him to be
made man, to be smitten and slaughtered, but
He also commingleth Himself with us, and not
by faith only, but also in very deed maketh
us His body. What then ought not he to
exceed in purity that hath the benefit of this
sacrifice, than what sunbeam should not that
hand be more pure which is to sever this
flesh, the mouth that is filled with spiritual
fire, the tongue that is reddened by that most
awful blood ? Consider with what sort of
honor thou wast honored, of what sort of table
thou art partaking. That which when angels
behold, they tremble, and dare not so much
as look up at it without awe on account of the
briglitness that cometh thence, with tliis we
are fed with this we are commingled, and
we are made one body and one flesh with
Christ. "Who shall declare the mighty
works of the Lord, and cause all His praises
to be heard ?" ^ What shepherd feeds his
sheep with his own limbs? And why do I
say, shepherd ? There are often mothers that
after the travail of birth send out their chil-
dren to other women as nurses; but He en-
dureth not to ilo this, but Himself feeds us
with His own blood, and by all means en-
twines us with Himself.

^L^rk it. He was born of our substance.
But, you say, this is nothing to all men;
though it does concern all. For if He came
unto our nature, it is quite plain that it was
to all; but if to all, tiien to each one. .Vnd
how was it, you say, that all did not reaj) the
profit therefrom. This was not of His doing,
whose clioice it was to tlo this in behalf of
all, but the fault of them that were not will-
ing.

With each one t)f the faithful doth He
mingle Himself in the mysteries, and whom
He begat. He nourishes by Himself, anil


»p..


496


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXII.


putteth not out to another; by this also per-
suading thee again, that He had taken thy
flesh. Let us not then be remiss, having
been counted worthy of so much both of love
and honor. See ye not the infants with how
much eagerness they lay hold of the breast?
with what earnest desire they fix their lips
upon the nipple ? With the like let us also
approach this table, and the nipple of the
spiritual cup. Or rather, with much more
eagerness let us, as infants at the breast, draw
out the grace of the spirit, let it be our one
sorrow, not to partake of this food. The
works set before us are not of man's power.
He that then did these things at that supper,
this same now also works them. We occupy
the place of servants. He who sanctifieth and
changeth them is the same. Let then no
Judas be present, no covetous man. If any
one be not a disciple, let him withdraw, the
table receives not such. For " I keep the
passover," He saith, "with my disciples." '
This table is the same as that, and hath
nothing less. For it is not so that Christ
wrought that, and man this, but He doth this
too. This is that upper chamber, where they
were then; and hence they went forth unto
the mount of Olives.

Let us also go out unto the hands of the
poor, for this spot is the mount of Olives.
For the multitude of the poor are olive-trees
planted in the house of God, dropping the oil,
which is profitable for us there, which the
five virgins had, and the others that had not
received perished thereby. Having received
this, let us enter in that with bright lamps
we may meet the bridegroom; having received
this, let us go forth hence.

Let no inhuman person be present, no one
that is cruel and merciless, no one at all that
is unclean.

6. These things I say to you that receive,
and to you that minister. For it is necessary
to address myself to you also, that you may
with much care distribute the gifts there.
There is no small punishment for you, if be-
ing conscious of any wickedness in any man,
you allow him to partake of this table. " His
blood shall be required at your hands." ^
Though any one be a general, though a dep-
uty, though it be he himself who is invested
with the diadem, and come unworthily, for-
bid him, the authority thou hast is greater
than his. Thou, if thou wert entrusted to
keep a spring of water clean for a flock, and
then wert to see a sheep having much mire
on its mouth, thou wouldest not suffer it to
stoop down unto it and foul the stream: but


now being entrusted with a spring not of
water, but of blood and of spirit, if tnou seest
any having on them sin, which is more griev-
ous than earth and mire, coming unto it, art
thou not displeased ? dost thou not drive tliem
off? and what excuse canst thou have ?

For this end God hath honored you with
this honor, that ye should discern these
things. This is your office, this your safety,
this your whole crown, not that ye should go
about clothed in a white and shining vest-
ment.

And whence know I, you may say, this
person, and that person ? I speak not of the
unknown, but of the notorious.

Shall I say something more fearful. It is
not so grievous a thing for the energumens^
to be within, as for such as these, whom Paul
affirms to trample Christ under foot, and to
" account the blood of the covenant unclean,
and to do despite to the grace of the Spirit." *
For he that hath fallen into sin and draws
nigh, is worse than one possessed with a devil.
For they, because they are possessed are not
punished, but those, when they draw nigh
unworthily, are delivered over to undying
punishment. Let us not therefore drive away
these only, but all without exception, whom-
soever we may see coming unworthily.

Let no one communicate who is not of
the disciples. Let no Judas receive, lest he
suffer the fate of Judas. This multitude also
is Christ's body. Take heed, therefore, thou
that ministerest at the mysteries, lest thou
provoke the Lord, not purging this body.
Give not a sword instead of meat.

Nay, though it be from ignorance that he
come to communicate, forbid him, be not
afraid. Fear God, not man. If thou should-
est fear man, thou wilt be laughed to scorn
even by him, but if God, thou wilt be an
object of respect even to men.

But if thou darest not to do it thyself,
bring him to me; I will not allow any to dare
do these things I would give up my life
rather than impart of the Lord's blood to the
unworthy; and will shed my own blood rather
than impart of such awful blood contrary to
what is meet.

But if any hath not known the bad man,
after much inquiry, it is no blame. For these
things have been said about the open sin-
ners. For if we amend these, God will speed-
ily discover to us the unknown also; but if we
let these alone, wherefore should He then
make manifest those that are hidden.

But these things I say, not that we repel


' Matt. xxvi. i8.


2 Ezek. xxxiii. 8.


3 /. e., vexed with devils.

4 Heb. X. 29. [Slightly altered, as in Homilv LXXV. 5, p»
455.-R.] -


Homily LXXXIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


49:


them only, nor cut them off, but in order that own dihgence, and for our care for others,


we may amend them, and bring them back,
that we may take care of them. For thus
shall we both have God propitious, and shall
find many to receive worthily; and for our


receive great reward; unto which God grant
we may all attain by the grace and love
towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom be glory world without end. Amen.


HOMILY LXXXIII.


Matt. XXVL 36—38.

" Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and saith unto the disci-
ples. Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder. And He took with Him Peter and the
two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and very heavy: and He saith unto
them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; tarry ye here, and watch
with me." '


Because they clung to Him inseparably,
therefore He saith, " Tarry ye here, while I
go away and pray." For it was usual with
Him to pray apart from them. And this He
did teaching us in our prayers, to prepare
silence for ourselves and great retirement.

And He takes with Him tlie three, and
saith unto them, " my soul is exceeding sor-
rowful, even unto death." Wherefore doth
He not take all with Him ? That they might
not be cast down; but these He taketh that
had been spectators of His glory. However,
even these He dismisses: " And He went on
a little farther, and prayeth, saying, Father,
if it be possible, let this cup pass from me;
nevertheless not as I will, but as Thou wilt.
And He cometh unto them, and findethtUem
sleeping, and saith unto Peter, What, could
ye not watch with me one hour ? Watch and
pray, that ye enter not into temptation; tlie
spirit indeed is willing, but the llesh is weak.""

Not without reason doth He inveigh against
Peter most, althougn the others also had slept;
but to make him feci by this also, for tlie
cause wliich I mentioned before. Then lie-
cause the others also said the same thing (for
when Peter had said (these are tlic words),
" Though I must die with Tliee, I will not
deny Thee; likewise also," it is added, " said
all the disciples ");3 He addresses Himself

« [The only variation of text is the siilMtitiilion of <rat for tot.
at the bcK<nnin»{ of veptr ^8. 'I'hr U. V. rcnilcnt, " luirrowfiil and
«ore irimt.lcd,' and "abide" inMrad of" tarry."— K.]

3 Mall. xxvi. (ir4i- I I'hc fint part of ver»c jy i« nbridnrd. and
in 40 " (hem " is sul«tiniird for " (lie dis< iplc*.' The rrinainder
of the pa<uuiKe i-i i" vcrbul agrccnitnt with the received text. -K.]

3 Matt. xxvi. 36.
82


to all, convicting their weakness. For they
who are desiring to die with Him. were not
then able so much as to sorrow with Him wake-
fully, but sleep overcame them.

And He prays with earnestness, in order
that the thing might not seem to be acting.
And sweats flow over him for the same cause
again, even that the heretics might not say
this, that He acts the agony. Tlierefore there
is a sweat like drops of blood, and an angel
appeared strengthening Him, and a thousand
sure signs of fear, lest any one should affirm
the words to be feigned For this cause also
was this prayer. By saying then, " If it be
possible, let it pass from me," He showed
His luimaiiity; but by saying, '' Nevertheless
not as I will, but as Thou wilt," He showed
His virtue and self-command, teaching us
even when nature pulls us back, to follow God.
For since it was not enougli for the foolisli to
siiow His face only. He uses words also.
Again, words sufficed not alone, but ileeils
likewise were needetl; these also He joins
with the words, that even they wiio are in a
liigii degree contentious may believe, that
He l)Oth became man and died. For if, even
wiicn these things are so, this be still disbe-
iicvcil l)y some, nuicli more, if these had not
been. See by how many things He siiows
the reality of the incarn.itioii: by \v!iat He
speaks, by what He siilfers. After tliat lie
cometli and saith to Peter, as it is said,
" What, couldest thou not watch one iiour
with me?"* All were sleeping, and He re-

* Comp. Mark xiv. 37.


498


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXIII.


bukes Peter, hinting at him, in what He spake.
And the words, " with me," are not employed
without reason; it is as though He had said,
Thou couldest not watch with me one hour,
and wilt thou lay down thy life for me ? and
what follows also, intimates this self-same
thing. For "Watch," saith He, "and pray
not to enter into temptation." See how He
is again instructing them not to be self-confi-
dent, but contrite in mind, and to be humble,
and to refer all to God.

And at one time He addresses Himself to
Peter, at another to all in common. And to
him He saith, "Simon, Simon, Satan hath
desired to have you, that he may sift you as
wheat; but I have prayed for, thee; '^ and to
all in common, " Pray that ye enter not into
temptation;'* every way plucking up their
self-will, and making them earnest-minded.
Then, that He might not seem to make His
language altogether condemnatory, He saith,
" The spirit indeed is ready, but the flesh is
weak." For even although thou dost desire
to despise death, yet thou wilt not be able,
until God stretch forth His hand, for the car-
nal mind draws down.

And again He prayed in the same way,
saying, " Father, if this cannot pass from me
except I drink it. Thy will be done," ' show-
ing here, that He fully harmonizes with God's
will, and that we must always follow this, and
seek after it.

" And He came and found them asleep." ^
For besides that it was late at night, their
eyes also were weighed down by their despon-
dency. And the third time He went and
spake the same thing, establishing the fact,
that He was become man. For the second
and third time is in the Scriptures especially
indicative of truth; like as Joseph also said
to Pharaoh, " Did the dream appear to thee
the second time ? For truth was this done,
and that thou mightest be assured that this
shall surely be. "3 Therefore He too once,
and twice, and three times spake the same
thing, for the sake of proving the incarnation.''

And wherefore came He the second time ?
In order to reprove them, for that they were
so drowned in despondency, as not to have
any sense even of His presence. He did
not however reprove them, but stood apart
from them a little, showing their unspeakable
weakness, that not even when they had been
rebuked, were they able to endure. But He
doth not awake and rebuke them again, lest He
should smite them that were already smitten.


1 Matt. xxvi. 42. [The word "cup" is omitted as in R. V.,
but " from me " is retained, as in the received text. — R.]

2 Matt. xxvi. 43. [R. V., "sleeping;" "again" is omitted.

3 Gen. xli. 32. 4 oi.KOVOiJ.ia..


but He went away and pra)'ed, and when He
is come back again. He saith, " Sleep on
now, and take your rest." And yet then
there was need to be wakeful, but to show
that they will not bear so much as the sight
of the dangers, but will be put to flight and
desert Him from their terror, and that He
hath no need of their succor, and that He
must by all means be delivered up, "Sleep
on now," He saith, " and take your rest; be-
hold the hour is at hand, and the Son of Man
is betrayed into the hands of sinners. ''s

He shows again that what is done belongs
to a divine dispensation.

2. But He doth not this only, but also, by
saying, "into the hands of sinners," He
cheers up their minds, showing it was the
effect of their wickedness, not of His being
liable to any charge.

" Rise, let us be going; behold, he is at
hand that doth betray me."* For by all
means He taught them, that the matter was
not of necessity, nor of weakness, but of some
secret dispensation. For, as we see. He fore-
knew that Judas would come, and so far from
flying. He even went to meet him. At any
rate, '* While He yet spake, lo, Judas, one of
the twelve, came, and with him a great multi-
tude with swords and staves, from the chief
priests and elders of the people."' Seemly
surely are the instruments of the priests!
" with swords and staves " do they come
against Him! And Judas, it is said, with
them, one of the twelve. Again he calleth
him " of the twelve," and is not ashamed.
Now he that betrayed Him gave them a sign,
saying, " Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same
is He, hold Him fast."^ Oh! what depravity
had the traitor's soul received. For with
what kind of eyes did he then look at his
Master ? with what mouth did he kiss Him ?
Oh! accursed purpose; what did he devise?
What did he dare ? What sort of sign of be-
trayal did he give ? Whomsoever I shall kiss,
he saith. He was emboldened by his Mas-
ter's gentleness, which more than all was
sufficient to shame him, and to deprive him
of all excuse for that he was betraying one
so meek.

But wherefore doth He say this ? Because
often when seized by them He had gone out
througn the midst, without their knowing it.
Nevertheless, then also this would have been
done, if it had not been His own will that He
should be taken. It was at least with a view
to teach them this, that He then blinded their
eyes, and Himself asked, " Whom seek ye ? " '
And they knew Him not, though being with

S Matt, xxvi" 45. * Matt. xxvi. 46. 7 Matt. xxvi. 47.

8 Matt. xxvi. 48. [R. v., " take him."] 9 John xviii. 4.


Homily LXXXIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


499


lanterns and torches, and having Judas with
them. Afterwards, as they had said, " Jesus;"
He saith, "I am He" whom ye seek: and
here again, " Friend, wherefore art thou
come ? " '

For after having shown His own strength,
then at once He yielded Himself. But John
saith, that even to the very moment He con-
tinued to reprove him, saying, " Judas, be-
trayest thou .the Son of Man with a kiss?" =
Art thou not ashamed even of the form of the
betrayal ? saith He. Nevertheless, foras-
much as not even this checked him, He sub-
mitted to be kissed, and gave Himself up will-
ingly; and they laid their hands on Him, and
seized Him that night on which they ate the
passover, to such a degree did they boil with
rage, and were mad. However, they would
have had no strength, unless He had Himself
suffered it. Yet this delivers not Judas from
intolerable punishment, but even more ex-
ceedingly condemns him, for that though he
had received such proof of His power, and
lenity, and meekness, and gentleness, he be-
came fiercer than any wild beast.

Knowing then these things, let us flee from
covetousness. For that, that it was, which
then drove him to madness; that exercises
them who are taken thereby in the most ex-
treme cruelty and inhumanity. For, when it
makes them to despair of their own salvation,
much more doth it cause them to overlook
that of the rest of mankind. And so tyran-
nical is the passing, as sometimes to prevail
over the keenest lust. Wherefore indeed I
am exceedingly ashamed, that to spare their
money, may indeed have bridled their un-
chastity, but for the fear of Christ they were
not willing to live chastely and with gravity.

Wherefore I say, let us flee from it; for I
will not cease for ever saying this. For why,
O man, dost thou gather gold ? Wliy dost
thou make thy bondage more bitter ? Why
thy watching more grievous? Why thy anx
iety more painful ? Account for thine own
the metals buried in the mines, those in the
kings' courts. For indeed if tliou hadst all
that heap, thou wouldest keep it only, and
wouldest not use it. For if now thou hast
not used tlie things tliou posscssest, but ab-
stainest from tliem as thougli tliey belonged
to others, much more would this be the case
with thee, if thou hadst more. For it is the
way of the covetous, the more they heap up
around them, the more to l)e sparing of it.
"But I know," sayest thou, "that these

« Matt. xxvi. 50. [The Crerk text in the Homily ia Ji^'w
irapfi ; but thrrr it !Wime nulhority f<ir «'<>' a napti; whirh i»
abundantly atlcsicd in thr Nrw 'Ictlaiiirnt pan<jii;r. Tin- latter
reading is accepted in the k. V., " I 'ricnd, </<> that for wliiih thciu
art come."— k.] j I.uke xxii. 48.


things are mine." The possession then is in
supposition only, not in enjoyment. But I
should be an object of fear to men, sayest
thou. Nay, but thou wouldest by this- become
a more easy prey both to rich and poor, to
robbers, and false accusers, and servants, and
in general to all that are minded to plot
against thee. For if thou art desirous to be
an object of fear, cut off the occasions by
which they are able to lay hold of thee and
pain thee, whoever have set their hearts there-
on. Hearest thou not the parable that saith,
that the poor and naked man, not even a hun-
dred men gathered together are ever able to
strip? For he hath his poverty as his great
est protection, which not even the king shall
ever be able to subdue and take.

3. The covetous man indeed all join in vex-
ing. And why do I say men, when moths and
worms war against such a man ? And why do
I speak of moths ? Length of time is enough
alone, even when no one troubles him, to do
the greatest injury to such a man.

I What then is the pleasure of wealth ? For
I see its discomforts, but do thou tell me the
pleasure of it. And what are its discomforts ?
sayest thou: anxieties, plots, enmities, hatred,

j fear; to be ever thirsting and in pain.

I For if any one were to embrace a damsel
he loves, but were not able to satisfy his de-
sire, he undergoes the utmost torment. Even
so also doth the rich man. For he hath
plenty, and is with her, but cannot satisfy all
his desire; but the same result takes place as
somewise man mentions; "The lust of an
eunuch to deflower a virgin; " and, " Like an
eunuch embracing a virgin and groaning; "'
so are all the ricli.

Why should one speak of the other things ?
how such a one is displeasing to all, to his
servants, his laborers, his neighl)ors, to them
that handle public affairs, to tliem that are
injured, to them that are not injured, to his

■ wife most of all, and to his children more tiuin
to any. For not as men does he bring them
up, but more miserably than menials and pur-
chased slaves.

And countless occasions for anger, and
vexation, and insult, and ridicule against him-
self, dotli lie bring about, being set forth as
a common laugliing stock to all. So the dis-
comforts are these, and perhaps more tluni
tlicsc; before one could never go tlirough

! them all in discourse, but experience will be

I able to set them before us.

But tell me tlie pleasure from hence. " I
appear to be rich," he saitli, " and am rc-
puteil to be rich." And what kind of pleas-

3 F.cclui. XX. 4, XX*. 30.


500


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXIII.


ure to be so reputed ? It is a very great name
for envy. I say a name, for wealth is a name
only void of reality.

" Yet he that is rich,'' saith he, " indulges
and delights himself with this notion." He
delights himself in those things about which
he ought to grieve. " To grieve ? where-
fore ? " asks he. Because this renders him
useless for all purposes, and cowardly and
unmanly both with regard to banishment and
to death, for he holds this double, longing
more for money than for light. Such a one
not even Heaven delights, because it beareth
not gold; nor the sun, forasmuca as it puts
not forth golden beams.

But there are some, saith he, who do enjoy
what they possess, living in luxury, in glut-
tony, in drunkenness, spending sumptuously.
You are telling me of persons worse than the
first. For the last above all are the men,
who have no enjoyment. For the first at
least abstains from other evils, being bound to
one love; but the others are worse than these,
besides what we have said, bringing in upon
themselves a crowd of cruel masters, and
doing service every day to the belly, to lust,
to drunkenness, to other kinds of intem-
perance, as to so many cruel tyrants, keeping
harlots, preparing expensive feasts, purchas-
ing parasites, flatterers, turning aside after
unnatural lusts, involving their body and their
soul in a thousand diseases springing there-
from.

For neither is it on what they want they
spend their goods, but on ruining the body,
and on ruining also the soul therewith; and
they do the same, as if any one, when adorn-
ing his person, were to think he was spending
his money on his own wants.

So that he alone enjoys pleasure and is
master of his goods, who uses his wealth for
a proper object; but these are slaves and cap-
tives, for they aggravate both the passions of
the body and the diseases of the soul. What
manner of enjoyment is this, where is siege
and war, and a storm worse than all the rag-
ing of the sea? For if wealth find men fools,
it renders them more foolish; if wanton, more
wanton.

And what is the use of understanding, thou
wilt say, to the poor man ? As might be ex-
pected thou art ignorant; for neither doth the
blind man know what is the advantage of light.
Listen to Solomon, saying, " As far as light
excelleth darkness, so doth wisdom excel
folly.'"

But how shall we instruct him that is in
darkness ? For the love of money is dark-

I Eccles. ii. 13.


ness, permitting nothing that is to appear as it
is, but otherwise. For much as one in dark-
ness, though he should see a golden vessel,
though a precious stone, though purple gar-
ments, supposes them to be nothing, for he
sees not their beauty; so also he that is in
covetousness, knows not as he ought the
beauty of those things that are worthy of our
care. Disperse then I pray thee the mist
that arises from this passion, and then wilt
thou see the nature of things.

But nowhere do these things so plainly ap-
pear as in poverty, nowhere are those things
so disproved which seem to be, and are not,
as in self-denial.

4. But oh! foolish men; who do even curse
the poor, and say that both houses and living
are disgraced by poverty, confounding all
things. For what is a disgrace to a house? I
pray thee. It hath no couch of ivory, nor
silver vessels, but all of earthenware and wood.
Nay, this is the greatest glory and distinction
to a house. For to be indifferent about worldly
things, often occasions all a man's leisure to
be spent in the care of his soul.

When therefore thou seest great care about
outward things, then be ashamed at the great
unseemliness. For the houses of them that
are rich most of all want seemliness. For
when thou seest tables covered with hangings,
and couches inlaid with silver, much as in the
theatre, much as in the display of the stage,
what can be equal to this unseemliness ? For
what kind of house is most like the stage, and
the things on the stage ? The rich man's or
the poor man's? Is it not quite plain that
it is the rich man's ? This therefore is full of
unseemliness. What kind of house is most
like Paul's, or Abraham's? It is quite evi-
dent tnat it is the poor man's. This therefore
is most adorned, and to be approved. And
that thou mayest learn that this is, above all,
a house's adorning, enter into the house of
Zacchaeus, and learn, when Christ was on the
point of entering therein, how Zacchaeus
adored it. For he did not run to his neigh-
bors begging curtains, and seats, and chairs
made of ivory, neither did he bring forth from
his closets Laconian hangings; but he adorned
it with an adorning suitable to Christ. What
was this ? " The half of my goods I will give,
he saith, "to the poor; and whomsoever I
have robbed, I will restore fourfold. "= On
this wise let us too adorn our houses, that
Christ may enter in unto us also. These are
the fair curtains, these are wrought in Heaven,
they are woven there. Where these are, there
is also the King of Heaven. But if thou

2 Luke xix. 8. [Altered, as in previous citations. — R.]


Homily LXXXIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


:)


oi


adorn it in another way, thou art inviting the
devil and his company.

He came also into the house of the publican
Matthew. What then did this man also do ?
He first adorned himself by his readiness,
and by his leaving all, and following Christ.

So also Cornelius adorned his house with
prayers and alms; wherefore even unto this
day it shines above the very palace. For
the vile state of a house is not in vessels lying
in disorder, nor in an untidy bed, nor in walls
covered with smoke, but in the wickedness of
them that dwell therein. And Christ showeth
it, for into such a house, if the inhabitant be
virtuous, He is not ashamed to enter; but
into that other, though it have a golden roof,
He will never enter. So that while this one
is more gorgeous than the palace, receiving
the Lord of all, that with its golden roof and
columns is like filthy drains and sewers, for
it contains the vessels of the devil.

But these things we have spoken not of
those who are rich for a useful purpose, but
of the grasping, and the covetous. For


neither is there amongst these, diligence nor
care about the things needful, but about pam-
pering the belly, and drunkenness, and other
like unseemliness; but with the others about
self-restraint. Therefore nowhere did Christ
enter into a gorgeous house, but into that of
the publican and chief publican, and fisher-
man, leaving the kings' palaces, and them
that are clothed with soft raiment.

If then thou also desirest to invite Him,
deck thy house with alms, with prayers, with
supplications, with vigils. These are the
decorations of Christ the King, but those of
mammon, the enemy of Christ. Let no one
be ashamed then of a humble house, if it
hath this furniture; let no rich man pride
himself on having a costly house, but let him
rather hide his face, and seek after this other,
forsaking that, that both here he may receive
Christ, and there enjoy the eternal taber-
nacles, by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and
might world without end. Amen.


HOMILY LXXXIV.

Matt. XXVL 51—54.

" And, behold, one of them which were with Jesus stretched forth his hand, and drew his
sword, and struck a servant of the high priest's, and smote off his ear."

"Then said Jesus unto him. Put up again thy sword unto his place, for all they that take
the sword, shall perish by the sword. Thinkest ' thou that I cannot pray to the Father,
and He shall presently 'give me more than twelve legions of angels ? How then should
the Scriptures be fulfilled that thus it must be ? " ^


Who was tliis " one," who cut off the ear?
John saith that it was Peter.* For the act
was of his fervor.

But tliis other point is worth inquiry, where-
fore they were bearing swords' For that
they bore them is evident not lience only, but
from their saying wiicn asked, " here arc
two." But wherefore did Christ even permit
them to have swords? For Luke affirms this
too, that He said unto them, " When I sent
you without purse, and scrip, and shoes,

« fR. v.. " Or thinkest."! » [R. V.. "even now."]

I [ TIk' ci(iilii>n is vrry act urate ; the unly variutiun i( lhcomi».
si<>n <i( fiov uftcr irartpa. — K.J
* John xviii. lo.


lacked ye anything?" .\nd when they said,
" Nothing," He said unto them, " P.ut now,
he that hath a purse, let him take it, and a
scrip, and he that hatii no sword, let him sell
his garment, and buy one." An.! when they
said, " Here are two sworils," He said unto
them, " It is enough." '

Wherefore tlien ilid He suffer them to liave
them? To assure tliem that He was to be
betrayed. 'I'herefore He s.iith unto them,
" Let him buy a sworil," not that they should


S I. like xxii. 3S-.t8. [On ihr rrndrrinKt tif vrrnr j|6, »er K. V.
The text of the llomily U(lmil« of either inlerpreimion, but the
comment fitvora the renderintf civcn in the text of the K. V. — K.]


502


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXIV.


arm themselves, far from it; but by this, in-
dicating His being betrayed.

And wherefore doth He mention a scrip
also ? He was teaching them henceforth to
be sober, and wakeful, and to use much dili-
gence on their own part. For at the begin-
ning He cherished them (as being inexperi-
enced) with much putting forth of His power
but afterwards bringing them forth as young
birds out of the nest. He commands them to
use their own wings. Then, that they might
not suppose that it was for weakness He is
letting them alone, in commanding them also
to work their part, He reminds them of the
former things, saying, "When I sent you
without purse, lacked ye anything ? " that by
both they might learn His power, both where-
in He protected them, and wherein He now
leaveth them to themselves by degrees.

But whence were the swords there ? They
were come forth from the supper, and from
the table. It was likely also there should be
swords because of the lamb, and that the dis-
ciples, hearing that certain were coming forth
against Him, took them for defense, as
meaning to fight in behalf of their Master,
which was of their thought only. Wherefore
also Peter is rebuked for using it, and with a
severe threat. For he was resisting the serv-
ant who came, warmly indeed, yet not de-
fending himself, but doing this in behalf of
his Master.

Christ however suffered not any harm to
ensue. For He healed him, and showed
forth a great miracle, enough to indicate at
once both His forbearance and His power,
and the affection and meekness of His disci-
ple. For then he acted from affection, now
with dutifulness. For when he heard, " Put
up thy sword into its sheath,"' he obeyed
straightway, and afterwards nowhere doeth
this.

But another saith, that they moreover
asked, " Shall we smite ? " ^ but that He for-
bad it, and healed the man, and rebuked His
disciple, and threatened, that He might
move him to obedience. " For all they that
take the sword," He said, "shall die with
the sword."

And he adds a reason, saying, "Think ye
that I cannot pray to my Father, and He
shall presently give me more than twelve
legions of angels? But that the Scriptures
might be fulfilled." ^ By these words He
quenched their anger, indicating that to the
Scriptures also, this seemed good. Where-
fore there too He prayed, that they might
take meekly what befell Him, when they had

I John xviii. ii. 2 Luke xxii. 49. 3 Matt. xxvi. 53, 54.


learnt that this again is done according to
God's will.

And by these two things. He comforted
them, both by the punishment of them that
are plotting against Him, " For all they," He
saith, " that take the sword shall perish with
the sword;" and by His not undergoing these
things against His will, " For I can pray.
He saith, " to my Father."

And wherefore did He not say, " Think ye
that I cannot destroy them all ? " Because He
was more likely to be believed in saying what
He did say; for not yet had they the right
belief concerning Him. And a little while
before He had said, " My soul is exceeding
sorrowful even unto death," and, " Father,
let the cup pass from me;"" and He had ap-
peared in an agony and sweating, and
strengthened by an angel.

Since then He had shown forth many tokens
of human nature, He did not seem likely to
speak so as to be believed, if He had said,
"Think ye that I cannot destroy them."
Therefore He saith, "What, think ye that I
cannot pray to my Father? " And again He
speaks it humbly, in saying, "He will pres-
ently-give me twelve legions of angels." For
if one angel slew one hundred and- eighty-five
armed thousands,^ what need of twelve legions
against a thousand men? But He frames His
language with a view to their terror and weak-
ness, for indeed they were dead with fear.
Wherefore also He brings against them the
Scriptures, saying, " How then shall the
Scriptures be fulfilled?" alarming them by
this also. For if this be approved by the
Scriptures, do ye oppose and fight against
them ?

2. And to His disciples He saith these
things; but to the others, " Are ye come out
as against a thief with swords and staves for
to take me ? I sat daily teaching in the tem-
ple, and ye laid no hold on me."*

See how many things He doeth that might
awaken them. He cast them to the ground,
He healed the servant's ear, He threatened
them with being slain; " For they shall perish
with the sword," He saith, "who take the
sword." By the healing of the ear, He gave
assurance of these things also; from every
quarter, both from the things present, and
from the things to come, manifesting His
power, and showing that it was not a work of
their strength to seize Him. Wherefore He
also adds, "I was daily with you, and sat
teaching, and ye laid no hold on me;" by
this also making it manifest, that the seizure


4 Matt. xxvi. 38, 39. 5 2 Kings xix. 35.

6 Matt. xxvi. 55. [R. V., " robber " ..." to seize me "
" ye took me not."]


Homily LXXXIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


50:


was of His permission. He passed over the
miracles, and mentions the teaching, that He
might not seem to boast.

When I taught, ye laid no hold on me;
when I held my peace, did ye come against
me ? I was in the temple, and no one seized
me, and now do ye come upon me late and
at midnight with swords and staves ? What
need was there of these weapons against Him,
who was with you always? by these things
teaching them, that unless He had volunta-
rily yielded, not even then would they have
succeeded. For neither could they (who were
not able to hold Him when in their hands,
and who, when they had got Him in the midst
of them, had not prevailed) even then have
succeeded, unless He had been willing.

After this, He solves also the difficulty why
He willed it then. For, " this was done,"
He saith, " that the Scriptures of the prophets
might be fulfilled." ' See how even up to
the last hour, and in the very act of being
betrayed. He did all things for their amend-
ment, healing, prophesying, threatening.
"For," He saith, "they shall perish by the
sword." To show that He is suffering vol-
untarily, He saith, " I was daily with you
teaching; ". to manifest His accordance with
the Father, He adds, " That the Scriptures
of the prophets might be fulfilled."

But wherefore did they not lay hold on
Him in the temple ? Because they would not
have dared in the temple, on account of the ■
people. Wherefore also He went forth with-
out, both by the place and by the time giving
them security, and even to the last hour tak-
ing away their excuse. For He who, in
order that He might o])ey the prophets, gave
up even Himself, how did He teach things
contrary to them ?

" Then all His disciples," it is said, " for- '
sook Him, and fled." For when He was
seized, they remained; but when He had said
these things to the multitudes, they fled. I
For thenceforth they saw that escape was no
longer possible, when He was giving Himself
up to them voluntarily, and saying, that this
was done according to the Scriptures.

And when these were fled, '' they lead Him
away to Caiaphas; but Peter followed, and
entered in to see what the end should be." '

Great was the fervor of tlie disciple; neither
did he fly when he saw them Hying, Init stood
his ground, and went in witli Him. And if
Jolin did so too, yet he was " known to the
iiigh priest." ^

And why did they lead Him away there,


« Mntt. xxvi. 56.

3 Matt. xxvi. 57, 58. [Abridged und altered.]

3 John xviii. 15.


where they were all assembled ? That they
might do all things with consent of the chief
priests. For he was then high priest, and all
were waiting for Christ there, to such a degree
did they spend the whole night, and give up
their sleep for this object. For neither did
they then eat the passover, but watched for
this other purpose. For John, when he had
said that " it was early," added, " they en-
tered into the judgment liall, lest they should
be defiled, but that they might eat the pass-
over."*

What must we say then ? That they ate
it on another day, and broke the law, on ac-
count of their eager desire about this murder.
For Christ would not have transgressed as to
the time of the passover, but tliey who were
daring all things, and trampling under foot a
thousand laws. For since they were exceed-
ingly boiling with rage, and having often at-
tempted to seize Him, had not been able;
having then taken Him unexpectedly, they
chose even to pass by the passover, for the
sake of satiating their murderous lust.

Wherefore also they were all assembled
together, and it was a council of pestilent men,*
and they ask some questions, wishing to in-
vest this plot with the appearance of a court
of justice. For " neither did tlieir testimo-
nies agree together;''* so feigned was the
court of justice, and all things full of confu-
sion and disorder.

" But false witnesses came, and said. This
fellow said, I will destroy this temple, and
in three days I will raise it. " ^ And indeed
He had said, " In three days,'* but He said
not, "I will destroy," but, "Destroy," and
not about that temple but about His own
body.*

What then doth the high priest ? Willing
to press Him to a defense, that by that he
might take Him, he saith, " Hearest Thou
not what these witness against Thee ? But
He held His peace."'

For the attempts at defense were unprofit-
able, no man hearing. For this was a show
only of a court of justice, but in triitli an on-
set of robbers, assailing Him without cause,
as in a cave, or on a road.

Wiierefore " He held His peace," but tlie
other continued, saying, " I adjure Thee by
the living God, that Tliou tell us whether
Thou be the Christ, the Son of the living God.

* lohn xviii. 58. [Compare Homily I. XXVI. i, and the note
there- K.)

5 auf < jptof AotMuf ; cf. Px. i. 1.

* Miirk xiv. 56, 59. [Thr pa<Mjii;r«nrr romltmrd. — R.l

7 Miitl. xxvi. 6n, 61. (Ihr citiilion is very (rrr, ncit nKrceinK
with liny one of the cvnnKrliit*. lutnrdiiiK' t<n>ur uuthuritie* ; but
it MTHiH to ( omhinr CrniiH (nun scvcriil |m.s»<i»je!i. — R.J

* Src John ii. i()-3i.

V Mutt, xxvi 6j, (>\. [Freely tiled ; the beginning it from the
InnKUKK'e of I'ilntr; chup. xxvii. 13 k.]


504


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXIV.


But He said, Thou hast said. Nevertheless
I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the
Son of Man sitting at the right hand of power,
and coming in the clouds. Then the high
priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath spoken
blasphemy."' And this he did to add force
to the accusation, and to aggravate what He
said, by the act. For since what had been
said moved the hearers to fear, what they did
about Stephen,^ stopping their ears, this high
priest doth here also.

3. And yet what kind of blasphemy was
this ? P'or indeed before He had said, when
they were gathered together, "The Lord
said unto my Lord, Sit Thou on my right
hand," 3 and interpreted the saying, and they
dared say nothing, but held their peace, and
from that time forth gainsaid Him no more.
Why then did they now call the saying a blas-
phemy ? And wherefore also did Christ thus
answer them ? To take away all their excuse,
because unto the last day He taught that He
was Christ, and that He sitteth at the right
hand of the Father, and that He will come
again to judge the world, which was the lan-
guage of one manifesting His full accordance
with the Father.

Having rent therefore his clothes, he saith,
"What think ye ?" * He gives not the sen-
tence from himself, but invites it from them,
as in a case of confessed sins, and manifest
blasphemy. For, inasmuch as they knew
that if the thing came to be inquired into,
and carefully decided, it would free Him
from all blame, they condemn Him amongst
themselves, and anticipate the hearers by
saying, " Ye have heard the blasphemy; " all
but necessitating and forcing them to deliver
the sentence. What then say they? "He is
guilty of death; " that having taken Him as
condemned, they should thus work upon
Pilate thereupon to pass sentence. In which
matter those others also being accomplices
say, " He is guilty of death; " themselves ac-
cusing, themselves judging, themselves pass-
ing sentence, themselves being everything
then.

But wherefore did they not bring forward
the Sabbaths? Because He had often stopped
their mouths; and moreover they wanted to
take Him, and condemn Him by the things
then said. And the high priest anticipated
them, and gave the sentence as from them,
and drew them all on by rending his vest-
ments, and having led Him away as now con-
demned unto Pilate, thus did all.


I Matt. xxvi. 63-65. [In verse 63, " the living God " occurs
twice, peculiar to this Homily : in verse 64 " of heaven " is omitted.
In other details the citation agrees with the received text. — R.]


2 Acts vii. 59.


3 Matt. xxii. 43-46.


Before Pilate at any rate they said nothing
of this kind, but what? " If 5 this Man were
not a malefactor, we would not have delivered
Him up unto thee; " attempting to put Him
to death by political accusations. And vvhere-
fore did they not slay Him secretly ? They
were desirous also to bring up an evil report
against His fame. For since many had now
heard Him, and were admiring Him, and
amazed at Him, therefore they endeavored
that He should be put to death publicly, and
in the presence of all.

But Christ hindered it not, but made full
use of their wickedness for the establishment
of the truth, so that His death should be
manifest. And the result was the contrary to
what they wished. For they wished to make
a show of it, as in this way disgracing Him,
but He even by these very things shone forth
the more. And much as they said, " Let us
put Him to death, lest the Romans come and
take away our place and nation;" * and after
they had put Him to death, this came to pass;
so also here; their object was to crucify Him
publicly, that they might injure His fame,
and the contrary result took place.

For in proof that indeed they had power to
have put Him to death, even amongst them-
selves, hear what Pilate saith: "Take ye
Him, and judge Him according to your law. "^
But they would not, that He might seem to
have been put to death as a transgressor, as
an usurper, as a mover of sedition. There-
fore also they crucified thieves with Him;
therefore also they said, " Write not that this
man is King of the Jews; but that He said
it."«

But all these things are done for the truth,
so that they might not have so much as any
shadow of a defense that is surely shameless.
And at the sepulchre too, in the like manner,
the seals and the watches made the truth to
be the more conspicuous; and the mockings,
and the jeerings, and the revilings, wrought
again this self-same effect.

For such is the nature of error: it is de-
stroyed by those things whereby it plots; thus
at least it fell out even here, for they that
seemed to have conquered, these most of all
were put to shame, and defeated, and ruined;
but He that seemed to be defeated, this man
above all hath both shone forth, and con-
quered mightily.

Let us not then everywhere seek victory,
nor everywhere shun defeat. There is an
occasion when victory brings hurt, but defeat


5 John xviii. 30. [R. V., " an evil-doer."]

6 John xi. 48. [Freely paraphrased.] 7 John xviii. 31.
8 John xix. 21. [The citation is accurate ; " it " is supplied by


4 Matt. XXVI. 66. ' the translator to complete the sense. — R.]


Homily LXXXIV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


505


profit. For, for instance, in the case of them
that are angry; he that hath been very out-
rageous seems to have prevailed; but this man
above all is the one sul)dued and hurt by the
most grievous passion; but he that hatti en-
dured nobly, this man hath got the better and
conquered. And while tiie one hath not had
strength to overcome so much as his own dis-
ease; the other hath removed another man's;
this hath been subdued by his own, that hath
got the better even of another's passion; and
so far from being burnt up, he quenched the
ilame of another when raised to a height.
But if he had minded to gain what seems to
be victory, both he himself would have been j
overcome; and having inflamed the other, he
would have occasioned him to have suffered \
this more grievously; and, like women, both |
the one and the other would have been dis-
gracefully and miserably overthrown by their
anger. But now he that hath exercised self-
control is both freed from this disgrace, and
hath erected a glorious trophy over anger both
in himself and in his neighbor, through his
honorable defeat.

4. Let us not then everywhere seek victory.
For he that hath overreached hath conquered
the person wronged, but with an evil victory,
and one that brings destruction to him that
has won it; but he that is wronged, and seems
to have been conquered, if he have borne it
with self-command, this above all is the one
that hath the crown. For often to be defeated
is better, and this is the best mode of victory.
For whether one overreaches, or smites, or
envies, he that is defeated, and enters not
into the conflict, this is he who hath the vic-
tory.

And why do I speak of overreaching and
envy? For he also that is dragged to mar-
tyrdom, tlius conquers by being bound, and
beaten, and maimed, and slain. And what is
in wars defeat, namely, for the combatant to
fall; this with us is victory. For nowhere do
we overcome by doing wrongfully, but every-
where by suffering wrongfully. Thus also
doth the victory become more glorious, when
we sufferers get the better of the doers.
Hereby it is shown that the victory is of dod.
For indeed it hath an ojjposile nature to out-
ward conquest, which fact is again al)Ove all
an infallible sign of streni^th. Thus also the
rocks in the sea, by being struck, break the
waves; thus also all the saints were |)ro-
claimed, and crowned, and set uj) their glori-
ous trophies, winning tiiis traiKiuil victory.
" For stir not thysclt," lie saitli, "neither
weary thyself. (iod hath given thee this
might, to concpier not by conflict, but by en-
durance alone. Do not ()p|)ose thyself also


as he does, and thou hast conquered; conflict
not, and thou hast gained the crown.' Why
dost thou disgrace thyself? Allow him not
to say that by conflicting thou hast got the
better, but suffer him to be amazed and to
marvel at thy invincible power; and to say to
all, that even without entering into conflict
thou hast conquered."

Thus also the blessed Joseph obtained a
good report, everywhere by suffering wrong
getting the better of them who were doing it.
For his brethren and the Egyptian woman
were amongst those that were plotting against
him, but over all did this man prevail. For
tell me not of the prison, wherein this man
dwelt, nor of the kings' courts where she
abode, but show me who it is that is con-
quered, who it is that is defeated, who that is
in despondency, who that is in pleasure. For
she, so far from being able to prevail over
the righteous man, could not master so much
as her own passion; but this man prevailed
both over her and over that grievous disease.
But if thou wilt, hear her very words, and
thou shalt see the trophy. " Thou brought-
est in unto us here an Hebrew servant to mock
us." = It was not this man that mocked thee,
O wretched and unhappy woman, but the
devil that told thee that thou couldest break
down the adamant. This //iv husband
brought not in unto thee an Hebrew servant
to plot against thee, but the wicked spirit
brought in that unclean lasciviousness; he it
was that mocked thee.

What then did Joseph ? He held his peace,
and thus is condemned, even as Christ is
also.

For all those things are types of tliese.
And he indeed was in bonds, and she in royal
courts. Vet what is this ? For he was more
glorious than any crowned victor, even while
continuing in his bonds, but she was in a more
wretched condition than any i)risoner, while
abiding in royal chambers.

But not hence alone may one see the vic-
tory, and the defeat, but by the end itself.
For which accomplislied his desired object?
The prisoner, not the high born lady ? For he
strove to keep his chastity, but she to ilestroy
it. Which then accomjjlished what he ile-
sired ? he who suffered wrong, or she who
did the wrong. It is cjuite plain, that it is he
who suffered. Surely then this is the one
who hath conquered.

Knowing then these things, let us follow
after this vii tory, wiiich is obtained by suffer-
ing wrong, let us llec from that which is got

' [Thr fiillowinj; cIuikc i« omitlnl in ihr Irnii^liilioii : "Much
bfltrr .itnl HiriiiniT urt Ihou tliaii lliiiic iinl.4>;i>iil>l." R.]
' ('>cn. xxxix. 17.


5o6


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXV


by doing wrong. For so shall we both live
this present life in all tranquility, and great
quietness, and shall attain unto the good


things to come, by the grace and love towards
man of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be
glory and might world without end. Amen.


HOMILY LXXXV.

Matt. XXVI. 67, 68.

" Then did they spit in His face, and buffeted Him, and others smote Him with the palms
of their hands/ saying, Prophesy unto us, thou Christ, who is he that smote^ thee ? " ^


Wherefore did they these things, when
they were to put Him to death ? What need
of this mockery ? That thou mightest learn
their intemperate spirit by all things, and
that having taken Him like a prey, they thus
showed forth their intoxication, and gave full
swing to their madness; making this a festival,
and assaulting Him with pleasure, and show-
ing forth their murderous disposition.

But admire, I pray thee, the self-command
of the disciples, with what exactness they
relate these things. Hereby is clearly shown
their dispostiion to love the truth, because
they relate with all truthfulness the things
that seem to be opprobrious, disguising noth-
ing, nor being ashamed thereof, but rather
accounting it very great glory, as indeed it
was, that the Lord of the universe should
endure to suffer such things for us. This
shows both His unutterable tenderness, and
the inexcusable wickedness of those men, who
had the heart to do such things to Him that
was so mild and meek, and was charming them
with such words, as were enough to change a
lion into a lamb. For neither did He fail in
any things of gentleness, nor they of inso-
lence and cruelty, in what they did, in what
they said. All which things the prophet
Isaiah foretold, thus proclaiming beforehand,
and by one word intimating all this insolence.
For " like as many were astonished at thee,"
he saith, " so shall thy form be held inglorious
of men, and thy glory of the sons of men.'' ^

For what could be equal to this insolence ?
On that face which the sea, when it saw it,
had reverenced, from which the sun, when it


1 [R. V. margin, " Or, with rods."]

2 [R. v., "struck thee." The variety of Greek terms used to
express the maltreatment is remarkable, and is indicated in the
R. v.— R.]

3 Isa. 111. 14 [lxx.].


beheld it on the cross, turned away his rays,
they did spit, and struck it with the palms
of their hands, and some upon the head;
giving full swing in every way to their own
madness. For indeed they inflicted the blows
that are most insulting of all, buffeting, smit-
ing with the palms of their hands, and to these
blows adding the insult of spitting at Him.
And words again teeming with much derision
did they speak, saying, " prophesy unto us,
thou Christ, who is he that smote thee ?" be-
cause the multitude called Him a prophet.

But another'' saith, that they covered His
face with His own garment, and did these
things, as though they had got in the midst of
them some vile and worthless fellow. And
not freemen only, but slaves ^ also were in-
temperate with this intemperance towards Him
at that time.

These things let us read continually, these
things let us hear aright, these things let us
write in our minds, for these are our honors.
In these things do I take a pride, not only in
the thousands of dead which He raised, but
also in the sufferings which He endured.
These things Paul puts forward in every way,
the cross, the death, the sufferings, the revil-
ings, the insults, the scoffs. And now he
saith, " let us go forth unto Him bearing His
reproach; " ^ and now, " who for the joy that
was set before Him endured the cross, de-
spising the shame. "^

" Now Peter sat in the court without; * and
a damsel came unto him, saying, thou also
wast with Jesus of Galilee. But he denied


before them all,^


saying,


I know not what


4 Luke xxii. 64.

5 Mark xiv. 65. fin this passage Sov\oi does not occur, but
iurrjpeVai, which has a wider sense. — R.]

6 Heb. xiii. 13. 7 Heb. xii. 2.

8 [The order here is peculiar to this Homily. — R.]

9 [avTuiv is inserted here. — R.]


Homily LXXXV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


507


thou sayest. And when he was gone out into
the porch, another maid saw him, and saith,
this man also was there' with Jesus of Naza-
reth. And again he denied with an oath.
And after a while came unto him they that
stood by, and said unto Peter, surely thou
also art one of them, for thy speech bewrayeth
thee. Then began he to curse and to swear,
I know not the man. And immediately the
cock crew. And Peter remembered the words
of Jesus, which said, before the cock crow,
thou shalt deny me thrice. And he went out,
and wept bitterly." *

Oh strange and wonderful acts ! When
indeed he saw his master seized only, he was
so fervent as both to draw his sword, and to
cut off the man's ear; but when it was natural
for him to be more indignant, and to be in-
flamed and to burn, hearing such revilings,
then he becomes a denier. For who would
not have been inflamed to madness by the
things that were then done ? yet the dis-
ciple, overcome by fears, so far from showing
indignation, even denies, and endures not the
threat of a miserable and mean girl, and not
once only, but a second and third time doth
he deny Him; and in a short period, and not
so much as before judges, for it was without;
for " when he had gone out into the porch,"
they asked him, and he did not even readily
come to a sense of his fall. And this Luke
saith,3 namely, that Christ looked on him,
showing that he not only denied Him, l:)ut
was not even brought to remembrance from
within, and this though the cock had crowed;
but he needed a further remembrance from
his master, and His look was to him instead
of a voice: so exceedingly was he full of fear.

P)Ut ^L^rk saith,-* that when he had once
denied, then first the cock crew, but when
thrice, then for the second time; for he de-
clares more particularly the weakness of tlie
disciple, and that he was utterly dead with
fear; having learnt these things of his master'
himself, for he was a follower of Peter. In
which respect one would most marvel at him,
that so far from hiding his teacher's faults,
he declared it more distinctly than the rest,
on tliis very account, that he was his disciple.

2. How then is what is said true, when
Mattiiew affirms that Christ said, " Wrily I
say unto thee, that before the cock crow thou

' [The reading i» peculiar (A^y«i' 'E«<t«at oC^ot), as indicated
in the rrnderinn. — R.J

■' Matt. xxvi. '"(-75. [In venic 74. unraOt^iaTiittv i« read; in
verne 75, aury i« ninilled. These vuri«tion^illlll ilmsr iminl .ilu.vr
are the only peculiuritie*. — K.]

3 Ltike xxii. 61.

* Mark xiv. CS, 71. [In bfith paii<uiK<-s in Mark ihrrr arc irxliml
variations in the Ms>. Tlir duuHr in vrr«c M, tclhiin ci( ilip tir»l
cock-<ri)win«, i» omitted in three of the hc»t Ms-., itiit the alwemc
of any parallel statement would account for the omiMion. — R.]

5 I Pet. V. J 3,


shalt deny me thrice;"* and RLark declares
after the third denial, that "The cock crew
the second time?"' Nay, most certainly is
it both true and in harmony. For because at
each crowing the cock is wont to crow both a
third and a fourth time, Mark, to show that
not even the sound checked him, and brought
him to recollection saith this. So that both
things are true. For before the cock had
finished the one crowing, he had denied a
third time. And not even when reminded of
his sin by Christ did he dare to weep openly,
lest he should be betrayed by his tears, but
" he went out, and wept bitterly.^'

" And when it was day, they led away Jesus
from Caiaphas to Pilate."* For because
they were desirous to put Him to death, but
were not able themselves because of tlie feast,
they lead Him to the governor.

But mark, I pray thee, how the act was
forced on, so as to take place at the feast.
For so was it typified from the first.

"Then Judas, which had betrayed him,
when he saw that He was condemned, re-
pented, and brought again the thirty pieces
of silver." 9

This was a charge both against him, and
against these men; against him, not because
he repented, but because he did so, late, and
slowly, and became self-condemned (for that
he delivered Him up, he himself confessed);
and against them, for that having the power
to reverse it, they repented not.

But mark, when it is that he feels remorse.
Wlien his sin was completed, and had received
an accomplishment. For the devil is like
this; he suffers not those that are not watch-
ful to see the evil before this, lest he whom
he has taken, should repent. At least, when
Jesus was saying so many things, he was not
influenced, but when his offense was com-
pleted, then repentance came upon him; and
not then ]irolital)ly. For to condemn it, and
to throw down the pieces of silver, ami not to
regard the Jewish people, were all acceinal)le
things; but to hang himself, this again was
unpartlonable, and a work of an evil spirit.
For the devil led him out of liis repentance
too soon, so that he sliould reap no fruit from
thence; and carries him off, by a most dis-
graceful death, and one manifest to all, h.av-
ing persuaded him to tiestroy himself.

ikit mark, I i)ray thee, the truth shining
forth on every side, even by what the adver-
saries both do and suffer. For inileed even
the very end of the traitor stops the nioinhs

* Malt. xxvi. 34. J Mark xiv. 7a.

" Chap, xxvii. i, 3. (Thi« i» not a citation, but a conibniation
of termii occurring in all four ucrountii. — K.]

''.Matt. xxvi. (, (k. V. omita " hud," and reads "repented
himself," " brounht baik." — K.)


5o8


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXV.


of them that had condemned Him, and suffers
them not to have so much as any shadow of
an excuse, that is surely shameless. For what
could they have to say, when the traitor is
shown to pass such a sentence on himself.

But let us see also the words, what is said;
" He brought again the thirty pieces of silver
to the chief priests,' and saith, I have sinned
in that I have betrayed innocent blood. And
they said, what is that to us ? see thou to that.
And he cast down the pieces of silver in the
temple,^ and departed, and went and hanged
himself. 3

For neither could he bear his conscience
scourging him. But mark, I pray thee, the
Jews too suffering the same things. For
these men also, when they ought to have been
amended by what they suffered, do not stop,
until they have completed their sin. For his
.sin had been completed, for it was a betrayal;
but theirs not yet. But when they too had
accomplished theirs, and had nailed Him
to the cross then they also are troubled; at
one time saying, " Write not, this is the king
of the Jews'''* (and yet why are ye afraid ?
why are ye troubled at a dead body that is
nailed upon the cross?); at another time they
guard over Him, saying, " Lest His disciples
steal Him away, and say that He is risen
again; so the last error shall be worse than
the first." 5 And yet if they do it, the thing
is refuted, if it be not true. But how should
they say so, which did not dare so much as to
stand their ground, when He was seized; and
the chief* of them even thrice denied Him,
not bearing a damsel's threat. But, as I said,
the chief priests were now troubled; for that
they knew the act was a transgression of the
law is manifest, from their saying, " See thou
to that."

Hear, ye covetous, consider what befell
him; how he at the same time lost the money,
and committed the sin, and destroyed his own
soul. Such is the tyranny of covetousness.
He enjoyed not the money, neither the
present life, nor that to come, but lost all at
once, and having got a bad character even
with those very men, so hanged himself.

But, as I said, after the act, then some see
clearly. See at any rate these men too for a
time not willing to have a clear perception of
the fact, but saying, "See thou to that:"
which thing of itself is a most heavy charge
against them. For this is the language of
men bearing witness to their daring and their

I [The words " and elders " are omitted, though Tischendorf
cites Chrysostom otherwise.'' — R.]

= [R. v., " into the sanctuary," acceptina; the reading given in
the Homily.— R.]

3 Matt, xxvii. 3-5. [R. V., " and he went away," etc.]

4 John XIX. 21. 5 Matt, xxvii. 64. [Abridged.]
^ 6 Kopv4>aloi,


transgression, but intoxicated by their passion,
and not willing to forbear their satanical at-
tempts, but senselessly wrapping themselves
up in a veil of feigned ignorance.

For if indeed these things had been said
after the crucifixion, and His being slain, of
a truth even then the saying would have had
no reasonable meaning, nevertheless it would
not have condemned them so much; but
now having Him yet in your own hands, and
having power to release Him, how could ye
be able to say these things ? For this de-
fense would be a most heavy accusation
against you. How? and in what way ? Be-
cause while throwing the whole blame upon
the traitor (for they say, " See thou to that "),
being able to have set themselves free from
this murder of Christ, they left the traitor,
and even pressed the crime further, adding
the cross to the betrayal. For what hindered
them, when they said to him, "See thou to
that," tnemselves to forbear the criminal act?
But now tney even do the contrary, adding to
it the murder and in every thing, both by
what they do, and by what they say, entang-
ling themselves in inevitable ills. For in-
deed after these things, when Pilate left it to
them, they choose the robber to be released
rather than Jesus; but Him that had done no
wrong, but had even conferred on them so
many benefits, they slew.

3. What then did that man ? When he
saw that he was laboring to no profit, and that
they would not consent to receive the pieces
of silver, " he cast them down in the temple,
and went and hanged himself.^ And the
chief priests took the pieces of silver, and
said, it is not lawful for to put them into the
treasury, because it is the price of blood.
And they took counsel, and bought with them
the potter's field to bury strangers in.
Wherefore that field was called, the field of
blood, unto this day. Then was fulfilled that
which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet,
saying, and they took the thirty pieces of
silver, the price of Him that was valued, and
gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord
appointed me.'^^

Seest thou them again self-condemned by
their conscience ? For because they knew that
they had been buying the murder, they put
them not into the treasury, but bought a field
to bury strangers in. And this also became
a witness against them, and a proof of their
treason. For the name of the place more
clearly than a trumpet proclaimed their blood-

7 Matt, xxvii. 5. [See notes on the previous citation of this
verse. — R.] ,

8 Matt, xxvii. 6-10. [The only textual peculiarities are, the
substitution of Kai for Se, at the beginning of verse 7 ; and the
omission of a clause in verse 9, as indicated above. — R.]


Homily LXXXV.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


509


guiltiness. Neither did they it at random, but
having taking counsel, and in every case in
like manner, so that no one should be clear
of the deed, but all guilty. But these things
the prophecy foretold from of old. Seest
thou not the apostles only, but the prophets
also declaring exactly those things which
were matters of reproach, and every way pro-
claiming the passion, and indicating it before-
hand ?

This was the case with the Jews without
their being conscious of it. For if they had
cast it into the treasury, the thing would not
have been so clearly discovered; but now
having bought a piece of ground, they made
it all manifest even to subsequent generations.

Hear ye as many as think to do good works
out of murders, and take a reward for the
lives of men. These almsgiving are Judaical,
or rather they are Satanical. For there are,
there are now also they, that take by violence
countless things belonging to others, and
think that an excuse is made for all if they
cast in some ten or a hundred gold pieces.

Touching whom also the prophet saith,
"Ye covered my altar with tears."' Christ
is not willing to be fed by covetousness. He
accepts not this food. Why dost thou insult
thy Lord, offering Him unclean things? It
is better to leave men to pine with hunger,
than to feed them from these sources. That
was the conduct of a cruel man, this of one
both cruel and insolent. It is better to give
nothing, than to give the things of one set of
persons to others. For tell me, if you saw
any two persons, one naked, one having a
garment, and then having stripped the one
that had the garment, thou wert to clothe the
naked, wouldest thou not have committed an
injustice ? It is surely plain to every one.
But if when thou hast given all that thou hast
taken to another, thou hast committed an in-
justice, and not shown mercy; when thou
givest not even a small portion of what thou
robbest, and callest the dita] alms, what
manner of punishment wilt thou not undergo ?
For if men offering lame brutes were blamed,
what favor wilt thou obtain doing things more
grievous ? For if the cliief, making restitution
to the owner himself, still doctii an injustice,
and so doeth an injustice, as by adding four-
fold scarcely to do away the charge against
himself, and this under the old covenant.;-" he
that is not stealing, but taking by violence,
and not even giving to him that is robl)e(l,
but instead of him to another; nor yet givnig
fourfold, but not so much as the half; and
moreover not living uiuler the old dispensa-


I Mai. ii. 13.


• Exod. xx'u. t.


tion, but under the new; consider how much
fire he is heaping together upon his own head.
And if he do not as yet suffer liis punishment,
for this self-same thing I say bewail him, for
he is treasuring up against himself a greater
wrath, unless he repent. For what ? "Think
ye," saith He, "that they alone were sinners
upon whom the tower fell down ? Nay, I say
unto you, but except ye repent, ye also shall
suffer the same things.'

Let us repent then, and give alms pure
from covetousness, and in great abundance.
Consider that the Jews used to feed eight
thousand Levites, and together with the Le-
vites, widows also and orphans, and they bore
many other public charges, and together with
these things also served as soldiers; but now
there are fields, and houses, and hirings of
lodgings, and carriages, and muleteers, and
mules, and a great array of this kind in the
church on account of you, and your hardness
of heart. For this store of the church oujiht
to be with you, and your readiness of mind
ought to be a revenue to her; but now two
wrong things come to pass, both you continue
unfruitful, and God's priests do not practise
their proper duties.

Was it not possible for the houses and the
lands to have remained in the time of the
apostles ? Wherefore then did they sell them
and give away ? Because this was a better
thing.

4. But now a fear seized our fathers (when
you were so mad after worldly things, and
because of your gatherings, and not dispers-
ing abroad), lest the companies of the widows
and orphans, and of the virgins, should perish
of famine; therefore were they constrained to
provide these things. For it was not their
wish to thrust themselves unto what was so
unbecoming; but their desire was that your
good will should have been a supply for tliem,
and that they should gather their fruits from
thence, and that they themselves should give
heed to prayers only.

But now ye have constrained them to
imitate the houses of them that manage public
affairs; whereby .'dl things are turned upside
down. For when both you ami we are en-
tangled in the same things, who is there to
propitiate God ? Therefore it is not possible
for us to open our moutlis, when the state of
the church is no better than that of worldly
men. Have ye not heard that the apostles
would not consent so much as to distribute
tlie money that was collected without any
trouble? But now our bisliops have gone
beyond agents, anil stewards, ;uid hucksters

1 I.uke xiii. 4, 5. [Freely cited.]


5IO


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXV.


in their care about these things; and when
they ought to be careful and thoughtful about
your souls, they are vexing themselves every
day about these things, for which the inn-
keepers, and tax-gatherers, and accountants,
and stewards are careful.

These things I do not mention for nought
in the way of complaint, but in order that
there may be some, amendment and change,
in order that we may be pitied for serving a
grievous servitude, in order that you may
become a revenue and store for the church.

But if ye are not willing, behold the poor
before your eyes; as many as it is possible
for us to suffice, we will not cease to feed;
but those, whom it is not possible, we will
leave to you, that ye may not hear those words
on the awful day, which shall be spoken to
the unmerciful and cruel. "Ye saw me an
hungered, and fed me not." '

For together with you this inhumanity
makes us laughing-stocks, because leaving
our prayers, and our teaching, and the other
parts of holiness, we are fighting all our time,
some with wine merchants, some with corn-
factors, others with them that retail other
provisions.

Hence come battles, and strifes, and daily
revilings, and reproaches, and jeers, and on
each of the priests names are imposed more
suitable for houses of secular men; when it
would have been fit to take other names in the
place of these, and to be named from those
things, from which also the apostles ordained,
from the feeding of the hungry, from the
protection of the injured, from the care of
strangers, from succoring them that are de-
spite fully used, from providing for the
orphans, from taking part with the widows,
from presiding over the virgins; and these
offices should be distributed amongst us in-
stead of the care of the lands and houses.

These are the stores of the church, these
the treasures that become her, and that afford

» Matt. XXV. 42.


in great degree both ease to us and profit to
you; or rather to you ease with the profit.
For I suppose that by the grace of God they
that assemble themselves here amount to the
number of one hundred thousand;^ and if each
bestowed one loaf to some one of the poor,
all would be in plenty; but if one farthing
only, no one would be poor; and we should
not undergo so many revilings and jeers, in
consequence of our care about the money.
For indeed the saying, " Sell thy goods, and
give to the poor, and come and follow me," ^
might be seasonably addressed to the prelates
of the church with respect to the property of
the church. For in any other way it is not
possible to follow Him as we ought, not being
freed from all grosser and more worldly
care.

But now the priests of God attend at the
vintage and harvest, and at the sale and
purchase of the produce; and whereas they
that served the shadow had an entire immu-
nity from such matters, although entrusted
with a more carnal service; we, who are in-
vited to the very inmost shrines of the
heavens, and who enter into the true holy of
holies, take upon ourselves the cares of
tradesmen and retail dealers.

Hence great neglect of the Scriptures, and
remissness in prayers, and indifference about
all the other duties; for it is not possible to be
split into the two things with due zeal. Where
I pray and beseech you that many fountains
may spring up to us from all quarters, and
that your forwardness may be to us the
threshing floor and the wine press.

For in this way both the poor will more
easily be supported, and God will be glorified,
and ye will advance unto a greater degree of
love to mankind, and will enjoy the good
things eternal; unto which God grant we may
all attain, by the grace and love towards man
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
world without end. Amen.


2 i. e.y the sura of all the congregations in Antioch.

3 Matt. xix. 21. [Abridged.]


Homily LXXXVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


,1 I


HOMILY LXXXVI.


Matt. XXVII. ii, 12.


" And Jesus stood before the governor; and the governor asked Him, saying. Art thou the
king of the Jews ? And Jesus said unto him. Thou sayest. And when He was ac-
cused of the chief priests and elders. He answered nothing." •


Seest thou what He is first asked ? which
thing most of all they were continually bring-
ing forward in every way ? For since they
saw Pilate making no account of the matters
of the law, they direct their accusation to the
state charges. So likewise did they in the
case of the apostles, ever bringing forward
these things, and saying that they were going
about proclaiming king one Jesus,^ speaking
as of a mere man, and investing them with a
suspicion of usurpation.

Whence it is manifest, that both the rend-
ing the garment and the amazement were a
pretense. But all things they got up, and
plied, in order to bring Him to death.

This at any rate Pilate then asked. What
then said Christ? " Thou sayest." He con-
fessed that He was a king, but a heavenly
king, which elsewhere also He spake more
clearly, replying to Pilate, " My kingdom is
not of this world;" ^ that neither they nor this
man should have an excuse for accusing Him
of such things. And He gives a reason that
cannot be gainsaid, saying, " If I were of this
world, my servants would fight, that I should
not be delivered." For this purpose I say,
in order to refute this suspicion. He both paid
tribute,* and commanded others to pay it, and
when they would make Him a king, He fled.^

Wherefore then did he not l)ring forward
these things, it may be said, at that time,
when accused of usurpation ? Because hav-
ing the proofs from His acts, of His power,
His meekness, His gentleness, beyond
number, they were willfully blind, and dealt un-
fairly, and the trii)unal was corru[)t. For these
reasons then He re|)lies to nothing, but holds
His peace, yet answering briefly (so as not to
get the rejiutation of arrogance from continual
silence) when the high i)riest adjured Him,
when the governor asked, i)ut in reply to their
accusations He no longer saith anything; for
He was not now likely to persuade them.

« [The article is omitted before '•ciderx," as in the bc»t New
Test.imciii Mss. Ill all nilier ilctuib the UKrccmcnt with the re-
ceived text is exact. — K.]

Act.H xvii. 7. 1 John xviii. 36.

4 Matt. xxii. 17. S John vi. 15.


Even as the prophet declaring this self-same
thing from of old, said, " In His humiliation
His judgment was taken away."*

At these things the governor marvelled, and
indeed it was worthy of admiration to see Him
showing such great forbearance, and holding
His peace. Him that had countless things to
say. For neither did they accuse Him from
knowing of any evil thing in Him, but from
jealousy and envy only. At least when tiiey
had set false witness, wherefore, having noth-
ing to say, did they still urge their point?
and when they saw Judas was dead, and that
Pilate had washed his hands of it, why were
they not pricked with remorse. For indeed
He did many things even at the very time,
that they might recover themselves, but by
none were they amended.

What then saith Pilate? " Hearest thou
not how many things these witness against
thee?"' He wislied that He should defend
Himself and be ac(iuitted, wherefore also he
said these things; but since He answered
nothing, he devises another thing again.

Of what nature was this? It was a custom
for them to release one of the condemned,
and by this means he attempt^ed to deliver
Him. For if you are not willing to release
Him as innocent, yet as guilty jxartlon Him
for the feast's sake.

Seest thou order reversed ? For the peti-
tion in behalf of the condemned it was custo-
mary to be with the people, and the granting
it with the rulers; but now the contrary hath
come to pass, and the ruler petitions the
people; and not even so do they become
gentle, but grow more savage and bloodthirsty,
driven to frenzy by the jiassion of envy. For
neither had they whereof they should accuse
Him, and this though He was silent, but they
were refuted even then liy reason of tlie
abund.ince of His righteous deeds, and Iieing
silent He overcame them that say ten thou-
sand things, and are maddened.


A Im. liii. 8, LXX., we marxin of our veruon.
7 Mutt, xxvii. f^ [The wurd " the«c" i» peculiar tu thia cita-
tion.—K.]


512


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXVI-


" And when he was set down on the judg-
ment seat, his wife sent unto him, saying, have
thou nothing to do with this just man, for I
have suffered many things this day in a dream
because of Him."' See what a thing takes
place again, sufficient to recall them all. For
together with the proof from the things done,
the dream too was no small thing. And
wherefore doth he not see it himself ? Either
because she was more worthy, or because he,
if he had seen it, would not have been equally
believed; or would not so much as have told
it. Therefore it was ordered that the wife
should see it, so that it might be manifest to
all. And she doth not merely see it, but also
suffers many things, that from his feeling
towards his wife, the man may be made more
reluctant to the murder. And the time too
contributed not a little, for on the very night
she saw it.

But it was not safe, it may be said, for him
to let Him go, because they said He made
Himself a king. He ought then to have
sought for proofs, and a conviction, and for
all the things that are infallible signs of an
usurpation, as, for instance, whether He levied
forces, whether He collected money, whether
he forged arms, whether He attempted any
other such thing. But he is led away at
random, therefore neither doth Christ acquit
him of the blame, in saying, "He that be-
trayeth me unto thee hath greater sin." ' So
that it was from weakness that he yielded and
scourged Him, and delivered Him up.

He then was unmanly and weak; but the
chief priests wicked and criminal. For since
he had found out a device, namely, the law
of the feast requiring him to release a con-
demned person, what do they contrive in op-
position to that? "They persuaded the
multitude," it is said, "that they should ask
Barabbas." ^

2. See how much care he taketh for them
to relieve them from blame, and how much
diligence they employed, so as not to leave
to themselves so much as a shadow of an
excuse. For which was right? to let go the
acknowledged criminal, or Him about whose
guilt there was a question? For, if in the
case of acknowledged offenders it was fit there
should be a liberation, much more in those of
whom there was a doubt. For surely this
man did not seem to them worse than ac-
knowledged murderers. For on this account,


I Matt, .\xvii. 19. [The readings enefj.tpe for otTre'crTeiAei/, and
Toiircu for eKfivu), are peculiar. R. V., " And while he was sitting
on the," etc. — R.]

= John xix. II. [" delivereth " is preferable, since the refer-
ence is not necessarily to Judas. Similarly in R. V. — R.]

3 Matt, xxvii. 20. [R. V., " ask for ;" but the form of the verb
in the Homily is peculiar. — R.]


it is not merely said they had a robber; but
one noted, that is, who was infamous in
wickedness, who had perpetrated countless
murders. But nevertheless even him did
they prefer to the Saviour of the world, and
neither did they reverence the season because
it was holy, nor the laws of humanity, nor
any other thing of the kind, but envy had
once for all blinded them. And besides their
own wickedness, they corrupt the people
also, that for deceiving them too they might
suffer the most extreme punishment.

Since therefore they ask for the other. He
saith, "What shall I do then with the
Christ," '^ in this way desiring to put them to
the blush, by giving them the power to choose,
that at least out of shame they might ask for
Him, and the whole should be of their boun-
tifulness. For though to say, He had not
done wrong, made them more contentious,
yet to require that He should be saved out of
humanity, carries with it persuasion and en-
treaty that cannot be gainsaid.

But even then they said, " Crucify Him.
But he said, why, what evil hath He done ?
but they cried out exceedingly,^ let Him be
crucified. But ht, when he saw that he prof-
ited nothing, washed his hands, saying, I am
innocent." Why then didst thou deliver Him
up ? Why didst thou not rescue Him, as the
centurion did Paul.* For that man too was
aware that he would please the Jews; and a
sedition had taken place on his account, and
a tumult, nevertheless he stood firm against
all. But not so this man, but he was ex-
tremely unmanly and weak, and all were cor-
rupt together. For neither did this man
stand firm against the multitude, nor the
multitude against the Jews,^ and in in every
way their excuse was taken away. For they
"cried out exceedingly," that is, cried out
the more, "Let Him be crucified." For
they desired not only to put Him to death,
but also that it should be on a charge of
wickedness, and though the judge was con-
tradicting them, they continued to cry out the
same thing.

Seest thou how many things Christ did in
order to recover them ? For like as He often
times checked Judas, so likewise did He re-
strain these men too, both throughout all His
Gospel, and at the very time of His con-
demnation. For surely when they saw the
ruler and the judge washing his hands of it,


[Abridged, but given in full in some editions
[Abridged. R. V., " prevailed nothing."


4 Matt, xxvii. 22.
of the Homily.— R.]

5 Matt, xxvii. 22-24.

6 Acts xxi.

7 !. e., the Jewish rulers ; Mr. Field has observed in his note
on this passage, that oi 'louSaioi is thus used, especially in St.
John's Gospel.


Homily LXXXVI.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


51,


and saying, " I am innocent of this blood,"
they should have been moved to compunction
both by what was said, and by what was done,
as well when they saw Judas had hanged him-
self, as when they saw Pilate himself entreat-
ing them to take another in the place of Him.
For when the accuser and traitor condemns
himself, and he who gives sentence puts off
from himself the guilt, and such a vision
appears the very night, and even as con-
demned he begs Him off, what kind of plea
will they have ? For if they were not willing
that He should be innocent, yet they should
not have preferred to him even a robber, one
that was acknowledged to be such, and very
notorious.

What then did they ? When they saw the
judge woshing his hands, and saying, " I am
innocent," they cried out " His blood be on
us, and on our children." ' Then at length
when they had given sentence against them-
selves, he yielded that all should be done.

See here too their great madness. For
passion and wicked desire are like this. They
suffer not men to see anytlung of what is
right. For be it that ye curse yourselves;
why do you draw down the curse upon your
children also ?

Nevertheless, the lover of man, though they
acted with so much madness, both against
themselves, and against their children, so far
from confirming their sentence upon their
children, confirmed it not even on them, but
from the one and from the other received
those that repented, and counts them worthy
of good things beyond number. For indeed
even Paul was of them, and the thousands
that believed in Jerusalem; for, " thou seest
it is said, brother, how many thousands 6i
Jews there are which believe." " And if some
continued />/ //wir sin, to themselves let them
impute their punishment.

'' Then released he Barabbas unto them,
but Jesus, when he had scourged Him, he
delivered to be crucified." ^

And wherefore did he scourge Him. Either
as one condemned, or willing to invest the
judgment with due form, or to please them.
And yet he ought to have resisted them. For
indeed even before this he had said, " Take
ye Him, and judge Him according to your
law."* .'\nd tliere were many things that
might have held back him and those men, the
signs and the miracles, and the great patience


• Matt, xxvii. 25.

> Acts xxi. 10. [The R. V. accepts a different readint; ; but
" which have believed " is the more uccurutc rcnderiiiK of the re-
ceived text. — K.]

J Malt, xxvii. a6. [R. V., " he scourged and delivered to be
crucified." — K.]

* John xviii. 31.


of Him, who was suffering these things, and
above all His untold silence. For since both
by His defense of Himself, and by His
prayers, He had shown His humanity, again
He showeth His exaltedness and the great-
ness of His nature, both by His silence, and
by His contemning what is said; by all lead-
ing them on to marvel at Himself.5 But to
none of these things did they give way.

3. For when once the reasoning powers are
overwhelmed as it were by intoxication or
some wild insanity, it would be hard for the
sinking soul to rise again, if it be not very
noble.

For it is fearful, it is fearful to give place
to these wicked passions, wherefore it were fit
in every way to ward off and repel their en-
tering in. For when they have laid hold of
the soul, and got the dominion over it, like
as fire lighting upon a wood, so do they kindle
the flame to a blaze.

Wherefore I entreat you to do all things so
as to fence off their entrance; and not by
comforting yourselves with this heartless
reasoning to bring in upon yourselves all
wickedness, saying, what of this ? Wiiat of
that ? For countless ills have tiieir birth from
hence. For the devil, being depraved, makes
use of much craft, and exertion, and self-
abasement for the ruin of men, and begins
his attack on tliem with things of a more tri-
fling nature.

And mark it, he desired to bring Saul into
superstition of witchcraft. But if he had
counselled this at the beginning, the other
would not have given heed; for how sliould
he, who was even driving them out ? There-
fore gently and by little and little he leads
him on to it. For when he had disobeyed
Samuel, and had caused the burnt-offering to
be offered, when he was not present, being
blamed for it, he says, "The cominilsion
from the enemy was too great,"* and when he
ought to have bewailed, he felt as thougii he
had done nothing.

Again Clod gave him the commands about
the Amalekites, but he transgressed these
too Thence he proceeded to his crimes
about David, and tlnis slipping easily and by
little and little he stayed not, until he came
unto the very pit of destruction, and cast
himself in. .So likewise in tiie case of Cain,
lie did not at once urge- iiim to slay his brotlier,
since he would not have persuaded him, but
first wrought upon him to offer things more
or less vile, saying, " Tiiis is no sm: " in the
second place he kindlt:tl envy anil jealousy,
saying, neither is there anything in this;

S irpuf ri) oi«f ioK iaiiiia.

*> (1. I Siiii). xiii. \j ; and xxviii. 15.


SH


THE AVORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXVI.


thirdly, he persuaded him to slay and to deny
his murder; and did not leave him before he
had put on him the crowning act of evil.

Wherefore it is necessary for us to resist
the beginning. For at any rate, even if the
first sins stopped at themselves, not even so
were it right to despise the first sins; but now
they go on also to what is greater, when the
mind is careless. Wherefore we ought to do
all things to remove the beginnings of them.

For look not now at the nature of the sin,
that it is little, but that it becomes a root of
great sin when neglected. For if one may say
something marvellous, great sins need not so
much earnestness, as such as are little, and
of small account. For the former the very
nature of the sin causes us to abhor, but the
little sins by this very thing cast us into re-
missness; and allow us not to rouse ourselves
heartily for their removal. Wherefore also
they quickly become great, while we sleep.
This one may see happening in bodies also.

So likewise in the instance of Judas, that
great wickedness had its birth. For if it had
not seemed to him a little thing to steal the
money of the poor, he would not have been
led on to this treachery. Unless it had
seemed to the Jews a little thing to be taken
captive by vainglory, they would not have
run on the rock of becoming Christ's mur-
derers. And indeed all evils we may see
arise from this.

For no one quickly and at once rusheth
out into vices. For the soul hath, yea it
hath a shame implanted in us, and a reverence
for right things; and it would not at once be-
come so shameless as in one act to cast away
everything, but slowly, and by little and little
doth it perish, when it is careless. Thus also
did idolatry enter in, men being honored be-
yond measure, both the living and the de-
parted; thus also were idols worshipped; thus
too did whoredom prevail, and the other evils.

And see. One man laughed unseasonably;
another blamed him; a third took away the
fear, by saying, nothing comes of this.
"For what is laughing? What can come of
it?" Of this is bred foolish jesting; from
that filthy talking; then filthy doings.

Again, another being blamed for slandering
his neighbors, and reviling, and calumniating,
despised it, saying, evil-speaking is nothing.
By this he begets hatred unspeakable, revil-
ings without end; by the revilings blows, and
by the blows oftentimes murder.

4. From these little things then that wicked
spirit thus brings in the great sins; and from
the great despair; having invented this other
while not less mischievous than the former.
For to sin destroys not so much as to despair.


For he that hath offended, if he be vigilant,
speedily by repentance amends what hath
been done; but he that hath learnt to de-
spond, and doth not repent, by reason thereof
fails of this amendment by not applying the
remedies from repentance.

And he hath a third grievous snare; as
when he invests the sin with a show of devo-
tion. And where hath the devil so far pre-
vailed as to deceive to this degree? Hear,
and beware of his devices. Christ by Paul
commanded " that a woman depart not from
her husband,' and not to defraud one another,
except by consent;"^ but some from a love
of continence forsooth, having withdrawn
from their own husbands, as though they were
doing something devout, have driven them to
adultery. Consider now v/hat an evil it is
that they, undergoing so much toil, should
be blamed as having committed the greatest
injustice, and should suffer extreme punish-
ment, and drive their husbands into the pit of
destruction.

Others again, abstaining from meats by a
rule of fasting, have by degrees gone so far
as to abhor them; which even of itself brings
a very great punishment.

But this comes to pass, when any hold fast
their own prejudices contrary to what is ap-
proved by the Scriptures. Those also among
the Corinthians thought it was a part of per-
fection to eat of all things without distinc-
tion, even of things forbidden, but neverthe-
less this was not of perfection, but of the
utmost lawlessness. Wherefore also Paul
earnestly reproves them, and pronounces
them to be worthy of extreme punishment.
Others again think it a sign of piety to wear
long hair. And yet this is amongst the things
forbidden, and carries with it much disgrace.

Again, others follow after excessive sorrow
for their sins as a profitable thing; yet it also
comes of the devil's wiles, and Judas showed
it; at least in consequence thereof he even
hanged himself. Therefore Paul again was
in fear about him that had committed forni-
cation, lest any such thing should befall him,
and persuaded the Corinthians speedily to
deliver him, " lest perhaps such a one should
be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow, "^
Then, indicating that such a result cometh of
the snares of that wicked one, he saith,
"Lest Satan should get an advantage over
us, for we are not ignorant of his devices,"-*
meaning that he assails us with much craft.
Since if he fought against us plainly and
openly, the victory would be ready and easy;
or rather even now, if we be vigilant, victory


I I Cor. vii. 10.
3 2 Cor. ii. 7.


2 I Cor. vii. 5.
4 2 Cor. ii. 10, II.


Homily LXXXVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


515


will be ready. For indeed against each one
of those ways God hath armed us.

For to persuade us not to despise even these
little things, hear what warning He gives us,
saying, " He that saith to his brother, thou
fool, shall be in danger of hell;"' and he
that hath looked with unchaste eyes is a com-
plete adulterer. ^^ And on them that laugh
he pronounces a woe, and everywhere He
removes the beginning and the seeds of evil,
and saith we have to give an account of an
idle word. 3 Therefore also Job applied ' a
remedy even for the thoughts of his children. •*

But about not despairing, it is said, " Doth
he fall, and not arise ? Doth he turn away,
and not return ?" = and, "I do not will the
death of the sinner, so much as that he should
turn and live:''* and, " To-day if ye will hear
His voice:"' and many other such things,
both sayings and examples are set in the
Scripture. And in order not to be ruined
under the guise of godly fear, hear Paul
saying, " Lest perhaps such a one be swal-
lowed up by overmuch sorrow.''

Knowing therefore these things, let us set
for a barrier in all the ways that pervert the


■ Matt. V. 22. 2 Matt. v. 28. 3 Matt. xii. 36.

4 Job i. 5. 5 Jer. viii. 4.

* Ezek. xviii. 23. [Abndged from the lxx.]

7 Ps. xcv. 7.


unwary the wisdom which is drawn from the
Scriptures. Neither say, why, what is it, if
I gaze curiously at a beautiful woman? For
if thou shouldest commit the adultery in the
heart, soon thou wilt venture on that in flesh.
Say not, why, what is it if I should pass by
this poor man ? For if thou pass this man
by, thou wilt also the next; if him, then the
third.

Neither again say, why, what is it, if I
should desire my neighbor's goods. For this,
this caused Ahab's ruin; although he would
have paid a price, yet I* took it from one un-
willing. For a man ought not to buy by
force, but on persuasion. But if he, who
would have paid the fair price, was so pun-
ished, because he took from one unwilling,
he who doeth not so much as this, and taketh
by violence from the unwilling, and that when
living under grace, of what punishment will
he not be worthy ?

In order therefore that we be not punished,
keeping ourselves quite pure from all violence
and rapine, and guarding against the sources
of sins together with the sins tliemselves, let
us with much diligence give heed to virtue;
for thus shall we also enjoy the good things
eternal by the grace and love towards man of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory world
without end. Amen.


HOMILY LXXXVII.

Uatv. XXVIL 27—29.

Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall,' and gathered unto
him the whole band of soldiers; and tliey stripped Him, and put on Him a imrplc r()l)e;
and when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it on His head, and a rccii in
His right hand; and they bowed the knee before Him, and mocked Him, saying, Hail,
king of tlie Jews."-


As though on some signal the devil then
was entering in triiimpli ' into all. For, be it
that Jews pining witli envy and jealousy were
mad against Him, as to the soldiers, wliencc
was it, and from what sort of cause ? Is it
not clear that it was the devil who was then


' rc'.rcck, " Prztoriuro ;'' romp. Mark xv. 16, A. V. — R.]
'J [The (Ireck tc


the reccivrd. — k.]
3 i\6ptvtv.


cxt.asKivcn by Kicld, agree* thmuKhnut with


entering in fury into the hearts of all ? For
indeed they matie a pleasure of their insults
against Him, i)eing a savage and ruthless set.
I mean that, when they ought to have been
awestruck, when they ouglit to have wept,
which even the lieoj-ilc did, this tliey tlid not.
but, on the contrary, were ilcspiteful, and in-
solent: j)erhaps themselves also seeking to
please the Jews, or it may be tloing all in
conformitv to their own evil nature.


5i6


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXVIL


And the insults were different, and varied.
For that Divine Head at one time they buffeted,
at another they insulted with the crown of
thorns, at another they smote with the reed,
men unholy and accursed !

What plea shall we have after this for being
moved by injuries, after Christ suffered these
things ? For what was done was the utmost
limit of insolence. For not one member, but
the whole entire body throughout was made
an object of insolence; the head through the
crown, and the reed, and the buffeting; the
face, being spit up©n; the cheeks, being
smitten with the palms of the hands; the
whole body by the stripes, by being wrapped
in the robe, and by the pretended worship;
the hand by the reed, which they gave him
to hold instead of a sceptre; the mouth again
by the offering of the vinegar. What could
be more grievous than these things ? What
more insulting ?

For the things that were done go beyond
all language. For as though they were afraid
lest they should seem to fall short at all in the
crime, having killed the prophets with their
own hands, but this man with the sentence
of a judge, so they do in every deed; and
make it the work of their own hands, and
condemn and sentence both among them-
selves and before Pilate, saying, " His blood
be on us and on our children," ' and insult
Him, and do despite unto Him themselves,
binding Him, leading Him away, and render
themselves authors of the spiteful acts done
by the soldiers, and nail Him to the cross,
and revile Him, and spit at Him, and deride
Him. For Pilate contributed nothing in this
matter, but they themselves did every thing,
becoming accusers, and judges, and execu-
tioners, and all.

And these things are read amongst us,
when all meet together. For that the
heathens may not say, that ye display to peo-
ple and nations the things that are glorious
and illustrious, such as the signs and the
miracles, but that ye hide these which are
matters of reproach; the grace of the Spirit
hath brought it to pass, that in the full festi-
val, when men in multitude and women are
present, and all, as one may say, at the great
eve of the passover, then all these things
should be read; when the whole world is pres-
ent, then are all these acts proclaimed with a
clear voice. And these being read, and made
known to all, Christ is believed to be God,
and, besides all the rest, is worshipped, even
because of this, that He vouchsafed to stoop
so much for us as actually to suffer these
things, and to teach us all virtue.

' Matt, xxvii. 25.


These things then let us read continually;
for indeed great is the gain, great the advan-
tage to be thence obtained. For when thou
seest Him, both by gestures and by deeds,
mocked and worshipped with so much deri-
sion, and beaten and suffering the utmost
insults, though thou be very stone, thou wilt
become softer than any wax, and wilt cast out
of thy soul all haughtiness.

Hear therefore also what follows. For
after "they had mocked Him, they led Him
to crucify Him," it is said, and when they
had stripped Him, they took His garments,
and sat down and watched Hihi, when He
should die. And they divide His garments
amongst them, which sort of thing is done in
the case of very vile and abject criminals, and
such as have no one belonging to them, and
are in utter desolation.

They parted the garments, by which such
great miracles were done. But they wrought
none now, Christ restraining His unspeakable
power. And this was no small addition of
insult. For as to one base and abject, as I
said, and the vilest of all men; so do they
dare to do all things. To the thieves at any
rate they did nothing of the kind, but to
Christ they dare it all. And they crucified
Him in the midst of them, that He might
share in their reputation.

And they gave Him gall to drink, and this
to insult Him, but He would not. But an-
other saith, that having tasted it. He said,
"It is finished." ^ And what meaneth, " It
is finished?" The prophecy was fulfilled
concerning Him. " For they gave me," it is
said, "gall for my meat, and for my thirst
they gave me vinegar to drink. "^ But
neither doth that evangelist indicate that He
drank, for merely to taste differs not from
not drinking, but hath one and the same
signification.

But nevertheless not even here doth their
contumely stop, but after having stripped and
crucified Him, and offered Him vinegar, they
proceeded still further, and beholding Him
impaled upon the cross, they revile Him,
both they themselves and the passers by; and
this was more grievous than all, that on the
charge of being an impostor and deceiver He
suffered these things, and as a boaster, and '
vainly pretending what He said. Therefore
they both crucified Him publicly, that they
might make a show of it in the sight of all;
and therefore also they did it by the hands of
the soldiers, that these things being perpe-
trated even by a public tribunal, the insult
might be the greater.


2 Matt, xxvii. 31. [iJYayoi' for aimiyayoi' "]

3 John XIX. 30. 3 Ps. Ixix. 21.


Homily LXXXVII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


51


2. And yet who would not have been
moved by the multitude that was following
Him, and lamenting Him ? Nay, not these
wild beasts. Wherefore also He to the mul-
titude vouchsafes an answer, but to these men
not so. For after having done what they
would, they endeavor also to injure His
honor, fearing His resurrection. Therefore
they say these things publicly, and crucified
thieves with Him, and wishing to prove Him
a deceiver, they say, "Thou that destroyest
the temple, and buildest it in three days come
down from the cross." ' For since on telling
Pilate to remove the accusation (this was the
writing, " The king of the Jews "), they pre-
vailed not, but he persevered in saying," Wnat
I have written, I have written," =* they then
endeavor by their derision of Him to show
that He is not a king.

Wherefore they said those things, and also
these. If " He is the king of Israel, let Him
come down now from the cross. He saved
others, Himself He cannot save,"^ aiming
hereby to bring discredit even on His former
miracles. And again, " If He be Son of God,
and He will have Him, let Him save Him."'*

O execrable; most execrable ! What, were
not the prophets prophets, nor the righteous
men righteous, because God rescued them
not out of their dangers. Nay surely they
were, though suffering these things. What
then could be equal to your folly ? For if the
coming of the dangers upon them did not
injure their honor with you, how much more
in the case of this man, was it wrong for you
to l)e offended, wlien both by what He did,
by what He said, He was ever correcting be-
forehand this suspicion of yours.

Yet nevertheless, even when these things
were said and done, they prevailed nothing,
not even at the very time. At any rate, he,
who was depraved in such great wickedness,
and who liad spent his whole life in murders
and house-breakings, when tiiese things were
being said, then confessed Him, and made
mention of a kingdom, and the people be-
wailed Him. And yet the things that were
done seemed to testify the contrary in the
eyes of those who knew not the mystericuis
dispensations, tliat He was weak and of no
power, nevertheless truth prevailed even by
the contrary things.

Hearing then these things, let us arm our-
selves against all rage, against all anger.
Shouldest thou perceive thy heart swelling,
seal thy breast setting upon it the cross. Call


■ Matt, xxvii. 40. Jjnhn xix. 33. 1 Mntt. xxvii, 43.

* NI:itt. xxvii. 41. [In tnc cit:ition« from vrrnc* 40 41, thr ex-
act order is not prcHcrvril, l>iit llir only (rxtuiil variitlion in in llie
clause, " Irt Ilimsuivc lliin," which <Ioch not occur in the ('>o»-
pcls. " If " is read, with the received text, in ver»e 43. — R.]


to mind some one of the things that then took
place, and thou wilt cast out as dust all rage
by the recollection of the things that were
done. Consider the words, the actions; con-
sider that He is Lord, and thou servant. He
is suffering for thee, thou for thyself ; He in
behalf of them who had been benefited by
Him and had crucified Him, thou in behalf
of thyself; He in behalf of them who had
used Him despitefully, thou oftentimes at the
hands of them who have been injured. He
in the sight of the whole city, or rather of the
whole people of the Jews, both strangers, and
those of the country, before whom He spake
those merciful words, but thou in the presence
of few; and what was more insulting to Him,
that even His disciples forsook Him. For
those, who before paid Him attention, had
deserted Him, but His enemies and foes,
having got Him in the midst of themselves
on the cross, insulted, reviled, mocked, de-
rided, scoffed at Him, Jews and soldiers from
below, from above thieves on either side: for
indeed the thieves insulted, and upbraided
Him both of them. How then saith Luke
that one " rebuked ?"5 Both things were
done, for at first both upbraided Him, but
afterwards one did so no more. For that
thou mightest not think the thing had been
done by any agreement, or that the thief was
not a thief, by his insolence he showeth thee,
that up on the cross he was a thief and an
enemy, and at once was changed.

Considering then all these things, control
thyself. For what sufferest thou like what
thy Lord suffered ? Wast thou publicly in-
sulted ? But not like these things. Art thou
mocked ? yet not thy whole body, not being
thus scourged, and stri|')ped. And even if
thou wast buffeted, yet not like this.

3. And add to this, I pray thee, by whom,
and wherefore, and when, and who it was;
and (the most grievous matter) that these
things being done, no one fouml fault, no one
blamed what was done, but on the contrnry
all rather approved, ami joineii in mocking
Him anil in jeering at Him; niul as a boaster,
impostor, and deceiver, and not able to prove
in His works the things that He said, so did
they revile Him. But He held His jK-ace to
all, prt-pariug for us the most povverful incen-
tives to long suffering.

But we, though hearing such tilings, are
not patient so mucii as to servants, hut we
rush and kick worse tiian wild asses, witli re-
spect to injuries against ourselves, being
savage and inhuman; but of those against
God not making much account. .\iul with

S Luke xxiii. 40.


5i8


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXVII.


respect to friends too we have the same dis-
position; should any one vex us, we bear it
not; should he insult us, we are savage more
than wild beasts, we who are reading these
things every day. A disciple betrayed Him,
the rest forsook Him and fled, they that had
been benefited by Him spat at Him, the serv-
ants of the high priest smote Him with the
palm of the hand, the soldiers buffeted Him;
they that passed by jeered Him and reviled
Him, the thieves accused Him; and to no
man did He utter a word, but by silence over-
came all ; instructing thee by His actions,
that the more meekly thou shalt endure, the
more wilt thou prevail over them that do thee
evil, and wilt be an object of admiration before
all. For who will not admire him that endures
with forbearance the insults he receives from
them that are using him despitefully ? For
even as, though any man suffer justly, yet
enduring the evil meekly, he is considered by
the more part to suffer unjustly; so though
one suffer unjustly, yet if he be violent, he
will get the suspicion of suffering justly, and
will be an object of ridicule, as being dragged
captive by his anger, and losing his own
nobility. For such a one, we must not call
so much as a freeman, though he be lord
over ten thousand servants.

But did some person exceedingly provoke
thee? And what of that? For then should
self-control be shown, since when there is no
one to vex, we see even the wild beasts gentle;
for neither are they always savage, but when
any one rouses them. And we therefore, if
we are only then quiet, when there is no one
provoking us, what advantage have we over
them. For they are both oftentimes justly
indignant, and have much excuse, for by
being stirred and goaded are they roused,
and besides these things they are devoid of
reason, and have savageness in their nature.

But whence, I pray thee, canst thou find a
plea for being savage and fierce ? What
hardship hast thou suffered ? Hast thou
been robbed ? For this self-same reason
shouldest thou endure it, so as to gain more
amply. But wast thou deprived of character ?
And what is this ? Thy condition is in no way
worsened by this, if thou practise self-com-
mand. But if thou sufferest no grievance,
whence art thou angry with him that hath
done thee no harm, but hath even benefited
thee ? For they who honor, make them that
are not watchful the more vain; but they who
insult and despise render those that take heed
to themselves more steadfast. For the care-
less are more injured by being honored than
by being insulted. And the one set of
persons, if we be sober, become to us authors


of self-control, but the others excite our pride,
they fill us with boastfulness, vainglory, folly,
they make our soul the feebler.

And to this fathers bear witness, who do
not flatter their own children so much as they
chide them, fearing lest from the praise they
should receive any harm, and their teachers
use the same remedy to them. So that if we
are to avoid any one, it should be those that
flatter us rather than those that insult us; for
this bait brings greater mischief than insult
to them, who do not take heed, and it is more
difficult to control this feeling than that. And
the reward too is far more abundant from
thence, and the admiration greater. For
indeed it is more worthy of admiration to see
a man insulted, and not moved, than beaten
and smitten, and not falling.

And how is it possible not to be moved ?
one may say. Hath any one insulted thee ?
Place the sign upon thy breast, call to mind
all the things that were then done; and all is
quenched. Consider not the insults only,
but if also any good hath been ever done unto
thee, by him that hath insulted thee, and
straightway thou wilt become meek, or rather
consider before all things the fear of God, and
soon thou wilt be mild and gentle.

4. Together with these things even from
thine own servants take a lesson concerning
these matters; and when thou seest thyself
insulting, but thy servant holding his peace,
consider that it is possible to practise self-
control, and condemn thyself for being vio-
lent; and in the very time of offering insults
learn not to insult; and thus not even when
insulted, wilt thou be vexed. Consider that
he who is insolent is beside himself and mad,
and thou wilt not feel indignant, when in-
sulted, since the possessed strike us, and we,
so far from being provoked, do rather pity
them. This do thou also; pity him that is
insolent to thee, for he is held in subjection by
a dreadful monster, rage, by a grievous demon,
anger. Set him free as he is wrought upon
by a grievous demon, and going quickly to
ruin. For so great is this disease as not to
need even time for the destruction of him
that is seized with it. Wherefore also one
said, " The sway of his fury shall be his
fall; " ' by this most of all showing its tyranny,
that in a short time it works great ills, and
needs not to continue long with us, so that if
in addition to its strength it were apt to last,
it would indeed be hard to strive against.

I should like to show what the man is who
insulteth, what he that practises self-control,
and to bring nakedly before you the soul of

^ Ecclus. i. 22


Homily LXXXVII.J


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


519


the one and the other. For thou shouldest
see the one Uke a sea tost with a tempest, but
the other like a harbor free from disturbance.
For it is not disturbed by these evil blasts,
but puts them to rest easily. For indeed
they who are insulting, do everything in
order to make it sting. When then they fail
of that hope, even they are thenceforth at
peace, and go away amended. For it is im-
possible that a man, who is angry, should not
utterly condemn himself, even as on the other
hand it is impossible for one who is not angry
to be self-condemned. For though it be
necessary to retaliate, it is possible to do this
without anger (and it were more easy and
more wise than .vith anger) and to have no
painful feeling. For if we be willing, the
good things will be from ourselves, and we
shall be with the grace of God sufficient for
our own safety and honor.

For why seekest thou the glory that cometh
from another ? Do thou honor thyself, and
no one will be able to insult thee ; but if thou
dishonor thyself, though all should honor
thee, thou wilt not be honored. For like as,
unless we put ourselves in an evil state, no
one else puts us in such a state; even so un-
less we insult ourselves, no one else can put
us to shame.

For let any man be great and worthy of
admiration, and let all men call him an adul-
terer, a thief, aviolater of tombs, a murderer,
a robber, and let him be neither provoked
or indignant, nor be conscious to himself of
any of these crimes, what disgrace will he
thence undergo? None. What then, you
may say, if many have such an opinion of
him? Not even so is he disgraced, but they
bring shame upon themselves, by accounting
one, who is not such, to be such. For tell
me, if any one think the sun to be dark, doth
he bring an ill name on that heavenly body,
or on himself? Surely on himself, getting


\ himself the character of being blind or mad,

■■ So also they that account wicked men good.

I and they that make the opposite error, dis-

; grace themselves.

Wherefore we ought to give the greater dil-
igence, to keep our conscience clear, and to
give no handle against ourselves, nor matter
for evil suspicion; but if others will be mad,
even when this is our disposition, not to care
very much, nor to grieve. For he that hath
got the character of a wicked man, being a
good man, is in no degree thereby hurt as
regards his being such as he is; but he that
hath been suspecting another vainly and
causelessly, receives the utmost harm; as, on
the other hand, the wicked man, if he be
supposed to be the contrary, will gain nothing
thence, but will both have a heavier judgment,
and be led into greater carelessness. For he
that is such and is suspected thereof, may
perhaps be humbled, and acknowledge his
sins; but when he escapes detection, he falls
into a state past feeling. For if, while all are
accusing them, offenders are hardly stirred
up to compunction, when so far from accus-
ing them, some even praise them, at what
time will they who are living in vice be able
to open their eyes ? Hearest thou that Paul
also blames for this, that the Corinthians (so
far from permitting him that had been guilty
of fornication, to acknowledge his own sin),
applauding and honoring him, did on the con-
trary urge him on in vice thereby ? Where-
fore, I pray, let us leave the suspicions of
the multitude, their insults and their honors,
and let us be diligent about one thing only,
that we be conscious to ourselves of no evil
thing, nor insult our own selves. For so, both
here, and in the world to come, we shall enjoy
much glory, unto which C.od grant we all may
attain, by the grace and love towards man ot
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
world without end. Amen,


520


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXVHI.


HOMILY LXXXVIII.

Matt. XXVII. 45—48.


" Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the earth until the ninth hour. And
about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, and said, Eli, Eli, lima sabach-
thani ? that is to say, my God my God, why hast thou forsaken me ? Some of them
that stood there, when they heard that said, this man calleth for Elias. And straight-
way one of them ran, and took a sponge, and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a
reed, and gave Him to drink," ^


This is the sign which before He had prom-
ised to give them when they asked it, say-
ing, "An evil and adulterous generation
seeketh after a sign, and there shall no sign
be given to it, but the sign of the prophet
Jonas; " ^ meaning His cross, and His death,
His burial, and His resurrection. And again,
declaring in another way the virtue of the
cross. He said, " When ye have lifted up the
Son of Man, then shall ye know that I am He."^
And what He saith is to this purport: "When
ye have crucified me, and think ye have over-
come me, then, above all, shall ye know my
might."

For after the crucifixion, the city was de-
stroyed, and the Jewish state came to an end,
they fell away^ from their polity and their
freedom, the gospel flourished, the word was
spread abroad to the ends of the world; both
sea and land, both the inhabited earth and
the desert perpetually proclaim its'* power.
These things then He meaneth, and those
which took place at the very time of the cru-
cifixion. For indeed it was much more mar-
vellous that these things should be done,
when He was nailed to the cross, than when
He was walking on earth. And not in this
respect only was the wonder, but because
from heaven also was that done which they
had sought, and it was over all the world,
which had never before happened, but in
Egypt only, when the passover was to be
fulfilled. For indeed those events were a
type of these.

And observe when it took place. At mid-
day, that all that dwell on the earth may
know it, when it was day all over the world;
which was enough to convert them, not by
the greatness of the miracle only, but also by
its taking place in due season. For after all


^ I [In verse 46, expa^ev is substituted for avePorja-^v, and /cat
eiTTtv for AeYwi/ ; as indicated above, Ai/md is the form given. In
other respects the agreement with the received text is exact. — R.]
2 Matt. xii. 39. 3 John viii. 28. 4 Or, "His."


their insulting, and their lawless derision, this
is done, when they had let go their anger,
when they had ceased mocking, when they
were satiated with their jeerings, and had
spoken all that they were minded; then He
shows the darkness, in order that at least so
(having vented their anger) they may profit
by the miracle. For this was more marvel-
lous than to come down from the cross, that
being on the cross He should work these
things. For whether they thought He Him-
self had done it, they ought to have believed
and to have feared; or whether not He, but
the Father, yet thereby ought they to have
been moved to compunction, for that dark-
ness was a token of His anger at their crime.
For that it was not an eclipse, but both wrath
and indignation, is not hence alone manifest,
but also by the time, for it continued three
hours, but an eclipse takes place in one
moment of time, and they know it, who have
seen this; and indeed it hath taken place even
in our generation.

And how, you may say, did not all marvel,
and account Him to be God ? Because the
race of man was then held in a state of great
carelessness and vice. And this miracle was
but one, and when it had taken place, imme-
diately passed away; and no one was con-
cerned to inquire into the cause of it, and
great was the prejudice and the habit of un-
godliness. And they knew not what was the
cause of that which took place, and they
thought perhaps this happened so, in the way
of an eclipse or some natural effect. And
why dost thou marvel about them that are
without, that knew nothing, neither inquired
by reason of great indifference, when even
those that were in Judaea itself, after so many
miracles, yet continued using Him despite-
fully, although He plainly showed them that
He Himself wrought this thing.

And for this reason, even after this He
speaks, that they might learn that He was


Homily LXXXVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


5-1


still alive, and that He Himself did this, and the instance of Elisha; '° one on touching a
that they might become by this also more i dead body rose again, but now by a voice He
gentle, and He saith, " Eli, Eli, lima sabach- j raised them, His body continuing up there,
thani ? " ' that unto His last breath they on the cross. And besides, those things were
might see that He honors His Father, and is , a type of this. For that this might be be-
no adversary of God. Wherefore also He
uttered a certain cry from the prophet,'' even
to His last hour bearing witness to the Old
Testament, and not simply a cry from the
prophet, but also in Hebrew, so as to be plain
and intelligible to them, and by all things He
shows how He is of one mind with Him that
begat Him.

But mark herein also their wantonness, and
intemperance, and folly. They thought (it
is said) that it was Elias whom He called, and
straightway they gave Him vinegar to drink. ^
But another came unto Him, and " pierced
His side with a spear,'' •• What could be
more lawless, ivhat more brutal, than these
men; who carried their madness to so great a
length, offering insult at last even to a dead
body ?

But mark thou, I pray thee, how He made
use of their wickednesses for our salvation.
For after the blow the fountains of our salva-
tion gushed forth from thence.

"And Jesus, when He had cried with a loud
voice, yielded up the Ghost." ^ This is what
He said, " I have power to lay down my life,
and I have power to take it again," and, " I
lay it down of myself."^ So for this cause
He cried with the voice, that it might be
shown that the act is done by power. Mark
at any rate saith, that " Pilate marvelled if
He were already dead: "^ and that the centu-
rion for this cause above all believed, because
He died with power.*

This cry rent the veil, and opened the
tombs, and made the house desolate. And
He did this, not as offering insult to the tem-
ple (for how should He, who saith, "Make
not my Father's house a house of merclian-
dise "),' but declaring them to be unwortliy
even of His abiding there; like as also when
He delivered it over to tiie Babylonians. But
not for this only were these tilings done, but
wiiat took place was a prophecy ofthe coming
desolation, and of tiie change into the greater
and iiigher state; and ti sii^n of His might.

And togetlier witli these tilings He sliowed
Himself also by what followed after these
things, by the raising of the dead. For in


■ Matt, xxvii. 46. > p,. xxii. i 1 Matt, xxvii. 48.

* John xix. 34. [Thisoccurrrcl Intrr, as the next Hriiirnrc iteems
to siiKKf^st. Hut in juinip Nrw 'lr>tiiment mss., the im idrnt in in-
terpolated nt this point in .Matthew C'hr)'!«u!iloi<i i)i,iy have re-
ferred Id it as helonnini.; l<> this (iospel. See Tiwhendorf in loco,
Westrott and Hort, vol. ii., Note* on Select KeadinKO. — K.l

-^ Matt, xxvii. 50. [The word "a>{ain" is omitted. K
" yielded up (lis Spirit. '—R.]

<• John X. 18. 7 Moric xv, 44.

BM • ...-■•


v.,


dark xv.


39-


9 John ii. 16.


lieved, therefore is that all done. And tliey
are not merely raised, but also rocks are rent,
and the earth sliaken, that tliey might learn,
that He was able to strike themselves blind,
and to rend them in pieces. For He tiiat
cleft rocks asunder, and darkened the world,
much more could have done these things to
them, had it been His will. But He would
not, but having discharged His wrath upon
the elements, them it was His will to save by
clemency. But they abated not their mad-
ness. Such is envy, such is jealousy, it is
not easily stayed. At that time then they
were impudent in setting themselves against
the actual appearances; and afterwards even
against the things theviselves," when a seal
being put upon Him, and soldiers watching
Him, He rose again, and they heard these
things from the very guards; they even gave
money, in order both to corrupt others, and
to steal away the history of the resurrection.
Marvel not therefore if at this time also
they were perverse, being thus altogether
prepared to set themselves impudently against
all things; but observe this other point, how
great signs He had wrought, some from
Heaven, some on earth, some in the very
temple, at once marking His indignation, and
at the same time showing that wliat were un-
approachable are now to be entered, and that
Heaven shall be opened; and the work re-
moved to the true Holy of Holies. And they
indeed said, " If He be the King of Israel,
let Him come down now from the cross," "
but He shows tiiat He is King of all the
world. And whereas those men said, " Thou
that destroyest this temple, and buildest it in
three days,'' '3 He shows that it shall be made
forever desolate. .Again they said, '* He
saved others. Himself He cannot save," '* but
He while abiding on the cross proved this
most abuiniantly on the botlies of His serv-
ants. For if for Lazarus to rise on the fourth
day was a great thing, how much more for all
those wiio had long ago fallen asleep, at once
to appear alive, which was a sign of t'.ic future
resurrection. For, "many bodies of the
saints which slept, arose," it is said, "and
went into the holy city, and apjieared to
many."" For in order that what was done
might not be accounted to be an imagination,

"> 3 KinRs xiii. 31,

" f 'I'he word» in italic* have no equivalent in the OreeV. — R.l
'■' \liitt. xxvii. 4J. M .Malt, xxvii. 40. M Mall, xxvii. 41.

1^ Matt, xxvii. 5J, s \- [Slinhlly aliridijed. nml with a few minor
variatii>ns, not appearing in our New I'lMtlament .M>s. — R.]


522


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXVIII.


they appear, even to many, in the city. And
the Centurion too then glorified God, saying,
" Truly this was a righteous man. And the
multitudes that came together to that sight,
returned beating their breasts."' So great
was the power of the crucified, that after so
many mockings, and scoffs, and jeers, both
the centurion was moved to compunction, and
the people. And some say that there is also
a martyrdom of this centurion, who after these
things grew to manhood in the faith.

"And many women were there beholding
afar off, which had followed Him, ministering
unto Him, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the
mother of James, and Joses, and the mother
of Zebedee's sons."^

These things the women see done, these
who were most inclined to feel for Him, who
were most of all bewailing Him. And mark
how great their assiduity. They had followed
Him ministering to Him, and were present
even unto the time of the dangers. Where-
fore also they saw all; how He cried, how He
gave up the ghost, how the rocks were rent,
and all the rest.

And these first see Jesus; and the sex that
was most condemned, this first enjoys the
sight of the blessings, this most shows its
courage. And when the disciples had fled,
these were present. But who were these ?
His mother, for she is called mother of
James, 3 and the rest. But another evangelist ■*
saith, that many also lamented over the
things that were done, and smote their
breasts, which above all shows the cruelty of
the Jews, for that they gloried in things for
which others were lamenting, and were neither
moved by pity, nor checked by fear. For
indeed the things that were done were of
great wrath, and were not merely signs, but
signs of anger all of them, the darkness, the
cloven rocks, the veil rent in the midst, the
shaking of the earth, and great was the ex-
cess of the indignation.

" But Joseph went, and begged the body.''^
This was Joseph, who was concealing his dis-
cipleship of late; now however he \v&A become
very bold after the death of Christ. For
neither was he an obscure person, nor of the
unnoticed; but one of the council, and highly


1 Luke xxiii. 47, 48.

2 Matt, xxvii. 55, 56. [There are three omissions: dn-o before
^a/cpoflei', TuJ 'IrjcToii aTrb T^s raAiAaia;, and iv ais ^v. — R.|

3 In Homily V. 4, he maintains her perpetual virginity ; " how
then, you will say, are James and others called His brethren ? In
thesamewayas Joseph himself too was considered the Husband of
Mary." This is at least consistent with the explanation given in
the spurious Homilies " on the Annunciation," Ben. t. ii. p. 797.
And "on the women bearing spices," t. ii. p. 159, Appendix, that
she was the ste/>-)nother oi ]ames. Theodoret, on Gal. i. 19, rejects
this vievif, and makes them sons of Cleopas by her sister.

4 l.uke xxii. 48.

5 Matt, xxvii. 57, 58. [R. V., "asked for." The reading jjTei.
is peculiar here. — R.]


distinguished; from which circumstance es-
pecially one may see his courage. For he
exposed himself to death, taking upon him
enmity with all, by his affection to Jesus,
both having dared to beg the body, and not
having desisted until he obtained it. But not
by taking it only, nor by burying it in a
costly manner, but also by laying it in his
own new tomb, he showeth his love, and his
courage. And this was not so ordered with-
out purpose, but so there should not be any
bare suspicion, that one had risen instead of
another.

"And there was Mary Magdalene, and the
other Mary, sitting over against the sepul-
chre."^ For what purpose do these wait by
it ? As yet they knew nothing great, as was.
meet, and high about Him, wherefore also
they had brought ointments, and were waiting
at the tomb, so that if the madness of . the
Jevvs should relax, they might go and em-
brace the body. Seest thou women's cour-
age ? seest thou their affection ? seest thou
their noble spirit in money ? their noble spirit
even unto death ?

Let us men imitate the women; let us not
forsake Jesus in temptations. For they for
Him even dead spent so much and exposed
their lives, but we (for again I say the same
things) neither feed Him when hungry, nor
clothe Him when naked, but seeing Him
begging, we pass Him by. And yet if ye
saw Himself, every one would strip himself
of all his goods. But even now it is the
same. For He Himself has said, I am he.
Wherefore then dost thou not strip thyself of
all ? For indeed even now thou hearest Him
say. Thou doest it unto me; and there is no
difference whether thou givest to this man or
to Him; thou hast nothing less than these
women that then fed Him, but even much
more. But be not perplexed ! For it is not
so much to have fed Him appearing in His
own person, which would be enough to prevail
with a heart of stone, as (because of His
mere word) to wait upon the poor, the
maimed, him that is bent down. For in the
former case, the look and the dignity of Him
who appears divides with thee that which is
done; but here the reward is entire for thy
benevolence; and there is the proof of the
greater reverence towards Him, when at His
mere word waiting upon thy fellow-servant
thou refreshest him in all things. Refresh
him, and believe Him, who receiveth it, and
saith. Thou givest to me. For unless thou
hadst given to Him, He would not have
counted thee worthy of a kingdom. If thou

6 Matt, xxvii. 61. [R. V., " And Mary Magdalene was there,"
etc.]


Homily LXXXVIII.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


5^3


hadst not turned away from Him, He would
not have sent thee to hell, if thou hadst
overlooked a chance person; but because it
is He Himself that i« despised, therefore
great is the blame.

Thus also Paul persecuted Him, in perse-
cuting them that are His; wherefore too He
said. "Why persecutest thou me?"' Thus
therefore let us feel, as bestowing on Christ
Himself when we bestow. For indeed His
words are more sure than our sight. When
therefore thou seest a poor man, remember
His words, by which He declared, that it is
He Himself who is fed. For though that
which appears be not Christ, yet in this man's
form Christ Himself receiveth and beggeth.

But art thou ashamed to hear that Christ
beggeth ? Rather be ashamed when thou dost
not give to Him begging of thee. For this is
shame, this is vengeance and punishment.
Since for Him to beg is of His goodness,
wherefore we ought even to glory therein;
but tor thee not to give, is of thy inhumanity.
But if thou believe not now, that in passing
by a poor man that is a believer, thou passest
by Him, thou wilt believe it then, when He
will bring thee into the midst and say, " Inas-
much as ye did it not to these, ye did it not
to me."" But God forbid that we should so
learn it, and grant rather that we may believe
now, and bring forth fruit, and hear that
most blessed voice that bringeth us into the
kingdom.

But perhaps some one will say, "Thou art
every day discoursing to us of almsgiving and
humanity." Neither will I cease to speak of
this. For if ye had attained to it, in the first
place, not even so ouglit I to desist, for fear
of making you the more remiss; yet had ye
attained, I miglit have relaxed a little; but if
ye have not arrived even at the half; say not
these things to me, but to yourselves. For
indeed thou doest the same in blaming me,
as if a little child, hearing often of the letter
alpha, and not learning it, were to blame its
teacher, because he is continually and for
ever reminding iiim about it.

For who from these discourses has become
more forward in tlic giving of alms? Who
has cast down his money ? Wiio has given
the half of his substance? Who the tiiird
part ' No one. How then should it be other
than al)surtl, when ye do not learn, to re(iuire
us to desist from teaching' Ye ought to do
the contrary. Though we were minded to
desist, ye ought to stop us and to say, we
have not yet learnt tliesc things, and how is it
ye have desisted from reminding us of them ?


' Acts ix. 4.


' Malt. XXV. 45. [AbridKcd.l


If it befell any one to suffer from his eye,
and I happened to be a physician, and then
having covered it up and anointed it, and
having applied other treatment, I had not
benefited it much, and so had desisted; would
he not have come to the doors of my surgery
and cried out against me, accusing me of
great remissness, for that I had of myself
withdrawn, while the disease remained; and
if, on being blamed, I had said in reply to
these things, that I had covered it up, and
anointed it, would he have endured it? By
no means, but would immediately have said;
"And what is the advantage, if I still suffer
pain." Reason thus also with respect to thy
soul. But what if after having often fo-
mented a hand that was lifeless and shrunk,
I had not succeeded in mollifying it ? Should
I not have heard the same thing? And even
now a hand that is shrunk and withered we
bathe, and for this reason, until we can
stretch it out perfectly, we will not desist.
W^ould that you too were to discourse of
nothing else, at home and at market, at table
and at night, and as a dream. For if we
were always careful about these things by
day, even in our dreams we should be en-
gaged in them.

What sayest thou ? Am I forever speaking
of almsgiving? I would wish myself that
there were not great need for me to address
this advice to you, but that I were to speak
of the battle against the Jews, and heathens,
and heretics; but when ye are not yet sound,
how can any one arm you for the fight ?
How should he lead you to the array, yet
having wounds and gashes. Since if indeed
I saw you thoroughly sound in health, I
should lead you forth to that battle array,
and ye would see by the grace of Christ ten
thousands lying dead, and their heads cast
one ujion anotlier. In other liooks at any
rate, many discourses have been spoken by
us touching these things, but not even so are
we able thoroughly to triumph in the victory,
l)ecause of the remissness of the multitude.
For when we conquer them ten thousand
times over in doctrines, they reproach us with
the lives of the multitude of tliose who join
our congregations, their wounds, their ilis-
eases in tiieir soul.

How then shall we with confidence show
you in the l)attle array, when ye rather do us
mischief, being straightway wounded l)y our
enemies, and made a mock of? For one
man's hand is diseased, and shrunk so as not
to be able to give away. How then sImmiUI
such a one hold a shield, and thrust it before
him, and avoid being wounded by the jeers
of cruelty. With others the feet halt, as


524


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXVIII.


many as go up to the theatres, and to the
resorts of the harlot women. How shall these
then be able to stand in the battle, and not to
be woundea with the accusation of wanton-
ness ? Another suffers and is maimed in his
eyes, not looking straight, but being full of
lasciviousness, and assailing women's chas-
tity, and overthrowing marriages. How then
should this man be able to look in the face of
the enemy, and brandish a spear, and throw
his dart, being goaded on all sides with jeers.
We may see also many suffering with the
belly not less than the dropsical, when they
are held in subjection by gluttony and drunk-
enness. How then shall I be able to lead
forth these drunken men to war ? With
others the mouth is rotten; such are the pas-
sionate, and revilers, and blasphemers. How
then shall this man ever shout in battle, and
achieve anything great and noble, he too
being drunk with another drunkenness, and
affording much laughter to the enemy ?

Therefore each day I go about this camp,
dressing your wounds, healing your sores.
But if ye ever rouse yourselves up, and be-
come fit even to wound others, I will both
teach you this art of war, and instruct you
how to handle these weapons, or rather your
works themselves will be weapons to you, and
all men will immediately submit, if ye would
become merciful, if forbearing, if mild and
patient, if ye would show forth all other vir-
tue. But if any gainsay, then we will also
add the proof of what we can show on our
part,' bringing you forward, since now we
rather are hindered (at least as to your part)
in this race.

And mark. We say that Christ hath done
great things, having made angek of men;
then, when we are called upon to give ac-
count, and required to furnish a proof out of

I TO. nap' eavTwi'.


this flock, our mouths are stopped. For I am
afraid, lest in the place of angels, I bring
forth swine as from a stye, and horses mad
with lust.

1 know ye are pained, but not against you
all are these things spoken, but against the
guilty, or rather not even against them if
they awake, but for them. Since now indeed
all is lost and ruined, and the church is be-
come nothing better than a stable of oxen,
and a fold for asses and camels, and I go
round seeking for a sheep, and am not able
to see it. So much are all kicking, like
horses, and any wild asses, and they fill the
place here with much dung, for like this is
their discourse. And if indeed one could see
the things spoken at each assemblage,* by
men, by women, thou wouldest see their
words more unclean than that dung.

Wherefore I entreat you to change this evil
custom, that the church may smell of oint-
ment. But now, while we lay up in it per-
fumes for the senses, the uncleanness of the
mind we use no great diligence to purge out,
and drive away. What then is the advan-
tage? For we do not so much disgrace the
church by bringing dung into it, as we dis-
grace it by speaking such things one to an-
other, about gains, about merchandise, about
petty tradings, about things that are nothing
to us, when there ought to be choirs of angels
here, and we ought to make the church a
heaven, and to know nothing else but earnest
prayers, and silence with listening.

This then let us do at any rate, from the
present time, that we may both purify our
lives, and attain unto the promised blessings,
by the grace and love towards man of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory world
without end. Amen.

2 (Tvva^Lv. [The word is usually applied to Christian assem-
blies, and in the edition of the Homilies it is sometimes rendered
"communion." But this passage confirms the wider application
defended in the notes to Homily V., p. 31. — R.]


Homily LXXXIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


5^5


HOMILY LXXXIX.

Matt. XXVH. 62—64.

" Now the next day,that followed the day of the preparation, the chief priests and Pharisees
came together unto Pilate, saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while
He was yet alive,' After three days I will - rise again. Command therefore that the
sepulchre be made sure until the third day, lest His disciples come and steal Him
away, and say to the people, He is risen from the dead: so the last error should be^
worse than the first. "


Everywhere deceit recoils upon itself, and
against its will supports the truth. And ob-
serve. It was necessary for it to be believed
that He died, and that He rose again, and
that He was buried, and all these things are
brought to pass by His enemies. See, at any
rate, these words bearing witness to everyone
of these facts. " We remember," these are
the words, " that that deceiver said, when
He was yet alive," (He was therefore now
dead), "After three days I rise again. Com-
mand therefore that the sepulchre be sealed,"
(He was therefore buried), " lest His disci-
ples come and steal Him away." So that if
the sepulchre be sealed, there will be no un-
fair dealing. For there could not be. So
then the proof of His resurrection has become
incontrovertible by what ye have put forward.
For because it was sealed, there was no unfair
dealing. But if there was no unfair dealing,
and the sepulchre was found empty, it is
manifest that He is risen, plainly and incon-
trovertibly. Seest thou, how even against
their will they contend for the proof of the
truth ?

But mark thou, I pray thee, the disciples'
love of truth, how they conceal from us none
of tlie tilings that are said l)y His enemies,
though they use opprobrious language. Be-
hold, at any rate, they even call Him a de-
ceiver, and these men are not silent about
that.

But these things show also their savageness
(that not even at His dentli did they let go
their anger), and these men's simple and
truthful disposition.

But it were wortii while to inquire concern-
ing that point also, where He said, *' After
three days I rise again ? " For one would not

• [oTi !* insrrtcd nt thU point (hut not in the milMrqiirnt cita-
tion). Tlu-rc arc no otiirr variations. K. V., " Now on the mor-
low, whii h is tlif i/ity iidrr the l'rr|uinilion, the rhirf priests and
the Pharisees were gathered together," etc. — K.]

= [k. v. <,mits " will.' ] I [k. v., " will be."]


find this thus distinctly stated,* but rather the
example of Jonah. So that they understood
His saying, and of their own will dealt un-
fairly.

What then saith Pilate? "Ye have a
watch; make it as sure as ye can. And they
made it sure, sealing the sepulchre, and set-
ting the watch." ^ He suffers not the soldiers
I alone to seal, for as having learnt the things
j concerning Christ, he was no longer willing
I to co-operate with them. But in order to be
rid of them, he endures this also, and saith,
" Do ye seal it as ye will, that ye may not
have it in your power to blame others." For
if the soldiers only had sealed, tiiey might
have said (although the saying would have
been improbable and false, yet nevertheless
as in the rest they cast aside siianie, so in
this too they might have been able to say),
that the soldiers, having given up the body to
be stolen, gave His disciples opportunity to
feign the history concerning His resurrection,
but now having themselves made it sure, they
are not able to say so much as this.

Seest thou how they labor for the truth
against their will ? For they tliemselves came
to Pilate, tliemselves asked, themselves sealed,
setting the watch, so as to be accusers, and
refuters one of another. And indeed wlien
I should they have stolen Him? on tlie Sab-
bath? And how' for it was not lawful so
I much as to go out.* And even if they trans-
gressed tlie law, how should they have dared,
who were so timid, to come forth ? And how
could tliey also hnve been able to persuade
the multitude ? liy saying what ? By doing
what ? And from what sort of zeal could they
have stood in behalf of the dead ? expecting

I 4 Not to the Jews, for it wiis often pl.iinly declared to the di*-
! ciplcs, as St. Chrysoslom himself olisrrtrs « little further on.

5 Matt, xxvii. 6;, r/>. (The only pniiliarily is indii.>te<l in the
alnivc rendering; for "made the sepulchre sure, seuliiiK the
1 stone." k. v., guard" fur " watch," and "the Kuurd bcia|{
I with them."- R.]


526


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXIX.


what recompense ? what requital ? Seeing
Him yet alive and merely seized, they had
fled; and after His death were they likely to
speak boldly in His behalf, unless He had
risen again? And how should these things be
reasonable ? For that they were neither will-
ing nor able to feign a resurrection, that did
not take place, is plain from hence. He dis-
coursed to them much of a resurrection, and
continually said, as indeed these very men
have stated, " After three days I rise again."
If therefore He rose not again, it is quite
clear that these men (having been deceived
and made enemies to an entire nation for His
sake, and come to be without home and with-
out city) would have abhorred Him, and
would not have been willing to invest Him
with such glory; as having been deceived, and
having fallen into the utmost dangers on His
account. For that they would not even have
been able, unless the resurrection had been
true, to feign it, this does not so much as
need reasoning.

For in what were they confident ? In the
shrewdness of their reasonings ? Nay of all
men they were the most unlearned. But in
the abundance of their possessions ? Nay,
they had neither staff nor shoes. But in the
distinction of their race? Nay, they were
mean, and of mean ancestors. But in the
greatness of their country? Nay, they were
of obscure places. But in their own num-
bers ? Nay, they were not more than eleven,
and they were scattered abroad. But in their
Master's promises ? What kind of promises ?
For if He were not risen again, neither would
those be likely to be trusted by them. And
how should they endure a frantic people.
For if the chief of them endured not the
speech of a woman, keeping the door, and if
all the rest too, on seeing Him bound, were
scattered abroad, how should they have
thought to run to the ends of the earth, and
plant a feigned tale of a resurrection ? For
if he stood not a woman's threat, and they
not so much as the sight of bonds, how were
they able to stand against kings, and rulers,
and nations, where were swords, and grid-
irons, and furnaces, and ten thousand deaths
day by day, unless they had the benefit of the
power and grace ' of Him who rose again ?
Such miracles and so many were done, and
none of these things did the Jews regard, but
crucified Him, who had done them, and were
they likely to believe these men at their mere
word about a resurrection ? These things are
not, they are not so, but the might of Him,
who rose again, brought them to pass.


2. But mark, I pray thee, their craft, how
ridiculous it is. " We remember," these are
their words, "that that deceiver said, while
He was yet alive. After three days I rise
again." Yet if He were a deceiver, and
boastfully uttered falsehoods, why are ye
afraid and run to and fro, and use so much
diligence? We are afraid, it is replied, lest
perchance the disciples steal Him away, and
deceive the multitude. . And yet this has
been proved to ha^e no probability at all.
Malice, however, is a thing contentious and
shameless, and attempts what is unreasonable.

And they command it to be made sure for
three days, as contending for doctrines, and
being minded to prove that before that time
also He was a deceiver, and they extend their
malice even to His tomb. For this reason
then He rose sooner, that they might not say
that He spake falsely, and was stolen. For
this, His rising sooner, was open to no charge,
but to be later would have been full of suspi-
cion. For indeed if He had not risen then,
when they were sitting there, and watching,
but when they had withdrawn after the three
days, they would have had something to say,
and to speak against it, although foolishly.
For this reason then He anticipated the time.
For it was meet the resurrection should take
place, while they were sitting by and watch-
ing. Therefore also it was fit it should take
place within the three days, since if it had
been when they were passed, and the men
had withdrawn, the matter would have been
regarded with suspicion. Wherefore also He
allowed them to seal it, as they were minded,
and soldiers sat around it.

And they cared not about doing these
things, and working on a Sabbath day, but they
looked to one object only, their own wicked
purpose, as though by that they were to suc-
ceed; which was a mark of extreme folly, and
of fear now greatly dismaying them. For
they who seized Him, when living, are afraid
of Him when dead. And yet if He had been
a mere man, they had reason to have taken
courage. But that they might learn, that
when living also He endured of His own
will, what He did endure; behold, both a
seal, a stone, and a watch, and they were not
able to hold Him. But there was one result
only, that the burial was published, and the
resurrection thereby proved. For indeed sol-
diers sat by it, and Jews are on the watch.

" But in the end of the Sabbath, = as it be-
gan to dawn towards the first day of the week,
came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to
see the sepulchre. And behold there was a

2 [R. v., " Now late on the Sabbath day."]


Homily LXXXIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


52:


great earthquake. For an angel of the Lord
descended from Heaven, and came and rolled
back the stone from the door of the tomb,'
and sat upon it. His countenance was like
lightning, and his raiment white as snow." ■

After the resurrection came the angel.
Wherefore then came he, and took away the
stone ? Because of the women, for they them-
selves had seen Him then in the sepulchre. ^
Therefore that they might believe that He
was risen again, they see the sepulchre void
of the body. For this cause he removed the
stone, for this cause also an earthquake took
place, that they might be thoroughly aroused
and awakened. For they were come to pour
oil on Him, and these things were done at
night, and it is likely that some also had be-
come drowsy. And for what intent and cause
doth he say, '* Fear not ye ? " * First he de-
livers them from the dread, and then tells
them of the resurrection. And the ye is of
one showing them great honor, and indicat-
ing, that extreme punishment awaits them
that had dared to do, what the others had
dared, except they repented. For to be afraid
is not for you, he means, but for them that
crucified Him.

Having delivered them then from the fear
both by his words, and by his appearance
(for his form he showed bright, as bearing
such good tidings), he went on to say, " I
know that ye seek Jesus the Crucified." ^
And he is not ashamed to call Him "cruci-
fied; " for this is the chief of the blessings.

"He is risen."* Whence is it evident?
" As He said." So that if ye refuse to be-
lieve me, he would say, remember His words,
and neither will ye disbelieve me. Then also
another proof, "Come and see the place
where He lay."' for this he had lifted up
the stone, in order that from this too they
might receive the proof. "And tell His tlis-
ciples, that ye shall see Him in (ialilee." *
And he prepares tiiem to bear good tidings
to others, which thing most of all made them
believe. And He said well "in (ialilee,"
freeing tliem from troubles and dangers, so
that fear should not hinder their faith.

"And they dei^arted from the se[nilchre
with fear ami joy."'' Why could tiiis be?
They had seen a thing amazing, and beyond


« [The only texdml v;«riiili<in in the iiddiiion (if
The R. V'. niiutH " from thr dcKir of the tomh," und r
away." to disiinKui^h from .Mark xvi. 4

^ Chap, xxviii. i-^


renders " rolled


^ [tMov, " Nilw," /'. »•., when He wan buried. — R.)

< Alatt. xxviii. 5. [ llir niipliatic UM'tf occum in the Circck of


the New 'I'cxtament pastjige.— K.]

• frTaupufKcoi'.] * Mutt, xxviii. d.

lis aKrrrs with the rniditii; of the two oldekt New 'I'cita-
ment Mss. So R. V. iiiarniii. K.]
« .Matt, xxviii. 7. [Al.niKvil 1
9 Matt, xxviii. 8. [Tin- \\<<f\ " >;reat " in omitted K.)


5 Irhv ia
7 [This


expectation, a tomb empty, where they had
before seen Him laid. Wherefore also He
had led them to the sight, that they might be-
come witnesses of both things, both of His
tomb, and of His resurrection. For they
considered that no man could have taken
Him, when so many soldiers were sitting by
Him, unless He raised up Himself. For this
cause also they rejoice and wonder, and re-
ceive the reward of so much continuance with
Him, that they should first see and gladly
declare, not what had been said only, but also
what they beheld.

3. Therefore after then they had departed
with fear and joy, " Behold, Jesus met them,
saying. All hail." But "they held Him by
the feet,"'° and with exceeding joy and glad-
ness ran unto Him, and received by the touch
also, an infallible proof, and full assurance of
the resurrection. "And they worshipped
Him." What then saith He? "Be not
afraid." Again, He Himself casts out their
fear, making way for faith, " But go, tell my
brethren, that they go into Cialilee, and there
shall they see me."" Mark how He Himself
sends good tidings to His disciples by these
women, bringing to honor, as I have often
said, that sex, which was most dislionored,
and to good hopes; and healing that which
was diseased.

Perchance some one of you would wish to
be like them, to hold the feet of Jesus; ye
can even now, and not His feet and His hands
only, but even lay hold on that sacred head,
receiving the awful mysteries witli a pure con-
science. But not here only, but also in that
day ye shall see Him, coming with that un-
speakable glory, and the multitude of the
angels, if ye are disposed to be humane; and
ye shall hear not these words only, "All
hail!" but also those others, "Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit tiie kingdom
prepared for you before the foundation of the
world."" .

Be ye tlierefore humane, that ye may hear
these things; and ye women, that wear gold,
who have looked on tlie running of these
women, at last, though late, lay aside the dis-
ease of tlic desire for golden ornaments So
that if ye are emulous of these wf>men, change
the ornaments which ye wear, antl clottie
yourselves instead witli almsgiving. Wliat is
the use, I pray you, of these precious stones,
and of tlie garments spangleil with gold ?
" My soul," you say, " is glad, and is pleased
with these tilings." I asked thee the profit,
but thou telli-st me the hurt. For nothing is


• Mult, xxvni. <j. (R. v., "t.K.k hold of hi«fecl."]
"> Malt, xxviii. 10. [R. v., " that they depart.")
iJ NIail. XXV. 14.


528


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily LXXXIX.


worse than being taken up with these things,
and delighting in them, and being riveted to
them. For more bitter is this grievous slav-
ery, when any one finds delight even in being
a slave. For in what spiritual matter will she
ever be diligent as she ought; when will she
laugh to scorn, as she should, the things of
this world, who thinks it a worthy matter for
joy, that she hath been chained in gold ? For
he that continues in prison, and is pleased, will
never desire to be set free; as indeed neither
will this woman; but as having become a kind
of captive to this wicked desire, she will not
endure so much as to hear spiritual language
with becoming desire and diligence, much
less to engage in such work.

What then is the profit of these ornaments
and this luxury ? I pray thee. " I am pleased
with them," thou sayest. Again thou hast
told of the hurt and the ruin. " But I enjoy
also," thou sayest, " much honor from the
beholders." And what is this? This is the
occasion of another destruction, when thou
art lifted up to haughtiness, to arrogance.
Come now, since thou hast not told me of the
profit, bear with me while I tell thee of the
mischiefs. What then are the mischiefs result-
ing therefrom ? Anxiety, which is greater
than the pleasure. Wherefore many of the
beholders, these I mean of the grosser sort,
derive more pleasure from it than she who
wears the gold. For thou indeed deckest thy-
self with anxiety, but they, without this, feast
their eyes.

Moreover, there are other things again, the
debasing of the soul, the being looked upon
with envy on all sides. For the neighboring
women stung by it, arm themselves against
their own husbands, and stir up against thee
grievous wars. Together with these things,
the fact that all one's leisure and anxiety are
spent on this object, that one doth not apply
one's self earnestly to spiritual achievements;
that one is filled with haughtiness^ arrogance,
and vainglory; that one is riveted to the
earth, and loses one's wings, and instead of
an eagle, becometh a dog or a swine. For
having given up looking up into Heaven, and
flying thither, thou bendest down to the earth
like the swine, being curious about mines and
caverns, and having an unmanly and base
soul. But dost thou, when thou appearest.
turn towards thee the eyes of them at the
market-place? Well then; for this very rea-
son, thou shouldest not wear gold, that thou
mayest not become a common gazing stock,
and open the mouths of many accusers. For
none of those whose eyes are toward thee ad-
mireth thee, but they jeer at thee, as fond of
dress, as boastful, as a carnal woman. And


shouldest thou enter into a church, thou goest
forth, without getting anything but countless
jeers, and revilings, and curses, not from the
beholders only, but also from the prophet.
For straightway Isaiah,' that hath the fullest
voice of all, as soon as he hath seen thee, will
cry out, " These things saith the Lord against
the princely daughters of Sion; because they
walked with a lofty neck, and with winkings
of the eyes, and in their walking, trailing
their garments, and mincing at the same time
with their feet; the Lord shall take off their
bravery, and instead of a sweet smell there
shall be dust, and instead of a stomacher,
thou shalt gird thyself with a cord. "^

These things for thy gorgeous array. For
not to them only are these words addressed,
but to every woman that doeth like them.
And Paul again with him stands as an accuser,
telling Timothy to charge the women, ''not
to adorn themselves with braided hair, or
gold, or pearls, or costly array." ^ So that
everywhere the wearing of gold is hurtful, but
especially when thou art entering into a
church, when thou passest through the poor.
For if thou wert exceedingly anxious to bring
an accusation against thyself, thou couldest
not put on any other array than this visage of
cruelty and inhumanity.

4. Consider at any rate how many hungry
bellies thou passest by with this array, how
many naked bodies with this satanical display.
How much better to feed hungry souls, than
to bore through the lobes of thy ears, and to
hang from them the food of countless poor
for no purpose or profit. What ? is to be rich
a commendation ? What ? is to wear gold a
praise ? Though it be from honest earnmgs
that these things are put on you, even so
what thou hast done is a very heavy charge
against thee; but when it is moreover from
dishonesty, consider the exceeding greatness
of it.

But dost thou love praises and honor?
Strip thyself therefore of this ridiculous cloth-
ing, and then all will admire thee; then shalt
thou enjoy both honor and pure pleasure;
since now at any rate thou art overwhelmed
with jeers, working for thyself many causes of
vexation arising out of these things. For
should any of these things be missing, con-
sider how many are the evils that have their
birth therefrom, how many maidservants are
beaten, how many men put to trouble, how
many led to execution, how many cast into
prison. And trials arise hence, and actions,
and countless curses and accusations against
the wife from the husband, against the hus-


I Isa. iii. 16, 24 [lxx.]


2 I Tim. ii. 9.


3 CKTaytjoyaL.


HOMILV LXXXIX.]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW


529


band from her friends, against the soul from
itself. "But it will not be lost." In the
first place, this is not easy to secure, but even
if it be kept safe constantly, yet by being
kei)t, it occasions much anxiety and care and
discomfort, and no advantage.

For what kind of profit arises from hence
to the house ? What advantage to the woman
herself who wears it ? No advantage indeed,
but much unseemliness, and accusation from
every quarter ? How wilt thou be able to kiss
Christ's feet, and cling to them, when thus
dressed ? From this adorning He turneth
away. For this cause He vouchsafed to be
born in the house of the carpenter, or rather
not even in that house, but in a shed, and a
manger. How then wilt thou be able to be-
hold Him, not having beauty that is desirable
in His eyes, not wearing the array that is
lovely before Him, but what is hateful. For
he that cometh unto Him must not deck him-
self out with such garments, but be clothed
with virtue.

Consider what after all these jewels are.
Nothing else than earth and ashes. Mix
water with them, and they are clay. Consider
and be ashamed to make clay thy master,
forsaking all, and abiding by it, and carrying
and bearing it about, even when thou enterest
into a church, when most of all thou oughtest
to flee from it. For neither for this cause was
the church built, that thou shouldest display
therein these riches, but spiritual riches. But
thou, as though thou wert entering into a
pompous procession, thus deckest thyself out
on every side, imitating the women on the
stage, even so dost thou carry about in profu-
sion that ridiculous mass.

Therefore, I tell thee, thou comest for
mischief to many, and when the congregation
is dismissed, in their houses, at their tables,
one may hear the more part describing these
things. For they have left off saying, thus
and thus said the prophet and the apostle,
and they describe the costliness of your gar-
ments, the size of your precious stones, and
all the otner unseemliness of them that wear
these tilings.

This makes you backward in almsgiving.
and your luisbantls. For one of you would
not readily consent to break up one of these
ornaments to feed a poor man. For wlien
thou wouldest choose even thyself to l)e in
distress ratlier than to beholtl these things
broken to pieces, how shouldest thou feed an-
other at the cost of them ?


For most women feel towards these things,
as to some living beings, and not less than
towards their children. "God forbid," thou
sayest. Prove me this then, prove it by your
works, as now at least I see the contrary.
For who ever of those that are completely
taken captive, by melting down these things,
would rescue a child's soul from death ? And
why do I say a child's ? Who hath redeemed
his own soul thereby, when perishing? Nay,
on the contrary, the more part even set it to
sale for these things every day. And should
any bodily infirmity take place, they do every-
thing, but if they see their soul depraved,
they take no such pains, but are careless both
about their children's soul, and their own soul,
in order that these things may remain to rust
with time.

And whilst thou art wearing jewels worth
ten thousand talents, the member of Ciirist
hath not the enjoyment so much as of neces-
sary food. And wiiereas the common Lortl
of all hath imparted to all alike of heaven,
and of the things m Heaven, antl of the spirit-
ual table, thou dost not impart to Him^ven
of perishing things, on purpose that thou
mayest continue perpetually bound with these
grievous chains.

Hence the countless evils,' hence the forni-
cations of the men, when ye prepare them
to cast off self-restraint, when ye teach t!iem
to take delight in these things with which the
harlot women deck themselves. For this
cause they are so quickly taken captive. For
if thou hadst instructed him to look down
upon these things, and to take delight in
chastity, godly fear and humility, he would
not have been so easily taken by the shafts -
of fornication. For the harlot is able 10
adorn herself in this way even to a greater de-
gree than this, but with those other ornaments
not so. Accustom him then to take deligiit
in these ornaments, which he cannot see
placed on tJie harlot. And how wilt thou
bring him into this habit? If thou take off
these, and put on those others, so shall both
thy husband be in safety, and thou in honor,
and God will be propitious to you, and all
men will admire you, and ye will attain unto
tiie good things to come, by the grace and
love towards man of our Lord Jesus Ciirist.
to whom be glory and might, world without
end. Amen.


' f Tlir Oxford translator inserts hrre " lirm r the jriiUiu»ie»,"
but tlirrc is ni> i'<>rr<->|><inilin< (ihr.isc in the Clrccit text. -R.]
» irrtpoit.


530


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XC.


HOMILY XC.

Matt. XXVIII. ii— 14.

" Now when they were going, behold, some of the watch came into the city, and declared
unto the chief priests all the things that were done.' And when they had assembled
with the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave large money unto the soldiers, say-
ing, Say ye, His disciples came by night, and stole Him away while we slept. And if
this come to the governor's ears, we will persuade him, and secure you."


For the sake of these soldiers that earth-
quake took place, in order to dismay them,
and that the testimony might come from
them, which accordingly was the result. For
the report was thus free from suspicion, as
proceeding from the guards themselves. For
of the signs some were displayed publicly to
the world, others privately to those present on
the spot; publicly for the world was the dark-
ness,^privately the appearance of the angel,
the earthquake. When then they came and
showed it (for truth shines forth, being pro-
claimed by its adversaries), they again gave
money, that they might say, as it is expressed,
" that His disciples came and stole Him."

How did they steal Him ? O most foolish
of all men! For because of the clearness and
conspicuousness of the truth, they are not
even able to make up a falsehood. For in-
deed what they said was highly incredible,
and the falsehood had not even speciousness.
For how, I ask, did the disciples steal Him,
men. poor and unlearned, and not venturing
so much as to show themselves ? What ? Vv^as
not a seal put upon it ? What ? were there not
so many watchmen, and soldiers, and Jews
stationed round it ? What ? did not those men
suspect this very thing, and take thought,
and break their rest, and continue anxious
about it ? And wherefore moreover did they
steal it ? That they might feign the doctrine
of the resurrection ? And how should it enter
their minds to feign such a thing, men who
were well content to be hidden and to live ?
And how could they remove the stone that
was made sure ? how could they have escaped
the observation of so many? Nay, though
they had despised death, they would not have
attempted without purpose, and fruitlessly to
venture in defiance of so many who were on
the watch. And that moreover they were
timorous, what they had done before showed


1 \'R. v., " come to pass."]

2 [R. v., " and rid you of care." The entire passage is in verb-
al agreement with the received text. — R.]


clearly, at least, when they saw Him seized,
all rushed away from Him. If then at that
time they did not dare so much as to stand
their ground when they saw Him alive, how
when He was dead could they but have feared
such a number of soldiers ? What ? was it to
burst open a door? Was it that one should
escape notice ? A great stone lay upon it,
needing many hands to move it.

They were right in saying, " So the last
error shall be worse than the first," 3 making
this declaration against themselves, for that,
when after so much mad conduct they ought
to have repented, they rather strive to outdo
their former acts, feigning absurd fictions,
and as, when He was alive, they purchased
His blood, so when He was dead and risen
again, they again by money were striving to
undermine the evidence of His resurrection.
But do thou mark, I pray thee, how by their
own doings they are caught everywhere. For
if they had not come to Pilate, nor asked for
the guard, they would have been more able to
act thus impudently, but as it was, not so.
For indeed, as though they were laboring to
stop their own mouths, even so did they all
things. For if the disciples had not strength
to watch with Him, and that, though upbraided
by Him, how could they have ventured upon
these things ? And wherefore did they not
steal Him before this, but when ye were
come? For if they had been minded to do
this, they would have done it, when the tomb
was not yet guarded on the first night, when
it was to be done without danger, and in se-
curity. For it was on the Sabbath that they
came and begged of Pilate to have the watch,
and kept guard, but during the first night
none of these was present by the sepulchre.

2. And what mean also the napkins that
were stuck on with the myrrh; for Peter saw
these lying. For if they had been disposed
to steal, they would not have stolen the body

3 Matt, xxvii. 6.<.


Homily XC]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


Do


naked, not because of dishonoring it only,
but in order not to delay and lose time in
stripping it, and not to give them that were
so disposed opportunity to awake and seize
them. Especially when it was myrrh, a drug
that adheres so to the body, and cleaves to
the clothes, whence it was not easy to take
the clothes off the body, but they that did
this needed much time, so that from this
again, the tale of the theft is improbable.

What ? did they not know the rage of the
Jews ? and that they would vent their anger
on them ? And what profit was it at all to
them, if He had not risen again ?

So these men, being conscious that they
had made up all this tale, gave money, and
said, "Say ye these things, and we will per-
suade the governor." For the)' desire that
the report should be published, fighting in
vain against the truth; and by their endeavors
to obscure it, by these even against their will
they occasioned it to appear clearly. For in-
deed even this establishes the resurrection,
the fact I mean of their saying, that the dis-
ciples stole Him. For this is the language of
men confessing, that the body was not there.
When therefore they confess the body was
not there, but the stealing it is shown to be
false and incredible, by their watching by it,
and by the seals, and by the timidity of the
disciples, the proof of the resurrection even
hence appears incontrovertible.

Nevertheless, these shameless and auda-
cious men, although there were so many
things to stop their mouths, " Say ye," these
are their words, " and we will persuade, and
will secure you." Seest thou all depraved?
Pilate, for he was persuaded ? the soldiers ?
the Jewish people ? Bui mar^'el not, if money
prevailed over soldiers. For if with His dis-
ciple it showed its might to be so great, much
more with these.

" And this saying is commonly reported,"
it is said, *' until this day." ' Seest thou again
the disciples' love of truth, how they are not
ashamed of saying even this, that such a re-
port prevailed against them.

*' Then the eleven disciples went away into
Galilee, and some worship[)ed, and some when
they saw Him doubted." -

Tiiis seems to me to be the last appearance
in Galilee, when He sent them forth to baji-
tize. And if "some rlonbted," licrein again
admire tljcir truthfulness, liow tliey conceal
not even their sliortcomings up to the last

' Ntatt. xxviii. i j. _[R. V., " wan uprnid nliDuid.' The pliruw
" nninnK the Jews ' in nmitled, unci tiiitpa^ i» udded, u* in the
Vaticnn Ms., and ViilKiitc.- R.]

" Malt, xxviii. i6, 17. [The citation is abridged and altered.
— K.l


day. Nevertheless, even these are assured by
their sight.

• What then saith He unto them, when He
seeth them .'' "All power is given unto me
in heaven and on earth." ' Again He speak-
eth to them more after the manner of man,
for they had not yet received the spirit, which
was able to raise them on high. '* Go ye,
make disciples of all nations, baptizing them
in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to ob-
serve all things whatsoever I have commanded
you; " * giving the one charge with a view to
doctrine, the other concerning command-
ments. And of the Jews He makes no men-
tion, neither brings forward what had been
done, nor upbraids Peter with his denial, nor
any one of the others with their flight, but
having put into their hands a summary of the
doctrine, that expressed by the form of bap-
tism, commands them to pour forth over the
whole world.

i After that, because he had enjoined on them
[ great things, to raise their courage, He says,
" Lo! I am with you alway, even unto the
end of the world. "^ Seest thou His own
proper power again ? Seest thou how those
other things also were spoken for condescen-
sion ? And not with those men only did He
promise to be, but also with all that believe
after them. For plainly the apostles were
not to remain here unto " the end of the
world;" but he speaks to the believers as to
one body. For tell me not, saith He, of the
difficulty of the things: for " I am with you,"
who make all things easy. This He said to
the j)rophets also in the Old Testament con-
tinually, as well to Jeremiah objecting his
youtii,* as to Moses ^ and Ezekiel ** shrinking
from the office, " I am with you," this here
also to these men. And mark, I pray thee,
the excellence of these, for the others, wlien
sent to one nation, often excused themselves,
but these said nothing of the sort, though sent
to the world. And He reminds them also of
the consummation, that He may draw them
on more, and that they may look not at the
present dangers only, but also at the good
things to come that are without end.

" For the irksome things, saith He, that ye
will undergo are finisheil together witli the
present life, since at least even this world it-
self siiall come to an end, but the good things
whicii ye shall enjoy remain immortal, as I
have often told you before." Thus having

1 Matt, xxviii. 18. [The citation ia accurate. R.V., "Allau-
thiirily h.iiYi \>rrn jfiven," etc.]

< .Mall, xxviii. iH, iij. [oCi' iti omilird, as in many xiss. R. V.,
"make diitcipleii of all the nations, lutplizing them into,' etc. . , .
" wlialiw>ever I commanded you."- K.] ■( .Matt, xxviii. ao.

'' Jer. i. 6, 8. 7 Exod. iv. lu, u. ** Kzck. ii. and liL


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XC.


invigorated and roused their minds, by the
remembrance of that day, He sent them forth.
For that day to them that live in good works
is to be desired, even as on the other hand
to those in sin, it is terrible as to the con-
demned.

But let us not fear only, and shudder, but
let us change too, while there is opportunity,
and let us rise out of our wickedness, for we
can, if we be willing. For if before grace
many did this, much more after grace.

3. For what grievous things are we enjoined?
to cleave mountains asunder ? to fly into the
air? or to cross the Tuscan sea? By no
means, but a way of life so easy, as not so
much as to want any instruments, but a soul
and purpose only. For what instruments had
these apostles, who effected such things ?
Did they not go about with one vestment and
unshod ? and they got the better of all.

For what is difficult of the injunctions?
Have no enemy. Hate no man. Speak ill
of no man. Nay, the opposites of these
things are the greater hardships. But He
said, you reply. Throw away thy money. Is
this then the grievous thing? In the first
place. He did not command, but advised it.
Yet even if it were a command, what is it
grievous not to carry about burdens and un-
seasonable cares ?

But oh covetousness ! All things are be-
come money; for this cause all things are
turned upside down. If anyone declares an-
other happy, he mentions this; should he
pronounce him wretched, hence is derived
the description of wretchedness. And all
reckonings are made on this account, how
such an one gets rich, how such an one gets
poor. Should it be military service, should
it be marriage, should it be a trade, should
it be what you will that any man takes in
hand, he does not appl}^ to what is proposed,
until he see these riches are coming in rapidly
upon him. After this shall we not meet to-
gether and consult how we shall drive away
this pest ? Shall we not regard with shame
the good deeds of our fathers ? of the three
thousand, of the five thousand, who had all
things common ?

What is the profit of this present life, when
we do not use it for our future gain ? How
long do ye not enslave the mammon that hath
enslaved you ? How long are ye slaves of
money ? How long have ye no love for lib-
erty, and do not rend in pieces the bargains
of covetousness ? But while, if ye should have
become slaves of men, you do all things, if
any one should promise you liberty; yet be-
ing captives of covetousness, ye do not so much


as consider how ye may be delivered from
this bitter bondage. And yet the one were
nothing terrible, the other is the most bitter
tyranny.

Consider how great a price Christ paid for
us. He shed His own blood; He gave up
Himself. But ye, even after all this, are
grown supine; and the most grievous thing of
all is, that ye even take delight in the slavery,
ye luxuriate in the dishonor, and that, from
which ye ought to flee, is become an object
of desire to you.

But since it is right not only to lament and
to blame, but also to correct, let us see from
what cause this passion and this evil have be-
come an object of desire to you. Whence
then, whence hath this come to be an object
of desire ? Because, thou sayest, it makes
me to be in honor and in security. In what
kind of security, I pray thee ? In the confi-
dence, not to suffer hunger, nor cold, not to
be harmed, not to be despised. Wilt thou
then, if we promise thee this security, refrain
from being rich ? For if it is for this that
riches are an object of desire, if it be in your
power to have security without these, what
need hast thou of these anymore? "And
how is it possible," thou sayest, " for one who
is not rich to attain to this ?" Nay, how is it
possible (for I say the opposite thing) if one
is rich ? For it is necessary to flatter many,
both rulers and subjects, and to entreat count-
less numbers, and to be a base slave, and to
be in fear and trembling, and to regard with
suspicion the eyes of the envious, and to fear
the tongues of false accusers, and the desires
of other covetous men. But poverty is not
like this, but altogether the contrary. It is a
place of refuge and security, a calm harbor,
a wrestling ground, and school of exercise to
learn self-command, an imitation of the life
of angels.

Hear these things, as many as are poor;
or rather also, as many as desire to be rich.
It is not poverty that is the thing to be feared,
but the not being willing to be poor. Ac-
count poverty to be nothing to fear, and it
will not be to thee a matter for fear For
neither is this fear in the nature of the thing,
but in the judgment of feeble-minded men.
Or rather. I am even ashamed that I have
occasion to say so much concerning poverty,
to show that it is nothing to be feared. For
if thou practise self-command, it is even a
fountain to thee of countless blessings. And
if any one were to offer thee sovereignty, and
political power, and wealth, and luxury, and
then having set against them poverty, were
to give thee thy choice to take which thou


Homily XC]


THE GOSPEL OF ST. MATTHEW.


DOJ


wouldest, thou wouldest straightway seize
upon poverty, if indeed thou knewest the
beauty thereof.

4. And I know that many laugh, when
these things are said; but we are not troubled;
but we require you to stay, and soon ye will
give judgment with us. For to me poverty
seems like some comely, fair, and well-
favored damsel, but covetousness like some
monster shaped woman, some Scylla or
Hydra, or some other like prodigies feigned
by fabulous writers.

For bring not for\vard, I pray thee, them
that accuse poverty, but them that have shone
thereby. Nurtured in this, Elias was caught
up in that blessed assumption. With this
Eliseus shone; with this John; with this all
the apostles; but with the other, Ahab, Jeze-
bel, Gehazi, Judas, Nero, Caiaphas, were con-
demned.

But if it please you, let us not look to those
only that have been glorious in poverty, but
let us observe the beauty itself of this damsel.
For indeed her eye is clear and piercing,
having nothing turbid in it, like the eye of
covetousness, which is at one time full of
anger, at another sated with pleasure, at an-
other troubled by incontinence. But the eye
of poverty is not like this, but mild, calm,
looking kindly on all, meek, gentle, hating no
man, shunning no man. For where there are
riches, there is matter for enmity, and for
countless wars. The mouth again of the
other is full of insults, of a certain haughti-
ness, of much boasting, cursing, deceit; but
the mouth and the tongue of this are sound,
filled with continual thanksgiving, blessing,
words of gentleness, of affection, of cour-
tesy, of praise, of commendation. And if
thou wouldest see also the pro]X)rtion of lier
members, she is of a goodly height, and far
loftier than wealth. And if many flee from
her, marvel not at it, for indeed so do fools
from the rest of virtue.

But the poor man, thou wilt say, is insulted
by him that is rich. Again thou art tleclar-
ing to me the praise of poverty. For who,
I pray thee, is blessed, the insulter, or the
insulted ? It is manifest that it is the insulted
person. But tlien, tlic one, covetousness,
urges to insult the other; poverty |)ersiiades
to endure. '' lUit the poor innn suffers hun-
ger,'' thou wilt say. I'aul also suffered hun-
ger, and was in famine.' *' But he has no
rest." Neither " had the Son of Man where
to lay His head." ''

Seest thou how far the j^raises of poverty
have proceedeil, and where it places thee, to


■ I Cor. iv. 1 1 ; J Cor. xi, 27 ; I'liil. iv. la.


' Matt. viii. »o.


what men it leads thee on, and how it makes
thee a follower of the Lord ? If it were good
to have gold, Christ, who gave the unuttera-
ble blessings, would have given this to His
disciples. But now so far from giving it
them, He forbad them to have it. Where-
fore Peter also, so far from being ashamed of
poverty, even glories in it, saying, "Silver
and gold have I none; but what I have give
I thee. "3 And who of you would not have
desired to utter this saying ? Nay, we all
would extremely, perhaps some one may say.
Then throw away thy silver, throw away thy
gold. "And if I throw it away, thou wilt
say, shall I receive the power of Peter?"
Why, what made Peter blessed, tell me ?
Was it indeed to have lifted up the lame
man ? By no means, but the not having
these riches, this procured him Heaven, For
of those that wrought these miracles, many
fell into liell, but they, who did those good
things, attained a kingdom. And this you
may learn even of Peter himself. For there
were two things that he said, "Silver and
gold have I none;" and, "In the name of
Jesus Christ rise up and walk."

Which sort of thing then made Him glori-
ous and blessed, the raising up the lame man,
or the casting away his money? And this
you may learn from the Master of the con-
flicts Himself. What then doth He Himself
say to the rich man seeking eternal life ? He
said not, "raise up the lame," but, "Sell
thy goods, and give to the poor, and come
and follow me, and thou shalt have treasure
in Heaven. "•• And Peter again said not,
" Behold, in Thy name we cast out ilevils;"
although he was casting them out, but, " Be-
hold, we have forsaken all antl followed Thee
what shall we have ? " ^ And Christ again, in
answering this apostle, said not, " If any man
raise up the lame," but, '" Whosoever hath
forsaken houses or lands, shall receive an
hundredfold in this world, and shall inherit
everlasting life."'

Let us also then emulate tills man, that we
may not be confountled, but may with conli-
dence stand at the judgment-seat of Christ;
that we may win Him to be with us, even as
He was with His dibciiilcs. For He will l)e
with us, like as He was with them, if we are
willing to follow them, and to be imitators of
their life and conversation. For in conse-
(juence of these things Goil crowns, and com-
mends men, not requiring of thee to raise the
dead, or to cure the lame. For not these
things make one to be like Peter, but the


3 Act* iii. 6.
S Matt. xix. 37.


4 Mall. xix. 91.

* .Mutt. xix. a9. [AhndRcd.]


534


THE WORKS OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM.


[Homily XC.


casting away one's goods, for this was the
apostles' achievement.

But dost thou not find it possible to cast
them away ? In the first place, I say, it is
possible; but I compel thee not, if thou art
not willing, nor constrain thee to it; but this
I entreat, to spend at least a part on the
needy, and to seek for thyself nothing more


than is necessary. For thus shall we both
live our life here without trouble, and in
security, and enjoy eternal life; unto which
God grant we all may attain, by the grace and
love towards man of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to whom be glory and might, together with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, now and
always, and world without end. Amen.


INDEXES.


INDEX OF SUB|1:CTS


Abel, wherefore slain, 446.

Abraham, humility of, 175, 439;
heartiness of, 237; varied life
of, 330; craft of, 350.

Aceldama, how a witness of the
truth, 508.

Adam, temptation of, 80-1, 92; life
of described, 417.

Adoption, may be useless, 59; in-
timated by Christ, 94.

Adultery, the Jews' law of, 23;
Christ's law of, 116-9; evils of,
300.

Advent, the first, 38; the second,
448, 458; will be in the night,
464, 470; is not near, 470.

Agony, the, how ordered and why,

497-

Almsgiving, merit of, 30, 35, 73,
268, 314, 325, 408, 467-8, 482,
500 ; duty of, 295, 395, 408,
441, 496, 523, 533; rule of, 100,
131, 235, 325, 433-5, 509; ex-
amples of, 395. (See Charity.)

Andrew, 87-8.

Angels, ministry of, 30, 83, 368,
502, 527.

Anger, how to be tamed, 23; when
right, no; evils of, 127. 319,
479, 518; how caused, 429.

Anointing, cures effected by, 217.

Antichrist, coming of, 458, 464.

Antioch, people of, ceremonious,
129; riotous, 217; profane, 248;
given to theatricals, 2^8; world-
ly' 37'*! ungrateful to (Jod, 377;
uncharitable, 390, SCx), 523;
luxurious, 430; population of,
510.

Antony, St., praise of. 54.

Apostles, the, inspiration of. 2, 222;
how victorious, 4, 14, 57; how rul-
ers of the kingdom, 0; teachers
in the ("hurch, 73; rcwartl of,
sure, 85. 227, 22<); c;ill of, 87-8;
represented ail Christians, 91;
above the Prophets, 97; slow to
understand the truth, 104, i()<),
318, 327,398, 502; firmness of,
l()<); how tr.iincd i)y < hrist, m/j,
212, 215, 2J7; mission of, how


seasonable, 213; list of. 213;
why not sent to Samaritans, 214;
why to be provided for, 215; to
bid peace, 216; first mission of,
prophetic, 219; how like sheep
and doves, 220; how proved in
the Acts, 221; aids and trials
of, 221; above heathen heroes,
222; case of, worse than ours,
224; when to flee, 227; will be
justified, 227; boldness of, 22S;
how to confess Christ, 229; how
to hate life, etc., 233; how en-
couraged by Christ, 234; how
humbled, 251; kindness of, 284;
how leavened the Church, 290;
why employed in the miracle of
loaves, 305 ; why washed not,
315; why sharply rebuked, 31S;
begin to believe, 327; varied life
of. 330 ! why questioned at
C^sarea Philippi, 332; confes-
sion of, inferior to Peter's, 333;
leaders of, who, 345; lovers of
mankind, 389; how to be judges,
393; how warned of the Passion,
and why, 398; when first per-
fect, 401; reconciled by Christ,
401; how .'ill cinial, 438; deaths
of, predicteii. 446; physicians of
the soul, 44S; eager for the .Ad-
vent, 450; why warned of the
Jews' troubles, 451; triumph of,
453; encouraged against trou-
bles, 458; how preparetl for the
Passion, 477,502-3; why against
Mary of lielhany, 481; tlight of,
preilicted, 493; what taught, at
the Agony, 498; what, at the
Hetrayal, 502-3; commission of,
531; blessed in poverty, 533.

Aristippus, censure of, 222.

Ascension, a proof of Christ's e(|Ual-
ity with the I'ather, 45.

Astrology, condemned, 36, 454.

Axe, moral of the, ()9.

Haiivi.dnisii captivity, why mcn-
tioiH-<l in the genealogy, 2o, ^o.

Haptism (of Christ), iwofoKI, to; a
second l)ci;iiinint; of tlu' gospel.


44; virtue of the, 71; humilia-
tion of, 75; reasons for, 62, 75.

Baptism (of John), how for remission
of sins, 62; prepared for Christ's,
63; effect of, on the Jews, 63;
of what value, 70, 71.

Baptism, sin after, dangerous, 26,
59, 60, 78; how to be recovered,
467; followed by temptation,
80; makes men brothers, 475.

Beatitudes, the. connection of, 96;
the seeds of Christian doctrine,
105.

Beauty, what it is, and where, 231.

Bethlehem, the glory of, 39, 44, 47;
the slaughter at, 55-7.

Blessing, frequent use of, in the early
Church, 216, (note).

Blind men at Jericho, praise of, 404.

Body, the, decay of, how a benefit,
'230.

Brethren, of Christ, 33, 522. note.

British Isles, 4S1.

Cain, sin of, what, 1S2. 513.
Canaan, woman of, why praiseil, 322.
Carefulness, reasons against, 147,

153-

Centurion, the. faith of. 176-S.

Charity, of timely interference, loi;
wliich the greatest, 120; extent
of, 127; contrasted with riches,
166; the root of all good. 291;
true motive of, what. 37 j; how
to be shown, 4(18; easiness of,
472. (See .Mmsgiving.)

Children, wherein our example, 385.

Children, the 'I hrec, humble confes-
sion of, iS, 92; glory of, 22, 99,
22<>; temperance of, 55.

Christ, law of, simple, 5; twofold
birth of, 9; why called Jesus, 10,
25; why traced up to Paviil, 10;
why to Thamar, 15; reservcil in
teaching the Incarnation. 15,44;
birth of, full of mysteries, 22;
how to be calleii Inunanuel, 33;
brethren of, why so called, 33;
witnessed by ills enemies, 44;
revealed Himself grailually, 44;
favoreil the Jews lirst, 45;


538


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


why sent into Egypt, 51; why
settled at Nazareth, 5S; why
came to John's baptism, 62; His
baptism far greater than John's,
71; why taught by natural em-
blems, 72; indwelling of, mys-
terious, 73; why humbled Him-
self to be baptized, 75 ; why went
into the desert, 80; why fasted,
80 ; temptation of, contrasted
with Adam's, 82; in temptation
represented us, 83; why went
into Galilee, 86; why waited for
John's imprisonment, 87; re-
served His doctrine at first, 87;
preached to all, through His dis-
ciples, 91; why referred some-
times to His Father's power on-
ly, 103; how fulfilled the law,
104; and enlarged it, 105, 108;
legislates with authority, 107;
uses temporal sanctions, 114;
why begins with the second ta-
ble, 115; straitened the law of
marriage, ng; how far forbids
display, 131; what most loves
and hates, 137; prepares to teach
greater strictness, 148 ; why
teaches from the lower creatures,
148, why from the lilies, 150;
why referred often to the Fath-
er, 151; acted what He taught,
151; why enjoins reserve. 159;
law of, how easy, 162; why re-
peated John's threat, 164; for-
bearing, even in judgment, 165;
often enforces obedience, 168,
170; joined miracles with doc-
trine, 172; intimates His Divin-
ity to the leper, 172; His care
to keep Himself in our minds,
175; draws out men's faith, 176,
206, 404 ; encourages high
thoughts of Himself, 177; why
repeated His miracles, 185; re-
jects some, invites others, 186-7;
answers to men's thoughts, 186,
196. 264, 329, 387; intimates
His Divinity in healing the de-
moniacs, 191, in the cure of the
paralytic, 196; careful to prove
His miracles, 197; why sat with
sinners, 200; reproved ignorance
of Holy Scripture, 201; teaches
reserve and caution, 204-5; how
prepared for His miracles, 206;
merciful according to faith, 211;
why went on circuit, 212; why
sent out the Twelve, 213; His
merciful care for them, 215;
how much worked in them,
223; will own His saints, 229;
how sent war, 232; encour-
ages His ministers, 234; His
mercy contrasted with ours,
235; His answer to John's mes-
sage, 239; His account of John,
245; how superior to John, 246;
His joy in the. gospel, 251: de-
clares His Divinity, 252; His
yoke, how easy, 253; straitened
the law of the sabbath, 257; His
reserve and its end foretold, 260;


defends His miracles, 264; fore-
saw the Jews' unbelief, 274;
how like Jonah, 274; why re-
buked His kindred, 279; His
treatment of His Mother, 280;
willed the Jews' salvation, 285;
His Mercy, a reason for ours,
286; His cure for His country-
men, 297; why prayed in some
miracles only, 304; His Di-
vinity recognized, on the sea,
312; how far condemned tradi-
tion, 315; prepares to abrogate
Judaism, 316; His doctrine of
meats, 31S; what favoured, in
the woman of Canaan, 323; why
refused a sign, 329; why re-
proved His disciples, and in
what spirit, 329-30; how as-
serted His Divinity to Peter,
333; how long reserved as to
His Passion, 334; what teaches
by Peter, 335; extent of His
promises, 337; would have wil-
ling service, 339; how to be
followed, 340 ; Merciful in
severity, 340; why Transfigured,
345 ; always spake of His Pas-
sion after His miracles, 353;
His care of the possessed, 355;
shewed His Sonship by the tri-
bute money, 358; His care for
little ones, 368 ; aims wholly at
repentance, 373; who "gathered
in His Name," 374; His love,
the source of ours, 375; our
pattern of forgiveness, 380;
His law of marriage, 383; rec-
ommended what, in children,
385; reproved what, in the rich
young man, 388; His promises
conditional, 392; prepared the
twelve for His Passion, 398;
why gives not Heaven Him-
self, 400; His care to reconcile
the Twelve, 401; His care to
shew the faith of those whom
He healed, 404; His power
shewn in entering the city, 405 ;
His self-denial, 405; His wis-
dom in answering the elders,
411; His severity to the Phari-
sees, 427; draws men on to own
His Godhead, 432; why re-
ferred to David, 432; respects
authority even in the bad, 436;
predicts His Passion, 445; His
Judgment, 448; His grief for
Jerusalem, 447; why warned the
Jews, 448; His power shewn in
the time of preaching the
gospel, 452; how to come to
Judgment, 459; would be fol-
lowed of choice, 460; is all in
all to Christians, 461 ; forbids
curiosity, 463; why spoke as if
ignorant of the Day, 464-5;
how overcame Satan, 473; is in
His poor, 475; how declared
His Passion, 477; how loved
His enemies, 477; His con-
siderateness, 481; why kept the
Passover, 485; His Mercy to


Judas, 486, 491, 498, to the
Jews, 503, 512, 521; why par-
took of the Supper, 492; why
ate and drank after His rising,
492; why went into Galilee, 493;
why needed to pray, 494; yielded
Flimself freely, yet shewed His
Power, 499, 503; how to be en-
tertained, 500; glorious under
insult, 504; why silent before
Pilate, 511; suffered in all His
members, 516; why spake aloud
on the Cross, 521; is in His poor,
522; how to be embraced, 527;
how always present with His
Church, 531; (See Divinity
Humanity, Economy, Passion,
' etc.)
Christians, must be more righteous
than Jews, 258; more than the
Pharisees, 395; to fight for one
another, 369; to act rightly,
without respect to others, 396;
guilt of, extreme, 455; should
obey Christ of choice, 460;
vanquished because of their own
unsoundness, 523 ; arms of,

524.

Church, the, in the Patriarchs, 16;
fidelity of, shewn in Ruth, 17;
is the "Salt of the earth," the
" Light," the " City," the
"Candle," 97-8; how increased,
290 ; the last appeal, 373 ;
charity of, 407; trials of, 452;
triumph of, 453; whereon built,
494. (See Kingdom, Gospel.)

Church Offerings, how far commend-
able, 313, 482.

Church Service, God speaks in, 7;
how to be improved, 73; a
spiritual school, 122 ; sin of
irreverence in, 139,216; prepara-
tion for, 319; lewd looks in, re-
proved, 443.

Circumcision, law of, how far, and
when, repealed, 316.

City of God, its glories, 7, 8, 10, 78,

79-

Commandment, the eighth, how im-
plied in the ninth, 120.

Communion, Holy, how to be im-
proved, 31 ; deserted for the
stage, 48 ; why private, 160;
how a sacrifice of thanksgiving,
174 ; intended for a bond of
brotherly love, 218; sin of pro-
faning, 242; dignity of, 312;
could not soften Judas, 491; the
profane not to be received at,
123, 496. (See Sacraments.)

Concord, blessedness of, 374.

Confession, the truest thanksgiving,
18.

Consolation, whence to be sought
by mourners, 209; sources of,
in death, 331.

Continence, a gift, but attainable,

384.
Corinthians, sin of, 41; repentance

of, 13.
Covetousness, how punished here,

60; akin to sensuality, 61;


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


539


blinds the soul, 143; dangerous,
144 ; unnatural, 145, 194;
heathenish, 152 ; a madness,
193, 320; how wasteful, 194; in
feasts, reproved, 301 ; exhor-
tation against, 426; how to be
cured, 449; extreme guilt of,
475; in Judas, 482; description
of, 483; nakedness of, 48S; self-
wounded, 489; the worst vice,
489; ensnaring, 499; insatiable,
499; miserable, 500; forbidden
even in thought, 515; a slavery,

532.
Courtiers, life of, a slavery, 362.
Craftsmen, sinful ingratitude of,

377-

Creatures, the, not evil, 343, 3^,
365, 384. (See ManichKans.)

Cross, the, beginning of remis-
sion, 62; predicted by John,
Isaiah, and David, 240; offence
of, when removed, 334: must
be borne as a Crown, 335; sign
of, its use and power, 336, 518;
glory of, shewn at the Trans-
figuration, 346; the beginning
of Grace, 436; will be seen at
the Judgment, 459; power of,
520-1.

Cyrus, moved by God, 39.

Daviu, why first in the genealogy,
10, 21; repentance of, 14, iSi-
4; humility of, 19, 56, 96, 149,
175; Son of, title of honor, 210;
profaneness of, why defended
by Christ, 256; strong in virtue,
weak in sin, 270; pleased God
without miracles, 290; forbear-
ance of, 386; true judgment of,
396; his testimony to Christ,
433; sin of, heinous, 455.

Death-bed, full of comfort to the
good. 331.

Demoniac, the relapsed, a type of
the Jews, 275.

Despair, danger of, 514.

Devil, the, not sensual, 27; encour-
ages play, 42; his craft in the
Temptation, 181; his activity
for our ruin, 83; how believes,
84; how fell, 92; being defeated,
departs, 99; how to be resisted,
124; how "the wicked One,"
136; power of, limited, 220;
ought to mourn, 2(j8; why can-
not stand divided, 264; cast
out by the Disciples, 265; his
fall prophesied, 266; strives to
bring reproach on nature, 355;
how to be cast out, 355; devised
self-mutilation, 3S4; an example
of pride, 403: more obeyed than
Christ, 407; loves lewd com-
pany, 430; tempts by vain glory,
434; his mode of attack, 487,

513-

Diogenes, censure of, 222.

Disi iples, why fr<>ni ( lalilee, 88;
distinguished from the multi-
tudes, 91; why sent on circuit,
212. (See Ap<«t!cs.)


Dispensation. (See Incarnation.')
Disposition, in men's own power,

282.
Dives, why damned, 60, 84, 430,

454. 455-
Divinity of Christ, declared by John,
3 (note); concealed at first, 45,
71, 104 ; tokens of, in the
Epiphany, 47; first declared by
the Spirit, 71; doubted by Satan,
81 ; intimated in words of Christ,
95, 99; hid from the Jews, 103,
116, 127, 151, 167; .confessed
by the leper, 172, by the Cen-
turion, 179; in two miracles,
190-1 ; by His answering to
men's thoughts, 195, 211 ; by
the two blind men, 211; in His
answer to John 239; in tlis
sayings of John, 245, 246; in
His thanksgiving, 251 ; in His
revealing the Father, 252 ; in
Isaiah's prophecy, 260-1; in His
acts of authority, 304; by I'eter
and others, 333; in His charge
to Peter, 333; by His Coming
in Glory, 341; in the Trans-
figuration, 346; in the miracle
of the Tribute, 358 ; in His
answer to the rich young man,
3S7; in His Entry into Jerusa-
lem, 405; by the children in the
Temple, 409; in the Parable of
the Marriage Feast, 421; to the
Lawyer, 432; in the question
about David's Lord, 433; in the
Garden, 497-503; to Caiaphas,

504-
Divorce, why allowed to the Jews,

119; why not to Christians, 119.
Docetae, refuted by Christ's burial,

273-

Doctrine, summary of Christian, 3;
why taught by familiar things,
38 ; revealed gradually, 45 ;
which, first taught, 71; without
practice vain, 167; supported by
miracles, 172; not to be pressed
unseasonably, 203 ; may vary
according to the persons ad-
dressed, 236 ; seldom put for-
ward by Christ, 395.

Doing and teaching, why joined, 106.

Dress, excess of, censured, 26, 307,
527 ; hinders devotion, 308 ;
leads to sin, 308; to pride, 52S.

EcoNnMY. (See Incarnation.)

Election, of the wise men. 39; time
and extent of, 394; is of grace,
but requires work. 423; belongs
to all believers, 457.

Elijah, despair of, 149; boldness of,
170, 2(y); why al the 'i'ranslig-
uration, 34() ; in what sense,
come already, 352; how to come
hereafter, 353.

Elisha, why. would not see Naaman,

173-
End. signs of the, 66, 45S; sudden-
ness of the, 464; to be in the
night, 464; why concealed from
us, 465; is not near, 470.


Envy, misery of, 262; of the coun-
trymen of Christ, 296; rebuked
in the laborers in the vineyard,

394-

Epiphany, mystery of the, 47.

Error, worse than ignorance, 454.

Esau, self-rejected, 15, 59.

Eunuch, the Ethiopian, believed af-
ter search, 6.

Eunuchs, how far praised, 3S4, 470.

Evangelists, candor of, 4S2. 506,

531.
Evil, cause of, 366; not necessary,

3(>7-

Evil speaking, sinful and dangerous,
13, 26, in; not to be listened
to, 248.

Example, force of, 99; of Christ and
His saints to be followed. 396;
to be found in deserts, 439; ne-
glect of, dangerous, 456 ; of
some, condemns others, 476.

Excommunication, threatened by
St. Chrysostom, 123, 496.

Expense, sinfulness of, 468.


Faith, in hell necessary, 85; why
not required at first by Christ,
89; must be followed by prac-
tice, 167, 395; examples of, 172,
176, 179, 195, 205. 321. 354,
404, 486; need of, 311; in the
doers only, has worked miracles,
354; how a mustard seed, yet
moves mountains, 355; hindered
by fear, 411.

Faithful, the, will endure to the end,
463.

Falling back, after baptism, danger-
ous, 276, 395; how recovered,
427.

Fasting, benefits of, 74, 80; of Christ,
how ordered, 81; Christian rule
of, 140; why not enjoined to
the disciples. 202 ; inferior to
charity, 291 ; a help to prayer
and almsgiving, 356; when com-
mendable, 46S.

Fear, of men censured, 229.

Fig-tree, the, an example of ven-
geance, 410.

Forbearance, duty of, 369, 372.

Forgiveness, how gained from God,
35; how connectcil witii John's
bapti><m, 63; not to be hail in
the next world, tjo; gained by
forgiving. 102; hope of. taught
by the Lord's Prayer, 135; de-
pends on ourselves, 136; duly
of, unlimiteil, 376, 379; forfeited
by cruelly, 379 : bcnelits all
parties. 380; reasons for. 47S.

Fornicator, guilt of, how nuasured,

455-
Free-will, not dcstroyeil by grace,

39; allowed by Christ, 364;

provcil by our own ct>nduct,

305 ; of ludas asserted. 486;

needs I I(kI s help, 4v>4 ; of Christ,

49S. 503.
Friendship, Christian motives of,

375-


540


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Gabriel, appearance of, explained,

24-

Genealogy, the, difficulties of, 6, 2o;
why mentions bad women, 6,
17; why omits three kings, 6;
the vestibule of the Gospel, 8;
sum of the gospel, 10 ; of fe-
males, not traced, 11; why di-
vided in three parts, 20.

Gentiles, call of the, signified, 26;
in the star, 38, in the wise men,
47, in "these stones," 69, in
Christ's settling at Capernaum,
86, 180, by Isaiah, 260, in the
ass's colt, 405, by the children
in the temple, 409, in parables,
416, 421, in Mary of Bethany,
481; spiritual pride of, 59; con-
dition of, before Christ, 87, 251;
sin and punishment of, 242; to
be respected in our lives, 277.

Gentleness, needful to the ministry,
197.

Glory, personified, and shown worth-
less, 363.

God, spake to the patriarchs, i; to
Moses, 2 ; in the apostles, 2 ;
kingdom of, described, 6; speaks
in divine service, 7 ; threatens
hell, 7; city and court of, de-
scribed, 7, 8; present at baptism
of Christ, 44; deceives His ene-
mies, 51; appeared in fire, 71;
long-suffering of, 84, 154, 197;
why must reward His saints,
85; how our Debtor, 100; re-
wards His own work in us, 115;
how we may resemble, 127; is
invisible, 133 ; why mentioned
in the Lord's Prayer, 134, why
in the sermon, 137; cannot agree
with mammon, 146; sure bounty
of, 152; unfailing goodness of,
156; providence of, 228 ; how
gives to him that hath, 285 ; how
near to His servants, 336; ap-
pears ever in clouds, 348; wills
the salvation of all, 368 ; His
gifts to man, 376; calls each in
his season, 394; throne of , inac-
cessible, 399 ; has given His
bond for our alms, 408 ; why
sometimes speaks uncertainly,
415; a Teacher of good works,
434; unity of, why declared in
Holy Scriptures, 432, 438 ; hates
bloodshed, 447; why speaks as
if ignorant, 465.

Godliness, how gainful, 417.

Good name, to whom, useful, 519.

Good-will, value of, 510.

Good works, our own to be forgot-
ten, 18; magnified by humility,
ig; spoiled by pride, 100; neces-
sary to salvation, 395, 495; which
the best, 468; the best furniture,
500.

Gospel, the, contrasted with the law,
i; excellency of, 4; how higher
than the law, 23, 167; described
Isaiah, and John, 64; all things
raised by, 78; how a light, 87;
comprises the law, 109 ; how


brings war, 232 ; raised the
standard of faith and practice,
241; how soon spread, 452; tri-
umph of, 453; how a testament,
491.
Gospels, the, why several, 3; har-
mony of, 3; accepted by all her-
etics, 4; simple purity of, 5, 6;
letters of the Divine King, 8;
nature of, 14; object of, the life
of Christ, 298; written in mild-
ness, 300.

Habit, no excuse for sin, 122; how
broken through, 122; danger of
evil, 515.

Hannah, sorrow of, blessed, 41.

Harvest, one here, one hereafter, 293.

Heart, the, how a treasure, 269.

Heaven, glories of, 7, 8; by what
usury gained, 35 ; first named by
John, 65 ; why opened at Christ's
baptism, 76; unseen but certain,
85; to be sought before all else,
153; will be given impartially,
400.

Hebrews, wickedness of the old, i.

Hell, object of, 7; descent to, 9; first
named by John, 63; proved by
John, 72; typified by the fur-
nace, 73; prepared for avarice,
79; proportioned to present im-
purity, 84; confessed by devils,
84 ; when first mentioned by
Christ, III ; why less than
Heaven, 129; intolerable, 164;
pains of, 276; mention of profit-
able, 277 ; how described by
Christ, 389; not prepared for us,
476.

Heretics, involuntary witnesses to
the truth of Holy Scripture, 4;
reproved by the monks' grace,
343, by Christ's blessing chil-
dren, 360; how to be dealt with,
288; meant by the tares, 287;
denied the Passion, 492. (See
Marcion, etc.)

Herod, folly of, 45 ; an example of
the profane, 48.

Herod (Antipas), overcome by John,
171; marriage of, why illegal,
^298.

Herodias, aggravated sin of, 299.

Hezekiah, prayer of, commended,

331-
High priest, how, more than one,

477-
Holy Spirit, gift of, higher than
Holy Scripture, i ; how came on
the apostles, i; signs of, 2, 77;
equality of, 2, 77; inspired the
evangelists, 4 ; descents of,
showed the new dispensation,
10; absolute need of, 12 ; His
operation in the Incarnation, 22,
25 ; moved the Magi, Cyrus,
Paul, 39; why appeared in fire,
40, 71 ; why first named by John
Baptist, 71; an earnest of judg-
ment, 72; why descended on
Christ, 76; why as a dove, 77;
a token of Heav»n, 86; gifts of,


sometimes without holiness, 168;
what the blasphemy against,
266; effect of, upon the apostles,
401; gift of, always ready, 413;
saves not the unwilling, 495.

Honor, contrasted with meekness,
166.

Humanity, raised to heaven by
Christ, 2, 78.

Humanity (of Christ), the bond be-
tween earth and heaven, 10;
how proved by Paul and Mat-
thew, 22; denied by Valentinus
and others, 22 (note); preached
earlier than the Godhead, 215;
shewn in the Epiphany, 47, 50,
in His fasting, 81, in His sleep-
, ing, 119, in His sailing, 195, in
feeling the crowd, 206, in His
prayer to God, 304, in His
agony, 497. (vSee Incarnation.)

Humility, the crown of virtue, 17;
examples of, 19 ; why first
named in the sermon, 92; the
true wisdom, 175; happiness,
362; neglect of, fatal, 295; the
way to glory, 401 ; in the
Monks, 438, also in seculars,

439-
Hypocrisy, what it is, 132, 141; pro-
voked the severity of Christ,
427 ; ruined the scribes, 440 ;
worse in Christians, 441.

, —

Idolatry, grossness of, 5.

Tgnorance, better than error, 454.

Incarnation, the, declared by the
three first Evangelists, 3; binds
Heaven and earth, 10; reserved
at first, 15, 52; accoftnt of, 22,
32; when first taught, 45; shown
in the fasting, and tempta-
tion, 80, in His retiring to
the desert place, 303, in His
question to Peter, 332; His care
to prove it, 417, 497; the great
mercy of God, 175.

Indulgence, cruelty of , 108, 123; un-
fits for Heaven, 467.

Innocents, the murder of, why per-
mitted, 55; was foretold, 57.

Insolence, against charity, iii ; to
the poor, censured, 236; to be
suffered, not acted, 473.

Intemperance, evils of, 283; vile-
ness of, 356; lasting debasement
of. 357; its • punishment, 357;
mother of lust, 429; power of,
overcome by the Monks, 429;
sinfulness of, 467.

Intercession, duty of, 189 ; not
always effectual, 34, 374.

Investment, which the best, 460.

Isaiah, Evangelical prophecies of,
32, 63, 240, 260, 285, 337.

Israel, a figure of believers, 45.

Jacob, an example of freedom from
care, 149; of forbearance, 270;
trial of, 310.

James, the brother of our Lord, his
character, 33.

Jerusalem, old names of, 32; coun-


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


541


cil of, 33; destruction of, fore-
told, 422.

Jesus, mysteries in the name of, 25.

Jewels, shewn useless, 529.

Jews, the, account of their unbelief,
15, 76, 87, 119, 273, 406; their
pride of birth, 16; gained noth-
ing from Abraham, 59, 6g; envi-
ous disposition of, 43 ; reproved
by Heathens, 38; were first fa-
vored in the gospel, 45, 422; yet
outrun by the Gentiles, 47; said,
and did not, 167; confusion of,
170; unthankful, 175; convicted
by their inconsistency, 246; pun-
ishment of, foretold, 275, 395,
415, 421 ; blindness of, proved
wilful, 284 ; asked no right
questions, 246, 286, 292 ; fin-
al conversion of, by Elijah, 353;
how to be judged by the apos-
tles, 392; craft of, 410; cowardice
of, 411; how bidden, 421; their
troubles from God, 451; hated
by all, 452; why to flee, 457;
how much and why punished,
457; madness of , against Christ,
477. 506, 516; government of,
changed, 482 ; how broke the
Passover, and why, 503, 512;
perverted justice in the trial of
Christ, 503, 511 ; resisted all
w^arning, 508, 513, yet not all
reprobated, 513; sole authors of
the I'assion, 516 ; used all
cruelties, 516 ; how convicted
themselves, 525. (See Phari-
sees.)

Job, patience of, 84; righteous, 107;
bore all but reproach, 96; char-
itable interference of, loi; not a
slave to wealth, 147,225; virtues
of, eminent, 224, under special
disadvantages, 225, as compared
with other saints, 225 ; pre-
vailed by his piety, without
miracle, 290; trials of, ordered
by God, 192, 310.

John, the Haptist, humility of, 19;
time of his preaching, 61; why
sent, 62; how baptized for Re-
mission, 62; how prepared for
Christ, 63; effect of his preach-
ing, 63, 65; austerity of, 64; great
before grace, 65 ; ivhy did no
miracles, 87; disciples of, envious
of Christ's, 201 ; message of, ex-
plained, 238; how prcdicteii the
Cross, 240; eiiualled the proph-
ets in knowledge, 240 ; clear
from charge of fickleness by
Christ, 243; stood between the
law and the gospel, 244; his
system contrasted with Christ's,
246; murderof, how aggravateil,
joa; in what sense, l-llias, 353.

John, the I-'vangelist, [)iirpose of his
Ciospel, to establish the (iod-
head, 3 (note) ; not jealous of
Peter after Pentecost, 401 ; why
did not six-ak of the destruction
of Jcrusakin. 458 ; the most
spiritual in doctrine, 482.


Joseph, an example of forgiveness,
381, of self-denial, 505; a type
of Christ, 505.

Joseph, the husband of Mary,
genealogy of, why traced, 6, 11.
14 ; his descent from Da\'id
proved by his marriage, 11; his
espousals were to shelter the
\'irgin, 15; his conduct proved
the miraculous birth, 23 ; en-
couraged to adopt the Child, 25;
referred to the prophets, 32 ;
praised for self-restraint, 23,
and for obedience, 33.

Joseph, of Arimathisa, emboldened
by the Cross, 522.

Josephus, to be believed, because a
zealous Jew, 457.

Judah, incest of, why mentioned in
the Gospel, 15, 17.

Judas, ruined by avarice, 61, 193,
4S2, 488; irritated by reproach,
96 ; had received grace, 168;
had been once elect, 392; hard-
ness of, 482, 499; deaf to all
warning, 482; not excused by
predestination, 4S6; utter ruin
of, 508; downward progress of,

514-

Judgment, of others blamed, 397; of
our own soul, commended, 271.

Judgment, The, why compared to
threshing, 72; certainty of, 86;
day of, a theatre, 132; sudden-
ness of, 146; will be equitable
to all, 242; foreseen by Isaiah,
260 ; is partly present, partly
future, 267; fairness of, 270; ex-
pectation of, in the early church,
342; why named in the Monks'
Grace, 342 ; shewn in the
Transfiguration, 349 ; how to
be thought of, 460; how proved,
• 462 ; why hidden, 465 ; not
really delayed, 466 ; justice of,
shown, 476.

Julian, miracles in the time of, 21.

KiN(;Df)M, the, rewards, guides, and
wars of 6; glories of, 7; a New
Polity, begun at the Baptism of
Jesus, 44, shown to be distant,
458; is our inheritance, 476; yet
of grace, 477.

Labor, pleasantness of, 331.
I.amech, what the sin of, 446.
Landlords, <j|)|)ressions of, 377.
Laughter, excess of, reproved, 26,

41-
Law, the, given in terrors, 2, 8; was
typified in Phares, id, 17; given
in conseciuence of (ientile gross-
ness, 3^; ceaseil at the i!ai)tism
of Christ, 78 ; enlarged by
Christ, 103; with new sanctions,
lu() ; how fulfilled by t hrist,
107, 108; not evil, though de-
fective, li>7 ; retaliation of,
really merciful, kh), 123; how
jH-rmitted evil, 120; an educa-
tion for the gos|)el, I2i; re-


spected by Christ in His charge
to the leper, 173; abrogation of ,
hinted by Christ, 316, 329, 458;
how hangs on love, 431 ; put
for the whole Old Testament,
435 ; in morals confirmed, in
ceremonials rejiealed, 436, 441 ;
how measured punishments,
455; rites of, when ceased, 491.

Life, inequalities of, solved by the
doctrine of a judgment, 86, 461;
a prison, 90; full of joy as of
sorrow, 330; different ages, and
sins of, 490.

Lord's Day, the, how to be spent,
31; little improved, 73.

Luke, addresses heathens, 4 ; his
genealog)' fuller than Matthew's,
7 ; imitates the style of Paul,
20 ; added to Matthew's ac-
count, 24, 96, 178, 201, 205,
206, 471.

Lust, a possession of the Devil, 193;
leads to cruelty, 300; how best
cured, 371; comes of drunken-
ness, 429 ; invites Devils, 430;
forbidden in thought, 515.

Luxury, why compared to thorns,
2S3; in feasting reproved, 301,
and in dress, 307; pain of, 330;
lust the cause of, 356; destruc-
tiveness of, 430; sin of, 467.

Lysias, compared with Pilate, 512.

Maccabees, praise of the, 241.

Macedonians, heresy of the, 77.

Manichceans, heresy of the, loS,
181. 305. 317. 343- (^ee Crea-
tures.)

Marcion, heresy of, 47, 252. 274,
492.

Marriage, Jewish law of, 11, 12, 22,
25, 428; a great mystery, 42;
duties of, 49; protected by Christ,
119; law of , explained by Christ,
382; prudent, in youth, 371;
abuse of, 443.

Martyrs, the, the real conquerors,

505-

Mary the Virgin, the parents of, not
named by Matthew, 6, 11, 12;
protected by her marriage, 15,
22; character of, consiilered in
the .Annunciation, 24; the per-
petual virginity of, not contra-
dicted by Matthew, 33; made il-
lustrious by her stay in I'gypt,
53; vanity of, reproved, 279.

Mary, of Bethany, promise to, 314;
the faith of, 4v'<(>; fame of, 4S1;
an example of liberality in church
offerings, 482.

NLitthew, the humble condition and
high graces of, 2; wrote in He-
brew for the Jews, 3; Christ
s|)oke in, (>; ilifticultics of, 6;
wrote before Mark, 2o; call of,
198; how trained by Christ, 205;
virtues of, 295; candor of, 345.

.Meats, question of. ijuiircctiy set-
tled, 317; Christ's law of, 318;
M.inicli.ian doctrine of. re-
proved. 343.


542


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Meditation, tiie benefits of, 12; neg-
lect of, too common, 271.

Meekness, duty and benefits of, 93,
123, 478, 519; better than honor,
166; the true mode of following
Christ, 472.

Mercy, man's different from God's,
94; benefits of, 102; sometimes
lies in severity, 109; of both
Covenants, 109; preferred to sac-
rifice, 200; God's, a reproof to
ours, 235; of kind answering,
235; enforced by the mercies of
Christ, 286; of Christ, shewn in
severity, 340; brings ease, 350;
how to be shewn to the breth-
ren, 372; how towards heathens,
373; to be shewn to Christians,
for Christ's sake, 378; is for
others, not ourselves, 436; must
be had before death, 471.

Ministry, the, responsibility of, 97;
has' need of gentleness, 197; and
caution, 203; how a harvest, 213;
how like sheep and doves, 220;
made strong in weakness, 220;
must have Scripture knowledge,
294; warned in the Transfigura-
tion, 346; sin of, heinous, 455;
should be free from secular care,

509-

Miracles, why told differently m the
Gospels, 3; use of, 20, 192:
ceased when no longer wanted,
20; some under Julian, 21; why
few at first, 44, 52; declared the
Creator, 104; did not save the
unholy, 168; alternated with
doctrine, 172; confirmed by
prophecy, 180; abundance of,
185; Christ's care to prove, 197,
206; inferior to obedience, 218;
defended by Christ, 264; noth-
ing without holiness, 290; why
always followed the predictions
of the Passion, 353; sometimes
followed, sometimes went be-
fore faith, 354; some wrought
by the garments of Christ, 516.

Mirth, excess of, censured, 41.

Monks, holiness of the Egyptian, 54;
some, never drank, 149; number
of the, 223; their grace before
meat commended, 342;- devo-
tion of, an example to seculars,
344; their retreats, dress, de-
votion, labors, music, contrasted
with the stage, 417, etc.; have
the wedding garment, 423; sol-
diers of Christ, 424; converse
with angels, 425; nobility of,
425; victorious over the vices,
429; humility of, 438.

Moses, mission of, contrasted with
Christ's, 1,2, to; prayer of, once
rejected, 34; self-denial of, 55;
the sons of, rejected for un-
worthiness, 59; why at the
Transfiguration, 346; an ex-
ample of forgiveness, 381; how
honored by Christ, 436; why
loved by God, 474.

Mourning, for sin, blessed, 40, 93;


excess of, censured, 208, 330;
profitable for the soul, 263.

Mutilation, a device of Satan, 384.

Mysteries, the. (See Holy Com-
munion.)

Names, significance of, in Holy
Scripture, 21; used to represent
events, 32.

Nativities, casting of, censured, 454.

Nature, proved not evil, against the
Manichseans, 360, 366; often
symbolized by Christ, 462.

Nazareth, why our Lord lived at, 58;
His second visit to, 296.

Nebuchadnezzar, pride of, 28; re-
pentance of, 84 ; did justice to
the virtue of the Three Chil-
dren, 99; received a revelation,
168.

Necessity, doctrine of, disproved,
181; not implied in our Lord's
preference of the apostles, 284-
6; in what sense taught by
Christ, 462.

Necromancers of Antioch censured,

249-

Neutrality, impossible to Christians,
266; not enough for salvation,
472.

Ninevites, the, a reproach to the
Jews, 38; the repentance of, de-
ferred God's wrath, 274, 392.

Nobility, what it is, to Christians,
16; pride of, condemned, 17; is
no substitute for virtue, 34; re-
proved by Christ at Nazareth,
59; vanity of the common, 361;
real, in John the Baptist, 362;
in the Monks, 425.

Oaths, against God's glory, 120.

Obedience, to be joined with prayer,
161; the end of our Lord's
teaching, 171; the best miracle,
219; joins to Christ, 280; neces-
sary to salvation, 392; must be
perfect, 395; easiness of, 532.

Offenses, why not removed, 364;
why foretold, 364, 367.

Oneness, of God, why often men-
tioned, 432, 438.

Parable, the, of the relapsed de-
moniac, applied to the Jews,
275; of the Sower, why the first,
281; of the Tares, against
heresy, 288; not to be explained
literally throughout, 292, 394.

Parasites, encouragement of, un-
christian, 302; a cruelty, 302.

Parents, wickedness of, not danger-
ous to good sons, 55; goodness
of, not a shelter to the evil, 59;
in what sense to be hated by
Christians, 233.

Passion, the, when first predicted by
Christ, 334; prediction of, pre-
ceded and followed by miracles,
353; foreshown at the Transfig-
uration, 349, in Galilee, 358, in
the way to Jerusalem, 397;
warnings of, not understood.


398; why a baptism, 399; how
Christ prepared the disciples
for, 477; how foreshown by
Mary of Bethany, 482; why
took place at the Passover, 485,
491; a mystery, 492; denied by
what heretics, 492; by whom
caused, 516; how our glory, 516;
description of, 517; of what a
lesson, 518.

Passions, the, how to be mortified,
27, 74, 336; must be tamed as
beasts, 370; sleep in children,
385; when to be checked, 513.

Passover, the, why observed by
Christ, 485, 491; how broken by
the Jewish rulers, 503.

Patience, how taught us by God, 67;
subdues calumny, 99; blessing
of, 126; duty of, 127, 197;
praised in the woman of Canaan,
323; victory of, 504.

Patriarchs, inspiration of the, i;
church of, appeared first, then
withdrawn, 16, 17; humble pa-
rentage of, 16; praise of, 59.

Paul, an example of humility, 19,
439; love of Christ, 28; obe-
dience, 39; zeal, 40; disinter-
ested labor, 54, 378; thankful-
ness, 175; repentance, 198-g;
spiritual power, 223; final tri-
umph, 331; sometimes used tem-
poral sanctions, 114; conversion
of, seasonable, 394.

Paul, of Samosata, denied the Divin-
ity of Christ, 47.

Peace, salutation of, enjoined to the
apostles, 216; sin of breaking,
in the church, 217; of Christians,
to be gained only by war, 232.

Peace-makers, blessing of the, 94.

Persia, first heard of the Messiah,

37, 38, 40, 44, 47, 51-

Persecution, suffered unjustly, does
away sin, and increases reward,
56; puts us in communion with
the prophets, 95; real gain, 169,
and happiness, 170; Christian
preparation for, 224; injures the
doer most, 270; from relations,
foretold, 393.

Peter, humility of, ig; style of his
Epistle, 20; call of, 87; first fall
of, 311; forward zeal of, 317,
318, 472; second "offence" of,
335, 473; his all-forsaking, and
reward,. 391; had sometimes the
first place, 401 ; indulged in
freedom of speech, by Christ,
450; last presumption of, 493;
why suffered to fall, 494; how
affected by his fall, 497, 502;
denial of, harmonized, 507; fin-
ally blessed in poverty, 533.

Pharaoh, an example of God's long-
suffering, 84; why, being sin-
ful, received a revelation, 168;
shown inferior to Abraham,
403; dream of, why repeated,
498.

Pharez, a type of the Jewish Church,

15-17-


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


543


Pharisees, design of the, against
John, 6S; righteousness of,
"real, but defective, 107; igno-
rant of the scriptures, 201; how
"wise and prudent," 251; en-
raged with the disciples, 255,
with Christ's healing, 259, on
account of envy, 265 ; false sons
of Abraham, 269; why they
asked, and were refused a sign,
273, 328-29; unbelief of, fore-
seen, 274; self-convicted of add-
ing to the law, 350; of breaking
it, by Christ, 350, by Isaiah.
351; why put questions often,
381; never abashed, 388; -gave
a third of their goods in charity;
never repented, 412, 426; vain-
glory of, 433. 437. 441, 446:
when in real authority, sup-
ported by Christ, 436; yet re-
buked for hardness, 437; cor-
rupteis of youth, 440; whence
ruined, 442; how worse than
their fathers, 444. (See Jews.)

Pharisee, the proud, lost for want of
humility and charity, 17, 92,
396, in spite of almsgiving, 396.

Philistines, the, taught the truth by
the heifers, 39.

Philosophers, the Grecian, doctrines
of, unnatural and devilish, 5;
despised by Christians, 54; de-
spised externals, 59, loo; con-
trasted with John the Baptist,
65; a shame to evil Christians,
100; contrasted with the apos-
tles, 222.

I'ilate, character of, compared to
that of Lysias, 512.

I'lato, the Republic of, censured, 5;
and contrasted with Christ's, 6.

Pleasure, when innocent, 250; of
labor, 331.

Plotinous, his doctrine of souls re-
futed, 191.

Poor, the, ill-treatment of, censured,
236; represented by the ajx)s-
tles, 391; only a tenth part of
the population, 407; how
Christ's brethren, and ours,

475-

Poverty, a furnace, 29; outward and
inward care of, 30; of the rich
man in torment, 60; praise of
voluntary, 92; Christ's gradual
training for, 150; real lightness
of, 254; glory and reward of,
2()S-(>; real dignity of, 5(^1, 532.

Praise, danger of, 96; love of, a
snare, 263.

Prayer, for others, not always effec-
tual, 34,374; requires persever-
ance, 67, 155; never unreasona-
able, 15^); Christ's rule of, 132;
fnrgiveiiess, the s|H.-cial moral of
the i.ord's, 137; enjoined after
hard commanils, i<x); two con-
tiitions of, 161; a remedy for
sin, 268; reciuires purity of
tongue, anil of heart, 319; IIc-
zekiah's, 331; blessedness of
conctjrd in, 374.


Preaching, a school, 73; why neces-
sary, 523.

Predestination, no excuse for Judas,
486; objections from, how an-
swered, 4S7.

Profaneness, censure of, 74; sin of
listening to, 248.

Promises, the, of Christ always con-
ditional, 392.

Prophets, the, why appealed to per-
sonal revelations, 20; disre-
garded by the Je'-s, 38; of the
Philistines, seconded by God,
39; maintained the doctrine of
Providence, 57; the works of
some lost, 58 (note); anticipated
the histor)- of John, 64; re-
buked pride, 68; double sense
of, 72; persecution of, 95; how
fulfilled by Christ, 104; con-
firmed by miracle, 180; accu-
racy of, 260, 406; all had wives,

344-
Providence, doctrine of, maintained

by the prophets, 57; urged by

Christ to console the apostles,

228.
Psalms, study of, profitable, but

neglected, 13; chanted in th»;

church, 73.
Publican, the, saved by penitence,

198; a lesson not to despair,

449-

Publicans, the, virtue of, a shame to
Christians, 128; trade of, mean,
199; why Christ sat with, 200;
wickedness of, proved, 373;
comparative obedience of, 422.

Punishment, scale of, under the gos-
pel, III; under the law, 455;
two kinds of, 373.

Purification, the, waited for by Mary,
58; law of, enlarged by the
Pharisees, 314-5; must be in-
ward, 319.

Purity, blessing of, 94; required for
prayer, 319; Christ's law of,
441.

Rabiii. title of, why forbidden, 43S.

Rahab, why mentioned in the gene-
alogy. 17.

Reconciliation, religious duty of,
112,478.

Regeneratiftn, by the Spirit in bap-
tism, asserted, 10, 41, 62, 78.

Relapse after baptism, dangerous,
276; how to be recovereil, 467.

Rcpeiitance, blessed in Hannah, 41;
giMul works, a great part of, 66;
more needful than budil) cure,
89; why ought to be painful,
89; not be liad after death, i>o,
241; proved not in vain, by the
example of Daviil, 182; its
jxjwer to avert wrath, shown in
the Ninevites, 392; striking ex-
amjile of, at Antioch, 412; of
.Manasseh, Paul, and others,
413; its Jabor small, its gain
great. 414; accepteil in bclicv-
iiig Jews, 513.

KciK-litions, when forbidden in


prayer, 133; why used in Holy
Scripture, 498.

Reproach, the greatest trial, 96; ef-
fect of, on Job and others, 96;
when undeser\'ed and for
Christ's sake, alone glorious,
99; overcome by virtue, 99; en-
dured by Christ, 380.

Reserve, examples of, in Christ's
life and teaching: in the Nativ-
ity, 10; in the Incarnation, 14,
15, 44; in the Epiphany, 52; in
His early life, 63; in John's re-
port of Him, 71; in the tempta-
tion, 82; commanded in the
Sermon, 159; in retiring from
the Gergesenes, 193; from the
Scribes, 19S; in teaching the
resurrection and other myster-
ies, 202; in doing miracles, 207;
in delaying to heal, 210; after
sending out the Twelve, 23S;
how long continued, 260, 345;
before Pilate, 511.

Restitution, duty of, 326.

Resurrection, the, truth of, argued
from reason, 8 5-6; shown in
the raising of Jairus's daughter,
and Lazarus, 20C); proved real
by the history of Jonah, 273;
shown in the parable of the
marriage feast, 421; why denied
by the Sadducees, 428; how
contained in the Old Testament,
429; foretasted by the monks,
429; should be rejoiced at by
Christians, 460; natural em-
blems of, 462, 472; to be at
night, 470; our best support in
trouble, 479; how most com-
monly proved, 492.

Resurrection of Christ, proved by
men's faith, 34; reserve in teach-
ing the, 202; foretold by John.
240; signs of the, 521; how
proved by the Jews' behav-
ior, 525, and by that of the
apostles, 526; why so early in
the liay, 526; witnessed by the
guard, 530.

Revenge, sinfulness of, 271; reasons
against. 478.

Reviling, the author of, suffers most,
3;.'o; may be borne, by the exam-
ple of Christ, 3S0; brings to
hell, 305.

Reward, of Christians certain, 85;
is both spiritual. «)5. and tem-
poral, 96; partly given here,
169; accumulation ol, in Is;iiah,
337; will be given impiirlially,
402; ol God's grace, not our
merit, 476.

Riches, contempt of, the true wealth,
30. 35; taught gr;4dually by
Ciirist, 142; dc|KniUiue on,
unsafe, <>o; disquiet of keeping.
142; jHrril of pur^uing, 144;
love of, unnatural, 144, 320;
how overcome, 145; cast out of
God's service, M^; compared
with charity, 166; love of, con-
demned in the rich young man.


544


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


388; engrossing power of, 388;
may be renounced by grace,
389; duties of, considered, 407;
why given to the wicked, 454-5;
vanity of, 461; a trust, 467;
inflame desire, 484.

Righteous, the, so called ironically,
201.

Righteousness, is the fulfilling of
the commandments, 62, 76; in-
cludes all virtue, 94, 106; of
the Jews, real but insufficient,
107; how much, required of
Christians, 122.

Romans, object of the Epistle to,
59-

Sabbath, the, law of, why strict at
first, 257; why straitened by
Christ, 257; kept, at home,

525-

Sacraments, the Jewish, ended by
Christ, 78; represent Christ,
313; are spiritual, 495; now to
be received, 405; from whom to
be withheld, and why, 496.

Sadducees, the case proposed by,
probably fictitious, 428.

Saints, the, intercession of, how re-
ceived, 35; why kept waiting by
God, 67; sufferings of, to be re-
warded, 85; mourned for others,
93; the final glory of, 349; some
actually, and all figuratively, re-
moved mountains, 355; can not
be envious, 394; our best pat-
terns, 396; why admired, 402;
how conquered, 505.

Samaritan, the good, a shame to
Christians, loi.

Samuel, could not prevail for Saul,
34; sons of, rejected for sin, 59.

Saul, injured himself most, in his
treatment of David, 270; ruined
by pride, 361; malice of, con-
trasted with David's goodness,
385; ensnared by Satan, from
small sins to greater, 513.

Scripture, Holy, given for our frailty,
i; gift of, aggravates sin, i;
harmonious connection of, 4;
how to be used at preaching, 6;
its necessity for all, shown by
examples, 13; helps repentance,
14; a mirror of the soul, 27; a
cure of sin, 28; late translations
of, 32; teaches by examples
from the animal creation, 49;
both New and Old Testaments
to be studied by ministers, 294;
neglect of, impoverishes the
soul, 294; speaks according to
men's own notions, 355; the
Monks' food, 419; why uses re-
petitions, 498.

Self-denial, persuasive force of, 278;
of the apostles, our pattern, 278;
what it is, 339; the best victory,

504.
Self-examination, duty of, urged,

271.
Selfishness, excludes from heaven,

469.


Sensuality, an excess of folly, be-
yond the devil's, 84; the soul's
vermin, 90; a demoniacal pos-
session, 193; how best cured,
390; sinfulness of, 467.

Septuagint, the, the writers of, above
suspicion, from their time of
writing, 32.

Sexes, the, both impartially treated
in. Holy Scripture, 117.

Sheep, Christians warned to be pro-
ductive, by the name of, 475.

Sickness, the consequence of sin, 89,
185.

Signs, imply something beyond na-
ture, 33; use of, to draw the at-
tention of the dull to new dis-
pensations, 77; why refused to
Satan, and to the Jews, 81, 328;
of Jonas, explained, 273-4, 520;
of the Cross, used for self-ad-
monition, 518.

Sin, why not always equally punished
here, 86; the cause of sickness,
89; pleasant in act, bitter in
effect, 89; a chain, a jailor, 90;
used synonymously with its pun-
ishment I2g; a burden here,
171; dangerous in believers, 181,
yet not hopeless in any, 181, is
worse in us than we think, 242;
a heavier yoke than Christ's,
253; which, the unpardonable,
266; the least, dangerous, 268;
remedies for, 268; ours against
God, greater than men's against
us, 376; the sense of, should
teach mercy, 378; foulness of,
before God, 442; guilt of, how
measured, 455; different at dif-
ferent ages, 490; how long
blinds men, 507; progress of,
described, 513.

Sinners, when to be avoided, when
not, 200; need never despair,
412; why rich, 454; condemned
by the example of the righteous,
476.

Slander, harms itself most, 270.

Sloth, dangerous in church rulers,
288; rebuked in the Parable of
the Talents, 472.

Sodomites, lust of, began in surfeit,
and luxury, 42, 80, 356; why
not named in chap. xxiv. , 464.

Soldiers, wickedness of the, at Anti-
och, 377.

Solomon, parentage of, an argument
against pride, 16, 361; prayer of,
heard, because right, 161.

Son, the, different from servants,
420; is One with the Father,
421; not really ignorant of the
last day, 465. (See Christ.)

Songs, profaneness and lewdness of
those heard on the stage, 13,
248, 419; compared with the
Monks' music, 419.

Soul, state of the departed, 191-2;
will be brought up for judgment,
271; is commonly neglected for
the body, 272, 370; loss of, ir-
reparable, 341 ; the chief part of


man, 341 ; should be first thought
of, in education, 371; meant by
the inside of the cup and platter,
441; treatment of, 448; the
apostles, the best physicians of,
448.

Sower, the, not to blame, but the
ground, 281.

Star, the, was not natural, 37; object
of, to reprove the Jews, 38; the
course of, accounted for, 46;
witnessed to Christ's Divinity,

47-

Stephen, an example of forgiveness,
381. _

Stewardship, the, of God's gifts,
how dispensed to Christians, 466.

Strife, in public, to be repressed, loi;
shameful to Christians, 102;
monstrous, after prayer, 138;
after Holy Communion, 218.

Suffering, needful for our own sakes,
338; but left free to us, 339; is
greater than charity, 388; of
saints here, proves a judgment,
462; the truest conquest, 505;
its many benefits, 518. (See
Passion.)

Supper, the, was celebrated in the
fifth day of the week, i. e. the
day before the feast, 485.

Swine, the, why destroyed by Christ,
192.

Swords, why granted to the apostles
in the garden, 502.

Sympathy, want of, among Chris-
tians, condemned, 478.

Synagogue, the, denounced as un-
faithful by the prophets, 17.

Temple, the, remains of, existing in
time of St. Chrysostom, 450.

Temptation, why follows baptism,
80; comes in solitude, 81;
Adam's and Christ's, compared,
81; Christ's includes all, 83;
may be avoided, if possible, 80,
86; the last generally the worst,

83.

Thamar, Christ's descent from,
shows His perfect humanity, 15.

Theatres, at Antioch, the whole day
wasted at, 7, 42, 49; corrupting
effect of, on men's minds, 13;
scenes of lawlessness, 26, 42;
gross mockery of the mysteries
of marriage at, 42; spectacle of
females swimming in, 48, fatal
to public morals, 49, and insult-
ing to the sex, 50; attract evil
acquaintance, 118; unnatural
acting of both sexes at, 249; the
cause of frequent adulteries, and
necromancy, 249; all encourage-
ment of, blamed, 250; expenses
of, enormous, compared with
men's alms, 407; devilish com-
pany, and music of, compared
with the Monks' choir, 418,
their contrary effects, upon
spectators, 419.

Themistocles, how inferior to the
apostles, 222.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


545


Till, implies nothing for the time to
come, 33.

Tongue, the, abuse of, reproved, 7,
13, 26; must be clean for prayer,
319; a talent for what use, 472;
how to be made like Christ's,
473; how like Satan's, 473.

Transfiguration, the, a vision of
future glor>-, 345.

Travellers, zeal and exactness, of, a
reproach to Christians, 7.

Tribute, Casar's, and God's, com-
patible, 427.

Truth, duty of always witnessing to
the, ^174.

Types, use of, to prepare for extra-
ordinary events, 10.

Uncharitableness, inexcusable in
lovers of pleasure, 407; is every
where denounced, 467; a sin
against Christ Himself, 475;
evils of, to the church, 509. (See
Covetousness.)

Unprofitableness, danger of spiritual,
472.

Usury, comparison of heavenly and
earthly, cruelty of the latter, 35;
forbidden to Christians, 350,
and even to Gentiles, 351; evils
of, 351-

Vainclory, defeats itself, iS, 386;
makes us hateful to God and
man, 18, 386; rebuked in the
second temptation, 80; spoils
our good actions, 100; con-
demned in the Sermon, 130,
in Christ's cure of the leper, 173;
the nurse of covetousness, 142;
the source of unthankfulness,
175; hinders self-knowledge,
175; observed in the Virgin
Mary, 279; folly of, 361; a
slavery, 362; real baseness of,
402; is in the devil, and the
wicked, 402-3; in good works
the worst, 433; betrays the soul
to shame, 434; in trifles, con-
demned, in the Pharisees, 437.


Violence, most hurtful to the doer,
518.

Virginity, called youth, in Holy
Scripture, 33; of Mary, declared
perpetual, 33; how far recom-
mended by Paul, 93; not nec-
essary to salvation, and so in-
ferior to alms-giving, 295, 314,
468; indirectly recommended by
Christ, 383; but must be volun-
tary, and spiritual, 3S4; a gift,
but attainable, 3S4; spoiled by
selfishness, 470; lies in re-
nouncing riches, 471.

Virtue, home the best school of, 74;
the Christian scale of, ^26, 128;
to be followed for her own sake,
141; has her reward even here,
169; to be shown in the world,
for heathen's sake, 277; possible
to all classes, 278; the best
affinity to Christ, 2S0; must be
perfect, 2S2; better than mir-
acles, 291; poetical description
of, 294; must be added to faith,
395; the best furniture, 500.

Voice, from Heaven, why sent, 77,
348.

Watchfulness, must be perfect, to
be useful, 2S3; the especial duty
of church-rulers, 28S; taught by
Christ's seeming ignorance of
the day, 465.

Way, the, easy though strait, 162.

Wild beasts, more tameable than
Christians, 27.

Wine, not the use, but the abuse of,
evil (against the Manichseans),
356.

Wise men, the, journey of, rash, hu-
manly speaking, 36; their ador-
ation of the Child, absurd, except
on faith, 37 ; were moved by
God's grace, 39; their exceeding '
reverence hindered them from
suspicion of Herod, 46; a type
of the Gentiles, 47; an example
of renouncing the world, for
Christ, 47.


Woman, the, who was a sinner,
blessed by repentance, 40.

Woman, the, with the issue, praised
for uncommon faith, 206 ; of
Canaan, for perseverance under
reproach, 323.

Women, vanity of, reproved by Isai-
ah and Paul, 117; to be reformed
with caution, 203; of Antioch,
condemned for painting the face,
203 ; " the Holy," in " old
time," praised, 204; intemper-
ance of, monstrous, 356; tyranny
of, 3S6; their fashion of wearing
little Gospels, 437; once modest.
443; reproved for love of jewels
and dress, 527; how ought to be
adorned, 529.

Women, the, zeal of, at the Passion,
522; at the Resurrection, 527.

Works, which the best, 46S; neces-
sarj' for salvation, 499; the best
furniture, 500.

World, the, is undergoing a change,
106 ; compared to children's
games, 165; need not be left for
cloisters, 278, 344; must be cru-
cified in us, 336; love of, a slav-
ery, 362; dangerous to salvation.
370; vanity of, 461 ; will be
worst, at last, 464.

Youth, the most important period
of life, 309; blest, in chastit\ ,
309; unbridled passions of, 370.
restrained by marriage, 371.

ZaccH/EUS, an example, of the ben-
efits of Christian communion,
200; of a rich man, saved. 449,
adorned his home with charity,
500.

Zeal, of Paul, and the early Chris-
tians commended. 40; of I'eter,
332, 493. 501; of the women, at
the Passion, 522; of Joseph of
Arimath;va, 522.

Zebedee's sons, request of, 39S.

Zorababcl, name of, symbolical.
21,44.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Gen.

i. 3 • •

• 323

Exod. V, 2. .

276

403

Deut. xxiv. 1-4 . .

118

2Chron. vi. 30

. . 196

i. II, 20.

305

xi. 5.

.

464

xxv. 4, 5 . 200

29S

viii. 7-9

53

ii. 4 . .

10

xii. II

487

xxxii. 8.

368

ix. 29

. 58

ii. 25

125

xii. 14

.

492

xxxii. 15 . .

342

xxiv. 21

. 446

iii. 5 . .

82

xii. 16

,

257

xxxiii. 9

233

xxxiii. I-

-20 1 54

iii. 9 . .

465

xii. 38

.

21

Josh. vi. 15 . . .

256

Job i. I. . .

23, 107

iii. 13 .

271

xiv. 15

.

133

ix. 27 . . .

53

i. 5. . 225,

271. 515

iii. 19 .

78, 208

xvi. 3

•

54

xxiv. 2 . . .

55

i. 12 . .

. . 137

iii. 22

92, 201

xvi. 29

.

525

Ruth i. I . . . .

17

ii. 9

. 84

iv I . .

. 367

xix. 8

,

411

I Sam. i. 13 . . 41,

133

iii. 25 . .

. 225

iv. 10

133

xix. 18

.

348

ii. 5, 6. . 180

376

vii. 16. .

. 225

iv. 12

7S

XX. 5

.

446

ii. 25 . . .

456

xi. 6 . .

. 225

IV. 24

446

XX. 12

.

316

ii. 30 . . .

198

XXX. 25 .

loi, 225

viii. 7

33

XX. 21

.

348

iii. 13 . . .

123

xxxi. I

117. 225

viii. II .

77

xxi. 17

.

316

vi. 6 .

51

xxxi. 24, 25

M7. 224

ix. 2 . .

392

xxi. 24

.

109

vi. 9 . . 39,

153

xxxviii. 7 .

• 459

ix. 5 . .

447

xxii. I

. 326

509

x. 3. . . .

485

xl. 3, 4 •

. 226

ix. 25 . .

41. 53

xxii. 25

.

351

xiii. 12 . .

513

xiii. 5, 6 .

. 226

xi. 7. 8 .

232

xxiii. 5

.

lOI

xiii. 14

19

Ps. i. I . . .

. 503

xii. I . .

330

xxxii.

,

34

xvi. I . . .

34

ii. 1,2. .

. 240

xii. II .

350

xxxii. 6

42

356

xvi. 7 . . •

196

ii. 7 . •

. 175

xiv. 14 .

237

.xxxii. 10

•

236

xxi. 6 . . .

256

iv. 4 . .

. . 271

XV. 15 .

192

xxxii. 27-;

5 ■

34,

XX vi. 16 .

386

v. 9 . .

419. 442

xviii. 7 .

237

232,

236, 346

xxviii. 1 .

39

vi. 5 . ■

• -Ml

xviii. 12-15

41

xxxiii. II

.

474

xxviii. 15 . 3S6,

513

vii. 9 .

1 9()

xviii. 17 .

176

Lev. xi. 24, 25

.

31S

2 Sam. iii. 23-30. .

271

viii. 2 . .

45

xviii. 20, 21

4('5

xiv. 1-32

.

173

xii. 7-9 . .

455

xviii. 11 .

. 348

xviii. 27 .

175, 403.

XV. 25 .

.

205

xii. 20 .

MI

xix. I . .

151

437

xxv. 35. 36

. .

351

XV. 25, 26

19

xix. 4 . .

• 174

xviii. 33.

• 34

Num. iii. 11-13

.

358

xvi. 10 . .

19

xxii. I

• 521

xix. 2

. I7<)

iii. 46-51

.

3?S

xvi. 11,12 .56, 96

xxii. 6

. 430

xix. 8, 14

22

xi. 12 .

.

23(1

XX. 9, 10 .

271

xxii 16, iS

. 240

XX. 3.

• 25

xii. 8 .

.

474

I Kings ii. 5,6. .

271

xxiii. 4

• 337

xxvii. 29.

• . 53

xii. 14 .

• 34,

'83

iii. 10-14 .

101

xxiii. 5

• 4.^«

xxvii. 41.

2(>2

XV. 32 .

.

257

xi. 11-13

II

xxiv. (j

. 463

xxviii. 20

MM

XV. 38, y)

.

437

xvii. 16 . .

306

xxiv. 8

■ "39

xxxi. 2y .

. 270

xvi. I .

.

261

xviii. iS . .

362

xxv. 17, I S

50

xxxiii. 3.

• • 53

XXV. 3 .

53

xviii. 21 . .

171

xxxiv. iS .

. 21)4

xxxv. iq.

• 57

xxv. 7-1 1

121,

232

xix. 18 . .

149

xxxiv. 13, 14

(>()

xxxviii. 27,

29. 16

xxviii. 9, II

J .

257

xix. 20 . 88,

420

xxxvii. 1 1

'W

xxxix. 12

125, 250

xxix. 7 .

.

202

xxi 1, etc. .

232

xxxviii. 4

• 253

xxxix. 17

. • 5"5

XXX. 2 .

.

120

xxi. 19 .

171

xxxix. 12

• 397

xl. 8 . .

. 3^'7

Deut. iv. 2. .

.

3'4

2 Kings i. S , . .

(>s

xiv. 2 . .

. 156

xii. 32 .

. . 4';«

vi. 4. 115,

24J.

435

iv. 42 . .

3^4

xiv. 11)

. 321

xlviii. 7 .

. 57

vi. 8 . .

.

437

v. II . . .

205

xiv. I I

17. 204

xiix. 7 .

• • 53

vi. I I, 12

.

342

xiii. 21 . 354,

521

xiv. 12

. 231

xlix. 10 .

n, 3.)

viii. 3 .

342

xix. 34, 35.11,

502

xlviii. 2 .

120

Exod. ii. 24 .

. . 1.^3

xxii. 4 .

.

lUI

XX. 3. . .

331

xlix. 7

34

iv. 2, 3.

190, 207

xxii. 27.

.

33

xxi. 1-18 .

>54

1. 12 . .

201

iv. 10-14

214. 34^

xxiii. 19

.

35 >

xxii. 8 . .

5 8

1. 14 .nnd23

. 112

531

xxiii. 22

120

2Chron. i. 1 1, 12. .

IM

11. 4 • .

■ 247

548


INDEX OF TEXTS.


FACE

F'AGE

PAGE

PAGE

Ps. li. 17 . 92,

295, 403

Isaiah vi. 9, ic .

. 285

Ezek. viii. 5 . . . 274

Ecclus. xviii. 16 . 237,319

liii. I . . .

431

vii. 14 . .

■ 33

xii. 9 . . . 292

xviii. 30 . . 444

Ivii. 4 . . .

. 488

viii. 3 .

• 32

xii. 22, 27 . . 69

XX. 4 . . . 499

Ixviii. 18 . .

. 139

ix. I, 2

86, 87

xni. 10 . . . 416

xxviii. 3 . . 479

Ixix. 21 .

240, 516

ix. 5, 6 .

. 40

xiv. 14 . . . 146

XXX. 7. . . 340

Ixxii. 6, 7

33, 329

xi. 6 . .

• 64

xiv. 14, 16 . 34

XXX. 20 . . 499

Ixxvi. 9 .

. 294

xi. 10 . 4

5, 64. 240

xvi. 6-g . . 276

xxxii. 10 . . 295

Ixxvii. 13 .

. 245

xiii. 9 .

. 276

xvi. 20, 21 . 455

xxxiv. 20. . 326

Ixxviii. 2 .

. 292

xiii. 21, 22

• 370

xvi. 23 . . . 273

Baruch iii. 35 . . . 139

Ixxviii. 20

• 305

xiv. 13 . .

• 175

xvi. 49 . 42, 80, 356

iii. 37 • • . 9

Ixxix. 3

. 119

xix. I .

. 348

xvi. 51 . . 247, 456

Song of the Three Chil-

Ixxx. 8 . .

. 281

XX. 2, 3

• 125

xviii. 23 . 285, 515

dren, ver. 4, 6, 8 . 18

IXXX. 12 .

• 17

xxix. 13 .

74, 316

XX. 12 . . . 257

ver. 16, 26. 29, 92

Ixxxiv. 10

• 29

XXXV. 10 .

208, 338

xxiii. 4, 5, II . 17

Ixxxvi. 8 .

• 245

xxxvi. 12

. 248

xxiv. 19 . . 292

Matt. i. 21. . . . 45

xc. 2 .

. 33

xxxvii. 35 .

1S3, 210

xxxiii. 8 . . 496

i. 22, 23 . . 105

xcv. 2.

. 90

xl.3 •

• 63

xxxiv. 23, 24 . II,

iii. I . . . 458

xcv. 7 .

. 515

xl. 15 .

. 72

353

iii. 6 . . . 199

xcvii. 2 .

. 348

xiii. 1-4 .

260, 329

xxxvi. 22 . . 18

iii. 7 ... 171

ci. 6 . . .

• 294

xliii. 26

. 267

xxxvii. 18 .

. 292

Hi. 8 . . 63, 66

cii. 3 . .

12

xlv. 7 .

. 153

xxxvii. 24

II, 353

iii. 9 59, 180, 181,

ciii. 20

• 135

xlix. 15

■ 155

Dan. ii. 17, 18

• 29

280

ciii. 22

• 139

li. I, 2 .

. 69

ii. 24

. 34

iii. 10 . . . 72

civ. 3 . .

. 348

Iii. 7 .

. . 216

iii. I . . .

. 168

iii. II 238, 240, 244

civ. 15 . .

. 357

Hi. 14 .

. 506

in. 17, 18 .

29, 226

iii. 12 213, 289, 411

cvi. 2

453, 495

Hii. 2 .

. 186

iii. 22

. 276

Hi. 14 . . 19, 238

cvi. 31

. 121

Hii. 4 .

. . 185

V. I . .

. 168

iii. 15 .62, 105,335

cvii. 16 .

. 241

Hii. 7 .

240, 336

vii. 13 .

. 348

iv. 4 . . 148, 343

cvii. 25 .

. 191

HH. 8 .

9. 5"

X. 3 . .

. 141

iv. 9, 10 . . 142

ex. I . . .

45, 183

liii. 9 .

. 105

Hosea i. 2 . .

17

iv. 12 . . . 303

cxi. 7 . . .

• 429

IHi. 12 .

139, 240

iii. 5 . .

II, 353

iv. 24 . . . 355

cxv. 3 .

. 179

Hv. 13 .

I

iv. 2 .

415, 447

V. 3. . . 253, 294

cxvi. 7

. 208

Ivi. 7 .

• 409

vi. 3, 4 . . 156

V. 4 . . . . 263

cxix. 71 .

. 67

IviH. 3 .

. 202

vi. 6 . 257, 314,

V. 8. . . . 295

cxxx. I

• 133

Iviii. 6-9,

286, 337,

475

V. 15 . . . 278

cxl. 3 . .

• 419

349

ix. 7 • • • 275

V. 16 . . 134, 290

cxli. 2

112, 443

Ixi. I .

■ 139

xiii. 14

• 139

V. 20 . . 347, 395

cxlv. 16 .

■ U9

Ixv. 24 .

• 337

Joel i. 6 . .

. 28

V. 22 377, 395, 515

cxlviii. 9 .

i49> 151

Ixvi. I .

. 120

ii. 13 • .

. 133

V. 24 . . . 372

cxlviii. 12

• ■ 33

Ixvi. 2 . 92

, 294, 403

Amos Hi. 6

• 153

V. 28 .49, 377, 515

Prov. v. 2-4 .

• ■ 444

Jer. i. 6-8 . .

. 2l4

v. 18 .

. 69

V. 34, 35 . 151, 153

vi. 6 .

■ . 49

i. 18 . .

• 334

vi. 6

301,478

V. 39 . • • 373

vi. 6-8 . .

122, 149

H. 5 . •

. 416

vii. 14, 15

. 296

V. 44 ■ . • 374

vi. 30

. 455

ii. lo, II .

. 122

vin. II .

13

V. 45. 130, 137, 152,

vi. 34 .

■ . 23

ii. 12 . ,

. 378

ix. 7 .

53, 68,

381

ix. 9 .

. • 39

ii. 32 . .

• 275

353

V. 46 . . 262, 373

ix. 12

. . 385

in. I . .

• 17

Micah i. II

• 478

vi. 1-3 . . . 434

xii. 28 .

. . 479

iii. 7 . .

413, 447

iH. 10 .

• 415

VI. 4 . . . 153

xvi. 5

. 403

iv. 2

. 121

iv. 3

• 139

vi. 12 . . . 372

xviii. 21 .

. • 319

V. 8 . .

. 84

V. 2

39, 44

vi. 17 . . . 201

xix. 17 . .

100, 408

vii. 16, 17

• 274

vi. 3 .

198, 416

vi. 19 . . . 449

XX. 6 .

• • 325

viii. 4 . 181

,413,515

vii. 5, 6

. 233

vi. 24. 193, 370, 449

xxiii. 13, 14

• 340

viii. 7 . .

• • 149

Zech. V. I .

. 69

vi. 26 . . 215, 449

xxiv. 17, 18

. 262

xi. 14 . .

. 34, 374

V. 7, 8 .

• • 253

vi. 33 • -180,344,

xxviii. I .

. . 171

xiii. 10-12

. . 202

ix. 9 .

130, 406

417, 420

Eccl. i. 2 . .

. . 461

XV. I .

• • 34

xiii. 7 .

■ 493

vi. 34 . . . 135

ii. 13 . .

. . 500

XV. 19 .

• • 473

Mai. H. 13 . .

. 509

vH. 6 . . 7, 251

vii. 2

• . 253

xvH. 9. .

. . 196

iii. I . 139,

244, 245

vii. II . . . 387

Song of Sol. viii.

6 . 23

xvii. 15 .

. 69

iv. 2 . .

• 139

vii. 12 . . . 5

Isaiah i. 3 .

■ . 275

xviii. 7-10

. • 392

iv. 5, 6 .

245, 352

vii. 13 . . 253, 294

i. 10

■ 68, 353

xxH. 17 .

. . 443

Wisd. iH. I

. 192

vii. 16 . . . 290

i. 15 ■

•319, 415

xxiii. 23 ,

. ■ 337

vi. 6

. 182

vii. 16-18 . . 269

i. 18 .

• • 324

XXX. 9

. 11,353

xvi. 29 .

• 175

vii. 22, 23 .218, 471,

i. 26, 27

• - 32

xxxi. 15 .

• • 57

xviii. 15

9

474

ii. 4 . .

. . 139

xxxi. 31-33

I, no

Ecclus. i. 22 .

. 518

vii. 28, 29 . 116,

iii. 16 .

• "7, 528

XXXV. 2

• ■ 275

ii. 2 .

. 67

177

V. 2 . .

• • 17

xxxvi. 23 .

. . 58

iv. 8 .

236, 319

viH. 2, 3 . . 354

V. 4. 76,24

6,281,416

1-37 • .

. . 21

V. 7 •

. . 420

viii. 4 . . . 197

V. 5 • .

. . 69

Ezek. i. 27

• . 71

ix. 8 .

. . 116

viH. 7, 8 . 19, 196,

V. II, 12

. . 81

H. 5 • .

4^5, 465

ix. 15 .

• . 319

322

V. 19

. . 70

iv 5 .

. . 247

X. 9 .

. . 483

vHi. II, 12. . 107,

vi. 3

• • 134

v. 7. .

. . 456

xii. 13.

. . 60

208, 261

INDEX UF TEXTS.


549


P.AGF.

PAGE

PAGE

lAGE

Matt.

viii. 20

59, 154,290,

Matt. XV. 21-28 . . 155

Matt. x.w. 34-46. 30, 235,

Mark xi. 13 .

. 410

393. 396, 533

XV. 26 . . . 328

294. 313. 349.

xii. 15

427

viii. 21

. 88, 420

XV. 27 . . . 156

489, 510, 523

xii. 29

115

viii. 22

• • 429

XV. 28 . . . 178

XXV. 42. . . 164

xii. 34

432

viii. 25-

-27.190, 312.

xvi. 6 . . 304. 355

xxvi. 10, II . 314

xii. 37

433

359

.\vi. 9 201, 305, 327

xxvi. 18 . . 496

xii. 40

440

ix. 2

. . 211

xvi. 14. . 297. 353

x.Kvi. 35

. 347

xii. 43

324

ix. 4

• • 243

xvi. 19. . . 400

xxvi. 38

• 474

xiii. 3

450

ix. 5

• ■ 473

xvi. 20. . . 303

xxvi. 39

. 209

xiii. 32

463

ix. 6

• • 413

xvi. 21 . . . 353

xxvi. 41

80

xiv. 37

497

ix. 14

• . 239

xvi. 22 . 202, 347,

xxvii. 13

■ 503

xiv. 37

497

ix 15

. . 274

398, 433. 493

xxvii. 63

• 273

xiv. 56-59

503

ix. 18

• 314.321

xvi. 24 . . . 388

xxvii. 64

50S, 530

xiv. 65 .

506

ix. 28

. . 89

xvi. 25 . . . 253

xxviii. 19

422

xiv. 68-72

507

ix. 34

. . 264

xvi. 26 . . . 371

xxviii. 20

91. 3'4

XV. 39. 44

521

ix. 37

. • 293

xvii. 23. . 202, 353

Luke i. 4 . .

3

X. 5.

. 321. 340

xvii. 24. . . 426

N.B. These passages in

i. 6 .

23

X. 6.

. . 422

xvii. 27. . . 317

Mattliew are quoted inci-

i 27 .

II

X. 9.

. 154. 291

-xviii. 3, 4 .377,385.

dentally, in addition to the

i. 29 .

24

X. 10

. . 158, 201

397

general Commentary.

i. 34 •

24

X. 15 .

. . 241

xviii. 15-17 . 157

i. 76 .

87

X. 16-I

3 . . 340

.wiii. 26-34 . 34

Mark. i. 7 . .

. 19

ii. 14 . 1

74,

23

2, 418

X. 22

. . 288

xviii. 32 . . 1 58

i. 13- •

. 80

ii. 39.

58

X. 25

. 226, 380

xix. 4 . . . 104

i. 31- •

. 184

ii. 48 .

15

X. 27 .

. ■ 159

xix. 8 . . . 119

i- 34- •

. 185

iii. 2, 3

62

X. 29 ,

• . 57

xix. 12 . . 397. 470

i. 40-42.

. 172

iii. 5, 6

64

X. 30

. . 192

xix. 16 . . 1S6, 449

i. 45- •

■ 174

iii. 10

171

X. 33

. . 41

xix. 21 . 397, 510.

ii. 4- •

. 195

iii. 14

. 149. 171

X 36 .

. ■ 364

533

ii. 7. .

. 196

iii. 16

. . 19

X. 37 •

• 253. 299

xix. 25 . . 160, 376

ii. 14 .

• 199

iv. 13

83

X. 39

• • 393

xix. 27 . . . 2gi

ii. 26 .

• 255

iv. 19

139

xi. 2

• • 304

xix. 28 . . . iSi

ii. 27 .

257, 265

iv. 23

106, 297

xi. 4-7

. . 187

xix. 29 . . 94, 291,

iii. 3

• 259

iv. 38-4

184, 185

xi. 8

. . 65

397. 450

iii. 24 .

4

V. 8 .

19

xi. 12

. 162, 426

.xix. 30 . . . 181

iv. 10 .

. 284

V. 12-16

172

.xi. 14

• . 353

XX. 22 . . . 345

iv. 13 .

. 281

V. 19 .

17

6. 195

xi. iS .

. . 87

XX. 23 . . . 333

iv. 33 .

. 292

iv. 27.

199

xi. 19

. . 200

XX. 27, 28. . 396

iv. 35 .

. 189

iv. 36. 3-

202

xi. 21, :

22 . . 456

xxi. 3 . . . 4S5

iv. 39 .

. 474

vi. I .

255

xi. 23

. . 296

xxi. 5-16 . . 105

V. 10 .

. 191

vi. 8. 9

259

xi. 27

■ . 333

xxi. 23 . . . 427

v. 19 .

. 211

vi. 16

213

xi. 28

. . 421

xxi. 25, 26. . 68

V. 35 .

. 206

vi. 20

• 9

1 . 294

xi. 29 .

20, 291, 396

xxi. 31 . . 64, 373

V. 37 .

. 205

vi. 22-26

96

xi. 30

. . 162

xxi. 32. . . 455

vi. 3 .

. 279

vi. 25

263

xii. 2

. . 200

xxi. 41 . . . 446

vi. 5 .

. 297

vi. 3t), 36

236. 257,

xii. 3

. 259, 265

xxii. 12, 13 . 349

vi lO .

• 297

307. 325

xii. II

. • 103

xxii. 17 . . 511

vi. 18 .

171, yuz

vi. 34 .

. . 100

xii. 12

. ■ 383

xxii. 36 . . 186

vi. 20 .

298

iv. 35 •

126, 351

xii. 14

• ■ 255

xxii. 39 . . 460

vi. 23 .

• 299

vi. 37 .

. . 370

xii. 23,

24 . 212, 285

xxii. 40 . .5, 273

vi. 52 .

• 304

vn. i-io.

. 176-178

xii. 25

• . 4

xxii. 42 . . 438

vii. 6 .

• . 74

vii. 18 .

. 238

xii. 27

. 392. 476

xxii. 43 . 183, 504

vii. II .

3 1 6

vii. 21 .

. 239

xii. 36

. . 515

xxii. 44 . . 435

vii. 19 .

. 3'8

vii. 35 .

. 87, 247

xii. 37

• • 319

x.xiii. I . . 159

vii. 24 .

155. .321

vii. 38 .

• 199

xii. 39

• 397. 520

xxiii. 4. . . 157

viii. 12 .

. 32S

vii. 45 .

302

xii. 41,

42. 38, 245.

xxiii. 9. . . 312

viii. 17, 18

327, 329

vii. 47 .

• 4')5

393. 476

xxiii. 16 . 120

ix. 6

■ 347

viii. 18 .

. 2S4

xii. 47,

48. . 187

xxiii. 23, 24 . 157

ix. 14-29

. 354

viii. 22 .

. 189

xiii. 22

. • 144

xxiii. 25 . . 489

ix. 32 . 292, 354,

viii. 30 .

. 291

xiii 43

■ • 349

xxiii. 32 . . 415

358, 398

viii. 31 .

191

xiii. 50

. . 280

xxiii. 34 . 294

>x 34 • . • 359

viii. 32 .

'37

xiii. 55

• 244. 279

xxiii 35 . . 455

ix. 38 .

if)8, 266

viii. 3()

u^^, 211

xiv. I

. . 297

xxiv 3. . . 61

ix. 40 .

. 2<)6

viii 49-56

205, 207,

xiv 2

. .171.332

xxiv. 12 . . 112

X. 4 . .

. 118

323

xiv. 12

. . 201

xxiv. 14 . (>(>, 174

X. 1 0

• 3S3

ix. 8, 9 .

171. 297

xiv If)

• • 327

xxiv. 21 . 275

X. 17-21

• 387

ix. 12 .

. 2S4

xn. 29

• • 359

xxiv. 23 . . 62

X. 18 .

186

ix. 28-36

345. .347

xiv. 33

• ■ . 333

xxiv. 27 . . 329

X. 29

94

ix. 45 335,

354, 358

XV. II

. • 359. 383

xxiv. 29 . . 329

X. 30 . .

72. 291

ix. 4'). 50

108. 2(16

XV. 12

. . . 284

xxiv. 35 • • 334

X. 32 .

2')2. 398

ix. 54. 55

198, 34'>

XV. 15

. . . 383

XXV. 12. . . 164

X. 35 •

399

ix. ()2

188

XV. 16

. . . t<)0

XXV. 30. . . 78

X. 37 .

• 398

x. 2 .

293

550


INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Lukex. 7 . .

. 215, 291

Luke xxiii. 40

• • 159,517

John viii. 44 .

. . 121

Acts i. 7 . .

• 463, 494

X. 19. .

■ • 403

xxiii. 43

• . • 93

viii. 46 .

. . 105

i. 8 . .

. . 422

X. 20. .

. 167, 218

xxiii. 47

. . . 522

viii. 48 .

116, 247,

i. 9 . .

. . 348

X. 21, 22.

. 251, 333

John i. I .

. . . 104

416, 426

i. 18 . .

. . 21

X. 25 . .

. . 186

i. 3 . 104, 151, 334,

viii. 49 .

■ . 473

ii. 2 . .

• • 77

xi. 5 • •

• I33> 155

463

viii. 58 .

. . 104

ii. 13 . .

. . 2

xi. 17. .

• . 4

i. 9 .

. . . 87

ix. 6, 14.

255,259

ii. 22 . .

• • 59

xi. 20. .

• . 265

i. 10, II

. . . 109

ix. 16, .

167, 285,

ii. 24 .

. . 50

xi. 27, 28

. . 280

i. 12 .

. . . 60

346

, 416, 426

ii. 29 . iS

53,255.433

xi. 33 •

. . 278

i. 13 .

. . . 10

ix. 32. .

. . 322

ii. 34 . .

• 45

xi. 41

• 314. 325

i. 14 .

. . . 23

x. 18. .

• • 520

ii. 41 . .

2, 149, 217

xi. 47, 48 .

182, 445,

i. 21 .

• • ■ 352

X. 20 . .

• • 247

iii. 6 . .

• 59. 533

455

i. 24, 25

. . . 68

X. 33 • •

. 196, 346

iii. 12

• 172, 494

xii. 7. .

. . 343

i. 27 .

19, 238,411

X. 40-42.

. . 404

iv. 4 . .

2, 149, 217

xii. 20 ,

. . 192

i. 29 .

71. 185,238,

X. 41 . .

• 246, 290

iv. 10

• • 59

xii. 32 .

. . 468

240

xi. 6 . .

. . 206

iv. 13 . 2]

4, 311,472

xii. 47 .

. 182, 455

i. 31, 33

. . . 62

xi. II. .

. . 207

iv. 16

. . 170

xii. 49 •

40, 233

i. 34 •

. . . 71

xi. 22, 25

• . 177

iv 20

. 170, 221

xiii. 4, 5-

• 509

i. 42 .

. . . 88

xi. 34- •

• 207, 465

iv. 32

. 147,217

xiii. 21 .

. . 289

i. 44 •

• . . 247

xi. 39- .

. . 207

V. I . .

. . 121

xiii. 23 .

. . 370

i. 46, 47

. . 59, 187

xi. 45- •

. . 177

V. 28 . .

. 170, 221

xiii. 34 .

. 455

i. 49 .

• • . 333

xi. 42. .

. . 103

V. 36, 37 •

. 65, 300.

xiv. 26, 27

233, 253

ii. i-ii

. . 280

xi. 44. .

. . 207

426

XV 7 .

. . 368

ii. 16 .

. . . 521

xi. 48. .

. . 504

V. 41 . .

• 253, 295

XV 13-20

• • 35

ii. 18 .

. . - 409

xii. 2.

. 189, 207

vi. 14

• • 59

xvi. 9. .

. 35, 268

ii. 19 .

274, 397, 503

xii. 8. .

. . 314

vii. 59 .

192, 504

xvi. 22 .

. . 83

iii. 13.

• • • 332

xii. 24 .

. 338, 462

viii. 10 .

. . 291

xvi. 23 .

• 30

iii. 20.

. . . 431

xii. 28, 29

• . 348

viii. 28 .

. . 6

xvi. 24 .60

, 146, 449

iii. 25, 2(

3 . . 239

xii. 47 .

• . 352

ix. 4 . .

• 198, 523

xvi. 26 449,

471, 489

iii. 29.

. . 19, 202

xiii. I

. . 485

ix. 20

• • 432

xvi. 27, 28

. 192

iii. 30.

. . 238, 421

xiii. 2

. . 487

ix. 40

■ • 473

xvii. I .

. . 364

iv. 1-3

• 303, 404

xiii. 7, 8.

• 75. 335

X. 4 . .

• 314, 468

xvii. 10 .

• 19

iv. 18.

• ■ 323

xiii. 15 .

. . 396

X. 14 . .

• . 317

xvii. 18 .

. 173

iv. 22.

. . 387

xiii. 22 .

. . 486

X. 15 . .

• • 494

xvii. 34.

• 464

iv. 25.

• . 352

xiii. 26 .

. . 486

X. 20, 25

■ • 321

xviii. I. 133

, 155,356

iv. 31.

. . 411

xiii. 27 .

487, 491

X. 41 . .

• . 492

xviii. II, 12

130, 202

iv. 35-

• 293, 410

xiii. 35 .

. . 219

xi. 3 . .

. . 214

xviii. 14 ,

• 92

iv. 38.

. 212, 411

xiii. 37 .

• 347

xi. 26

• . 49

xviii. 18 .

. 186

iv. 49.

• 179, 321

xiv. 6.

. . 252

xii. 19 .

. • 55

xxviii. 27

. 449

V. I, 6

• • 195

xiv 12 .

. . 228

xii. 23

. . 21

xxviii. 29, 3

0 . 94

V. 7 .

• • 413

xiv. 15 .

• • 431

xiii. 22 .

. . 19

xxviii. 30 .

72, 291

V. 9, 10

• . 259

xiv. 26 .

. . I

xiii. 46 .

. 47,422

xxviii. 31-3.

[ • 335.

V 14 .

. 276,413

xiv. 27 .

. . 216

XV. 4 .

• • 33

398

V. 17 . IC

)3, 201, 255,

xiv. 30 .

. . 105

xvi. 3

• . 316

xix. 5-8, 9.

200, 326,

259

XV. I .

. . 72

xvi. 4

• • 33

500

V, 31 . .

• . 387

XV 13 .

■ • 375

xvi. 15 .

- • 443

xix. 10 . .

. 368

V. 46 .

. . 68

XV. 15 .

. 227

xvi. 18 .

. . 81

xix. II .

• 399

vi. 9 .

. 304, 327

XV. 22

. . 241

xvii. 6, 7

. 224, 511

xix. 40 . .

. 86

vi. 15- 3

06, 328, 511

xvi. 5, 6 .

. 219

xvii. 23, 2i

. . 38

XX. 5

. 67

vi. 17. .

. . 328

xvi. 12 .

203, 334

xviii. 2 .

• • 452

XX. 13 .

• 465

vi. 21. .

. . 311

xvi. 33 . .

67, 208

xix. 4 '.

62, 63

XX. 17, 18 ,

. 416

vi. 26.

• . 306

xvii. 10 .

. 108

XX. 30

. . 364

XX. 36 .

. 428

vi. 45. .

. . I

xvii. 22, 23

. 219

XX. 31

. . 41

XX. 49 . .

• 440

vi. 60, 61

• • 492

xviii. 4 .

. 498

XX. 34 .

• • 54

xxi. 3, 4. .

. 324

vi. 62.

• • 332

xviii. 10, II

• 501,

XX. 37 .

. . 41

xxi. 6, 7 . .

• 450

vi. 68, 6g

. . 401

502

xxi. II

. . 65

xxi. 15 . .

. 222

vii. 4> 5,

6 . 33, 187.

xviii. 15 .

401, 503

xxi. 18 .

• • 33

xxii. 3 .

. 491

279

xviii. 23 .

• 473

xxi. 20 .

• 34, 513

xxii. 4 . .

. 482

vii. 12

. 410, 426

xviii. 28 .

. 503

xxi. 33 .

. . 512

xxii. 7 . .

. 485

vii. 20 .

. . 247

xviii. 31 .

504, 513

xxiii. 6, 7

. 232, 428

xxii. 15 .

487, 492

vii. 23

• 103, 259

xviii. 36 .

. 5"

xxiii. 8 .

. . 428

xxii. 24 .

. 484

vii. 25, 2(

) . . 417

xix. II .

• 512

xxvi. 5 .

. . 428

xxii. 30 .

• 295

vii. 33. 3'

* . . 398

xix. 21 .

504, 508

Rom. i. 18

. . 241

xxii. 32 .

• 493

vii. 37 .

. . 421

xix. 22 .

. 517

i. 25 .

• • 343

xxii. 35-38 .

215, 501

vii. 39 .

■ . 213

xix. 27 . .

• 33

i. 28 .

. . 252

xxii. 42 .

• 474

vii. 42

. . II

xix. 30 . .

. 516

ii. 5 • ■

• • 456

xxii. 48 .

499, 522

vii. 52 .

• . 59

xix. 34 . .

• 521

ii. 8, 9 .

• . 241

xxii. 49 .

. 502

viii. 13 .

. 87, 240

XX. 6 . . •

. 401

ii. 12 .

• 241, 455

xxii. 61 .

• 507

viii. 28 .

• • 520

xxi. 7 .

65, 311

ii. 13 •

. . 411

xxii. 64 .

. 506

viii. 33 .

• 69, 323

xxi. 16 . ,

290, 431,

. ii. 17, 18

. . 167

xxiii. 24 .

. 353

viii. 39 .

. . 280

465, 468

ii. 21 .

. . 106

xxiii. 34 .12'

7.375,478

viii. 41 .

• • 323

xxi. 21 .

. 494

iii. 22 .

. . 156

INDEX OF TEXTS.


OD


PAGE

PACE

FACE

lACE

Rom

iii. 23 .

. . 201

I Cor. vi. 3 ... 476

2 Cor. viii. 9

. . . 156

I Thess. ii. 14, 15. 95, 422

iii. 31 .

. 105

vi. 7 ... no

viii. 14

. . . 234

ii. 19 . . 362

V. 3 . .

. . 115

vi. 9, 10 . Ill, 357

ix. 6

. • 35, 407

iii. 8 . . . 363

V. 4 . .

. . 479

vi. II . . . 62

ix. 8

. . . 343

iv. 3 . . . 395

V. ID

. . 258

vi. 15 . . . 301

ix. 15

• • • 77

iv. 5 . . . 129

vi. 4

. . 62

vii. 3, 4 . . 49

x. 6 .

. . . 261

iv. 13 . . 129

vi. 7

. . 1S8

vii. 5, 10 . . 514

xi. 2

. . . 421

iv. 15 . . 47

vi. ty

. . 251

vii. 15 . . . 393

xi. 3

. . . 41

iv. 16 . 460, 470

vi. 19 .

. . 41S

vii. 23 . . . 336

xi. 7

. . . 67

iv. 17 . . 293

vi. 21 .

. . 115

vii. 25 . . . 470

xi. 12

. . . 216

y. 3 ... 464

viii. I .

. 107

vii. 26, 28, 32 . 93

.\i. 13

• • ■ 452

2 Thess. ii. 9, 10 459

viii. 3, 4

. 105

vii. 29, 31 . . 49,

xi. 26, 27. 364, 452,

iii. I . . . 277

viii. 6, 7

. 163

428, 449

533

iii. 10-15. 235,236

viii. 18 .

. • 253

vii. 32 . . . 154

xi. 29 .

. 363. 469

I Tim. i. 9 . . 68, 107

viii. 23 .

. 134

vii. 34, 35 . . 471

xii. 7

. . 67

ii. 8 138, 161, 319

viii. 24 .

. 229

ix. 7 . . . 200

xii. 9 I

75, 220, 374

ii. 9 117, 307, 528

viii. 32. 16

1,313.369

ix. 14

. . 201

xii. 10

. . 115

iii. 6 . .92, 403

viii. 34 .

• 127

ix. 26

. . 461

xii. 15

. . 217, 406

iv. 2 . . . 49

viii. 35 .

• 253

X. I .

. . 257

Gal. i. 4. 5 ■

• • 343

V. 5 ... 210

viii. 38 .

. 28

X. 3-5

• • 395

i. 13 •

. . . 199

V. 6 . . 117, 449

ix. 3

. iiS

X. 7 •

. . . 42

i. 15 •■

. . . 394

V. 20 . . . 157

i.x. 5 .

. 23

X. II

■ • 13

ii. 2 .

. . 461

V. 23 . . . 356

ix. 6 .

45, 59

X. 12

. i3i, 413

ii. 8 .

• 421,422

vi. 6 ... 351

ix. 20 .

. 487

X. 24

. . . 468

ii. 9 .

• ■ 354

vi. 9 ... 449

ix. 28 .

. 70

X. 27

. . 291

ii. 13 •

■ • 97

vi. 10 . 214, 3S7,

ix. 30 .

. 62

x. 31 •

• ■ 303

iii. 28 .

• . . 443

391.431, 449

X. 2 . .

41

X. 32

• . 99

iv. 4 .

. . 22

xi. 16 . . . 319

X. 3 . •

62, 251

X. 33

. . . 29

iv. 14. 15

. 331. 393

2 Tim. ii. 12 . . . 393

X. 4 . .

. 105

xi. 10

. . 368

iv. 22 .

. . no

ii. 25 . . . 19S

X. 12

. 156

xi. 26

• • 492

V. 2 .

. . 60

iii. 5 . . . 160

X. 14 .

. 282

xi. 27

. . 48

V. 12 .

. . 384

iv. 2 . . . 157

X. 15 .

. 2X6

xi. 31, 32. 267, 271,

V. 22 .

■ • 343

iv. 7, 8 .331, 400

X. 18 .

174,452

397

V. 24 .

. . 429

iv. 15 . . . 160

xi. 4 .

• 149

xii. 26 . . . 362

vi. I .

■ . ■ 77

iv. 17 . . . 223

xi. 8 .

. 232

xii. 31 . . 218, 291

vi. 4 .

• . 493

Titus i. 12 . . . . 38

xi. 17

■ 236

xiii. 2 . . . 168

vi. 8 .

. . 170

i. 15. . • • 173

xi. 25, 26

406

xiii. 3 . . . 468

vi. 14

• 274. 336

ii. 3. 5 . . • 117

xi. 28 .

59

xiii. 4 . . . 432

vi. 17

. . 115

ii. S . . . . 198

xi. 29 .

. 379

xiii. 8 ... 375

Eph. ii. 14

• • 32

ii. II, 13 .352, 393

xi. 33 .

. 376

xiii. 9 . . . 252

iii. 8 .

• • 175

iii. 10 . . . 160

xii. 12 .

• 133

xiii. 10. . . 107

iv. 25

. . lOI

Heb. i. 7, 8, 13 . . 400

xii. 19 .

. no

xiv. 20 241,385,479

iv. 26 .

. no, 113

iii. 3 .... 244

xiii. 4, 5

. 114

xiv. 22 . . . 77

v. 4 .

. . 42

iv. 13 . . 141, 349

xiii. 7 .

. 427

xiv. 34. 35 • 49

V. 14 .

■ . 413

V. 12 . . . 123

xiii. 12 .

. 66

XV. 9 . 19, 175, 439

V. 18.

. . 313

vi. 1,2... 73

xiv. 4 .

• 157

XV. 26 . . . 241

V. 32 .

. . 421

vi. 4 . . . . 276

xiv. 9 .

• 429

XV. 30, 31 . . 224

vi. I . .

• 333. 316

vii. 4 . . . 9

xiv. ID .

. 157

XV. 33 . . 13, 38

vi. 2, 3

. . 93

viii. S-n . . I

XV. 2, 3

. 468

XV. 36 . . . 462

vi. 9 .

. . 276

X. 28, 29 . 455, 49O

XV. 9 . .

• 423

XV. 41 . . . 341

vi. 12

. 42, 162

X. 32, 33 • • 96

XV. 12 . .

45, (>4

XV. 52 . . . 460

Phil. i. 23 . I

64, 192, 468

X. 37 . 66, 449, 466

xvi. 4

. 331

xvi. 13 . . . 28S

ii. 4 •

29

xi. 13-15 . . 59

xvi. 18 .

. 163

2 Cor. i. 4 . . . . 330

ii. 7 .

23

xi. 38 . . . 30

I Cor

. i. 9 . .

. 367

i. 8 . . . . ic^o

ii. 10, II

241

xii. 2 . . . 506

i. 30 .

2

ii. 2 . . . . 43

ii. 17. 18

254

xii. 4 ... 128

ii. 9 .

73. 338

ii. 4 • • • • 363

ii. 30 .

• 347

xii. 6 . . . 84

ii. 10 .

. 4f'3

ii. 7. 10. II . 514

iii. 2 .

130

xii. 12 . . . 413

ii. II

. 260

ii. II . . . 260

iii. 13. I-

\ ■

"5

xii. 14 . .94. 395

ii. 14 •

159, 33<'

iii. 3 . . . I

iii. 19

■ ■ 43. 147

xii. 18 . . . 8

ii. 16 .

99

iv. 5 . . . 252

iv. 4 .

. . 4". 248

xii. 22, 23, 44 . 9

iii. 5

. 438

iv. 16 . . . 479

iv. 5. 6

449. 4W)

xiii. 4 . . . 319

iii. 7

. 148

iv. 17 . . . 115

iv. 12

. ■ 533

xiii. 13 . . . 506

iii. iS .

• 251

iv. 17, 18 . 162, 253

Col. i. 0 .

452 1

James iv. 6 . . . 403

iv. 4 .

41

v. 19 . . . 113

i. 23 .

4521

V. 12 . . . 120

iv. 5

• '57

v. 20 . . . 477

i. 24 .

' 15

v. 14. «5 ■ • 217

iv. II .

• 533

vi. 15 . , . 208

ii. 3 . .

4(M

1 liter iii. 7 ■ . . 50

V. I . .

267

vii. 2 . . . 217

ii. 12 .

<j2

iii. 15 . . . 223

v. 5 . .

. . 5^'

vii. 5 . . 364, 452

ii. 14 .

240

iii. 19, 20 . 9

V. 8 . .

. . 257

vii. 10 . . . 93

iii. 15

•74

iv. (i . . . 9

V. II

2lX)

vii. II . . . 14

iii. 17

342

V. 13 . . . 5«7

V. 12 .

■ • 373

viii. 1-3 . . 3(>6

iv. 6 . .

1(H)

luilc 3 45

V. 13 .

. . 26

viii. 5

• . 94

I Thcss. ii. 9 .

5-»l

Kcv. iv. 8 . . . . 134

•I


4


^^■flUr


'M


- a


' <'K . > ':


%


..(7 ■• ■,,-'-i.,-*V' '


' ■■■'3'>>V.4L

■' '■ ^-^U: y^r -h'. ■■^'^m

,' ' .■■ ■ ."•"■,' --'■4 '-"^ ''-'J. / / ■ •.■V--7'


m


'r-^-'--^/-:


■ ' ♦


BR

60

34,6

1886

v.lQ

cop. 2


A Select library of the Nicene
and post-Nice ne fathers of
the Christian church


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET


UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY


'_i> ^j» i
