Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Series 2, Vol. 3: Theodoret, Jerome, Gennadius, & Rufinus: Historical Writings
Philip Schaff & Henry Wace (eds.), various translators (1890)
Source: Internet Archive
https://archive.org/details/selectlibraryofn03scha
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

uimaiiuuuuujjiMiJuwu


wimwunuiwwiwwiigimxiii.


^


ll1fllfr.lfii


sQi:


■W*t>, -i


Htltntru itf


Ct^nvu^'*


XV^^9S3


A SELFXT LIBRARY


OK


NICENE AND POST-NICENE FATHERS


OF


THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.


^econb ^eriee.


TRANSLATED INTO ENCHJSH WITH PROLEGOMENA AND EXPLANATORY NOTES


UNDER THE EDITORIAL SUPERVISION OF

HENRY WAGE, D.D., and PHILIP SCHAFF, D.D., LL.D.,

Principal of King's College, Professor of Church History in the Union Theological

London, Seminary, New York.

IN CONNECTION WITH A NUMBER OF PATRISTIC SCHOLARS OF EUROPE

AND AMERICA.


VOLUME III.

THEODORET, JEROME, GENNADIUS, RUFINUS;
HISTORICAL WRITINGS, ETC.


NEW YORK:

THE CHRISTIAN LITERATURE COMPANY.

M DCCCC VI.


• ' •.


/m

3


qs'^s-'^


1


./


CONTENTS OF VOLUME III.


\


PAGE

PREFACE BY THE GENERAL EDITOR v

THEODORET:

With Prolegomena and Notes by the Rev. Blo.mfield Jackson, M.A. —

Preface viii

Chronological Tables xi

Prolegomena i

Pedigrees 3:2

^ The Ecclesiastical History 33

The Dialogues 160

The Letters 250

JEROME AND GENNADIUS :

Translated with Introduction and Notes by Ernest Gushing Richardson, Ph.D. —

Introd JCTioN 353

Jerome — Lives of Illustrious Men 359

Gennadius — Lives of Illustrious Men ... 385

RUFINUS and JEROME:

Translated with Prolegomena and Notes by the Hon. and Rev. Canon W. H.

Fremantle, M.A. —

Prolegomena 405

Preface to the Commentary on the Benedictions of the Twelve

Patriarchs 417

Preface to the Commentary on the Benedictions of the Twelve

Patriarchs. Book II 419

Preface to the Apology of Pamphilus 420

Treatise on the Adulteration of the works of Origen 421

Preface to the Translation of Origex's IIf/« 'Ap^Y"*^ B. I & II 427

Preface to the Translation of Origen's Uriu 'Apjuv B. Ill & IV 429

Apology of Rufinus addressed to Anastasius Bp. of Rome 430

Letters of Anastasius to John Bishop of Jerusalem concerning

Rufinus 432

Rufinus' Apology against Jerome B. I 434

Rufinus' Apology against Jerome B. II 460

Jerome's Apology in answer to Rufinus B. I 4S2

Jerome's Apology in answer to Rufinus B. II 501

Jerome's Apology in answer to Rufinus B. Ill 513

Rufinus on the Creed 541

Rufinus' Preface to his Translation of the Recognitions of Clement. . 563

Rufinus' Preface to his Translation of the Sayings of Xystus 564

(iii)


iv CONTENTS.

I-AGE

RUP^INUS AND JEROME.— Co/i/tuued.

RuFiNus' Preface to his Translation ok the Chlrcii History ok

EusEBius 565

RuFiNus' Preface to his Translation of Origkn on Pss. 36, 37, 3 566

RuFiNus' Preface to his Translation of Origen on tiik Ep. to the

Romans 566

RuFiNLs' Peroration appended to Oru;en on the Ep. to ihe Romans.. 567

RuFiNus' Preface to his Translation of Origen on Numbers 56S


PREFACE.


This volume contains the following works :

I. Theodoret : Church History, Dialogues, and Letters. Translated, with ample Pro-
legomena and explanatory notes, by the Rev. Blomfield Jackson, M.A., Vicar of St,
Bartholomew's, Cripplegate, London.

II. Jerome and Gennadius : Lives of Lllustrioiis Men. Translated, with introduction
and notes, by Ernest Gushing Richardson, Ph.D., Librarian of Princeton College.

III. Rufinus : Apology against Jerome, and Jerome: Apology in reply to Rufinus ;
RuFiNus : Commentary on the Apostles' Creed, and Prefaces to his translations of the Clem-
entine Recognitions, the Sayings of Xystus, Eusebius's Ghurch History, and several of Origen's
works ; translated, with notes, and an introduction on the Life and Works of Rufinus by the
Hon. and Rev. Wini. Henry Fremantle, M.A., Ganon of Canterbury.

The English reader has now, in the first three volumes of this Library, a complete collec-
tion of the historical writings of the Fathers, whose permanent value, as sources, is universally
acknowledged. Several of them have never before appeared in English.

The unavoidable delay in the publication of the third volume has been very annoying to
the general editors and publishers, but the subscribers will be amply compensated by the
addition of the writings of Rufinus, which were not promised in the prospectus.

It is encouraging that this difficult and costly enterprise is beginning to be duly appreciated
by competent judges on both sides of the Atlantic. It is especially gratifying to read from a
thorough patristic scholar of the Anglican Church such a hearty commendation of the first
volume (the work of two young American divines), as appeared in "The Church Quarterly
Review" for April, 1892. We share in his hope (p. 125) that the labors of Dr. McGiffert and
Dr. Richardson will stimulate a new and critical edition of all the historical works of Eusebius,
after the model set by Bishop Lightfoot in his Apostolic Fathers, and that one of the English
University Presses will consider it an honor to undertake the expense of publication.

PHILIP SCHAFF.
New York, July 12, 1893.


(v)


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, DIALOGUES,

AND LETTERS


OF


THEODORE T.


TRANSLATED WITH NOTES


BY


THE REV. BLOMFIELD JACKSON, M.A.,

Victir of St. Bai'tholomeias, Moor Lane, and Fellow of King's College, London.


(vii)


TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.


The following translation has been made from the edition published in Migne's
Patrologia. The plan originally proposed was, in the case of the History, to make a
revision of an existing translation. This was, however, after a brief trial, abandoned,
and the translation has throughout been made entirely afresh. The Letters, so far as the
translator is aware, have never been published in English before. The notes indicate with
suthcient clearness to whom he is indebted for such elucidation of the text as he may Ikivc
been enabled to furnish. Conscious of its imperfections, and not confident tliat revision
can have removed all blemishes and errors, he yet puts forth this English version of the
History, Dialogues, and Letters of Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, in the hope that he may
not have done great injustice to their holy and learned author.

LONDOX, July, 189.1.


Tlpog tiop Koa'tovvtav i(J[.ifv.


CONTENTS.


PROLEGOMENA.

Chronological Tables .......... xi

LiFK AND Writings ........... i

Cyril's "Twelve Chapters" or Anathemas, with Theodoret's

Counter-Statements ......... 25

Pedigrees ..........•■•• 3^

The Ecclesiastical History ...... ^ o .. 33


The Dialogues


(i^)


160


The Letters ,..,....-..-• 250


CHRONOLOGICAL TABLES.


XI


CHRONOLOGICAL TABLES TO ACCOMPANY THE HISTORY AND

LIFE OF THEODORET.


323-
324-


325-


326.

327-
328.

329-
330-

331-

333-

335-


336.


337-
33S.

340-


342.

343-
343-4

345-
345 o'


Defeat and relegation of Licinius.

Execution of Licinius. Macarius, bishop of Jeru-
salem, Silvester of Rome, and Alexander of
Alexandria.

Colluthus condemned at Alexandria.

20th year of Constantine I. COUNCIL OF
NrC^EA (May 20 — Aug. 25).

Birth of Gallus (Caesar).

Birth of Gregory of Nazianzus.

Eustathius of Beroea elected bishop of Antioch.

Constantine writes a letter ordering the building
and reparation of churches.

Also a letter to Macarius, bishop of Jerusalem,
about the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.

Alexander, bishop of Alexandria, died in January
(perhaps April ) , and Athanasius succeeds, prob-
ably on June 8th. The Festal Index gives 328.

.''Consecration of Frumentius to the Abyssinian
bishopric.

Arian Council of Antioch, and deposition of Eus-
tathius : but the date is much controverted.
Possibly 330 or 331.

Incident of Ischyras and Macarius.

Birth of Basil of Caesarea, " the Great."

Byzantium dedicated as Constantinople, May nth.

Birth of Julian.

Perhaps the deposition of Eustathius.

Constantine's letter to Sapor II.

Division of the empire between Constantine,
Constantius, and Constans, sons, and Dalma-
tius and Hannibalianus, nephews, of the em-
peror.

Dedication of the Great Church at Jerusalem.

Anthony summoned to Alexandria.

Councils of Tyre and Jerusalem; first exile of
Athanasius.

Athanasius at Treves.

Death of Arius.

Death ( .'' Clinton gives 340) of Alexander of Con-
stantinople.

Death of Constantine I. Whitsunday.

Athanasius' restoration recommended by Con-
stantine II.

Constantine II. defeated and slain near Aquileia.

Constantius at war with Persia.

Death of Eusebius of Cresarea, the historian.

Paul and Eusebius of Nicomedia rivals at Con-
stantinople.

Athanasius withdraws to Rome.

Gregory at Alexandria.

Arian Synod of the Dedication of the Great Church
at Antioch, commonly dated 341.

Constantius orders expulsion of Paul from Con-
stantinople.

Persecution in Persia.

or 347. (See note on p. 67.) Council of Sardica.

Athanasius recei\ed at Milan by Constans.

Murder of GregDry.

346. Deposition of Stephen of Antioch.

Return of Athanasius, October 21.


Theod. 1. I ; Soc. i. 4; Soz. i. 8; Eus. -x. 9

TJieod. i. 2 ; Soc. i. 9; Soz. i. 2.
Theod. i. j.

Theod. I. 6; Soc. i. 8; Soz. i. 17.
Theod. ill', i.

Theod. I. J ; Soz. i. 2.

Theod. t. 14.

Theod. i. 16; Soc. i. 9.

Theod. i. 2§ ; Soc. i. 15; Soz. ii. 17.
Theod. t. 23 ; Soc. i. 19; Soz. ii. 24.


Theod. i. 20 ; Soc. i. 24 ; Soz. ii. 19.
Theod. ii. 6; Soc. i. 27.

cf. Theod. i. 18 ; Soc. i. 16; Soz. i. 3.


Theod, i. 24.


Theod. {. 2q ; Soc. i. 28; Soz. ii. 26.
'Theod. iv. 24.

Theod. i. 2S-2g ; Soc. i. 28; Soz. ii. 25.
Theod. i. 2g ; Soc. i. 315; Soz. li. 28.
Theod. i. ij ; Soc. i. 38; Soz. ii. 29.

Theod. i. ig.

ThtO({. i. JO ; Soc. i. 39; Soz. ii. 34.

Theod. ii. I ; Soc. ii. 3; Soz. lii. 2.
Theod. ii. J ; Soc. ii. 5; Soz. lii. 2.


Theod. i. ig ; Soc. ii. 7; Soz. iii. 4.

Theod. ii. s ; Soc. ii. 11 ; Soz. iii. 6.

Theod. ii. J ; Soc. ii. in; Soz. iii. 5.

Theod. ii. 4; Soc. ii. 7; Soz. iii. 4.

Theod. ii. 6 ; Soc. ii. 20; Soz. iii. 11.

Theod. ii. g.

Theod. ii. S ; Soc. ii. 26; -Soz. iii. 20.

Theod. ii, j ; Soc. ii. 33; Soz. iii. 70.


XII


THEODORET.


347. Birth of John Chrvsostoin.

349. Council at Jeriisali'in (>hinsi. ii. 171 11.), under

hp. Ma\inius, in ra\our of Athanasius. 1st Coun-
cil of Siiniiuin.

350. Revolt of Mai^ncntius.
Constans killed February 27.

3^1. Conslantius, sole emperor, defeats Magnentius at
Mursa.

2nd Council of Sirmium.
3:52. Liberiiis succeeds Julius in the See of Rome

Paul of Constantinople strangleil.
353. Suicide of Magnentius.
3151^. Council of Milan.

356. Intrusion of George at Alexandria.

357. Deposition of Cyril of Jerusalem by Acacius.
3rd Council of Sirmium.

35S. Return of Libcrius.

359. Synod of the Isaurian Seleucia.

Birth of Gratianus.

Council of Ariininum.
300. Synod of Nica.

3rd Council of Constantinople. (Semi Arian.)
I^fii. Nov. 3 Death of Constantius. )^

Accession of Julian. J

362. Murder of George of Alexandria.

Athanasius returns Feb. 22, but goes into 4th
exile in October.

363. Jidian's baffled attempt to rebuild the Temple.
Julian's Persian expedition and death, June 26.
Accession of Jovian, June 27.

364. Death of Jovian.

Accession of Valentinian. Valens Augustus.

366. Liberius, bp. of Rome, dies and is succeeded by

Damasus.

367. Gratianus, son of Valentinian, declared Augustus.

let. s. 8.
5th exile of Athanasius.
370. Basil becomes bishop of Ccesarea.

372. Gregory of Nazianzus becomes bishop of Sasima.

373. Death of Athanasius, May 2.
Death of Ephraim Syrus, June 19.

374. Auxentius of Milan dies.
Ambrose archbishop of Milan.

375. Gratian emperor of the West.

378. Death of Valens.

379. Theodosius named Augustus, Jan. 19.
Gregory of Nazianzus at Constantinople.

381. Council of Constantinoit.k. (2n(l c.knkr.m.)

3S3. Death of Gratian. Rebellion of Maximus.

386. Birth of Theodoret, according to the less probable

date of Garnerius.
3S7. Sedition at Antioch.
388. Defeat and death of Maximus.

Death of Cyril of Jerusalem.
390. Destruction of the Serapeum.

Massacre at Thessalonica.

Death of Gregory of Nazianzus.

392. Death of Valentinian 11. ""

Emperor.

393. Birth of Tiieodokkt, according to the more

probable date of Tillemont.

394. Theodosius defeats ICugenius.

395. Death of Theodosius. Accession of llonorius and

Arcadius.
398. John Chrysostom becomes bishop of Constanti-
nople.

400. Revolt of Gainas.

401. Roman legions withdrawn from Britain.

403. Synod of " the Oak."

404. Death of the empress Eudoxia.
Chrysostom ordereil to quit Constantinople.

407. Death of Chrysostom.

405. Death of Arcadius. Accession of Theodosius II.
410. Sack of Rome by Alaric,


Eugenius set


up as


Theod. ii. 12 ; Soc. ii. 25.

TJicoct. ii. i) ; Soc. ii. 25; Soz. iv. i.


Theod. ii. 12.

Theod. ii. ./ ; Soc. ii. 2G\ Soz. iv. 2.

Theod. ii. 12 ; Soc. ii. 3^) ; Soz. iv. 9.
Theod. ii. la ; Soc. ii. 14; Soz. iv. 30.
Theod. ii. 22; Soc. ii. 42; Soz. iv. 21;.

Theod. ii. 14; Soc. ii. 42; Soz. iv. 15.
Theod. ii. 22 ; Soc. ii. 39; Soz. iv. 22.

Theod. ii. ij : Soc. ii. 37; Soz. iv. 17.
Theod. ii. ib.


Thecd. Hi. i ; Soc. ii. 47; Soz. v. 1.


Theod. iii.j; Soc. iii. 4; Soz. vi. 6.
Theod. iii. /j; Soc. iii. 70; Soz. v. 22.
Theod. iii. 20; Soc. iii. 17; Soz. vi. i.

Theod. ii'.4; Soc. iii. 26; Soz. vi. 3.


Theod. ii. ly ; Soc. iv. 29; Soz. vi. 23.

Theod. V. i.

Theod. i-i'. 16 ; Soc. iv. 26; Soz. vi. 16.
Theod. 7'. 7; Soc. iv. 26; Soz. vi. 17.
Theod. iv. ij ; Soc. iv. 20; Soz. vi. 19.
Theod. iv. 26 ; Soz. iii. 16.
Theod. tv. ^ ; Soc. iv. 30; Soz. i. 24.
Theod. iv. 6.

Theod. V. i ; Soc. iv. 31 ; Soz. vi. 36.
Theod. iz>. 32 : Soc. iv. 37; Soz. vi. 40.
Theod. V. 5 / Soc. v. 2 ; Soz. vii. 2.
Theod. V. S : Soc. v. 6; Soz. vii. 7.
Theod. T'. 8 ; Soc. v. 8; Soz. vii. 7.
Theod. V. 12 ; Soc. v. 11 ; Soz. vii. 13.

Theod. t'. ig ; Soc. v. 15; Soz. vii. 23.


Theod. V. 22 ; Soc. v. 16; Soz. vii. 15.
Theod. V. JJ.


Theod. V. 24.

Theod. z>. 24; Soc. v. 25; Soz. vii. 24.

Theod. z>. 2j ; Soc. v. 26; Soz. vii. 25.

'Theod. ->. 2"/ ; Soc. \i. 2; Soz. viii. 2.
cf. Theod. V. 33 ; Soc. vi. 6; Soz. viii. 4.

Theod. V. ^t; Soc. \\. 15; Soz. \iii. 19

Theod. V.34 ; Soc. vi. iS; Soz. viii. 24.
Theod. V. 34.
Theod. •>. j6.


CHRONOLOGICAL TABLES.


Xlll


413
415

41S

4^5
42S

429
430


431-

43^-

433-
434

438.


440,

444'

446
448.
449.


4SC.

451'
453
45S.


Cyril becomes patriarch of Alexandria.

Murder of Iljpatia at Alexandria.

Theodoret loses his parents and retires to Nicerte

Council of Carthage.

Death of Ilonorius.

Theodoret becomes bishop of Cyrus.

Accession of Valentinian III.

Nestorius becomes bishop of Constantinople.

Vandals in Africa.

Death of Theodotus, patriarcli of Antioch, fixed by
Theodoretus as the term of his History.

Letters of Celestine of Rome and Cyril of Alex-
andria to John of Antioch on the Western con-
demnation of Nestorius.

Death of St. Augustine.

Council of Ephesus. (3rd general.)

Council of Orientals at Beroea. (St. Patrick's
mission.)

Peace between Cj'ril and the Orientals.
(c). Friendly correspondence between Theod. and
Cyril.

Translation of the relics of Chrysostom to Con-
stantinople.

Cyril denounces Diodorus and Theodore of
Mopsuestia : renewal of hostilities with Theo-
doret.

Accession of Isdigerdes II., the last event referred
to in the Ecc. History.

Death of Cyril of Alexandria.

Accession of Dioscorus.
(c). Composition of the "Dialogues."

Dioscorus deposes Irenoeus of Tyre.

(March 30.) Edict confining Theodoret within
the limits of his diocese.

(Aug.) Assembly of the " Latrocinium " at Eph-
esus.

(July 29.) Death of Theodosius II.

Accession of Pulcheria and Marcian.

Council of Chalcedon. (4th general.)

Death of Theodoret, according to Tillemont.

Probable date of the death, according to Garnerius,


Tlicod. V. jj.

Theod. Epp. CXI I/, CAVA'.


T/icod. Epp. XXIX-XXXV^l.
Theod. V. J9.


Theod. Ep. LXXXIII.
Theod. V. j6; Soc. vii. 45.


Theod. V. jS.

Theod. Ep. CLXXX.


PROLEGOMENA.


THE LIFE AND WRITINGS OF THE BLESSED THEODORETUS,

BISHOP OF CYRUS.


I. — Parentage, Birth, and Education.

At Antioch at the close of the fourth century there were living a husband and wife,
opulent and happy in the enjoyment of all the good things of this life, one thing only
excepted. They were childless. Married at seventeen, the young bride lived for several
years in the enjoyment of such pleasures as wealth and society could give. At the age of
twenty-thi-ee she was attacked by a painful disease in one of her eyes, for which neither
the books of older authorities nor later physiological discoveries could suggest a remedy.
One of her domestic servants, compassionating her distress, informed her that the wife of
Pergamius, at that time in authority in the East, had been healed of a similar ailment by
Petrus, a famous Galatian solitary who was then living in the upper story of a tomb in the
neighbourhood, to which access could only be obtained by climbing a ladder. The afflicted
lady, says the story which her son himself repeats,' hastened to climb to the recluse's
latticed cell, arrayed in all her customary elaborate costume, with earrings, necklaces, and
the rest of her ornaments of gold, her silk robe blazing with embroidery, her face smeared
with red and white cosmetics, and her eyebrows and eyelids artificially darkened. "Tell
me," said the hermit, on beholding his brilliant visitor, "tell me, my child, if some skilful
painter were to paint a portrait according to his art's strict rules and offer it for exhibition,
and then up were to come some dauber dashing off his pictures on the spur of the moment,
who should find fault with the artistic picture, lengthen the lines of brows and lids, make
the face whiter and heighten the red of the cheeks, what would you say.? Do you not think
the original painter would be hurt at this insult to his art and these needless additions of
an unskilled hand." These arguments, we learn, led eventually to the improvement of the
young Antiochene gentlewoman both in piety and good taste and her eye is said to have
been restored to health by the imposition of the sign of the cross. Not impossibly the
discontinuance of the use of cosmetics may have helped, if not caused, the cure.

Six years longer the husband and wife lived together a more i-eligious life, but still
unblessed with children. Among the ascetic solitaries whom the disappointed husband
begged to aid him in his prayers was one Macedonius, distinguished, from the simplicity
of his diet, as " the barley eater." In answer to his prayers, it was believed, a son was at
last granted to the pious pair.^ The condition of the boon being that the boy should be
devoted to the divine service, he was appropriately named at his birth " Theodoretus," or
"Given by God." ^ Of the exact date of this birth, productive of such important
consequences to the history and literature of the Church, no precise knowledge is
attainable. The less probable year is 3S6 as given by Garnerius,'' the more probable
and now generally accepted year 393 follows the computation of Tillemont.*

' Rclig. Hist. iiSS ct seq. 2 Rclig. Hist, 1214.

3 The Hebrew equivalents of this very general desig-natinn are Nathaniel and Matthew. Modern Eng-lish custom has
travelled back to the Greek for its Theodore, Theodora, but Dieudonne and Diodati are familiar in French and Italian.

■• Gamier the French Jesuit Father, was born in Paris in i6i2, and died in 16S1. His "Auctarium Theodoreti Episcopi
Cyrensis," with dissertations, was published in 16S4.

"According to this reckoning Thcodoret would be fifty-six at the time of the letter to Leo, written 449, in which he
speaks of his old age, and about thirty at his consecration as bishon in 423.

W. Moller in Herzog's Encyclopedia of Prot. Theol. (Ed. 1SS5. xv. 402) gives 390.

VOL. III. B


THEODORET.


While yet in his svvaddlinj^ bands the little Theodoret began to receive training
appropriate to his high career,' and, as he himself tells us, with the j^ardonable exaggeration of
enthusiasm, was no sooner weaned than he began to learn the apostolic teaching. Among
his earliest impressions were the lessons and exhortations of Peter of Galatia, to whom his
mother owed so much, and of Macedonius " the barley eater," who had helped to save the
Antiochenes in the troubles that arose about the statues.^ Of the latter^ Theodoret quotes
the earnest charges to a holy life, and in his modesty expresses his sorrow that he had not
profited better by the solitary's solemn entreaties. If however Macedonius was indeed quite
ignorant of the Scriptures,'' it may have been well for the boy's education to have been not
wholly in his hands. It is not impossible that he may have had a childish recollection of
Chrysostom, who left Antioch in 398. To Peter he used to pay a weekly visit, and records"
how the holy man would take him on his knees and feed him with bread and i^aisins. A
treasure long preserved in the household of Theodoret's parents was half Peter's girdle, woven
of coarse linen, which the old man had one day wound round the loins of the boy.
Frequently proved an unfailing remedy in various cases of family ailment, its very reputa-
tion led to its loss, for all the neighbours used to borrow^ it to cure their own complaints,
and at last an unkind or careless friend omitted to return it.^

When a stripling Theodoret was blessed by the right hand of Aphraates the monk, of
whom he relates an anecdote in his Ecclesiastical History,^ and when his beard was just
beginning to grow was also blessed by the ascetic Zeno.'* At this period he was
already a lector® and was therefore probably past the age of eighteen. By this time his
general education would be regarded as more or less complete, and to these earlier years
may be traced the acquaintance which he shows with the writings of Plomcr, Thucydides,
Plato, Euripides, and other Greek classics. Lighter literature, too, will not have been
excluded from his reading, if we accept the genuineness of the famous letter on the death
of Cyril,'" and may infer that the dialogues of Lucian are more likely to have amused the
leisure hours of a lad at school and college than have intruded on the genuine piety and
marvellous industry of the Bishop of Cyrus.

Theodoret was familiar with Greek, Syriac, and Hebrew, but is said to have been unac-
quainted with Latin." Such I presume to be an inference from a passage in one of his
works'^ in which he tells us " The Romans indeed had poets, orators, and historians, and
we are informed by those who are skilled in both languages that their reasonings are
closer than the Greeks' and their sentences more concise. In saying this I have not the
least intention of disparaging the Greek language which is in a sense mine,'^ or of making
an ungrateful return to it for my education, but I speak that I may to some extent close the
lips and lower the brows of those who make too big a boasting about it, and may teach
them not to ridicule a language which is illuminated by the truth." But it is not clear
from these words that Theodoret had no acquaintance wath Latin. His admiration for
orthodox Western theology as well as his natural literary and social curiosity would lead
him to learn it. In the Ecclesiastical History (iii. 16) there is a possible reference to
Horace.

Theodoret's chief instructor in Theology was the great light of the school of Antioch,
Theodorus, known from the name of the see to which he was appointed in 392, " ISIop-
suestia," or " the hearth of Mopsus," in Cilicia Secunda. He also refers to his obligations

lEp. LXXXI. = Ecc. Hist. V. 19. p. 146. a Relig. Hist. 1215. * cf. Ecc. Hist. p. 146. « Relig. Hist. iiSS.

' The confidence of Theodoret in the wonder working powers of half Peter's girdle may be taken as a crucial instance of
what detractors of the individual and of the a<je would ciiil his foolish credulity. }?ut an unsound process of reasoning from
post hoc ict pfopter hoc is not confined to any particular period, and it is not impossible that the scientists of the thirty-fourth
century may smile benevolently at some of the cherished remedies of the nineteenth.

'Cf. p. 127. » Relig. Hist. I20.V " Vide n. p. .^4.

10 Vide p. 346. To what is said there may be added the following remarks from Dr. Salmon's " Infallibility of the Church"
p. 303, n. " The letter from which these passages are taken was read as Theodoret's atthe fifth General Council (fifth Session)
and there accepted as his. But on questions of this kind Councils are not infallible; and the letter contains a note of spuri-
ousness in purporting to be addressed to John, bishop of Antioch, who died before Cyril. I own that the suggestion that for
'John' we ought to read ' Domnus ' does not suffice to remove suspicion from my mind. But it is solely for the reason
just st.atcd that I feel no confidence in accepting the letter as Theodoret's. Newman's opinion that it is incredible Theodoret
could have written so ' atrocious ' a letter is one which it is amazing should be held by any one familiar with tlie controversial
amenities of the time. Our modern urbanity is willing to bury party animosities in tlic grave; but in the fifth century Swift's
translation would be thought the <mly proper otic of the maxim ' De mortuis nil tiisi bonum' ' when scoundrels die let all be-
moan them.' Certainly the m;in who half a dozen vears after Chrysostom's death spoke of him as Judas Iscariot had no right
to expect to be politely treated after his own death by one whom he had relentlessly persecuted."

Glubokowski, whose great work on Theodoret now in progress is unfortunately a scaled volume to the majority of
readers on account of its being written in the author's native Russian, is of opinion that the letter is spurious. See also
Schrbckh Kircheges. xviii. 370. I am myself unable to see the forceof the /w^^rwai evidence of spuriousness. It may have been
half playful, and never meant for pulilication.

n Cf. Can. Venables Diet. Christ. Biog. iv. qo6. 12 Grcecarum affectionum curalio S43.

18 To a Syrian it would not be literally the mother tongue, but was possibly acquired in infancy.


PROLEGOMENA.


to Diodorus of Tarsus.^ Accepting 393 as the date of his birth and 392 as that of Theodore's
appointment to his see, it would seem that the younger theologian must have been rather a
reader than a hearer as well of Theodore as of Diodore. But Theodore expounded Script-
ure in many churches of the East.' The friendship of Theodoret for Nestorius may have
begun when the latter was a monk in the convent of St. Euprepius at the gates of Antioch.
It is recorded ^ that on one occasion Theodore gave oflence while preaching at Antioch by
refusing to give to the blessed Virgin the title Qeotukoc. He afterwards retracted this refusal
for the sake of peace. The original objection and subsequent consent have a curious sig-
nificance in view of the subsequent careers of his two famous pupils. Of the school of
Antioch as distinguished from that of Alexandria it may be said broadlv that while the
latter shewed a tendency to syntheticism and to unity of conception, the former, under the
influence of the Aristotelian philosophy, favoured analytic processes. ■* And while the
general bent of the school of thinkers among whom Theodoret was brought up inclined to
a recognition of a distinction between the two natures in the Person of Christ, there was
much in the special teaching of its great living authority which was not unlikely to lead to
such division of the Person as was afterwards attributed to Nestorius. " Such were the in-
fluences under which Theodoret grew up.

On the death of his parents he at once distributed all the property that he inherited
from them, and embraced a life of poverty,^ retiring, at about the age of three and twenty,
to Nicerte, a village three miles from Apamea, and seventy-five from Antioch, in the
monastery of which he passed seven calm and happy years, occasionally visiting neighbour-
ing monasteries and perhaps during this period paying the visit to Jerusalem which left an
indelible impression on his memory. " With my own eyes," he writes,' "I have seen that
desolation. The prediction rang in my ears when I saw the fulfilment before my eyes and
I lauded and worshipped the truth." Of the peace of Theodoret's earlier manhood Dr.
Newman ** says in a sentence less open to criticism than another which shall be quoted fur-
ther on, "There he laid deep within him that foundation of faith and devotion, and ob-
tained that vivid apprehension of the world unseen and future which lasted him as a secret
spring of spiritual strength all through the conflict and sufferings of the years that fol-
lowed."

II. — Episcopate at Cyrus.

Cyrus or Cyrrhus was a town of the district of Syria called after it Cyrestica. The
capital of Cyrestica was Gindarus, which Strabo describes" as being in his time a natural
nest of robbers. Cyrus lies on a branch of the river OEnoparas, now Aphreen, and the site
is still known as Koros. A tradition has long obtained that it received the name of Cyrus
from the Jews in honour of their great benefactor, but this is more than doubtful.
The form Cyrus may have arisen from a confusion with a Cyrus in Susiana.^" The
Cyrestica is a fertile plain lying between the spurs of the Alma Dagh and the Euphrates,
irrigated by three streams and blessed with a rich soil. The diocese, which was subject
to the Metropolitan of Hierapolis, contained some sixteen hundred square miles ^^ and eight
hundred distinct parishes each with its church. ^^ But Cyrus itself was a wretched little
place *^ scantily inhabited. Before it was beautified by the munificence of Theodoret it
contained no buildings of any dignity or grace. The people of the town as well as of the
diocese seem to have been poor in orthodoxy as well as in pocket, and the rich soil of the
district grew a plentiful crop of the tares of Arianism, Marcionism, Eunomianism and
Judaism.^*

Such was the diocese to which Theodoret, in spite of his honest fzolo episcopari,^^ was
consecrated at about the age of thirty, A. D. 433. Of the circumstances of this consecration
we have no evidence. Garnerius conjectures that he must have been ordained deacon
by Alexander who succeeded Porphyrins at Antioch. He was probably appointed, if not
consecrated, to succeed Isidorus at Cyrus, by Theodotus the successor of Alexander on the
patriarchal throne of Antioch. In this diocese certainly for five and twenty years, per-
haps for five and thirty, with occasional intervals he worked night and day with
unflagging patience and perseverance for the good of the people committed to his
care, and in the cause of his Master and of the truth. The ecclesiastic of these early

1 Ep. XVI. 2 John of Antioch Fac. ii. 2.

s Cyril. Alex. Ep. LXIX. ' Grcec. Affect. Cur. logo. " Ep. XLII. '= Ep. LXXXI.

* Glubokowski p. 63. ^ Historical Sketches iii. ^ig. J^Ep. CXIII.

E e.g-. Theodorus, Migne 776. s> Strabo xvi. c. 751. " Ep. CXXXVIII.

6Ep. CXIIl. lOGlubokowskip. 31. Tilieniont v. 217. " Epp. LXXXI, CXIII.

B 2


THEODORET.


times is sometimes imagined to have been a morose and ungenial ascetic, wasting
his energies in unprofitable hair-spHtting, and taking little or no interest in the
every day needs of his contemporaries. In marked contrast with this imaginary
bishop stands out the kindly figure of the I'eal bishop of Cyrus, as the modest statements
and hints supplied by his own letters enable us to recall him.

As an administrator and man of business he was munificent and efficient. Stripped,
as we have already learnt, of his family property by his own act and will, he must have
been dependent in his diocese on the revenues of his see. From these, which cannot have
been small, he was able to spend large sums on public works. Cyrus was adorned with
porticoes, with two great bridges, with baths, and with an aqueduct, all at Theodoret's ex-
pense.^ On assuming the administration of his diocese he took measures, he tells us, " to
secure for Cyrus " the necessary arts," and from these three words we need not hesitate
to infer that architects, engineers, masons, sculptors, and carpenters, would be attracted
" from all quarters " to the bishop's important works. And for this increased population
it is interesting to note that Theodoret provided competent practitioners in medicine and
surgery, in which it would seem he was not himself unskilled.^ His keen interest in the
temporal needs of his people is shewn by the efforts he made to obtain relief for them from
the cruel pressure of exorbitant taxation.* So unendurable was the tale of imposts under
which they groaned that in many cases they were deserting their farms and the country, and
he earnestly appeals to the empress Pulcheria and to his friend Anatolius to help them.*
The tender sympathy felt by him for all those afflicted in body and estate, as well as in
mind, is shewn in his letters on behalf of Celestinianus, or Celestiacus, a gentleman of
position at Carthage, who had suffered cruelly during the attack of the Vandals," and in
the admirable and touching letters of consolation addressed to survivors on the deaths
of relatives. That these should have been religiously preserved need excite no surprise.'
Of the terms on which he lived with his neighbours we can form some idea from the jus-
tifiable boast contained in his letter to Nomus. In the quarter of a century of his episco-
pate, he writes, he never appeared in court either as prosecutor or defendant ; his clergy
followed his admirable example; he never took an obol or a garment from any one; not
one of his household ever received so much as a loaf or an egg ; he could not bear to think
that he had any property beyond his few poor clothes." Yet he was always ready to give
where he would not receive, and in addition to all the diocesan and literary work which
he conscientiously performed, he spent more time than he could well afford in all sorts of
extra diocesan business which his position thrust in his way.

As a shepherd of souls he was unceasing in his efforts to win heathen, heretics and
Jews to the true faith. His diocese, when he assumed its government, was a veiy hot-
bed of heresy.^ Nevertheless in the famous letter to Leo '° he could boast that
not a tare was left to spoil the crop. His fame as a preacher was great and wide,
and makes us the more regret that of the discourses which in turn roused, cheered, and
blamed, so little should survive. The eloquence, so to say, of his extant writings, gives
indications of the force of spoken utterances not less marked by learning and literar}- skill.
Two of his letters give vivid pictures of the enthusiasm of oriental auditories in Antioch,
once so populous and so keen in theological interest, where now^ amid a people
numbering only about a fiftieth part of their predecessors of the fifth century, there is not
a single church. We see the patriarch John in a frenzy of gladness at Theodoret's ser-
mons, clapping his hands and springing again and again from his chair ; " we see the heads
of the congregation receiving the bishop of Cyrus with frantic delight as he came down
from the pulpit, flinging their arms round him, kissing now his head, now his breast, now
his hands, now his knees, and hear them exclaiming, " This is the Voice of the Apostle ! " "'
But Theodoret had to encounter sometimes the fury of opposition. Again antl again in
his campaign against heretics and unbelievers he was stoned, wounded, and brought nigh
unto death. '^ " He from whom no secrets are hid knows all the bruises my body has
received, aimed at me by ill-named heretics, and what fights I have fought in most of the
cities of the East against Jews, heretics, and heathen." '*

1 Epp. LXXIX. LXXXI. 2 Ep. CXV. > Epp. CXI V, CXV, and Dial. p. 217 cf. also de Prov. 518 et seqq.

« Epp. XLIl, XLIII, XLV. ^ Epp. XLIII. and XI.V. 0 Epp. XXIX.-XXXVl.

'cf. Epp. yil. VIII. XIV. XV. XVII.XVIII. LXV. I.XIX. » Ep. LXXXI.

" " In a diocese such as his, Ivini; as it wcro in a corner of tht; world, not reached by the public posts, isolated by the
great river to the east and the niouiitain clinins to the west, )ieo])led by half-leavened heathen, Christianity assumed many
strange forms, sometimes hardly recoijnisal)le caricatures of the truth." Canon Venables. Diet. Clirist. Biojj. iv. gci6.

i"Epp. CXIII. u Ep. LXXXIII. "Ep. CXLVII. " Epp. lxXXI and CXIH. " Ep. CXIII.


PROLEGOMENA.


Til. — Relations with Nestorius and to Nestorianism.

Nestorius, patriarch of Constantinople, was bound by ties of close friendship both to
Theodoret and to John, patriarch of Antioch. In August, 430, the western bishops, under
the presidency of the Pope Celestine, assembled in council at Rome, condemned Nestorius,
and threatened him with excommunication. Shortly afterwards a council of Orientals at
Alexandria, summoned by Cyril, endorsed this condemnation and despatched it to Constan-
tinople. Then John received from Celestine and Cyril letters announcing their common
action. When the couriers conveying these communications reached Antioch they found
John surrounded by Theodoret and other bishops who were assembled possibly for the ordi-
nation of Macarius, the new bishop of Laodicea. John took counsel with his brother bishops,
and a letter was despatched in their common name to Nestorius, exhorting him to accept
the term QcoruKor, round which the whole war waged ; pointing out the sense in which it
could not but be accepted by every loyal Christian, and imploring him not to embroil
Christendom for a word. This letter has been generally attributed to Theodoret. But
while the conciliatory sage of Cyrus was endeavouring to formulate an Eirenicon, the ardent
Egyptian made peace almost impossible by the publication of his famous anathematisms.
John and his friends were distressed at the apparent unorthodoxv of Cyril's condemnation
of Nestorius, and asked Theodoret to refute Cyril.' The strong language employed in
Letter CL. conveys an idea of the heat of the enthusiasm with which Theodoret entered on
the task, and his profound conviction that Cyril, in blind zeal against imaginary error on
the part of Nestorius, was himself falling headlong into the Apollinarian pit. An eager
war of words now waged over Nestorius between Cyril and Theodoret, each denounc-
ing the other for supposed heresy on the subject of the incarnation ; and, with deep
respect for the learning and motives of Theodoret, we may probably find a solution of
much that he said and did in the fact that he misunderstood Nestorius as completely as
he did Cyril.* Cyril, nursed in the synthetic principles of the Alexandrian school, could
see only the unity of the two natures in the one Person. To him, to distinguish, as the ana-
lysis of Theodoret distinguished, between God the Word and Christ the Man, was to come
perilously near a recognition of two Christs, keeping up as it were a mutual dialogue of
speech and action. But Cyril's unqualified assertion that there is one Christ, and that Christ
is God, really gave no ground for the accusation that to him the manhood was an unreality.
Yet he and Theodoret were substantially at one. Theodoret's failure to apprehend Cyril's
drift was no doubt due less to any want of intelligence on the part of the Syrian than
to the overbearing bitterness of the fierce Egvptian.

On the other hand Theodoret's loyal love for Nestorius led him to give his friend
credit for meaning what he himself meant. While he was driven to contemplate the
doctrines of Cyril in their most dangerous exaggeration, he shrank from seeing how the
Nestorian counter statement might be dangerously exaggerated. Theodoret, as Dr. Bright
remarks,^ " uses a good deal of language which is prima facie Nestorian; his objections
are pervaded by an ig)io7'atio elencki^ and his language is repeatedly illogical and
inconsistent; but he and Cyril were essentially neai'er to each other in belief than at the
time they would have admitted, for Theodoret virtually owns the personal oneness and
explains the phrase ' God assumed man' by 'He assumed manhood.'" Cyril " in his
letter to Euoptius earnestly disclaims both forms of ApoUinarianism — the notion of a
mindless manhood in Christ and the notion of a body formed out of Godhead. In his
reply (on Art iv.) he admits the language appropriate to each nature."

Probably both the Egyptian and the Syrian would have found no difficulty in
subscribing the language of our own judicious divine; "a kind of mutual commutation
there is whereby those concrete names, God and Man^ when we speak of Christ, do take
interchangeably one another's room, so that for truth of speech it skilleth not whether we
say that the Son of God hath created the world and the Son of Man by his death hath
saved it or else that the Son of Man did create, and the Son of God died to save the
world. Howbeit, as oft as we attribute to God what the manhood of Christ claimeth, or
to man w^hat his Deity hath right unto, we understand by the name of God and the name
of Man neither the one nor the other nature, but the whole person of Christ, in whom both
natures are. When the Apostle saith of the Jews that they crucified the Lord of Glory,
and when the Son of Man being on earth aflirmeth that the Son of Man was in heaven at


1 Vide the Anathematisms and Theodoret's refutation in the Proleg-omena.

2 cf. Glubokowski p. 9S. » Diet. Christ Biog. i. 767.


THEODORET.


the same instant, there is in these two speeches that mutual circulation before mentioned.
In the one there is attributed to God or the Lord of Glory death, whereof divine nature
is not capable; in the other ubiquity unto man, which human nature admittcth not.
Therefore by the Lord of Glory we must needs understand the whole person of Christ,
who lacing Lord of Glory, was indeed crucified, but not in that nature for which he is
termed the Lord of Glory. In like manner by the Son of Man the whole person of Christ
must necessarily be meant, who being man upon earth, filled heaven with his glorious
presence, but not according to that nature for whicii the title of Man is given him.
Without this caution the Fathers whose belief was divine and their meaning most sound,
shall seem in their writing one to deny what another constantly doth afiirm. Theodoret
disputeth with great earnestness that God cannot be said to suffer. But he thereby
meaneth Christ's divine nafitre against Apollinarius, which held even Deity itself
passible. Cyril on the other side against Nestorius as much contendeth that whosoever
will deny very God to have suftei'ed death doth forsake the faith. Which notwithstanding
to hold were heresy, if the name of God in this assertion did not import as it doth the
person of Christ, who being verily God suffered death, but in the flesh, and not in that
substance for which the name of God is given him." '

As to the part played by Theodoret throughout the whole controversy we may
conclude that thoug^h he had to own himself beaten intellectually, vet the honours of the
moral victory remain with him rather than with his illustrious opponent. Not for the
last time in the history of the Church a great duel of dialectic issued in a conclusion
wherein of the champion who was driven to say, "I was wrong," the congregation of
the faithful has yet perforce felt that he was right.

The end is well known. Theodosius summoned the bishops to Ephesus at the
Pe-ntecost of 431. There arrived Cyril with fifty supporters early in June ; there arrived
Theodoret with his Metropolitan Alexander of Hierapolis, in advance of the rest of the
Orientals. The Cyrillians were vainly entreated to wait for John of Antioch and his party,
and opened the Council without them. When they arrived they would not join the
Council, and set up their own " Conciliabulum " apart. Under the hot Levantine sun of
July and August the two parties denounced one another on the one side for not accepting
the condemnation of Nestorius, which the Cyrillians had passed in the beginning of their
proceedings, on the other for the informality and injustice of the condemnation. Then
deputies from the Orientals, of whom Theodoret was one, hurried to Constantinople, but
were allowed to proceed no further than Chalccdon. The letters written by Theodoret
at this time to his friends among the bishops and at the court, and his petitions to the
Emperor,* leave a vivid impression of the zeal, vigour and industry of the writer, as well
as of the extraordinary literary readiness which could pour out letter after letter, memorial
after memorial, amid all the excitement of controversy, the weariness of travel, the
sojourning in strange and uncomfortable quarters, and the tension of anxiety as to an
uncertain future.

Though Nestorius was deposed his friends protested that thcv woidd continue true to
him, and Theodoret was one of the synod held at Tarsus, and of another at iVntioch, in
which the protest against Cyril's action was renewed. But the oriental bishops were now
themselves undergoing a process of scission,^ John of Antioch and Acacius of Bertra
heading the peacemakers who were anxious to come to terms with C}ril, while Alexander
of Hierapolis led the irreconcilal)les. Intellectually Theodoret shrank from concession,
but his moral instincts were all in fovour of peace. He himself drew up a declaration of
faith wliich was presented by Paul of Emesa to Cyril, which Cyril accepted. But still true
to his friend, Theodoret refused to accept the deposition of Nestorius and his individual
condemnation, and it was not till several j^ears had elapsed that, moved less by the threat of
exile and forfeiture, as the imperial penalty for refusing to accept the position, than by the en-
treaties of his lieloved flock and of his favourite ascetic solitaries that he would not leave them,
Theodoret found means of attaching a meaning to the current anathemas on Nestorianism,
not, as he said, on Nestorius, which allowed him to submit. He even entered into friendly
correspondence with Cyril.'' But the truce was holhnv. Cyril was indignant to find that
Theodoret still maintained his old opinions. At last the protracted quarrel was ended by
Cyril's death in June, 444.

On the famous letter over which so many battles of criticism have been fought wc

1 Hooker. Ecc. Pol. v. liii. 4. a Epp., CLVII., CLVIIL, CLXVIl., CLXVIII., CLXIX., CLXX.

• Hefelc. Hist. Consc. iii. 127. Can. Venables. Diet. Christ, liioy. iv. 910. * Ep. LXXXUI.


PROLEGOMENA.


have already spoken. If it was really written by Theodoret, to which opinion my own
view inclines/ there is no reason why we should damn it as " a coarse and ferocious invec-
tive." If genuine, it was clearly a piece of grim pleasantry dashed oft' in a moment of
excitement to a joersonal friend, and never intended for the publicity w^hich has drawn such
severe blame upon its writer.

But though the death of Cyril might appear to bring relief to the Church and Empire
as well as to his individual opponents, it was by no means a ground of unmixed gratifica-
tion to Theodoret." Dioscorus, who succeeded to the Patriarchate of Alexandria, however
Theodoret in the language of conventional courtesy may speak of the new bishop's humble
mindedness,'* inherited none of the good qualities of Cyril and most of his faults. Theod-
oret, naturally viewed with suspicion and dislike as the friend and supporter of Nestorius,
gave additional ground for ill-will and hostility by action which brought him into individ-
ual conflict with Dioscorus. He accepted the synodical letters issued at Constantinople at
the time of Proclus, and so seemed to lower the dignity of the apostolic sees of Antioch
and Alexandria; * he also warmly resented the tyrannical treatment of his friend Irenteus,
bishop of Tyre." Irenceus had indeed in the earlier days of his banishment to Petra after
his first condemnation in 435 attacked Theodoret for not being thoroughly Nestorian, but
Theodoret was able to claim Irenaeus as not objecting to the crucial term OenroKog,^ reasonably
understood, and accepted him as unquestionably orthodox. When therefore Dioscorus, the
Archimandrite Eutyches, and his godson the eunuch Chrysaphius attacked Domnus for
consecrating Irenaus to the Metropolitan see of Tyre, Theodoret indignantly protested and
counselled Domnus as to how he had best reply.' But Dioscorus and his party had now the
ear, and guided the fingers, of the imperial weakling at Constantinople, and the deposition
of Irenjeus (Feb. 17, 44S) was followed after a year's successful intrigues by the autograph
edict of Theodosius confining Theodoret within the limits of his own diocese as a vexatious
and turbulent busybody.

IV. — Under the Ban of Theodosius and of the Latrocinium.

Theodoret was at Antioch when Count Rufus brought him the edict. His friends
would have detained him, but he hurried away." On reaching Cyrus he wrote to his
friend Anatolius warmly protesting against the cruel and unjust action taken against him,
and informing the patrician that Euphronius, a military officer, had travelled hard on the
track of Rufus to ask for a written acknowledgment of the receipt of the edict of relega-
tion.® The letters written at this crisis by the indignant pen of the maligned scholar and
saint '° have a peculiar value, at once biographical, literary, and theological. To Euse-
bius bishop of Ancyra he sends an important catalogue of his works. To Dioscorus, the
chief of the cabal against him, he sends a summary of his views on the incarnation and the
nature of our Lord, couched in such terms as might perhaps in earlier days have shortened
his great controversy with Cyril. But the opponents of Theodoret were not in a mood
to be moved by any formulation of the terms of his faith. Dioscorus received the letter
with insult, and publicly joined in the shout of anathema which he permitted to be
raised against his hated brother." The condemnation of Eutyches by Flavian's Constan-
tinopolian Synod had roused the Eutychian party to leave no stone unturned to secure its
reversal and crush it and all who upheld it. Of the latter Theodoret was the most prominent,
the ablest and perhaps the holiest. Hence he was the natui^al representative and personi-
fication of the doctrines that Dioscorus sought to decry and degrade. ^^ The sixth Council
of Ephesus of evil fame met in the Church of St. Mary the Virgin on August 8, 449.
Eutyches was acquitted. Flavian was condemned. Ibas of Edessa, Domnus of Antioch,
and Theodoret of Cyrus were deprived of their sees. The disgraceful scenes of violence
which marked every stage of this shamefid ecclesiastical gathering have been described
again and again with the vivid detail ^^ rendered possible by the exactitude of contemporary

1 Glubokowski p. 163 thinks it spurious. - Glubokowski, p. 163.

3 Ep. LX. c Ep. ex. ••> Ep. LXXIX.

4 Ep. LXXXVI. ' Ep. ex. 10 Epp. LXXIX. LXXX. LXXXI. LXXXII. LXXXIII.
s Epp. HI. XII. XVI. XXXV. 8 Epp. LXXIX .ind LXXX. n Ep. LXXXVI.

12 " Theodoret's condemnation was the chief object aimed at in summoning" the Latrocinium. He was "the bugbear
of the whole Eutycliian party and consequently condemned in advance." Canon Venables, Diet. Ohrist. Biog. iv. 913 and
Martin Brigandage a Ephese p. 192.

13 See specially Gibbon ehap. xlvii. Milman Hist. Lat. Ohrist. Book II. Ohap.Jiv. Stanley, Christian Inst it iii ions,
Chap. xvi. 4 and Canon Bright Art. Dioscorus in Diet. Christ. Biog. General Councils, it may be remarked, have been depreci-
ated and ridiculed by historians of tv/o kinds; the anti-Christian, such as Gibbon, who have been glad of the opportunity of
bringing discredit on the Church; and the Roman, such as Cardinal Newman, who are aware that the authority of Councils is
not always reconcileable with the asserted authority of the Bishop of their favourite see. (" Even those councils which were
otcumenical have nothing to boast of in regard to the Fathers, taker individually, which compose them. They appear as the


THEODORET.


narrative, but, innsmuch as Theodoret was condemned in his absence we are concerned
here less with the manner in which his condemnation was brought about than with the
steps he took to protest against and to reverse it.

To the prisoner of Cyrus courier after courier would bring intelligence of the riots
and tricks of the council. At last came news of the crowning wrong. On the indictment
of an Antiochene presbyter named Pelagius, Theodoret was condemned as an enemy of
God, a disseminator of poison, a false teacher deserving to be burnt. In support of the
accusation was quoted the careful theological statement addressed by Theod«^ret to the
monks in the Euphratensis and the Osrhoene whicli appears as Letter CLI., as well as
citations from his works at large. Dioscorus described the absent defendant as a blasphe-
mous enemy of God and the Emperor whose life had been spent in damning souls. The-
odoret was sentenced not merely to deposition from his see but to degradation from the
priesthood and to excommunication, and his books were ordered to be burnt.' So the great
council ended with the deposition of Flavian of Constantinople, Eusebius of Dorylajum,
Daniel of Carrai, Irenteus of Tyre, Aquilinus of Biblus, and Domnus of Antioch as well as
of Theodoret.^ Eutyches the heretic Archimandrite was restored and the brutal Dioscorus
seemed master of Christendom. One word of manly Latin had broken in on the supple
suffrages of the servile orientals, the '■'• CoJitradicitur'' of Hilarius the representative of the
Church of Rome.

To that church, and to its illustrious bishop, Theodoret naturally turned in his hour of
need. He implored his friend Anatolius to get him permission to plead his own cause in
person in the West, or if not to let him retire to his old home at Nicerte.^ The latter alter-
native was conceded. In this retreat he i^eceived many proofs of the affectionate regard of
his friends and offers of more practical help than his modest necessities demanded.''
Thence products of his facile pen travelled far and wide. The whole series of letters writ-
ten at this period gives touching testimony to the gentle and forgiving spirit of the sorely
tried bishop. There is nothing of the bitterness and fierce anger which appear sometimes
in the earlier controversy with Cyril. He is refined, not soured, by adversity, and, though
he never approached nearer to canonization than the acquisition of the inferior title of
Blessed, he appears in these dark days as no unworthy specimen of the suffering saint.*
The chief interest of these letters is in truth moral spiritual and theological. This, however,
has been obscured by the ecclesiastical interest which has been given them by the unwar-
ranted attempt to represent Theodoret's letter to Leo as an " appeal " to the see of Rome
in the later and technical sense of the word. Whether St. Hilary of Aries ever did or did
not give the lie to his short life of strenuous protest against the growing aggrandizement of
the see of Rome, there is no doubt that before his death at the age of 41 in 449 hissuflVagans
had been released by Leo from allegiance to a Metropolitan disobedient to the Roman
chair, and that Valentinian had issued an edict confirming Leo's claims and making the

antag-cmist host in a bahtic, not as the shepherds of their people." Hist. Sketches, p. 335.) And it mxist he conceded that so
far as outward circumstances went the Latrocinuun was as good a council as any other. As is pointed out by Dean Mihnan,
" It is difficult to discover in what respect, either in the legality of its convocation or the number and dignity of the assembled
prelates, consists its inferiority to more received and honoured councils. Two imperial commissioners attended to maintain
order in the council and peace in the city Dioscorus the patriarch of Alexandria by the Imperial command assumed the
presidency. The I5ishops who formed the Synod of Constantinople were excluded as parties in the transaction, but Flavianus
took his place with the Metropolitans of Antioch and Jerusalem and no less than three hundred and sixty bishops and ecclesi-
astics. Three ecclesiastics, Julian a bishop, Renatus a presbyter, and Hilarius a deacon were to represent the bishop of liome.
The Abbot IJarsumas (this was an innovation) took liis seat in thcCouncil as a kind of representative of the monks." JMil-
man, Lat. Christ. Bool< II. Chap. iv. The fact is that the fjreal Councils of the Early Church are like the fjreat men of the
Early Church. Some have authority and some have not. Hut their authority does not depend upon formal circumstances or
outward position. They have authority because the inspired common sense of the Cliurch has seen and valued the truth and
wisdom of their utterances. Athanasius, Arius, Cyril, and Nestorius, were all great churchmen. Alhanasius and Cyril
stand out asi^ainst the background of centuries as champions of the faith. Arius and Nestorius are counted as heretics.
Character does not outweigh doctrine. Nestorius is unsound in the faith though he was an amiable and virtuous man ; Cyril
is an authority of orthodoxy tlujugh his personal qualities were not Saintly. Of all the councils that according to Ammianus
.Marcellinus hamstrung the postal resources of the Kmpire, take Nicea, Tyre, and the two Ephesian councils of 431 and 449.
.\ica;aand the earlier Ephesian are accepted by the Church. Catholic. Tyre and the later Ephesian, though both were sum-
moned at the will of princes and attended by a large concourse of bishops, are rejected. Why? The earlier Ephesian in the
disorder and violence of its proceedings was as disgraceful as tlie Tyrian and the later liphesian. The councils of Nicxa and
of Ephcsus, called the first and the third <ecuinenical councils, are vindicated by the assent of the wisest of theChurch. The
'\\ct\xm secnrus judical orbis ttrranim hero holds good, and is seen to be identical with the ultimate foundation of thereat
Aristotelian detinition " define<l by reason, and as the wise man would define." And such is also the practical outcome of the
statement of Article XXI. of the Church of England.

cf. the striking jiassagc nf Augustine (Cont. Mnximin. Arian. ii. 14). " Sed nunc nee ego Niccenum, nee tu dehes
Ariminense, tanquam prajudiratnrits,J^roferre consilium. Nee ego htijus auctoritate, nee tu illiua detitieris. Scripturarum
ntietorilatibus,non qiiornmqiie proprtiSySed ulrisque communilnis teslihus, res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratioue
roncerlet." On the first four accepted (ecumenical councils Dr. Salmon {InJaHihilily of the Cliurch, p. 2S7) remarks, " Gregory
'.he Greai: says that he venerates these four as the four Gospels, and describes them as the foursquare stones on which the
structure of faith rests. Yet the hard struggle each of these councils had to make and the number of years which the struggle
lasted before its decrees obtained general acceptance, show that they obtain their authority because of the truth which tliey
declared and it was not because of their authority that the decrees were recognised as true."

1 Canon Venablcs Diet. Christ. Biog. Aclcs du Brigandage, pp. ig^, 19^. 2 Evagrius i. 10.

»Ep. CXIX. *Ep. CXXIII. BEpp.CiCIII. toCXXXIIl.aiidCLXXXI.


PROLEGOMENA.


authority of the Bishop of Rome supreme in the West.' It would be useful to maintainers
of the Roman supremacy if they could adduce instances of any assertion or acceptance of
similar authority in the East. So it has been said that Theodoret appealed to the Pope.^
In a sense this is of course perfectly true. Theodoret did appeal to the Pope. But the
whole superstructure of papal supremacy, so far as Theodoret is concerned, is really
based upon a poor pai'onomasia. The bishop of Cyrus " appealed" to the bishop of Rome
as any bishop believing himself to lie under an unjust sentence might appeal to any other
bishop, and as Theodoret did appeal to other bishops. It is quite true that the church of Rome
had many claims to honour and regard, as Theodoret himself felicitously and opportunely
points out, and that the present occupant of its throne was a man of unblemished orthodoxy
and of commanding personal dignity. But to recognise these facts is a long way from ad-
mitting that this veiy dignified see had either de facto or de Jure any coercive jurisdiction
over the Metropolitans of Alexandria or of Hierapolis, to the latter of whom Cyrus was
subordinate. Theodoret himself quotes the crucial passage in St. Matthew's gospeP ap-
parently without any idea that the " Petra " means all the successors of the " Petrus." ■*
What Theodoret asked from Leo was not the sentence of a superior but the sympathy and
support of an influential brother. What made it so peculiarly important that he should gain
the ear and the approval of Leo was that Rome had been wholly unconcerned in the intrigue
which condemned him. He could have had no more idea of papal authority in the later
ultramontane sense than he could of the decrees of the Vatican Council. Bound as he was
to do his utmost to vindicate not so much his own position and doctrinal soundness, as the
truth now trampled on by the combined factions of Alexandria and the court, he naturally
turned to Leo as alike the most respected and most independent bishop of his age.''

Leo, however, could do little or nothing to help him. Theodosius, completely under
the influence of Chrysaphius and Dioscorus, was quite satisfied as to the proper constitution
and equity of the Latrocinlum.

V. — Theodoret and Chalcedon.

Now, not for the last time in history, an important part was played by a horse.
In July, 450, Theodosius, while hunting in the neighbourhood of his capital, was thrown
from the saddle into a stream, hurt his spine, and a few days afterwards died.® With him
died the cause of Eutyches and of Chrysaphius. The eunuch was promptly executed, and
at last a Council was conceded to reconsider and rectify the crimes and blunders of the
Latrocinium.' But the Empress and her venerable husband did not wait for the Council
to undo some of the wrong done to Theodoret, and the large place he filled in the eyes and
estimation of the oriental world is shewn by the interest shewn at Constantinople in his
behalf.** The decree of relegation appears to have been rescinded, and he was free to
present himself at the synod. On the first assembling of the five hundred bishops,® under the

1 Cf. Milman Lat. Christ. Book ii. Chap, iv; Const. Valentin, iii Aug. apud S. Leon. op. epist. xi.

^Garnerius, the Jesuit, in his dissertation on the lilc of Theodoret writes : " When Theodoret g'ot news of his deposition
he determined to send envoys to the apostolic see, that is to the head of all the churches in the world, to plead his cause before
the righteous judgment seat of St. Leo," and in his summary of his own chapter he says " Theodoret appeals to the apostolic
see."

3 Matt. xvi. iS. 4 Ep. CXLVI.

^cf. Glubokowski. pp. 237, 239. Du Pin. iv. S3. Cardinal Newman, in his very bright and sympathetic sketch of
Theodoret, (Hist. Sketches ii. 30S ed. 1S91) writes the following remarkable sentence. "This, at least, he has in common
with St. Chrysostom that both of them were deprived of their episcopal rank by a council, both appealed to the holy see, and
by the holy see both were cleared and restored to their ecclesiastical dignities." It would be difficult in the compass of so
short a sentence to combine more statements so completely misleading. To say that Chrysostom and Theodoret both ap-
pealed to the " holy see" is as much an anachronism as to say that they appealed to the Court of the Vatican or to the Dome
of St. Peter's. In their day there was no Iioly see, that is to say, xar' e^ox'ji'. All sees were holy sees, just as all bishops were
styled your holiness. Rome, it is true, was tlie only apostolical see in the West, but it was not the only apostolical see, and
whatever official precedence it could claim over Antioch, Jerusalem, and Alexandria, was due to its being the see of the old
imperial capital, a precedence expressly ordered at Chalcedon to be shared with the new Rome on the IJosphorus. As to the
"appeal," we have seen what it meant in the case of Theodoret. It meant the same in the case of Chrysostom. Cut to the
quick at the cruel and brutal treatment of his friends after his banishment from Constantinople in the summer of 404 he
pleaded his cause in letters sent as well to Venerius of Milan and Chromatins of Aquileia as to Innocent of Rome. _ Innocent
very properly^ espoused his cause, declared his deposition void, and did his best to move Honorius to move Arcadius to con-
voke acouncil. The cruel story of the long martyrdom of bitter exile and the death in the lonely chapel at Comana is a terri-
ble satire on the restoration to ecclesiastical dignities. The unwary reader of" the historical sketch " might imagine the famous
John of the mouth of gold brought back in triumph to Constantinople by the authority of the pope in 404 as he had been bv the
enthusiasm of his flock in 403, and Arcadius and Eudoxia cowering before the power of Holy Church like Henry IV. at
Canossa in 1077. The true picture of the three years of agony which preceded the old man's passage to the better world in
407 is a painful contrast to contemplate (Pallad. Dial. 1-3. Theodoret V. 34. Sozomen viii. 26, 27, 2S.) Of Theodoret's
restoration to " ecclesiastical dignity," and Leo's part in it, we shall see further on.

"cf. the deaths of William I. and William III. of England.

^Though Marcian's independence of western dictation was shewn in the summoning of the bishops not to a place in Italy,
as Leo had hoped and urged, but to Chalcedon, the beautiful Asiatic suburb of Constantinople.

8 Epp. CXXXIX, CXL.

"Accounts of the numbers vary. Marcellinus says 630. There were more than 400 signatures.


lo THEODORET.


presidency of the imperial Commissioners,' the minutes of the Latrocinium were read ;
the presence of Dioscorus was protested against by the Roman representation as having dared
to hold a synod unauthorized by Rome ; and the claim of Theodoret to sit and vote, al-
lowed both by the imperial Commissioners and by the westerns, since Leo ^ had accepted
him as an orthodox bishop, was vehemently resisted by the Eutychians. He entered, but
at first did not vote, and his enemies at last succeeded in wringing from him a jDcrsonal
anathema not only of Nestorianism, but of Nestorlus. The scenes reported in detail are
too characteristic alike of the earlier Councils and of Theodoret to be omitted.

"The illustrious Presidents and the honorable Assessors ordered that the most religious
bishop Theodoret should enter, that he might be a partaker of the Council, because the holy
Archbishop Leo had restored the bishopric to him ; and the most sacred and pious
Emperor determined that he was to be present at the Holy Council. And on the entrance
of the most religious Theodoret, the most religious bishops of Egvpt, Illyricum and Pales-
tine called out : ' Have mercy upon us ! The faith is destroyed. The Canons cast him out.
Cast out the teacher of Nestorius.' Tlie most religious bishops of the East and those of
Pontus, Asia, and Thrace shouted out : 'We had to sign a blank paper ; we were scourged,
and so we signed. Cast out the Manichceans ; cast out the enemies of Flavian ; cast out
the enemies of the faith.' Dioscorus, the most religious bishop of Alexandria said :
'Why is Cyril being cast out, wdio is anathematized by Theodoret ? ' The Eastern
and Pontic and Asian and Thracian most religious bishops shouted out : ' Cast out Dioscorus
the murderer. Who does not know the deeds of Dioscorus?' The Egyptian and the
Illyrian and the Palestinian most religious bishops shouted out : ' Long years to the
Empress ! ' The Eastern and the most religious bishops with them shouted out : ' Cast out
tlie murderers ! ' The Egyptians and the most religious bishops with them shouted out :
' The Empress has cast out Nestorius. Long years to the orthodox Empress ! The Coun-
cil will not receive Theodoret.' Theodoret, the most religious bishop, came up into the
midst and said : ' I have oflered petitions to the most godlike, most religious and Christ-
lo\ing masters of the world, and I have related the disasters which have befallen me, and I
claim that they shall be read.' The most illustrious Presidents and the most honourable
Assessors said : ' Theodoret, the most religious bishop, having received his proper place
from the holy Archbishop of the renowned Rome, now occupies the place of an
accuser. Wherefore, that there be no confusion in our proceedings, allow the things
which have had a beginning to be finished. No prejudice will accrue to anyone from
the appearance of the most religious Theodoret. Every argument for you and for him,
if you desire to make one on one side or the other is of course reserved.'
And after Theodoret, the most religious bishop, had sat down in the midst,
the Eastern, and the most religious bishops who were with them, shouted
out: 'He is worthy! He is worthy!' The Egyptians and the most religious
bishops who were with them shouted out : ' Do not call him a bishop ! He is not
a bishop ! Cast out the fighter against God ! Cast out the Jew^ ! ' The Easterns and
the most religious bishops who were with them shouted out : ' The orthodox for the
Council ! Cast out the rebels ! Cast out the murderers ! ' The Egyptians and the most
religious bishops who were with them shouted out : ' Cast out the fighter against God I
Cast out tlie insulter of Christ ! Long years to the Empress ! Long years to the
Emperor! Long years to the orthodox Emperor! Theodoret has anathematized Cyril.'
The Easterns and the most religious bisho]:)s who were witli them shouted out : ' Cast
out the murderer Dioscorus ! ' The Egyptians and the most religious bishops with them
shouted out : ' Long years to the Assessors ! He has not the right of speech. Pie is expelled
from the whole Synod !' Basil, the most religious bishop of Trajanopolis, in the prov-
ince of Rhodope, rose up and said: 'Theodoret has been condemned by us.' The
Egyptians and the most religious bishops with them shouted out : ' Theodoret has ac-
cused Cyril. We cast out Cyril if we receive Theodoret. The Canons cast out Theodoret.
God has turned away from him.' The most illustrious Presidents and the most honourable
Assessors said : ' The vulgar cries are not worthy of bishops, nor will they assist either
side. Suffer, therefore, the reading of all the documents.' The Egyptians and the most

> Porliaps of the Emperor himself. (Breviar. Hist. Eutych.) The representatives of the imperial government sat in the
centre of the Cancelli ; on tlicir riyht were Dioscorus, Juvenal of Jerusalem, and the Palestinian bishops ; on their left Pascha-
sinus of IJlvlia;um, (Marsala) I.ucentius of Asculum(Ascoli) with Boniface, a Iloman presbyter, the three representatives of
Leo, Anatolius of Constantinople, Maximus of Antiocli, and the orientals. Paschasinus signed -.xs " sj'nodo /'/■icsuiens," hitt
he did not cither locallv or eflVclively preside.

^The acts of the Council of Chalcedon refer to Theodoret having been righted by the bishop of " the illustrious city of
Rome; " " the archbishop of the senior city of Rome." The primacy is that of the ancient capital.


PROLEGOMENA. n


religious bisliops with them sliouted out : ' Cast out one man, and we will all hear.
We shout out in the cause of Religion. We say these things for the sake of the orthodox
Faith.' The most illustrious Presidents and the honourable Assessors said: 'Rather
acquiesce, in God's name, that the hearing of the documents should take place, and concede
tliat all shall be read in proper order.' And at last they were silent, and Constantine,
the most holy Secretary and Magistrate of the Divine Synod, read these documents."'

One more sad incident must be given — the demand made at the eighth session that
Theodoret should pronounce a curse on his ancient friend. " The most reverend bishops
all stood before the rails of the most holy altar, and shouted " Theodoret must now
anathematize Nestorius." Theodoret, the most reverend bishop, passed into the midst,
and said: "I have made my petition to the most divine and religious Emperor,
and I have laid documents before the most reverend bishops occupying
the place of the most sacred Archbishop Leo ; and if you think fit, they
shall be read to you, and you will know what I think.' The most
reverend bishops shouted 'We want nothing to be read — only anathematize Nestori-
us.' Theodoret, the most reverend bishop, said : ' I was brought up by the ortho-
dox, I was taught by the orthodox, I have preached orthodoxy, and not only
Nestorius and Eutyches, but any man who thmks not rightly, I avoid and count him an
alien.' The most reverend bishops shouted out : ' Speak plainly ; anathema to
Nestorius and his doctrine — anathema to Nestorius and to those who defend him.'
Theodoret, the most reverend bishop said : ' Of a truth I say nothing except so far
as I know it to be pleasing to God. First I will convince you that I am here, not because
I care for my city, not because I covet rank. Because I have been falsely accused, 1
come to satisfy you that I am orthodox, and that I anathematize Nestorius and Eutyches,
and every one who says that there are two Sons.' Whilst he was speaking, the most
reverend bishops shouted out : ' Speak plainly ; anathematize Nestorius and those who
think with him.' Theodoret, the most reverend bishop, said : ' Unless I set forth at
length my faith I cannot speak. I believe' — And whilst he spoke the most reverend
bishops shouted : ' He is a heretic ! He is a Nestorian ! Away with the heretic I An-
athema to Nestorius and to any one who does not confess that the Holy Virgin Mary is
the Parent of God, and who divides the only begotten Son into two Sons.' Theodoret,
the most revei"end bishop, said, ' Anathema to Nestorius and to whoever denies that the
Holy Virgin Mary is the Parent of God, and who divides the only begotten Son into
two Sons. I have subscribed the definition of faith, and the epistle of the most holy
Archbishop Leo.'


r> 2


VL — Retirement after Chalcedon, and Death.

Some doubt hangs over the question whether after his vindication at Chalcedon
Theodoret resumed his labours at Cyrus, or occupied himself with literary work in the
congenial seclusion of Nicerte. Garnerius makes it about the time of his quitting Chal-
cedon that Sporacius charged him with the duty of writing on the Heresies,^ and if so his
five books on this subject would seem to have constituted the first fruit of his comparative'
leisure. Sporacius "* he styles his " Christ-loving Son," and no doubt owed something to
the aid of the influential "Comes domesticorum," who was present at Chalcedon, when
the question of his admission to the Council was being agitated. To this period has also
been referred his commentary on the Octateuch." On Dr. Newman's statement that
Theodoret made over the charge of his diocese to Hypatius (one of his chorepiscopi, who
had been entrusted with his appeal to Pope Leo) and retired into his monastery, and
there regaining the peace which he had enjoyed in youth, passed from the peace of the
Church to the peace of eternity. Canon Venables "^ remarks that there is no authority
for so pleasing a picture, and that Tillemont ' contradicts it altogether. Garnerius quotes
his congratulation to Sabinianus ** on leaving Perrha as suggestive of what conduct he might
have preferred.

It is at least certain that during this period he received a long and sympathetic letter from

1 Labbe, iv., 102, 103.

'Labbe iv. 621. Bertram (Theod. Ep. Cyr. doctrina christologica, 1SS3) thinks Theodoret changed his views; Mbll'T
Herzog XV. s.v.) that he retained them, though necessarily modified in expression by stress of circumstances,
s Pra;f. Hseret, Fab. ^ ^Ep. XCVII.

■> Photius Cod. 204. The Octateuch comprises the first eight books of the Old Testament.
6 Diet. Christ. Biog. iv. 916, » xv., 311. « Ep. CXXVI.


12 THEODORET.


Leo, from which it is clear that the Roman bishop reposed great confidence in him.' It
is characteristic of one in whom the mere man was merged in the theologian and ecclesiastic
that, as of the year of his birth, so of the year of his death, we have no specific informa-
tion, and arc compelled to form our conclusions on evidence which though valuable, is not
overwhelming. Theodorus Lector, the composer of the Historia Tripartita, in the 6th
century, states^ that Theodoret prepared a sepulchral urn for the burial of the famous as-
cetic Jacobus ; that he predeceased Jacobus ; but that Jacobus was buried in it.^ Evagrius ■*
mentions Jacobus Syrus as still living when the Emperor Leo sent his Circular Letter to
the bishops in 458, though then he must have been in extreme old age. And Gennadius,
who lived not long after Theodoret, says that he died in the reign of Leo. The evidence is
not strong. Theodoret may have died some years before Jacob. But Gennadius probably
knew. On the whole we may conclude that there is some probability that Theodoret sur-
vived till 45S ; none that he lived longer. Like Lucius Gary, Viscount Falkland, to whom,
in his isolation, Dean Stanley* compares him, Theodoret must have expired with the cry
of" Peace, Peace," in his heart, it not on his lips. Garnerius is careful to prove that he
died in " the peace of the Church," and appeals in support of this contention to the
laudatory testimony of Popes Vigilius, Pelagius I., Pelagius IL, and Gregory the Great.
The peace of the Church, in the narrower sense, has not always been accorded to holy men
and women who have assuredly departed this life in the faith and fear of their Lord. In
its truer and holier connotation it coincides with a state in which we trust we may contem-
plate the godly old man of Cyrus, forgetting the storms that had beaten now and
again on the life he was leaving behind him, and stepping quietly into the calm of the
windless haven of souls, — the Peace not of man, but of God.

VII. — The Condemnation of "the Three Chapters."

A sketch of the life of Theodoret might well be supposed to terminate with his death.
But it can hardly be regarded as complete without a brief supplementary notice of the
posthumous controversy which has contributed to his fame in ecclesiastical history. The
Council of Chalcedon was designed to give rest to the Church, and to undo a great wrong,
and catholic common sense has since vindicated its decisions. But it was not to be sup-
posed that the opinions and passions which had achieved a combined triumph at Ephesus
in 449 would die away and disappear in consequence of the imperial and synodical action
of 451. The face of the world was changing. The vandal Genseric ca2:)turcd and pil-
laged Rome. The Teutonic races were pushing to a foremost place, and accepting first of
all an Arian Christianity. Clovis represented orthodoxy almost alone. Theodoric, the
Arian Ostrogoth, mastered Italy. Then the turning tide saw Rome once again a city of
sole empire, but not the chief city. The victories of Belisarius made of Rome a suburb
of Constantinople, and empire and theology swayed and were swayed by the policy of
Justinian and the palace plots of Theodora. All through monophysitism had had its
friends and defenders. Metropolitans, monks, and mobs had anathematized one another
for nearly a century. At Alexandria Dioscorus had w^on almost a local canonization, and
the patriarch Timotheus, nicknamed " the Cat," had left a strong monophysite party, con-
solidated under Peter the Stutterer as the " acephali." " At Antioch Peter the Fuller had
anathematized all who refused to accept the Shibboleth he appended to the Trisagion,
" who wast crucified on our account." Leo, Marcian's successor on the Eastern throne,
had followed Marcian's theology, and Zeno, Leo ; but the usurper Basiliscus had seen ele-
ments of strength in a bold liid for monophysite support. Zeno, on the fall of Basiliscus,
had attempted to atone the disunited sections of ChristencU)m by the henoticon, or edict of
unity, but the henoticon had been for years a watchword of division. Anastasius had
favoured the Eutychians. And in his reign Theodoret had been twice condemned, at the
synods of Constantinople and Sidon, in 499 and 512. '

Justin I., the unlettered barbarian, supported the Chalcedonians, but in 544 Belisarius


> Leo. Ep. cxx., and Migne Thcod. iv. 1 19^ Chagrined at the decision of the Council that Constantinople was to enjov
honora.-y precedence next after old Ivonie and practical equality and independence, in that the metropolitans of" l^onlus, Asia,
and Thrace were to be ordained by tlie patriarch of Constantinople, Leo manages to write to Theodoret, /flr parenthcse, of the
Jioman See as one " qnam avU-rts omnium Dominus statuit pra-siJere." H in " statin'/ " Leo had meant to refer to a Divine
Providence overrulinji: history, and in "/;-a-.«/<^(?/-t-" to the fact that Rome was for many years the capital of the world, his
remark would have been open to little objection. But he meant something- quite different.

= Collect. Hook i. Ed. Migne p. 566.

3 There seems no authority for the statement of Garnerius (Hist. Theod. xiii) repeated in Smith's Diet. Chris. Biog. that
Jacobus and Theodoret shared it. * de Scrip. Ecc. So.

» Christian Institutions. Chaj). xvi. 6 ■A,(e,^aAot — headless^ i.e., without bishop.

'Victor lunuii. and Mansi, viii. 371. Mansi, viii. 197-200.


PROLEGOMENA. 13


had made the Eutychian VigiHus bishop of Rome. When Justinian aspired to become a
second Constantine, and give theological as well as civil law to the world, it was proposed
to condemn in a fifth oecumenical council certain so-called Nestorian writings, on the plea
that such a condemnation might reconcile the opponents of Chalcedon. The writings in
question were the Letter of Ibas of Edessa to Maris, praising Theodore of Mopsuestia ;
the works of Theodore himself, and the writings of Theodoret against Cyril. These
three literary monuments were known as " the Three Chapters." ' Of the controversy
of the Three Chapters it has been said that it " filled more volumes than it was worth
lines." * The Council satisfied nobody. Pope Vigilius, detained at Constantinople and
Marmora with something of the same violence with which Napoleon L detained Pius VI.
at Valence, declined to preside over a gathering so exclusively oriental. The West was out-
raged by the constitution of the synod, irrespective of its decisions. The Monophysites
were disappointed that the credit of Chalcedon should be even nominally saved by the nice
distinction which damned the writings, but professed complete agreement with the council
which had refused to damn the writers. The orthodox wanted no slur cast upon Chalce-
don, and, however fenced, the condemnation of the Three Chapters indubitably involved
such a slur. Practically, the decrees of the fourth and fifth councils are mutually incon-
sistent, and it is impossible to accept both. Theodoret was reinstated at Chalcedon in
spite of what he had written, and what he had written was anathematized at Constanti-
nople in spite of his reinstatement.

The xiii Canon of the fifth Council runs as follows, "if any one defends the impious
writings of Theodoret which he published against the true faith, against the first holy
synod of Ephesus and against the holy Cyril and his twelve chapters; and all that he
wrote in defence of the impiousTheodorus and Nestorius, and others who held the same
opinions as the aforesaid Theodorus and Nestorius, defending them and their impiety, and
accordingly calling impious the doctors of the church who confess the union according to
hypostasis of God the Word in the flesh ; and does not anathematize these writings and
those who have held or do hold similar opinions, above all those who have written against
the true faith and the holy Cyril and his twelve chapters, and have remained to the day of
their death in such impiety ; let him be anathema."

In this condemnation the works certainly included are Theodoret's " Objections to
Cyril's Chapters," some of his letters, and, among his lost works, the " Pentalogium,"
namely five books on the Incarnation written against Cyril and his supporters at Ephesus,
of which fragments are preserved, and two allocutions against Cyril delivered at Chalcedon
in 431, of which portions exist in the acts of the fifth Council, and do not exhibit The-
odoret at his best.

The Council has at least preserved to us an interesting little record of the survival at Cyrus
of the memory of her great bishop, for it appears that at the seventh collation, held at the
end of May, notice was taken of an enquiry ordered by Justinian respecting a statue or por-
trait of Theodoret which was said to have been carried in procession into his cathedral town,
by Andronicus a presbyter and George a deacon. 3 A more important tribute to his memory
is the fact that, though it officially anathematized writings some of which, composed in
the thick of the fight, and soiled with its indecorous dust, Theodoret himself may well have
regretted and condemned, the Council advisedly abstained from directly condemning a
bishop whose character and person were protected by the notorious iniquity of the robber
council that had deposed him, the friendship of the illustrious Leo, and the solemn vindi-
cation of the church in Synod at Chalcedon, as well as by his own confession of the taith,
his repudiation of the errors of Nestorius, and the stainless beauty and pious close of his
long life.

No better reconciliation between Chalcedon and Constantinople can be proffered than
that which Garnerius quotes from the letter said to have been written by Gregory the
Great, though sent in the name of Pelagius II, to the lUyrians on the fifth council, "It is
the part of unwarrantable rashness to defend those writings of Theodoret which it is noto-


1 Dean Milman (Lat. Christ, iv, 4), following- in the wake of Gibbon, remarks that " the church was not now disturbed
b)' the sublime, if inexplicable, dogmas concerning the nature of God, the Persons of the Trinity, or the union of tlie divine
and human nature of Christ, concerning the revelations of Scripture, or even the opinions of the ancient fathers. The ortho-
doxy or heterodoxy of certain writings by bishops, but recently dead, became the subject of imperial edicts, of a fifth so-called
CEcumenic Council, held at Constantinople, and a religious war between the East and the West," but it was on their explana-
tion of sublime if inexplicable dogmas that the orthodoxy or heterodoxy of these bishops depended, and so far as the subject
matter of dispute is concerned, the position in 553 was not very different from that of 451. In both cases the church was moved
at once by honest conviction and partisan passion ; the state was influenced partly by a healthy desire to promote peace through-
out the empire, partly by the meaner ambition of posing as theological arbitrator.

* Gibbon, chap, xlvii. Schaft Hist. Christ, iii, 770. 3 Labbe. Act. Cone. Const, v. Coll. vii.


14 THEODORET.


rious that Theodorct himself condemned in his subsequent profession of the right faith.
So long as we at once accept himself and repudiate the erroneous writings which have long
remained unknown we do not depart in any way from the decision of the sacred synod,
because so long as we only reject his heretical writings, we, with the synod, attack Nestorius,
and with the synod express our veneration for Theodoret in his right confession. His
other writings wc not only accept, but use against our foes." '

VIII. — The Works of Theodoret.

Of authorities for the works of Theodoret we may first cite himself. In four of his
letters he mentions his own writings; viz. : in Ixxxii, to Eusebius of Ancyra ; in cxiii, to
Leo of Rome ; in cxvi, to the Presbyter Renatus ; and in cxlv, to the monks at Constanti-
nople. Of these the first was written in 445 and the last three in 449 and a reference to
them will show the works mentioned. It is to be noticed ^ that no allusion is made to the
Refutation of the Twelve Chapters; to the defence of Diodorus of Tarsus and Theodorus of
Mopsuestia, nor to the Dialogues, though all are held to have been wi-itten before the
Latrocinium. It may have been, as Garnerlus conjectures, that Theodoret did not judge
it politic at this time to call attention to these particular works, but the assumption is not
based on strong grounds, and Theodoret never appears as one unwilling to avow his convic-
tions, which indeed, were perfectly well known.

Gennadius, presbyter of Marseilles, who died in 496, writes " Theodoretus, bishop of
Cyrus, is said to have written many works : those, however, which have come to my
knowledge are the following; of the Incarnation of the Lord, against the presbyter
Eutyches, and Dioscorus, bishop of Alexandria, who deny that there was in Christ human
flesh, — powerful writings wherein he proves, as well by argument as by scriptural evi-
dence, that Christ had very flesh of the substance of His mother, which He took from
the Virgin, and very Godhead, which by eternal generation He received, in being gener-
ated, from God the father begetting Him. There exist also his books of Ecclesiastical
History, which he wrote in imitation of Eusebius of Ccesai-ea, beginning from the end of
the books of Eusebius down to his own time, viz. : from the twentieth year of Constan-
tine down to the reign of Leo I, in whose reign he died." ^

Photius, in the ninth century, says that he has read the Ecclesiastical History; twenty-
seven books against Heresies, among which he reckons the " Eranistes ; " five books
" Hicrcticarum Fabularinn ; " five in praise of Chrysostom ; with Commentaries on
Daniel, the Octateuch, Kings, Chronicles, and the Twelve Minor Prophets.

Nicephorus Callistus Xanthopulus in the fourteenth century. Hist. Ecc. xiv. 54, writes :
" Theodoretus, Syrian by birth, was a follower of the great Chrysostom, whom he set
before him as a model of style. His own was flowing and copious, eloquent and easy,
and not destitute of Attic grace." He mentions expositions of difticult passages of the Old
Testament; Commentaries on the Prophets and the Psalms; the " de Providentia ; " a
volume "On the Apostles;" the Confutation of heresies, called "the battle between
truth and falsehood ; " the refutation of Cyril's " Twelve Chapters ; " the Ecclesiastical
History; the " Philotheus," a History of the Lovers of God ; three books on the divine
doctrines, and five hundred ( ?) letters.

The following is the catalogue of extant works as given by Sirmondus and followed
by Garncrius.

(i.) Excfietical. Qiiestions on the Octateuch, the Books of Kings and Chronicles ;
the Interpretation of the Psalms, Canticles, the Four Greater, and the Twelve Lesser
Prophets ; an exposition of all the Epistles of St. Paul, including the Plebrews.

(ii.) Historical. The Ecclesiastical History, and the "Philotheus," or Religious
History.

(iii.) Controversial. The Eranistes, or Dialogues, and the Haereticarum Fabu-
larum Comjoendium.

(iv.) Theological. The Grsecarum Affectionum Curatio, the Discourse on Charity,
and the De Providentia.

(v.) Epistolary. The Letters.

(vi.) To these may be added the Refutation of the Twelve Chapters, and the follow-
ing given in the Auctarium of Garnerius.

I Pcla<r. Pap:c. 7.-i6ed. Mi!»nc. ^Cf. Garnerius in Migne's Theodoret V. 2^5.

3The lust record in the History appears to be of A.D.440, cf. p. 159. Eusebius ends, and Theodoret begins, with the
defeat of Licinius in 323. Constantine began to reign in 306.


PROLEGOMENA. 15


(i.) Prolegomena and extracts from Commentaries on the Psalms.

(3.) Part of a Commentary on St. Luke.

(3.) Sermon on the Nativity of St. John the Baptist.

(4.) Portions of Sermons on St. Chrysostom.

(5.) Homily preached at Chalcedon iu 431.

(6.) Fragments of the Pentalogium, extracted from Marius Mercator,' who at-
tributed the work to the instigation of the devil.

Lost zvorks. ■

(i.) The Pentalogium, of which fragments are preserved in the Auctarium.

(2.) Opus mysticum, sive mysteriorum fidei expositiones, lib. xii.

(3.) Works " de theologia et Incarnatione," identified by Garnier with three Dia-
logues against the Macedonians, and two against the ApoUinarians, erroneously attributed
to Athanasius.

(4.) Adversus Marcionem.

(5.) Adversus JudiEos ( .? the Commentary on Daniel).

(6.) Responsiones ad quaesitus magorum Persarunn.

(70 Five sermons on St. Chrysostom.

(8.) Two allocutions spoken at Chalcedon against Cyril in 431.

(9.) Sermon preached at Antioch on the death of Cyril.
(10.) Works on Sabellius and the Trinity, of which portions are given by Baluz.
Misc. iv.

IX. — Contents and Character of the Extant Works.

(a) The character of the Commentary on the Octateuch and the Books of Kings
and Chronicles is indicated by the Title "fif rd arropa rf/^ deiac Tpaf/jg kut' iKkoyijv," or " On se-
lected difficulties in Holy Scripture." These questions are treated, with occasional de-
flexions into allegory, from the historico-exegetical point of view of the Syrian School,'
of which Diodorus of Tarsus and Theodore of Mopsuestia were distinguished representa-
tives. On Diodorus Socrates * remarks, "he composed many works, relying on the
bare letter of Scripture, and avoiding their speculative aspect." This might be said
of Diodorus' great pupil too. Nevertheless, though generally following a line of in-
terpretation in broad contrast with that of Origen, Theodoret quotes Origen as well as
Diodore and Theodore of Mopsuestia as authorities. Of the 1S2 "questions " on Genesis
and Exodus the following may be taken as specimens.

Qiiestion viii. " What spirit moved upon the waters.?" Theodoret's conclusion is
that the wind is indicated.

Qiiestion X. " Why did the author add, ' And God saw that it was good'?" To
persuade the thankless not to find fault with what the divine judgment pronounces good.

Qiiestion xix. " To whom did God say ' let us make man in our image and like-
ness'?" The reply, carefully elaborated, is that here is an indication of the Trinity.

Question xx. " What is meant by ' image ' ? "

Here long extracts from Diodorus, Theodorus, and Origen are given.

Question xxiv. " Why did God plant paradise, when He intended straightway to
drive out Adam thence ? "

God condemns none of foreknowledge. And besides, He wished to shew the saints the
Kingdom prepared for them from the foundation of the world. ^

Qiiestion xl. " What is the meaning of the statement ' The man is become as one of
us ' ? " Theodoret thinks this is said ironically. God had forbidden Adam to take of the
fruit of the tree of life, not because he grudged man immortal life, but to check the course
of sin. So death is a means of cure, not a punishment.

Qiiestion xlvii. " Whom did Moses call sons of God?" A long argument replies,
the sons of Seth.

Question Ixxxi suggests an ingenious excuse for Jacob. " Did not Jacob lie when he
said, 1 am Esau thy firstborn?" He had bought the precedence of primogeniture, and
therefore spoke the truth when he called himself firstborn.

1 a writer, supposed to be a layman, whose works were discovered in two MSS. at the end of the seventeenth century
One is in the Vatican, the other was found in the Cathedral Library of Beauvais. Marius wrote fully on the Nestorian Coii
troversy, and with acrimony against Theodoret.

2 As catalogued by Canon Venables from Cave (Hist. Lit. i. 405 ff.) Diet. Christ. Biog-. iv. 91S.

3 cf. Gieseler i. 2oq, who refers to Miinter in Staiidlins Archiv. fiir Kirchengesch. i. 1. 13.
*vi.,3. 6 Matt. XXV. 34.


i6 THEODORET.


Exodus. " Question xii. What is the meaning of the phrase ' I will harden Pha-
raoh's heart'?" This is answered at great length.

The information given in these notes, as we might call them, is theological, exegetic,
and explanatory of peculiar terms, and is often of interest and value. On the fourteen
Books of Questions and Answers Canon Venables,* quoting Ceillier, remarks that the
whole form a literary and historical commentary of great service for the right comprehen-
sion of the text, characterized by honesty and common sense, and seldom straining or
evading the meaning to avoid dangerous conclusions.

(b) On the Psalms and the rest of the Books of the Old Testament the Commen-
tary is no longer in the catechetical form, but is styled Interpretation.'

The Psalmist, Theodoret observes,^ in many places predicts the passion and resurrec-
tion of our Lord, and to attentive readers causes real delight by the variety of his prophe-
sying. In view of some recent discussions concerning the authorship of certain Psalms it
is interesting to find the entlnisiast for orthodoxy in the 5th century writing " It has been
contended by some critics that the Psalms are not all the work of David, but are to be as-
cribed in some cases to other writers. Accordingly, from the titles^ some have been attrib-
uted to Idithum, some to Etham, some to the sons of Core, some to Asaph, by men who
have learned from the Chronicles that these writers were prophets.* On this point I make
no positive statement. What difference indeed does it make to me whether all the Psalms
are David's, or some were the composition of others, when it is clear that all were written
by the active operation of the Holy Spirit.?"

The importance of the commentary on the Psalms may be estimated by the fact that it
is longer than all the catechetical commentary on the preceding Books combined.

The interpretation on the Canticles follows spiritual, as distinguished from literal, lines.
The lover is Jesus Christ ; — the bride, the Church. From the prologue it appears that
Theodoret held all the Old Testament to have been re-written, under divine inspiration, by
Ezra. This is regarded as the earliest of the exegetical works.

The original commentary on Isaiah has been lost. The only existing portions are
passages collected from the Greek catena? by Sirmond and edited in his edition, but the
opinion has been entertained * that these passages should be referred to Theodore of Mop-
suestia who also commented on Isaiah, and who is sometimes confused with Theod-
oret by the compilers of the Greek catenae.

The commentary on Jeremiah includes Baruch and the Lamentations.*

(c) The epistles of St. Paul, among which Theodoret I'eckons the Epistle to the
Hebrews, are the only portions of the New Testament on which we possess our author's
commentaries. On them the late Bishop Lightfoot writes, " Theodoret's commentaries on
St. Paul are superior to his other exegetical writings, and have been assigned the palm
over all patristic expositions of Scripture. See Schrockh xviii. p. 398. sqq., Simon, p. 314
sqq. Rosenmiiller iv. p. 93 sqq., and the monograph of Richter, de Theodoreto Epist.
Paulin. interprete (Lips. 1S22.) For appreciation, terseness of expression and good
sense, they are perhaps unsurpassed, and, if the absence of foults were a just standard of
merit, they would deserve the first place ; but they have little claim to originality, and he
who has read Chi'ysostom and Theodore of Mopsuestia will find scarcely anything in
Theodoret which he has not seen before. It is right to add however that Theodoret
modestly disclaims any such merit. In his preface he apologises for attempting to
interpret St. Paul after two such men who are ' luminaries of the world : ' and he professes
nothing more than to gather his stores ' from the blessed fathers.' In these expressions
he alludes doubtless to Chrysostom and Theodore." '

As a specimen of the mode of treatment of a crucial passage, of interest in view of the
writer's relations to the Nestorian and Eutychian controversies, the notes on I. Cor. xv. 27,
28 may be quoted. " This is a passage which Arians and Eunomians have been wont to
be constantly adducing with the notion that they arc thereby belittling the dignity of
the only-begotten. They ought to have perceived that the divine apostle has written
nothing in this passage about the Godhead of the only-begotten. He is exhorting us to
believe in the resuiTection of the flesh, and endeavours to prove the resurrection of the
flesh by the resurrection of the Lord. It is olwious that like is conformed to like. On
this account he calls Him ' the first fruits of them tliat have fallen asleep,' and styles Him


1 Diet. Christ. ISiog-. iv. qi6,] > epfijji-eia. » In Ps. Ed. Migne 604, 605.

* cf. I. Chron. vi. 44., xv. 17, 19, and Art. Jeduthun in Diet. Bib.

» Garnerius. Theod. Eil. Migne i, 274. 0 cf. note on page 327. 1 Lightfoot. Epist. Gal. ed. 1S66, p. 226.


PROLEGOMENA. 17


' Man,' and by comparison with Adam proves that by Him the general resurrection
will come to pass, with the object of persuading objectors, by shewing the resurrection
of one of like nature, to believe that all mankind will share His resurrection. It must
therefore be recognised that the natures of the Lord are two : and that divine Scripture names
Him sometimes from the human, and sometimes from the divine. If it speaks of God,
it does not deny the manhood : if it mentions man it at the same time confesses the
Godhead. It is impossible always to speak of Him in terms of sublimity, on account of
the nature which He received from us, for if even when lowly terms are employed some
men deny the assumption of the flesh, clearly still more would have been found infected
with this unsoundness, had no lowly terms been used. What then is the meaning of
'then is subjected'? This expression is applicable to sovereigns exercising sovereignty
now, for if He then is subjected He is not yet subjected. So they are all in error
who blaspheme and try to make subject Him who has not yet submitted to the limits
of subjection. We must wait, and learn the mode of the subjection. But we have gone
through long discussions on these points in our contests with them. It is enough now to
indicate briefly the Apostle's aim. He is writing to the Corinthians who have only just
been set free from the fables of heathendom. Their fables are full of violence and
iniquity. Not to name others, and pollute my lips, they worship parricide gods, and say
that sons I'evolted against then- fathers, drove them from their realm, and seized their
sovereignty. So after saying great things of Christ, in that He shall destroy all rule and
authority and power, and shall put an end to death, and hath subdued all things under
his feet; lest starting from those fables of theirs thev should expect Him to treat His
father like the Dtemons whom they adore ; after mentioning, as was necessary, the
subjugation of all things the apostle adds ' The Son Himself shall be subject to Him that
did put all things under Him.' For not only shall He not subject the Father to
Himself, but shall Himself accept the subjection becoming to a son. So the divine
apostle, suspecting the mischief arising from the pagan mythology, uses expressions of
lowliness because such terms are helpful. But let objectors tell us the form of that
subjection. If they are willmg to consider the truth. He shewed obedience when He
was made man, and wrought out our salvation. How then shall He then be subjected,
and how shall He then deliver the kingdom to God the Father? If the case be viewed in
this way, it will appear that God the Father does not hold the kingdom now. So full
of absurdity are their arguments. But He makes what is ours His own, since we are
called His body, and He is called our Head. ' He took our iniquities and bore our
diseases.'^ So He says in the Psalm 'my God, my God, look upon me, why hast
Thou forsaken me. The words of my transgressions are far from my health.' *
And yet He did no sin, neither was guile found in His mouth. But a mouth
is made of our nature, in that He was made the first fruits of the nature. So He
appropriates our frequent disobedience and the then subjection, and, when we are
subjected after our delivery from corruption He is said to be subjected. What follows
leads us on to this sense. For after the words ' then shall the son be subject to Him that
did put all things under Him,' the Apostle adds ' that God may be all in all.' He is
everywhere now in accordance with His essence, for His nature is uncircumscribed, as says
the divine apostle, ' in Him we live and move and have our being.' ^ But, as regards His
good pleasure, He is not in all, for ' the Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear Him, in
those that hope in his mercy.'* But in these He is not wholly. For no one is 'pure of
uncleanness,'^ and'In thy sight shall no man living be justified"^ and ' If thou Lord shouldst
mark iniquities O Lord who shall stand?' Therefore the Lord taketh pleasure wherein
they do right and taketh not pleasure wherein they err. But in the life to come where corrup-
tion ceases and immortality is given passions have no place ; and after these have been quite
driven out no kind of sin is committed for the future. Thus hereafter God shall be all in
all, when all have been released from sin and turned to Him and are incapable of any incli-
nation to the worse. And what in this place the divine Apostle has said of God in another
passage he has laid down of Cbrist. His words are these. ' Where there is neither Jew
nor Greek, circumcision nor uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian . . . but Christ is
all and in all.' ' He would not have applied to the Son what is attributable to the Father
had he not of divine grace learnt that He is of equal honour with Him." *

On the meaning of the passage about them that are baptized for the dead it is curious to


5 Is. liii. 4. s Acts xvii. 2S. ^ Job xiv. 4. LXX. 7 Coloss. iii. 11.

»Ps. xxii. I. * Ps. cxlvii. II. '■ Psalm cxiiii. 2. « Theodor. Ed. Migne iii. 271. Seqq.

VOL. III. C


i8 THEODORET.


find only one interpretation curtlv profTei'ecl In apparent unconsciousness of any other being
known or possible. Thcodoict's words are " He, says the apostle, who is baptized is
buried with tiie Lord, that as he has been sharer in the death so he may be sharer in
the resurrection. But if the body is dead and does not rise why then is he baptized.'"
The dead for which a man is baptized seems to be regarded as his own dead body i.e.,
dead in trespasses and sin and subject to corruption. '

(d) Of the historical works, (i) the iilcclesiastical History needs less description, in that
a translation in extenso is given in the text. Its style and spirit speak for themselves.
Photius^ well describes it as " clear, lofty, and concise."

Gibbon, ■^ referring to the three ecclesiastical historians of this period speaks of
" Socrates, the more curious Sozomen, and the learned Theodoret." Of learning, in-
dustry, and veracity the proofs are patent in the book itself. The chief fault of the work
is its want of chronological arrangement.' A minor shortcoming is what may be called a
lack of perspective; a fulness of detail is sometimes conceded to mere episode and pa-
renthesis, while characters and events of high and crucial importance would scarcely be
known to be so, were we dependent for our estimation of them on Theodoret alone. Va-
lesius inclines to the opinion that his opening words about supplying things omitted ' re-
fer to Socrates and Sozomen, and compares him in his composition of a history after those
writers (there is just a possibility that he might have completed the parallel by referring to
a third predecessor — Rufinns) to St. John filling up the gaps left by the synoptists." But
this view is open to question. Theodoret names no previous writers but Eusebius. A
special importance attaches to his account of such events and persons as his local knowU
edge enables him to give with completeness of detail, as for instance, all that relates to
Antioch and its bishops. Garnerius is of opinion that the work might with propriety 1)0
entitled A History of the Arian Heresy ; all other matter introduced he views as merely
episodic.^ He also quotes the letter* of Gregory the great in which the Roman bishop
states that " the apostolic sec refuses to receive the History of ' Sozomenus ' (sic) inas-
much as it abounds with lies, and praises Theodore of Mopsuestia, maintaining that he was
up to the day of his death, a great Doctor." "Sozomen" is supposed to be a slip of the
pen, or of the memory, for " Theodoret." But, if this be so, " multa mentitur " is an un-
fair description of the errors of the historian. Fallible he was, and exhibits failure in
accuracy, especially in chronology, but his truthfulness of aim is plain. ^

(ii) The Religious History, several times referred to in the Ecclesiastical Histoiy,
and therefore an earlier composition, contains the lives of thirty-three famous ascetics, of
whom three were women. The " curious intellectual problem" '" of the readiness w^ith which
Theodoret, a disciple of the " prosaic and critical " school of Antioch, accepts and repeats
marvellous tales of the miracles of his contemporary hermits, has been invested with fresh
interest in our own time by the apparent sympathy and similar belief of Dr. Newman,
who asks " What made him drink in with such relish wdiat we reject with such disgust.'*
Was it that, at least, some miracles were brought home so absolutely to his sensible
experience that he had no reason for doubting the others which came to him second-hand.'*
This certainly will explain what to most of us is sure to seem the stupid credulity of so
well-read, so intellectual an author." " Cardinal Newman evidently implies that the
evidence was irresistible, even to a keen and trained intelligence. Probably in many cases
the explanation is to be found, as has been already suggested in the remarks on Theodoret's
birth, in the ready acceptance of the current views of the age and place as to cause and
effect. Theodoret believed in the marvels of his monks. Matthew Hale believed in


' Here Theodoret agrees in the main with Chrysostoin and Tlicophyliict, vide RefF. in Alford ad loc.
" Unquestionably the rit^ht view of this controverted passage is that of the Greek Fathers, Chrysostom, Theophylact,
Theodoret, and others. In residing their comments it is quite clear that they found no more difficulty in St. Paul's elliptical
use of the Greek i/irep than we do in Sliakespcre's use of the English ' for.' They did not hesitate in their homilies to expound
that the phrase * for the dead ' meant * with an interest in the resurrection of the dead,' or that ' for ' by itself meant even so
much as ' in expectation of the resurrection.' Speaker's Commentary, iii. 373. - Rib. Cod. xxxi.

3 Chap. xxi. n.

* Ceillicr (x. 42) repeats the charge of distinct errors in chronology in (a) the statement that Arius died in 325 instead of
in 336; (b) the extension of the exile of^ Athanasius by four months ; (c) tlie election of Ambrose at the beginning of the reign
of Valentinian, instead often years later; (d) the troubles at Antioch placed after instead of before those at Thessalonica;
(e) the siege of Nisibis in 3^0 confounded with that of 359. As to (a) the truth is that Theodoret is guilty rather of vagueness
than of a misstatement. (Vide I. capp. xiii, xiv.) Theobjection to (b) the two years and four months exile of Athanasius is
due to Valerius (obs. Ecc. i). Canon Biight (Diet. Christ. Biog. i. 187) agrees with Theodoret (cf. Newman Hist. Tracts xii
and Ilcfele, Concilicngesch. i.467.) In (c) Theodoret is vague, in (d) wrong. According to Valesius.Volagcsus, and not
Jacobus, was bishop of Nisibis in 350. b t^? e/ocArjo-iacmio"/? io-Topiat tH TrapaAfin-dnevo.

c Valesii annotationes — Theod : Migne III. 1522. Valesius is the Latinized form of Henri de Valois, French historio-
grapher royal, who edited Ammianus Marcellinus and the Greek Ecclesiastical historians. He died in 1692.

'• Theod. Ed. Migne. V. 2S2. » Ep. XXXIV.

* " IJaronius obviously approves of Gregory's remark about Theodoret's lies, that is his errors in the order of events,
and out of Book iv. produces no less than fifteen l)hnHUrs, to say nothing of those in iii and v." Garner. loc. cit. aSo, 381.

^" Canon Venables Diet. Christ. Biog. iv. 91S. ^^Uisioricat Sketches iii. 314.


PROLEGOMENA. 19


witchcraft. Neither, that is, was some centuries removed from his own age. Neitlicr
need be accused of stupid credulity. The enthusiasm which led him to reckon on finding
the noble army of martyrs a very present help in time of trouble because he had a little
bottle of their oil, probably that burned at their graves, slung over his bed ; and his
assurance that the old cloak of Jacobus, folded for his pillow, was a more than adamantine
bulwark against the wiles of the devil, indicate no more than an exaggerated reliance on
the power of material memorials to ailect the imagination.' And it is curious to remark
that with all this acceptance of the cures effected by ascetics, Theodoret made a
provision of medical skill for his flock at Cyrus."

(e) The works reckoned as theological, as distinct from the controversial, are three:
(i) The twelve discourses entitled 'EAAt^ivayjh (?f/w-fr-//,/)7ra%/«rwy, or " Grcecartim affectiomnn
curatio^ seji evangeliccs veritatis ex gciiiilttim philosophia cognitio.'''' They contain an
elaborate apology for Christian philosophy, with a refutation of the attacks of paganism
against the doctrines of the gospel, and may have been designed, as Garnerius conjec-
tures, to serve as an antidote against whatever might still survive of the influence of
Julian and his writings. Here we see at once our author's " genius and erudition "
(Mosheim). In these orations he exhibits a wide acquaintance with Greek literature,
and we find cited, or referred to, among other writers, Homer, Hesiod, Alcman,
Theognis, Xenophanes, Pindar, Heraclitus, Zeno, Parmenides, Empedocles, Euripides,
Herodotus, Xenophon, Plato, Aristotle, Demosthenes, Diodorus Siculus, Plutarch, and
Porphyry. Homer and Plato are largely quoted. Basnage,^ indeed, contested their
genuineness, but without weakening their position among Theodoret's accepted works.
They have seemed to some to encourage undue honoui to and invocation of saints and
martyrs^ but their author seems to anticipate later exaggeration of their reverence by the
distinction, " We ascribe Godhead to notliing visible. Them that have been distinguished
in virtue we honour as excellent men, but we worship none but the God and Father of
all, His Word, and the Holy Spirit."" (ii). The Discourses against paganism were
followed by ten on Divine Providence, a work justly eulogized as exhibiting Theodoret's
literary power in its highest form. Of it Garnerius, who is by no means disposed
to bestow indiscriminate laudation on the writer, remarks that nothing was ever pub-
lished on this subject more eloquent or more admirable, cither by Theodoret, or by
any other.® The discourses may not improbably have been delivered in public at
Antioch, and have been the occasion of the enthusiastic admiration described as shewn
by tlie patriarch John.' In them he presses the argument of the divine guidance of the
world from the constitution of the visible creation, and specially of the body of man.
The preacher draws many illustrations from the animal world and shews himself to be
an intelligent observer. The pui'suit of righteousness is proved not to be vain, even though
the achieved result is not seen until the resurrection, and it is argued that from the begin-
ning God has not cared for one chosen race alone but for all mankind. The crowning
evidence of divine providence is in the incarnation. " I have taught you " — so the great ora-
tions conclude — "the universal jDrovidence of God. You behold His unfathomable loving
kindness ; — His boundless mercy; cease then to strive against Him that made you ; learn
to do honour to your benefactor, and requite his mighty benefits with grateful utterance.
Offer to God the sacrifice of praise ; defile not your tongue with blasphemy, but make it
the instrument of worship for which it was designed. Such divine dispensations as are
plain, reverence; about such as are hidden make no ado, but wait for knowledge in the
time to come. When we shall put ofl' the senses, then we shall win perfect knowledge.
Imitate not Adam who dared to pluck the forbidden fruit ; lay not hold of hidden things,
but leave the knowledge of them to their own fit season. Obey the words of the wise
man — say not What is this.-* For what purpose is this! 'For all things were made for
good.' ** Gathering then from every source occasion for praise, and mingling one melody,
ofler it with me to the Creator, tlie giver of good, and Christ the Saviour, our very God.
To them be glory and vv^orship and honour for endless age on age. Amen."

(iii) The Discourse on Divine Love. This love, saj^s Theodoret, is the source of the
holy life of the ascetics. For his own part he would not accept the kingdom of heaven
without it, or with it, were such a thing possible, shrink from the pains of bed. It was

»Theod. Ed. Mi^ne. iii. 1244. Schrockh. xviii. 362. 2Ep. CXV.

3 Histoire dt. V i^glise. II. 122^. Jacques de Beauval Basnage f 1723.

* Schrbckh Kirchcnsjesch., V o\, xviii. 410. 6 Gr.-cc. Cur. AfT. Ed. Migne 754.

•i " On y voit toiite. la heaitte du ginie de Tlieodorel; die choix dans les pensres, de la noblesse davsles exf^ressions, dt
Velfffance et de la neltete dans le style, de la suite et de la force dans les raisonnements." Ceillier x. SS (Keini Ceillicr t 1761.
}iis.'''//istohe Generale des aiitei/rs sacrcs" was published in Paris 1729-1763.) ' Kp. Ixxxiii. <* cf. Ecclus. xxxix. 27.

C 2


20 THEODORET.


really love, he says, which led to Peter's denial ; lie need not have denied if he could have
borne to keep aloof, but love goaded him to be near his Lord.

(f.) The controversial works are

(i.) The " Eranistes," or Dialogues, of which the translation is included in the
text. They contain a complete refutation of the Eutychian position, and the quotations
in them are in several cases valuable as giving portions of the writing of Fathers not else-
where preserved. They are supposed to have been written shortly after the death of Cyril
in 444, and are intended at once to vindicate Theodoret's own orthodoxy, and to expose
the errors of the party protected by Dioscorus.

(ii.) The IKereticarum Fabularum Compendium, {AlperiKf/Q KmninSmr i-trouy) was com-
posed at the request of Sporacius, one of the representatives of Marcian at Chalcedon, and
is, as its title indicates, an account of past or present heresies. It is divided into five
Books, which treat of the following heretics.

I. Simon Magus, JNIcnander, Saturnilus,' Basilides, Isidorus, Carpocrates, Epiphancs,
Prodicus, Valentinus, Secundus, Marcus the Wizard, the Ascodruti,^ the Colorbasii, the
Barbclioti,^ the Ophites, the Cainites, the Antitacti, the Perati, Monoimus, Hcrmogenes,
Tatianus, Severus, Bardcsanes, Harmonius Florinus, Cerdo, Marcion, Apelles, Potitus,
Prepon, and Manes.

II. The Ebionites, the Nazarenes, Cerinthus, Artemon, Theodotus, the Melchise-
deciani, the Elkcsitcs, Paul of Samosata, Sabellius, Marcellus, Photinus.

III. The Nicolaitans, the Montanists, Noetus of Smyrna, the Tessarcsca^decatites
(i.e. Qiiartodecimani) Novatus, Nepos.

IV. Arius, Eudoxius, Eunomius, Aetius, the PsathjnMani, the Macedoniani, the Do-
natists, the Meletians, Appollinarius, the Audiani, the Messaliani, Nestorius, Eutyches.

V. The last book is an "• Epitome of the Divine Decrees."

This catalogue, it has been remarked, does not include Origenism and Pelagianism.'*
But though Theodoret did not S3anpathize with Origen's school of scriptural interpreta-
tion, there was no reason why he should damn him as unsound in the faith. And the
controversy between Jerome and Rufinus as to Origen was a distinctively western con-
troversy. So was Pelagianism a western heresy, with which Theodoret was not brought
into immediate contact.

The fourth book is obviously the most important, as treating of heresies of which the
writer would have contemporary knowledge. And special interest has attached to the
chapter on Nestorius, who is condemned not merely for erroneous opinion on the incarna-
tion and person of Christ, but as a timeserver and pretender, seeking rather to be thought,
than to be, a Christian. Garnerius indeed doubts the genuineness of the chapter, and
Schulze, in defending it, points out the similarity of its line of argument to that employed in
the treatise " against Nestorius," which is very generally regarded as spurious. It may
have been added after Chalcedon, when the writer had been forced into the denunciation of
his old friend. But the expressions used alike of the incarnation and of Nestorius seem
somewhat in contrast with other writings of Theodoret. Schi'ockh " inclines to the view in
which Ceillicr concurs, that this damning account of Nestorius was really written by his
old champion, and accounts for the harshness of condemnation by the influence of the
clamours of Chalcedon and the induration which old age sometimes brings on tender
spirits. It can only be said that if this is Theodoret, it is Theodoret at his worst.

The heads of the Epitome of Divine Decrees are the following twenty-nine: Of the
Father ; of the Son ; of the Holy Ghost ; of Creation ; of Matter ; of yEons ; of Angels ; of
Daemons ; of Man ; of Providence ; of the Incarnation of the Saviour; that the Lord took a
body; that He took a soul as well as Plis body; that the human nature which He took was
perfect ; that He i-aised the nature which He took ; that He is good and just ; that He gave
the Old and the New Testament ; of Baptism ; of Resurrection ; of Judgment ; of Promises ;
of the Second Advent {'E-njavna') of the Saviour; of Antichrist ; of Virginity; of Marriage;
of Second Marriage; of Fornication; of Reijentance ; of Abstinence.

The short chapter on the Incarnation has a special value in view of the author's con-
nection with the Nestorian Controversy. " It is worth while," he writes in it, " to ex-
hibit what we hold concerning the Incarnation, for this exposition proclaims more clearly

> SaTopi'eiAos or 2aTopi'iAo? in Hippnlytus, Epiphanius, and Theodoret; but Saropvii'o? (Saturninus) in Irenaaus and
Eusebius.

2 A Galatian sect. Jerome has " Ascodrobi," Epiphanius (Hxr. 416) identifies " Tascodrugitse," with Cataphrygians or
Montanists, and says they were so called froin the habit of puttinjj their finger to their nose when praying.

3 In lipiphanius (i. 85, T?) Barbelitie. Harbelo was a niythnloyic personage; — The sect gnostic.
* Ceillicr x. S.^. " icviii. 416.


PROLEGOMENA. ±i


the providence of the God of all. In his forged fables Valentinus maintained a distinction
between the only-begotten and the Word, and further betvv^een the Christ within the pleroma
and Jesus, and also the Christ who is without. He said that Jesus became man, by
putting on the Christ that is without, and assuming a body of the substance of the soul ; and
that He made a passage only through the Virgin, having assumed nothing of the nature
of man. Basilides in like manner distinguished between the only-begotten, the Word and
the Wisdom. Cerdon, on the other hand, Marcion, and Manes, said that the Christ ap-
peared as man, though he had nothing human. Cerinthus maintained that Jesus was
generated of Joseph and Mary after the common manner of men, but that the Christ came
down from on high on Jesus. The Ebionites, the Theodotians, the Artemonians, and
Photinians said that the Christ was bare man born of the Virgin. Arius and Eunomius
taught that He assumed a body, but that the Godhead discharged the function of the soul.
ApoUinarius held that the body of the Saviour had a soul,^ but had not the reasonable
soul ; for, according to his views, intelligence was superfluous, God the Word being
present. I have stated the opinions taught by the majority of heresies with the wish of making
plain the truth taught by the church. Now the church makes no distinction between
{tov avTov avoiml^EL) the Son, the only begotten, God the Word, the Lord the Saviour, and Jesus
Christ. ' Son,' ' only begotten,' ' God the Word,' and ' Lord,' He was called before the
Licarnation ; and is so called also after the Incarnation ; but after the Incarnation the same
(Lord) was called Jesus Christ, deriving the titles from the facts. 'Jesus' is interpreted
to mean the Saviour, whereof Gabriel is witness in his words to the Virgin ' Thou
shalt call His name Jesus, for He shall save His people from their sins.' " But He was
styled ' Christ ' on account of the unction of the Spirit. So the Psalmist David says
' Therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows.'^ And through the Prophet Isaiah the Lord Himself says 'The spirit of the
Lord is upon me, because the Lord hath anointed me.' ■• Thus the Lord Himself taught
us to understand the prophecy, for when He had come into the synagogue, and opened the
book of the Prophets, He read the passage quoted, and said to those present ' This day
is the Scripture fulfilled in your ears.' * The great Peter, too, preached in terms harmoni-
ous with the prophets, for in his explanation of the mystery to Cornelius he said ' That
word ye know which was published throughout all Judaea, and began from Galilee after
the Baptism which John preached ; how God anointed Jesus Christ with the Holy Ghost
and with power.' ® Hence it is clear that He is called Christ on account of the unction
of the spirit. But he was anointed not as God, but as man. And as in His human
nature He was anointed, after the Incarnation He was called also ' Christ.' But yet there
is no distinction between God the Word and the Christ, for God the Word incarnate was
named Christ Jesus. And He was incarnate that He might renew the nature corrupted
by sin. The reason of His taking all the nature which had sinned was that He might
heal all. For He did not take the nature of the body using it as a veil of His Godhead,
according to the wild teaching of Arius and Eunomius ; for it had been easy for Him even
without a body to be made visible as He was seen of old by Abraham, Jacob and the rest
of the saints. But he wished the very nature that had been worsted to beat down the
enemy and win the victory. For this reason He took both a body and a reasonable soul.
For Holy Scripture does not divide man in a threefold division, but states that this living
being consists of a body and a soul.' For God after forming the body out of the dust
breathed into it the soul and shewed it to be two natures not three. And the same Lord
in the Gospels says, ' Fear not them which kill the body but are not able to kill the soul,' ^
and many similar passages may be found in divine Scripture. And that He did not assume
man's nature in its perfection, contriving it as a veil for His Godhead, according to the
heretics' fables, but achieving victory by means of the first fruits for the whole race, is
truly witnessed and accurately taught by the divine apostle, for in His Epistle to the Ro-
mans, when unveiling the mystery of the Incarnation, he writes ' Wherefore as by one man
sin entered into the world, and death by sin ; and so death passed upon all men, for that
all have sinned : for until the law sin was in the world : but sin is not imputed when there
is no law. Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them who had
not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression, who is the figure of Him that is
to come.' ^

1 eM>^uX°''- * Is. Ixi. I. ' cf. note on pp. 132 and 194.

2 Matt. i. 21. "Lukeiv. 21. » Matt. x. 28.

s Ps. xlv. 7. « Acts X. 37, 38. 9 Rom. V. 12, 13, 14.


22 THEODORET.


(iii.) The refutations of the Twelve Chapters of Cyril are translated in the
Prolegomena.^

In the Epistle of Cyril to Cclestinus and the Comrnonitoriuni datum Posidonio ' Cyril
shows what sense he wishes to fix on the utterances of Nestorius. " The faith, or rather the
' cacodoxy ' of Nestorius, has this force; he says that God the Word, prescient that he
who was to be born of the Holy Virgin would be holy and great, therefore chose him and
arranged that he should be generated of the Virgin without a husband and conferred on
him the privilege of being called by His own names, and raised him so that even though
after the incarnation he is called the only begotten Word of God, he is said to have been
made man because He was always with him as with a holy man born of the Virgin. And
as He was with the prophets so, says Nestorius, was He by a greater conjunction {avtwpna'^ .
On this account Nestorius always shrinks from using the word union (tvuaic) and speaks of
' conjunction,' as of some one without, and, as He says to Joshua ' as I was with Moses
so will I be with thee.' ^ But, to conceal his impiety, Nestorius says that He was with him
from the womb. Wherefore he does not say that Christ was very God, but that Christ
was so called of God's good pleasure; and, if he was called Lord, so again Nestorius
understands him to be Lord because the divine Word conceded him the boon of being so
named. Nor does he say as we do that the Son of God died and rose again on our behalf.
The man died and the man rose, and this has nothing to do with God the Word. And in the
mysteries what lies (i.e. on the Holy Table) (to KpoKEijuevov) is a man's body; but we be-
lieve that it is flesh of the Word, having power to quicken because it is made flesh and
blood of the Word that quickeneth all things."

Nestorius was not unnaturally indignant at this misrepresentation of his words,
and complains of Cyril for leaving out important clauses and introducing additions
of his own.'' Cyril succeeded in pressing upon Celestinus the idea that Nestorius,
who had vigorously opposed the Pelagians, was really in sympathy with them,
and so secured the condemnation of his opponent at Rome and at Alexandria, and
published his twelve anathemas to complete his own vindication. These wx're
answered by Theodoret on behalf of the eastern church in 431. In 433 formal peace
was made, so far as the theological, as apart from the personal, dispute was concerned, by
the acceptance by both John of Antioch and Cyril of the formula, slightly modified, which
Theodoret himself had drawn up at Ephesus two years before. "" It is as follows : "We
confess our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the only begotten, to be perfect God and
perfect man, of a reasonable soul and body, begotten before' the ages of the
Father, as touching His godhead, and in the last davs on account of us and our salvation
(born) of the Virgin Mary as touching His manhood; that He is of one sub-
stance with the Father as touching His godhead, of one substance with us as touching His
manhood ; for there is made an union of two natures ; wherefore we confess one Christ,
one Son, one Lord. According to this meaning of the unconfounded union we confess the
holy Virgin to be ^BeotSkoq,' on account of God the Word being made flesh and becoming
man, and of this conception uniting to Himself the temple taken of licr. We acknowledge
that theologians use the words of evangelists and apostles about the Lord some in common,
as of one person, and some distinctively, as of two natures, and deliver tlie divine as touch-
ing the Godhead of the Christ, and the lowly as touching His manhood." ®

This is substantially what Theodoret says again and again. This satisfied Cyril.
This would prolxably have been accepted by Nestorus too.' What then was it, apart
from the odium theologicum, which kept Nestorius and Cyril apart? Below the apparent
special pleading and word-jugglery on the surface of the controversy lay the principle
that in the Cln-ist God and man were one; the essence of the atonement or reconciliation
lying in the complete union of the human and the divine in the one Person; the "I" in
the "I am" of the Temple and the "I thirst" of tlie Cross being really the same.
" God and man is one Christ." The position which the Cyrillians viewed with alarm
was a reduction of tliis unity to a mere partnership or alliance; — God dwelling in Jesus
of Nazareth as He dwells in all good men, only to a greater degree; — the eternal Word
being in close contact with the son of Mary {avi>&<pein). So, whatever may have been
the unhappy faction-fights with which the main issue was confused, there was in trutli a
great crisis, a great question for decision ; was Jesus of Nazareth an unique personality,


» Page 26. = Afiinsi. T. IV. 1012 Seqq. Mi-nc P:it. I.XXVII. 85.

8 Jos. i. s. ■» Gicscler Vol. I. p. 231. •''• Gicscltr i. 231;. '' Synod, c. 17. ISI;insi V. p. 773.

"In Walch's Hist. Ketz. V. 77S, there is a good summary of Sestoriiis' views: he'lhiiiks the disi)ute a mere logomachy.
So also Luther, and after him Basnage, Dupin, Jablonski. vide reff. in Gieseler i. 236.


PROLEGOMENA. 23


or only one more in the goodly fellowship of prophets? Was He God, or was He not?
There can be little doubt as to the answer Nestorius would have given. There can be
none as to that of Theodoret, But on the part of Cyril there was the quite mistaken con-
viction that Theodoret was practically contending for two Christs. On the other hand
Theodoret erroneously identified Cyril with the confusion of the substance and practical
patripassianism which he scathes in the " Eranistes," and which the common sense of
Christendom has condemned in Eutyches.

(g) To Nicephorus Callistus in the 15th century five hundred of Theodoret's letters
were known,' and he is eloquent in their praise. Now, the collection, including several by
other writers, comprises only one hundred and eighty one. The value of their contributions
to the history of the times as well as of their writer will be evident on their study. The
order in which they are published is preserved in the translation for the sake of reference.
A chronological order would have obvious advantages, but this in many cases could only
be conjectural. Where the indications of time are fairly plain the probable date is
suggested in a note. The letters are divided into (a) dogmatic, (b) consolatory, (c)
festal, (d) commendatory, (e) congratulatory, (f) commenting on passing events. Of
them vScliulze writes "Nihil eo in genere scribendi perfectius ; nam quce sunt epistolarum
virtutes, brevitas, perspicuitas, elegantia, urbanitas, modestia, observantia decori, et ingen-
iosa prudensque ac erudita simplicitas, in epistolis Theodoreti admirabiliter ita elucent ut
scribentibus exemphi esse possint." '•• They not only" says Schrockh,^ "vindicate the
admiration of Nicephorus, but are specially attractive on account of their exhibition of the
writer's simplicity, modesty, and love of peace."

From the study of these letters " we rise," writes Canon Venables,^ " with a heightened
estimate of Theodoret himself, his intellectual power, his theological precision, his warm-
hearted affection for his friends, and the Christian virtues with which, notwithstanding
some weaknesses and an occasional bitterness for which, however distressing, his persecu-
tions offered some palliation, his character was adorned."

The reputation of Theodoret in the Church is a growing reputation, and the
practical canonization which he has won in the heart of Christendom is a testimony
to the power and worth of character and conduct. Though never officially dignified
by a higher ecclesiastical title than " Beatus" he is yet to Marcellinus " Episcopus sanctus
Cyri " * and to Photius " " divinus vir." His earnest, sometimes bitter, conflict with the
great intellect and strong will of Cyril, and apparent discomfiture in the war which raged,
often with dire confusion, up and down the long lines of definition, have not succeeded in
robbing him of one of the liighest places among the Fathers of whom the Church is
proudest. He exhibits, each in a lofty and conspicuous form, all the qualities which mark
a great and good churchman. His theological writings would have won high fame in a
recluse. His administration of his diocese, as we learn it from his modest letters, would
have gained him the character of an excellent bishop, even had he been no scholar. His
temper in controversy, though occasionally breaking out into the fiery heat of the oriental,
is for the most part in happy contrast with that of his opponents. His devotion to his
duty is undeniable, and his industry astonishing. It is impossible not to feel as we read
his writings that he is no self-seeker arguing for victory. He believes that the fate of the
Church rests on the fidelity of Christians to the Nicene Confession, and in his champion-
ship of this creed, and his opposition to all that seems to him to threaten its adulteration
or defeat, he knows no awe of prince or court. Owning but one Lord, he is true through
evil and good report to Him, and his figure stands out large, bright, and gracious across
the centuries, against a background of intrigue and controversy sometimes very dark, as
of a patient and faithful soldier and servant of Christ.'^ If his shortcomings were those of
his own age, — and in an age of virulent strife and of denial of all mercy to opponents
his memory rises as a comparative monument of moderation, — his graces were the graces
of all the ages.' Were it customary, or even possible, in our own church and time to
maintain the ancient custom of reciting before the Holy Table the names approved as
of good men and true in the past history of the Holy Society, in the long catalogue of the
faithful departed for whom worshippers bless the name of their common Lord, a place
must indubitably be kept for Theodoretus, bishop of Cyrus.


1 Ecc. Hist. xiv. 54. ^ xviii. 427. 3 Diet. Christ. Biog:. iv. 91S.

* Marc. 466. Cciller x. 25. 5 Cod. xxiv., p. 527.

'^ La vie saintc et edifiaiite que Tliiodoret mena des sa premiere jetuiesse ; les travaux apostoliques dont il honora son
episcopal; son zele pour la conversion des ennemis dc Peglise ; les persecutions quWl souffrait pour lenom deyHsus Christ ; son
antour pour la solitude, potir la j>auvrcte et pour les pauvres ; Vesprit de charite qiCil a fait paraitre dans toutes les occa


X- 25. 7 cf. Schrockh xviii. 356.


^4 THEODORET.


MANUSCRIPTS AND EDITIONS OF SEPARATE WORKS.


The editions of the Ecclesiastical History are the most numerous, though of several
others there are many. Of the collected works the following are the principal.

(i) Editio princeps, of Paulus Manutius, Latin Version only. Rome I55^*

(ii) J. Birckman, fol. 2 voll. Latin only Cologne 1573.

(iii) J. Sirmond, 4 voll. fol. Greek and Latin, Paris 1643.

To this the Auctarium of J. Gamier, with his dissertations was added in 1684.

(iv) John Lewis Schulze, Greek and Latin, based upon the preceding, in 5 voll.
Halle, 1774.

(v) Migne's edition of the foregoing. Paris i860.

(The last-named is the Edition used for the translation in this work.)

The MS8. authority for the works of Theodoret is strong. The afore-named editions
are based on MSS. in the libraries of Augsburg, Florence, Rome and Naj^les.

To works on Theodoret mentioned in the notes may be added : —

S. Kiipper, Ausgew. Schriften des sel. Theodoret aus dem Urtext iibers.

E. Binder, Etudes sur Theodoret. Geneva, 1844.

Specht, Theodor von Mopsuestia, und Theodoret von Cyrus. Munich, 1S71.


THE ANATHEMAS OF CYRIL. 25


THE ANATHEMAS OF CYRIL IN OPPOSITION TO NESTORIUS.


(Mansi T. IV. p, 1067-1082, Migne Cat. 76, col. 391. The anathemas of Nestorius against Cyril are to be

found in Hardouin i. 1297.")

I. If any one refuses to confess that the Emmanuel is in truth God, and therefore that
the holy Virgin is Mother of God (Oeo-oKng), for she gave birth after a fleshly manner to the
Word of God made flesh ; let him be anathema.

II. If any one refuses to confess that the Word of God the Father is united in hypos-
tasis to flesh, and is one Christ with His own flesh, the same being at once both God and
man, let him be anathema.

III. If any one in the case of the one Christ divides the hypostases after the union,
conjoining them by the conjunction alone which is according to dignity, independence, or
prerogative, and not rather by the concurrence which is according to natural union, let
him be anatliema.

IV. If any one divides between two persons or hypostases the expressions used in the
writings of evangelists and apostles, whether spoken by the saints of Christ or by Him
about Himself, and applies the one as to a man considered properly apart from the Word
of God, and the others as appropriate to the divine and the Word ot God the Father alone,
let him be anathema.

V. If any one dares to maintain that the Christ is man bearing God, and not rather
that He is God in truth, and one Son, and by nature, according as the Word was made flesh,
and shared blood and flesh in like manner with ourselves, let him be anathema.

VL If any one dares to maintain that the Word of God the Father was God or Lord
of the Christ, and does not rather confess that the same was at once both God and man,
the Word being made flesh according to the Scriptures, let him be anathema.

VII. If any one says that Jesus was energized as man by God the Word, and that
He was invested with the glory of the only begotten as being another beside Him, let him
be anathema.

VIII. If any one dares to maintain that the ascended man ought to be worshipped to-
gether with the divine Word, and be glorified with Him, and with Him be called God as
one with another (in that the continual use of the preposition " with " in composition makes
this sense compulsory), and does not rather in one act of worship honour the Emmanuel
and pi'aise Him in one doxology, in that He is the Word made flesh, let him be anathema.

IX. If any one says that the one Lord Jesus Christ is glorified by the Spirit, using
the power that works through Him as a foreign power, and receiving from Him the ability
to operate against unclean spirits, and to complete His miracles among men ; and does not
rather say that the Spirit is His own, whereby also He wrought His miracles, let him be
anathema.

X. Holy Scripture states that Christ is High Priest and Apostle of our confession,^ and
offered Himself on our behalf for a sweet-smelling savour to God and our Father.' If,
then, any one says that He, the Word of God, was not made our High Priest and Apostle
when He was made flesh and man after our manner; but as being another, other than Him-
self, properly man made of a woman ; or if any one says that He offered the offering on
His own behalf, and not rather on our behalf alone ; for He that knew no sin would not
have needed an offering, let him be anathema.

XL If any one confesses not that the Lord's flesh is giver of life,^ and proper to the
Word of God Himself, but (states) that it is of another than Him, united indeed to Him in
dignity, yet as only possessing a divine indwelling; and not rather, as we said, giver of
life, because it is proper to the Word of Him who hath might to engender all things alive,
let him be anathema.

XII. If any one confesses not that the Word of God suffered in flesh, and was cruci-
fied in flesh, and tasted death in flesh, and was made firstborn of the dead, in so far as He
is life and giver of life, as God ; let him be anathema.

1 Heb. iii. i, R. V, » cf. Eph. v. 2. » ^uoiroioi'. cf. to Kvpi.ov to ^wottoiov of the Creed of Constantinople.


26 THEODORET.


COUNTER-STATEMENTS OF THEODORET.


(Opp. Ed, Schulze. V. i. seq. Migne, Lat. 76. col. 391.)

Against J. — But all we who follow the words of the cvanc^elists state that God the
Word was not made flesh l)y nature, nor yet was changed into flesh ; for the Divine is im-
mutable and invariable. Wherefore also the prophet David says, " Thou ai't the same, and
thy years shall not fail." ^ And this the great Paul, the herald of the truth, in his Epistle to
the Hebrews, states to have been spoken of the Son.^ And in another place God says
through the Prophet, " I am the Lord: I change not."^ If then the Divine is immutable
and invariable, it is incapable of change or alteration. And if the immutable cannot be
changed, then God the Woi'dwas not made flesh by mutation, but took flesh and tabernacled
in us, according to the word of the evangelist. This the divine Paul expresses clearly in his
Epistle to the Philippians in the vv^ords, " Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ
Jesus : who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God : but
made Himself of no reputation and took upon Him the form of a servant." * Now it is plain
from these words that the form of God was not changed into the form of a servant, but,
remaining what it was, took the form of the servant. So God the Word was not made flesh,
but assumed living and reasonable flesh. He Himself is not naturally conceived of the Vir-
gin, fashioned, formed, and deriving beginning of existence from her ; He who is before the
ages, God, and with God, being with the Father and with the Father both known and wor-
shipped ; but He fashioned for Himself a temple in the Virgin's w^omb, and was with that
which was formed and begotten. Wherefore also we style that holy Virgin OcnroKnc, not
because she gave birth in natural manner to God, but to man united to the God that had
fashioned Him. Moi cover if He that was fashioned in the Virgin's womb was not man but
God the Word Who is before the ages, then God the Word is a creature of the Holy
Ghost. For that which was conceived in her, says Gabriel, is of the Holy Ghost.* But if
the only begotten Word of God is uncreate and of one substance and co-eternal with the
Father it is no longer a formation or creation of the Spirit. And if the Holy Ghost did not
fashion God the Word in the Virgin's womb, it follows that we understand the form of the
servant to have been fashioned, formed, conceived, and generated. Bjt since the form was
not stripped of the form of God, but was a Temple containing God the Word dwelling in it,
according to the words of Paul •' For it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness
dwell" " bodily," ^ we call the Virgin not mother of man (arflpw-oroAof) but mother of
God (dsoTUKog), applying the former title to the fashioning and conception, but the latter to
the union. For this cause the child who was born is called Emmanuel, neither God sepa-
rated from human nature nor man stripped of Godhead. For Ennnanuel is interpreted to
mean " God with us", according to the words of the Gospels ; and the expression " God
with us" at once manifests Him Who for our sakes was assumed out of us, and proclaims
God the Word Who assumed. Therefore the child is called Emmanuel on account of God
Who assumed, and the Virgin Ocotuko^ on account of the union of the form of God with
the conceived form of a servant. For God the Word was not changed into flesh, but the
form of Gotl took the form of a servant.

Against II. — We, in obedience to the divine teaching of the apostles, confess one
Christ ; and, on account of the union, we name the same both God and man. But we are
wholly ignorant of the union according to hypostasis ' as being strange and foreign to the
divine Scriptures and the Fathers who have interpreted them. And if the author of these
statements means by the union according to hypostasis that there was a mixture of flesh
and Godhead, we shall oppose his statement with all our might, and shall confute his blas-
phemy, for the mixture is of necessity followed by confusion ; and the admission of confusion
destroys the individuality of each nature. Things that are undergoing mixture do not re-
main what they were, and to assert this in the case of God the Word and of the seed of

>Ps. ci.2S. 3Mal.iii.6. 0 Matt. . 23. » cf. n. p. 72,

»Heb. i. 13. « Phil, ii.s, 6,7, « Coloss. i. 19, and ii. 9.


COUNTER-STATEMENTS OF THEODORET. 27


David would be most absurd. We must obey the Lord when He exhibits the two natures
and says to the Jews, " Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up." ^ But if
there had been mixture then God had not remained God, neitlier was the temple recog-
nised as a temple ; then the temple was God and God was temple. This is involved in
the theory of the mixture. And it was quite superfluous for the Lord to say to the Jews,
"Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up." He ought to have said,
Destroy me and in three days I shall be raised, if there had really been any mixture and
confusion. As it is, He exhibits the temple imdergoing destruction and God raising it up.
Therefore the union according to hypostasis, which in my opinion they put before us in-
stead of mixture, is superfluous. It is quite sufficient to mention the union, which both
exhibits the properties of the natures and teaches us to worship the one Christ.

Against III. — The sense of the terms used is misty and obscure. Who needs to be
told that there is no diflerence between conjunction and concurrence ? The concurrence is
a concurrence of the separated parts ; and the conjunction is a conjunction of the distin-
guished parts. The very clever authoi of the phrases has laid down things that agree as
though they disagreed. It is wrong, he says, to conjoin the hypostases by conjunction ; they
ought to be conjoined by concurrence, and that a natural concurrence. Possibly he states
this not knowing what he says ; if he knows, he blasphemes. Nature has a compulsory
force and is involuntary ; as for instance, if I say we are naturally hungry, we do not feel
iiunger of free-will but of necessity; and assuredly paupers would have left ofT begging if
the power of ceasing to be hungry had lain in their own will ; we are naturally thirsty ; we
naturally sleep ; we naturally breathe ; and all these actions, I repeat, belong to the category
of the involuntary, and he who is no longer capable of them necessarily ceases to exist. If
then the concurrence in union of the form of God and the form of a servant was natural,
then God the Word was united to the form of the servant under the compulsion of neces-
sity, and not because He put in force His loving kindness, and the Lawgiver of the Uni-
verse will be found to be a follower of the laws of necessity. Not thus have we been
taught by the blessed Paul ; on the contrary, we have been taught that He took the form of
a servant and " emptied Himself;"* and the expression "emptied Himself" indicates the
voluntary act. If then He was united by purpose and will to the nature assumed from
us, the addition of the term natural is superfluous. It suffices to confess the union, and an
union is understood of things distinguished, for if there were no division an union could
never be apprehended. The apprehension then of the union implies previous apprehen-
sion of the division. How then can he say that the hypostases or natures ought not to be
divided.'' He knows all the while that the hypostasis of God the Word was perfect before
the ages ; and that the form of the servant which was assumed by It was perfect ; and this
is the reason why he said hypostases and not hypostasis. If therefore either nature is per-
fect, and both came together, it is obvious that after tlie form of God had taken the form of
a servant, piety compels us to confess one son and Christ ; while to speak of the united hypos-
tases or natures as two, so far from being absurd, follows the necessity of the case. For if
in the case of the one man we divide the natures, and call the mortal nature body, but the
immortal nature soul, and both man, much more consonant is it with right reason to re-
cognise the properties alike of the God who took and of the man who was taken. We find
the blessed Paul dividing the one man into two where he says in one passage, " Though
our outward man perish yet the inward man is renewed," ^ and in another *' For I delight
in the law of God after the inward man," ■* And again " that Christ may dwell in the inner
man,"* Now if the apostle divides the natural conjunction of the synchronous natui'es, with
what reason can the man who describes tlie mixture to us by means of other terms indite
us as impious when we divide the properties of the natures of the everlasting God and of
the man assumed at the end of days }

Against IV. — These statements, too, are akin to the preceding. On the assumption
that there has been a mixture, he means that there is a distinction of terms as used both in
the holy Gospels and in the apostolic writings. And he uses this language while glorify-
ing himself that he is at war at once with Arius and Eunomius and the rest of the
heresiarchs. Let then this exact professor of theology tells us how he would confute the
blasphemy of the heretics, while applying to God the Woi-d what is uttered humbly and
appropriately by the form of the servant. They indeed while thus doing lay down that
the Son of God is inferior, a creature, made, and a servant. To whom then are we, hold-

ijohnii.ig. s n. Cor. iv. 16. 0 jjphes, lii. 17, Greek as in A.V, " in your hearts."

* Phil, ii. 7, * Rom. vii, 33.


2S THEODORET.


ing as we do the opposite opinion to theirs, and confessing tlie Son to lie of one substance
and co-eternal with God the Father, Creator of the Universe, Maker, Beautifier, Ruler, and
Governor, All-vvise, Almighty, or rather Himself, Power, Life and Wisdom, to refer the
words "My God, my God why hast thou forsaken me; " ' or " Father if it he possible let
this cup pass from me ; " * or " Father save me from this hour ; " ^ or "• That hour no man
knoweth, not even the Son of Man ; " ■* and all the other passages spoken and written in
lowliness by Him and by the holy apostles about Him ? To whom shall we apply the
weariness and the sleep ? To w'hom the ignorance and the fear? Who was it who stood
in need of angelic succour ? If these belong to God the Word, how was wisdom ignorant?
How could it be called wisdom when affected by the sense of ignorance ? How could He
speak the truth in saying that He had all that the Father hath,* when not having the knowl-
edge of the Father ? For He says, "The Father alone knoweth that day."" How could He
be the unchanged image of Him that begat Him if He has not all that the Begetter hath?
If then He speaks the truth when saying that He is ignorant, any one might suppose this of
Him. But if He knoweth the day, but says that He is ignorant with the wish to hide it,
you see in what a blasphemy the conclusion issues. For the truth lies and could not
properly be called truth if it has any quality opposed to truth. But if the truth does not lie,
neither is God the Word ignorant of the day which He Himself made, and which He Him-
self fixed, wherein He purposes to judge the world, but has the knowledge of the Father as
being unchanged image. Not then to God the Word does the ignorance belong, but to the
form of the servant who at that time knew as much as the indwelling Godhead revealed.
The same position may be maintained about other similar cases. How for instance could
it be reasonable for God the Word to say to the Father, " Father if it be possible let this
cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I will but as Thou wilt" ?' The absurdities which
necessarily thence follow are not a few. First it follows that the Father and the Son are
not of the same mind, and that the Father wishes one thing and the Son another, for He
said, " Nevertheless not as I will but as Thou wilt." Secondly we shall have to contemplate
great ignorance in the Son, for He will be fovmd ignorant whether the cup can or cannot
pass from Him ; but to say this of God the Word is utter impiety and blasphemy. For
exactly did He know the end of the mystery of the occonomy Who for this very reason
came among us. Who of His own accord took our nature. Who emptied Himself. For
this cause too He foretold to the Holy Apostles, " Behold we go up to Jerusalem; and
the Son of Man shall be betrayed . . . into the hands of the Gentiles to mock and to
scourge and to crucify Him, and the third day He shall rise again." ** How then can He
Who foretold these things, and, when Peter deprecated their coming to pass, rebuked him,
Himself deprecate their coming to pass, when He clearly knows all that is to be.'' Is it not
alxsurd that Abraham many generations ago should ha\e seen His day and have been glad,^
and that Isaiah in like manner, and Jeremiah, and Daniel, and Zcchariah, and all the fellow-
ship of the prophets, should have foretold His saving passion, and He Himself be ignorant,
and beg release from and deprecate it, though it was destined to come to pass for the salvation
of the world ? Therefore these words are not the words of God the Word, but of the form
of the servant, afraid of death because death was not yet destroyed.^ Surely God the Word
permitted the utterance of these expressions allowing I'oom for fear, that the nature of
Him that had to be born may be plain, and to prevent our supposing the Son of Abra-
ham and David to be an unreality or appearance. The crew of the impious heretics
has given birth to this blasphemy through entertaining these sentiments. We shall there-
fore apply what is divinely spoken and acted to God the Word ; on the other hand what is
said and done in humility we shall connect with the form of a servant, lest we be tanited
with the blasphemy of Arius and Eunomius.

Against V. — We assert that God the Word shared like ourselves in flesh and blood,
and in immortal soul, on account of the union relating to them ; l)ut that God the Word was
made flesh by any change we not only refuse to say, but accuse of impiety those who do,
and it may be seen that this is contrary to the very terms laid down. For if the Word was

' Matt, xxvii. 48. 2 Matt. xxvi. jg. 3johnxii.27.

* Matt. xxiv. 36 and Mk. xiii. 22. There is no niamiscript authority for the variation Son " of Man."

"John XVI. 15. I' Matt. xxiv. 36. ■? Matt. xxvi. 39. » Mutt. xx. iS, 19. " John viii. 26.

'" For the view that the cup deprecated by the Saviour was death there is no direct Scri|)tural authority, and to adopt the
exegesis of Thcodoret and of many others woidd be to phicc the divine humanity of the Messiali on a lower level than that not
merely of many a martyr and patriot but of many men unconscious of martyr's or patriot's hisj;h callinsr, who have nevertheless
faced death and pain with calm and cheerful fnriitude. The bitterness of the cup which the Saviour prayed might if possi.ble
pass from Him seems rather to have lain 111 tlie culmination of the sin of the race and nation with which His love for men had
identified llim ; the greed, the treacherv, the meanness, the cruelty, the disloyalty, shewn by the Sons of Israel to the Son ol
David, by the sons of men to Uie Son of Man.


COUNTER-STATEMENTS OF THEODORET. 29

changed into flesh He did not share with us in flesh and blood : but if He shared in flesh
and blood He shared as being another besides them : and if the flesh is anything other be-
sides Him, then He was not changed into flesh. While therefore we use the term sharing'
we worship both Him that took antl that wliich was taken as one Son. But we reckon the
distinction of the natures. We do not object to the term man bearing God, as employed bv
many of the holy Fathers, one of whom is the great Basil, who uses this term in his argu-
ment to Amphilochius about the Holy Ghost, and in his interpretation of the fifty-ninth
psalm. But we call Him man bearing God, not because He received some particular di\inc
grace, but as possessing all the Godhead of the Son united. For thus says the blessed Paul
in his interpretation, " Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit,
after the tradition of men, after the rudime!i!:s of the world, and not after Christ. For in
Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily."^

Against VI. — The blessed Paul calls that which was assumed by God the Word
" form of a servant," ^ but since the assumption was prior to the union, and the blessed Paul
was discoursing about the assumption when he called the nature which was assumed "form
of a servant," after the making of the union the name of " servitude " has no longer place.
For seeing that the Apostle when writing to them that believed in Him said, " So thou
art not a servant but a son " ^ and the Lord said to His disciples, " Henceforth I will not
call you servants but friends ;" "^ much more the first fruits of our nature, through whom
even we were guerdoned with the boon of adoption, would be released from the title of
servant. We therefore confess even " the form of the servant" to be God on account of
the form of God imited to it ; and we bow to the authority of the prophet when he calls
the babe also Emmanuel, and the child which was born, " Angel of great counsel, won-
derful Counsellor, mighty God, powerful, Prince of peace, and Father of the age to come." "
Yet the same prophet, even after the union, when proclaiming the nature of that which was
assumed, calls him who is of the seed of Abraham " servant" in the words " Thou art my
servant O Israel and in thee will I be glorified ;" ' and again, " Thus says the Lord that
formed me from the womb to be his servant ; " ® and a little further on, " Lo I have given
thee for a covenant of the people, for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my sal-
vation unto the end of the earth." ^ But what was formed from the womb was not God
the Word but the form of the servant. For God the Word was not made flesh by being
changed, but He assumed flesh with a rational soul.

Against VII. — If the nature of man is mortal, and God the Word is life and giver of
life, and raised up the temple which had been destroyed by the Jews, and carried it into
heaven, how is not the form of the servant glorified through the form of God.'' For if
being originally and by nature mortal it was made immortal thi'ough its union with God
the Word, it therefore received what it had not ; and after receiving what it had not, and
being glorified, it is glorified by Him who gave. Wherefore also the Apostle exclaims,
" According to the working of His mighty power which he wi"ought in Christ when He
raised Him from the dead."^**

Against VIII. — As I have often said, the doxology which we offer to the Lord Christ
is one, and we confess the same to be at once God and man, as the method of the union
has taught us ; but we shall not shrink from speaking of the properties of the natures. For
God the Word did not undergo change into flesh, nor yet again did the man lose what he
was and undergo transmutation into the nature of God. Therefore we worship the Lord
Christ, while we maintain the properties of either nature.

Against IX. — Here he has plainly had the hardihood to anathematize not only those
who at the present time hold pious opinions, but also those who were in former days
heralds of truth ; aye even the writers of the divine gospels, the band of the holy Apostles,
and, in addition to these, Gabriel the archangel. For he indeed it was who first, even
before the conception, announced the birth of the Christ according to the flesh ; saying in
reply to Mary v^dien she asked, " How shall this be, seeing I know not a man.?" "The
Holy Ghost shall come upon thee and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee ;
therefore also that holy thing that shall be born of thee shall be called the vSon of God." "
And to Joseph he said, " Fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife, for that which is con-
ceived in her is of the Floly Ghost." ^^ And the Evangelist says, "When as his mother
Mary was espoused to Joseph . . . she was found with child of the Holy Ghost

I Kou-wvia, in the sense of participation. 2 Coloss. ii. S. 9. s Phil. ii. 7. < Gal. iv. 7.

« John XV. 15. '' Isaiah vii. 14 and ix. 6. Ixx. Alex. ' Isaiah xlix. 3. ^ Isaiah xlix. 5.

9 Isaiah xiix. 6 " covenant of the people " being- imported from Ixii, 6. '" Ephes. 1, ig, 20. 1^ Luke 1. 34, 35.
"Matt. i. 20. i3Matt. i.iS.


>> 1


30 THEODORET.


And the Lord Himself when He liad come into the synagogue of the Jews and had taken
tlic prophet Isaiah, after reading the passage in which he says, " The spirit of the Lord is
upon me because He hath anointed me " and so on, added, " This day is this scripture ful-
filled in your ears."^ And the blessed Peter in his sermon to the Jews said, "God
anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost." ^ And Isaiah many ages before had pre-
dicted, "There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow
out of his roots; and the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of
the Lord ; " ^ and again, " Behold my servant whom I uphold, my beloved in whom my soul
(Iclighteth. I will put my spirit upon him ; he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles."*
This testimony the Evangelist too has inserted in his own writings. And the Lord Him-
self in the Gospels says to the Jews, " If I with the spirit of God cast out devils, no doubt
the kingdom of God is come upon you." " And John says, " He that sent me to baptize with
water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and re-
maining on Him, the same is He which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost." " So this exact
examiner of the divine decrees has not only anathematized prophets, apostles, and even the
archangel Gabriel, but has sutTered his blasphemy to reach even the Saviour of the world
Himself. For we have shewn that the Lord Himself after reading the passage " The
spirit of the Lord is upon me because He hath anointed me," said to the Jews, " This day
is this scripture fulfilled in your cars." And to those who said that He was casting out
devils b}' Beelzebub He replied that He was casting them out by the Spirit of God. But
we maintain that it was not God the Word, of one substance and co-eternal with the
Father, that was formed by the Holy Ghost and anointed, but the human nature which
was assumed by Him at the end of days. We shall confess that the S]3irit of the Son
was His own if he spoke of it as of the same nature and proceeding from the Father, and
shall accept the expression as consistent with true piety. But if he speaks of the Spirit as
being of the Son, or as having its origin through the Son we shall reject this statement as
blasphemous and impious. For we believe the Lord when He says, "The spirit which
proceedeth from the Father ; " ' and likewise the very divine Paul saying, " VVe have re-
ceived not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God." ^

Against X. — The unchangeable nature was not changed into nature of flesh, but
assumed human nature and set it over the common high priests, as the blessed Paul teaches
in the words, " For every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men in things
pertaining to God, that he may ofler both gifts and sacrifices for sins: who can have
compassion on the ignorant and on them that are out of the way ; for that he himself also
is encompassed with infirmity. And by reason hereof he ought, as for the people so also
for himself." ^ And a little further on interpreting this he says, " As was Aaron so also was
the Christ." '" Then pointing out the infirmity of the assumed nature he says, " W'ho in the
days of His flesh, when He had ofl'ered up prayers and su2:)plication with strong crying and
tears unto Him that was able to save Him from death, and was heard for His godly fear,
though He was a son yet learned obedience by the things that He suftered : and having been
made perfect He became unto all that obey Him the author of eternal salvation; named of
God a high priest of the order of Melchisedec." ^^ Who then is He who was perfected by
toils of virtue and who was not perfect by nature? Who is He who learnt obedience by
experience, and before his experience was ignorant of it? Who is it that lived with godly
fear and oflered supplication with strong crying and tears, not able to save Himself but appeal-
ing to Him that is able to save Him and asking for release from death ? Not God the Word,
the impassible, tlie immortal, the incorporeal, whose memory is joy and release from
tears, " For he has wiped away tears from olV all faces," ^'- and again the prophet says,
" I remembered God and was glad,"'* Who crowneth them that live in godly fear, " Who
knoweth all things before they be," " "Who hath all things tliat the Father hath ; " " Who
is the unchangeable image of the Father," ^^ " Who shcwcth the Father in himself." ^^ It is
on the contrary that which was assumed by Him of the seed of David, mortal, passible,
and afraid of death; although this itself afterwards destroyed the power of death through
union with the God who had assumed it;'*' which walked through all righteousness and
said to John, " Suiler it to be so now for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness." '*

1 I.uke iv. 77, 21. 8 John i. 33. n Hebrews v. 7, 10. '"Col. i. 15.

«Actsx.3S. 'lolnx. 5, 26. 1= Is:ii:ih xxv. S. i7Johnxiv.7.

' Isaiali xi. 1,2. »lCnr. ii. 12. 1^ I'siilms 77, 3, Ixx. wileb.ii.14.

* Isaiah xlii. I. » Hebrews v. 1-3. " 1 list. Susaiiii : 42. l» Matt. iii. 15.

* Matt. xii. 28. "" Hebrews V. 4 iind 5. >•'• John xvi. 15.


COUNTER-STATEMENTS OF THEODORET. 31


This took the name of the priesthood of Melchisedcc, for it put on infirmity of nature; —
not the Ahnighty God the Word. Wherefore also, a little before, the blessed Paul said,
" We have not a high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but
was in all points tempted like as we are yet without sin." ' It was the nature taken from
us for our sakes which experienced our feelings without sin, not He that on account of our
salvation assumed it. And in the beginning of this part of his subject he teaches us in
the words " Consider the apostle and high priest of our profession, Jesus, who was faithful
to Him that appointed Him as also Moses was foithful in all His house." ^ But no one
holding the right faith would call the unmade the uncreate, God the \\'ord coeternal with
the Father, a creature ; but on the contrary. Him of David's seed Who being free from all sin
was made our high priest and victim, after Himself oflering Himself on our behalf to God
having in Himself the Word, God of God, united to Himself and inseparably conjoined.

Against XI. — In my opinion he appears to give heed to the truth, in order that, by
concealing his unsound views by it, he may not be detected in asserting tlie same dogmas as
the heretics. But nothing is stronger than truth, which by its own rays luicovers the dark-
ness of falsehood. B\- the aid of its illumination we shall make his heterodox belief plain.
In the first place he has nowhere made mention of intelligent flesh, nor confessed that the
assumed man was perfect, but every where in accoixlance with the teaching of Apollinarius
bespeaks of flesh. Secondly, after introducing the conception of the mixture under other
terms, he brings it into his arguments ; for there he clearly states the flesh of the Lord to
be soulless. For, he says, if any one states that the flesh of the Lord is not proper flesh of
the very Word who is of God the Father, but that it is of another beside Him, let him be
anathema. Hence it is plain that he does not confess God the Word to have assumed a
soul, but only flesh, and that He Himself stands to the flesh in place of soul. We on the
contrary assert that the flesh of the Lord having in it life ^ was life-giving and reasonable,
on account of the life-giving Godhead united to it. And he himself unwillingly confesses
the diflerence between the two natures, speaking of flesh, and " God the Word " and call-
ing it " His own flesh." Therefoi-e God the Word was not changed into nature of flesh,
but has His own flesh, the assumed nature, and has made it life-giving by the union.

Against XII. — Passion is proper to the passible ; the impassible is above passions.
It was then the form of the servant that suffered, the form of God of course dwelling with
it, and permitting it to suffer on account of the salvation brought forth of the sufferings,
and making the sufferings its own on account of the union. Therefore it was not the
Christ" who suffered, but the man assumed of us by God. Wherefore also the blessed
Isaiah exclaims In his prophecy, " A man of sorrows and acquainted with grief." ^ And
the Lord Christ Himself said to the Jews, "Why seek ye to kill me, a man that hath told
you the truth ? " ® But what is threatened with death is not the very life, but he that hath
a mortal nature. And giving this lesson in another place the Lord said to the Jews,
" Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up." ' Therefore what was de-
stroyed was the (temple descended) from David, and, after its destruction, it was raised
up by the only begotten Word of God, impassibly begotten of the Father before the ages.

iHeb. iv. 15. 2Heb. iii. 1-2. 3 eMil/vYOf.

* For " the Christ" we might expect here "the Word," for that the Christ suffered is the plain statement of Scripture
d. Pet. ii. 2i). But Theodoret uses the name Christ of the eternal word, e.g;. de Providentia x. 66i. " When you hear
Christ mentioned, understand the only begotten Son the Word, begotten of His Father before the ages, clad in human nature."

sis.liii.3. ejohn vii. 19. d. viii.40. 'John 11. 9.


32


PEDIGREES.


DYNASTY OF CONSTANTINE.


1

Crispus. Claudius Quintillus.

IGothicus. procd. Imp. 270.

Imp. 268.

Eutropius = Claudia. Galeria Valeria Eutropia = * Maximianus Hercultus.*

I/iip. with Diocletian, 286.

Helena (i)=CbNSTANTlus l.^(n) Theodora Flavia.
I Imp. 303.


Minervina (i) = Constantine I.=(ii) *F
* Crispus.*


austa.*


Maxentius
assumed Umpire 306.


\.!^


>


Constantia = Licinius. *Constantine.* *Dalmatius.* *Constantius* =
I Hannibalianus. Basilina.

*Licinius.*


*Dalmatius Caesar.*


r


' *A Son.* Callus.

\ I

Constantine II. Constantius II. Constans. Flavia Maxima= Constantia=*Hannibalianus.* Helena= Julian
Imp. 33T. Imp. 33'/. Imp. 33^. Gratian. Imp. 36M

* Put to death.


DYNASTIES OF VALENTINIAN AND THEODOSIUS.


I

(i) Severa = Valentinianus I. = (ii) Justina.

Imp. 364.


r r

Gratianus. Valentinianus II
I/np. 37S- Imp. 37S'


Valens.
Imp. 364.


usta. Grata. Galla (ii) = Theodosius I. = (i) Flaccilla.

I Imp. or. 37g. .

I I 1

Constantius III. (ii) = Galla Placilia Arcadius = Eudoxia. IIonorius.


I?fip. 421,


= (i) Atauljilms.


Imp. or. 3g3.


Imp. occ.3gs.


I 1 \ 1

Eudocia = Theodosius II. Flaccilla. Arcadia. Pulcheria =
Imp. 408. Imp. 414.

Marcianus.
Valentinianus III. -- Eudo.\ia. imp. 450.

Lnp. 42S'


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF

THEODORET.


BOOK I.


PROLOGUE.

Design of the History.

When artists paint on panels and on walls
the events of ancient history, they alike delight
the eye, and keep bright for many a year the
memory of the past. Historians substitute
books for panels, bright description for pig-
ments, and thus render the memory of past
events both stronger and more permanent, for
the painter's art is ruined by time. For this
reason I too shall attempt to record in writing
events in ecclesiastical history hitherto omitted,
deeming it indeed not right to look on without
an effort while oblivion robs '^ noble deeds and
useful stories of their due fame. For this cause
too I have been frequently urged by friends to
undertake this work. But when I compare my
own powers with the magnitude of the under-
taking, I shrink from attempting it. Trusting,
however, in the bounty of the Giver of all
good, I enter upon a task beyond my own
strength.

Eusebius of Palestine ^ has written a history
of the Church from the time of the holy Apostles
to the reign of Constantine, the prince beloved
of God. I shall begin my history from the
period at which his terminates 3.

CHAPTER I.

Origin of the Ariafi Heresy.

After the overthrow of the wicked and
impious tyrants, Maxentius, Maximinus, and


I aukaia, Cf. 2 Cor. xi. 8.

" Ct. Basil de Spir. Sanct., 29. "o 7raXai(rTti/o9 " means "of
Caesarea," his see, to distinguish him from his namesake, Bishop
of Nicomedia.

3 The last event mentioned by Eusebius is the defeat of Licinius,
who was put to death a.d. 324.

VOL. III. ]


Licinius, the surge which those destroyers, like
hurricanes, had roused was hushed to sleep ;
the whirlwinds were checked, and the Church
henceforward began to enjoy a settled calm.
This was established for her by Constantine,
a prince deserving of all praise, whose calling,
like that of the divine Apostle, was not of
men, nor by man, but from heaven. He en-
acted laws prohibiting sacrifices to idols, and
commanding churches ^ to be erected. He
appointed Christians to be governors of the
provinces, ordering honour to be shown to the
priests, and threatening with death those
who dared to insult them. By some the
clmrches which had been destroyed were re-
built ; others erected new ones still more
spacious and magnificent. Hence, for us, all
was joy and gladness, while our enemies were
overwhelmed with gloom and despair. The
temples of the idols were closed ; but frequent
assemblies were held, and festivals celebrated,
in the churches. But the devil, full of all
envy and wickedness, the destroyer of man-
kind, unable to bear the sight of the Church
sailing on with favourable winds, stirred up
plans of evil counsel, eager to sink the vessel
steered by the Creator and Lord of the Uni-
verse. When he began to perceive that the
error of the Greeks had been made manifest,
that the various tricks of the demons had
been detected, and that the greater number
of men worshipped the Creator, instead of
adoring, as heretofore, the creature, he did
not dare to declare open war against our God
and Saviour; but having found some who,
though dignified with the name of Christians,


I €/CK\7)(ria. The use of the word in i Cor. xi. 18 indicates a

transition stage between "Assembly" and "Building." The
brethren met " in assembly : " soon they met in a church. Cf. Aug.
Ep. 190, 5. 19: "lit nomhie ecclesUe, id est popiili qui cont'metur,
significeiniis iocuiii qui contiiiet." Chrysost. Horn. xxix. in Acta :
oi jrpdyorot Tas e/cKATjerias wKoh6^i\<Ta.v .


34


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[I.I.


were yet slaves to ambition and vainglory, he
made them fit instruments for the execution
of his designs, and by their means drew others
back into "their old error, not indeed by the
former method of setting up the worship of the
creature, but by bringing it about that the
Creator and Maker of all should be reduced to
a level with the creature. I shall now proceed
to relate where and by what means he sowed
these tares.

Alexandria is an immense and populous
city, charged with the leadership not only of
Egypt, but also of the adjacent countries, the
Thebaid and Libya. After Peter^, the victorious
champion of the faith, had, during the sway of
the aforesaid impious tyrants, obtained the
crown of martyrdom, the Church in Alexandria
was ruled for a short time by Achillas 3. He was
succeeded by Alexander ■*, who proved him-
self a noble defender of the doctrines of the
gospel. At that time, Arius, who had been
enrolled in the list of the presbytery, and
entrusted with the exposition of the Holy Scrip-
tures, fell a prey to the assaults of jealousy, when
he saw that the helm of the high priesihood
was committed to Alexander. Stung by this
passion, he sought opportunities for dispute and
contention ; and, although he perceived that
Alexander's irreproachable conduct forbade his
bringing any charges against him, envy would
not allow him to rest. In him the enemy of
the truth found an instrument whereby to
stir and agitate the angry waters of the
Church, and persuaded him to oppose the
apostolical doctrine of Alexander. While the
Patriarch, in obedience to the Holy Scriptures,
taught that the Son is of equal dignity with
the Father, and of the same substance with
God who begat Him, Arius, in direct opposi-
tion to the truth, affirmed that the Son of God
is merely a creature or created being, adding
the famous dictum, " There once was a time
when He was not s ; " with other opinions which
may be learned from his own writings. He
taught these false doctrines perseveringly, not
only in the church, but also in general meet-
ings and assemblies ; and he even went from
house to house, endeavouring to make men
the slaves of his error. Alexander, who was
strongly attached to the doctrines of the
Apostles, at first tried by exhortations and
counsels to convince him of his error; but
when he saw him inlaying the madman ^ and
making public dcclai alien of his impiety, he
deposed him from the order of the presbytery.


' Succeeded Thconas as Archbishop of Alexandria, a.d. 300.
Beheaded by order ol' Maximhius, a.d. 311. Eu.seb. vii. 32.

3 Patriarch of Alexandria, A.D. 311 — 312. Promoted Arius to the
priesthood. Soz._ i. 15. 4 Patriarch, a.d. 312—326.

5 ^v TTOTe ore ovK fiv. 6 Kopvfia.vTi.S)V7a..


for he heard the law of God loudly declaring,
" If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out^ and casi
it from theeT.''


CHAPTER II.

List of the principal Bishops.

Of the church of Rome at this period
Silvester ^ held the reins. His predecessor in
the see was Miltiades ^, the successor of that
Marcellinus3 who had so nobly distinguished
himself during the persecution.

In Antioch, after the death of Tyrannust.
when peace began to be restored to the
churches, Vitaliss received the chief authority,
and restored the church in the " Palaea ^ " which
had been destroyed by the tyrants. He was
succeeded by Philogonius?, who completed all
that was wanting in the work of restoration :
he had, during the time of Licinius, signalised
himself by his zeal for religion.

After the administration of Hermon^, the
government of the church in Jerusalem was
committed to Macarius 9, a man whose character
was equal to his name, and whose mind was
adorned by every kind of virtue.

At this same period also, Alexander, illus-
trious for his apostohcal gifts, governed the
church of Constantinople '°.

It was at this time that Alexander, bishop of
Alexandria, perceiving that Arius, enslaved
by the lust of power, was assembling those who
had been taken captive by his blasphemous doc-
trines, and was holding private meetings, com-
municated an account of his heresy by letter to
the rulers of the jDrincipal churches. That the
authenticity of my history may not be suspected,
I shall now insert in my narrative the letter
whicli he wrote to his namesake, containing, as
it does, a clear account of all the facts I have
mentioned. I shall also subjoin the letter of
Arius, together with the other letters which are
necessary to the completeness of this narra-
tive, that they may at once testify to the truth
of my work, and make the course of events
more clear.

The following letter was written by Alexander
of Alexandria, to the bishop of the same name
as himself


7 iav . . . (TKoi'SaAifj), St. Matt. v. 29 and xviii. 9 ; et . .
(7Kav6aAifet, cf. Mark ix. 43.

' Up. of Rome, from Jan. 31, A.l). 314, to Dec. 31, A.D. 335.

2 Otherwise Melchiadcs. July 2, a.d. 310, to Jan. 10, A.D. 314.

3 Jan. 30, A.D. 296, to Oct. 25, A.D. 304. Accused of apostasy,
under Diocletian.

4_Bisliop of Andoch during the persecution of Diocletian, KaO'
hv fiKiiaatv 1/ tuiv eKK\rj<Tiit>v noKtopKia. Eus. H.E. vii. 3a.

5 2ist Bp. of Antioch, a.d. 312 — a.d. 318.

6 The ancient part of the city of Antioch.

7 A.l). 319—323. 8 A.D. 302—311.

9 Macarius = Blessed, a.d. 311— ? 334. Vide Chapters iv. and
xvii. «o Circa ? A.D. 313 or 317 — 340.


I. 3-]


OF THEODORET.


35


V


CHAPTER HI.

The Epistle of Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria,
to Alexander, Bishop of Constantinople.

" To his most revered and likeminded
brother Alexander, Alexander sendeth greeting
in the Lord.

" Impelled by avarice and ambition, evil-
minded persons have ever plotted against the
wellbeing of the most important dioceses.
Under various pretexts, they attack the religion
of the Church ; and, being maddened by the
devil, who works in them, they start aside from
all piety according to their own pleasure, and
trample under foot the fear of the judgment of
God. Suffering as I do from them myself, I
''deem it necessary to inform your piety, that you
may be on your guard against them, lest they or
any of their party should presume to enter your
diocese (for these cheats are skilful in de-
ception), or should circulate false and specious
letters, calculated to delude one who has devoted
himself to the simple and undefiled faith.

" Arius and Achillas have lately formed
a conspiracy, and, emulating the ambition of
Colluthus, have gone far beyond him ^ He
indeed sought to find a pretext for his own
pernicious line of action in the charges he
brought against them. But they, beholding his
making a trade of Christ for lucre ^, refused to
remain any longer in subjection to the Church ;
but built for themselves caves, like robbers,
and now constantly assemble in them, and
day and night ply slanders there against
Christ and against us. They revile every godly
apostolical doctrine, and in Jewish fashion
have organized a gang to fight against Christ,
denying His divinity, and declaring Him to be
on a level with other men. They pick out every
passage which refers to the dispensation of
salvation, and to His humiliation for our sake ;
they endeavour to collect from them their own
impious assertion, while they evade all those
which declare His eternal divinity, and the
unceasing 3 glory which He possesses with
the Father. They maintain the ungodly
doctrine entertained by the Greeks and the
Jews concerning Jesus Christ ; and thus, by
every means in their power, hunt for their
applause. Everything which outsiders ridicule

' Alexander's words seem to imply that Colluthus began his
schismatical proceedings in assuming to exercise episcopal func-
tions before the separation of Arius from the Church, and that
one cause of his wrong action was impatience at the mild course at
first adopted by Alexander towards Arius. The Council of Alex-
andria held in a.d. 324 under Hosius, decided that he was only
a Presbyter.

2 ;)(pt(TTeju.7ropia. The word xP"'"''^'i"-'''opo5 is applied in the
"Didache " to lazy consumers of alms. Cf. Ps. Ignat_. ad Trail. :
ov xpto-Tiaj/ol aAAd xpicrefiTropot, Ps. Ignat. ad Mag. ix., and Bp.
Lightfoot's note.

3 Readings vary between aAeKTOs = indescribable, and oAtjktos
= ceaseless. Cf. 'AAijkto), the Fury.


in US they officiously practise. They daily ex-
cite persecutions and seditions against us.
On the one hand they bring accusations
against us before the courts, suboruing as
witnesses certain unprincipled women whom
they have seduced into error. On the other
they dishonour Christianity by permitting
their young women to ramble about the
streets. Nay, they have had the audacity to
rend the seamless garment of Christ, which the
soldiers dared not divide.

" When these actions, in keeping with their
course of life, and the impious enterprise
which had been long concealed, became
tardily known to us, we unanimously ejected
them from the Church which worships the
divinity of Christ. They then ran hither
and thither to form cabals against us, even
addressing themselves to our fellow-ministers,
who were of one mind with us, under the pre-
tence of seeking peace and unity with them,
but in truth endeavouring by means of fair
words, to sweep some among them away into
their own disease. They ask them to write
a wordy letter, and then read the contents to
those whom they have deceived, in order that
they may not retract, but be confirmed in their
impiety, by finding that bishops agree with and
support their views. They make no acknow-
ledgment of the evil doctrines and practices
for which they have been expelled by us, but
they either impart them without comment, or
carry on the deception by fallacies and
forgeries. Thus concealing their destructive
doctrine by persuasive and meanly truckling
language, they catch the unwary, and lose
no opportunity of calumniating our religion.
Hence it arises that several have been led to
sign their letter, and to receive them into com-
munion, a proceeding on the part of our fellow-
ministers which I consider highly reprehensible;
for they thus not only disobey the apostolical
rule, but even help to inflame their diabolical
action against Christ. It is on this account,
beloved brethren, that without delay I have
stirred myself up to inform you of the unbelief
of certain persons who say that " There was a
time when the Son of God was not-*;" and
" He who previously had no existence subse-
quently came into existence ; and when at some
time He came into existence He became such as
every other man is." God, they say, created
all things out of that which was non-existent,
and they include in the number of creatures,
both rational and irrational, even the Son ol
God. Consistently with this doctrine they,
as a necessary consequence, affirm that He

4 ''Hi' TTore ore ov< yv 0 vibs Toi) 6eov. koX Teyovev v<rTepov 0
■n-poTspov p-r] vnapxiav toioCtos yevop.fvo'; ore Kai jrore ye'yocei' oios
Ka.1 TTas ne^vKev ai/Opunroi.


D 2


36


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[1.3.


is by nature liable to change, and capable
both of virtue nnd of vice, and thus, by
their hypothesis of his having been created
out of that which was non-existent, they
overthrow the testimony of the Divine Scrip-
tures, which declare the immutability of the
Word and the Divinity of the Wisdom of
the Word, which Word and Wisdom is Christ.
I * We are also able,' say these accursed wretches,
* to become like Him, the sons of God ; for it is
written, — / have flourished and broui^ht up
children 5.' When the continuation of this text
is brought before them, which is, 'and they
have rebelled m^ainst Me^ and it is objected
that these words are inconsistent with the
Saviour's nature, which is immutable, they
throw aside all reverence, and affirm that God
foreknew and foresaw that His Son would not
rebel against Him, and that He therefore chose
Him in preference to all others. They like-
wise assert that He was not chosen because
He had by nature any thing superior to the
other sons of God ; for no man, say they, is
soil of God by nature, nor has any peculiar
relation to Him. He was chosen, they allege,
because, though mutable by nature, His pains-
taking character suffered no deterioration. As
though, forsooth, even if a Paul and a Peter
made like endeavours, their sonship would in
no respects differ from His.

" To establish this insane doctrine they in-
sult the Scriptures, and bring forward what
is said in the Psalms of Christ, ' Thou hast
loved righteousness and hated iniquity^ there-
fore thy God hath anointed thee with the oil
of gladness above thy felloivs^' Now that
the Son of God was not created out of the
non-existent 7, and that there never was a
time in which He was not, is expressly taught
by John the Evangelist, who speaks of Him
as ' the only begotteji Son which is in the
bosom of the Father^.'' This divine teacher
desired to show that the Father and the Son
are inseparable; and, therefore, he said, 'tliat
the Son is in the bosom of the Father.'
Moreover, the same John affirms that the
Word of God is not classed among things
created out of the non-existent, for, he says that
' all things were made by Him 9,' and he also
declares His individual personality '^° in the fol
lowing words : ' /« the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was with God, and the Word
was God. . . . All things were made by Him,
and without Hint was not any thing made that
was made^^.^ If, theft, all things were made by


5 Isai. i. 2. vioi/s eyeVfrjcra koX vtl/toira, as in Sept. Vulg., filios
eniitrivi ct exallavi. Rcvd., marg., '' made great and exalted."

6 Ps. .\lv. 7, as in Sept., except that aSiiciai/ is siib^iiliiled for
a.vo\i.i.o.v. 7 Oiire ef oiiK oviutv ytyti'ijrac.

8 John i. i8. 9 John 1.3. «o UTrooToo-ii'.

" John i. I, 3,


Him, how is it that He who thus bestowed
existence on all, could at any period have
had no existence himself? The Word, the
creating power, can in no way be defined as
of the same nature as the things created, if
indeed He was in the beginning, and all things
were made by Him, and were called by Him
out of the non-existent into being. ' That 7vhich
is^^' must be of an opposite nature to, and es-
sentially different from, things created out of the
non-existent. This shows, likewise, that there
is no separation between the Father and the
Son, and that the idea of separation cannot
even be conceived by the mind ; while the
fact that the world was created out of the non-
existent involves a later and fresh genesis of
its essential nature '3^ all things having been
endowed with such an origin of existence by
the Father through the Son. John, the most
pious apostle, perceiving that the word * was '
applied to the Word of God '4 was far beyond
and above the intelligence of created beings,
did not presume to speak of His generation
or creation, nor yet dared to name the Maker
and the creature in equivalent syllables. Not
Ithat the Son of God is unbegotten, for the
Father alone is unbegotten ; but that the in-
effable personality of the only-begotten God


" TO ov, the self-existent of philosophy.

'3 The history of the word vTroo-rao-i? is of crucial value in the study
of the Arian controversy. Its various usages may be classified as
(\) Classical ; iyi) S criptural ; [\\\) Ecclesiastical. The correlative
substantive of the verb ir</)icrTr)ju.i, I make to stand under, [from
VIVO =sub. under, and icrTrj/ai, Jsta] ; it means primarily « standing
under. Hence, materially, it means in (i) Classical Greek, sedi-
ment, prop, foundation : substances as opposed to their reflexions,
substantial nature, as of timber [Theoph. C. P. 5. 16. 4]. So
naturally grew the signification of ground of hope, actual existence;
and, in the later philosophy, it had come to be employed instead of
ovtria. for the noetic substratum " underlying " the pha;nomena.
(ii) Scriptural. In the N.T. it is found five times, twice in 2 Cor.
and thrice in Heb. (a) 2 Cor. ix. 4, and O) xi. 17. " Confidence "
of boasting, (y) Heb. i. 3, 6 X"-?"-""^? ■'"'I' vn-ocTTdtretos, A.V. the
express image of His "person." R.V., the very image of llis
"substance." (5) Heb. iii. 14, " Confidence." (e) Heb. xi. i, A.V.
" substance" of things hoped for. R.V. Assurance of things hoped
for. (iii) Ecclesiastical. The earlier ecclesiastical use, like the
later philosophical, identified it with ovaia, and so the Nicene Con-
fession anathematized those who maintained the Son to be of a
different substance or essence from the Father (iiTrocTTao-co)? ^
oiio-ias). In the version of Hilary of Poictiers {de Synodis, § 84 ;
Op. ii. 5io)ovcri'a is translated by "substantia," the etymological
equivalent of uTroCTTacris, except in the phrase quoted, when " sub-
stantia aut essentia " represents oixTta by its own etymological
equivalent " essentia." Thus in a.d. 325 to have contended for
Tpeis uTToa-Totrets would have been heretical. But as the subtilty
of controversy required greater nicety of phrase, it was laid down
(Basil the Great, Ep. 38J that while oucrta is an univeisal denoting
that which is common to the individuals of a species, UTrdo-Tao-is
makes an individual that which it is, and constitutes personal exist-
ence. Hence /iit'a iiTrdcTTao-is became Sabellian, and rpeis oiia-iai
Arian, while rpets iiffoo-Taa-eis was orthodox, cf. Theod. Dial. i. 7.
Er.anistes loq. " Is there any distinction between ovcria and
iin-otrracrts S "

Orthodoxus. "In extra-Christian philosophy there is not; for
ovcria signifies to oc, that which is^ and uTrdcTTaa-is that which sub-
sists. But according to the doctrine of the Fathers there is the
same difi'erence between ouo-i'a and vnoa-Taari,'! as between the com-
mon and the particular ; the race, and tlie species or individual." . .
'' The Divine ouo-t'a (substance) means the Holy Trinity ; but the
iiffdoTao-is indicates any 7rpda-<U7roi' (person) as of the Father, the
Son, or of the Holy Ghost. For we who follow the definitions 01
the Fathers assert VTrdo-rao-is, irpoo'oiiTOv and iSidrr)! (subst.Tiitinl
natuie. person, or individuality) to mean the same thing." Vide
also Newman's ^na«j 0/ i/i^ Foitrth Century, Appendix, Note iv.
fourth Edition.

'4 " In the beginning was the word." John i. i.


1.3-]


OF THEODORET.


37


is beyond the keenest conception of the evan-
gelists and perhaps even of angels. There-
fore, I do not think men ouglit to be con-
sidered pious who presume to investigate this
subject, in disobedience to the injunction,
' Seek not what is too difficult for thee, neither-
enquire into what is too high for thee''^.^ For
if the knowledge of many other things in-
comparably inferior is beyond the capacity
of the human mind, and cannot therefore be
attained, as has been said by Paul, ^ Eye
hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things which
God hath prepared for them that love Him '^,' and
as God also said to Abraham, that the stars
could not be numbered by him '7 ^ and it is
likewise said, ' Who shall number the grains of
sand by the sea-shore, or the drops of rain ^^? ' how
then can any one but a madman presume to
enquire into the nature of the Word of God ?
It is said by the Spirit of prophecy, ' Who
shall declare His generation '9 1 ' And, therefore,
our Saviour in His kindness to those men who
were the pillars of the whole world, desiring to
reheve them of the burden of striving after this
knowledge, told them that it was beyond their
natural comprehension, and that the Father
alone could discern this most divine mystery ;
^ JVo man^ said He, ^ knoweth the Son but the
Father, and no man k7ioweth the Father save
the Son^°.' It was, I think, concerning this
same subject that the Father said, ^ My secret
is for Me and for Mine 2^'

" But the insane folly of imagining that the
Son of God came into being out of that which
had no being, and that His sending forth took
place in time, is plain from the words ' which
had no being,' although the foolish are incap-
able of perceiving the folly of their own utter-
ances. For the phrase ' He was not' must either
have reference to time, or to some interval
in the ages. If then it be true that all things
were made by Him, it is evident that every age,
time, all intervals of time, and that ' when ' in
which ' was not ' has its place, were made by
Him. And is it not absurd to say that there
was a time when He who created all time,
and ages, and seasons, with which the ' was
not ' is confused, was not ? For it would be the
height of ignorance, and contrary indeed to all
reason, to affirm that the cause of any created
thing can be posterior to that caused by it.
The interval during which they say the Son
was still unbegotten of the Father was, ac-
cording to their opinion, prior to the wisdom
of God, by whom all things were created.


i6 I Cor. ii. g.
'8 Ecclus. i. 2.
-» isai. 1111. o. *° Matt. xi. 27.

21 Is. xxiv. 16: "My leanness, my leanness, woe unto me."
A.V. '^ Secntum vteum mihi." Vule.


15 Ecclus. iii. 21.
'7 Gen. XV. 5.
'9 Isai. liii. 8.


They thus contradict the Scripture which de-
clares Him to be ' the firstborn of every crea
ture^^.^ In consonance with this doctrine, Paul
with his usual mighty voice cries concerning
Him ; ' whom He hath appointed heir of all
things, by whom also He made the ^vorlds"^^.'
' For by Him were all things created that are in
heaven, and that are in earth, visible and in-
visible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
p)-incipalities, or powers : all things were created
by Him and for Him : and He is before all
things'^^' Since the hypothesis implied in the
phrase ' out of the non-existent ' is manifestly
impious, it follows that the Father is always
Father. And He is Father from the continual
presence of the Son, on account of whom He
is called ^s Father. And the Son being ever
present with Him, the Father is ever perfect,
wanting in no good thing, for He did not beget
His only Son in time, or in any interval of
time, nor out of that which had no previous
existence.

" Is it not then impious to say that there
was a time when the wisdom of God was not ?
Who saith, ' / was by Him as one brought up
with Him : I was daily His delight ^^ ? ' Or that
once the power of God was not, or His Word,
or anything else by which the Son is known,
or the Father designated, defective ? To assert
that the brightness of the Father's glory ' once
did not exist,' destroys also the original light of
which it is the brightness^?; and if there ever was
a time in which the image of God was not, it is
plain that He Whose image He is, is not always :
nay, by the non-existence of the express image
of God's Person, He also is taken away of whom
this is ever the express image. Hence it may
be seen, that the Sonship of our Saviour has not
even anything in common with the sonship ot
men. For just as it has been shown that the
nature of His existence cannot be expressed by ^
language, and infinitely surpasses in excellence '
all things to which He has given being, so His
Sonship, naturally partaking in His paternal
Divinity, is unspeakably different from the son-
ship of those who, by His appointment, have
been adopted as sons. He is by nature im-
mutable, perfect, and all-sufficient, whereas
men are liable to change, and need His help.
What further advance can be made by the


a2 Col. i. 15. , , „ ,

23 Heb. i. 2. Vide Alford. proleg. to Ep. to Heb., Nowhere
except in the Alexandrian Church does there seem to have existed
any idea that the Epistle was St. Paul's." "At Alexandna the
conventional habit ot quoting the Epistle as St. Paul's gradually
prevailed over critical suspicion and early tradition."

24 Col. i. 16, 17. J , • u

25 xpiJfiaTi'^o) = (i) to have dealings with ; (ii) to deal with
an oracle or divine power ; (iii) to get a name for dealing, and so
to ie called. Cf. Matt. ii. 12 ; Acts xi. 26.

26 Prov. viii. 30. , , , ,

27 Heb. i. 3. itv anavyoia-iiaTiii ^6^71^ Koi xiipiiKTyip ti^s jn^oo-ja-
creuii aiiToO.


38


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[1.3.


wisdom of God ^^ ? What can the Very Truth, or
God the Word, add to itself? How can the
Life or the True Light in any way be bettered ?
And is it not still more contrary to nature to
suppose that wisdom can be susceptible of
folly ? that the power of God can be united
with weakness ? that reason itself can be dim-
med by unreasonableness, or that darkness can
be mixed with the true light ? Does not the
Apostle say, ' W/ial comiinmion hath light with
dark7iess ? and what concord hath Christ 7vith
Belial^^V and Solomon, that ^ the way of a ser-
pent upon a rock^°' was ^ too woiiderfuP for
the human mind to comprehend, winch ' rock/
according to St. Paul, is Christ 3'. Men and
angels, however, who are His creatures, have
received His blessing, enabling them to exer-
cise themselves in virtue and in obedience
to His commands, that thus they may avoid
sin. And it is on this account that our Lord,
being by nature the Son of the Father, is
worshipped by all \ and they who have put off
the spirit of bondage, and by brave deeds and
advance in virtue have received the spirit of
adoption through the kindness of Him Who is
the Son of God by nature, by adoption also
become sons.

"His true, peculiar, natural, and special
Sonship was declared by Paul, who, speaking
of God, says, that ' He spared 7iot His own
Son, but delivered Him up for us 3^,' who are not
by nature His sons. It was to distinguish
Him from those who are not ' His own^ that he
called Him ' His own son.'' It is also written in
the Gospel, ' This is My beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased 'i^;' and in the Psalms the Saviour
says, ' The Lord said unto Me, Thou art My
Son^*.' By proclaiming natural sonship He
shows that there are no other natural sons
besides Himself.

" And do not these words, I begot thee ' from
the womb before the morning 35^' plainly show
the natural sonship of the paternal birth 36 of
One whose lot it is, not from diligence of
conduct, or exercise in moral progress, but by
individuality of nature ? Hence it ensues that
the filiation of the only-begotten Son of the
Father is incapable of fall ; while the adoption
of reasonable beings who are not His sons by
nature, but merely on account of fitness of
character, and by the bounty of God, may
fall away, as it is written in the wortl, • 2he
sons of God saw the daughters of men, and
took them as wives ^ and so forth 37, And

28 Contrast the advance of the manhood. Luke ii. 52, "n-pou-
KOjTTe," the word used in the text.

^ 2 Cor. vi. 14, 15, 3" I'rov. xxx. 19. 3' i Cor. x. 4.

32 Rom. viii. 32. 33 M.-jtt. iii. 17. 34 Ps. ii. 7.

35 Ps. ex. 3. Sept. CK yacTTpos Trpo 'Etu<T<^opou i^ivvr\aa. ere.

36 The readings vary between ■yei'i/^crcajs, yiveanui, and /xatev-
o-eios (cf. Phit. Theact. 150 B), which is adopted by Valesius.

37 Gen. vi. 2.


God, speaking by Isaiah, said, ' / have nour-
ished and brought up children, and they have
rebelled against Me 3^.'

" I have many things to say, beloved, but
because I fear that I shall cause weariness by
further admonishing teachers who are of one
mind with myself, I pass them by. You, having
been taught of God, are not ignorant that the
teaching at variance with the religion of the
Church which has just arisen, is the same as
that propagated by Ebion39 and Artemas*^,
and rivals that of Paul of Samosata, bishop
of Antioch, who was excommunicated by a
council of all the bishops. Lucianus^^ his sue
cessor, withdrew himself from communion
with these bishops during a period of many
years.

" And now amongst us there have sprung up,
' out of the non-existent ' men who have greedily
sucked down the dregs of this impiety, offsets
of the same stock : I mean Arius and Achillas,
and all their gang of rogues. Three bishops 4^
of Syria, appointed no one knows how, by
consenting to them, fire them to more fatal
heat. I refer their sentence to your decision.
Retaining in their memory all that they can
collect concerning the suffering, humiliation,
emptying of Himself ^3, and so-called poverty,
and everything of which the Saviour for our
sake accepted the acquired name, they bring
forward those passages to disprove His eternal
existence and divinity, while they forget all
those which declare His glory and nobility and
abiding with the Father ; as for instance, ' 1
a7id My Father are one^*.' In these words the
Lord does not proclaim Himself to be the
Father, neither does He represent two natures
as one ; but that the essence of the Son of the
Father preserves accurately the likeness of the
Father, His nature taking oif the impress of
likeness to Him in all things, being the exact
image of the Father and the express stamp of
the prototype. When, therefore, Philip, de-
sirous of seeing the Father, said to Him, ^ Lord,
shoia us the Father,' the Lord with abundant
plainness said to him, ' He that hath seen Me
hath seen the Father '•^^ as though the Father

38 Is.i. i. 2.

39 The imaginary name for the founder of Ebionism, firststarted

by Tertullian. "JI'^SS = poor.

40 Artemas, or Aitcmon, a philosophizing denier of Christ's
divinity, excommunicated by Pope Zephyrinus (.\.D. 202 — 21).

41 Lucianus, the presbyter of Antiocli, who became the head
of the tlieological school of that city in which the leaders of the
Arian heresy were trained, after the deposition of Paulus refused
to hold conununion with his three successors in the patriarchate,
Domnus, Tima;us, and Cyril. During the episcopate of the last
named he once more entered into communion with the church
of Antioch. On the importance of Lucianus as founder of the
Arians, Vide Newman's Arians of the Fourth Century, Chap. 1
Sec. i. and cf. the letter of Arius post. Chap. iv.

42 Eusebi\is of Ca;sarea, Theodotus of Laodicea, and Paulinus o(
Tyre. See Arius' letter to Eusebius of Nicomedia, ch. iv.

43 KcVu)(7i9, cf. Phil. ii. 7.

44 John X. 30. 45 John xiv. 9.


1. 3.]


OF THEODORET.


39


were beheld in the spotless and living mirror
of His, image. The same idea is conveyed in
the Psalms, where the saints say, '■In Thy light
we shall see light ^'^! It is on this account that
' he who honoiireth the Son, honoureth the
Father '^7.'' And rightly, for every impious word
which men dare to utter against the Son is
spoken also against the Father.

" After this no one can wonder at the false
calumnies which I am about to detail, my be-
loved brethren, propagated by them against
me, and against our most religious people.
They not only set their battle in array against
the divinity of Christ, but ungratefully insult
us. Ihey think it beneath them to be
compared with any of those of old time, nor
do they endure to be put on a par with the
teachers we have been conversant with from
childhood. They will not admit that any
of our fellow-ministers anywhere possess even
mediocrity of intelligence. They say that they
themselves alone are the wise and the poor,
and discoverers of doctrines, and to them alone
have been revealed those truths which, say
they, have never entered the mind of any other
individuals under the sun. O what wicked ar-
rogance ! O what excessive folly ! What false
boasting, joined with madness and Satanic
pride, has hardened their impious hearts !
They are not ashamed to oppose the godly
clearness of the ancient scriptures, nor yet
does the unanimous piety of all our fellow-
ministers concerning Christ blunt their au-
dacity. Even devils will not suffer impiety
like this ; for even they refrain from speaking
blasphemy against the Son of God.

" These then are the questions I have to raise,
according to the ability I possess, with those
who from their rude resources throw dust on
the Christ, and try to slander our reverence
for Him. These inventors of silly tales assert
that we, who reject their impious and unscrip-
tural blasphemy concerning the creation of
Christ from the non-existent, teach that there
are two unbegotten Beings. For these ill-
instructed men contend that one of these alter-
natives must hold ; either He must be believed
to have come out of the non-existent, or
there are two unbegotten Beings. In their
ignorance and want of practice in theology
they do not realize how vast must be the distance
between the Father who is uncreate, and the
creatures, whether rational or irrational, which
He created out of the non-existent ; and that
the only-begotten nature of Him Who is the
Word of God, by Whom the Father created the
universe out of the non-existent, standing, as
it were, in the middle between the two, was


46 Ps. xxxvi. 9.


♦7 John V. 23.


begotten of the self-existent Father, as the
Lord Himself testified when He said, ^ Every
one that lovefh the Father, loveth also the Son
that is begotten of Him 4^.' -m.

" We believe, as is taught by the apostolical
Church, in an only unbegotten Father, Who of
His being hath no cause, immutable and
invariable, and Who subsists always in one
state of being, admitting neither of progres-
sion nor of diminution ; Who gave the law,
and the prophets, and the gospel ; of patriarchs
and apostles, and of all saints. Lord : and in
one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son
of God, begotten not out of that which is not,
but of the Father, Who is ; yet not after the
manner of material bodies, by severance or
emanation, as Sabellius 49 and Valentinus 5°
taught; but in an inexpressible and inexplic-
able manner, according to the saying which
we quoted above, ' Who shall declare His
generation s^ .? ' since no mortal intellect can
comprehend the nature of His Person, as
the Father Himself cannot be comprehended,
because the nature of reasonable beings is
unable to grasp the manner in which He was
begotten of the Father s^.

" But those who are led by the Spirit of truth
have no need to learn these things of me, for
the words long since spoken by the Saviour
yet sound in our ears, ' No one knoweth who the
Father is but the Son, and no one knoweth who
the Son is but the Father 53.' We have learnt that
the Son is immutable and unchangeable, all-suffi-
cient and perfect, like the Father, lacking only
His "unbegotten." He is the exact and pre-
ciselv similar image of His Father. For it is clear
that the image fully contains everything by which
the greater likeness exists, as the Lord taught us
when He said, ' My FatJier is greater than /54.'
And in accordance with this we believe that
the Son always existed of the Father ; for he is
the bright7iess of His glory, and the express image
of His Father's Person ^^.' But let no one be 1
led by the word ' ahvays ' to imagine that the \
Son is unbegotten, as is thought by some
who have their intellects blinded : for to say
that He was, that He has always been, and ,
that before all ages, is not to say that He is |
unbegotten.

" The mind of man could not possibly invent
a term expressive of what is meant by being
unbegotten. I believe that you are of this
opinion ; and, indeed, I feel confident in your
orthodox view that none of these terms in any
way signify the unbegotten. For all the terms

48 I John V. I.

49 Condemned A.D. 261 by Council held at Alexandria.

50 Taught in Rome in a.d. 140, and died in Cyprus in

A.D. 160.

S» Isa. liii. 8. S^ ^ naTpinr) Beoyovia. S3 Matt. xi. 27 :

observe the slight variation. 54 John xiv. 28. 55 Heb. i. 3.


40


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[1-3.


appear to signify merely the extension of time,
and are not adequate to express the divinity
and, as it were, the primgeval being of the only-
begotten Son. They were used by the holy
men who earnestly endeavoured to clear up the
mystery, and who asked pardon from tliose
who heard them, with a reasonable excuse for
their failure, by saying ' as far as our com-
prehension has reached.' But if those who
allege that what was ' known in parV has been
' done away s^' for them, expect from human lips
anything beyond human powers, it is plain that
the terms ' was,' and ' ever,' and ' before all ages,'
fall far short of this expectation. But whatever
they may mean, it is not the same as ' the unbe-
gotten.' Therefore His own individual dignity
must be reserved to the Father as theUnbegotten
One, no one being called the cause of His exist-
ence : to the Son likewise must be given the
honour which befits Him, there being to Him
a generation from the Father which has no begin-
ning ; we must render Him worship, as we have
already said, only piously and religiously ascrib-
ing to Him the ' was ' and the ' ever,' and the
' before all ages ; ' not however rejecting His di-
vinity, but ascribing to Him a perfect hkeness
in all things to His Father, while at the same
time we ascribe to the Father alone His own
proper glory of ' the unbegotten,' even as the
Saviour Himself says, ' My FatJicr is greater
than /S7.'

" And in addition to this pious belief re-
specting the Father and the Son, we confess,
as the Sacred Scriptures teach us, one Holy
Ghost, who moved the saints of the Old Tes-
tament, and the divine teachers of that which
is called the New. We believe in one only
Catholic Church, the apostolical, which cannot
be destroyed even though all the world were
to take counsel to fight against it, and which
gains the victory over all the impious attacks
of the heterodox ; for we are emboldened by
the words of its Master, ' Be of good cheer,
I have overcome the world ^^.' After this, we
receive the doctrine of the resurrection from
the dead, of which Jesus Christ our Lord be-
came the first-fruits ; Who bore a Body, in
truth, not in semblance, derived from Mary
the mother of God 59 ; in the fulness of time
sojourning among the race, for the remis-
sion of sins : who was crucified and died, yet
for all this suffered no diminution of His
Godhead. He rose from the dead, was taken
into heaven, and sat down at the right hand of
the Majesty on high.

" In this epistle I have only mentioned these
things in part, deeming it, as I have said,


S6 I Cor. xiii. lo.
ii'^ John xvi. 33.


57 John xiv. 28.
59 fK rrii ©eoTOKOu Mapi'as.


wearisome to dwell minutely on each article,
since they are well known to your pious
diligence. These things we teach, these
things we preach ; these are the dogmas of
the apostolic Church, for which we are ready
to die, caring little for those who would force
us to forswear them ; for we will never re-
linquish our hope in them, though they should
try to compel us by tortures.

'^ Arius and Achillas, together with their fel-
low foes, have been expelled from the Church,
because they have become aliens from our
pious doctrine : according to the blessed Paul,
who said, ^ If any of you preach any other gospel
than that which yon have received, let him be ac-
cursed, even though he should pretend to be an
angel from heaven ^, and ' But if any man teach
otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even
the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the
doctrine which is according to godliness, he is proud,
knowing 7iothi?ig^'^^ and so forth. Since, then,
they have been condemned by the brotherhood,
let none of you receive them, nor attend to
what they say or write. They are deceivers,
and propagate lies, and they never adhere to
the truth. They go about to different cities
with no other intent than to deliver letters
under the pretext of friendship and in the name
of peace, and by hypocrisy and flattery to
obtain other letters in return, in order to
deceive a few ^ silly women who are laden
with sins^''.'' I beseech you, beloved brethren,
to avoid those who have thus dared to act
against Christ, who have publicly held up the
Christian reUgion to ridicule, and have eagerly
sought to make a display before judicial tri-
bunals, who have endeavoured to excite a per-
secution against us at a period of the most
entire peace, and who have enervated the un-
speakable mystery of the generation of Christ.
Unite unanimously in opposition to them, as
some of our fellow-ministers have already done,
who, being filled with indignation, wrote to me
against them, and signed our formulary ^3.

" I have sent you these letters by my son
Apion, the deacon ; being those of (the min-
isters in) all Egypt and the Thebaid, also of
those of Libya, and the Pentapohs, of Syria,
Lycia, Pamphylia, Asia, Cappadocia, and in
the other adjoining countries. Whose ex-
ample you likewise, I trust, will follow. Many
kindly attempts have been made by me to
gain back those who have been led astray,
but no remedy has proved more efficacious
in restoring the laity who have been deceived
by them and leading them to repentance, than


60 Gal. i. 9. 6' I Tim. vi. 3, 4. 6a 2 Tim. iii. 6.

63 T6^o9. (i) a cut or slice ; (ii) a portion of a roll, volume,

or " tome."


I. 4.]


OF THEODORET.


41


the manifestation of the union of our fellow-
ministers. Salute one another, with the bro-
therhood that is with you. 1 pray that you
may be strong in the Lord, my beloved, and
that I may receive the fruit of your love to
Christ.

" The following are the name of those who
have been anathematized as heretics : among
the presbyters, Arius ; among the deacons,
Achillas, Euzoius, Aithales, Lucius, Sarmates,
Julius, Menas, another Arius, and Helladius."

Alexander wrote in the same strain to Philo-
gonius^4, bishop of Antioch, to Eustathius ^s^
who then ruled the church of the Beroeans, and
to all those who defended the doctrines of the
Apostles. But Arius could not endure to keep
quiet, but wrote to all those whom he believed
to agree with him in opinion. His letter to
Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, is a clear
proof that the divine Alexander wrote nothing
that was false concerning him, I shall here
insert his letter, in order that the names of those
who were implicated in his impiety may be-
come generally known.

CHAPTER IV.

The Letter of Anus to Eusebius, Bishop
of Nicomedia.

" To his very dear lord, the man of God, the
faithful and orthodox Eusebius, Arius, un-
justly persecuted by Alexander the Pope ', on
account of that all-conquering truth of which
you also are a champion, sendeth greeting
in the Lord.

" Ammonius, my father, being about to de-
part for Nicomedia, I considered myself bound
to salute you by him, and withal to inform
that natural affection which you bear towards
the brethren for the sake of God and His
Christ, that the bishop greatly wastes and
persecutes us, and leaves no stone unturned ^
against us. He has driven us out of the
city as atheists, because we do not concur in
what he publicly preaches, namely, God always,
the Son always ; as the Father so the Son ; the
• Son co-exists unbegotten with God ; He is
everlasting ; neither by thought nor by any
interval does God precede the Son ; always
God, always Son ; he is begotten of the unbe-
gotten ; the Son is of God Himself. Eusebius,


*4 Vide supra.

65 Bp. first of Beroea in Syria and then of Antioch, c. 324—331.
Beroea, the Helbon of Ezekiel (xxvii. 18) is now Aleppo or Haleb.

' On the name " Pope," vide Diet. Christ. Ant., s.v. 1st, it was
applied to the teachers of converts, andly, to liishops and Abbots,
and was, srdly, confined to the Patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch,
Jerusalem, Constantinople, and to the Bp. of Rome ; 4thly, it was
claimed by the Bp. of Rome exclusively.

2 ■no.vTO. Kakiav KLvel. Cf. Luc. Scyth. ii. The commoii proverb
was wdvTa i^Uvai kolKuv, to let out every reef. Ar.^^^^ Eur,
Med. 278, &c.


ommon pro'

w


your brother bishop of Ca;sarea, Theodotus,
Paulinus, Athanasius, Gregorius, Aetius, and all
the bishops of the East, have been condemned
because they say that God had an existence
prior to that of His Son ; except Philogonius,
Hellanicus, and Macarius, who are unlearned
men, and who have embraced heretical opi-
nions. Some of them say that the Son is an
eructation, others that He is a production,
others that He is also unbegotten. These
are impieties to which we cannot listen,
even though the heretics threaten us with
a thousand deaths. But we say and believe,
and have taught, and do teach, that the Son
is not unbegotten, nor in any way part of the
unbegotten; and that He does not derive His
subsistence from any matter; but that by His
own will and counsel He has subsisted before
time, and before ages, as perfect God, only
begotten and unchangeable, and that before He
was begotten, or created, or purposed, or esta-
blished. He was not. For He was not unbe-
gotten. We are persecuted, because we say that
the Son has a beginning, but that God is without
beginning. This is the cause of our persecu-
tion, and likewise, because we say that He is of
the non-existent 3. And this we say, because
He is neither part of God, nor of any es-
sential being! For this are we persecuted;
the rest you know. I bid thee farewell in
the Lord, remembering our afflictions, my
fellow-Lucianist 5, and true Eusebius^."

Of those whose names are mentioned in this
letter, Eusebius was bishop of Csesarea ?, Theo-


3 ef ovK ovT(av eOTiv.

4 €^ vTTOKei^ifVou Ttvos. Arlstotle, Metaph. vi. 3, i, defines
TO UTTOKei'/iecoj/ as that Ka6' ov to. aWa Aeyerat. . . . fiaAiCTTa 6e
fioKet eti'at ovaia. to vTvoKeiix^uov TrpcoTor.

5 Arius and Eusebius had been fellow disciples of Lucianus the
Priest of Antioch martyred under Maximinus in a.d. 311 or 312.
Vide note on page 38.

6 Arius plays on the name Eusebius, 6V(re/3^s, pious.

7 From the phrase, " o a.5eXi|>6s o-ou 6 ec Kattrapeia," it has been
inferred by some that the two Eusebii were actually brothers.
Eusebius of Nicomedia, in the letter of Chapter V., calls the
Palestinian Sco-ttott)? ; but this alone would not be fatal to the
brotherhood, for Seneca (EJ> Mor. 104), calls his brother Gallio
doiniuus. The phrase of Arius is not worth much agauist the
silence of every one else. Vid. Diet. Christ. Biog. Article, Eu-
sebius.

Tneodotus, bishop of Laodicea, in Syria, (not the Phrygian
Laodicea of the Apocalypse), was a Physician of the body as well
as of the soul {Euseb. H.E. vii. 32).

Paulinus, bishop first of Tyre, and then ot Antioch for six
months, died in a.d. 329. {PJtiiost. H.E. iii. 15, cf. Bishop Light-
loot in Diet. Christian Biog. Article, Eusebius of Caesarea).

Athanasius, bishop of Anazarbus, an important town of Cilicia
Campestris, is accused of dangerous Arianism by his great name-
sake. {Atkan. de Syttod, 584).

Gregorius succeeded Eusebius of Nicomedia at Berytus (Bey
rout), on the translation of the latter to Nicomedia.

Aetius, Bishop of Lydda, (the Lydda of the Acts, on the plain
of Sharon, now Ludd, the city of El-Khudr, who is identified with
St. George), died soon after the Arian Synod of Antioch, a.d. 330
{Phiiosi. H.E. iii. 12), and is to be distinguished from the arch-
Arian Aetius, Julian's friend, who survived till A.D. 367 (Plnl.
H.E. ix. 6). , ,., „

Philogonius was raised to the episcopate per saltum, like bt.
Ambrose (Chrysost. Orat. 71, tom. v. p. 507), he preceded the
Arian Paulinus. ,

Hellanicus was present at Nicaa, but was driven from the bee ot
Tripolis, in Phoenicia, by the Arians (/4 <Aan. //iV^ /I r. rti^ VI/<>«. § 5)-


42


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[I-4-


dotus of Laodicea, Paulinus of Tyre, x\tha-
nasius of Anazarbus, Gregorius of Berytus, and
Aetius of Lydda. Lydda is now called Dios-
polis. Arius prided himself on having these
men of one mind with himself He names
as his adversaries, Philogonius, bishop of An-
tioch, Hellanicus, of Tripolis, and Macarius,
of Jerusalem. He spread calumnies against
them because they said that the Son is eternal,
existing before all ages, of equal honour and
of the same substance with the Father.

When Eusebius received the epistle, he too
vomited forth his own impiety, and wrote to
Paulinus, chief ^ of the Tyrians, in the follow-
ing words.


CHAPTER V.

The Letter of Eusehius, Bishop of Nico media,
to Paulinus, Bishop of Tyre.

"To my lord Paulinus, Eusebius sendeth
greeting in the Lord.

" The zeal of my lord Eusebius in the
cause of the truth, and likewise your silence
concerning it, have not failed to reach our ears.
Accordingly, if, on the one hand, we rejoiced
on account of the zeal of my lord Eusebius ;
on the other we are grieved at you, because
even the silence of such a man appears like
a defeat of our cause. Hence, as it behoves
not a wise man to be of a different opinion
from others, and to be silent concerning the
truth, stir up, I exhort you, within yourself
the spirit of wisdom to write, and at length
begin what may be profitable to yourself and
to others, specially if you consent to write
in accordance with Scripture, and tread in
the tracks of its words and will.

" We have never heard that there are two un-
begotten beings, nor that one has been divided
into two, nor have we learned or believed that
it has ever undergone any change of a corporeal
nature ; but we affirm that the unbegotten is one,
and one also that which exists in truth by Him,
yet was not made out of His substance, and
does not at all participate in the nature or
substance of the unbegotten, entirely distinct
in nature and in power, and made after perfect
likeness both of character and power to the
maker. We believe that the mode .of His
^beginning not only cannot be expressed by
'words but even in thought, and is incompre-
Ihensible not only to man, but also to all beings
j superior to man. These opinions we advance,
not as having derived them from our own ima-


Macarius is praised by Atlianasius {0?ai. I. adv. Arian. p. 291).
On a possible "passage of arms" between him and Eusebius of
Caesaicj at Nica;a, vide Stanley, Eastern Church, Lett, V. Cf.
tost, cap. xvii.


gination, but as having deduced them from
Scripture, whence we learn that the Son was
created, established, and begotten in the same
substance and in the same immutable and
inexpressible nature as the Maker; and so
the Lord says, ' God created me in the begin-
ning of His way ; 1 7uas set up from everlasting;
before the hills was I brotight forth '.'

" If He had been from Him or of Him, as a
portion of Him, or by an emanation of His sub-
stance, it could not be said that He was created
or established ; and of this you, my lord, are
certainly not ignorant. For that which is of
the unbegotten could not be said to have been
created or founded, either by Him or by
another, since it is unbegotten from the begin-
ning. But if the fact of His being called/
the begotten gives any ground for the belief
that, having come into being of the Father's "".
substance, He also has from the Father likeness .
of nature, we reply that it is not of Him alone ,
that the Scriptures have spoken as begotten,^'
but that they also thus speak of those who
are entirely dissimilar to Him by nature. For
of men it is said, ' / have begotten and brought
up sons, and they have rebelled against me^;'
and in another place, ' Thou hast forsaken God
who begat thee^;' and again it is said, ^Who
begat the drops of dew 4 .? ' This expression does
not imply that the dew partakes of the nature
of God, but simply that all things were formed
according to His will. There is, indeed, nothing
which is of His substance, yet every thing
which exists has been called into being by His
will. He is God; and all things were made
in His likeness, and in the future likeness of
His Word, being created of His free will.
All things were made by His means by God.
All things are of God.

"When )^ou have received my letter, and
have revised it according to the knowledge
and grace given you by God, I beg you will
write as soon as possible to my lord Alexander.
I feel confident that if you would write to him,
you would succeed in bringing him over to your
opinion. Salute all the brethren in the Lord.
May you, my lord, be preserved by the grace
of God, and be led to pray for us."

It is thus that they wrote to each other,
in order to furnish one another with weapons
against the truth s. And so when the blas-
phemous doctrine had been disseminated in the
cliurches of Egypt and of the East, disputes and
contentions arose in every city, and in every
village, concerning theological dogmas. The
common people looked on, and became judges

» Prov. viii. 22 — 26 Sept. * Isa. i 2.

3 Deut. xxxii. 18. 4 Job xxxviii. aS.

S Arius first published his heresy, a.d. 319.


I. 6.]


OF THEODORET.


43


of what was said on either side, and some
applauded one party, and some the other.
I These were, indeed, scenes fit for the tragic
/ stage, over which tears might have been shed.
t For it was not, as in bygone days, when the
church was attacked by strangers and by ene-
mies, but now natives of the same country,
who dwelt under one roof, and sat down at
one table, fought against each other not with
spears, but with their tongues. And what was
still more sad, they who thus took up arms
against one another were members of one
another, and belonged to one body.

CHAPTER VI.

General Council of Niccsa.

The emperor, who possessed the most pro-
found wisdom, having heard of these things,
endeavoured, as a first step, to stop up their
fountain-head. He therefore despatched a
messenger renowned for his ready wit to
Alexandria with letters, in the endeavour to
extinguish the dispute, and expecting to re-
concile the disputants. But his hopes having
been frustrated, he proceeded to summon the
celebrated council of Nicsea'; and pledged his
word that the bishops and their officials should
be furnished with asses, mules, and horses for
their journey at the public expense. When
all those who were capable of enduring the
fatigue of the journey had arrived at Nicsea,
he went thither himself, with both the wish of
seeing the multitude of bishops, and the
yearning desire of maintaining unanimity
amongst them. He at once arranged that all
their wants should be liberally supphed. Three
hundred and eighteen bishops were assembled.
The bishop of Rome'', on account of his very
advanced age, was absent, but he sent two
presbyters 3 to the council, with authority to
agree to what was done.

At this period many individualswere richly en-
dowed with apostolical gifts ; and many, like the
holy apostle, bore in their bodies the marks of
the Lord Jesus Christ*. James, bishop of An-
tioch, a city of Mygdonia, which is called Nisibis
by the Syrians and Assyrians, raised the dead
and restored them to life, and performed many
other wonders which it would be superfluous
to mention again in detail in this history, as
I have already given an account of them in my
work, entitled " Philotheus s." Paul, bishop of


Originally named Antigonea, after its founder; then Nicsea
after the Queen of Lysimachus ; now Isnik.

2 Sylvester. 3 Vitus and Vincentius.

4 Cf. Gal. vi. 17. The "stigmata" here meant are the marks
of persecution.

5 i.e. The $iA69eos laropCa, or "Religions History" a work
containmg the lives of celebrated ascetics, composed before the
Ecclesiastical History. For Dr. Newman's explanation ot its
apparent credulity, Nidit Hist. Sketches, iii. 314, and compare his


Neo-Caesarea, a fortress situated on the banks
of the Euphrates, had suffered from the frantic
rage of Licinius. He had been deprived of
the use of both hands by the application of a
red-hot iron, by which the nerves which give
motion to the muscles had been contracted
and rendered dead. Some had had the right
eye dug out, others had lost the right arm.
Among these was Paphnutius of Egypt. In
short, the Council looked like an assembled
army of martyrs. Yet this holy and celebrated
gathering was not entirely free from the ele-
ment of opposition ; for there were some,
though so few as easily to be reckoned, of fair
surface, like dangerous shallows, who really,
though not openly, supported the blasphemy
of Arius.

When they were all assembled ^, the emperor
ordered a great hall to be prepared for their ac-
commodation in the palace, in which a sufficient
number of benches and seats were placed ;
and having thus arranged that they should
be treated with becoming dignity, he desired
the bishops to enter in, and discuss the sub-
jects proposed. The emperor, with a few
attendants, was the last to enter the room ;
remarkable for his lofty stature, and worthy of
admiration for personal beauty, and for the still
more marvellous modesty which dwelt on his
countenance. A low stool was placed for him
in the middle of the assembly, upon which,
however, he did not seat himself until he had
asked the permission of the bishops. Then
all the sacred assembly sat down around him.
Then forthwith rose first the great Eustathius,
bishop of Antioch, who, upon the translation
of Philogonius, already referred to, to a better
life, had been compelled reluctantly to become
his successor by the unanimous suffrages of
the bishops, priests, and of the Christ-
loving laity. He crowned the emperor's head
with the flowers of panegyric, and commended
the diligent attention he had manifested in the
regulation of ecclesiastical affairs.

The excellent emperor next exhorted the
Bishops to unanimity and concord ; he recalled
to their remembrance the cruelty of the late
tyrants, and reminded them of the honourable
peace which God had, in his reign and by his
means, accorded them. He pointed out how
dreadful it was, aye, very dreadful, that at
the very time when their enemies were de-
stroyed, and when no one dared to oppose
them, they should fall upon one another,
and make their amused adversaries laugh,
especially as they were debating about holy


Apologia pro Vita sua, on his own acceptance of the marvellous,
Appendix, p. 57.

6 On the circumstances and scene of the opening of the Council
consult Stanley's Eastern Church, Lecture IV.


44


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[I. 6.


things, concerning which they had the written
teaching of the Holy Spirit. " For the gos-
pels " (continued he), " the apostolical writ-
ings, and the oracles of the ancient pro-
phets, clearly teach us what we ought to believe
concerning the divine nature. Let, then, all
contentious disputation be discarded ; and let
us seek in the divinely-inspired word the solu-
tion of the questions at issue." These and
similar exhortations he, like an affectionate son,
addressed to the bishops as to fathers, labour-
ing to bring about their unanimity in the apo-
stolical doctrines. Most members of the synod,
won over by his arguments, established con-
cord among themselves, and embraced sound
doctrine. There were, however, a few, of whom
mention has been already made, who opposed
these doctrines, and sided with Arius ; and
amongst them were Menophantus, bishop of
Ephesus, Patrophilus, bishop of Scythopolis,
Theognis, bishop of Nicasa, and Narcissus,
bisho]) of Neronias, which is a town of the
second Cilicia, and is now called Irenopolis;
also Theonas, bishop of Marmarica, and Se-
cundus, bishop of Ptolemais in Egypt ?. They
drew up a formulary of their faith, and pre-
sented it to the council. As soon as it was
read it was torn to pieces, and was declared to
be spurious and false. So great was the uproar
raised against them, and so many were the
reproaches cast on them for having betrayed
religion, that they all, with the exception of
Secundus and Theonas, stood up and took the
lead in publicly renouncing Arius. This im-
pious man, having thus been expelled from the
Church, a confession of faith which is received
to this day was drawn up by unanimous con-
sent ; and, as soon as it was signed, the council
was dissolved.


CHAPTER VII.

Confutation of Arianism deduced from the
Writings of Eiistathius and Athanasius.

The above-named bishops, however, did
not consent to it in sincerity, but only in


7^ Menophantus was one of the disciples of Lucianus {Philos.
H.E. ii. 14). He accepted the Nicene decision, but \v.-»s excom-
miinicaled by thi; Sardican Kathcrs. Cf. Uook ll. Cliap. 6.

Patrophilus, bishop of Scythopolis, the Bethshan of Scripture,
was an ardent and persistent Arian. Theodorct mentions liis share
in the deposition ot Eustathius (I. 20). Theoj;nis was sentenced lo
banishment on account of the Arian sympathies he displayed at
Nicica, but escaped by a feigned acceptance.

Narcissus of Irenopolis, a town of Cilicia Secunda, took an active
part in the Arian movement : Athanasius says that he was thrice
degraded by diflerent synods, and is the worst of the Euscbiuiis
{Aih. Ap. de/us;a, sec. 2S).

Marmarica is not a town, but a district. It lay west of Egypt,
about the modern Harca.

There were two cities in Egypt named Ptolemais, one in Upper
Egypt below Abydos ; one a port of the Red Sea.

After the time of Constautine, Cihcia was divided into three
districts ; Cilicia Prima, with Tarsus for chief town ; Secunda,
wiih Anazarbus ; Tertia, with Seleuceia.


appearance. This was afterwards shewn by
their plotting against those who were fore-
most in zeal for religion, as well as by what
these latter have written about them. For
instance, Eustathius, the famous bisliop of
Antioch, who has been already mentioned,
when explaining the text in the Proverbs,
* The Lord created me in the beginning of If is
7uay, before His ivorks of old ^,' wrote against
them, and refuted their blasphemy.

^ " I WILL now proceed to relate how these
different events occurred. A general council
was summoned at Nicaea, and about two
hundred and seventy bishops were convened.
There were, however, so many assembled that
I cannot state their exact number, neither,
indeed, have I taken any great trouble to
ascertain this point. When they began to in-
quire into the nature of the faith, the formulary
of Eusebius was brought forward, which con-
tained undisguised evidence of his blasphemy.
The reading of it before all occasioned great grief
to the audience, on account of its departure
from the iaith, while it inflicted irremediable
shame on the writer. After the Eusebian
gang had been clearly convicted, and the im-
pious writing had been torn up in the sight of
all, some amongst them by concert, under the
pretence of preserving peace, imposed silence
on all the ablest speakers. The Ariomaniacs,
fearing lest they should be ejected from the
Church by so numerous a council of bishops,
sprang forward to anathematize and condemn
the doctrines condemned, and unanimously
signed the confession of faith. Thus having
retained possession of their episcopal seats
through the most shameful deception, although
they ought rather to have been degraded, they
continue, sometimes secretly, and sometimes
openly, to patronize the condemned doctrines,
plotting against the truth by various argu-
ments. Wholly bent upon establishing these
plantations of tares, they shrink from the
scrutiny of the intelligent, avoid the observant,
and attack the preachers of godliness. But
we do not believe that these atheists can ever
thus overcome the Deity. For though they
^ gird t /ten I selves ' they ' shall be broken in pieces,'
according to the solemn prophecy of Isaiah 3."

These are the words of the great Eustathius.
Athanasius, his fellow combatant, the cham-
pion of the truth, who succeeded the celebrated
Alexander in the episcopate, added the follow-
ing, in a letter addressed to the Africans.

" The bishops convened in council being

_' Prov. viii. 22, Ixx. Kvpcos eKTto-e fte ap)(^v bSiov aiirov tit ipya

avToi.

= At this point, according to Valesius, a quotation from the
homily ot Eustathius on the above text fioni Proverbs viii. 22,
begins. On Eustathius, see notes on Chapters IIL and XX.

3 Is, viii. 9, Ixx. iav yap ttoAii' i<7-xv<ri)Te ndkiv T]TTT)&ij<rt(r8s ,


I.;.]


OF THEODORE!.


45


desirous of refuting the impious assertions
invented by the Arians, that the Son was
created out of that which was non-existent •*,
that He is a creature and created being s, that
there was a period in which He was not^,
/and that He is mutable by nature, and being all
agreed in propounding the following declara-
tions, which are in accordance with the holy
Scriptures ; namely, that the Son is by nature
only-begotten of God, Word, Power, and sole
Wisdom of the Father ; that He is, as John
said, 'the true God 7,' and, as Paul has writ-
ten, 'the brightness of the glory, and the
express image of the person of the Father ^,'
the followers of Eusebius, drawn aside by their
own vile doctrine, then began to say one to
another, Let iis agree, for we are also of God ;
' There is but one God, by %vhom are all
things'^;' 'Old things are passed away ; behold,
all things are become new, and all things are of
God''°.^ They also dwelt particularly upon
what is contained in 'The Shepherd":' 'Be-
lieve above all that there is one God, who
created and fashioned all things, and making
them to be out of that which is not.'

"But the bishops saw through their evil design
ind impious artifice, and gave a clearer elucida-
tion of the words ' of God,' and wrote, that the
Son is of the substance of God ; in order that
while the creatures, which do not in any way
derive their existence of or from themselves,
are said to be of God, the Son alone is said
to be of the substance of the Father ; this
being peculiar to the only-begotten Son, the
true Word of the Father. This is the reason
why the bishops wrote, that He is of the sub-
stance of the Father.

" But when the Arians, who seemed few
in number, were again interrogated by the
Bishops as to whether they admitted ' that
the Son is not a creature, but Power, and
sole Wisdom, and eternal unchangeable" Im-
age of the Father; and that He is very
God,' the Eusebians were noticed making
signs to one another to shew that these de-
clarations were equally applicable to us. For
it is said, that we are ' the image and glory
of God^'i;'' and '■for always we who live'^^:^
there are, also, they said, many powers ; for it
is written — ' Ali the power of God went out
of the land of Egypt ^^.^ The canker-worm


4 'Ef ovK ovTutv. 5 KTitTiia Kal Troirifia.

' HoTt ore ovk ^v. 7 i Joh.v. 20.

8 Heb. i. 3. Cf. p. 37, note xxvii.

9 T Cor. viii. 6. «o 2 Cor. v. 17, 18.
" Ilerm. Pastor. Vis. v. Mand. i.

'2 aTrapaAAaKTOs, cf. James i. 17, Hap' m oiiK evt napaWayij.

'3 I Cor. .xi. 7.

'+ 2 Cor. iv. II. del yap i^ftet! ot ^ufTes. The aei of St. Paul
qualifies not "ot ^Civre^" but the jrapa6i56/u.e0a which follows,
" For we who live are ever being delivered to death."

IS Exod. xii. 41, " The Hosts of the Lord," A.V. e^rjXffe iraa-a
q Svvaim Kvpi'ov, Sept.


and the locust are said to he ' a great poiver'^^.^
And elsewhere it is written, ' The God of
powers is with us, the God of Jacob is our
hclper'^T.'' To which may be added that we
are God's own not simply, but because the Son
called us ' brethren '8.' The declaration that
Christ is ' the true God ' does not distress
us, for, having come into being, He is true,

" Such was the corrupt opinion of the Arians ;
but on this the bishops, having detected their
deceitfulness in this matter, collected from
Scripture those passages which say of Christ
that He is the glory, the fountain, the stream,
and the express image of the person ; and
they quoted the following words : ' In thy
light we shall see light =^9; ' and likewise, ''I and
the Father are one'^°.' They then, with still
greater clearness, briefly declared that the
Son is of one substance with the Father;
for this, indeed, is the signification of the
passages which have been quoted. The com-
plaint of the Arians, that these precise words
are not to be found in Scripture, is proved
groundless by their own practice, for their own
impious assertions are not taken from Scrip-
ture ; for it is not written that the Son is of the ■
non-existent, and that there was a time when
He was not: and yet they complain of having
been condemned by expressions which, though
not actually in Scripture, are in accordance
with true religion. They themselves, on the
other hand, as though they had found their
words on a dunghill, uttered things verily
of earth. The bishops, on the contrary, did
not find their expressions for themselves ; but,
received their testimony from the fathers,
and wrote accordingly. Indeed, there were
bishops of old time, nearly one hundred and
thirty years ago, both of the great city of Rome
and of our own city^', who condemned those
who asserted that the Son is a creature, and that
He is not of one substance with the Father.
pAisebius, the bishop of Csesarea, was ac
quainted with these facts; he, at one time,
favoured the Arian heresy, but he afterwards
signed the confession of faith of the Council of
Nicaea. He wrote to the people of his diocese,
maintaining that the word ' consubstantial'" was
' used by illustrious bishops and learned writers
as a term for expressing the divinity of the
Father and of the Son ".' "

So these men concealed their unsoundness
through fear of the majority, and gave their

i6 Joel ii. 25, "My great army," A.V.

17 "The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our
refuge," Ps. xlvi. 7.

IB Heb. ii. 11. '9 Ps. xxxvi. 9. «> Joh. x. 30.

21 Alexandria. The allusion, according to Valesius, is to
Dionysius, Bishop of Rome, 259—269, and to Dionysius, Bishop
of Alexandria. The Letter of Athanasius to the Africans was
written, according to Baronius, in 369. So Tpiiav may suit the
chronology better than Tpio-Kovra.

22 Ath. Ep. ad Afros 5 and 6.


46


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[1.7.


assent to the decisions of the council, thus
drawing upon themselves the condemnation
of the prophet, for the God of all cries unto
them, " 'I'his people honour Me with their lips,
but in their hearts they are far from Me ^3."
Theonas and Secundus, however, did not hke
to take this course, and were excommunicated
by common consent as men who esteemed the
Arian blasphemy above evangelical doctrine.
The bishops then returned to the council, and
drew up twenty laws to regulate the discipline
of the Church.


CHAPTER VIII.

Facts relating to Meletius the Egyptian, from
whom originated the Meletian schism, which
remains to this day. — Synodical Epistle re-
specting hiin.

After Meletius' had been ordained bishop,
which was not long before the Arian contro-
versy, he was convicted of certain crimes by
the most holy Peter, bishop of Alexandria,
who also received the crown of martyrdom.
After being deposed by Peter he did not
acquiesce in his deposition, but filled the
Thebaid and the adjacent part of Egypt with
tumult and disturbance, and rebelled against
the primacy of Alexandria. A letter was written
by the council to the Church of Alexandria,
stating what had been decreed against his
revolutionary practices. It was as follows : —

Synodical Epistle.

"To the Cliurch of Alexandria which, by
the grace of God, is great and holy, and to
the beloved brethren in Egypt, Libya, and
Pentapolis, the bishops who have been con-
vened to the great and holy council of Nicsea,
send greeting in the Lord.

" The great and holy council of Nicaea having
been convened by the grace of God, and by
the most religious emperor, Constantine, who
summoned us from different provinces and
cities, we judge it requisite that a letter be
sent from the whole Holy Synod to inform
you also what questions have been mooted and
debated, and what has been decreed and
established.

*' In the first place, the impious doctrines
of Arius were investigated before our most
religious emperor Constantine ; and his im-
piety was unanimously anathematized, as
well as the blasphemous language and views


^3 Isai. xxix. 13.

' Meleiiiis (MeAe'rios), Bishop of Lycopolis, in Upper Egyp'>
was accused ot apostasy. During the Patriarch Peter's with-
drawal under persecution he intruded into the see of Alexandria.
He was deposed in 306,


which he had propounded, alleging that the
Son of God was out of what was not, that
before He was begotten He was not, that
there was a period in which He was not,
and that He can, according to His own free-
will, be capable either of virtue or of vice.
The holy council anathematized all these as-
sertions, and even refused so much as to
listen to such impious and foolish opinions,
and such blasphemous expressions. The final
decision concerning him you already know, or
will soon hear ; but we will not mention it now,
lest we should appear to trample upon a man
who has already received the recompense due
to his sins. Such influence has his impiety
obtained as to involve Theonas, bishop of
Marniarica, and Secundus, bishop of Ptolemais,
in his ruin, and they have shared his punish-
ment.

"But after Egypt had, by the grace of God,
been delivered from these false and blas-
phemous opinions, and from persons who dared
to raise discord and division among a hitherto
peaceable people, there yet remained the ques-
tion of the temerity of Meletius, and of those
ordained by him. We now inform you, be-
loved brethren, of the decrees of the council
on this subject. It was decided by the holy
council, that Meletius should be treated witli
clemency, though, strictly speaking, he was not
worthy of even the least concession. He was
permitted to remain in his own city, but was
divested of all power, whether of nomination
or of ordination, neither was he to shew him-
self in any province or city for these purposes :
but only to retain the bare name of his office.
Those who had received ordination at his hands
were to submit to a more religious re-ordina-
tion ; and were to be admitted to communion
on the terms of retaining their ministry, but
of ranking in every diocese and church below
those who had been ordained before them by
Alexander, our much-honoured fellow-minister
Thus they would have no power of choosing or
nominating others to the ministry, according to
their pleasure, or indeed of doing anything with-
outthe consent of the bishops ofthe Catholic and
Apostolic Church, who are under Alexander.
But they who, by the grace of God, and in
answer to your prayers, have been detected
in no schism, and have continued spotless
in the Catholic and Apostolic Church, are to
have the power of electing, and of nominating
men worthy of the clerical office, and are
permitted to do whatsoever is in accordance
with law and the authority of the Church. If
it should happen, that any of those now holding
an office in the Church should die, then let
those recently admitted be advanced to the
honours of the deceased, provided only that


k9.]


OF THEODORET.


4)r


they appear worthy, and that the people choose
them, and that the election be confirmed and
ratified by the catholic bishop of Alexandria.
The same privilege has been conceded to all
the others. With respect to Meletius, however,
an exception has been made, both on account
of his former insubordination, and of the rash-
ness and impetuosity of his disposition ; for it
the least authority were accorded to him, he
might abuse it by again exciting confusion.
These are the chief points which relate to
Egypt, and to the holy Church of Alexandria.
Whatever other canons were made, or dogmas
decreed, you will hear of them from Alexander,
our most-honoured fellow-minister and brother,
who will give you still more accurate informa-
tion, because he himself directed, as well as
participated in, every thing that took place.

"We also give you the good news that, accord-
ing to your prayers, the celebration of the most
holy paschal feast was unanimously rectified, so
that our brethren of the East, who did not pre-
viously keep the festival at the same time as those
of Rome, and as yourselves, and, indeed, all have
done from the beginning, will henceforth cele-
brate it with you. Rejoice, then, in the success
of our undertakings, and in the general peace
and concord, and in the extirpation of every
heresy, and receive with still greater honour
and more fervent love, Alexander, our fellow-
minister and your bishop, who imparted joy to
us by his presence, and who, at a very ad-
vanced age, has undergone so much fatigue for
the purpose of restoring peace among you.
Pray for us all, that what has been rightly
» decreed may remain steadfast, through our
Lord Jesus Christ, being done, as we trust,
according to the good pleasure of God and the
Father in the Holy Ghost, to whom be glory
for ever and ever. Amen."

Notwithstanding the endeavours of that
divine assembly of bishops to apply this
medicine to the Meletian disease, vestiges of
— his infatuation remain even to this day ; for
there are in some districts bodies of monks
who refuse to follow sound doctrine, and ob-
serve certain vain points of discipline, agreeing
with the infatuated views of the Jews and the
Samaritans.


CHAPTER IX.

The Epistle of the Emperor Constantine, con-
cerning the matters transacted at the Coimcii,
addressed to those Bishops who were not
present.

The great emperor also wrote an account
of the transactions of the council to those
bishops who were unable to attend. And


I consider it worth while to insert this epistle
in my work, as it clearly evidences the piety
of the writer.

" CoNSTANTiNus AUGUSTUS to the Churches.

" Viewing the common public prosperity en-
joyed at this moment, as the result of the great
power of divine grace, I am desirous above all
things that the blessed members of the Catholic
Church should be preserved in one faith, in
sincere love, and in one form of religion,
towards Almighty God. But, since no firmer
or more effective measure could be adopted to
secure this end, than that of submitting every-
thing relating to our most holy religion to the
examination of all, or most of all, the bishops,
I convened as many of them as possible, and
took my seat among them as one of yourselves ;
for I would not deny that truth which is the
source of my greatest joy, namely, that I am your
fellow-servant. Every point obtained its due
investigation, until the doctrine pleasing to the
all-seeing God, and conducive to unity, was
made clear, so that no room should remain for
division or controversy concerning the faith.

" The commemoration of the most sacred
paschal feast being then debated, it was unani-
mously decided, that it would be well that it
should be everywhere celebrated upon the same
day. What can be more fair, or more seemly,
than that that festival by which we have received
the hope of immortality should be carefully
celebrated by all, on plain grounds, with the
same order and exactitude? It was, in the first
place, declared improper to follow the custom
of the Jews in the celebration of this holy
festival, because, their hands having been
stained with crime, the minds of these
wretched men are necessarily blinded. By re-
jecting their custom, we establish and hand
down to succeeding ages one which is more
reasonable, and which has been observed ever
since the day of our Lord's sufterings. Let us,
then, have nothing in common with the Jews,
who are our adversaries. For we have received
from our Saviour another way. A better and
more lawful line of conduct is inculcated by our
holy religion. Let us with one accord walk
therein, my much-honoured brethren, studiously
avoiding all contact with that evil way. They
boast that without their instructions we should
be unable to commemorate the festival pro-
perly. This is the highest pitch of absurdity.
For how can they entertain right views on any
point who, after having compassed the death
j of the Lord, being out of their minds, are guided
I not by sound reason, but by an unrestrained
passion, wherever their innate madness carries
them. Hence it follows that they have so far
I lost sight of truth, wandering as far as possible


48


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[1.9.


from the correct revisal, that they celebrate a
second Passover in the same year. What
motive can we have for following those who
are thus confessedly unsound and in dire
error? For we could never tolerate celebra-
ting the Passover twice in one year. But,
even if all these facts did not exist, your own
sagacity would prompt you to watch with dili-
gence and with prayer, lest your pure minds
should appear to share in the customs of a
people so utterly depraved. It must also be
borne in mind, that upon so important a point
as the celebration of a feast of such sanctity,
discord is wrong. One day has our Saviour
set apart for a commemoration of our deliver-
ance, namely, of His most holy Passion. One
hath He wished His Catholic Church to be,
whereof the members, though dispersed through-
out the most various parts of the world, are
yet nourished by one spirit, that is, by the
divine will. Let your pious sagacity reflect
how evil and improper it is, that days de-
voted by some to fasting, should be spent
by others in convivial feasting ; and that after
the paschal feast, some are rejoicing in fes-
tivals and relaxations, while others give them-
selves up to the appointed fasts. That this
impropriety should be rectified, and that all
these diversities of commemoration should be
resolved into one form, is the will of divine
Providence, as I am convinced you will all
perceive. Therefore, this irregularity must be
corrected, in order that we may no more have
any thing in common with those parricides and
the murderers of our Lord. An orderly and
excellent form of commemoration is observed
in all the churches of the western, of the
southern, and of the northern parts of the
world, and by some of the eastern ; this form
being universally commended, I engaged that
you would be ready to adopt it likewise, and
thus gladly accept the rule unanimously adopted
in the city of Rome, throughout Italy, in all
Africa, in Egypt, the Spains, the Gauls, the
Britains, Libya, Greece, in the dioceses of
Asia, and of Pontus, and in Cilicia, taking into
your consideration not only that the churches
of the places above-mentioned are greater in
[)oint of number, but also that it is most
pious that all should unanimously agree in
that course which accurate reasoning seems
to demand, and which has no single point in
common with the perjury of the Jews.

" Briefly to summarize the whole of the pre-
ceding, the judgment of all is, that the holy Pas-
chal feast should be held on one and the same
day ; for, in so holy a matter, it is not becoming
that any difference of custom should exist, and
it is better to follow the opinion which has not
the least association with error and sin. This


being the case, receive with gladness the heavenly
gift and the plainly divine command ; for all that
is transacted in the holy councils of the bishops
is to be referred to the Divine will. Therefore,
when you have made known to all our beloved
brethren the subject of this epistle, regard
yourselves bound to accept what has gone
before, and to arrange for the regular observance
of this holy day, so that when, according to my
long-cherished desire, I shall see you face to
face, I may be able to celebrate with you this
holy festival upon one and the same day ; and
may rejoice with you all in witnessing the
cruelty of the devil destroyed by our efforts,
through Divine grace, while our faith and peace
and concord flourish throughout the world.
May God preserve you, beloved brethren."


CHAPTER X.

The daily 7vants of the Church supplied by the
Emperor, and an account of his other virtues.

Thus did the emperor write to the absent.
To those who attended the council, three hun-
dred and eighteeninnumber.he manifested great
kindness, addressing them with much gentleness,
and presenting them with gifts. He ordered nu-
merous couches to be prepared for their accom-
modation and entertained them all at one
banquet. Those who were most worthy he
received at his own table, distributing the
rest at the others. Observing that some
among them had had the right eye torn
out, and learning that this mutilation had
been undergone for the sake of religion, he
placed his lips upon the wounds, believing that
he would extract a blessing from the kiss.
After the conclusion of the feast, he again
presented other gifts to them. He then wrote
to the governors of the provinces, directing
that provision-money should be given in every
city to virgins and widows, and to those who
were consecrated to the divine service ; and he
measured the amount of their annual allowance
more by the impulse of his own generosity
than by their need. The third part of the
sum is distributed to this day. Julian im-
piously withheld the whole. His successor '
conferred the sum which is now dispensed,
the famine which then prevailed having les-
sened the resources of the state. If the pen-
sions were formerly triple in amount to what
they are at present, the generosity of the em-
peror can by this fact be easily seen.

I do not account it right to pass over the
following circumstance in silence. Some quar-
relsome individuals wrote accusations against


Jovian.


I. II.]


OF THEODORET.


49


certain bishops, and presented their indict-
ments to the emperor. This occurring before
the estabhshment of concord, he received the
lists, formed them into a packet which he sealed
with his ring, and ordered them to be kept
safely. After the reconciliation had been
effected, he brought out these writings, and
burnt them in their presence, at the same time
declaring upon oath that he had not read a
word of them. He said that the crimes of
priests ought not to be made known to the
multitude, lest they should become an occasion
of offence, and lead them to sin without fear.
It is reported also that he added that if he
were to detect a bishop in the very act of com-
mitting adultery, he would throw his imperial
robe over the unlawful deed, lest any should
witness the scene, and be thereby injured.
Thus did he admonish all the priests, as well
as confer honours upon them, and then ex-
horted them to return each to his own flock.

CHAPTER XI.

I shall here insert the letter respecting the
faith, written by Eusebius, bishop of Caesarea,
as it describes the effrontery of the Arians,
who not only despise our fathers, but reject
their own : it contains a convincing proof
of their madness. They certainly honour
Eusebius, because he adopted their sentiments,
but yet they openly contradict his writings.
He wrote this epistle to some of the Arians,
who were accusing him, it seems, of treachery.
The letter itself explains the writer's object

Epistle of Eusebius, Bishop of Ccesarea, which
he wrote from NiccBa when the great Council
was assembled.

" You will have probably learnt from other
sources what was decided respecting the faith
of the church at the general council of Nicaea,
for the fame of great transactions generally
outruns the accurate account of them : but lest
rumours not in strict accordance with the truth
should reach you, I think it necessary to send
to you, first, the formulary of faith originally
proposed by us, and, next, the second, pub-
lished with additions made to our terms. The
following is our formulary, which was read
in the presence of our most pious emperor,
and declared to be couched in right and proper
language.

77ie Faith put forth by us.

"*As in our first catechetical instruction,
and at the time of our baptism, we received
from the bishops who were before us and


as we have learnt from the Holy Scriptures,
and, alike as presbyters, and as bishops, were
wont to believe and teach ; so we now believe
and thus declare our faith. It is as fol-
lows ; —

" ' We believe in one God, Father Al-
mighty, the Maker of all things, visible and
invisible ; and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the
Word of God, God of God, Light of Light,
Life of Life, Only-begotten Son, First-born
of every creature, begotten of the Father be- •
fore all worlds ; by Whom all things were
made; Who for our salvation was incarnate,
and lived among men *. He suffered and
rose again the third day, and ascended to the
Father; and He will come again in glory to
judge the quick and the dead. We also be-
lieve in one Holy Ghost.

" ' We believe in the being and continual
existence of each of these ; that the Father is
in truth the Father ; the Son in truth the Son ;
the Holy Ghost in truth the Holy Ghost ; as
our Lord, when sending out His disciples to
preach the Gospel, said, ' Go forth and teach
all nations, baptizing them into the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost "^.^ We positively affirm that we hold this
faith, that we have always held it, and that we
adhere to it even unto death, condemning
all ungodly heresy. We testify, as before God
the Almighty and our Lord Jesus Christ, that
we have thought thus from the heart, and from
the soul, ever since we have known ourselves ;
and we have the means of showing, and, in-
deed, of convincing you, that we have always
during the past thus believed and preached.'

" When this formulary had been set forth by us,
there was no room to gainsay it ; but our beloved
emperor himself was the first to testify that it
was most orthodox, and that he coincided in
opinion with it ; and he exhorted the others to
sign it, and to receive all the doctrine it con-
tained, with the single addition of the one
word — * consubstantial.' He explained that this
term implied no bodily condition or change 3,
for that the Son did not derive His existence
from the Father either by means of division^
or of abscission, since an immaterial, intellectual, '
and incorporeal nature could not be subject;
to any bodily condition or changes. These
things must be understood as bearing a divine
and mysterious signification. Thus reasoned
our wisest and most religious emperor. The
addition of the word consubstantial has given
occasion for the composition of the following
formulary : —


I "n-oXtrevcra^evoi'," Cf. Phil, i, 27, and ill. ao, and Acts
xxiii. I.

* Matt, xxviii. 19. 3 iraflij, irados.


VOL. Ill,


^


'5b


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[I. II.


The Creed puhlished by the Council.
" * We believe in one God, Father Almighty,
Maker of all things visil)le and invisible. And
in one I>ord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, be-
gotten of the Father ; only-begotten, that is,
of the substance of the Father, God of God,
Light of Light, Very God of very God,
begotten not made, being of one substance
with the Father: by Whom all things were
made both in heaven and on earth : Who for
us men, and for our salvation, came down from
heaven, and was incarnate, and was made
man ; He suffered, and rose again the third
day ; He ascended into heaven, and is coming
to judge both quick and dead. And we
believe in the Holy Ghost. The holy Catholic
and Apostolic Church anathematizes all who
say that there was a time when the Son of God
was not; that before He was begotten He
was not ; that He was made out of the non-
existent ; or that He is of a difterent essence
and of a different substance * from the Father;
and that He is susceptible of variation or

change.'

" When they had set forth this formulary, we
did not leave without examination that passage
in which it is said that the Son is of the
substance of the Father, and consubstantial
with the Father. Questions and arguments
thence arose, and the meaning of the terms
was exactly tested. Accordingly they were
led to confess that the word consubstantial
signifies that the Son is of the Father, but
not as being a part of the Father. We
deemed it right to receive this opinion ;
for that is sound doctrine which teaches
that the Son is of the Father, but not
part of His substance. From the love of
peace, and lest we should fall from the true
belief, we also accept this view, neither do we
reject the term ' consubstantial.' For the same
reason we admitted the expression, 'begotten,
but not made ;' for they alleged that the
word 'made' applies generally to all things
which were created by the Son, to which the
Son is in no respect similar ; and lliat con-
sequently He is not a created tiling, like
the things made by Him, but is of a sub-
stance superior to all created objects. The
Holy Scri])tures teach Him to be begotten
of the Father, by a mode of generation which
is incomprehensible and inexplicable to all
created beings. So also the term 'of one


substance with the Father,' when investigated,
was accepted not in accordance with bodily
relations or similarity to mortal beings. For
it was also shown that it does not either imply
division of substance, nor abscission, nor
any modification or change or diminution in
the power of the Father, all of which are alien
from the nature of the unbegotten Father.
It was concluded that the expression ' bci//g
of one substance witJi the Father^ implies that
the Son of God does not resemble, in any
one respect, the creatures which He has made ;
but that to the Father alone, who begat Him, He ,
is in all points perfectly like : for He is of the
essence and of the substance 4 of none save of i
the Father. This interpretation having been
given of the doctrine, it appeared right to us
to assent to it, especially as we were aware
that of the ancients some learned and cele-
brated bishops and writers have used the term
'consubstantial' with respect to the divinit)'
of the Father and of the Son.

" These are the circumstances which I had
to communicate respecting the published formu
lary of the f;xith. To it we all agreed, not with
out investigation, but, after having subjected
the views submitted to us to thorough ex-
amination in the presence of our most beloved
emperor, for the above reasons we all ac-
quiesced in it. We also allowed that the
anathema appended by them to their formulary
of faith should be accepted, because it pro-
hibits the use of words which are not scrip-
tural ; through which almost all the disorder
and troubles of the Church have arisen. And
since no passage of the inspired Scripture
uses the terms ' out of the non-existent,' or
that ' there was a time when He was not,'
nor indeed any of the other phrases of the
same class, it did not appear reasonable to
assert or to teach such things. In this opinion,
therefore, we judged it right to agree, since,
indeed, we had never, at any former period,
been accustomed to use such terms s. More-
over, the condemnation of the assertion that
before He was begotten He was not, did not
appear to involve any incongruity, because all
assent to the fact that He was the Son of God
before He was begotten according to the flesh.
And here our emperor, most beloved by God,


4 vn'oo'Tao'Cut and ovaia.%.


S The genuineness of the following sentence is doubted. It is
not found in Socrates ot in Epiphanius. But it is not unreasonably
held by Viilesius that Socrates, who seems to have undertaken to
clear the character of Eusebius of all heretical taint, purposely
suppressed tlie passage as inconsistent witli orthodoxy. Soc. i. 8.
Dr. Newman writes of this passage, "It is remarkable as shewing
his (Conslanline's) utter ignorajice of doctrines which were never
iultndtd for discussion among the unbapti7cd heatlien, or the
seculaiized Chtiitian, that, in spiie of bold avowal of the orthodox
, faith ill detail" (i.e. in his letiei to Anus), "yet shortly after he
e.xplained to Eusebius one ot tlie Nicene declarations in a sense
which even Arius would scaicely have allowed, expressed as it is
almost after the manner of Paukis. " Ariaiis," 3rd ed., p. 256.


I. 13.]


OF THEODORET,


51


began to reason concerning His divine origin,
and His existence before all ages. He was
virtually in the Father without generation ^,
even before He was actually begotten, the
Father having always been the Father, just as
He has always been a King and a Saviour,
and, virtually, all things, and has never known
any change of being or action,

" We have thought it requisite, beloved
brethren, to transmit you an account of these
circumstances, in order to show you what ex-
amination and investigation we bestowed on
all the questions which we had to decide; and
also to prove how at one time we resisted firmly,
even to the last hour, when doctrines im-
properly expressed offended us, and, at another
time, we, without contention, accepted the
articles which contained nothing objectionable,
when after a thorough and candid investi-
gation of their signification, they appeared
perfectly comformable with what had been
confessed by us in the formulary of faith which
we had published."

CHAPTER XII.

ConfutaUoJi of the blasphemies of the Avians of
our time^frojn the writings of Eiisebius, Bishop
of Casarea.

EusEBius clearly testifies that the aforesaid
term " consubstantial " is not a new one, nor
the invention of the fathers assembled at the
council ; but that, from the very first * it has
been handed down from father to son. He
states that all those then assembled unanimously
received the creed then published ; and he
again bears testimony to the same fact in
another work, in which he highly extols the
conduct of the great Constantine. He writes
as follows 2 : —

** The emperor having delivered this discourse
in Latin, it was translated into Greek by an
interpreter, and then he gave liberty of speech
to the leaders of the council. Some at once
began to bring forward complaints against
their neighbours, while others had recourse to
recriminations and reproaches. Each party
had much to urge, and at the beginning the
debate waxed very violent. The emperor
patiently and attentively listened to all that was
advanced, and gave full attention to what was
urged by each party in turn. He calmly en-
deavoured to reconcile the conflicting parties ;
addressing them mildly in Greek, of which
language he was not ignorant, in a sweet and
gentle manner. Some he convinced by argu-

6 Here it has been proposed to read for ayen/i^ra)?, without
generation, which does not admit of an orthodox uiterpretation,
o€CY6i'i'»JTios, i.e. by eternal generation.

I aviadev. Cf. St. Luke i. 3. Plat. Pliil. 44 D. &c.

« Euseb. Vit, Constant, lib. iii. c. 13.


ment, others he put to the blush ; he com-
mended those who had spoken well, and ex-
cited all to unanimity; until, at length, he
reduced them all to oneness of mind and
opinion on all the disputed points, so that they
all agreed to hold the same faith, and to cele-
brate the festival of Salvation upon the same
day. What had been decided was committed
to writing, and was signed by all the bishops."

Soon after the author thus continues the
narrative : —

" When matters had been thus arranged, the
emperor gave them permission to return to
their own dioceses. They returned with great
joy, and have ever since continued to be of
the one opinion, agreed upon in the presence
of the emperor, and, though once widely
separated, now united together, as it were, in
one body. Constantine, rejoicing in the success
of his efforts, made known these happy results
by letter to those who were at a distance. He
ordered large sums of money to be liberally
distributed both a.mong the inhabitants of the
country and of the cities, in order that the
twentieth anniversary of lais reign might be
celebrated with public festivities."

Although the Arians impiously gainsay the
statements of the other fathers, yet they ought
to believe what has been written by this father,
whom they have been accustomed to admire.
They ought, therefore, to receive his testimony
to the unanimity with which the confession of
faith was signed by all. But, since they im-
pugn the opinions of their own leaders, they
ought to become acquainted with the most
foul and terrible manner of the death of Arius
and with all their powers to flee from the
impious doctrine of which he was the parent.
As it is likely that the mode of his death is not
known by all, I shall here relate it.

CHAPTER XIII.

Extract from the Letter of Athanasius on the
Death of Arius ^

After Arius had remained a long time in
Alexandria, he endeavoured riotously to ob-
trude himself again into the assemblies of the
Church, professing to renounce his impiety,
and promising to receive the confession of faith
drawn up by the fathers. But not succeeding
in obtaining the confidence of the divine
Alexander, nor of Athanasius, who followed ^
Alexander alike in the patriarchate and m


1 The letter was written to Serapion, P>ishop of Thmuis, no'
Tmi el Eiiidid, in Egypt. St. Anthony left one of his sheepskit
to Serapion, tlie otiier to Athanasius. Cf. Jer. de Vir. iUust. 99.

2 Aihanasius, chosen alike by the designation of the dying Alc;(
ander, by popular acclamation, and by the election of the Bishop
of the Province, was, in spite of his reluctance and reiiremer.t
consecrated, a.d. 326.


$: 2


<2


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[I- 13-


piety, he, helped and encouraged by Eusebius,
bishop of Nicomedia, betook himself to Con-
stantinople. The intrigues upon which he then
entered, and their punishment by the righteous
Judge are all best narrated by the excellent
Athanasius, in his letter to Apion3, I shall
therefore now insert this passage in my work.
He writes : —

" I was not at Constantinople when he died :
but Macarius, the presbyter, was there, and from
him I learnt all the circumstances. The em-
peror Constantine was induced by Eusebius and
his party to send for Arius. Upon his arrival,
the emperor asked him whether he held the
faith of the Catholic church. Arius then swore
that his faith was orthodox, and presented
a written summary of his belief; concealing,
nowever, the reasons of his ejection from the
Church by the bishop Alexander, and making
a dishonest use of the language of Holy
Scripture. When, therefore, he had declared
upon oath that he did not hold the errors for
which he had been expelled from the Church
by Alexander, Constantine dismissed him, say-
ing, ' If thy faith is orthodox, thou hast well
sworn ; but if thy faith is impious and yet
thou hast sworn, let God from heaven judge
thee.' When he quitted the emperor, the parti-
zans of Eusebius, with their usual violence,
desired to conduct him into the church ; but
Alexander, of blessed memory, bishop of Con-
stantinople, refused his permission, alleging
that the inventor of the heresy ought not to be
admitted into communion. Then at last the
partizans of Eusebius pronounced the threat:
'As, against your will, we succeeded in prevail
ing on the emperor to send for Arius, so now,
even if you forbid it, shall Arius join in com-
munion 4 with us in this church to-morrow.' It
was on Saturday that they said this. The bishop
Alexander, deeply grieved at what he had
heard, went into the church and poured forth
his lamentations, raising his hands in supplica-
tion to God, and throwing himself on his
face on the pavement in the sanctuary s, prayed.
Macarius went in with him, prayed with him,
and heard his prayers. He asked one of two
things. * If Arius,' said he, 'is to be joined to
the Church to morrow, let me Thy servant
depart, and do not destroy the pious with the
impious. If Thou wilt spare Thy Church, and


3 The name does not vary in the MSS. of Theodoretus, but
Schuize would alter it to Serapion on the authority of the MSS. of
Athanasius.

* o-i)i'axS>jtr«Tai. The word (TVfofts, originally equivalent to
(Twayuiyiq, and little used before the Christian era, means some-
times the gathering of the congregation, sometimes the Holy
Communion. Vide Suiccr s.v. Here the meaning is determined
by parallel authority. (Cf. Soc. I. 38.)

5 KpdTtiov. The sacraiium or chancel, called also to ayiof.
Cf. Book y. cap. 17, where Ambrgsius rebukes Theodosius for
■intering within the tails.


I know that Thou dost spare her, look upon the
words of the followers of Eusebius, and give not
over Thy heritage to destruction and to shame.
Remove Arius, lest if he come into the Church,
heresy seem to come in with him, and impiety be
hereafter deemed piety.' Having thus prayed,
the bishop left the church deeply anxious, and
then a horrible and extraordinary catastrophe
ensued. The followers of Eusebius had
launched out into threats, while the bishop
had recourse to prayer. Arius, emboldened
by the protection of his party, delivered many
trifling and foolish speeches, when he was
suddenly compelled by a call of nature to
retire, and immediately, as it is written,
'falling headlong, he burst astmder in the tnidst^,'
and gave up the ghost, being deprived at
once both of communion and of life. This,
then, was the end of Arius 7. The followers of
Eusebius were covered with shame, and buried
him whose belief they shared. The blessed
Alexander completed the celebration, rejoicing
with the Cnurch in piety and orthodoxy, pray-
ing with all the brethren and greatly glorify-
ing God. This was not because he rejoiced at
the death of Arius — God forbid ; for ' // is
appointed unto all men once to die^ ;' but be-
cause the event plainly transcended any human
condemnation. For the Lord Himself passing
judgment upon the menaces of the followers
of Eusebius, and the prayer of Alexander,
condemned the Arian heresy, and shewed that
it was unworthy of being received into the
communion of the Church ; thus manifesting
to all that, even if it received the countenance
and support of the emperor, and of all men,
yet by truth itself it stood condemned."

These were the first fruits, reaped by Arius,
of those pernicious seeds which he had himself
sown, and formed the prelude to the punish-
ments that awaited him hereafter. His impiety
was condemned by his punishment.

I shall now turn my narrative to the piety
of the emperor. He addressed a letter to all
the subjects of the Roman empire, exhorting
them to renounce their former errors, and to
embrace the doctrines of our Saviour, and
trying to guide them to this truth. He stirred
up the bishops in every city to build churches,
and encouraged them not only by his letter,
but also by presenting them with large sums of
money, and defraying all the expenses of build-
ing. This his own letter sets forth, which was
after this manner : —


« Acts i. i8.

7 We are not necessarily impaled on Gibbon's dilemma of poison
or miracle. There are curious instances of sudden death undei
similar circumstances, e.g. that ol George Valla of Piacenza, at
Venice, circa 1500. Vide Bayle's Diet. s,v,

8 Heb. ix. 27.


1. 15.]


OF THEODORET.


53


CHAPTER XIV.

Letter written by the Etnperor Constantine re-
specting the building of Churches '.

" CoNSTANTiNus AUGUSTUS, the great and
the victorious, to Eiisebiiis.

" I am well aware, and am thoroughly con-
vinced, my beloved brother, that as the ser-
vants of our Saviour Christ have been suffering
up to the present time from nefarious machina-
tions and tyrannical persecutions, the fabrics of
all the churches must have either fallen into
utter ruin from neglect, or, through apprehen-
sion of the impending iniquity, have been
reduced below their proper dignity. But now
that freedom is restored, and that dragon =,
through the providence of God, and by our
instrumentality, thrust out from the govern-
ment of the Empire, I think that the divine
power has become known to all, and that
those who hitherto, from fear or from in-
credulity or from depravity, have lived in error,
will now, upon becoming accjuainted with
Him who truly is, be led into the true
and correct manner of life. Exert yourself,
therefore, diligently in the reparation of the
churches under your own jurisdiction, and ad-
monish the principal bishops, priests, and
deacons of other places to engage zealously in
the same work; in order that all the churches
which still exist may be repaired or enlarged,
and that new ones may be built wherever
they are required. You, and others through
your intervention, can apply to magistrates 3
and to provincial governments ■*, for all
that may be necessary for thij purpose;
for they have received written injunctions to
render zealous obedience to whatever your
holiness may command. May God preserve
you, beloved brother."


Thus the emperor wrote to the bishops
in each province respecting the building of
churches. From his letter to Eusebius of
Palestine, it is easily learnt what measures
he adopted to obtain copies of the Holy
Bible 5,


» This letter, according to Du Pin, was written a.d. 324 or 325.

2 Either Maxenlius or Licmius.

3 riy^iiovfvui, used in Luke ii. 2, of Quirinus, and iii. i, ol
Pontius Pilate, but Theodoretus employs it and its correlatives
of both civil and ecclesiastical authorities.

4 cTTopxiKi) Tofi5 ; eVapxia occurs Acts xxiii. 34, of Cilicia, and
in XXV. I, of Judaea, the province of the Procurator Fesius, but in
the time of Con-tantme the eVopxoi were civil pra;fects, without any
military command, governmg four great tn-apxiai, viz. (1) Tlnace,
Egypt, and the East, (ii) lUyricum, Macedonia, and Greece,
(iii; Italy and Africa, and (iv) Gaul, Spain, and Britain. (Zos.
ii. 33.) On the accurate use of titles in the N.T. vide Bp. Light-
foot in Appendix to Essays on Supeniatuial Religion.

5 Ta upa J3i/3.\ia, or, " the holy books : " The Books, par excel-
lence, weie about this time becoming The Book, whence Biblia
Sacra as a singular.


CHAPTER XV.

The Epistle of Constantine concerning the pre
paration oj copies of the Holy Scriptures.

" CoNSTANTiNus AUGUSTUS, the great and
the victorious, to Eusebius.

" In the city ' which bears our name, a great
number of persons have, through the providen-
tial care of God the Saviour, united themselves
to the holy Church. As all things there are in
a state of rapid improvement, we deemed it most
important that an additional number of churches
should be built. Adopt joyfully the mode of
procedure determined upon by us, which we
have thought expedient to make known to
your prudence, namely, that you should get
written, on fine parchment, fifty volumes^,
easily legible and handy for use ; these you
must have transcribed by skilled callig rap hers,
accurately acquainted with their art. I a^ean,
of course, copies of the Holy Scriptures, which,
as you know, it is most necessary that the con-
gregation of the Church should both have
and use. A letter has been sent from our
clemency to the catholicus 3 of the diocese, in
order that he may be careful that everything
necessary for the undertaking is supplied. The
duty devolving upon you is to take measures to
ensure the completion of these manuscripts
within a short space of time. When they are
finished, you are authorised by this letter to
order two public carriages for the purpose of
transmitting them to us ; and thus the fair
manuscripts will be easily submitted to our
inspection. Appoint one of the deacons of
your church to take charge of this part of the
business; when he comes to us, he shall re-
ceive proofs of our benevolence. May God
preserve you, beloved brother."

What has been already said is enough to
shew, nay to clearly prove, how great zeal the
emperor manifested on the matters of religion.
I \vill, however, add his noble acts with regard
to the Sepulchre of our Saviour. For having
learnt that the idolaters, in their frantic rage,
had heaped earth over the Lord's tomb, eager
thus to destroy all remembrance of His Salva-
tion, and had built over it a temple to the
goddess of unbridled lust, in mockery of the
Virgin's birth, the emperor ordered the foul
shrine to be demolished, and the soil polluted
with abominable sacrifices to be carried away

1 Constantinople was dedicated a.d. 330 ou the site of the
ancient Hyzanliuin. _ . .^ ^ i

2 cru)/xaT4a. The Codex Sinaiticus has been thought to be ouo

"^'sTe' the "Comes fisci," or officer managing the revenues of
the Province. Dioecesis is used in civil sense by Ciceio, Ep. Fara.
. 8 4 and Ammianus (17, 7. 6). mentions the compliment paid uy
Conslantius U. to his empress Eusebia, by naming a "Diocese
of the Empire after her.


54


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[I. 15.


and thrown out far from the city, and a new
temple of great size and beauty to be erected
on the site. All this is clearly set forth in the
letter which he wrote to the president ■* of the
church of Jerusalem, Macarius, whom we
have already mentioned as a member of the
c^reat Nicene Council, and united wiih his
brethren in withstanding the blasphemies of
Arius. The following is the letter.

CHAPTER XVI.

Letter from the Eviberor to Macarius, Bishop of
Jerusalem, concerning the building of the Holy
Church.

" CoNSTANTiNUS, the victorious and the
great, to Macarius.

*' The grace of our Saviour is so wonderful,
that no words are adequate to express the pre-
sent marvel. The fact that tlie monument of
His most holy sufferings should have remained
concealed beneath the earth, during so long
a course of years, until the time when, on
the death of the common enemy of all, it
was destined to shine forth on His liberated
servants, surpasses every other subject of
admiration. If all the wise men through-
out the world were collected into one place,
and were to endeavour to express themselves
worthily of it, they could not approach within
an infinite distance of it; for this miracle is
as much beyond all human power of belief,
as heavenly things by their nature are mightier
than human. Hence it is my first and only
object that, as by new miracles the faith in
the truth is daily confirmed, so the minds of
us all may be more earnestly devoted to the
holy law, wisely, zealously, and with one
accord. As my design is, I think, now
generally known, I desire that you, above all,
should be assured that my most intense anxiety
is to decorate with beautiful edifices that
consecrated spot, which by God's command
I have relieved from the burden of the foul
idol which encumbered it. For from the begin-
ning He declared it holy, and has rendered it
still more holy from the time that He brought
to light the proof and memorial of the suffer-
ings of our Lord.

I trust, then, to your sagacity to take every
necessary care, not only that the basilica itself
surpass all others ; but that all its arrangements
be such that this building may be incomparably
superior to the most beautiful structures in every
city throughout the world. We have entrusted
our friend Dracilianus', who discharges the


4 jrpdeSpo!. Cf. Thuc. iii. 23. The n-puTartis in office in tlie
Athenian tKK\i\<j\.a. were so called. In our .lUlhur a common syno-
nym for Ijisiiop. TTooeiipia =^ sedes = see.

» Vide note 4 on chap. xiv.


functions of the most illustrious prefect of
the province, with the superintendence of the
work of the erection and decoration of the
walls. He has received our orders to engage
workmen and artisans, and to provide all
that you may deem requisite for the building.
Let us know, by letter, when you have in-
spected the work, wliat columns or marbles
you consider would be most ornamental,
in order that wdiatever you may inform us
is necessary for the work may be conveyed
thitlier from all quarters of the world. For
that which is of all places the most wonderful,
ought to be decorated in accordance with its
dignity. I wish to learn from you whether
you think that the vaulted roof of the basilica
ought to be panelled 2, or to be adorned in some
other way ; for if it is to be panelled it may
also be gilt. Your holiness must signify to the
aforesaid officers, as soon as possible, what
workmen and artificers, and what sums of
money, are requisite ; and let me know
promptly not only about the marbles and
columns, but also about the panelled ceiling,
if you decide that this will be the most
beautiful mode of construction. May God
preserve you, beloved brother 3."


CHAPTER XVII.

Helena'^, Mother of the Emperor Coustantine. —
Her zeal in the Erection of the Holy Church.

The bearer of these letters was no less illus-
trious a personage than the mother of the
emperor, even she who was glorious in her
offspring, whose piety was celebrated by all ;
she who brought forth that great luminary and
nurtured him in piety. She did not shrink
from the fatigue of the journey on account of
her extreme old age, but undertook it a little
before her death, which occurred in her
eightieth year *.


2 KaKwvapia, fr. Lat. lacunar, (lacuna lacus Jlak) = fretted
ceiling. Cf. Hor. Od. II. xviii. 2.

3 On the tiaditional site of the Holy Sepulchre, and ihe build-
ings on it, vide Stanley's "Sinai and Palestine," pp. 457 and
seqq., and Canon Bright in Diet. Christ. Ant., article " Holy
Sepulchre."

• Flavia Julia Helena, the first wife of Constantius Chlorus,
born of obscure parents in Bithynia, tA.D. 328. " Stabulariam
banc primo fuisse adserunt, sic cogiiitam Constantio seniori."
(Ambr. de obitu Theod. § 42, p. 295 ) The story of her being the
(laughter ol a British Piince, and born at York or Colchester, is
part of the belief current since N\ illiam of Malmesbury concerning
Constaniine's British Ougin, which is probably due to two passages
of uncertaiii ijitcrpretation in the Panegyrici : (a) Max. et Const, iv.,
"liberavit illc (L onstantius) Britannias servitute, tu etiani nobiles,
lUic oriciido, fecisti." (b) Kum. Pan. Const, ix., "O lortunata et
nunc omnibus beatior terris Britannia, quae Constantir.um Csesarera
prima vidisti." But is this said of birth or accession ? Cf. Gibbon,
chap xiv.

2 Crispus and Fausta were put to death in 326. "If it was
not in order to seek expiation for her son's crimes, and consolation
for lurown sorrows, tliat Helen made her famous journey to the
Holy Land, it was immediately consequent upon them." Stanleyi
Eastern Church, p. an.


I. i8.]


OF THEODORET.


S5


When the empress beheld the place
where the Saviour suffered, she immediately
ordered the idolatrous temple, which had been
there erected 3, to be destroyed, and the very
earth on which it stood to be removed.
When the tomb, which had been so long
concealed, was discovered, three crosses were
seen buried near the Lord's sepulchre. All
held it as certain that one of these crosses
was that of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that the
other two were those of the thieves who were
crucified with Him. Yet they could not discern
to which of the three the Body of the Lord had
been brought nigh, and which had received the
outpouring of His precious Blood. But the wise
and holy Macarius, the president of the city,
resolved this question in the following manner.
He caused a lady of rank, who had been long
suffering from disease, to be touched by each
of the crosses, with earnest prayer, and thus
discerned the virtue residing in that of the
Saviour. For the instant this cross was
brought near the lady, it expelled the sore
disease, and made her whole.

The mother of the emperor, on learning the
accomplishment of her desire, gave orders that
a portion of the nails should be inserted in the
royal helmet, in order that the head of her
son might be preserved from the darts of his
enemies'*. The other portion of the nails she
ordered to be formed into the bridle of his
horse, not only to ensure the safety of the em-
peror, but also to fulfil an ancient prophecy; for
long before Zechariah, the prophet, had pre-
dicted that " There shall be upon the bridles of the
horses Holiness unto the Lord Almighty s."

She had part of the cross of our Saviour
conveyed to the palace^. The rest was enclosed
in a covering of silver, and committed to the
care of the bishop of the city, whom she ex-
horted to preserve it carefully, in order that it
might be transmitted uninjured to posterity?.
She then sent everywhere for workmen and
for materials, and caused the most spacious
and most magnificent churches to be erected.

3 i.e. of Venus, said to have been erected by Hadrian to pollute
a spot hallowed by Christians.

4 The tradition which identifies the n.nil in Constantine's helmet
with the iron band in the I'amous crown ol' Queen Theodolinda at
Monza dales from the sixteenth century.

5 Zech. xiv. 20. ecrraL to ctti iov \o.Kivqv tou Ittitou 'Aytoc Tw
Kvpca> ToJ Trai'TOKparopi. Ixx.

^ This portion Socrates says(i. 17) was enclosed by Constantine
in a statue placed on a column of porphyry in his iorum at Con-
stantinople.

7 Carried away from Jerusalem by Chosroes 11. in 614, it was
recovered, says the legend, by Heraclius in 628. The ieast of the
" Exaltation ot the Cross " on Sept. 14th, combines the Commemo-
ration of the Vision of Constantine, the exaltation ot the relic
at J erusaleni, and its triumphal entry after its exile under Chosroes.
In later years it was, as is well known, supposed to have a miracu-
lous power of self-multiplication, and such names as St. Cross
at Winchester, Santa Croce at Florence, and Vera Cruz in
Mexico illustrate its cultus. Paulinus of Nola, at the beginning
of the filth ceutury, sending a piece toSulpicius Severus, says that
though bits were frequently taken from it, it grew no smaller
(£p. xxxi.).


It is unnecessary to describe their beauty and
grandeur; for all the pious, if I may so speak,
hasten thither and behold the magnificence of
the buildings ^.

This celebrated and admirable empress per-
formed another action wordiy of being remem-
bered. She assembled all the women who had
vowed perpetual virginity, and placing them on
couches, she herself fulfilled the duties of a
handmaid, serving them with food and hand-
ing them cups and pouring out wine, and
bringing a basin and pitcher, and pouring out
water to wash their hands.

After performing these and other laudable
actions, the empress returned to her son, and
not long after, she joyfully entered upon the
other and a better life, after having given her
son much pious advice and her fervent parting
blessing. After her death, those honours were
rendered to her memory which her stedfast and
zealous service to God deserved 9.

CHAPTER XVIII.

The unlawful Translation of Eusebius, Bishop
of Kicomcdia.

The Arian party did not desist from their
evil machinations. They had only signed the
confession of faith for the purpose of disguising
themselves in sheeps'-skins, while they were
acting the part of wolves. The holy Alexander,
of Byzantium, for the city was not yet called
Constantinople, who by his prayer had pierced
Arius to the heart, had, at the period to which
we are referring, been translated to a belter
Ufe. Eusebius, the propagator of impiety, little
regarding the definition which, only a short
time previously, he with the other bishops had
agreetl upon, without delay quitted Nicomedia
and seized upon the see of Constantinople, in
direct violation of that canon ^ which prohibits
bishops and presbyters from being translated
from one city to another. But that those who
carry their infatuation so far as to deny the
divinity of the only-begotten Son of God,
should likewise violate the other laws, cannot
excite surprise. Nor was this the first occasion


8 May 3rd has been kept since the end of the eighth century in
honour of the " Invention of the Cross," and the Commemoration
of the ancient " Ellinmas" was retained in the reformed Anglican
Calendar.

9 Tillemont puts her death in 32S. Eusebius (V. Const, iii. 47),
says she was carried eni tv/i/ ^acnAtiioucrai/ v6\i.v, by which he
generally means Rome, but Socrates (i. 17) writes, tis tjji/ ^a^iAiv-
ovuau viav Pu/ixtji/, i.e. Con.'>tantinople. There is a chapel in her
honour in the church of the Ara Ca;li at Rome, but her traditional
burial-place is a mile and a liall beyond the Porta Maggi^re, on the
Via Labicaiia, and thence came ilie porphyry sarcophagus called
St. Helena's, whicli was placed by Pius VI. in the Hall of the Greek
Cross in the Vatican.

I i.e. Apost. Can. xiv., which forbids translation without an
" evKoyo^ airia, or prospect of more spiritual gain in saving souls ;
and guards the application of the rule by the proviso that neither
the b.shop himself, nor the n-apoiKta desiring him, but many bishops,
shall decide the point.'' Diet. Christ. Ant. i. 226.


56


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[L i8.


that he made this innovation ; for, having been
originally entrusted with the see of Bcrytus, he
leapt from thence to Nicomedia. Whence he
was expelled by the synod, on account of his
manifest impiety, as was likewise Theognis,
bishop of Nicaea. This is related a second
time in the letters of the emperor Constantine ;
and I shall here insert the close of the letter
which he wrote to the Nicomedians.

CHAPTER XIX.

Epistle of the Emperor Constaniine against
Eusebius a?id Theognis^ addressed to the
Nicomedians.

"Who has taught these doctrines to the
innocent multitude? It is manifestly Eusebius,
the co-operator in the cruelty of the tyrants.
For that he was the creature ' of the tyrant has
been clearly shown ; and, indeed, is proved by
the slaughter of the bishops, and by the fact
that these victims were true bishops. The
relentless persecution of the Christians pro-
claims this fact aloud.

" I shall not here say anything of the
insults directed against me, by which the
conspiracies of the opposite faction were
mainly carried out. But he went so far as to
send spies to watch me, and scarcely refrained
from raising troops in aid of the tyrant. Let
not any one imagine that I allege what I am
not prepared to prove. I am in possession of
clear evidence; for I have caused the bishops
and presbyters belonging to his following to be
seized. But I pass over all tliese facts. I only
mention them for the purpose of making these
persons ashamed of their conduct, and not from
any feeling of resentment.

" There is one thing I fear, one thing which
causes me anxiety, and that is to see you
charged as accomplices ; for you are influenced
by the doctrines of Eusebius, and have thus
been led away from the truth. But your cure
will be speedy, if, after obtaining a bishojj
who holds pure and faithful doctrines, you
will but look unto God. This depends upon
you alone; and you would, no doubt, have
thus acted long ago, had not the aforesaid
Eusebius come here, strongly supported by
those then in power, and overturned all disci-
pline.

** As it is necessary to say something more
about Eusebius,your patience will remember that
a council was held in the city of Nicsea, at which,
in obedience to my conscience, I was i)resent,
being actuated by no other motive than the
desire of producing unanimity among all, and


before all else of proving and dispelling the
mischief which originated from the infatuation
of Arius of Alexandria, and was straightway
strengthened by the absurd and pernicious
machinations of Eusebius. But, beloved and
much-honoured brethren, you know not how
earnestly and how disgracefully Eusebius,
although convicted by the testimony of his
own conscience, persevered in the support of
the false doctrines which had been universally
condemned. He secretly sent persons to
me to petition on his behalf, and person-
ally intreated my assistance in preventing his
being ejected from his bishopric, altliough his
crimes had been fully detected. God, who,
I trust, will continue His goodness towards you
and towards me, is witness to the truth of what
I say. I was then myself deluded and de-
ceived by Eusebius, as you shall well know. In
everything he acted according to his own desire,
his mind being full of every kind of secret evil.

" Omitting the relation of the rest of his mis-
deeds, it is well that you should be informed of
the crime which he lately perpetrated in concert
with Theognis, the accomplice of his folly.
I had sent orders for the apprehension of certain
individuals in Alexandria who had deserted our
faith,and by whose means the firebrand of dissen-
sion was kindled. But these good gentlemen,
forsooth, bishops, whom, by the clemency of the
council, I had reserved for penitence, not only
received them under their protection, but also
participated in their evil deeds. Hence I came
to the determination to punish these ungrateful
men, by apprehending and banishing them to
some far-distant region.

" It is now your duty to look unto God with
that same faith which it is clear that you
have ever held, and in which it is fitting
you should abide. So let us have cause of
rejoicing in the appointment of pure, ortho-
dox, and beneficent bishops. If any one should
make mention of those destroyers, or presume
to speak in their praise, let him know that his
audacity will be repressed by the authority
which has been committed to me as the servant
of God. May God preserve you, beloved
brethren ! "

The above-mentioned bishops were then de-
posed and banished. Amphion = was entrusted
with the church of Nicomedia, and Chrestus3
with that of Nicaea. But the exiled bishops,
employing their customary artifices, abused the
benevolence of the emperor, renewed the


» 77p6o-(fruf, originally a protected "runaway," then protege or
client.


= Athanasius, Disp prima Cont. Ar., mentions an Amphion,
oriliodox bishop of Kpiphania in Cilicia Secunda. That he is the
same as the Amphion of the text is asserted by Baronius and
doubted by Tillemont. Diet. Christ. Biog. s.v.

3 In 328, Chrestus and Amphion retired on the recantation
of Theognis and Eusebius, whose ^i/SAi'oi' tueravoiat, or act of
retractation, is given in Soc. i. xiv.


I. 21.]


OF THEODORET.


57


previous contests, and regained their former
power.

CHAPTER XX.

The artful Machinations of Eusebius and his
followers against the Holy Eustathius, Bishop

of Antioch.

Eusebius, as I have already stated, seized
the diocese of Constantinople by force. And
thus having acquired great power in that city,
frequently visiting and holding familiar inter-
course with the emperor, he gained confidence
and formed plots against those who were fore-
most in the support of the truth. He at first
feigned a desire of going to Jerusalem, to see
the celebrated edifices there erected : and the
emperor, who was deceived by his flattery, al-
lowed him to set out with the utmost honour,
providing him with carriages, and the rest of
his equipage and retinue. Theognis, bishop
of Nicsea, who, as we have before said, was
his accomplice in his evil designs, travelled
with him. When they arrived at Antioch,
they put on the mask of friendship, and were
received with the utmost deference. Eu-
stathius, the great champion of the faith,
treated them with fraternal kindness. When
they arrived at the holy places, they had an inter-
view with those who were of the same opinions
as themselves, namely, Eusebius, bishop of
Csesarea, Patrophilus, bishop of Scythopolis,
Aetius, bishop of Lydda, Theodotus, bishop
of Laodicea, and others who had imbibed the
Arian sentiments; they made known the plot
they had hatched to them, and went with them
to Antioch. The pretext for their journey was,
that due honour might be rendered to Eusebius ;
but their real motive was their war against re-
ligion. They bribed a low woman, who made
a traffic of her beauty, to sell them her tongue,
and then repaired to the council, and when all
the spectators had been ordered to retire, they
introduced the wretched woman. She held
a babe in her arms, of which she loudly and
impudently affirmed that Eustathius was the
father. Eustathius, conscious of his innocence,
asked her whether she could bring forward any
witness to prove what she had advanced. She
replied that she could not : yet these equitable
judges admitted her to oath, although it is said
in the law, that " at the mouth of two or three
witnesses shall the matter be established ' / "
and the apostle says, '■'^ against an elder receive
not any accusation but before two or three
wit?iesses^'' But they despised these divine
laws, and admitted the accusation against this
great man without any witnesses. When the


woman had again declared upon oath that
Eustathius was the father of the babe, these
truth loving judges condemned him as an
adulterer. When the other bishops, who up-
held the apostolical doctrines, being ignorant of
all these intrigues, openly opposed the sentence,
and advised Eustathius not to submit to it, the
originators of the plot promptly repaired to the
emperor, and endeavoured to persuade him that
the accusation was true, and the sentence of
deposition just ; and they succeeded in obtaining
the banishment of this champion of piety and
chastity, as an adulterer and a tyrant. He was
conducted across Thrace to a city of Illyricum3.

CHAPTER XXI.

Bishops of Heretical opinions ordained in Antioch
after the Banishment of St. Eustathius \

EuLALius was first consecrated in place of
Eustathius. But Eulalius surviving his eleva-
tion only a short period, it was intended
that Eusebius of Palestine should be trans-
lated to this bishopric. Eusebius, however,
refused the appointment, and the emperor for-
bade its being conferred on him. Next Euphro-
nius was put forward, who also dying, after a lapse
of only one year and a few months, the see was
conferred on FlacciUus ^ All these bishops se-
cretly clung to the Arian heresy. Hence it was
that most of those individuals, whether of the
clergy or of the laity, who valued the true
religion, left the churches and formed assemblies
among themselves. They were called Eusta-
thians, since it was after the banishment of
Eustathius that they began to hold their meet-
ings. The wretched woman above-mentioned
was soon after attacked by a severe and pro-
tracted illness, and then avowed the im-
posture in which she had been engaged, and
made known the whole plot, not only to two or
three, but to a very large number of priests.
She confessed that she had been bribed to bring
this false and impudent charge, but yet that her


I Deut. xix. 15.


' I Tim. V. xg.


3 Jerome says Trajanopolis, but Eustathius died at Philippi,
circa 337. Athanasius, who calls Eustathius "a contessor and
sound 111 the faith " (Hist. Ar. { 4), says the false charge which had
most weight with Constantine was that the bishop of Antioch had
sL-iiiderccl the Empress Helena. Sozomen (II. 19) records the
patience with which Eustathius suffered, and sums up his character
as tliatuf "a good and true man, specially remarkable for eloquence,
to which his extant writings testify, admirable as they are alike for
the dignity of their style ol ancient cast, the sound wisdom of their
sentiments, the beauty of their language, and grace of expression. "
The sole survivor of his works is an attack on Origen's inter-
pretation of Scripture.

1 Socrates, H E. i. 24, says that on the deposition of Eustathius
"6(/)e|t)S ini en) oktuj Ae'-j/erai. toi' ef 'Ai'Tioxe'? ^poi'Ov Trj^ exxAr)-
cri'as <TXo\a.<7aL 6i//6 Se , . . xetpOTOi'etTai. Eii(/)poi'ios. " Cf. Soz. H.E.
ii. 19. There is much confusion about this succession of bishops.
Jerome (Chron. ii. p. 92) gives the names of the Arian bishops
thrust in succession into the place ot Eustathius, as Eulalius,
Eusebius, Eufronius, PlaciUus. " Perhaps Eulalius was put
forward for the vacant see, like Eusebius, but never actually ap-
pointed." Bp. Lightioot, JJict. Christ. Biog. ii. 315.

2 This name is variously given as PlaciUus (Jerome), Placitus
(Soz.), Flacillus (Ath. and Eus.), and in different version.s of
Theodoret are found *XdKiT09, nAaKtVrios, and 4>aAictos.


!;8


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[I. 21.


oath was not altogether false, as a certain
FAistathius, a coppersmith, was the father of the
babe. Such were some of the crimes pcri)etrated
in Antioch by this most excellent faction.

CHAPTER XXn.
Conversion of the Itidians'*.
At this period, the light of the knowledge of
God was for the first time shed upon India.
The courage and the piety of the emperor had
become celebrated throughout the world ; and
the barbarians, having learnt by experience to
choose peace rather than war, were able to enjoy
intercourse with one another without fear. Many
persons, therefore, set out on long journeys ;
some for the desire of making discoveries,
others from a spirit of commercial enterprise.
About this period a native of Tyre ^, acquainted
with Greek philosophy, desiring to penetrate
into the interior of India, set off for this pur-
pose with his two young nephews. When he
had accomplished the object of his wishes, he
embarked for his own country. The ship being
compelled to put in to land in order to obtain
a fresh supply of water, the barbarians fell upon
her, drowned some of the crew, and took the
others prisoners. The uncle was among the
number of those who were killed, and the lads
were conducted to the king. The name of the
one was ^Edesius, and of the other Frumentius.
The king of the country, in course of time, per-
ceiving their intelligence, promoted them to the
superintendence of his household. If any one
should doubt the truth of this account, let him
recal to mind the history of Joseph in the king-
dom of Egypt, and also the history of Daniel,
and of the three champions of the truth, who,
from being captives, became princes of Babylon.
The king died ; but these young men re-
mained with his son, and were advanced to still
greater power. As they had been brought up
in the true religion, they exhorted the mer-
chants who visited the country to assemble,
according to the custom of Romans 3, to take
part in the divine liturgy. After a consuler-
able time they solicited the king to reward
their services by permitting them to return to
their own country. They obtained his per-
mission, and safely reached Roman territory,
.^desius directed his course towards Tyre,

' Ilepi T^s 'Ii/Jwi/ nicTeioi. The term " India" is used v.-»guely,
partly from the old belief that Asia and Africa joined somewhere
south of the Indian Ocean. Here the Indians are Abyssinians.

2 The version adopted by Rufinus, the earliest extant authority
for this story, is followed, in the main, by Socrates, Sozomen, and
Theodoret. The Tyrian traveller is named iMeropius.

3 The words of Sozonien (ii. 24) corresponding with the passage
in which Rufinus (i. 9) speaks of meeting " romano ritu or.itionis
caiissa," are J7 pu/xaiois e'flo? eKKAi)(Ticic,Vii', i.e. to assemble tu
worship after the manner of civilized citizens of the Empire, and
not like savages. The expression has nothing to do «iili the
customs of the Church of Rome, in the later sense of the word, .ts
has sometimes been represented. Cf. Soc. I. 19, ras Xiii<jriat'iKai


but Frumentius, whose religious zeal was
greater than the natural feeling of aftection
for his relatives, proceeded to Alexandria, and
informed the bishop of that city that the
Indians were deeply anxious to obtain spiritual
light. Athanasius then held the rudder of that
church ; he heard the story, and then "Who,"
said he, " better than you yourself can scatter
the mists of ignorance, and introduce among
this people the light of Divine preaching?"
After having said this, he conferred upon him
the episcopal dignity, and sent him to the
spiritual culture of that nation. The newly-
ordained bisliop left this country, caring nothing
for the mighty ocean, and returned to the un-
tilled ground of his work. There, having the
grace of God to labour with him, he cheer-
fully and successfully playetl the husbandman,
catching those who sought to gainsay his
words by works of apostolic wonder, and
thus, by these marvels, confirming his teaching,
he continued each day to take many souls
alive*.

CHAPTER XXIII.

Conversion of the Iberians'^.

Frumentius thus led the Indians to the
knowledge of God. Iberia, about the same
time, was guided into the way of truth by
a captive woman ^. She continued instant in
prayer, allowing herself no softer bed than
a sack spread upon the ground, and ac-
counted fasting her highest luxury. This
austerity was rewarded by gifts similar to those
of the Apostles. The barbarians, who were
ignorant of medicine, were accustomed, when
attacked by disease, to go to one another's
houses, in order to ask those who had suffered
in a similar way, and had got well, by what
means they had been cured. In accordance
with this custom, a mother who had a
sick child, repaired to this admirable woman,
to enquire if she knew of any cure for the
disease. The latter took the child, placed it


4 "The king, if we identify the narrative with the Ethiopian
version of the story, must have been the father of the Abreha
and Atzbeha of the Ethiopian annals " '■ Friunentius received
the title of Abbana, or Abba Salama " (cf. Absalom), " the Father
of Peace." "The bishopric of Auxume " (Axum, about 100 miles
S. W. of Massowah) "assumed a metropolitan character." (Diet,
of Christ. Biog., Ait. Ethiopian Church). Constantius afterwards
wrote to the Ethiopian Prince to ask him to replace Frumentius
by Theophilua, an Arian, but without success (Ath. Ap. ad
Const. 31).

• This story, like the preceding, is copied or varied by Sozo-
men, Socrates, and our author, Irom the version found also in
Rufinus. Iberia, the modern Cjeorgia, was conquered by Pompey,
;uid ceded by Jovian.

- The Evaiigelizer of Georgia is honoured on Dec. 15th (Guerin
Pel. Holland, xiv. 306) as " Sainte Chrctiennc," and it is doubtful
whetlier the name Nina, in which slie appears in the Armem)-
gregorian Calendar for June 11 (Nealc, Eastern Church, ii. 799),
may not be a title. "Nina" is inubably a name of rank, and
perhaps is connected with our nun (Neale, i. 61). Moses of Chorene
(ii. 83) gives the name "Nunia." Riihnus (i. 10) states that he
gives the stury as he heard it Irom King Dacurius at Jerusalem.
On the various legends of St. Nina and her work, vide
S. C. Malan, Hist, of Georgian Church pp.17 — 33.


I. 24.]


OF THEODORET.


159


upon her bed, and prayed to the Creator of
the world to be propitious to it, and cure the
disease. He heard her prayer, and made
it whole. This extraordinary woman hence
obtained great celebrity ; and the queen, who
was suffering from a severe disease, hearing
of her by report, sent for her. The captive
held herself in very low estimation, and
would not accept the invitation of the queen.
But the queen, forced by her sore need,
and careless of her royal dignity, herself ran
to the captive. The latter made the queen
lie down upon her mean bed, and once again
applied to her disease the efficacious remedy
of prayer. The queen was healed, and offered
as rewards for her cure, gold, silver, tunics,
and mantles, and such gifts as she thought
worthy of possession, and such as royal muni-
ficence should bestow. The holy woman told
her that she did not want any of these, but
that she would deem her greatest reward to
be the queen's knowledge of true religion.
She then, as far as in her lay, explained the
Divine doctrines, and exhorted her to erect a
church in honour of Christ who had made her
whole. The queen then returned to the palace,
and excited the admiration of her consort, by
the suddenness of her cure ; she then made
known to him the power of that God whom
the captive adored, and besought him to ac-
knowledge the one only God, and to erect
a church to Him, and to lead all the nation to
worship Him. The king was greatly delighted
with the miracle which had been performed
upon the queen, but he would not consent to
erect a church. A short time after he went
out hunting, and the loving Lord made a prey of
him as He did of Paul ; for a sudden darkness
enveloped him and forbade him to move from
the spot; while those who were hunting with
him enjoyed the customary sunlight, and he
alone was bound with the fetters of blindness.
In his perplexity he found a way of escape, for
calling to mind his former unbelief, he implored
the help of the God of the captive woman, and
immediately the darkness was dispelled. He
then went to the marvellous captive, and asked
her to shew him how a church ought to be
built. He who once filled Bezaleel with
architectural skill, graciously enabled this
woman to devise the plan of a church. The
woman set about the plan, and men began
to dig and build. When the edifice was
completed, the roof put on, and every thing
supplied except the priests, this admirable
woman found means to obtain these also.
For she persuaded the king to send an
embassy to the Roman emperor asking for
teachers of religion. The king accordingly
despatched an embassy for the purpose. The


emperor Constantine, who was warmly attached
to the cause of religion, when informed of the
purport of the embassy, gladly welcomed the
ambassadors, and selected a bishop endowed
with great faith, wisdom, and virtue, and pre-
senting him with many gifts, sent him to the
Iberians, that he might make known to them
the true God. Not content with having granted
the requests of the Iberians, he of his own
accord undertook the protection of the
Christians in Persia ; for, learning that they
were persecuted by the heathens, and that their
king himself, a slave to error, was contriving
various cunning plots for their destruction, he
wrote to him, entreating him to embrace the
Christian religion himself, as well as to honour
its professors. Plis own letter will render his
earnestness in the cause the plainer.

CHAPTER XXIV.

Letter written by the Emperor Constantine to
Sapor'', the King of Persia, respecting the
Christians.

" In protecting the holy faith I enjoy the
light of truth, and by following the light of
truth I attain to fuller knowlege of the faith.
Therefore, as facts prove, I recognize that most
holy worship as teaching the knowledge of
the most holy God. This service I profess.
With the Power of this God for my ally,
beginning at the furthest boundaries of the
ocean, I have, one after another, quickened
every part of the world with hope. Now
all the peoples once enslaved by many tyrants,
worn by their daily miseries, and almost ex-
tinct, have been kindled to fresh life by re-
ceiving the protection of the State.

"The God I reverence is He whose emblem
my dedicated troops bear on their shoulders,
marching whithersoever the cause of justice
leads them, and rewarding me by their splendid
victories, I confess that I reverence this God
with eternal remembrance. Him, who dwelleth
in the highest heavens, I contemplate with pure
and unpolluted mind. On Him I call on
bended knees, shunning all abominable blood,
all unseemly and iliomened odours, all fire
of incantation ^, and all pollution by which un-
lawful and shameful error has destroyed whole
nations and hurled them down to hell.

" God does not permit those gifts which, in
His beneficent Providence, He has bestowed


1 Sapor II. (Shapur) Postumus, the son of Hormisdas 11.,
was one of the greatest of the Sassanida. He reigned trom
A.D. sio 'o 381. and fought with success against Coustantius II.
and juhaii, " augendi regni cupiditate supra homines flagrans."

Amm. Marc, xviii. 4. , r.- • r- j • i-

2 The reading 01 Basil. Cr. and Lat., and Pini Codex, eTrufiTj
for yeaJST), is approved by Schulze, and may indicate a side-hit at
the Magian fire-worship. But the adjectival form in-wSrjs fur
intoSo's is doubtful.


6o


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[I. 24.


upon men for the supply of iheir wants to he
perverted according to every man's desire.
He only requires of men a pure mind and
a spotless soul, and by these He weiglis their
deeds of virtue and piety. He is pleased with
gentleness3 and modesty; He loves the meelc*,
and hates those who excite contentions ; He
loves faith, chastises unbelief; He breaks all
power of boasting 5, and punishes the insolence
of the proud ^. Men exalted with pride He
utterly overthrows, and rewards the humble 7
and the patient ^ according to their deserts.
Of a just sovereignty He maketh much,
strengthens it by His aid, and guards the
counsels of Princes with the blessing of peace.
" I know that I am not in error, my brother,
when I confess that this God is the Ruler
and the Father of all men, a truth which
many who preceded me upon the imperial
throne were so deluded by error as to attempt
to deny. But their eud was so drerul!'ul tliat
they have become a fearful warning to all
mankind, to deter others from similar iniquity 9.
Of tlicse I count that man one whom the
wrath of God, like a thunderbolt, drove hence
into your country, and who made notorious
the memorial of his shame which exists in
your own land '°. Indeed it appears to have
been well ordered that the age in which
we live should be distinguished by the open
and manifest punisliments inflicted on such
persons. I myself have witnessed the end
of those who have persecuted the people
of God by unlawful edicts. Hence it is that
I more especially thank God for having now,
by His special Providence, restored peace to
those who observe His law, in which they
exalt and rejoice.


3 Cf. 2 Cor. X. L 4 Cf. Matt. xi. 29. S Cf. Jas. iv. 16.

6 Ci. Luke i. 51. 7 Cf. Luke i. 52. 8 Cf. 2 Tim. ii. 24.

9 The imperial writer may iiave had in his mind Tiberius,
whose miserable old age was probably ended by murder ; Caius,
slabbed by his own guard ; Claudius, poisoned by his wife ; Ncio,
driven to shameful suicide ; Vitellius, beaten to death by a brutal
mob ; Domitian, assassinated by his wile and freedmen ; Cuinmodus,
murdered by his courtiers, and Pertinax ljy his guards ; Caracalla,
murdered ; Heliogabalus, murdered ; Alexander Severus, ftLaxi-
minus, Gordiainis, murdered; Decius, killed in war; Gallus,
.'Emilianus, Gallienus, all murdeied; Aurclianus, Probus, Carus,
murdered. On the otijer hand Trajan, iM.ircus Aurelius, and
Diocletian, who persecuted the Church with less or more severity,
died peaceful deaths.

»o Valerianus, proclaimed Emperor in Rhoetia, a.d. 254, was
defeated in his campaign against the Persian^, and treated with
indignity alive and dead. After being made to croucii as .1 foot-
stool for his conqueror to tread on when mnunting on horseback,
he was flayed alive, a.d. 260, and his tanned skin nailed in a
Persian temple as a "memorial of his shame." Cf. Ci>nst. Orat.
xxiv. Gibbon's catholic scepticism includes the humiliation of
Valerianus. " The tale," he says, "is moral and pathetic, but the
truth of it may very fairly be called in question." (Dctliue and
Fall, Chap. X.). But the passage m the text, in which the al-
lusion has not always been perceived, and llie p.irallel refeicnce
in the Emperor's oration, indicate the belief of a time little more
than half a century after the event. Lactanlius (de Moite Per-
secutorum V.), was probably about ten years old when Valeriamis
was defeated, and, if so, gives the testimony of a contemporary.
Orosius [vn. 22) and Agathias (iv. p. 133) would only copy earlier
writers, but the latter states that for the fact ol Sapi r's thus
treating Valerianus there is "abundant historical testimony."
Cf. Tillemont, Hist. Enip. iii. pp. 314, 315.


" I am led to expect future happiness and
security whenever God in His goodness unites
all men in the exercise of the one pure
and true religion. You may therefore well
understand how exceedingly I rejoice to hear
that the finest provinces of Persia are adorned
abundantly with men of this class ; I mean
Christians ; for it is of them I am speaking.
All then is well with you and with them, for
you will have the Lord of all merciful and
beneficent to you. Since then you are so
mighty and so pious, I commend the Chris-
tians to your care, and leave them in your
protection. Treat them, I beseech you, with
the affection that befits your goodness. Your
fidelity in this respect will confer on yourself
and on us inexpressible benefits."

This excellent emperor felt so much solici-
tude for all who had embraced the true re-
ligion, that he not only watched over those
who were his own subjects, but also over
the subjects of other sovereigns. For this
reason he was blessed with the special protec-
tion of God, so that although he held the reins
of the whole of Europe and of Africa, ar,d the
greater part of Asia, his subjects were all well
disposed to his rule, and obedient to his
government. Foreign nations submitted to his
sway, some by voluntary submission, others
overcome in war. I'rophies were everywhere
erected, and the emperor was styled Victo-
rious.

The praises of Constantine have, however,
been proclaimed by many other writers. We
must resume the thread of our history. This
emperor, who deserves the highest fame,
devoted his whtle mind to matters worthy of
the apostles, while men who had been ad-
mitted to the sacerdotal dignity not only
neglected to edify the church, but endeavoured
to uproot it from the very foundations. They
invented all manner of false accusations against
those who governed the church in accordance
with the doctrines taught by the apostles, and
did their best to depose and banish them.
Their envy was not satisfied by the infamous
flilsehood which they had mvented against
Eustathius, but they had recourse to every
artifice to effect the overthrow of another great
bulwark of rehgion. These tragic occurrences
I shall now relate as concisely as possible.


CHAPTER XXV.

An account of the plot formed against the Holy
At/ianasius.

Alexander, that admirable bishop, who had
successfully withstood the blasphemies of Arius,
died five months after the council of Nicsea,


1. 27.]


OF THEODORET.


61


and was sncceed-ed in the episcopate of the
church of Alexandria by Athanasius. Trained
from his youth in sacred studies, Athanasius
had attracted general admiration in each eccle-
siastical oiifice that he filled. He had, at the
general council, so defended the doctrines of
the apostles, that while he won the approbation
of all the champions of the truth, its opponents
learned to look on their antagonist as a per
sonal foe and public enemy. He had attended
the council as one of the retinue of Alexander,
then a very young man, although he was the
principal deacon \

When those who had denied the only-begotten
Son of God heard that the helm of the Church
of Alexandria had been entrusted to his hands,
knowing as they did by experience his zeal for
the truth, they thought that his rule would prove
the destruction of their authority. They, there-
fore, resorted to the following machinations
against him. In order to avert suspicion, they
bribed some of the adherents of Meletius, who,
although deposed by the council of Nicaea, had
persevered in exciting commotions in the The-
baid and in the adjacent part of Egypt, and
persuaded them to go to the emperor, and to
accuse Athanasius of levying a tax upon Egypt^,
and giving the gold collected to a certain
man who was preparing to usurp the imperial
power 3. The emperor being deceived by this
story, Athanasius was brought to Constantinople.
Upon his arrival he proved that the accusation
was false, and had the charge given him by God
restored to him. This is shown by a letter
from the emperor to the Church of Alexandria,
of which I shall transcribe only the concluding
paragraph.


A Portion of the Letter from the Emperor Con-
st ajitine to the Akxa/idrians.

"Believe me, my brethren, the wicked men
were unable to effect anything against your
bishop. They surely could have had no other
design than to waste our time, and to leave
themselves no place for repentance in this life.
Do you, therefore, help yourselves, and love
that which wins your love ^ ; and exert all your
power in the expulsion of those who wish to
destroy your concord. Look unto God, and
love one another. I joyfully welcomed Atha-
nasius your bishop ; and I have conversed with


' "tou xopo'' TMV tioKovuiv riyoviievoi." The youth of Atha-
nasius indicates a variety in the qualifications for the archi-
diaconale, (or he can hardly have been the senior deacon. Cf.
Diet. Christian Ant., Art. "Archdeacon.'

2 In order to provide o-rixapia or variegated vestments. Ath.
Apol. cont. Ar. V. ? 60. The possibility of such charges indicates
the importance of the Patriarchate.

3 Phikimenus. Ath. Ap. cont. Ar. V. \ 60.

4 TO (fiiXrpov TO vfieVepof. Athanasius (Apol. cont. Ar. V. 5 62)
quotes the phrase as rifieTepov, "our love."


him as with one whom I know to be a man of

God."

CHAPTER XXVI.

Another plot against Athanasius.

The calumniators of Athanasius, however, did
not desist from their attempts. On the contrary,
they devised so bold a fiction against liim, that
it surpassed every invention of the ancient
writers of the tragic or comic stage. They
again bribed individuals of the same party,
and brought them before the emperor, vocifer-
ously accusing that champion of virtue of many
abominable crimes. The leaders of the party
were Eusebius, Theognis, and Theodorus,
bishop of Perinthiis, a city now called Heraclea'.
After having accused Athanasius of crimes
which they described as too shocking to be
tolerated, or even listened to, they persuaded
the emperor to convene a council at Csesarea
in Palestine, where Athanasius had many
enemies, and to command that his cause should
be there tried. The emperor, utterly ignorant
of the plot that had been devised, was per-
suaded by them to give the required order.

But the holy Athanasius, well aware of the
malevolence of those who were to try him,
refused to appear at the council. This served
as a pretext to those who opposed the truth
to criminate him still further ; and they
accused him before the emperor of contumacy
and arrogance. Nor were their hopes alto-
gether frustrated ; for the emperor, although
exceedingly forbearing, became exasperated by
their representations, and wrote to him in an
angry manner, commanding him to repair to
Tyre. Here the council was ordered to assemble,
from the suspicion, as I think, that Athanasius
had an apprehension of Csesarea on account of
its bishop. The emperor wrote also to the
council in a style consistent with his devoted
piety. His letter is as follows.

CHAPTER XXVII.

Epistle of the Emperor Constatitine to the
Council of Tyre ^

*' CoNSTANTiNus AUGUSTUS to the holy coun-
cil assembled in Tyre.

" In the general prosperity which distin-
guishes the present time, it seems right that the
Catholic Church should likewise be exempt

I Perinthus, on the Propontis, also knov/n as Heraclea, and
now Erekli, was once a flourishing town. Theodorus was deposed
at Sardica. On his genuine writings, vide Jer. de Vir. III. c. 90,
and on a Commentary on the Psalter, published in 1643, and
attributed to him, vide Diet. Christ. Biog. iv. 934.

1 The Council of Tyre met a.d. 335, on the date, vide Bp.
Lightfoot in Diet. Christ. Biog. iii. 316, note. " The scenes at the
Council of Tyre form the most picturesque and the most shameful
chapter in the Arian controversy." Id.


62


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[I. 27.


from trouble, and that the servants of Christ
should be freed from every reproach.

" But certain individuals instigated by the
mad desire of contention, not to say leading
a life unworthy of their profession, are en-
deavouring to throw all into disorder. This
appears to me to be the greatest of all possible
calamities. I beseech you, therefore, in i)ost
haste, as the phrase goes, to assemble together,
without any delay, in formal synod ; so that you
may support those who require your assistance,
heal the brethren who are in danger, restore
unanimity to the divided members, and rectify
the disorders of the Church while time permits ;
and thus restore to those great provinces tlie
harmony which, alas ! the arrogance of a few
men has destroyed. I believe every one
would admit that you could not perform any-
thing so pleasing in the sight of God, so sur-
passing all my prayers as well as your own, or
so conducive to your own reputation, as to
restore peace.

" Do not ye therefore delay, but when you
have come together with all that sincerity
and fidelity which our Saviour demands of all
His servants, almost in words that we can hear,
endeavour with redoubled eagerness to put
a fitting end to these dissensions.

" Nothing shall be omitted on my part to fur-
ther the interests of our religion. I have done all
that you recommended in your letters. I have
sent to those bishops whom you specified, direct-
ing them to repair to the council for the pur-
pose of deliberating with you upon ecclesiastical
matters. I have also sent Dionysius % a man of
consular rank, to counsel those who are to sit
in synod with you, and to be himself an eye wit-
ness of your proceedings, and particularly of the
order and regularity that is maintained. If any
one should dare on the present occasion also to
disobey our command, and refuse to come to
the council, which, however, I do not anticipate,
an officer will be despatched immediately to
send him into banishment by imperial order,
that he may learn not to oppose the decrees
enacted by the emperor for the support of truth.

" All that now devolves upon your holinesses
is to decide with unanimous judgment, without
partiahty or prejudice, in accordance with the
ecclesiastical and apostolical rule, and to devise
suitable remedies for the offences which may
have resulted from error; in order that the
Church may be freed from all reproach, that my
anxiety may be diminished, that peace may be
restored to those now at variance, and that your
renown may be increased. May God preserve
you, beloved brethren."


= Athanasius (Apol. cent Ar. VI. 572) describes him as acting
with gross partiality.


The bishops accordingly repaired to the
council of Tyre. Amongst them were those
who were accused of holding heterodox doc-
trines; of whom Asclepas, bishop of Gaza, was
one. The admirable Athanasius also attended.
I shall first dwell on the tragedy of the accusa-
tion, and shall then relate the proceedings of
this celebrated tribunal.

CHAPTER XXVIII.
TJie Council of Tyre.

Arsenius was a bishop of the Meletian fac-
tion. The men of his party put him in a place of
concealment, and charged him to remain there
as long as possible. They then cut off" the right
hand of a corpse, embalmed it, placed it in
a wooden case, and carried it about everywhere,
declaring that it was the hand of Arsenius, who
had been murdered by Athanasius. But the
all-seeing eye did not permit Arsenius to
remain long in concealment. He was first
seen alive in Egypt ; then in the Thebaid ;
afterwards he was led by Divine Providence to
Tyre, where the hand of tragic fame was
brought before the council. The friends of
Athanasius hunted him up, and brought him
to an inn, where they compelled him to lie hid
for a time. Early in the morning the great
Athanasius came to the council.

First of all a woman of lewd life was brought
in, who deposed in a loud and impudent manner
that she had vowed perpetual virginity, but that
Athanasius, who had lodged in her house, had
violated her chastity. After she had made her
charge, the accused came forward, and with
him a presbyter worthy of all praise, by name
Timotheus. The court ordered Athanasius to
reply to the indictment ; but he was silent, as
if he had not been Athanasius. Timotheus,
however, addressed her thus : " Have I, O
woman, ever conversed with you, or have I
entered your house?" She replied with still
greater effrontery, screaming aloud in her dis-
pute with Timotheus, and, pointing at him with
her finger, exclaimed, " It was you who robbed
me of my virginity; it was you who stripped
me of my chastity;" adding other indelicate
expressions which are used by shameless women.
The devisers of this calumny were put to
shame, and all the bishops who were privy to
it, blushed.

The woman was now being led out of the
Court, but the great Athanasius protested
that instead of sending her away they ought
to examine her, and learn the name of the
hatcher of the plot. Hereupon his accusers
yelled and shouted that he had perpetrated
other viler crimes, of which it was utterly
impossible that he could by any art or ingenuity


I. 30.|


^OF THEODORET.


63


be cleared ; and that eyes, not ears, would
decide on the evidence. Having said this,
they exhibited the famous box and exposed
the embalmed hand to view. At this sight
all the spectators uttered a loud cry. Some
believed the accusation to be true ; the
others had no doubt of the falsehood, and
thought that Arsenius was lurking somewhere
or other in concealment. When at length, after
some difficulty, a little silence was obtained, the
accused asked his judges whether any of them
knew Arsenius. Several of them replying that
tliey knew him well, Athanasius gave orders
tliat he should be brought before them. Then
he again asked them, " Is this the riglit
Arsenius? Is this the man I murdered? Is
this the man those people mutilated after
his murder by cutting off his right hand?"
When they had confessed that it was the same
individual, Athanasius pulled off his cloak, and
exhibited two hands, both the right and the
left, and said, "Let no one seek for a third
hand, for man has received two hands from the
Creator and no more."

Even after this plain proof the calumniators
and the judges who were privy to the crime,
instead of hiding themselves, or praying that
the earth might open and swallow them up,
raised an uproar and commotion in the assem-
bl)^, and declared that Athanasius was a sorcerer,
and that he had by his magical incantations
bewitched the eyes of men. The very men
who a moment before had accused him of
murder now strove to tear him in pieces and to
murder him. But those whom the emperor had
entrusted with the preservation of order saved
the life of Athanasius by dragging him away,
and hurrying him on board a ship \

When he appeared before the emperor, he
described all the dramatic plot which had been
got up to ruin him. The calumniators sent bi-
shops attached to their faction into Mareotis,
viz., Theognis, bishop of Nicaea, Theodorus,
bishop of Perinthus, Maris, bishop of Chal-
cedon, Narcissus of Cilicia^, with others of the
same sentiments. Mareotis is a district near
Alexandria, and derives its name from the lake
Maria 3. ^ Here they invented other falsehoods,
and, forging the reports of the trial, mixed up the
charges which had been shown to be false with
fresh accusations, as if they had been true, and
despatched them to the emperor.


' Here comes in the famous scene of the sudden apparition
of Athanasius belore Constantine. "The Emperor is enterin.'
Constaraiiiople in state. A small figure darts across his path in
tlie middle of the square, and stops his horse. The Emperor,
tliunderstruck, tries to pass on ; he cannot guess who the petitioner
can be. It is Athanasius, who comes to insist ou justice, when
thought to be leagues away at the Council of Tyre." Stanley
Eastern Church, Lect. VII.

2 Bishop of Neronias, or Irenopolis. Of. p. 44, note.

3 Mare.i or Maria, a town and lake of Lower Egypt, giving its
name to the district : now lake Marrout.


CHAPTER XXIX.

Consecration of the CJntrch of Jerusalem. —
Banishment of St. Athanasius.

All the bishops who were present at the
council of Tyre, with all others from every
quarter, were commanded by the emperor to
proceed to ^lia' to consecrate the churches
which he had there erected. The emperor
despatched also a number of officials of the
most kindly disposition, remarkable for piety
and fideHty, whom he ordered to furnish
abundant supplies of provisions, not only to
the bishops and their followers, but to the
vast multitudes who flocked from all parts
to Jerusalem. The holy altar was decorated
with imperial hangings and with golden vessels
set with gems. When the splendid festival was
concluded, each bishop returned to his own
diocese. The emperor was highly gratified
when informed of the splendour and mag-
nificence of the function, and blessed the
Author of all good for having thus granted
his petition.

Athanasius having complained of his unjust
condemnation, the emperor commanded the
bishops against whom this complaint was
directed to present themselves at court. Upon
their arrival, they desisted from urging any
of their former calumnies, because they knew
how clearly they could be refuted; but they
made it appear that Athanasius had threatened
to prevent the exportation of corn. The
emperor believed what they said, and banished
him to a city of Gaul called Treves 2. This
occurred in the tliirtieth year of the emperor's
reign 3.

CHAPTER XXX.

Will of the blessed Emperor Constantine.

A YEAR and a few months afterwards^
the emperor was taken ill at Nicomedia, a city
of Bithynia, and, knowing the uncertainty of
human life, he received the holy rite of baptism 2,
which he had intended to have deferred until
he could be baptized in the river Jordan.

He left as heirs of the imperial throne his
three sons, Constantine, Constantius, and Con-
stans 3, the youngest.

He ordered that the great Athanasius should


1 iEIia Capitolina, the name given to Jerusalem on its restoration
by (/Elius) Hadrianus.

2 Augusta Treverorum, Treveri, Trier, or Treves, on the

Moselle, was now the official Capital of Gaul.

3 i.e. A.D. 336.

» A.D. 337.

2 At the hand of Eusebius of Nicomedia.

3 Vide Pedigree, in the Prolegomena. Constantine II. received
Gaul, Britain, Spain, and a part of Africa: Constantius the East,
and Constans Illyricum, Italy, and the rest of Africa. In 340 Coii-
stans defeated his brother, who was slainnear Aquileia, and becam
master of the West.


64


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY OF THEODORET. [I. 30.


return to Alexandria, and expressed this de-
cision in the presence of Eusebius, who did
all he could to dissuade him.


CHAPTER XXXI.

Apology for Const antine.

It ousht not to excite astonishment that
Constantine was so far deceived as to send
so many great men into exile ; for he believed
the assertions of bishops of high fame and
reputation, who skilfully concealed their malice.
Those who are acquainted with the Sacred
Scriptures know that the holy David, although
he was a prophet, was deceived ; and that too
not by a priest, but by one who was a menial,
a slave, and a rascal. I mean Ziba, who
deluded the king by lies against Mephiboshetli,
and thus obtained his land '. It is not to con-
demn the prophet that I thus speak ; but that
I may defend the emperor, by showing the
weakness of human nature, and to teach that
credit should not be given only to those who
advance accusations, even though they may
appear worthy of credit ; but that the other
[)ai ty ought also to be heard, and that one ear
should be left open to the accused.


■ Our Author is of the same opinion as Sir George Grove,
as against Prulessor riiint, on the character of Mephibosheth.
Diet. l!ib. ii. 326.


CHAPTER XXXII.

The end of the Holy Emperor Constantine.

The emperor was now translated from his
earthly dominions to a better kingdom '.

Thk body of the emperor was enclosed in
a golden coffin, and was carried to Constan-
tinople by the governors of the provinces,
the military commanders, and the other officers
of state, preceded and followed by the whole
army, all bitterly deploring their loss; for Con-
stantine had been as an affectionate father
to them all. The body of the emperor was
allowed to remain in the palace until the
arrival of his sons, and high honours were
rendered to it. But these details require no
description here, as a full account has been
given by other writers. From their works,
which are easy of access, may be learnt how
greatly the Ruler of all honours His faithful
servants. If any one should be tempted to
unbelief, let him look at what occurs now near
the tomb and the statue of Constantine ^ and
then he must admit the truth of what God
has said in the Scriptures, " Them that honour
Me I will hofioiir, and they that despise Me
shall be lightly esteemed 'i."

» Whitsunday, a.d. 337.

* Valesius explains this alhision by quoting the Arian Philos-
torgius (ii. 17), who says that "the statue of Constantine, .standing
on its porphyry column, was honoured with .sacrilices, illumina
tions, and incense." The accusation of idolatrous worship may li'-
disregarded. Cf. Chron. Alex. 665, 667. 3 1 Sam. li. 30.


END OF THE FIRST BOOK.


BOOK II.


CHAPTER I.

Return of St. Athanasius.

The divine Athanasius returned to Alex-
andria, after having remained two years and
four months at Treves '. Constantine, the
eldest son of Constantine the Great, whose
imperial sway extended over Western Gaul,
wrote the following letter to the church of
Alexandria.

Epistle of the Emperor Constantine, the son of
Constantine the Great, to the Alexandrians.

" CoNSTANTiNUS CiESAR to the people of
the Catholic Church of Alexandria.

*' I think that it cannot have escaped your
pious intelligence that Athanasius, the inter-
preter of the venerated law, was opportunely
sent into Gaul, in order that, so long as the
savagery of these bloodthirsty opponents was
threatening peril to his sacred head, he might
be saved from suffering irremediable wrongs.
To avoid this imminent peril, he was snatched
from the jaws of his foes, to remain in a city
under my jurisdiction, where he might be
abundantly supplied with every necessary.
Yet the greatness of his virtue, relying on
the grace of God, led him to despise all
the calamities of adverse fortune. Constantine,
my lord and my father, of blessed memory,
intended to have reinstated him in his former
bishopric, and to have restored him to your
piety ; but as the emperor was arrested by the
hand of death before his desires were accom-
plished, I, being his heir, have deemed it fit-
ting to carry into execution the purpose of
this sovereign of divine memory. You will
learn from your bishop himself, when you see
him, with how much respect I have treated

« From Feb. 336 to June 338. The "Porta Nigra" and
the ruins of the Baths still shew relics of the splendour of the
imperial city. The exile was generously treated. Maximinus,
the bishop of Treves, was orthodox and friendly. (Ath. ad Episc.
y^gypi. \ 8.) On the conclusion of the term of his relegation to
Treves Constantine II. took him in the imperial suite to Vimina-
cium, a town on the Danube, not far from the modern Passarovitz.
Here the tkree emperors met. Athanasius continued his journey
to Alexandria via Constantinople and the Cappadocian Caesarea.
(Ath. Hist. Ar.\% and Apol. ad Const. \ 5.)

VOL, III. ]


him. Nor indeed is it surprising that he
should have been thus treated by me. I was
moved to this line of conduct by his own great
virtue, and the thought of your affectionate
longing for his return. May Divine Providence
watch over you, beloved brethren ! "

Furnished with this letter, St. Athanasius
returned ^ from exile, and was most gladly wel-
comed both by the rich and by the poor, by
the inhabitants of cities, and by those of the
provinces. The followers of the madness of
Arius were the only persons who felt any
vexation at his return. Eusebius, Theognis,
and those of their faction resorted to their
former machinations, and endeavoured to pre-
judice the ears of the young emperor against
him.

I shall now proceed to relate in what man-
ner Constantius swerved from the doctrines
of the Apostles.

CHAPTER II.

Declension of the Emperor Constantius
from the true Faith.

CoNSTANTiA, the widow of Licinius, was the
half-sister of Constantine ^ She was intimately
acquainted with a certain priest who had im-
bibed the doctrines of Arius. He did not openly
acknowledge his unsoundness ; but, in the fre-
quent conversations which he had with her,
he did not refrain from declaring that Arius
had been unjustly calumniated. After the
death of her impious husband, the renowned
Constantine did everything in his power to
solace her, and strove to prevent her from
experiencing the saddest trials of widowhood.
He attended her also in her last illness =, and
rendered her every proper attention. She
then presented the priest whom I mentioned
to the emperor, and entreated him to receive


a In Nov. 338. H'.s clergy thought it the happiest day of their
lives. Ath. Ap. Cont. Ar. \ 7.

1 Vide Pedigree. Philostorgius (ii. t6) said the will was given
to Eusebius of Nicomedia. Valesius (on See. i. 25) thinks that
if the story had been true Athanasius would have recorded it,
with the name of the Presbyter.

2 A.D. 327—328.


66


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[II. 2.


him under his protection. Constantine acceded
to her request, and soon after fulfilled his
promise. But though the priest was permitted
the utmost freedom of speech, and was most
honourably treated, he did not venture to re-
veal his corrupt principles, for he observed the
firmness with which the emperor adhered to
the truth. When Constantine was on the
point of being translated to an eternal kin?
dom, he drew up a will, in which he directed
that his temporal dominions should be divided
among his sons. None of them was with
him when he was dying, so he entrusted the
will to this priest alone, and desired him to
give it to Constantius, who, being at a shorter
distance from the spot than his brothers, was
expected to arrive the first. These directions
the priest executed, and thus by putting the
will into his hands, became known to Con-
stantius, who accepted him as an intimate
friend, and commanded him to visit him fre-
quently. Perceiving the weakness of Con-
stantius, whose mind was like reeds driven
to and fro by the wind, he became embold-
ened to declare war against the doctrines of
the gospel. He loudly deplored the stormy
state of the churches, and asserted it to be due
to those who had introduced the unscriptural
word "consubslantial" into the confession of
faith, and that all the disputes among the
clergy and the laity had been occasioned by
it. He calumniated Athanasius and all who
coincided in his opinions, and formed de-
signs for their destruction, being used as
their fellow worker by Eusebius 3, Theognis, and
Theodorus, bishop of Perinthus.

The last-named, whose see is generally known
by the name of Heraclca, was a man of great
erudition, and had written an exposition of
the Holy Scriptures 4.

These bishops resided near the emperor,
and frequently visited him ; they assured him
that the return of Athanasius from banishment
had occasioned many evils, and had excited
a tempest which had shaken not only Egypt,
but also Palestine, Phoenicia, and the adjacent
countries s.

CHAPTER in.

Scco/id Exile of St. Athanasius. — Ordination

and Death of Gregorius.
With these and similar arguments, the bi-
shops assailed the weak-minded emperor, and
persuaded him to expel Athanasius from his


3 Of Nicomedia, now tranferred to the see of Constantinople.

4 Vide note on p. 6i.

5 The ground of objection to the return was (i) that Atlianasius
Iiad been condemned by a Council— that of Tyre, and (i'M tliat he
\vas restored by the aiuhority of tlie state alone. The first inten-
tion was to get ilie Arian Pistus advanced to the patriarchate.


church. But Athanasius obtained timely inti-
mation of their design, and departed to the
west '. The friends of Eusebius had sent
false accusations against him to Julius, who
was then bishop of Rome^. In obedience to
the laws of the church, Julius summoned the
accusers and the accused to Rome, that the
cause might be tried 3. Athanasius, accordingly,
set out for Rome, but the calumniators refused
to go because they saw that their falsehood
would easily be detected! But perceiving that
the flock of Athanasius was left without a
pastor, they appointed over it a wolf instead
of a shepherd. Gregorius, for this was his name,
surpassed the wild beasts in his deeds of
cruelty towards the flock : but at the expira-
tion of six years he was destroyed by the
sheep themselves. Athanasius went to Con-
stans (Constantine, the eldest brother, having
fallen in battle), and complained of the plots
laid against him by the Arians, and of their
opposition to the apostolical faith s. He
reminded him of his father, and how he
attended in person the great and famous
council which he had summoned ; how he
was present at its debates, took part in
framing its decrees, and contirmed them
by law. The emperor was moved to emu-
lation by his father's zeal, and promptly
wrote to his brother, exhorting him to pre-
serve inviolate the religion of their father,
which they had inherited; "for," he urged,
" by piety he made his empire great, destroyed
the t3'rants of Rome, and subjugated the foreiLm
nations on every side." Constantius was led
by this letter to summon the bishops from
the east and from the west to Sardica ^, a city
of Illyricum, and the metropolis of Dacia, that
they might deliberate on the means of removing


1 Easter, a.d. 340. The condemnation was confirmed at the
Council of Antioch, a.d. 341.

2 They were met by a deputation of Athanasians, bringing
the encyclical of the Egyptian Bishops in favour of the accused.
Apol. Cont. Ar.%-i.

3 On the bearing of these communications with Rome on the
question of Papal jurisdiction, vide Salmon, Infallibility of the
Church, p. 405. Cf. Wladimir Guettde, ilistoire de I'Eglise, III.
p. 112.

4 The innocence of Athanasius was vindicated at the Council
held at Rome in Nov. a.d. 341.

5 For the violent resentment of the Alcx.indri.in Church at
the obtrusion of Gregorius, an Ullra-Arian, and aijparently an
illustration of the old proverb of the three bad Kappas, " Kairn-a-
SoKts, KpijTes, Ki'AiKes, rpi'a xaTrira KaKicrTa," for he was a Cap-
padocian — vide Ath. Encyc. 3, 4, Hist. Ar. 10. The sequence
of events is not without difficulty, and our author gives here little
help. Athanasius was in Ale.\andria in the spring of 340, when
Gregorius made his entry, and started for Rome at or about Easter.
Constantine II. was defeated and slain by the troops of his brother
Constans, in the neighliourhood of Aquilcia, and his corpse found
in the river Alsa, in .-Vpril, 340. Athanasius remained at Rome till
the summer of 343, when he was summoned to Milan by Constans
(vl/. ad Const. 3, 4).

Results of his visit to Rome were the adherence of Latin Cliris-
tianity to the orthodox opinion (Cf. Miliu.in, JJist. of Lat.
Christianity, vol. i. p. 78), and the introduction of Monachism into
the West. Vide Robertson's Ck. Hist. ii. 6.

6 Now Sophia, in Bulg.iria. The centre of Moesia was called
Dacia Cis-Danubiana, when the tract conquered by Tr.ijan was
abandoned.


II. 6.]


OF THEODORET.


57


the otlier troubles of the church, which were
many and pressing.

CHAPTER IV.

Panlus, Bishop of Constantinople.

Paulus ', bishop of Constantinople, who
faithfully maintained orthodox doctrines, was
accused by the unsound Arians of exciting sedi-
tions, and of such other crimes as they usually
laid to the charge of all those who preached
true piety. The people, who feared the
machinations of his enemies, would not permit
him to go to Sardica. The Arians, taking
advantage of the weakness of the emperor,
procured from him an edict of banishment
against Paulus, who was, accordingly, sent to
Cucusus, a little town formerly included in
Cappadocia, but now in Lesser Armenia. But
these disturbers of the public peace were not
satisfied with having driven the admirable
Paulus into a desert. They sent the agents of
their cruelty to despatch him by a violent
death. St. Athanasius testifies to this fact in
the defence which he wrote of his own flight.
He uses the following words ^: "They pur-
sued Paulus, bishop of Constantinople, and
having seized him at Cucusus, a city of Cappa-
docia, they had him strangled, using as their
executioner Philippus the prefect, who was the
protector of their heresy, and the active agent
of their most atrocious projects 3."

Such were the murders to which the blas-
phemy of Arius gave rise. Their mad rage
against the Only-begotten was matched by
cruel deeds against His servants.

CHAPTER V.

The Heresy of Macedonnis.

The Arians, having effected the death of
Paulus, or rather having despatched him to the
kingdom of heaven, promoted Macedonius ^ in
his place, who, they imagined, held the same
sentiments, and belonged to the same faction
as themselves, because he, like them, blas-
phemed the Holy Ghost. But, shortly after,
they deposed him also, because he refused to
call Him a creature Whom the Holy Scriptures


affirm to be the Son of God. After his separ-
ation from them, he became the leader o(
a sect of his own. He taught that the Son
of God is not of the same substance as the
Father, but that He is like Him in every
particular. He also openly affirmed that the
Holy Ghost is a creature. These circum-
stances occurred not long afterwards as we
have narrated them.

CHAPTER VI.

Comicil held at Sardica.

Two hundred and fifty bishops assembled at
Sardica % as is proved by ancient records. The
great Athanasius, Asclepas, bishop of Gaza,
already mentioned 2, and Marcellus 3, bishop
of Ancyra, the metropolis of Galatia, who also
held this bishopric at the time of the council of
Nicaea, all repaired thither. The calumniators,
and the chiefs of the Arian faction, who had
previously judged the cause of Athanasius,
also attended. But when they found that
the members of the synod were staunch in
their adherence to sound doctrine, they would
not even enter the council, although they had
been summoned to it, but fled away, both
accusers and judges. All these circumstances
are far more clearly explained in a letter drawn
up by the council ; and I shall therefore now
insert it

Sy nodical Letter from the Bishops assembled at
Sardica., add?'essed to the other Bishops.

" The holy council assembled at Sardica,
from Rome, Spain, Gaul, Italy, Campania,
Calabria, Africa, Sardinia, Pannonia, Moesia,
Dacia, Dardania, Lesser Dacia, Macedonia,
Thessaly, Achaia, Epirus, Thrace, Rhodope,
Asia, Caria, Bithynia, the Hellespont, Phrygia,
Pisidia, Cappadocia, Pontus, the lesser Phry-
gia, Cilicia, Pamphylia, Lydia, the Cyclades,
Egypt, the Thebaid, Libya, Galatia, Palestine
and Arabia, to the bishops throughout the world,
our fellow-ministers in the catholic and apostolic
Church, and our beloved brethren in the Lord.
Peace be unto you.

" The madness of the Arians has often led
them to the perpetration of violent atrocities


» A native of Thessalonica ; he had been secretary to his pre-
decessor Alexander.

2 Ath. defug. 53. Cf. Hist. Ar. ad Mon. 7.

3 Fiavius Philippus, praetorian prsefect of the East, is described
by Socrates (II. 16), as fieiirifpos ficra jSaaiAe'a. Paulus was
removed from Constantinople in 342, and not slain till 350. Phi-
lippus died in disappointment and misery. Diet. Christ. Biog, iv.
356.

I On the vicissitudes of the see of Constantinople, after the
death of Alexander, in a.d. 336, vide Soc. ii. 6 and Soz. iii. 3.
Paulus was murdered in 350 or 351, and the "shortly after" of the
text means nine years, Macedonius being replaced by Eudoxius
of Antioch, in 360. On how far the heresy of the '"Pneumato-
machi," called Macedonianism, was really due to the teaching
of Macedonius, vide Robertson's Church Hist. II. iv. for refF.


» The Council met in 343, according to Hefele ; 344, accord-
ing to Mansi, on the authority of the Festal Letters of Athanasius.
Summoned by both Emperors, it was presided over by Hosius.
The accounts of the numbers present vary. Some authorities
adhere to the traditional date, 347. Soc. ii. 20 ; Soz. iii. 11.

2 Vide I. xxvii.

3 Perhaps present at the Synod of Ancyra (Angora], in A.D.
315. Died, A.D. 374. Marcellus played the man at Nica;a, and
was accused by the Arians of Sabellianism, and deposed. He was
distrusted as a trimmer, but could boast "se communione Julii
et Athanasii, Romanse et Alexandrinae urbis poutificura, usse muni-
tum" {yer. de vir. ill. c. S6). Cardinal Newman thinks Athanasius
attacked him in the IVth Oration against the Arians. Vide Die.'-
Christ. Biog. iii. 808.


F 2


68


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[II. 6.


against the servants of God who keep the true
faith ; they introckice false doctrines themselves,
and persecute those who uphold orthodox prin-
ciples. So violent were their attacks on the
faith, that they reached the ears of our most
])ious emperors. Through the co-operation of
the grace of God, the emperors have summoned
us from different provinces and cities to the holy
council which they have appointed to be held in
the city of Sardica, in order that all dissensions
may be terminated, all evil doctrines expelled,
and the religion of Christ alone maintained
amongst all people. Some bishops from the
east have attended the council at the solicitation
of our most religious emperors, principally on
account of the reports circulated against our be-
loved brethren and fellow-ministers, Athanasius,
bishop of Alexandria, Marcellus, bishop of
Ancyra in Galatia, and Asclepas, bishop of
Gaza. Perhaps the calumnies of the Arians
have already reached you, and they have en-
deavoured thus to forestall the council, and
make you believe their groundless accusations
of the innocent, and prevent any suspicion
being raised of the depraved heresy which they
uphold. But they have not long been permitted
so to act. The Lord is the Protector of the
churches ; for them and for us all He suffered
death, and opened for us the way to heaven.

" The adherents of Eusebius. Maris, Theo-
dorus, Theognis, Ursacius, Valens, Menophan-
tus, and Stephanus, had already written to
Julius, the bishop of Rome, and our fellow-
minister, against our aforesaid fellow-ministers,
Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, Marcellus,
bishop of Ancyra in Galatia, and Asclepas,
Ijishop of Gaza. Some bishops of the op-
posite party wrote also to Julius, testifying
to the innocence of Athanasius, and proving
that all that had been asserted by the followers
of Eusebius was nothing more than lies and
slander. 'I'he refusal of the Arians to obey the
summons of our beloved brother and fellow-
ruler, Julius, and also the letter written by that
bishop, clearly prove the falseness of their accu-
sation. For, had they believed that what they
had done and represented against our fellow-
minister admitted of justification, they would
have gone to Rome. But their mode of proce-
dure in this great and holy council is a mani-
fest proof of their fraud. Upon their arrival
at Sardica, they perceived that our brethren,
Athanasius, Marcellus, Asclepas, and others,
were there also ; they were therefore afraid to
come to the test, although they had been sum-
moned, not once or twice only, but repeatedly.
There were they waited for by the assembled
bishops, particularly by the venerable Hosius,
one worthy of all honour and respect, on
account of his advanced age, his adherence


to the faith, and his labours for the church.
All urged them to join the assembly and avail
themselves of the opportunity of proving, in
the presence of their fellow-ministers, the
truth of the charges they had brought against
them in their absence, both by word and
by letter. But they refused to obey the
summons, as we have already stated, and so
by their excesses proved the falsity of their
statements, and all but proclaimed aloud the
plot and schemes they had formed. Men
confident of the truth of their assertions are
always ready to stand to them openly. But
as these accusers would not appear to sub-
stantiate what they had advanced, any future
allegations which they may by their usual
artifices bring against our fellow-ministers, will
only be regarded as proceeding from a desire
of slandering them in their absence, without
the courage to confront them openly.

" They fled, beloved brethren, not only be-
cause their charges were slander, but also be-
cause they saw men arrive with serious and mani-
fold accusations against themselves. Chains
and fetters were produced. Some were present
whom they had exiled : others came forward
as representatives of those still kept in exile.
There stood relations and friends of men whom
they had put to death. Most serious of all,
bishops also appeared, one of whom 4 exhibited
the irons and the chains with which they had
laden him. Others testified that death followed
their false charges. For their infatuation had
led them so far as even to attempt the
life of a bishop ; and he would have been
killed had he not escaped from their hands.
Theoduluss, our fellow-minister, of blessed me-
mory, passed hence with their calumny on his
name ; for, through it, he had been condemned
to death. Some showed the wounds which
had been inflicted on them by the sword ;
others deposed that they had been exposed
to the miseries of famine.

*' All these depositions were made, not by a
few obscure inchviduals, but by whole churches ;
the presbyters of these churches giving evi-
dence that the persecutors had armed the
military against them with swords, and the
common people with clubs ; had employed
judicial threats, and produced spurious docu-
ments. The letters written by Theognis,
for the purpose of prejudicing the emperor
against our fellow-ministers, Athanasius, Mar-
cellus, and Asclepas, were read and attested
by those who had formerly been the deacons


* Probably Lucius, Bishop of Hadrianople, who had been
deposed by the Arians, and appealed to Julius, who wished to
right him. Still kept out by the Arians, he appealed to the
Council of Sardica, and, in accordance with its decree, Constantius
ordered his restoration (Soc. ii. 26). Cf. Chap. XII.

5 Bishop of Trajanopolis (Ath. I/isi. Ar. 19).


II. 6.]


OF THEODORET.


69


of Theognis. It was also proved that they
had stripped virgins naked, had burnt churches,
and imprisoned our fellow-ministers, and all
because of the infamous heresy of the Ario-
maniacs. For thus all who refused to make
common cause with them were treated.

" The consciousness of having committed all
these crimes placed them in great straits.
Ashamed of their deeds, which could no longer
be concealed, they repaired to Sardica, think-
ing that their boldness in venturing thither
would remove all suspicion of their guilt. But
when they perceived the presence of those
whom they had falsely accused, and of those who
had suffered from their cruelty; and that like-
wise several had come with irrefragable accu-
sations against them, they would not enter the
council. Our fellow-ministers, on the other
hand, Athanasius, Marcellus, and Asclepas,
took every means to induce them to attend, by
tears, by urgency, by challenge, promising not
only to prove the falsity of their accusations, but
also to show how deeply they had injured their
own churches. But they were so overwhelmed
by the consciousness of their own evil deeds,
that they took to flight, and by this flight
clearly proved the falsity of their accusations,
as well as their own guilt.

" But though their calumny and perfidy, which
had indeed been apparent from the beginning,
were now clearly perceived, yet we determined
to examine the circumstances of the case
according to the laws of truth, lest they should,
from their very flight, derive pretexts for re-
newed acts of deceitfulness.

" Upon carrying this resolution into effect,
we proved by their actions that they were false
accusers, and that they had formed plots
against our fellow-ministers. Arsenius, whom
they declared had been put to death by Atha-
nasius, is still alive, and takes his place among
the living. This fact alone is sufficient to
show that their other allegations are false.

"Although they spread a report everywhere
that a chalice had been broken by Macarius,
one of the presbyters of Athanasius, yet those
who came from Alexandria, from Mareotis, and
from other places, testified that this Was not
the fact; and the bishops in Egypt wrote to
Juhus, our fellow-minister, declaring that there
was not the least suspicion that such a deed
had been done. The judicial facts which the
Arians assert they possess against Macarius
have been all drawn up by one party ; and
in these documents the depositions of pagans
and of catechumens were included. One of
these catechumens, when interrogated, replied
that he was m the church on the entry of
Macarius. Another deposed that Ischyras,
whom they had talked about so much, was


then lying ill in his cell. Hence it appears
that the mysteries could not have been cele-
brated at that time, as the catechumens were
present, and as Ischyras was absent ; for he was
at that very time confined by illness. Ischyras,
that wicked man who had falsely affirmed that
Athanasius had burnt some of the sacred books,
and had been convicted of the crime, now
confessed that he was ill in bed when Macarius
arrived ; hence the falsehood of his accusation
was clearly demonstrated. His calumny was,
however, rewarded by his party ; they gave
him the title of a bishop, although he was not
yet even a presbyter. For two presbyters came
to the synod, who some time back had been
attached to Meletius, and were afterwards re-
ceived back by the blessed Alexander, bishop
of Alexandria, and are now with Athanasius,
protesting that he had never been ordained
a presbyter, and that Meletius had never had
any church, or employed any minister in
Mareotis. Yet, althotigh he had never been
ordained a presbyter, they promote him to
a bishopric, in order that his title may impose
upon those who hear his false accusations ^

" The writings of our fellow-minister, Mar-
cellus, were also read, and plainly evinced the
duplicity of the adherents of Eusebius; for
what Marcellus had simply suggested as a
point of inquiry, they accused him of professing
as a point of faith. The statements which he
had made, both before and after the inquiry,
were read, and his faith was proved to be
orthodox. He did not affirm, as they repre-
sented, that the beginning of the Word of God
was dated from His conception by the holy
Mary, or that His kingdom would have an
end. On the contrary, he wrote that His king-
dom had had no beginning, and would have no
end. Asclepas, our fellow-minister, produced
the reports drawn up at Antioch in the pre-
sence of the accusers, and of Eusebius, bishop
of Ceesarea, and proved his innocence by the
sentence of the bishops who had presided as
j udges.

" It was not then without cause, beloved
brethren, that, although so frequently sum-
moned, they would not attend the council;
it was not without cause that they took to
flight. The reproaches of conscience con-
strained them to make their escape, and thus,
at the same time, to demonstrate the ground-
lessness of tlieir calumnies, and the truth of
those accusations which were advanced and


6 The strange story of Ischyras is gathered from notices in the
Apol. c. Arian. Without ordination, he started a small con-
venticle'of some half-dozen people, and the Alexandrian Synod
of 324 condemned his pretensions. The incident of the text may
be assigned to 329. He afterwards faced both ways, to Athanasius
and the Eusebians, and was recognised by them as a bishop.
Did. Christ. Biog. iii. 302.


70


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[II. 6.


proved against them. Besides all the other
grounds of complaint, it may be added that all
those who had been accused of holding the
Arian heres}-, and had been ejected in conse-
quence, were not only received, but advanced
to the highest dignities by them. They raised
deacons to the presbyterate, and thence to the
episcopate ; and in all this they were actunted
by no other motive than the desire of propa-
gating and diffusing their heresy, and of cor-
rupting the true faith.

" Next to Eusebius, the following are their
principal leaders ; Theodorus, bishop of Hera-
clea, Narcissus, bishop of Ncronias in Cilicia,
Stcplianus, bishop of Antioch, Gcorgius?, bishop
of Laodicea, Acacius^, bishop of Cffisarea in
Palestine, Menophantus, bishop of f^phcsus
in Asia, Ursacius, bishop of Singidunum? in
Moesia, and Valens, bishop of Mursa '° in Pan-
nonia. These bishops forbade those who came
with them from the east to attend the holy
council, or to unite with the Church of God.
On their road to Sardica they lield private as-
semblies at difi'erent places, antl formed a com
pact cemented by threats, that, when they
arrived in Sardica, they would not join the hoi)-
council, nor assist at its deliberations ; arrang-
ing that, as soon as they had arrived they
should present themselves for form's sake, and
forthwith betake themselves to flight. These
facts were made known to us by our fellow-
minislers, Macarius of Palestine", and Asterius
of Arabia '% who came with them to Sardica,
but refused to share their unorthodoxy. These
bishops complained before the holy council of
the violent treatment they had received from
them, and of the want of right principles
evinced in all their transactions. They added
thai there were many amongst them who still
held orthodox opinions, but that these were
prevented from going to the council ; and
that sometimes threats, sometimes promises,
were resorted to, in order to retain them in
that party. For this reason they were com-
pelled to reside together in one house ; anci
never allowed, even for the shortest space of
time, to be alone.

"It is not right to pass over in silence and
without rebuke the calumnies, the imprison-


7 Georgiiis succeeded llie Aii.in Theodotiis, of whom mention
h.is already been made (p. 4a), in the see of the Syrian Laodicea
(LataUia). Athanasius (cie/ttg. § 26), speaks of his " dissolute lite,
condemned even by his own friends."

^ Kiiuwn as 6 ^lOf. i;'j6'aA,uos, " The one-eyed." He succeeded
the llibturian Euscbiiis in tliu see ot Ca-sarca in 340, and the
Nicoiiicdian Eusebius as a leader of the Arian Court party in 342.

9 Now Ijilijraae.

«o Now Ks.^eg on the Drave. Here Constantius deicated Mag-
nentius, a.d. _-;5i.

»« Bishop of Petra in Palestine. {Tnmus ad Antioch. 10.)
There is some coniusion in the names of the sees, and a doubt
whether thcie were really two Petras. Cf. Reland, Palestine,
p. 2j8, Le CJuien, /■'.ast. Christ, iii. 665, 666.

" Bishop of Petra in Arabia, (.Ath. Hist. Ar. 18, A/>al. cont.
Ar. 48).


mcrts, the murders, the stripes, the forged
letters, the indignities, the stripping naked of
virgins, the banishments, the destruction of
churches, the acts of incendiarism, the trans-
lation of bishops from small towns to large
dioceses, and above all, the ill-starred Arian
heresy, raised by their means against the true
faith. For these causes, therefore, we declare
the innocence and purity of our beloved brethren
and fellow-ministers, Athanasius, bi.shop of
Alexuntlria, Marcellus, bishop of Ancyra in
Galatia, and Asclepas, bishop of Gaza, and of
all the other servants of God who are with
them ; and we have written to each of their
dioceses, in order that the people of each
church may be made acquainted with the
innocence of their respective bishops, and that
they may recognise them alone and wait for
their return. Men who have come down on
their churches like wolves ^3, such as Gregorius
in Alexandria, Easilius in Ancyra, and Quintia-
nus^4 in Gaza, we charge them not even to call
bishops, nor yet Christians, nor to have any
communion with them, nor to receive any
letters from them, nor to write to them.

" Theodorus, bishop of Heraclea in Europe,
Narcissus, bishop of Neronias in Cilicia, Aca-
cius, bishop of Cffisarea in Palestine, Stephanus,
bishop of Antioch, Ursacius, bishop of Singi-
dunum in Moesia, Valens, bishop of Mursa in
Pannonia, Menophantus, bishop of Ephesus,
and Georgius, bishop of Laodicea (for though
fear kept him from leaving the East, he Jias
been deposed by the blessed i\lexander, bishoj)
of Alexandria, and has imbibed the infatuation
of the Arians), have on account of their various
crimes been cast forth from their bishoprics
by the unanimous decision of the holy council.
We have decreed that they are not only not
to be regarded as bishops, but to be refused
communion with us. For those who separate
the Son from the substance and divinity of the
i'"athcr, anti alienate the M'ord from the Father,
ought to be separated from the Catholic
Church, and alienated from all who bear the
name of Christians. Let them then be anathema
to you, and to all the faithful, because they have
corrupted the word of truth. For the apostle's
precept enjoins, if any one should bring to you
another gospel than that which ye have re-
ceived, let htm be accursed 's. Command that no
one hold communion with them ; for light can
have no fellowship with darkness. Keep far
off from them ; tor what concord has Christ
with Belial ? Be careful, beloved brethren, that
you neither write to them nor receive their


'3 Cf. Acts XX. 29.

'4 'I'hrust on the see of Gaza by the Ariaus oil the deposition
of Asclepas QSoz. iii, 8, 12).
«5 Gal. 1. 8.


II. 6.]


OF THEODORET.


71


letters. Endeavour, beloved brethren and
fellow-ministers, as though present with us in
spirit at the council, to give your hearty con-
sent to what is enacted, and affix to it your
written signature, for the sake of preserving
unanimity of opinion among all our fellow-
ministers throughout the world ^^.

*' We declare those men excommunicate from
the Catholic Church who say that Christ is
God, but not the true God ; that He is the Son,
but not the true Son ; and that He is both
begotten and made ; for such persons acknow-
ledge that they unelerstand by the term ' be-
gotten,' that which has been made ; and be-
cause, although the Son of God existed before
all ages, they attribute to Him, who exists not
in time but before all time, a beginning and
an end ^t.

"Valens and Ursacius have, like two vipers
brought forth by an asp, proceeded from the
Arian heresy. For they boastingly declare
themselves to be undoubted Christians, and yet
affirm that the Word and the Hoi) Ghost were
both crucified and slain, and that they died
and rose again ; and they pertinaciously main-
tain, like the heretics, that the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost are of diverse and distinct
essences ^^. We have been taught, and we hold
the catholic and apostolic tradition and faith
and confession which teach, that the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost have one essence,
which is termed substance ^9 by the heretics. If
it is asked, ' What is the essence of the Son ? '
we confess, that it is that which is acknowledged
to be that of the Father alone ; for the Father
has never been, nor could ever be, without the
Son, nor the Son without the Father. It is
most absurd to affirm that the Father ever
existed without the Son, for that this could never
be so has been testified by the Son Hunself, who
said, ' / am in the Father, and the Father in
Me ^° ;' and ' / a)id My Father are one ^^' None
of us denies that He was begotten ; but we say
that He was begotten before all things, whether
visible or invisible ; and that He is the Creator
of archangels and angels, and of the world, and
of the human race. It is written, ' Wisdom
ivhich is the worker of all things taught me ^^,'
and again, ' All things tvere made by Him -3.'

" He could not have existed always if He had


16 Here, according to the Version of Athanasius f^Ap. coat. Ar. 45),
the Synodical Epistle ends. An argument against the genuinencbS
of the addition lb the introduction of a new lormulu ot laith, while
from the letter of Athanasius '"ex synodo Alexandrina ad legates
apustolica; sedis," it is plain that nothing was added to the Nieene
Creed. (Labbe iii. 84.)

'7 This passage is very corrupt : the translation follows the Greek
of Valesius, yei'i'TjTos euTt;' ci/xa koX yei/rjTds. It is not certain that
the distinction between dyevi/rjTo; " unbegotten," and ayeVrjros,
"uncreate," was in use quite so early as 344. If the passage is
spurious and of later date, the distinction might be more naturally
found.


10 u7ro(7Tao-etl.
=• John X. 30.


19 ovata.
aa Wisdom vii, aa.


*> John xiv. 10.


23 John i. 3.


had a beginning, for the everlasting Word has
no beginning, and God will never have an
end. We do not say that the Father is Son, nor
that the Son is Father ; but that the Father is
Father, and the Son of the Father Son. We
confess that the Son is Power of the Father.
We confess that the Word is Word of God the
Father, and that beside Him there is no other.
We believe the Word to be the true God, and
■Wisdom and Power. We affirm that He is
truly the Son, yet not in the way in which
others are said to be sons : for they are either
gods ]jy reason of their regeneration, or are
called sons of God on account of their merit,
and not on account of tlaeir being of one
essence -*, as is the case with the Father and
the Son. We confess an Only-begotten and
a Firstborn ; but that the Word is only-
begotten, who ever was and is in the Father.
We use the word firstborn with respect to
His human nature. But He is superior (to
man) in the new creation ^s (of the Resur-
rection), inasmuch as He is the Firstborn
from the dead.

" We confess that God is ; we confess
the divinity of the Father and of the Son
to be one. No one denies that the Father
is greater than the Son : not on account
of another essence ^+, nor yet on account
of their difterence, but simply from the very
name of the Father being greater than that
of the Son. The words uttered by our Lord,
'/ a/id My Father are one~^,' are by those
men explained as referring to the concord
and harmony which prevail between the Father
and the Son ; but this is a blasphemous and
perverse interpretation. Wc, as Catholics,
unanimously condemned this foolish and lament-
able opinion : for just as mortal men on a
difterence having arisen between them quarrel
and afterwards are reconciled, so do such
interpreters say that disputes and dissension
are liable to arise between God the Father
Almighty and His Son ; a supposition which
is altogether absurd and untenable. But we
believe and maintain that those holy words,
'7 and My Father are one,' point out the one-
ness of essence -•♦ which is one and the same
in the Father and in the Son.

"We also believe that the Son reigns with
the Father, that His reign has neither beginning
nor end, and that it is not bounded by time,
nor can ever cease : for that which always exists
never begins to be, and can never cease.

"We believe in and we receive the Holy


z-t virdcrrao-ts. . «,. • /-■ j

as This translation follows the reading of the All.itian L-oacx,
adopted by Valesius, rjj Konvy /cTiaei. If we read Koivr) for icaivj?:
we must render "excels or differs in relation tu the common
creation " which He shares with m?n.
•6 John V. -o.


72


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[II. 6.


Ghost the Comforter, whom the Lord both
promised and sent. We believe in It as sent.

" It was not the Holy Ghost who suffered,
but the manhood witli which He clothed Him-
self; which He took from the Virgin Mary,
which being man was capable of suffering ; for
man is mortal, whereas God is immortal. We
believe that on the third day He rose, the man
in God, not God in the man; and that He
brought as a gift to His Fadier the man-
hood which He had delivered from sin and
corruption.

"We believe that, at a meet and fixed time,
He Himself will judge all men and all their
deeds.

" So great is the ignorance and mental dark-
ness of those whom we have mentioned, that
they are unable to see the light of truth. They
cannot comprehend the meaning of the words :
' that they may be one in us ^7.' It is obvious
why the word ' one^ was used ; it was because
the apostles received the Holy Spirit of God,
and yet there were none amongst them who
were the Spirit, neither was there any one of
them who was Word, Wisdom, Power, or
Only-begotten. * As Thou,'' He said, ' and
I are one, that they ?nay be one in us.' These
holy words, ' that they f?iay be one in usl are
strictly accurate : for the Lord did not say,
'one in the same way that I and the Father
are one,' but He said, ' that the disciples, being
knit together and united, may be one in faith
and in confession, and so in the grace and piety
of God the Father, and by the indulgence and
love of our Lord Jesus Christ, may be able to
become one.'"

From this letter may be learnt the duplicity
of the calumniators, and the injustice of the
former judges, as well as the soundness of the
decrees. These holy fathers have taught us
not only truths respecting the Divine nature,
but also the doctrine of the Incarnation ^2.


27 John xvii. 21.

='* oiKOfo^ia. In classical Greek oiKOi<oj>iia is simply the manage-
tneiu (a) of .1 household, (/3) of the state. In the N.T. we have
it in Luke xvi. for " stewardsliip," and in five other places;
(ij 1 Cor. ix. 17, A. v. "dispensation," K.V. "stewardship;"
ui) Eph. i. 10 A.V. and R.V. "dispensation;" (iii) Eph. iii. 2,
A.V. and R.V. "dispensation;" (iv) Col i. 25, A.V. and K.V.
•' dispensation ; " (v) i Tim. i. 4, where A.V. adopts the inferior
reading o\Koto\i.y\v , and R.V. renders tlie olKouo/j-iav of i<5AFGKLP
by "dispensation." Suiccr gives as the meanings of the word
(i) ministerium evangelii, (ii) providcntia et nunicn quo Dei sapi-
entia omnia moderatur, (iii) ipsa Cliristi natura: humana; assunip-
tio, (iv) totius redemptionis mystcrium ct passionis Christi Sacra-
mentum. Thcodoret himsell (Ed. Migne iv. 93) says ttjc tvav-
OpiuTrrjaic Se toO WeoO Adyou KoAoO/iei' otKovofiiai', and quaintly
distinguishes (Cant. Cant. p. 83) tj crjui/pra Kal 6 Ai'/Sovot Tovrecmv
1) 6to,\oyia Tf leai oifcoi-onia. On a phrase of St. Ignatius (Ei^li.
xviii.), '6 p^ptoTO? iKvo4>op'r]6^ vno Mapta? /car* otKOi'OfAtar," Hp.
Lightfoot (^Aftosiolic FatJters, II. p. 75 note) writes: "The word
oi/coro/nia came to be applied more especially to the Incarnation
because this was par excellence the system or plan which God
had ordained for the government of His household and the dis-
pensation of His stores. Hence in tlie province of theology,
oiKoi'Ofiia was distinguished by the fathers from SeoAoyia proper,
the former being the teaching which was concerned with the Incar-


Constans was much concerned on hear-
ing of the easy temper of his brother, and
was highly incensed against those who had
contrived this plot and artfully taken advantage
of it. He chose two of the bishops who had
attended the council of Sardica, and sent them
with letters to his brother ; he also despatched
Salianus, a military commander who was cele-
brated for his piety and integrity, on the same
embassy. The letters which he forwarded
by them, and which were wordiy of himself,
contained not only entreaties and counsels,
but also menaces. In the first place, he
charged his brother to attend to all that the
bishops might say, and to take cognizance
of the crimes of Stephanus and of his accom-
plices. He also required him to restore
Athanasius to his flock; the calumny of the
accusers and the injustice and ill-will of his
former judges having become evident. He
added, that if he would not accede to his
request, and perform this act of justice, he
would himself go to Alexandria, restore Atha-
nasius to his flock which earnestly longed
for him, and expel all opponents.

Constantius was at Antioch when he received
this letter; and he agreed to carry out all that
his brother commanded.

CHAPTER VII.

Account of the Bishops Euphratas and Vincen-
tius, and of the plot formed in A?itioch against
thetn.

The wonted opponents of the truth were
so much displeased .it these proceedings, that
they planned a notoriously execrable and im-
pious crime.

The two bishops resided near the foot of
the mountain, while the military commander
had settled in a lodging in another quarter.

At this period Stephanus held the rudder of
the church of Antioch, and had well nigh
sunk the ship, for he employed several tools
in his despotic doings, and by their aid in-
volved all who maintained orthodox doctrines
in manifold calamities. The leader of these
instruments was a young man of a rash and
reckless character, who led a very infamous
life. He not only dragged away men from
the market-place, and treated them with blows
and insult, but had the audacity to enter


nation and its consequences, and the latter the teaching which
related to the Eternal ;ind Divine nature of Christ. The first step
towards this special appropriation of oi»coi'o/oiia to the Incarnation
is found in St. Paul ; e g. Ephes. i. 10, eis oin oi'Oniai/ToO irATjpoi-
Haros Twi- Katpuv. ... In this passage of Ignatius it is moreover
connected with the ' reserve' of God (xix. ei/ iia-v^ia Oeoii (wpaxOr)].
Thus ' economy ' has already reached its first stage on the way to
the sense of ' dissimulation,' which was afterwards connected wit
it, and which led to disastrous consequences in the theology and
practice of a later age." Cf. H ev,- man's A ri'ans, chap. i. sec. 3.


II. 9.]


OF THEODORET.


73


pnvate houses, whence he carried off men
and women of irreproachable character. But,
not to be too prolix in relating his crimes, I will
merely narrate his daring conduct towards the
bishops ; for this alone is sufficient to give
an idea of the unlawful deeds of violence which
he perpetrated against the citizens. He went
to one of the lowest women of the town, and
told her that some strangers had just arrived,
who desired to pass the night with her. He
took fifteen of his band, placed them in hiding
among the stone walls at the bottom of the
hill, and then went for the prostitute. After
giving the preconcerted signal, and learning
that the folk privy to the plot were on the
spot, he went to the gate of the courtyard
belonging to the inn where the bishops were
lodging. The doors were opened by one of
the household servants, who had been bribed
by him. He then conducted the woman into
the house, pointed out to her the door of the
room where one of the bishops slept, and
desired her to enter. Then he went out to
call his accomplices. The door which he had
pointed out happened to be that of Euphratas,
tlie elder bishop, whose room was the outer
of the two. Vincentius, the other bishop,
occupied the inner room. When the woman
entered the room of Euphratas, he heard the
sound of her footsteps, and, as it was then
dark, asked who was there. She spoke, and
Euphratas was full of alarm, for he thought
that it was a devil imitating the voice of a
woman, and he called upon Christ the Saviour
for aid. Onager, for this was the name of
the leader of this wicked band (a name '
peculiarly appropriate to him, as he not only
used his hands but also his feet as weapons
against the pious), had in the meantime re-
turned with his lawless crew, denouncing as
criminals those who were expecting to be
judges of crime themselves. At the noise
which was made all the servants came running
in, and up got Vincentius. They closed the
gate of the courtyard, and captured seven of
the gang ; but Onager and the rest made off.
The woman was committed to custody with
those who had been seized. At the break of
day the bishops awoke the officer who had
come with them, and they all three proceeded
together to the palace, to complain of the
audacious acts of Stephanus, whose evil deeds,
they said, were too evident to need either trial
or torture to prove them. The general loudly
demanded ot the emperor that the audacious
act should not be dealt with synodically, but
by ordinary legal process, and offered to give
up the clergy attached to the bishops to be


* 'Ovaypos = wild ass


first examined, and declared that the agents of
Stephanus must undergo the torture too. To this
Stephanus insolently objected, alleging that the
clergy ought not to be scourged. The emperor
and the principal authorities then decided that
it would be better to judge the cause in the
palace. The woman was first of all questioned,
and was asked by whom she was conducted
to the inn where the bishops were lodging.
She replied, that a young man came to her,
and told her that some strangers had arrived
who were desirous of her company ; that in the
evening he conducted her to the inn ; that he-
went to look for his band, and when he had
found it, brought her in through the door of
the court, and desired her to go into the
chamber adjoining the vestibule. She added,
that the bishop asked who was there ; that he
was alarmed ; and that he began to pray ; and
that then others ran to the spot.


CHAPTER Vin.

Stephanus deposed.

After the judges had heard these replies,
they ordered the youngest of those who had
been arrested to be brought before them.
Before he was subjected to the examination by
scourging, he confessed the whole plot, and
stated that it was planned and carried into
execution by Onager. On this latter being
brought in he affirmed that he had only acted
according to the commands of Stephanus. The
guilt of Stephanus being thus demonstrated, the
bishops then present were charged to depose
him, and expel him from the Church. By his
expulsion the Church was not, however, wholly
freed from the plague of Arianism. Leontius,
who succeeded hmi in his presidency, was
a Phrygian of so subtle and artful a disposi-
tion, that he might be said to resemble the
sunken rocks of the sea ^ We shall presently
narrate more concerning him ^.

CHAPTER IX.

The second return of Saint Athanasius.

The emperor Constantius, having become
acquainted with the plots formed against the
bishops, wrote to the great Athanasius once,
and twice, aye and thrice, exhorting him to

• (^atri 5e Kal i/rjccrcrii' aAiTrAoi/tiCTeri. \'.pi.ous

Tcis V(|)aAous TreVpas TWj/ <^av£ptt»^ (xni\d.6oiV*

Anth. Pal xi. 390.

2 Leontius, Bishop of Antioch from a.d. 348 to 357, was one of
the School ol Lucianus. (Philost. iii. 15), cf. pp- 38 and 41, notes.
Athanasius says hard things of him {de/ug. \ 26), but Dr. Salmon
{Diet. Christ. Biog. s.v.) is of opinion that "we may charitably
think that the gentleness and love ot peace which all attest were
not mere hypocrisy, and may impute his toleration of heretics to
no worse cause than insufficient appreciation of the importance
of the issues involved." Vide infra, chap. xix.


74


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[II. 9.


return from the \\'est '. I shall here insert the
second letter, because it is the shortest of the
three.

Constantius Augustus the Conqueror to
Athanasius.

" AlUiough I have already apprised you by
previous letters, that you can, without fear of
molestation, return to our court, in order that
you may, according to my ardent desire, be
reinstated in your own bishopric, yet I now
again despatch another letter to your gravity to
exhort you to take immediately, without fear
or suspicion, a public vehicle and return to us,
in order that you may receive all that you
desire."

When Athanasius returned, Constantius re-
ceived him with kindness, and bade him go
back to the Church of Alexandria ^ But there
were some attached to the court, infected with
the errors of Arianism, who maintained that
Athanasius ought to cede one church to those
who were unwilling to hold communion with
him. On this being mentioned to the emperor,
and by the emperor to Athanasius, he re-
marked, that the imperial command appeared
to be just; but that he also wished to make
a request. The emperor readily promising to
grant him whatever he might ask, he said that
those in Antioch 3 who objected to hold com-
munion with the party now in possession of the
churches wanted temples to pray in, and that
it was only fair that one House of God also be
assigned to them. This request was deemed
just and reasonaljle by the emperor; but the
leaders of the Arian taction resisted its being
carried into execution, maintaining that neither
party ought to have the churches assigned to
them. Constantius on this was struck with
high admiration for Athanasius, and sent him
back to Alexandria! Gregorius was dead, hav-
ing met his end at the hands of the Alexandrians
themselves s. The people kept high holiday in
honour of their pastor; feasting marked their
joy at seeing him again, and praise was given
to God ^. Not long after Constans departed
this life 7.


* Athanasius had gone fiom Sardica to Naissvis (in vipper
Dacia), and thence to Aquileia, wliere he was received by Con-
stans. A(>. ad Const. ? 4, i! 3-

= Athanasius went from Aquilcia to Rome, where lie saw Julius
again, thence to Treves to the Court of Constans, and back to the
East to Antioch, where the conversation about the "one churcli"
took place. Soc. ii. 23 ; Soz. iii. 20.

3 i.e. the friends of Kust;ithius.

4 The more significant from the fact that Constantius affected
a more than human impassibility. Cf. the graphic account of his
entry into Rome " velut coUo munito rectam acicm lumiiunn
tendens, nee de.xtra vultum ncc lacva llectcbat, tanquam fignicntum
hominis : non cum rota concuteret nutans nee spueas aut os aut
nasum tergens vel fricans nianumve a^itans visus est unquam."
Amm. Marc. xvi. 10. 5 About I'eb. AD. 345.

* Oct. A.u. 346. Fest. Ind. The return is described by Gregory
of Nazi.'iizus (Orat. 21). Authorities, however, difi'er as to wliich
return he paints.

7 i.e. was murdered by the troops of the usurper Magnentius


CHAPTER X.

Third exile and flight of Athanasius,

Those who had obtained entire ascendency
over the mind of Constantius, and influenced
him as they pleased, reminded him that Atha-
nasius had been the cause of the differences
between his brother and himself, which had
nearly led to the rupture of the bonds of
nature, and the kindling of a civil war. Con-
stantius was induced by these representations
not only to banish, but also to condemn the
holy Athanasius to deadi ; and he accordingly
despatched Sebastianus', a military commander,
with a very large body of soldiery to slay him,
as if he had been a criminal. How the one
led the attack and the other escaped will be
best told in the words of him who so suf-
fered and was so wonderfully saved.

Thus Athanasius writes in his Apology for his
Flight: — "Let the circumstances of my retreat
be investigated, and the testimony of the
opposite faction be collected ; for Arians ac-
companied the soldiers, as well for the pur-
pose of spurring them on, as of pointing
me out to those who did not know me. If
they are not touched with sympathy at the
tale I tell, at least let them listen in the
silence of shame. It was night, and some
of the people were keeping vigil, for a com-
munion 2 was expected. A body of soldiers
suddenly advanced upon them, consisting of
a generals and five thousand armed men with
naked swords, bows and arrows, and clubs, as
I have already stated. The general surrounded
the church, posting his men in close order,
that those within might be prevented from
going out. I deemed that I ought not in such
a time of confusion to leave the people, but
that I ought rather to be the first to meet the
danger; so I sat down on my throne and
desired the deacon to read a psalm, and the
people to respond, ' For His mercy endureth for
ever.' Then I bade them all return to their own
houses. But now the general with the soldiery
forced his way into the church, and surrounded
the sanctuary in order to arrest me. The clergy
and the laity who had remained clamorously
besought me to withdraw. This I firmly refused
to do until all the others had retreated. I rose,
had a prayer offered, and directed all the
people to retire. ' It is better,' said I, ' for me
to meet the danger alone, than for any of you


at lUiberis (re-named Helena by Constantine, and now Elne,
in Roussilloii), a.d. 350.

' Probably .i>/7i!««i-, who is described by Athanasius him..,clf
as sent to get hnn removed from Alexandria, but as denying that
he had the written authority of Constantius. This was in Jan.
A.D. 356. 2 (nivalis. Cf. p. 52 note.

3 Syrianus. Ath. Ap. ad Coftst. S 25.


11. TI.]


OF TIIEODORET.


75


to be hurt.' When the greater number of the
people had left the church, and just as the rest
were foUowing, the monks and some of the
clergy who had remained came up and drew
mc out. And so, may the truth be my witness,
the Lord leading and protecting me, we passed
through the midst of the soldiers, some of
whom were stationed around the sanctuary,
and others marching about the church. Thus
I went out unperceived, and fervently thanked
God that I had not abandoned the people, but
that after they had been sent away in safety,
I had been enabled to escape from the hands
of those who sought my life ■♦."

CHAPTER XI.

The evil and daring deeds done by Georgius ^ in
Alexandria.

Athanasius having thus escaped the blood-
stained hands of his adversaries, Georgius,
who was truly another wolf, was entrusted
with authority over the liock. He treated the
sheep with more cruelty than wolf, or bear,
or leopard could have shewn. He compelled
young women who had vowed perpetual vir-
ginity, not only to disown the communion of
Athanasius, but also to anathematize the faith
of the fathers. The agent in his cruelty was
Sebastianus, an officer in command of troops.
He ordered a fire to be kindled in the centre
of the city, and placed the virgins, who were
stripped naked, close to it, commanding them
to deny the faith. Although they formed
a most sorrowful and pitiable spectacle for
believers as well as for unbelievers, they con-
sidered that all these dishonours conferred the
highest honour on them; and they joyfully
received the blows inflicted on them on account
of their faith. All these facts shall be more
clearly narrated by their own pastor.

" About Lent, Georgius returned from Cap-
padocia, and added to the evils which he
had been taught by our enemies. After the
Easter week virgins were cast into prison,
bishops were bound and dragged av/ay by the
soldiers, the homes of widows and of orphans
were pillaged, robbery and violence went on
from house to house, and the Christians during


4 Ath. Ap. deftig. \ 24.

I Georgius, a fraudulent contractor of Constantinople (Ath.
Hist. Ar. 75), made Arian Bishop of Alexandria on the expulsion
of Athanasius, in a.d. 356, was born in a UiUer's shop at Ejiiphania
in Cilicia. (Amm. Marc. xxii. 11, 3.) He was known as "the
Cappadocian,"and further illustrates the old saying of " KawTrafioKts
Kpt)T€S KiAiKe?, Tpia Kairrra KaKicna," and the kindred epigram
KixmT'xdoKrjv nor' ey.Sva KaKrj 6dKct/* dAAd /cat avr/j
KarOaui yeuo*a)u.eV7) aifiaTOS to/36Aou.

The crimes of the brutal "Antipope" (Prof. Bright in Did.
Christ. Biog.) are many, but he was a book-collector. (Jul. Ep.
ix. 36, cf. Gibbon I. Chap. 23.) Gibbon says " the infamous George
of Cappadocia has been transformed into the renowned St. George
of England ;" an identity sufficiently disproved.


the darkness of night were seized and torn
away from their dwellings. Seals were fixed
on many houses. The brothers of the clergy
were in peril for their brothers' sake. These
cruelties were very atrocious, but still more so
were those which were sul3sequently perpe-
trated. In the week following the holy festival
of Pentecost, the people who were keeping
a fast came out to the cemetery^ to pray,
because they all renounced any communion
with Georgius. This vilest of men was informed
of this circumstance, and he incited Sebastianus
the military commander, a Manichean3,to attack
the people ; and, accordingly, on the Lord's day
itself he rushed upon them with a large body of
armed soldiers wielding naked swords, and bows,
and arrows. He found but few Christians in
the act of praying, for most of them had retired
on account of the lateness of the hour. Then
he did such deeds as might be expected from
one who had lent his ears to such teachers.
He ordered a large fire to be lighted, and the
virgins to be brought close to it, and then tried
to compel them to declare themselves of the
Arian creed. When he perceived that the}'
were conquering, and giving no heed to the
fire, he ordered them to be stripped naked, and
to be beaten until their faces for a long while
were scarcely recognisable. He then seized
forty men, and inflicted on them a new kind of
torture. He ordered them to be scourged with
branches of palm-trees, retaining their thorns ;
and by these their flesh was so lacerated that
some because of the thorns fixed fast in them
had again and again to put themselves under
the surgeon's hand ; others were not able to
bear the agony and died. All who survived,
and also the virgins, were then banished to
the Greater Oasis. They even refused to give
up the bodies of the dead to their kinsfolk
for burial, but flung them away unburied, and
hid them just as they pleased, in order that
it might appear that they had nothing to do
with these cruel transactions, and were ignorant
of them. But they were deceived in this
foolish expectation : for the friends of the
slain, while they rejoiced at the faithfulness
of the deceased, deeply lamented the loss ol
the corpses, and spread abroad a full account
of the cruelty that had been perpetrated.

"The following bishops were banished from
Egypt and from Libya : — Ammonius, Muius,
Cams, Philo, Hermes, Plenius, Psinosiris,
Niiaminon, Agapius, Anagamphus, Marcus,
Dracontius, Adelphius, another Ammonius,
another Marcus, and Athenodorus ; and also


2 KoifxijTijpioi', or sleeping-place. Cf. Chrysost ed. Migne. ii.

3 The earliest account of the system of Manes or Mani is to be
found in Euseb. H.E. vii. 31. From the end of the thivd centuiv
it made rapid progress.


y6


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[II. II.


the presbyters Hierax and Dioscorusl These
were all driven into exile in so cruel a manner
that many died on the road, and others at the
place of their banishment. The persecutors
caused the death s of more than thirty bishops.
For, like Ahab, their mind was set on rooting
out the truth, had it been possible ^."

Athanasius also, in a letter addressed to the
virgins 7 who were treated with so much bar-
barity, uses the following words : " Let none
of you be grieved although these impious
heretics grudge you burial and prevent your
corpses being carried forth. The impiety of
the Arians has reached such a height, that
they block up the gates, and sit like so many
demons around the tombs, in order to hinder
the dead from being interred."

These and many other similar atrocities
were perpetrated by Georgius in Alexandria.

The holy Athanasius was well aware that
there was no spot which could be considered
a place of safety for him ; for the emperor had
promised a very large reward to whoever
should bring him alive, or his head as a proof
of his death.


CHAPTER Xn.

Council of Milan.

After the death of Constans, Magnentius
assumed the chief authority over the Western
empire ; and, to repress his usurpation, Con-
slantius repaired to Europe. But this war,
severe as it was, did not put an end to the
war against the Church. Constantius, who
had embraced Arian tenets and readily yielded
to the influence of others, was persuaded to
convoke a council at Milan', a city of Italy,
and first to compel all the assembled bishops
to sign the deposition enacted by the in-
iquitous judges at Tyre ; and then, since
Athanasius had been expelled from the
Church, to draw up another confession of
faith. The bishops assembled in council on

4 One Ammonius had been consecrated by Alexander, and was
bishop ol Pacnemunis (Ath, ati Drnc. 210, and Hist. Ar. { 72).
Anoilier was apparently consecrated by Athanasius {Hist. Ar.\ 72).
An Ammonius was banished to the Upper Oasis (id.). Cains was
the orthodox bishop of Thnuiis. Philo was banished to lialiylun
(Hist. Ar. $72, cf. Jer. Vita Hitarionis y>). Mniiis, Psinosnis,
Nilammon, Plcnius, Marcus the sees of these two Marci were
Zygra and Phila;j, and Athenodorus, were relegated to the parts
about the Libyan Amnion, nine days' journey Irom Alexandria,
only that they might perish on the road. One did die. {Hist Ar.
\ 72.) Adelpliius was bishop of Onuphis in the Delta, and was
sent to the Tlicbaid. (Join, ad Ant. 615. j Dracontius, to whom
Athanasius addressed a letter, went to the deserts about Clysma
(25 m. s.w. ol Suez;, and Hierax and Dio.scorus to Syene (Assouan
{Hist. Ar. \ 72), whither Tr.ijan had banished Juvenal.

5 Some authorities lead more mildly, "drove into exile."

6 A/>. fie Jug. \ 7. Cf. Hist. Ar. i 72.

7 " Ha;c Atlianasii Epistola hodie quod sciam non extat."
Valesius.

' Aihanasius was condemned at Aries (353) as well as at Milan
in 355. At the latter place Constantius atVected more than his
father's infallibiluy, and exclaimed, " What 1 will, be that a Canon."
Ath. Hist. Ar. i 33.


the receipt of the imperial letter, but they
were far from acting according to its directions.
On the contrary, they told the emperor to his
face that what he had commanded was unjust
and impious. For this act of courage they
were expelled from the Church, and relegated
to the furthest boundaries of the empire.

The admirable Athanasius thus mentions
this circumstance in his Apology ^ : — " Who,"
he writes, " can narrate such atrocities as they
have perpetrated ? A short time ago when
the Churches were in the enjoyment of peace,
and when the people were assembled for
prayer, Liberius 3, bishop of Rome, Paulinus,
bishop of the metropolis of Gaul 4, Dionysius,
bishop of the metropolis of Italy s^ Luciferus,
bishop of the metropolis of the Isles of
Sardinia ^, and Eusebius, bishop of one of the
cities of Italy t, who were all exemplary bi.shops
and preachers of the truth, were seized and
driven into exile, for no other cause than
because they could not assent to the Arian
heresy, nor sign the false accusation which
had been framed against us. It is unnecessary
that I should speak of the great Hosius, that
aged^ and faithful confessor of the faith, for
every one knows that he also was sent into
banishment. Of all the bishops he is the
most illustrious. What council can be men-
tioned in which he did not preside, and con-
vince all present by the power of his reason-
ing ? What Church does not still retain the
glorious memorials of his protection ? Did
any one ever go to him sorrowing, and not
leave him rejoicing ? Who ever asked his aid,
and did not obtain all that he desired ? Yet
they had the boldness to attack this great man,
simply because, from his knowledge of the
impiety of their calumnies, he refused to affix
his signature to their artful accusations agains
us."

From the above narrative will be seen the
violence of the Arians against these holy men.
Athanasius also gives in the same book an
account of the numerous plots formed by the


2 A/>ol. lie fug. \ 4 and \ S- , ,

3 For the persecution and vacillation of Liberius, "one of the
few Popes that can be charged with heresy " (Principal Barniby in
Diet. Christ. Biog. s.v.), see also Ath. Hist. vlr. { 35 et seqq.

4 Treves. Dionysius w.is the successor of St. Maximinus and
a firm champion ol orthodoxy. Cf. Snip. Sev. II. 52.

5 Milan. Paulinus was banished to Cappadocia.

6 Calaris (Cagliari). Luciferus, a vehement defender of Atha-
n.isius, was banished to Eleutheropolis in Palestine. Mr. LI.
Davies (Vict. Christ. Biog. s.v.), thinks the traditional story ol
the imprisonment of Luciferus at Milan, to prevent his outspoken
advocacy ol Athanasius, shews internal evidence of probability.

7 Eusebius, bishop ol Vercellse (Vercelli), was a staunch Atha-
nasian. He was banished to Scytlmpolis, where the bishop Patro-
philus (ct. P.ook 1. chapter VI. and XX.), a leading Arian, was, he
says, his "jailer." (Vide his letters.)

** The epithet tvyripoTaTos telicilously describes the honoured
old age of the bishop ol Cordova^he was now a hundred years old
(Hist. Ar. }45) — before his pitiable lapse. He was sent to Sir-
niium (Mitrovitz).


II. 13.]


OF THEODORET.


77


chiefs of the Arian faction against many
others : — " Did any one," said he, " whom
they persecuted and got into tlieir power ever
escape from them without suffering what in-
juries they pleased to inflict ? Was any one
who was an object of their search found by
them whom they did not subject to the most
agonizing death, or else to the mutilation of
all his limbs ? The sentences inflicted by the
judges are all attributable to these heretics ;
for the judges are but the agents of their will,
and of their malice. Where is there a place
which contains no memorial of their atrocities ?
If any one ever differed from them in opinion,
did they not, like Jezebel, falsely accuse and
oppress him ? Where is there a church which
has not been plunged in sorrow by their plots
against its bishop? Antioch has to mourn
the loss of Eustathius, the faithful and the
orthodox 9. Balaneae weeps for Euphration '° ;
Paltus " and Antaradus " for Cymatius and
Carterius. Adrianople has been called to de-
plore the loss of the well-beloved Eutropius '3^
and of Lucius his successor, who was re-
peatedly loaded with chains, and expired
beneath their weight '■♦. Ancyra, Beroea, and
Gaza had to mourn the absence of Marcellus 'S^
Cyrus ^^ and Asclepas '7, who, after having suf-
fered much ill-treatment from this deceitful sect,
were driven into exile. Messengers were sent
in quest of Theodulus '^ and Olympius'9, bi-
shops of Thrace, as well as of me and of the
presbyters of my diocese ; and had they found
us, we should no doubt have been put to
death. But at the very time that they were
planning our destruction we effected our es-
cape, although they had sent letters to Donatus,
the proconsul, against Olympius, and to Phila-
grius=^°, against me."

Such were the audacious acts of this impious
faction against the most holy Christians. Hosius


9 Cf. Book I. Chap. 20.

'o Euphration is mentioned also in Hist. Ar. § 5. Balaneae
is now Banias on the coast of Syria.

" Now Boldo, a little to the N. of Banias.

«2 In Phoenicia, now Tortosa.

»3 " A good and excellent man," Ath. Hist. Ar. § 5.

»4 Vide p. 68, note.

'5 On the question of the orthodoxy of Marcellus of Ancyra
(Angora), vide the conflicting opinions of Bp. Lightfoot {Diet.
Christ. Bio^. ii. 342), and Mr. Ffoulkes (id. iii. 810). Ath. {Apol.
contra Ar. J 47) says of the Council of Sardica, "The book of our
brother Marcellus was also read, by which the frauds of the Euse-
bians were plainly discovered . . . his faith was found to be cor-
rect," cf. p. 67, note.

16 The successor of Eustathius at Beroea, cf. p. 41, note 65.
Socrates says the statement that Cyrus accused Eustathius of
Sabellianism is an Arian calumny (Soc. i. 24 ; ii. 9.).

'7 Asclepas or yEsculapius was at Tyre (p. 62), and was de-
posed on the charge of overturning an altar, us flucrcao'Tijptoi'
avarpeil/a'; (Soz. iii. 8). '8 Vide p. 68.

19 Bishop of ./Enos in Thrace, now Enos. (Hist. Ar. i 19.)
Here was shown the tomb of Polydorus. Plin. 4, 11, 18. Virgil
(./En. iii. 18) makes iEneas call it .lEneadse, but see Conington's
note.

20 Philagrius was prsefect of Egypt a.d. 335 — 340. Ath.
(Ep. E}icyc.) calls him " a persecutor of the Church and her
virgins, an apostate of bad character."


was the bishop of Cordova, and was the most
highly distinguished of all those who assembled
at the council of Nicsea ; he also obtained the
first place among those convened at Sardica.

I now desire to insert in my history an
account of the admirable arguments addressed
by the far-famed Liberius, in defence of the
truth, to the emperor Constantius. They are
recorded by some of the pious men of that
period in order to stimulate others to the
exercise of similar zeal in divine things.
Liberius had succeeded Julius, the successor
of Silvester, in the government of the church
of Rome.


CHAPTER XIIT.

Conference between Liberius., Pope of Rome, and
the Emperor Constantius '.

Constantius. — " We have judged it right,
as you are a Christian and the bishop of our
city, to send for you in order to admonish you
to abjure all connexion with the folly of the
impious Athanasius. For when he was sepa-
rated from the communion of the Church
by the synod the whole world approved of
the decision."

Liberius. — " O Emperor, ecclesiastical sen-
tences ought to be enacted with strictest
justice : therefore, if it be pleasing to your
piety, order the court to be assembled, and. if
it be seen that Athanasius deserves condemna-
tion, then let sentence be passed upon him
according to ecclesiastical forms. For it is
not possible for us to condemn a man unheard
and untried."

Constantius. — " The whole world has con-
demned his impiety; but he, as he has done
from the first, laughs at the danger."

Liberius. — " Those who signed the con-
demnation were not eye-witnesses of anything
that occurred ; but were actuated by the desire
of glory, and by the fear of disgrace at thy
hands."

The Emperor. — " What do you mean by
glory and fear and disgrace ? "

Liberius. — " Those who love not the glory
of God, but who attach greater value to thy
gifts, have condemned a man whom they have
neither seen nor judged ; this is very contrary
to the principles of Christians."

The Emperor. — " Athanasius was tried in
person at the council of Tyre, and all the
bishops of the world at that synod condemned
him."


' The interview took place at Mil.in, after the Eunuch Euse-
bius. Chamberlain ol Constantius, had in vain tried to win over the
bishop at Rome, and had exasperated him by making an improper
offering at the shrine of St. Peter. (Hist. Ar. \ 86.)


78


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[11. 13.


LiRERius. — " No judgment has ever been
passed on him in his presence. Those
who there assembled condemned him after he
had retired."

EusEBius THE EuNUCH = foohshly inter-
posed.— " It was demonstrated at the council
of Nicaia that he held opinions entirely at
variance with the catholic faith."

LiEERius. — "Of all those who sailed to
Mareotis, and who were sent for the pur-
pose of drawing up memorials against the
accused, five only delivered the sentence
against him. Of the five who were thus sent,
two are now dead, namely, Theognis and
Theodorus. The three others, Maris, Valens,
and Ursacius, are still living. Sentence was
passed at vSardica against all those who were
sent for this purpose to Mareotis. They pre-
sented a petition to the council soliciting
pardon for having drawn up at Mareotis me-
morials against Athanasius, consisting of false
accusations and depositions of only one party.
Their petition is still in our hands. Whose
cause are we to espouse, O Emperor? With
whom are we to agree and hold communion?
With those who first condemned Athanasius,
and then solicited pardon for having con-
demned liim, or with tliose who have con-
demned these latter?"

Epictetus3 the Bishop. — "O Emperor, it
is not on behalf of the faith, nor in defence
of ecclesiastical judgments that Liberius is
pleading; but merely in order that he may
boast before the Roman senators of having
concjucred the emperor in argument."

The Emperor {addressiiig Liberius). — "What
portion do you constitute of the universe, that
you alone by yourself take part with an im-
pious man, and are destroying the peace of
the empire and of the whole world ?"

Liberius. — "My standing alone does not
make the truth a whit the weaker. According
to the ancient story, there are found but three
men resisting a decree."

EusEBius the Eunuch. — "You make our
emperor a Nebuchadnezzar."

Liberius. — " By no means. But you rashly
condemn a man without any trial. What I
desire is, in the first place, that a general confes-
sion of faith be signed, confirming that drawn
up at the council of Nica^a. And secondly, that
all our brethren be recalled from exile, and


= I adopt the suggestion of V.nlcsius, that oAdyco? refers not
to the condemnation, but to the foolish remark of the imperiai
chamberlain. Another expedient lor clearing Eusebius of the
absurdity ot saying that Athanasius was condemned at Niccea,
where he triumphed, has been to read Tyre for Nicii'ii.

3 Bishop ot CentumcelUe (Civiia Vecchia) ; " a bold young
fellow, ready for any mischief." A protc'ge of the Cappadoci.an
Georgius. he was^an Arian o: the worst type, and had elTected the
substitution of Felix for Liberius in the Roman see by irregular
and scandalous means. i^AXh.Hiit. Ar. \ 75.;


reinstated in their own bishoprics. If, when
all this has been carried into execution, it can
be shown that the doctrines of all those who
now fill the churches with trouble are conform-
able to the apostolic faith, then we will all
assemble at Alexandria to meet the accused,
the accusers, and their defender, and after
having examined the cause, we will pass judg-
ment upon it."

Epictetus the Bishop. — " There will not
be sufticient post-carriages to convey so many
bishops."

Liberius. — "Ecclesiastical aff"airs can be
transacted without post-carriages. The churches
are able to provide means for the conveyance
of their respective bishops to the sea coast ■♦."

The Emperor. — " The sentence which has
once been passed ought not to be revoked
The decision of the greater number of bishops
ought to prevail. You alone retain friendship
towards that impious man."

Liberius. — "O Emperor, it is a thing
hitlierto unheard of, that a judge should ac-
cuse the absent of impiety, as if he were his
personal enemy."

The Emperor,^" All without exception
have been injured by him, but none so
deeply as I have been. Not content with
the death of my eldest brothers, he never
ceased to excite Constans, of blessed memory,
to enmity against me ; but I, with much mod-
eration, put up alike with the vehemence of
both the instigator and his victim. Not one
of the victories which I have gained, not even
excepting those over Magnentius and Silva-
nus, equals the ejection of this vile man from
the government of the Church.'"

Liberius. — "Do not vindicate your own
hatred and revenge, O Emperor, by the in-
strumentality of bishops ; for their hands
ought only to be raised for purposes of bles-
sing and of sanctification. If it be consonant
with your will, command the bishops to return
to their own residences ; and if it appear that
they are of one mind with him who to-day
maintains the true doctrines of the confession
of faith signed at Nica^a, then let them come
together and see to the peace of the world, in
order that an innocent man may not serve as
a mark for reproach."


4 A passage of Ammianus Marcellinus (xxi. 16) on the "cursus
publicus" has been made famous by Gibbon. "The Christian
religion, which in itself is plain and simple, Constantius con-
founded by the dotage of superstition. Instead of reconciling the
parties by the weight of his authority, he cherished and propagated,
by verbal disputes, the differences which his vain curiosity had ex-
cited. The highways were covered with troops of bishops gallop-
ing from every side to the assemblies which they call synods;
and while they laboured to reduce the whole sect to their own
particular opinions, the public establishment of the posts was almost
ruined by their hasty and repeated journeys." Gibbon, chap. xx.

5 Constantine II. had befriended Athanasius, but the patriarch
was neither directly nor indirectly responsible for his att.ack on
Constans and his death.


II. 15.]


OF THEODORET.


79


The Emperor. — "One question only re-
quires to be made. I wish you to enter into
communion with the churches, and to send you
back to Rome. Consent therefore to peace,
and sign your assent, and then you shall re-
turn to Rome."

LiBERius. — " I have already taken leave of
the bretliren who are in that city. The de-
crees of the Church are of greater importance
than a residence in Rome."

The Emperor. — " You have three days to
consider whether you will sign the document
and return to Rome ; if not, you must choose
the place of your banishment."

LiDERius. — " Neither three days nor three
months can change my sentiments. Send me
wherever you please."

After the lapse of two days the emperor
sent for Liberius, and finding his opinions un-
changed, he commanded him to be banished
to Beroea, a city of Thrace. Upon the de-
parture of Liberius, the emperor sent him five
hundred pieces of gold to defray his expenses.
liberius said to the messenger who brought
them, " Go, and give them back to the em-
peror ; he has need of them to pay his troops."
The empress ^ also sent him a sum of the same
amount ; he said, " Take it to the emperor,
for he may want it to pay his troops ; but if
not, let it be given to Auxentius and Epictetus,
for they stand in need of it." Eusebius the
eunuch brought him other sums of money, and
he thus addressed him : " You have turned
all the churches of the world into a desert,
and do you bring alms to me, as to a criminal ?
Begone, and become first a Christian 7." He
was sent into exile three days afterwards, with-
out having accepted anything that was oftered
him.

CHAPTER XIV.

Coticerning the Banishment and Return of the
Holy Liberius.

This victorious champion of the truth was
sent into Thrace, according to the imperial
order. Two years after this event Constantius
went to Rome. The ladies of rank urged their
husbands to petition the emperor for the re-
storation of the shepherd to his flock : they
added, that if this were not granted, they would
desert them, and go themselves after their
great pastor. Their husbands replied, that
they were afraid of incurring the resentment of
the emperor. " If we were to ask him," they


6 Eusebia. Constantius II. was thrice married ; (i) A.D. 336
(Eus. Vit. Cotisi- iv. 49), to his cousin Constantia, sister of Julian
(vid. Pedigree in prolog.) ; (ii) A.u. 352, to Aurelia Eusebia, an
Arian " ot exceptional beauty of body and mind" (Amm. Marc.
xxi. 6), and (iii) A.D. 360 or 361, to Faustina.

7 Liberius does not reckon the Arian eunuch as a Christian.


continued, " being men, he would deem it an
unpardonable ofience ; but if you were your-
selves to present the petition, he would at any
rate spare you, and would either accede to
your request, or else dismiss you without in-
jury." These noble ladies adopted this sug-
gestion, and presented themselves before the em-
peror in all their customary splendour of array,
that so the sovereign, judging their rank from
their dress, might count them worthy of being
treated with courtesy and kindness. Thus en-
tering the presence, they besought him to take
pity on the condition of so large a city, de
prived of its shepherd, and made an easy prey
to the attacks of wolves. The emperor re-
plied, that the flock possessed a shepherd
capable of tending it, and that no other was
needed in the city. For after the banishment
of the great Liberiu.s, one of his deacons,
named Felix, had been appointed bishop. He
preserved inviolate the doctrines set forth in
the Nicene confession of faith, yet he held
communion with those who had corrupted that
faith. For this reason none of the citizens of
Rome would enter the House of Prayer while
he was in it. The ladies mentioned these facts
to the emperor. Their j^ersuasions were suc-
cessful; and he commanded that the great
Liberius should be recalled from exile, and
that the two bishops should conjointly rule the
Church. The edict of the emperor was read in
the circus, and the multitude shouted that the
imperial ordinance was just; that the specta-
tors were divided into two factions, each de-
riving its name from its own colours % and that
each faction would now have its own bishop,
ilfter having thus ridiculed the edict of the
emperor, they all exclaimed with one voice,
" One God, one Christ, one bishop." I have
deemed it right to set down their precise
words. Some time after this Christian people
had uttered these pious and righteous accla-
mations, the holy Liberius returned, and Felix
retired to another city.

I have, for the sake of preserving order,
appended this narrative to what relates to the
proceedings of the bishops at Milan. I shall
now return to the relation of events in their
due course.

CHAPTER XV.
Council of Arimiuum'^.

When all who defended the faith had
been removed, those who moulded the


I There were originally four factions in the Circus ; blue, green,
white, and red. Domitian added two more, golden and purple.
But the blue and the green absorbed the rest, and divided the
multitude at the games. Cf. Juv. XI. 197.

" Totam hodie Romam circus capit, et fragor aurem
Percutit, eventum viridis quo colligo panni."
Cf. Amm. Marc. xiv. 6, and Plin. Ep. ix. 6,

I A.D. 359.


8o


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[11. 15.


mind of the emperor according to their own
will, flattering themselves that tlie faith which
they opposed might be easily subverted, and
Arianism estabUshed in its stead, persuaded
Constantius to convene the Bishojxs of both East
and West at Ariminum^, in order to remove from
the Creed the terms which had been devised by
the Fathers to counteract the corrupt craft of
Arius, — " substance 3," and "of one substance*."
For they would have it that these terms had
caused dissension between church and church.
On their assembling in synod the partizans of
the Arian faction strove to trick the majority
of the bishops, especially those of cities of
the Western Empire, who were men of simple
and unsophisticated ways. The body of the
Church, they argued again and again, must
not be torn asunder for the sake of two terms
which are not to be found in the Bible ; and,
while they confessed the propriety of describing
the Son as in all things ^^ like" the Father,
pressed the omission of the word '■^substance"
as unscriptural. The motives, however, of
the propounders of these views were seen
through by the Council, and they were con-
sequently repudiated. The orthodox bishops
declared their mind to the emperor in a
letter; for, said they, we are sons and heirs
of the Fathers of the Council of Nicaea, and
if we were to have the hardihood to take away
anything from what was by them subscribed,
or to add anything to what they so excellently
settled, we should declare ourselves no true
sons, but accusers of them that begat us.
But the exact terms of their confession of
faith will be more accurately given in the
words of their letter to Constantius.


Letter^ written to the Emperor Constantius by
the Synod assembled at Ariminu?n.

" Summoned, we believe, at the bidding of
God, and in obedience to your piety, we
bishops of the Western Church assembled in
synod at Ariminum in order that the faith of


* The eastern bishops were summoned to Selcucia, in Ciiicia ;
the western to Ariminum, (Rimini). "A previous Conference was
held at Sirniium, in order to determine on the creed to be presented
to the bipartite Council. . . . The Euscbians struggled for the
adoption of the Acacian Ilomceon, which the Eni| eror had already
both received and abandoned, and they actually efiec'ed the adop-
tion of the ' like in all things according to the Scriptures,' a
phrase in which the semi-Arians, indeed, included their 'like in
substance' or Homceiision, but which did not necessarily refer
to suhsiance or nature at all. Under these circumstances the two
Councils met in the autumn of a.d. 359, under the nominal
superintendence of the semi-Arians ; but, on the Euscbian side.
the sharp-witted Acacius undertaking to deal with the disputatious
Greeks, the overbearing and cruel Valens with the plainer Latins."
(Newman, Arians, iv. {4.) At Seleucia there were 150 bishops;
at Ariminum 400.

3 ovxri'a. 4 biJ.oov<Tiov.

5 This letter exists in Ath. de Syn. Arim. et Seleu., Soc. ii. 39,
Soz. iv. 10, and the Latin of Hilarius (P>. viii.), whicii frequently
diflfers considerably from the Greek.


the Church Catholic might be set forth, and
its opponents exposed. After long con-
sideration we have found it to be plainly
best for us to hold fast and guard, and by
guarding keep safe unto the end, the faith
established from the first, preached by
Prophets, and Evangelists, and Apostles,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, warden of
thy empire, and champion of thy salvation.
For it is plainly absurd and unlawful to make
any change in the doctrines rightly and justly
defined, and in matters examined at Nicasa
with the cognisance of the right glorious
Constantine, thy Father and Emperor, whereof
the teaching and spirit was published and
preached that mankind might hear and under-
stand. This faith was destined to be the one
rival and destroyer of the Arian heresy, and
by it not only the Arian itself, but likewise all
other heresies were undone. To this faith to
add aught is verily perilous ; from it to subtract
aught is to run great risk. If it have either
addition or loss, our foes will feel free to act as
they please. Accordingly Ursacius and Valens,
declared adherents and friends of the Arian
dogma, were pronounced separate from our
communion. To keep their place in it, they
asked to be granted a locus penitentice and
pardon for all the points wherein they had
owned themselves in error; as is testified by
the documents written by themselves, by means
of which they obtained favour and forgiveness.
These events were going on at the very time
when the synod was meeting at Milan, the
presbyters of the church of Rome being also
present. It was known that Constantine, who,
though dead, is worthy of remembrance, had,
with all exactitude and care, set forth the
creed drawn up : and now that, after receiving
Baptism, he was dead, and had passed away
to the peace which he deserved. We judged
it absurd for us after him to indulge in any
innovation, and throw a slur on all the holy
confessors and martyrs who had devised and
formulated this doctrine, in that their minds
have ever remained bound by the old bond
of the Church. Their faith God has handed
down even to the times of thy own reign,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by Whose
grace such empire is thine that thou rulest
over all the world. Yet again those pitiable
and wretched men, with lawless daring, have
proclaimed themselves preachers of their un-
holy opinion, and are taking in hand the
overthrow of all the force of the truth. For
when at thy command the synod assembled,
then they laid bare their own disingenuous
desires. For they set about trying through
villany and confusion to make innovation.
They got hold of certain of their own follow-


II. 15.]


OF THEODORET.


8i


ing, — one Germanius^, and Auxentius?, and
Caiiis^, promoters of heresy and discord, whose
doctrine, though but one, transcends a very
host of blasphemies. When, however, they
became aware that we were not of their way
of thinking, nor in sympathy with their vicious
projects, they made their way into our meeting
as though to make some other proposal, but
a very short time was enough to convict them
of their real intentions. Therefore in order
to save the management of the Church from
falling from time to time into the same diffi-
culties, and to prevent them from being
confounded in whirlpools of disturbance and
disorder, it has seemed the safe course to
keep what has been defined aforetime fixed
and unchanged, and to separate the above-
named from our communion. Wherefore we
have sent envoys to your clemency to signify
and explain the mind of the synod as ex-
pressed in this letter. These envoys before
all things we have charged to guard the truth
in accordance with the old and right defini-
tions. They are to inform your holiness, not
as did Ursacius and Valens, that there will
be peace if the truth be upset ; for how can
the destroyers of peace be agents of peace ?
but rather that these changes will bring strife
and disturbance, as well on the rest of the
cities, as on the Roman church. Wherefore
we beseech your clemency to receive our
envoys with kindly ears and gentle mien, and
not to suffer any new thing to flout the dead.
Suffer us to abide in the definition and settle-
ment of our Fathers, whom we would un-
hesitatingly declare to have done all they did
with intelligence and wisdom, and with the
Holy Ghost. The innovation now sought to
be introduced is filling the faithful with un-
belief, and unbelievers with credulity 9.

"We beg you to order bishops in distant
parts, who are afflicted alike by advanced age
and poverty, to be provided with facilities for
travelling home, that the churches be not left
long deprived of their bishops.

" And yet again this one thing we supplicate,
that nothing be taken from or added to the


6 Germanus (Ath. andSoz.), Germiniiis (according to Hilarius),
bishop of Cyziiiiis, was translated to Sirmiuni, ad. 356. The creed
composed by Marcus of Arethusa with the aid of Germinius,
Valens and others, is known as " the dated_ creed," from the
minuteness, satirized by Athanasius, with which it specifies the
day (May 22, a.d. xi. Kal. Jun.), in the consulate of Eusebius
and Hypatius (Ath. de Syn. {8). _ .

7 Auxentius, the elder, bishop of Milan, succeeded Dionysius
in 355, and occupied the see till his death in 374, when Ambrose
was chosen to fill his place. Auxentius, the younger, known also
as Mercurinus, was afterwards set up by the Arian Court party
as a rival bishop to Ambrose. A third Auxentius, a supporter
of the heretic Jovinianus, is mentioned in the Epistle of Siricius.
Vide refr. in Baronius and Tillemoiit. An Auxentius, Azi&a bishop
of Mopsuestia, is mentioned by Philostorgius, v. i. 2.

8 A I'annonian bishop. Ath. ad Epict.

9 The word ui the text is co^iorrjTa, which is supposed to have
stood for crudelitatem, a clerical error for credulitatem in the
Latin original.

VOL. III.


established doctrines, but that all remain un-
broken, as they have been preserved by your
father's piety, and to our own day. Let us
toil no longer nor be kept away from our own
dioceses, but let the bishops with their own
people spend their days in peace, in prayer, and
in worship, offering supplication for thy empire,
and health, and peace, which God shall grant
thee for ever and ever. Our envoys, who
will also instruct your holiness out of the
sacred Scriptures, convey the signatures and
salutations of the bishops."

The letter was written, and the envoys sent,
but the high officers of the Imperial Court,
though they took the despatch and delivered
it to their master, refused to introduce the
envoys, on the ground that the Sovereign was
occupied with state aftairs. They took this
course in the hope that the bishops, an-
noyed at delay, and eager to return to the
cities entrusted to their care, would at length
be compelled themselves to break up and
disperse the bulwark erected against heresy.
But their ingenuity was frustrated, for the
noble champions of the Faith despatched a
second letter to the emperor, exhorting him to
admit the envoys to audience and dissolve the
synod. This letter I subjoin.

The Second Letter of the Synod to Constantiiis.

*' To Constantius the "Victorious, the pious
emperor, the bishops assembled at Ariminum
send greeting.

" Most illustrious lord and autocrat, we have
received the letter of your clemency, informing
us that, in consequence of occupations of
state, you have hitherto been unable to see
our envoys. You bid us await their return,
that your piety may come to a decision on
the object we have in view, and on the de-
crees of our predecessors. But we venture
in this letter to repeat to your clemency the
point which we urged before, for we have in
no way withdrawn from our position. We en-
treat you to receive with benign countenance
the letter of our humility, wherein now we
make answer to your piety, and the points
which we have ordered to be submitted to
your benignity by our envoys. Your clemency
is no less aware than we are ourselves how
serious and unfitting a state of things it is,
that in the time of your most happy reign so
many churches should seem to be without
bishops. Wherefore once again, most glorious
autocrat, we beseech you that, if it be pleasing
to your humanity, you will command us to
return to our churches before the rigour of
winter, that we may be able, with our people,
as we have done and ever do, to offer most
earnest prayers for the health and wealth of


82


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


ril. 15.


youT empire to Almighty God, and to Christ
His Son, our Lord and Saviour."

CHAPTER XVI.

Concerning the Sy?iod held at Nica '^ in Thrace,
and the Confession of Faith drawn up there.

After this letter they^ irritated the em-
peror, and got the majority of the bishops,
against their will, to a certain town of Thrace,
of the name of Nica. Some simple men they
deluded, and others they terrified, into carry-
ing out their old contrivance for injuring the
true religion, by erasing the words " Sub-
stance " and " of one Substance " from the
Creed, and inserting instead of them the
word "like." I insert their formula in
this history, not as being couched in proper
terms, but because it convicts the faction of
Arius, for it is not even accepted by the dis-
affected of the present time. Now, instead of
" the like " they preach " the unlike 3."

Unsound Creed put forth at Nica in Thrace.

"We believe in one only true God, Father
Almighty, of Whom are all things. And in
the only-begotten Son of God, Who before all
ages and before every beginning was begotten
of God, through Whom all things were made,
both visible and invisible : alone begotten,
only-begotten of the Father alone, God of
God : like the Father that begat Him, accord-
ing to the Scriptures, Whose generation no
one knoweth except only the Father that begat
Him. This Only-begotten Son of God, sent
by His Father, we know to have come down
from heaven, as it is written, for the destruction
of sin and death ; begotten of the Holy Ghost
and the Virgin Mary, as it is written, according
to the flesh. Who companied with His dis-
ciples, and when the dispensation was fulfilled,
according to the Father's will, was crucified,
dead, and buried, and descended to the world
below, at Whom Hell himself trembled. On


' At or near the modern Hafsa, not far to the S. of Adrianople.

^ i.e. the Arians.

3 " The I'^iisebians, little pleased with the growing dogmatism
of niciiibers of their own body, fell upon the expedient of confinins;
their confession to Scripture terms ; wliich, when separated from
tlieir context, were of course iiKulequate to concentrate and as-
certain the true doctrine. Hence the formula of the Hoiiiocoii,
which was introduced by Acacius with the express purpose of
deceiving or baffling the semi-Avi;in members ol his party. This
measure was the more necessary for Eusebian interests, inasmuch
as a new variety ot the heresy arose in the East at the same time,
advocated by Aetius and Eunomius ; who, by professing boldly the

?iure Arian text, alarmed Constantius, and threw him back upon
iasil, and the other semi Arians. This new doctrine, called
Aiiomccan, because it maintained that the usia or substance of
the Son was unlike (ai/ofioio;) the Divine usia, was actually adopted
by one portion of the Eusebians, Valens, and his rude occidentals ;
whose language and temper, not admitting the refinements of
Grecian genius, led them to rush from orthodoxy into the most
hard and undisguised impiety. And thus the parties stand at the
date now before us 'a.d. 356 — 361) ; Constantius being alternately
^wa^■l■d by Rasil, Acacius, and Valcns, that is by the Homousian,
the Hon:tian, and the Anomoian. the semi-Arian, the Scripturalist,
and the Arian pure" (Newman, .Brians, iv. \ 4;.


the third day He rose from the dead and
companied with His disciples forty days. He
was taken up into Heaven, and sitteth on the
right hand of His Father, and is coming at the
last day of the Resurrection, in His Father's
Glory, to render to every one according to his
works. And we believe in the Holy Ghost,
which the Only-begotten Son of God, Jesus
Christ, both God and Lord, promised to send
to man, the Comforter, as it is written, the
Spirit of Truth. This Spirit He Himself sent
after He had ascended into Heaven and sat
at the right hand of the Father, from thence
to come to judge both quick and dead. But
the word ' the Substance,' which was too
simply inserted by the Fathers, and, not being
understood by the people, was a cause of
scandal through its not being found in the
Scriptures, it hath seemed good to us to re-
move, and that for the future no mention
whatever be permitted of 'Substance,' on
account of the sacred Scriptures nowhere
making any mention of the 'Substance' of
the Father and the Son. Nor must one ' es-
sence 4 ' be named in relation to the person s
of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And we call
the Son like the Father, as the Holy Scriptures
call Him and teach ; but all the heresies, both
those already condemned, and any, if such
there be, which have risen against the docu-
ment thus put forth, let them be Anathema."

This Creed was subscribed by the bishops,
some being frightened and some cajoled, but
those who refused to give in their adhesion
were banished to the most remote regions of
the world.

CHAPTER XVH.

Sy nodical Act of Da ma sits, Bishop of Rome, and
of the Western Bishops, about the Council at
ArimiJium.

The condemnation of this formula by all
the champions of the truth, and specially
those of the West, is shewn by the letter
which they wrote to the Illyrians ^ First of
the signatories was Damasus, who obtained
the presidency of the church of Rome after
Liberius, and was adorned with many virtues^

4 v7ro(rTa<ris. 5 TTpoo'fun'Oi'.

I The letter is given in Soz. vi. 23. The Latin text (Coll. Rom.
ed. Holsten. p. 163) differs materially from the Greek.

• These were displayed after his establishment in his see.
He was the nominee of the Arian party, and bloody scenes marked
the struggle with his rival Ursinus. " Damasus et Ursinus,
supra humanum modum ad rapiendam episcopatus sedem ardcntes,
scissis studiis asperrinie conflictahantur, adiisijue mortis vulnerum-
que discrimina proijressis. . . . Constat in basilica ubi ritus cliris-
tiani conventiculum uno die centum triginta septem reperta cada-
vcra peremjitorum." Amm. Marc, xxvii. 3, 13. _" But we can say
that ne used his success well, and that the chair of St. Peter was
never more respected nor more vicorous than during his bishopric."
Mr. Moberly in Diet. Christ. Biog. i. 782. Jerome calls him
(Ep. Hier. xlviii. 230) " an illustrious man, virgin doctor of the virgin
church."

But not his least claim to pur regard is that in the Catacombs


II. i8.]


OF THEODORET.


83


With him signed ninety bishops of Italy and
Galatia3, now called Gaul, wlio met together
at Rome. I would have inserted their names
but that I thought it superfluous.


" The bishops assembled at Rome in sacred
synod, Damasus and Valerianus + and the rest,
to their beloved brethren the bishops of Illyria,
send greeting in God.

" We believe that we, priests of God, by whom
it is right for the rest to be instructed, are
holding and teaching our people the Holy
Creed which was founded on the teaching of
the Apostles, and in no way departs from the
definitions of the Fathers. But through a
report of the brethren in Gaul and Venetia we
have learnt that certain men are fallen into
heresy.

" It is the duty of the bishops not only to
take precautions against this mischief, but also
to make a stand against whatever divergent
teaching has arisen, either from incomplete
instruction, or the simplicity of readers of un-
sound commentators. They should be minded
not to sHde into sHppery paths, but rather
whensoever divergent counsels are carried to
their ears, to hold fast the doctrine of our
fathers. It has, therefore, been decided that
Auxentius of Milan is in this matter specially
condemned. So it is right that all the teachers
of the law in the Roman Empire should be
well instructed in the law, and not befoul the
faith with divergent doctrines.

"When first the wickedness of the heretics
began to flourish, and when, as now, the blas-
phemy of the Arians was crawling to the
front, our fathers, three hundred and eighteen
bishops, tlie holiest prelates in the Roman
Empire, deliberated at Nicaea. The wall which
they set up against the weapons of the devil,
and the antidote wherewith they repelled his
deadly poisons, was their confession that the
Father and the Son are of one substance, one
godhead, one virtue, one power, one likeness s,
and that the Holy Ghost is of the same es-


it was his " labour of love to rediscover the tombs which had been
blocked up for concealment under Dioclelian, to remove the earth,
widen the passages, adorn the sepulchral chambers with marble, and
support the friable tufa walls with arches of brick and stone."
" Koma Sotterranea," Northcote and Brownlow, p. 97.

3 raAoirai = KeAxoi, the older name, which exists in Herodotus
II. 33 and IV. 49. Pausanias(I. iii. 5)saysoi/(e 6e' TTore auTov5 KoAeio'-
6aiVaXa.TaL<; e^euCK1^(Te, KeATOi^op Kara T6 ctftai to apxalov Kal napa
Tots aAAoi5 Mco/xd^ofTo. Galatia occurs on the Monumentum Ancy-
ranum. Bp. Lightfoot (Galat. p. 3) says the first instance of Gallia
(Galli) which he has found in any Greek writer is in Epictetus II.
20, 17.

4 In Sozomen, Valerius, Bishop of Aquileia. " But little is
known of his life, but under his rule there grew up at Aquileia the
society of remarkable persons of whom Hieronymus became the
most famous." JJicL Christ. Biog. iv. 1102.

5 xo-paKTTjp' contrast the statement in Heb. i. 3, that the Son is
the x"-?"-"-'^'^? °f 'he person of the Father. xa.paxTr\f> in the letter
of Damasus approaches more nearly our use of "character"
as meaning distinctive qualities, cf. Plato Phaed. 26 B.


sence ^ and substance. Whoever did not thus
think was judged separate from our commu-
nion. Their deliberation was worthy of all
respect, and their definition sound. But cer-
tain men have intended by other later dis-
cussions to corrupt and befoul it. Yet, at the
very outset, error was so fiir set right by the
bishops on whom the attempt was made at
Ariminum to compel them to manipulate or in-
novate on the faith, that they confessed them-
selves seduced by opposite arguments, or
owned that they had not perceived any con-
tradiction to the opinion of the Fathers de-
livered at Nicsea. No prejudice could arise
from the number of bishops gathered at Ari-
minum, since it is well known that neither the
bishop of the Romans, whose opinion ought
before all others to have been waited for, nor
Vincentius, whose stainless episcopate had
lasted so many years, nor the rest, gave in
their adhesion to such doctrines. And this is
the more significant, since, as has been already
said, the very men who seemed to be tricked
into surrender, themselves, in their wiser mo-
ments, testified their disapproval.

" Your sincerity then perceives that thisone
faith, which was founded at Nicsea on the
authority of the Apostles, ought to be kept
secure for ever. You perceive that with us,
the bishops of the East, who confess themselves
Catholic, and the western bishops, together
glory in it. We believe that before long those
who think otherwise ought without delay to be
put out from our communion, and deprived of
the name of bishop, that their flocks may be
freed from error and breathe freely. For they
cannot be expected to correct the errors of
their people when they themselves are the
victims of error. May the opinion of your
reverence be in harmony with that of all the
priests of God. We believe you to be fixed
and firm in it, and thus ought we rightly to
believe with you. May your charity make us
glad by your reply.

" Beloved brethren, farewell."

CHAPTER XVIII.

The Letter of Athanasius, bishop of Alex-
andria, concerning the same Council.

The great Athanasius also, in his letter to
the Africans, writes thus about the council
at Ariminum. "Under these circumstances
who will tolerate any mention of the council
of Ariminum or any other beside the Nicene?
Who would not express detestation of the
setting aside of the words of the Fathers, and
the preference for those introduced at Ari-


urro<7TO(ris.


G 2


84


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[II. 19.


miniim by violence and party strife? Who
would wish to be associated with these men
— fellows who do not, forsooth, accept their
own words? In tlieir own ten or a dozen
synods they have laid down, as has been nar-
rated already, now one thing now another ;
and at the present time these synods, one after
another, they are themselves openly denounc-
ing. They are now suil'ering the fate under-
gone of old by the traitors of the Jews. For
as is written in the Book of the Prophet
Jeremiah '•'• they have for sakeJi me tJic foun-
tain of living waters and hctved thc?}i out
cisterns^ broken cisterns that cafi hold no
water ^'''^ so these men, in their opposition to
the Oecumenical synod, have hewed for them-
selves many synods which have all proved
vain and like '•''buds that yield 7io 77ieal^^'' ^ let
us not therefore admit those who cite the
council of Ariminum or any other but that of
Nicasa, for indeed the very citers of Ariminum
do not seem to know what was done there ; if
they had they would have held their tongues.
For you, beloved, have learnt from your own
representatives at that Council, and are con-
sequently very well aware, that Ursacius,
Valens, Eudoxius, and Auxentius, and with
them Demophilus were asked to anathematize
the Arian licresy, and made excuse, choosing
rather to be its champions, and so were all de-
posed for making propositions contrary to the
Nicene decrees. The bishops, on the con-
trary, who were the true servants of the Lord,
and of the right faith, — about two hundred
in number, — declared their adherence to the
Nicene Council alone, and their refusal to
entertain the thought of either subtraction
from, or addition to, its decrees. This con-
clusion they have communicated to Constan-
tius, by whose order the council assembled.

On the other hand the bishops who were
deposed at Ariminum have been received by
Constantius, and have succeeded in getting
the two hundred who sentenced them grossly
insulted, and threatened with not being
allowed to return to their dioceses, and with
having to undergo rigorous treatment in
Thrace, and that in the wijiter, in order to
force them to accept the innovators' measures.

If, then, we hear any one appealing to Ari-
minum, show us, let us rejoin, first the sen-
tence of deposition, and then the document
drawn up by the bishops, in which they de-
clare that they do not seek to go beyond the
terms drawn up by the Nicene Fathers, nor
appeal to any other council than that of Nica^a.
In reality, these are just the facts they con-


' Jer. ii. 13.

' Hosea viii. 7. The text " Spaytiara jar) Ixoira laxvi' " recalls
the septuaijint Spdyfia ovk fX"" '■"^X^"-


ceal, while they put prominently forward the
forced confession of Thrace. They do but
shew themselves friends of the Arian heresy,
and strangers to the sound faith. Only let
any one be w^illing to put side by side that
great synod, and those others to which these
men appeal, and he will perceive, on the one
side, true religion, on the other, folly and dis-
order. The fathers of Nica^a met together
not after being deposed, but after confessing
that the Son was of the Substance of the
Father. These men were deposed once, a
second time, and again a third time at Ari-
minum, and then dared to lay down that it is
wrong to attribute Substance or Essence to
God. So strange and so many were the
tricks and machinations concocted by the mad
gang of Arius in the West against the dogmas
of the Truth.

CHAPTER XIX.

Concerning the cunning of Leontius, Bishop
of Antioch, and tiic boldness of Flavianus
atid Diodorus.

At Antioch Placidus was succeeded by
Stephanus, who was expelled from the
Church. Leontius then accepted the Pri-
macy, but in violation of the decrees of the
Nicene Council, for he had mutilated him-
self, and was an eunuch. The cause of his
rash deed is thus narrated by the blessed
Athanasius. Leontius, it seems, was the
victim of slanderous statements on account of
a certain young woman of the name of
Eustolia.^ Finding himself prevented from
dwelling wnth her he mutilated himself for
her sake, in order that he might feel free to
live with her. But he did not clear himself
of suspicion, and all the more for this reason
was deposed from the presbyterate. So
much Athanasius has written about the rest
of his earlier life. I shall now give a sum-
mary exposure of his evil conduct. Now
though he shared the Arian error, he always
endeavoured to conceal his unsoundness. He
observed that the clergy and the rest of the
people were divided into two parts, the one,
in giving glory to the Son, using tlie conjunc-
tion " and," the other using the preposition
"through " of the Son, and applying " in "
to the Holy Ghost. He himself oflcred all
the doxology in silence, and all that those

» Ath. Ap. de fug. § 26 and Hist. Ar. g 28. The question of
avt'eCa-aKTai. was one of the great scandals and difficulties of the
early Church. Some suppose that the case of Leontius was the
cause of the first Canon of the Nicene Council n-epl tCiv toKixiovtiov
iavrovs tKTenvuv.

Theodoretus (iv. 12) relates an instance of what was consid-
ered conjugal chastity, and the mischiefs referred to in the text
arose from the rash attempt to imitate such continence. Vide
Suicer in voc.


II. 19.]


OF THEODORET.


BS


standing near him could hear was the " For
ever and ever." And had not the exceeding
wickedness of his soul been betrayed by other
means, it might have been said that he
adopted this contrivance from a wish to pro-
mote concord among the people. But when
he had wrought much mischief to the cham-
pions of the truth, and continued to give
every support to the promoters of impiety,
he was convicted of concealing his own
unsoundness. He was influenced both by
his fear of the people, and by the grievous
threats which Constantius had uttered against
any who had dared to say that the Son was
unlike the Father. His real sentiments were
however proved by his conduct. Fol-
lowers of the Apostolic doctrines never re-
ceived from him either ordination or indeed
the least encouragement. Men, on the
other hand, who sided with the Arian super-
stition, were both allowed perfect liberty in
expressing their opinions, and were from
time to time admitted to priestly office. At
this juncture Aetius, the master of Eunomius,
who promoted the Arian error by his spec-
ulations, was admitted to the diaconate.
Flavianus and Diodorus, however, who had
embraced an ascetic career, and were open
champions of the Apostolic decrees, publicly
protested against the attacks of Leontius
against true religion. That a man nurtured
in iniquity and scheming to win notoriety by
ungodliness should be counted worthy of the
diaconate, was, they urged, a disgrace to the
Church. They further threatened that they
would withdraw from his communion, travel
to the western empire, and publish his plots
to the world. Leontius was now alarmed,
and suspended Aetius from his sacred office,
but continued to show him marked favour.

That excellent pair Flavianus and Dio-
dorus,^ though not yet admitted to the


1 Flavianus was a noble native of Antioch, and was after-
wards (3S1-404) bishop of tliat see. Diodorus in later times
(c. 379) became bishop of Tarsus, " one of the most deservedly
venerated names in the Eastern church for learninsf, sanctity,
courage in withstanding heresy, and zeal in the defence of tlie
truth. Diodorus has a still greater clnim on the grateful
remembrances of the whole church, as, if not the founder, the
chief promoter of the rational school of scriptural interpreta-
tion, of which his disciples, Chrysostom and Theodorus of
Mopsuestia, and Theodoret, were such distinguished represen-
tatives." Diet. Christ. Biog. 1.836. On the renewed champion-
ship of the Antiochene church by Flavianus and Diodorus
under the persecution of Valens vide iv.22.

Socrates (vi. S), describing the rivalry of the Homoousians
and Arians in singing partizan hymns antiphonally in the
streets of Antioch in the days of Arcadius, traces the mode of
chanting to the great Ignatius, who once in a Vision heard
angels so praising God.

But, remarks Bp. Lightfoot (Apostolic Fathers Pt. 2. I.
p. 31.) " Antiphonal singing did not need to be suggested by
a heavenly Vision. It existed already among the heathen in
the arrangements of the Greek Chorus. It was practised with
much elaboration of detail in the Psalmody of the Jews, as
appears from the account which is given of the Egyptian
Therapeutes. Its introduction into the Christian Church
therefore was a matter of course almost from the beginning :
and when we read in Pliny (Ep. x, 97) that the Christians of


priesthood and still ranked with the laity,
worked night and day to stimulate men's zeal
for truth. They were the first to divide
choirs into two parts, and to teach them to
sing the psalms of David antiphonally.
Introduced first at Antioch, the practice
spread in all directions, and penetrated to
the ends of the earth. Its originators now
collected the lovers of the Divine word and
work into the Churches of the Martyrs, and
with them spent the night in singing psalms
to God.

When Leontius perceived this, he did not
think it safe to try to prevent them, for he
saw that the people were exceedingly well-
disposed towards these excellent men. How-
ever, putting a colour of courtesy on his
speech, he requested that they would per-
form this act of worship in the churches.
They were perfectly well aware of his evil
intent. Nevertheless they set about obeying
his behest and readily summoned their choir ^
to the Church, exhorting them to sing praises
to the good Lord. Nothing, however, could
induce Leontius to correct his wickedness,
but he put on the mask of equity,* and con-
cealed the iniquity of Stephanus and Placidus.
Men who had accepted the corruption of the
faith of priests and deacons, although they
had embraced a life of vile irregularity, he
added to the roll ; while others adorned with
every kind of virtue and firm adherents of
apostolic doctrines, he left unrecognised.
Thus it came to pass that among the clergy
were numbered a majority of men tainted
with heresy, while the mass of the laity were
champions of the Faith, and even professional
teachers lacked courage to lay bare their
blasphemy. In truth the deeds of impiety
and iniquity done by Placidus, Stephanus, and
Leontius, in Antioch are so many as to want
a .special histoiy of their own, and so terrible

Bithyniasang hymns toChrist as toagod, • alternately '(secum
invicem) we may reasonably infer that the practice of antipho-
nal singing prevailed far bevond the limits of the church of
Antioch, even in the time of Ignatius himself."

Augustine (Conf. ix. 7) states that the fashion of singing
"secundum morein orientalium partium " was introduced into
the Church of Milan at the time of the persecution of Ambrose
by Justina, " ne populus maroris tcedio contabesceret," and
thence spread all over the globe.

Platina attributes the introduction of antiphons at Rome to
Pope Damasus.

Hooker (ii. :66) quotes the older authority of " the Prophet
Esay," in the vision where the seraphim cried to one another in
what Bp. Mant calls " the alternate h^'mn."

1 1 prefer the reading of Basil Gr. and Steph. i. epyoras to
the epaa-To.^ of Steph. 2 and Pin.

2e7rieiKeia9. " The mere existence of such a word as f TrifiVeia
is itself a signal evidence of the high development of ethics
among the Greeks. It expresses exactly thnt moderation
which recognizes the impossibility, cleaving to formal law, of
anticipating or providing for all cases that will emerge, and
present themselves to it for decision ... It is thus more
truly just than strict justice will have been ; being Bixaiov Kal
/SeArioi' rii-o; SiKaiov, as Aristotle expresses it. Eth. Nic. V.
10.6." Archbp. Trench's synonyms of the N.T. p. 15J. The
" clemency " on which Tertullus reckons in Felix is sTrteiiceta;
and in II. Cor. x. St. Paul beseeches by the " gentleness " 01'
eTnciKcta of Christ.


86


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[II.


20-22.


as to be worthy of the lament of David ; for
of them too it must be said " For lo thy
enemies make a murmuring and they that
hate thee Hft up their head. Tliey have
imagined craftily against the people and
taken counsel against thy secret ones. They
have said come and let us root them out
that they be no more a people : and that
the name of Israel may be no more in re-
membrance." ^

Let us now continue the course of our
narrative.

CHAPTER XX.

Concerning the imiovations of Eudoxius, of
Germanicia, and the zeal of Basiliiis ^ of
Ancyra, and of Eustathius* of Sebastcia
against him.

Germanicia is a city on the coasts of Ci-
licia, Syria, and Cappadocia, and belongs to
the province called Euphratisia. Eudoxius,
the head of its church, directly he heard of
the death of Leontius, betook himself to
Antioch and clutched the see, where he rav-
aged the vineyard of the Lord like a wild
boar. He did not even attempt to hide his
evil ways, like Leontius, but raged in direct
attack upon the a2:)ostolic decrees, and in-
volved in various troubles all who had the
hardihood to gainsay him. Now at this
time Basilius had succeeded Marcellus, and
held the helm of the church of Ancyra, the
capital of Galatia, and Sebastia, the chief
city of Armenia, was under the guidance of
Eustatliius. No sooner had these bishops
heard of the iniquity and madness of Eudox-
ius, than they wrote to inform the Em-
peror Constantius of his audacity. Con-
stantius was now still tarrying in the west.


iPs. S3.- 2.3.4.

* Eudoxius, eif^htli bishop of Constantinople, and formerly
of Germanicia (Tep^iai'iKua, now Marasli, or Banicia),\vas one
of the most violent of the Arians. lie was orii^inally refused
ordination by St. Eustathius, but on the deposition of tlial
l)isliop in 331 tile Eusebians puslied him fcnnvard. After rulini;:
at Germanicia for some seventeen years he intruded himself on
the see of Antioch.

Under the patronajjc of the Acacians he became patriarcli
of Constantinople in 360, and died in 370.

3 Hasilius,a learned pliysician, a Semiarian of Ancyra, was
made bishop of that see on the dei)osition of Marcellus, in 3^6,
and excommunicated at Sardica in 347. In 350 he was >-ein-
statetl at the command of Constantius. lie was a>jain exiled
under Acacian inlluencc, failed to jret restitution from Jovian,
and probalily died in exile. (Soc. li, 20, 20, iv, 24.) N'i'dealso
Tlieod. ii, 23. His works are lost. Atlianasius jjraises him
as amonsf those who were (de Synod. 603 ed. Migne) " not far
from acceptiiif^ the Ilomousion."

■• liustatliius was bishop of Sebasteia or Scbastc (Siwas) on
the llalys, from 357 to 3S0.

Basil, Ep. 241, § 9, "says that he was a heretic " black who
could not turn wliite" ; but he exhibited many shades of theo-
logical colour, preservinjif through all vicissitudes a high per-
sonal character, and a something " more than liuniaii." Basil
Ep. 212, § 2. Ordained by Eulalhis, lie was degraded because
he insisted on wearing very uiiclerical costinne. (Soc. ii, 43.)
The question of the identity of this Eustatliius with the Eusta-
thius condemned at the Council of Ancyra is discussed in the
Diet. Christ. Ant. i, 709.


and, after the death of the tyrants, was en-
deavouring to heal the harm tliey liad
caused. Both bishops were \\ell known to
the Emperor and had great influence with
him on account of the high character they
bore.

CHAPTER XXI.

Of the Second Council of Niccea.

On receipt of these despatches Constantius
wrote to the Antiochenes denying that he
had committed the see of Antioch to Eudox-
ius, as Eudoxius had publicly announced.
He ordered that Eudoxius be banished, and
be punished for the course he had taken at
the Bithynian Nicaja, where he had ordered
the synod to assemble. Eudoxius himself
had persuaded the oflicers entrusted with
authority in the imperial household to fix
Nictea for the Council. But the Supreme
Ruler and Governor, who knows the future
like the past, stopped the assembly by a
mighty earthquake, whereby the greater part
of the city was overthrown, and most of the
inhabitants destroyed. On learning this the
assembled bishops were seized with panic,
and returned to their own churches. But I
regard this as a contrivance of the divine
wisdom, for in that city the doctrine of the
faith of the apostles had been defined by the
holy Fathers. In that same city the bishops
who were assembling on this later occasion
were intending to lay down the contrary.
The sameness of name would have been
svn-e to furnish a means of deception to the
Avian crew, and trick unsopliisticated souls.
They meant to call the council " the Nicene,"
and identify it with tlie famous council of
old. But He who has care for the churches
disbanded the synod.


CHAPTER XXII.
Of the Council held at Seleucia in Isauria.

After a time, at the suggestion of the ac-
cusers of Eudoxius, Constantius ordered the
synod to be held at Seleucia. This town of
Isauria lies on the seashore and is the chief
town of the district. Hither the bishops of
the East, and with them those of Pontiis in
Asia, were ordered to assemble.'

1 " Now that the Scmiarians were forced to treat with their
late victims on equal terms, tliey agreed to hold a geneial
Council. Both parties might hope for success. If the Ilonirean
influence was strong at Court, the Semiarlans were strong
in the East, and could count on some help from the Western
Nicenes. But the Court was resolved to secuie a decision to
its own mind. As a Council of the whole Empire might have
been too independent, it was divided. The Westerns were to


II. 23.]


OF THEODORET.


^7


The see of Cassarea, the capital of Pales-
tine, was now held by Acacius, who had
succeeded Eusebius. He had been con-
demned by the council of Sardica, but had
expressed contempt for so large an assembly
of bishops, and had refused to accept their
adverse decision. At Jerusalem Macarius,
whom I have often mentioned, was suc-
ceeded by Maximus, a man conspicuous in
his struggles on behalf of religion, for he had
been deprived of his right eye and maimed
in his right arm.^

On his translation to the life which knows
no old age, Cyrillus, an earnest champion of
the apostolic decrees,^ was dignified with the
Episcopal office. These men in their conten-
tions with one another for the first place
brought great calamities on the state.
Acacius seized some small occasion, deposed
Cyrillus, and drove him from Jerusalem.
But Cyrillus passed by Antioch, which he
had found without a pastor, and came to
Tarsus, where he dwelt with the excellent
Silvanus, then bishop of that see. No
sooner did Acacius become aware of this
than he wrote to Silvanus and informed him
of the deposition of Cyrillus. Silvanus
however, both out of regard for Cyrillus, and
not without suspicion of his people, who
greatly enjoyed the stranger's teaching, re-
fused to prohibit him from taking a part in
the ministrations of the church. When
however they had arrived at Seleucia, Cy-
rillus joined with the party of Basilius and
Eustathius and Silvanus and the rest in the


meet at Ariminum in Italy, the Easterns at Seleucia in Isauria."
" It was a fairly central spot, and easy of access from Egypt
and Syria by sea, but otherwise most unsuitable. It was a
mere fortress, lyino; in a rugged country, where the spurs of
Mount Taurus reach the sea. Around it were the ever-restless
marauders of Isauria." "The choice of such a place is as
significant as if a Pan-Anglican synod were called to meet at
the central and convenient port of Souakim."

Gwatkin " The Arian Controversy." pp. 93-96.

The Council met here A.D. 359.

1 He appears to have been less conspicuous forconsislency in
the Arian Controversy. At Tyre he is described by Sozomen
and Socrates as assenting to the deposition of Athanasius,
but Rufinus (H. E. i. 17) tells the dramatic stnry of the success-
fulmteriiosition of the aged and mutilated Paphnutius of the
Thebaid, who took his vacillating brother by the hand, and
led him to the little knot of Athanasians. Sozomen (iv. 203)
represents him as deposed by Acacius for too zealous ortho-
doxy, and replaced by Cyril, then a Semiarian. Jerome agrees
with Theodoret, and makes Cyril succeed on the death of
Maximus in 350 or 351. (Chron. ann. 349.)

- Sozomen and Socrates are less favourable to his orthodoxv.
In his favour see the synodical letter written by the bishops
assembled at Constantinople after the Council in 3S1, and
addressed to Pope Damasus, which is given in the Vth book
of our author. Chapter 9. He was engaged in a petty con-
troversy with Acacius on the precedence of the sees of C^sare.i
and yElia (Jerusalem), and in 357 deposed. On appeal to the
Council of Seleucia he was reinstated, but again deposed by
Constantius, partly on the pretended charge of dealing im-
properly with a robe given by Constantine to Macarius, which
Theodoret records later (Chap, xiii.) Restored by Julian he was
left in peace under Jovian and Valentinian, exiled by Valens,
and restored by Theodosius. He died in 3S6, and left
Catechetical lectures, a Homily, and an Epistle, of which tlie
authenticity has been successfully defended, and which vindi-
cate rather'his orthodoxy than his ability, cf. Canon Venables.
Diet. Ch. Biog. s. V.


council. But when Acacius joined the
assembled bishops, who numbered one hun-
dred and fifty, he refused to be associated in
their counsels before Cyrillus, as one stripped
of his bishopric, had been put out from
among them. There were some who, eager
for peace, besought Cyrillus to withdraw,
with a pledge that after the decision of the
decrees they would enquire into his case.
He would not give way, and Acacius left
them and went out. Then meeting Eudoxius
he removed his alarm, and encouraged him
with a promise that he would stand his
friend and supporter. Thus he hindered him
from taking part in the council, and set out
with him for Constantinople.


CHAPTER XXHI.

0/ what befell the orthodox bishops at
Constantinople.

Constantius, on his return frorn the West,
passed some time at Constantinople. There
Acacius urged many accusations against the
assembled bishops in presence of the em-
peror, called them a set of vile characters
convoked for the ruin and destruction of the
churches, and so fired the imperial wrath.
And not least was Constantius moved by
what was alleged against Cyrillus, " for,"
said Acacius, " the holy robe, which the
illustrious Constantine the emperor, in his
desire to honour the church of Jerusalem,
gave to Macarius, the bishop of that city, to
be worn when he performed the rite of
divine baptism, all fashioned with golden
threads as it was, has been sold by Cyrillus.
It has been bought," he continued, " by a
certain stage dancer; dancing about when
he was wearing it, he fell down and perished.
With a man like this Cyrillus," he went on,
" they set themselves up to Judge and
decide for the rest of the world." The
influential party at the court made this an
occasion for persuading the emperor not to
summon the whole synod, for they were
alarmed at the concord of the majority, but
only ten leading men. Of these were Eus-
tathius of Armenia, Basilius of Galatia,
Silvanus of Tarsus, and Eleusius of Cyzicus.'


1 ?'.^., Eustathius of Sebasteia, and Basilius of Ancyra (vide
note on p. 86). Silvanus of Tarsus was one of the Somiarians
of high character. For his kindly entertainment of Cyril of
Jerusalem vide page 87. Tillemont places his death in 363.

Eleusius of Cyzicus ^vas also a Semiarian of the better type
(cf. Hil. de Syn. j). 133). The evil genius of his life was
Macedonius of Constantinople, by whose influence he was
made bishop of Cyzicus in 356. Here with equal zeal he de-
stroyed pagan temples and a Novatian churcli, and this was
remembered against him when he attem|Hed to return to his
see on the accession of Julian. At Nicomedia in 366 he was
moved by the threats of \'^alcns to declare himself an Arian,
and then in remorse resigned his see, but his flock refused to
let him go. Socr. iv, 6.


88


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[11. 23.


On their arrival they urged the emperor
that Eudoxius should be convicted of blas-
phemy and lawlessness. Constantius, how-
ever, schooled by the opposite party, replied
that a decision must first be come to on
matters concerning the faith, and that after-
wards the case of Eudoxius should be
enquired into. Basilius, rclj'ing on his
former intimacy, ventured boldly to object
to the emperor that he was attacking the
apostolic decrees ; but Constantius took this
ill, and told Basilius to hold his tongue,
" for to you," said he, " the disturbance of
the churches is due." When Basilius was
silenced, Eustathius intervened and said,
" since, sir, you wish a decision to be come
to on what concerns the faith, consider the
blasphemies rashly uttered against the Only
Begotten by Eudoxius," and as he spoke he
produced the exposition of faith wherein,
besides many other impieties, were found
the following expressions: "Things that
are spoken of in unlike terms are unlike in
substance : " " There is one God the Father
of whom are all things, and one Lord Jesus
Christ through whom are all things." Now
the term " of whom " is unlike the term
" through whom ; " so the Son is unlike God
the Father. Constantius ordered this ex-
position of the faith to be read, and was
displeased with the blasphemy which it in-
volved. He therefore asked Eudoxius if he
had drawn it up. Eudoxius instantly repu-
diated the authorship, and said that it was
written by Actius. Now Aetius was he
whom Leontius, in dread of the accusations
of Flavianus and Diodorus, had formerly de-
graded from the diaconate. He had also been
the supporter of Georgius, the treacherous
foe of the Alexandrians, alike in his impious
words and his unholy deeds. At the present
time he was associated with Eunomius and
Eudoxius; for, on the death of Leontius,
when Eudoxius had laid violent hands on
tlie episcopal throne of the chinxh at An-
tioch, he returned from Egypt with Euno-
mius, and, as he found Eudoxius to be of
the same way of thinking as himself, a syb-
arite in luxiny as w^ell as a heretic in faith,
he chose Antioch as the most congenial place
of abode, and both he and Eunomius were
fast fixtures at the couches of Eudoxius.
His highest ambition was to be a successful
parasite, and he spent his whole time in
going to gorge himself at one man's table or
another's. The emperor had been told all
this, and now ordered Aetius to be brought
before him. On liis aj^pearance Constan-
tius showed him the document in question
and proceeded to enquire if he was the


author of its language. Aetius, totally ig-
norant of what had taken place, and unaware
of the drift of the enquiry, expected that he
should win praise by confession, and owned
that he was the author of the phrases in
question. Then the emperor perceived the
greatness of his iniquity, and forthwith con-
demned him to exile and to be deported to a
i^lace in Phrygia. So Aetius reaped disgrace
as the fruit of blasphemy, and was cast out
of the palace. Eustathius then alleged that
Eudoxius too held the same views, for
that Aetius had shared his roof and his table,
and had drawn up this blasphemous formula
in submission to his judgement. In proof of
his contention that Eudoxius was concerned
in drawing up the document he urged the
fact that no one had attributed it to Aetius
except Eudoxius himself. To this the
emperor enjoined that judges must not
decide on conjecture, but are bound to make
exact examination of the facts. Eustathius
assented, and urged that Eudoxius should
give proof of his dissent from the sentiments
attributed to him by anathematizing the com-
position of Aetius. This suggestion the
emperor very readily accepted, and gave
his orders accordingly ; but Eudoxius drew
back, and employed many shifts to evade
compliance. But when the emperor waxed
wroth and threatened to send him oft' to
share the exile of Aetius, on the ground
that he was a partner in the blasphemy so
punished, he repudiated his own doctrine,
though both then and afterwards he per-
sistently maintained it. However, he in liis
turn protested against the Eustathians that it
was their duty to condemn the word
" Homoiision " as unscriptural.

Silvanus on the contrary pointed out that
it was their duty to reject and expel from
their holy assemblies the phrases " out of
the 7ion-existent" and '"'' creature''^ and
" of another substa7ice" these terms being
also unscriptural and found in the writings
of neither prophets nor apostles. Constan-
tius decided that this was right, and bade
the Arians pronounce the condemnation.
At fii'st they persisted in refusing; but in the
end, when they saw the emperor's wrath,
they consented, though much against the
grain, to condemn the terms Silvanus had
put before them. But all the more earnestly
they insisted on their demand for the con-
demnation of the '"'• Homoiisioii" But then
with unanswerable logic Silvanus put both
before the Arians and the emperor the
truth that if God the Word is not of tlie non-
Existent, He is not a Creature, and is not of
another Substance. He is then of one Sub-


II. 24.]


OF THEODORET.


89


stance with God Who begat Him, as God of
God and Light of Light, and has the same
nature as tlie Begetter. This contention he
urged with power and with truth, but not
one of his hearers was convinced. The
party of Acacius and Eudoxius raised a
mighty uproar ; the emperor was angered,
and threatened expulsion from their churches.
Thereupon Eleusius and Silvanus and the
rest said that while authority to punish lay
with the emperor, it was their province to
decide on points of piety or impiety, and
"we will not," they protested, "betray the
doctrine of the Fathers."

Constantius ought to have admired both
their wisdom and their courage, and their
bold defence of the apostolic decrees, but he
exiled them from their churches, and ordered
others to be appointed in their place. There-
upon Eudoxius laid violent hands on the
Church of Constantinople ; and on the ex-
pulsion of Eleusius from Cyzicus, Eunomius
was appointed in his place.


CHAPTER XXIV.

Synodical Epistle written against Aetius.

After these transactions the emperor
ordered Aetius to be condemned by a formal
Letter, and, in obedience to the command,
his companions in iniquity condemned their
own associate. Accordingly they wrote to
Georgius, bishop of Alexandria, the letter
about him to which I shall give a place in
my history, in order to expose their wicked-
ness, for they treated their friends and their
foes precisely in the same way.

Copy of the Letter written by the whole
council to Georgius against Aetius his
deacon, on account of his iniquitous blas-
phemy.

To the right honourable Lord Georgius,
Bishop of Alexandria, the holy Synod in
Constantinople assembled, Greeting.
In consequence of the condemnation of
Aetius by the Synod, on account of his un-
lawful and most offensive writings, he has
been dealt with by the bishops in accordance
with the canons of the church. He has
been degraded from the diaconate and ex-
pelled from the Church, and our admonitions
have gone forth that none are to read his un-
lawful epistles, but that on account of their
unprofitable and worthless character they
are to be cast aside. We have further ap-
pended an anathema on him, if he abides in
his opinion, and on his supporters.


It would naturally have followed that all
the bishops met together in the Synod
should have felt detestation of, and approved
the sentence delivered against, a man who
is the author of offences, disturbances and
schisms, of agitation over all the world, and
of rising of church against church. But in
spite of our prayers, and against all our ex-
pectation, Seras, Stephanus, Heliodorus and
Theophilus and their party Miave not voted
with us, and have not even consented to sub-
scribe the sentence delivered against him,
although Seras charged the aforenamed
Aetius with another instance of insane arro-
gance, alleging that he, with still bolder im-
pudence, had sprung forward to declare that
what God had concealed from the Apostles
had been now revealed to him. Even after
these wild and boastful words, reported by
Seras about Aetius, the aforenamed bishops
were not put out of countenance, nor could
they be induced to vote with us on his con-
demnation. We however with much long
suffering bore with them ^ for a great length
of time, now indignant, now beseeching,
now importuning them to join with us and
make the decision of the Synod unanimous;
and we persevered long in the hope that they
might hear and agree and give in. But when
in spite of all this patience we could not
shame them into acceptance of our dec-
larations against the aforesaid offender, we
counted the rule of the church moi^e precious
than the friendship of men, and pronounced
against them a decree of excommunication,
allowing them a period of six months for
conversion, repentance, and the expression
of a desire for union and harmony with the
synod. If within the given time they
should turn and accept agreement with their
brethren and assent to the decrees about
Aetius, we decided that they should be
received into the church, to the recovery of
their own authority in synods, and our af-
fection. If however tliey obstinately per-
sisted, and preferred human friendship to the


1 Seras, or Serras, had been an Arian leader in Libya. In
356 Serras, together with Sccundus, deposed bishop of Ptole-
niais, proposed to consecrate Aetius ; he refused on the g'round
that they were tainted with Orthodoxy. Phil. iii. 19. In 359 he
subscribed the decrees of Scleucia a's bishop of Par.-Etonium
(AlBareton W. of Alexandria) (Epiph. Ha^r. Ixxiii. 20). Now
he is deposed (360) by the Constantinopolitan Synod. Vide
Diet. Christ. Biog-. s. v.

Stephanus, a Libyan bishop ordained bySecundus of Ptole-
mais, and concerned with him in the murder of the Presbyter
Secundus, as described by Athan. in Hist. Ar. § 65 cf. Ath.
de Syn. § i3.

Heliodorus was Arian bishop of Apollonia or Sozysa
(Shahfah) in Libya Prima, cf. LeQuien Or. Ch. ii. 617.

Theophilus, previously bishop of Eleutheropolis in Pales-
tine, was translated, against his vow of fidelity to that see,
(Soz. iv. 34) to Castabala in Cihcia. On the place Vide Bp.
Lig-htfoot. Ap. Fathers Pt. ii. Vol. lii. 136.

'2 (rviJ.mpi.rivix^r\ixev is the suggestion of Valeaius for
(TVfiTf epi£>|(r)9itrd>)H£v, a word of no authority.


90


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[IL 25.


canons of tlie church and our affection, then
we judged them deposed from the rank of the
bishops. If they suffer degradation it is
necessary to appoint other bishops in their
place, that the lawful church may be duly
ordered and ut unity with herself, while all
the bishops of every nation by uttering the
same doctrine with one mind and one coun-
sel preserve the bond of love.

To acquaint you with the decree of the
Synod we have sent these present to your
reverence, and pray that you may abide by
them, and by the grace of Christ rule the
churches under you aright and in peace.


CHAPTER XXV.

Of the causes which separated the Eiiiwtnians
from the Arians.

EuNOMius in his writings praises Aetius,
styles him a man of God, and honours him
with many compliments. Yet he was at
that time closely associated with the party
by whom Aetius had been repudiated, and
to them he owed his election to his bishopric.

Now the followers of Eudoxius and Aca-
cius, who had assented to the decrees put forth
at Nice in Thrace, already mentioned in this
history, appointed other bishops in the
churches of the adherents of Basilius and
Eleusius in their stead. On other points I
think it superfluous to write in detail. I pur-
pose only to relate what concerns Eunomius.

For when Eunomius had seized on the see
of Cyzicus in the lifetime of Eleusius, Eu-
doxius urged him to hide his opinions and
not make them known to the party who were
seeking a pretext to persecute him. Eudox-
ius was moved to offer this advice both
by his knowledge that the diocese was sound
in the faith and his experience of the anger
manifested by Constantius against the party
who asserted the only begotten Son of God
to be a created being. " Let us" said he to
Eunomius " bide our time ; when it comes
we will preach what now we are keeping
dark ; educate the ignorant ; and win over
or compel or punish our opponents." Euno-
mius, yielding to these suggestions, pro-
pounded his impious doctrine under the
shadow of obscurity. Those of his hearers
who had been nurtured on the divine oracles
saw clearly that his utterances concealed
under their surface a foul fester of error.^
But however distressed they were they

1 On the picturesque word iin-ouAo; cf. Mipp : xxi, 32; Plat :
Gorgr. 51S E. and tlie well-known i)assai;e in the CICd : Tvran-
nus (1306) where CEdipus speaks of the promise of his youth
as " a fair outside all fraught with ills below."


considered it less the part of prudence than
of rashness to make any open protest, so they
assumed a mask of heretical heterodoxy,
and paid a visit to the bishop at his private
residence with the earnest request that he
would have regard to the distress of men
borne hither and thither by different doc-
trines, and would plainly expound the truth.
Eunomius thus emboldened declared the
sentiments which he secretly held. The
deputation then went on to remark that it
was unfair and indeed quite wrong for the
whole of his diocese to be prevented from
having their share of the truth. By these
and similar arguments he was induced to lay
bare his blasphemy in the public assemblies
of the church. Then his opponents hurried
with angry fervour to Constantinople ; first
they indicted him before Eudoxius, and when
Eudoxius refused to see them, sought an au-
dience of the emperor and made lamenta-
tion over tlie ruin their bishop was wreaking
among them. " The sermons of Eunomius,"
they said, " are more impious than the
blasphemies of Arius." The wrath of Con-
stantius was roused, and he commanded Eu-
doxius to send for Eunomius, and, on his
conviction, to strip him of his bishopric.
Eudoxius, of course, though again and again
importuned by the accusers, continued to
delay taking action. Then once more they
approached the emperor with vociferous com-
plaints that Eudoxius had not obeyed the
imperial commands in any single particular,
and was perfectly indifferent to the delivery
of an important city to the blasphemies of
Eunomius. Then said Constantius to Eu-
doxius, if you do not fetch Eunomius and try
him, and on conviction of the charges
brought against him, punish him, I shall
exile you. This threat frightened Eudoxius,
so he wrote to Eunomius to escape from
Cyzicus, and told him he had only himself
to' blame because he had not followed the
hints given him. Eunomius accordingly
withdrew in alarm, but he could not endure
the disgrace, and endeavoured to fix the guilt
of his betrayal on Eudoxius, maintaining that
both he anci Aetius had been cruelly treated.
And from that time he set up a sect of his
own for all the men who were of his way of
thinking and condemned his betrayal, sepa-
rated from Eudoxius and joined with Euno-
mius, whose name they bear up to this day.
vSo Eunomius became the founder of a heresy,
and added to the blasphemy of Arius by his
own peculiar guilt. He set up a sect of his
own because he was a slave to his ambition,
as the facts distinctly prove. For when
Aetius was condemned and exiled, Eunomius


II. 26.]


OF THEODORET.


91


refused to accompany him, though he called
him his master and a man of God, but re-
mained closely associated with Eudoxius.

But when his turn came he paid the pen-
alty of his iniquity ; he did not submit to
the vote of the S3'nod, but began to ordain
bishops and presbyters, though himself de-
prived of his episcopal rank. These then
were the deeds done at Constantinople.


CHAPTER XXVI.

Of the siege of the city of Nisibis^ and the
apostolic conversation of Bishop Jacobus.

On war being waged against the Romans
by Sapor King of Persia, Constantius mus-
tered his forces and marched to Antioch.
But the enemy were driven forth, not by the
Roman army, but by Him whom the pious
in the Roman host worshipped as their God.
How the victory was won I shall now pro-
ceed to relate.

Nisihis, sometimes called Antiochia Myg-
donia, lies on the confines of the realms of
Persia and of Rome. In Nisibis Jacobus
whom I named just now was at once bishop,
guardian,' and commander in chief. He was
a man who shone with the grace of a truly
apostolic character. His extraordinary and
memorable miracles, which I have fully re-
lated in my religious history, I think it
superfluous and iiTelevant to enumerate
again.^

1 Now Nisibin, an important city of Mesopotamia on tlie
Myffdonius (Hulai). Its name was clianged under the Mace-
donian dynasty to Antiochia Mygdonlca. Frequently taken
and retaken it was ultimately ceded by Jovian to Sapor A.D.

363-

' " jroAioOxos" is an epithet of the protecting- deityof acity,
as of Athens " l\a.kKa.<; iroAioOxos; " Ar. £q. 5S1.

3 Born in the city of which he was afterwards bishop, Jacobus
early acquired fame by his ascetic austerity. While on a
journe)' into Persia with the object at once of confirming his
own faith and that of the Christian sufferers under the perse-
cution of Sapor II, he was supposed to work wonders, of
which the following, relatea by Theodoretus, is a specimen.
Once upon a time he saw a Persian judge delivering an unjust
sentence. Now a huge stone happening to be lying close by,
he ordered it to be crushed and broken into pieces, and so
proved the injustice of the sentence. The stone was instantly
divided into innumerable fragments, the spectators were panic-
stricken, and the judge in terror revoked his sentence and dc
livered a righteous judgment. On the see of his native city
falling vacant Jacobus was made bishop. The " Religious
History " describes him aa signalling his episcopate by the
miracle attributed by Gregory of Nyssa to Gregory the
Wonder- Worker, and by Sozomen (vli. 27) to Ejiiphanius.
As in the " Nuremberg Chronicle," the same woodcut serves
for Thales, Nehemiah, and Dante, so a popular miracle was
indiscriminately assigned to saint after saint. " Once upon a
time he came to a certain village, — the spot I cannot name, —
and up coine some beggars putting down one of their number
before him as though dead, and begging him to supply some
necessaries for the funeral. Jacobus granted their petition,
and on behalf of the apparently dead man began to pray to
God to forgive him the sins of'^his lifetime and grant him a
place in the company of the just. Even while he was speak-
ing, away flew the soul of the man who had up to this moment
shammed death, and coverings were provided for the corpse.
The holy man proceeded on his journey, and the inventors of
this play told their recumbent companion to get up. But now


One however I will record because of the
subject before us. The city which Jacobus
ruled was now in possession of the Romans,
and besieged by the Persian Army. The
blockade was prolonged for seventy days.
" Helepoles " ^ and many other engines were
advanced to the walls. The town was begirt
with a palisade and entrenchment, but still
held out. The river Mygdonius flowing
through the middle of the town, at last the
Persians dammed its stream a considerable
distance up, and increased the height of its
bank on both sides so as to shut the waters in.
When they saw that a great mass of water
was collected and ali^eady beginning to over-
flow the dam, they suddenly launched it like
an engine against the wall. The impact was
tremendous ; the bulwarks could not sus-
tain it, but gave way and fell down. Just
the same fate befell the other side of the
circuit, through which the Mygdonius made
its exit ; it could not withstand the shock,
and was carried away. No sooner did
Sapor see this than he expected to captui'e
the rest of the city, and for all that day he
rested for the mud to dry and the river to
become passable. Next day he attacked
in full foi'ce, and looked to enter the city
through the bi'eaches that had been made.
But he found the wall built up on both sides,
and all his labour vain. For that holy man,
through prayer, filled with valour both the
troops and the rest of the townsfolk, and
both built the walls, withstood the engines,
and beat oft the advancing foe. And all
this he did without approaching the walls,
but by beseeching the Lord of all within the
church. Sapor, moreover, was not only


they saw that he did not hear, that the pretence had become a
reality, and that what a moment ago was a live man's mask
was now a dead man's face. So tney overtake the great Ja-
cobus, bow down before him, roll at his feet and declare that
they would not have played their impudent trick but for their
poverty, and implored him to forgive them and restore the dead
man's soul. So Jacobus in imitation of the philanthropy of
the Lord granted their prayer, exhibited his wonder working
power, and through his prayer restored the life which his
power had taken away."

AtNica;aTheodoret describes Jacobus as a " champion " of
the orthodox "phalanx." (Relig. Hist. 1114.) At the stale
dinner given by Constantine to the Nicene Fathers, "James of
Nisibis (so ran the Eastern tale — Biblioth. Pat. civ.) saw
angels standing round the Emperor, and underneath his pur-
ple robe discovered a sackcloth garment. Constantine, in re-
turn, saw angels ministering to James, placed his seat above
the other bishops, and said. 'There are three pillars of the
world, Antony in Egypt, Nicolas of JSIyra, James in As-
syria.' " Stanley, Eastern Church, Lect. V.

1 Ammianus Marcellinus 23. 4. 10. thus describes the
" 'EAfiroAi? ii.-i]xa.vri." "An enormous testudo is strengthened
by long planks and fitted with iron bolts. This is covered
with hides and fresh wicker-work. Its upper parts are
smeared with mud as a protection agninst fire and mis-
siles. To its front are fastened three-pronged spear points
made exceedingly sharp, and steadied by iron weights, like
the thunderbolts of painters and potters. Thus whenever it
was directed against anything these stings were shot out to
destroy. The nuge mass was moved on wheels and ropes
from within by a considerable body of troops, and advanced
with a mighty impulse against the weaker part of a town
wall. Then unless the defenders prevailed against it the
walls were beaten in and a wide breach made."


92


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[II. 27.


astounded at the speed of the building of
the walls but awed by another spectacle.
For he saw standing on the battlements
one of kingly mien and all ablaze with
purple robe and crown. He supposed that
this was the Roman emperor, and threat-
ened his attendants with death for not hav-
ing announced the imperial presence; but
on their stoutly maintaining that their report
had been a true one and that Constantius
was at Antioch, he perceived the meaning
of the vision and exclaimed "their God is
fighting for the Romans." Then the
wretched man in a rage flung a javelin into
the air, though he knew that he could not
hit a bodiless being, but unable to curb his
passion. Therefore the excellent Ephraim
(he is the best writer among the Syrians)
besought the divine Jacobus to mount the
wall to see the barbarians and to let fly at
them the darts of his curse. So the divine
man consented and climbed up into a tower;
but when he saw the innumerable host,
lie discharged no other curse than to ask
that mosquitoes and gnats might be sent
forth upon them, so that by means of these
tiny animals they might learn the might of
the Protector of the Romans. On his prayer
followed clouds of mosquitoes and gnats ;
they filled the hollow trunks of the elephants,
and the ears and nostrils of horses and other
animals. Finding the attack of these little
creatures past endurance they broke their
bridles, unseated their riders and threw the
ranks into confusion. The Persians aban-
doned their camp and fled head-long. So the
wretched prince learned by a slight and
kindly chastisement the power of the God
who protects the pious, and marched his
army home again, reaping for all the harvest
of the siege not triumph but disgrace.


CHAPTER XXVII.

Of the Council of Antioch and what was done
there against the holy Mektius,

At this time,' Constantius was residing
at Antioch. The Persian war was over ;
there had been a time of peace, and he once
again gathered bishops together with the ob-
ject of making them all deny both the formula
" of one substance " and also the formula " of
dirterent substance." On the death of Leon-
tius, Eudoxius had seized the see of Antioch,

1A.D.361.


but on his expulsion and illegal estab-
lishment, after many synods, at Constanti-
nople, the church of Antioch had been left
without a shepherd. Accordingly the assem-
Ijled bishops, gathered in considerable num-
bers from every quarter, asserted that their
primary obligation was to provide a pastor
for the flock and that then with him they
would deliberate on matters of faith. It fell
out opportunely that the divine Meletius
who was ruling a certain city of Armenia '
had been grieved with the insubordhiation of
the people under his rule and was now living
without occupation elsewhere. The Arian
faction imagined that Meletius was of the
same way of thinking as themselves, and an
upholder of their doctrines. They therefore
petitioned Constantius to commit to his
hands the reins of the Antiochene church.
Indeed in the hope of establishing their im-
piety there was no law that they did not
fearlessly transgress ; illegality was be-
coming the very foundation of their blas-
phemy ; nor was this an isolated specimen of
their irregular proceedings. On the other
hand the maintainers of apostolic doctrine,
who were perfectly well aware of the sound-
ness of the great Meletius, and had clear
knowledge of his stainless cliaracter and
wealth of virtue, came to a common vote,
and took measures to have their resolution
written out and subscribed by all without
delay. This document both parties as a
bond of compromise entrusted to the safe
keeping of a bishop who was a noble cham-
pion of the truth, Eusebius of Samosata.
And when the great Meletius had received
the imperial summons and arrived, forth to
meet him came all the higher ranks of the
priesthood, forth came all the other orders of
the church, and the whole population of the
city. There, too, were Jews and Gentiles
all eager to see the great Meletius. Now
the emperor had charged both Meletius and
the rest who were able to speak to expound
to the multitude the text "The Lord formed
me in the beginning of his way, before his
works of old " (Prov. viii. 22. Ixx), and he
ordered skilled writers to take down on the
spot what each man said, with the idea that in
this manner their instruction would be more
exact. First of all Georgius of Laodicea
gave vent to his foul heresy. After him
Acacius - of Csesarea propounded a doctrine


' According; to Sozomen.Sebaste; but Socrates (1 1. 44) makes
him hisliop of the Syrian Rcroja Grcijory <>f Xyssa (Oral; In
Full M:iij • Melctii) puts on record "the sweet calm look, the
radiant smik', the kind hand sccondinij the kind voice."

- On Acacius ot Cxsarea vide note on paije 70. At the
Synoil of Seleucia in 359 he started tlie party of the llomceans,
and was deposed. In the rcig^n of Jovian tliey inclined to


II. 28.J


OF THEODORET.


93


of compromise far removed indeed from the
blasphemy of the enemy, but not preserving
the apostolic doctrine pure and undefiled.
Then up rose the great Meletius and exhib-
ited the unbending line of the canon of the
faith, for using the truth as a carpenter does
his rule he avoided excess and defect. Then
the multitude broke into loud applause and
besought him to give them a short summary
of his teaching. Accordingly after showing
three fingers, he withdrew two, left one,
and uttered the memorable sentence, " In
thought they are three but we speak as to


one


" 1


Against this teaching the men who had
the plague of Arius in their hearts whetted
their tongues, and started an ingenious slan-
der, declaring that the divine Meletius was a
Sabellian. Thus they persuaded the fickle
sovereign who, like the well known Euripus,^
easily shifted his current now this way and
now that, and induced him to relegate
Meletius to his own home.

Euzoius, an open defender of Arian
tenets, was promptly promoted to his place ;
the very man whom, then a deacon, the great
Alexander had degraded at the same time
as Arius. Now the part of the people who
remained sound separated from the unsound,
and assembled in the apostolic church which
is situated in the jDart of the city called the
PalcEa.^

For thirty years indeed after the attack
made upon the illustrious Eustathius they
had gone on enduring the abomination of
Arianism, in the expectation of some favour-
able change. But when they saw impiety
on the increase, and men faithful to the
apostolic doctrines both openly attacked and
menaced by secret conspiracy, the divine
Meletius in exile, and Euzoius the champion
of heresy established as bishop in his place,
they remembered the words spoken to Lot,
" Escape for thy life " ; * and further the law
of the gospel which plainly ordains " if
thy right eye offend thee pluck it out and


Orthodoxy; in that ofValens to Arianism (cf. Soc. iv. 2).
Acacius was a benefactor to the Public Library of Caasarea
( llieron. Ep, ad Marcellain (141). Baronius places his death in

366.

iTpia TO voovixevafWiivl Sk Si,a\ey6)j.e0a " Tria sunt quae intel-
liguntur, sed tanquam unum alloquimur." The narrative of
Sozomen (iv. 2S) enables us to supply what Theodoret infe-
'icitously omits. It was when an Arian archdeacon rudely put
his hand over the bishop's mouth that Meletius indicated the
orthodox doctrine by his fingers. When the archdeacon at
his wits' end uncovered the mouth and seized the hand of the
confessor, " with a loud voice he the more clearly proclaimed
his doctrine."

2 The Euripus, the narrow channel between Eubcea and the
mainland, changes its current during eleven days in each
month, eleven to fourteen times a day. cf. Arist. Eth. N. ix. 6. 3.
"fierappei ioanep EOpiTros."

3 cf. p. 34.

♦ Gen. XIX. 17.


cast it from thee." ^ The Lord laid down
the same law about both hand and foot, and
added, " It is profitable for thee that one of
thy members should perish and not that thy
whole body should be cast into hell."

Thus came about the division of the
Church.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

Abotit Eusebius, Bishop of Samosata.

The admirable Eusebius mentioned above,
who was entrusted with the common resolu-
tion, when he beheld the violation of the
covenant, returned to his own see. Then
certain men who were uneasy about the
written document, persuaded Constantius to
dispatch a messenger to recover it. Ac-
cordingly the emperor sent one of the offi-
cers who ride post with relays of horses, and
bring communications with great speed.
On his arrival he reported the imperial
message, but, " I cannot," said the admir-
able Eusebius, " surrender the deed de-
posited with me till I am directed so to do
by the whole assembly who gave it me."
This reply was reported to the emperor.
Boiling with rage he sent to Eusebius again
and ordered him to give it up, with the fur-
ther message that he had ordered his right
hand to be cut oft' if he refused. But he
only wrote this to terrify the bishop, for
the courier who conveyed the dispatch had
orders not to carry out the threat. But when
the divine Eusebius opened the letter and
saw the punishment which the emperor had
threatened, he stretched out his right hand and
his left, bidding the man cut oft' both. " The
decree," said he, " which is a clear proof
of Arian wickedness, I will not give up."

When Constantius had been informed of
this courageous resolution he was struck
with astonishment, and did not cease to ad-
mire it ; for even foes are constrained by the
greatness of bold deeds to admire their
adversaries' success.

At this time Constantius learned that
Julian, whom he had declared Ctesar of
Europe, was aiming at sovereignty, and
mustering an army against his master.
Therefore he set out from Syria, and died in
Cilicia.- Nor had he the helper whom his


1 Matt. v. 29.

2 Constantius died at Mopsucrene, on the Cydnus, according
to Socrates and the Chron. Alex., on Nov. 5,361. Socrates
(ii. 47) ascribes his illness to chagrin at the successes of
Julian, and says that he died in the 46th year of his age and
3Qth of his reign, having for thirteen years been associated iu
the empire with his Father. Ammianus (xxi. 15, 2) writes,
" Venit Tarsum, ubi leviore febri contactus, ratusque itinerario


94


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[in. I.


Father had left liini ; for he had not kept ' piety, and so bitterly bewailed his change of
intact the inheritance of his Father's faith.


motu imininutae valetudinis excuti posse discriinen, pctiit per
vias djfficiles Mopsucrenas, Cillciae ultiiiKiin hinc perjjcnli.
bus stationcm, sub Tauri montis radicibus positaiu : tgrcdlque
sequuto die conutus, invalenti morbi gravitate dctentus est:
paulatinique urente calore nimio venas, ul ne tangi qnidcin
corpus eiiis posset in niodum fiiculi Icrvcns, cum usus detic-
eret inedclaruin, ultiinuin spiralis deflebat exitiuin; mentisque
sensu turn etiam integro, successorem suae potestatis
Statuisse dlcitur Julianuni. Ueinde anhelitu iam pulsatus
letaU contlcult diuquc cuin aniina colluctatus iaiii discessura,
abiit e vita III. Non. Octobrium, (i.e. Oct. j — a ditVcrciit
date from that given by others) imperii vitaeque anno quadra-
gesimo et mensibus paucis." His Father liuving died in 337,


Constantius really reigned 24 years alone, and if we include
the 13 years which Socrates reckons in the lifetime of Con.
stantine, we only reach 37. He was born on Aug. 6, 317, and
was therefore a little over 44 at his death.

" Constantius was essentially a little man, in whom his
father's vices took a meaner form." " The peculiar repul-
siveness of Constantius is not due to any flagrant personal
vice, but to the combination of cold-blooded treachery with
the utter want of any inner nobleness of character. Yet he
was a pious emperor, too, in his way. He loved the ecclesi-
astical game, and was easily won over to the Kusebian side."

Gwatkia. " The Arian Controversy." p. 63.


BOOK III.


CHAPTER I.

Of the reign of Jiilianus ; how from a child he
was brought up in piety and lapsed into
impiety ; and in what manner, though at first
he kept his impiety secret, he afterwards laid
it bare.

Constantius, as has been narrated, de-
parted this life groaning and grieving that he
had been turned away from the faith of his
father. Julian heard the news of his end
as he was crossing from Europe into Asia,
and assumed the sovereignty with delight at
having now no rival.

In his earlier days, while yet a lad, Julian
had, as well as Gallus' his brother, imbibed
pure and pious teaching.

In his youth and earlier manhood he con-
tinued to take in the same doctrine. Con-
stantius, dreading lest his kinsfolk should
aspire to imperial power, slew them ; ^ and
Julian, through fear of his cousin, was en-
rolled in the order of Readers,^ and used to read
aloud the sacred books to the people in the
assemblies of the church.


> On the murder of the Princes ot the blood Callus was first
sent alone to Tralles or Ephesus, (.Soc. iii. i,) and afterwards
spent some lime with his brother Julian in Cappadocia in re-
tirement, but with a suitable establishment. On their rela-
tionship to Constantius vide Pedigree in the prolegomena.

2 The massacre "involved the two uncles of Constantius,
seven of his cousins, of whom Ualmatius and Ilannibaliauus
were the most ilhistricms, the patrician Optatus, who had mar-
ried a sister of the late Emperor, and the pr.tfect Abcavius."
*' If it were necessary to aggravate the horrors of this bloody
scene we niii;ht add t1iat Constantius himself had espoused the
daughter of liis uncle Julius, and that he had bestowed his sis-
ter in marriage on his cousin Ilannibalianus." " Of so numer-
ous a fimily Gallus and Julian ainne, the two youngest cliildren
of Julius Constantius, were saved from the hands of the assas-
sins, till their rage, satiated with slaughter, had in some
measure subsided." Gibbon, Chap, xviii. Theodoretus foj.
lows the opinion of Athanasius and Julian in ascribing the
main guilt to Constantius, but, as (iibbon points out, Eutropius
and the Victors "use the very qualifying expressions ;" "sinente
potius (|uam jubente;" " incertum quo suasore ; " and " v;
militum." Gregory of Nazianz.us (Or. iv. 21) ascribes the pre-
servation of both Julian and his brother Gallustothe clemency
and protection of Constantius.

STertuUian (De Pr.-csc.41) is the earliest authority for the of.
ficeof Anagnostes, Lector, or Reader, as a distinct order in the
Church. Henceforward it appears as one of the minor orders,


He also built a martyr's shrine ; but the
martyrs, when they beheld his apostasy, re-
fused to accept the offering ; for in conse-
quence of the foundations being, like their
founder's mind, unstable, the edifice fell
down^ before it was consecrated. Such
were the boyhood and youth of Julian. At
the period, however, when Constantius was
setting out for the West, drawn thither by
the war against Magnentius, he made Gallus,
who was gifted with piety which he retained
to the end,^ Cassar of the East. Now Julian
flung away the apprehensions which had
previously stood him in good stead, and,
moved by unrighteous confidence, set his
heart on seizing the sceptre of empire. Ac-
cordingly, on his way through Greece, he
sought out seers and soothsayers, with a de-
sire of learning if he should get what his
soul longed for. He met with a man who
promised to predict these things, conducted
him into one of the idol temples, introduced
him within the shrine, and called upon the
demons of deceit. On their appearing in
their wonted aspect terror compelled Julian
to make the sign of the cross upon his brow.
They no sooner saw the sign of the Lord's
victory than they were reminded of their


and is frequently referred to by Cyprian (Epp. 29. 3S, etc.). By
one of Justinian's novels it was directed that no one should be
ordained Header before the age of eighteen, but previously
young boys were admitted to the office, at the instance of their
parents, as introductory to the higher functions of the sacred
ministry. Diet. Christ. Ant. i. So.

* Sozomen (v. 2) tells us that when the princes were build-
ing a chapel for the martyr Mamas, the work of Gallus stood,
but that of Julian tumbled down. A more famous instance of
the care of Gallus for the christian dead is the story of the
translation of the remains of the martyr Babylas from Anti-
och to Daphne, referred to by our author (iii. 6) as well as by
.Sozomen v. 19, and by Rufinus x. 35. cf. Bishop Lightfoot,
Ap. Fathers 11. i. 42.

2 Gallus was made Cxsar by the childless Constantius in 350,
in about his 25th year. "Fuit" says Am. Marcellinus
(xiv. II. 28) "forma conspicuus bona, decente filo corporis,
membrorumque recta compage, flavo capillo et molli, barba
licet recens emergente lanugine tenera." His government at
Antioch was not successful, and at the instigation of the Eu-
nuch JCusebius he was executed in 354 at Pola, a town already
infamous for the murder of Crispus,


III. 2.]


OF THEODORET.


95


own rout, and forthwith fled away. On the
magician becoming acquainted with the
cause of their flight he bhamed him ; but
Julian confessed his terror, and said that he
wondered at the power of the cross, for that
the demons could not endure to see its sign
and ran away. "Think not anything of the
sort, good sir;" said the magician, "they
were not afraid as you make out, but they
went away because they abominated what
you did." So he tricked the wretched man,
initiated him in the mysteries, and filled him
with their abominations.

So lust of empire stripped the wretch of
all true relisrion. Nevertheless after attain-
ing the supreme power he concealed his
impiety for a considerable time ; for he was
specially apprehensive about the troops who
had been instructed in the principles of true
religion, first by the illustrious Constantine,
who freed them from their former error and
trained them in the ways of truth, and after-
wards by his sons, who confirmed the
instruction given by their father. For if
Constantius, led astray by those under
whose influence he lived, did not admit the
term djuouliaiov, at all events he sincerely ac-
cepted the meaning underlying it, for God
the Word he styled true Son, begotten of
his Father before the ages, and those who
dared to call Him a creature he openly
renounced, absolutely prohibiting the wor-
ship of idols.

I will relate also another of his noble
deeds, as satisfactory proof of his zeal for
divine things. In his campaign against
Magrnentius he once mustered the whole of
his army, and counselled them to take part
all together in the divine mysteries, " for,"
said he, " the end of life is always uncertain,
and that not least in war, when innumerable
missiles are hurled from either side, and
swords and battle axes and other weapons
are assailing men, whereby a violent death
is brought about. Wherefore it behoves
each man to wear that precious robe which
most of all we need in yonder life hereafter :
if there be one here who would not now put
on this garb let him depart hence and go
home. I shall not brook to fight with men
in my army who have no part nor lot in our
holy rites." ■■■

CHAPTER II.

0/ tJie return of the bishops and the conse-
cration of Paulinus.

Julian had clear information on these
points, and did not make known the impiet}'

1 djui;>/Tui9<


of his soul. With the object of attracting all
the bishops to acquiescence in his rule he
ordered even those who had been expelled
from their churches by Constantius, and
who were sojourning on the furthest confines
ot the empire, to return to their own churches.
Accordingly, on the promulgationof this edict,
back to Antioch came the divine Meletius,
and to Alexandria the far famed Athana-
sius.^

But Eusebius,^ and Hilarius ^ of Italy and
Lucifer ■* who presided over the flock in the
island of Sardinia, were living in the Thebaid
on the frontier of Egypt, whither they had
been relegated by Constantius. They now
met with the rest whose views were the
same and affirmed that the churches ought
to be brought into harmony. For they not
only suffered from the assaults of their
opponents, but were at variance with one
another. In Antioch the sound body of the
church had been split in two ; at one and
the same time they who from the beginning,
for the sake of the right worthy Eustathius,
had separated from the rest, were assembling
by themselves ; and they who with the ad-
mirable Meletius had held aloof from the
Arian faction were performing divine ser-
vice in what is called the Palaea. Both
paities used one confession of faith, for both
parties were champions of the doctrine laid
down at Nicsea. All that separated them
was their mutual quarrel, and their regard
for their respective leaders ; and even the
death of one of these did not put a stop to
the strife. Eustathius died before the elec-
tion of Meletius, and the orthodox party,
after the exile of Meletius and the election
ofEuzoius, separated from the communion
of the impious, and assembled by themselves ;
with these, the party called Eustathians
could not be induced to unite. To effect an
union between them the Eusebians and


iThe accession of Julian was made known in Alexandria at
the end of Nov. 361, and the Pagans at once rose against
George, imprisoned him, and at last on Dec. 24, brutally beat
and kicked him to death. The Arians appointed a successor —
Lucius, but on Feb. 22 Athanasius once more appeared among
his faithful flock, and lost no time in getting a Council for the
settlement of several moot points of discipline and doctrine,
which Theodoret proceeds to enumerate.

- i.e. of Vercellae. Vide p. 76. From Scythopolis he had
been removed to Cappadocia, and thence to the Thebaid,
whence he wrote a letter, still extant, to Gregory, bp. of Elvira
in Spain.

3 Valesius supposes Hilary of Poictiers to be mentioned
here, though he recognises the difficulty of the "6 ex t^?
'IraAio?," and would alter the text to meet it. Possibly this is
the Hilary who is said to have been bishop of Pavia from 35S to
376, and may be the " Sanctus Hilarius" of Aug. Cont. diias
Epist. Pelag iv. 4. 7. cf. article Ambrosiaster in Diet. Christ.
Biog.

* cf. p. 76, note. Lucifer, bishop of Cagliari, had first been
relegated in 355 to Eleutheropolis, (a town of the 3d C, iu
Palestine, about 20 m. west of Jerusalem) whence he wrote the
controversial pamphlets still extant. He vigorously abused
Constantius, to whom he paid the compliment of sending
a copy of his work. The emperor appears to have retorted by
having him removed to the Thebaid, whence he returned in 361 .


96


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[III. 3.


Luciferians sought to discover a means.
Accordingly Eusebius besought Lucifer to
rcpan- to Alexandria and take counsel on the
matter with the great Athanasius, intending
hmiself to undertake the labour of bringing
about a reconcjliation.

Lucifer however did not go to Alexandria,
but repaired to Antioch. There he urged
many arguments in behalf of concord on
both parties. The Eustathians, led by
Paulinus, a presbyter, persisted in opposi-
tion. On seeing this Lucifer took the im-
proper course of consecrating Paulinus as
their bishop.

This action on the part of Lucifer pro-
longed the feud, which lasted for eighty-five
years, until the episcopate of the most praise-
worthy Alexander.'

No sooner was the helm of the church at
Antioch put into his hands than he tried
every expedient, and brought to bear great
zeal and energy for the promotion of con-
cord, and thus joined the severed limb to the
rest of the body of the church. At the time
in question however Lucifer made the
quarrel worse and spent a considerable time
in Antioch, and Eusebius when he arrived
on the spot and learnt that bad doctoring
had made the malady very hard to heal,
sailed away to the West.

When Lucifer returned to Sardinia he
made certain additions to the dogmas of the
church and those who accepted them were
named after him, and for a considerable
time were called Luciferians. But in time
the flame of this dogma too went out and it
was consigned to oblivion."^ Such were the
events that followed on the return of the
bishops.

CHAPTER III.

Of the nu?nber and character of the deeds
done by Pagans against the Christians when
they got the power from Julian.

When Julian had made his impiety
openly known the cities were filled with
dissensions. Men enthralled by the deceits
of idolatry took heart, opened the idols'

'cf. p. 41. Eustathius died nbout 3.^7, at Philippi, — prob-
ably about six years after his deposition. Alexander, an
ascetic (cf. post, v. Ch. 35) did not become bishop of Antiocli
till 413.

- The raison d'etre of the Luciferians as a distinct party was
their unwillingness to accept communion with men who had
ever lapsed into Arianism. Jerome gives 371 as the date of
Lucifer's death. "To what extent he was an actual schismatic
remains obscure." St. Ambrose remarks that " he had
separated himself from our communion," (de excessu Satyri
1127,47) and St. Augustine that " he fell into the darkness of
schism, having lost the light of charity." (En. iSj n. 47.)
But there is no mention of any separation other than Lucifer's
own repulsion of so many ecclesiastics; and Jerome in his
dialogue against the Luciferians (§ 20) calls him " heatus2iD.A
bonus pastor." J. LI. Davies in Diet. Christ. Biog. s. v.


shrines, and began to perform those foul
rites which ought to have died out from the
memory of man. Once more they kindled
the fire on the altars, befouled the ground
with victims' gore, and defiled the air with
the smoke of their burnt sacrifices. Mad-
dened by the demons they served they ran
in corybantic ' frenzy round about the
streets, attacked the saints with low stage
jests, and with all the outrage and ribaldry
of their impure processions.

On the other hand the partizans ^ of piety
could not brook their blasphemies, returned
insult for insult, and tried to confute the error
which their opponents honoured. In their
turn the workers of iniquity took it ill ; the
liberty allowed them by the sovereign was
an encouragement to audacity and they dealt
deadly blows among the Christians.

It was indeed the duty of the emperor to
consult for the peace of his subjects, but he
in the depth of his iniquity himself maddened
his peoples with mutual rage. The deeds
dared by the brutal against the peaceable he
overlooked and entrusted civil and military
offices of importance to savage and impious
men, who though they hesitated publicly to
force the lovers of true piety to offer sacrifice
treated them nevertheless with all kinds of
indignity. All the honours moreover con- >
ferred on the sacred ministry by the great \
Constantine Julian took away.

To tell all the deeds dared by the slaves of
idolatrous deceit at that time would require
a history of these crimes alone, but out of
the vast number of them I shall select a few
instances. At Askalon and at Gaza, cities
of Palestine, men of priestly rank and women
who had lived all their lives in virginity
were disembowelled, filled with barley, and
given for food to swine. At Sebaste, which
belongs to the same people, the coffin of
John the Baptist was opened, his bones burnt,
and the ashes scattered abroad.^


' Corybantes, the name of the priests of Cybele, whose re.
ligious service consisted in noisy music and wild, armed
dances, is a word of uncertain origin. The chief seat of their
rites was Pessinus in Galatia.

- ©tacrcorat. lit. The " club-fellows," or " members of a re-
ligious brotherhood."

3 Sebaste was a name given to Samaria by Herod the Great
in honour of Augustus, cf. Rufinus H. E. xi. 28 and Thco-
phanes, Chronographia i. 117. Theodoretus claims to have
obtained some of tlic relics of^ the Baptist for his own church
at Cyrus (Kelig. Hist. 1241;). On the development of the
tradition of the relics, cf. Diet. Christ. Ant. i. 883. A
magnificent church was built by Theodosius (Soz. vii. 21 and
24) in a suburb of Constantinople, to enshrine a head dis-
covered by some unsound monks. The church is said by
Sozomen (vii. 24) to be " at tlie seventh milestone," on the
road out of Constantinople, ami the place to be called Hebdo.
mon or " seventh." I am indebted to the Rev. II. F. Tozer for
the suggestion that Ilebdomon was a promontory on the
Propontis, to the west of the extreme part of the city, where
the Cyclobion was, and where the Seven Towers now are; and
that the Seven Towers being about six Roman miles from the
Seraglio Point, which is the apex of the triangle formed by


III. 4. 5]


OF THEODORET.


97


Who too could tell without a tear the
vile deed done in Phojnicia? At Heliopolis^
by Lebanon there lived a certain deacon of
the name of Cyrillus. In the reign of Con-
stantine, fired by divine zeal, he had broken
in pieces many of the idols there worshipped.
Now men of infamous name, bearing this
deed in mind, not only slew him, but cut
open his belly and devoured his liver. Their
crime was not, however, hidden from the
all-seeing eye, and they suffered the just
reward of their deeds ; for all who had taken
part in this abominable wickedness lost their
teeth, which all fell out at once, and lost,
too, their tongues, which rotted away and
dropped from them : they were moreover
deprived of sight, and by their sufferings
proclaimed the power of holiness.

At the neighbouring city of Emesa^they
dedicated to Dionysus, the woman-formed,
the newly erected church, and set up in it his
ridiculous androgynous image. At Dorys-
tolum,^ a famous city of Thrace, the victo-
rious athlete yEmilianus was thrown upon
a flaming pyre, by Capitolinus, governor
of all Thrace. To relate the tragic fate of
Marcus, however, bishop of Arethusa,'' with
true dramatic dignity, would require the
eloquence of an yEschylus or a Sophocles.
In the days of Constantius he had de-
stroyed a certain idol-shrine and built a
church in its place ; and no sooner did
the Arethusians learn the mind of Julian
than they made an open display of their
hostility. At first, according to the pre-
cept of the Gospel," Marcus endeavoured
to make his escape ; but when he became
aware that some of his own people wei'e
apprehended in his stead, he returned and
gave himself up to the men of blood. After
they had seized him they neither pitied his
old age nor reverenced his deep regard for
virtue ; but, conspicuous as he was for the
beauty alike of his teaching and of his life,
first of all they stripped and smote him,
laying strokes on every limb, then they
flung him into filthy sewers, and, when they
had dragged him out again, delivered him
to a crowd of lads whom they charged to


the city, t'le phrase at the seventh milestone is thus ac-
counted for. Bones alleq-ed to be parts of the scull are still
shewn at Amiens. The same emperor built a church for the
body on the site of the Scrapeum at Alexandria.

1 rieliopolis, the modern Baalbcc, the "City of the Sun," was
built at the west foot of Anti-Libanus, near the sources of the
Orontes.

2 On the Orontes; now Homs. Here Aurelian defeated
Zenobia in 273.

3 Durostorum, now Silistria, on the right bank of the Dan.
ube.

* Valesius (note on Soz. v. 10) would distinguish this Mar-
cus of Arethusa from the Ariaii Mari'us of Arethusa, author
of the cieed of Sirmium (Soc. H. E. ii. 30), apparently on
insufficient grounds (Diet. Christ. Bioa:. s. v.). Arethusa was
a town not far from the source of the Orontes.

" Matt. X, 23.

VOL. III.


prick him without mercy with their pens.^
Alter this they put him into a basket,
smeared him with pickle- and honey, and
hung him up in the open air in the height
of summer, inviting wasps and bees to a
feast. Their object in doing this was to
compel him either to restore the shrine
which he had destroyed, or to defray the
expense of its erection. Marcus, however,
endured all these grievous sufferings and
affirmed that he would consent to none of
their demands. His enemies, with the idea
that he could not afford the money from
poverty, remitted half their demand, and bade
him pay the rest ; but Marcus hung on high,
pricked with pens, and devoured by wasps
and bees, yet not only shewed no signs
of pain, but derided his impious tormentors
with the repeated taunt, " You are ground-
lings and of the earth ; I, sublime and ex-
alted." At last they begged for only a small
portion of the money; but, said he, "it is
as impious to give an obole as to give
all." So discomfited they let him go, and
could not refrain from admiring his con-
stancy, for his words had taught them a new
lesson of holiness.

CHAPTER IV.

0/ the laws made by Julian against the
Christians.

Countless other deeds were dared at that
time by land and by sea, all over the world,
by the wicked against the just, for now with-
out disguise the enemy of God began to lay
down laws against true religion. First of all
he prohibited the sons of the Galileans, for
so he tried to name the worshippers of the
Saviour, from taking part in the study of
poetry, rhetoric, and philosophy, for said he,
in the words of the proverb " we are shot
with shafts feathered from our own wing,"^
for from our own books they take arms and
wage war against us.

After this he made another edict ordering
the Galileans to be expelled from the army.

CHAPTER V.

Of the fourth exile and flight of the holy
Athanasius.

At this time Athanasius, that victorious
athlete of the truth, underwent another peril,

1 The sharp iron stilus was capable of inflicting- severe
wounds. CKsar, when attacked by his murderers, " caught
Casca's arm and ran it throuirh with his pen." Suetonius.

2 ya-pov, garuin, was a fish-pickle, cf. the barbarous punish-
ment of the (rica<f)eucri?, infiicted among- others on Milhridates,
who wounded Cyrus at Cuuaxa. (Plut. ArtaxerxeF.)

3 cf. Aristophanes (Aves SoS) " Ta6' oiix, in-' aKKuiv aKXa. T019
avrCiv n-Tcpoi?."


98


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[in. 6, 7


for the devils could not brook the power of
his tongue and prayers, and so armed their
ministers to revile him. Many voices did
they utter beseeching the champion of wick-
edness to exile Athanasius, and adding yet
this further, that if Athanasius remained,
not a heathen would remain, for that he
would get them all over to his side. Moved
by these supplications Julian condemned
Athanasius not merely to exile, ^ but to death.
His people shuddered, but it is related that
he foretold the rapid dispersal of the storm,
for said he " It is a cloud which soon van-
ishes away." He however withdrew as
soon as he learnt the arrival of the beai'ers
of the imperial message, and finding a boat
on the bank of the river, started for the
Thebaid. The officer who had been ap-
pointed for his execution became acquainted
with his flight, and strove to pursue him at
hot haste ; one of his friends, however, got
ahead, and told him that the officer was com-
ing on apace. Then some of his companions
besought him to take refuge in the desert,
but he ordered the steersman to turn the
boat's head to Alexandria. So they rowed
to meet the pursuer, and on came the bearer
of the sentence of execution, and, said he,
" How far off is Athanasius.? " " Not far,"
said Athanasius,^ and so got rid of his foe,
while he himself returned to Alexandria
and there remained in concealment for the
remainder of Julian's reign. ^

CHAPTER VI.

0/ Apollo and Daphne, and of the holy
Babylas.

Julian, wishing to make a campaign
against the Persians, dispatched the trustiest
of his officers to all the oracles throughout
the Roman Empire, while he himself went
as a suppliant to implore the Pythian oracle
of Daphne to make known to him the future.
The oracle responded that the corpses lying
hard by were becoming an obstacle to divi-
nation ; that they must first be removed to
another spot ; and that then he would utter
his prophecy, for, said he, " I could say
nothing, if the grove be not purified." Now


• The crowning outrage which moved Julian to put out the
edict of exile was the baptism by the bishop of some pagan
ladles. The letter of Julian (Ep. p. 1S7) fixed Dec. ist, 362,
as the limit of Athanasius' permission to stay in Egypt, but it
was on Oct. 23d (Fest. Ind.) that the order was communicated
to him.

2 The story may be compared with that of Napoleon on the
return from Elba in Feb. iSiS, when on being hailed by some
passing craft with an eiupiirv as to the emperor's health, he is
said to have himself taken the speaking trumpet and replied
•• Qiiite well."

3 He concealed himself at Cliocren. (?E1 Carcon) near Alex-
andria, and went thence to Memphis, whence he wrote his
Festal Letter for 363. Julian died June 26, 363.


at that time there were lying there the relics
of tlie victorious martyr Babylas ' and the
lads who had gloriously suftered with him,
and the lying prophet was plainly stopped
from uttering his wonted lies by the holy in-
fluence of Babylas. Julian was aware of
this, for his ancient piety had taught him the
power of victorious martyrs, and so he re-
moved no other body from the spot, but only
ordered the worshippers of Christ to trans-
late the relics of the victorious martyrs.
They marched with joy to the grove,- put
the coffin on a car and went before it leading
a vast concourse of people, singing the psalms
of David, while at every pause they shouted
" Shame be to all them that worship molten
images."^ For they understood the transla-
tion of the martyr to mean defeat for the
demon.

CHAPTER VII.

Of Theodorus the Confessor.

Julian could not endure the shame
brought upon him by these doings, and on the
following day ordered the leaders of the
choral procession to be arrested. Sallustius
was prefect at this time and a servant of
iniquity, but he nevertheless was anxious to
persuade the sovereign not to allow the
Christians who were eager for glory to at-
tain the object of their desires. VV^hen how-
ever he saw that the emperor was impotent
to master his rage, he arrested a young man
adorned with the graces of a holy enthu-
siasm while walking in the Forum, hung
him up before the world on the stocks, lacer-
ated his back with scourges, and scored his
sides with claw-like instruments of torture.
And this he did all day from dawn till the
day was done ; and then put chains of iron
on him and ordered him to be kept in
ward. Next morning he informed Julian of
what had been done, and reported the young
man's constancy and added that the event
was for themselves a defeat and for the
Christians a triumph. Persuaded of the
truth of this, God's enemy suffered no more

1 Babylas, bishop of Antioch from 23S to 251, was martyred
in the Decian persecution either by death in prison (Euseb. H.
E. vi. 39 /icTa Tiji' 6/uoAoyiai' iv 5ecr;u.uiT))pi<i) nfraAAo^oiTO?) or by
violence. (Chrys. des. B. c. gentes) "Babylas had won (or


himself a name by his heroic courage as bishop of Antioch.
It was related of him that on one occasion when the enijieror
Philip, who was a Christian, had presented himself one


Easter Eve at the time of prayer, he had boldly refused ad-
mission to the sovereign, till he had gone through the proper
discipline of a penitent for some offence committed. (Eus.
Il.E. vi.34.) He acted like a good sliepherd, says Chrysos-
torn, who drives away the scabby sheep, lest it should infect
the flock." Bp. Lightfoot, Ap. Fathers II. i. p. 40-46.

' " 'rhe Daplinean Sanctuary was four or five miles distant
from the city." " Rufinus says six, but this appears to be an
exaggeration." Bp. Lightfoot 1. c.

3 Ps. 96. 7.


III. 8, 9-]


OF THEODORET.


99


to be so treated and ordered Theodorus' to
be let out of prison, for so was named this
young and glorious combatant in truth's bat-
tle. On being asked if he had had any
sense of pain on undergoing those most
bitter and most savage tortures he replied
that at the first indeed he had felt some little
pain, but that then had appeared to him one
who continually wiped the sweat from his
face with a cool and soft kerchief and bade
him be of good courage. " Wherefore,"
said he, '• when the executioners gave over
I was not pleased but vexed, tor now there
went away with them he who brought me
refreshment of soul." But the demon of
lying divination at once increased the
martyr's glory and exposed his own false-
hood ; for a thunderbolt sent down from
heaven burnt the whole shrine ^ and turned
the very statue of the Pythian into fine dust, for
it was made of wood and gilded on the sur-
face. Julianus the uncle of Julian, prefect
of the East, learnt this by night, and riding
at full speed came to Daphne, eager to bring
succour to the deity whom he worshipped ;
but when he saw the so-called god turned
into powder he scourged the officers in
charge of the temple,^ for he conjectured that
the conflagration was due to some Christian.
But they, maltreated as they were, could not
endure to utter a lie, and persisted in saying
that the fire had started not from below but
from above. Moi'eover some of the neigh-
bouring rustics came forward and asserted
that they had seen the thunderbolt come
rushing down from heaven.

CHAPTER VIII.

Of the confiscation of the sacred treasures a?td
taking away of the allowances.^

Even when the wicked had become ac-
quainted with these events they set them-

* " Gibbon seems to confuse this young man Theodorus with
Theodoretus the presbyter and martyr who was put to death
about this time at Antioch by the Count Julianus, the uncle of
the emperor, (Soz. v. S., Ruinart's Act. Mart. Sine. p. 605 sq.)
for he speaks in his text of ' a presbyter nf the name of Theo-
doret,' and in his notes of ' the passion of S. Theodore in the
Acta Sincera of Ruinart,' " Bp. Lightfoot. p. 43.

2 " Gibbon says, ' During the night which terminated th.is
indiscreet procession, the temple of Daphne was in flames,'
and later writers have blindly followed him. He docs not
give any authority, but obviously he is copying Tillemont H.
E. iii. p. 407 ' en mesme temps que I'on portant dans la ville la
chasse du Saint Martyr, c'est a dire la nuit suivante.' The
only passage which Tillemont quotes is Ammianus, (xxii. 1 5)
' eodem tempore die xi. Kal. Nov.,' which does not bear him
out. On the contrary the historians generally (cf. Soz. v. 20,
Theod. iii. 7) place the persecutions which followed on the
processions, and which must have occupied some time, before
the burning of the temple." Bp. Lightfoot.

3 vtuiKopov;. vewKopo? is the word rendered "worshipper " in
Acts xix. 35 by A. V. The R. V. has correctly "temple-
keeper," the old derivation from (coptui ^ sweep, being no
doubt less probable than the reference of the latter part of the
word to a root v^KtJR^v/ I^OL, found in colo, euro.

*Ti7S Tu>v (nTT)pe(7-iwc <i(/)aipe(Teuj5. This deprivation is not fur-


selves in array against the God of all ; and
the prince ordered the holy vessels to be
handed over to the imperial treasury. Of
the great church which Constantine had
built he nailed up the doors and declared it
closed to the worshippers wont to assemble
there. At this tinie it was in possession of
the Arians. In company with Julianus the
prefect of the East, Felix the imperial
treasurer, and Elpidius, who had charge
of the emperor's private purse and property,
an officer whom it is the Roman custom
to call "Comes privatarum," ^ made their
way into the sacred edifice. Both Felix
and Elpidius, it is said, were Christians,
but to please the impious emperor aposta-
tised from the true religion. Julianus com-
mitted an act of gross indecency on the
Holy Table ^ and, when Euzoius endeavoured
to prevent him, gave him a blow on the face,
and told him, so the story goes, that it is the
fate of the fortunes of Christians to have no
protection from the gods. But Felix, as he
gazed upon the magnificence of the sacred
vessels, furnished with splendour by the mu-
nificence of Constantine and Constantius,
"Behold," said he, "with what vessels
Mary's son is served." But it was not long
before they paid the penalty of these deeds
of mad and impious daring.

CHAPTER IX.

Of what befell Julianus, the E^nperor's Uncle,
and Felix.

Julianus forthwith fell sick of a painful
disease ; his entrails rotted away, and he
was no longer able to discharge his excre-
ments through the normal organs of excre-
tion,^ but his polluted mouth, at the instant
of his blasphemy, became the organ for
their emission.

His wife, it is said, was a woman of con-
spicuous faith, and thus addressed her
spouse : " Husband, you ought to bless our
Saviour Christ for shewing you through
your castigation his peculiar power. For

ther referred to in the text. Philostorgius (vii. 4) says " He
distributed the allowance of the churches among the ministers
of the daemons," cf. Soz. v. 5. The restitution is recorded in
Theod. iv. 4. The o'lTo/u.eTpioi' of St. Luke xii. 42. (cf. ^\\v
Tpo0i;i' in Matt. xxiv. 45) is analogous to the a-i.Tripi<Ti.a of the
text, ^'ide Suicer s. v.

1 By the constitution of Constantine the two great ministers
of finance were (i) the Comes sacrariim /«r^;V/on«/«, treasurer
and paymaster of the public staff of the Empire; (ii) Comes
rei privatce, wlio managed the privy purse and kept the liber
benejiciorum, an account of privileges granted by the emperor,
cf. Diet. Christ. Ant. i. p. 634.

2 TpoTrefa is the word commonly employed by the Greek
Fathers and in Greek Liturgies to designate the Lord's Table.
f^vcnacrT-qpLOv is used by Eusebius H. E. x.4, for the Altar of the
Church of Tyre, but the earlier QvcriauTripiov of Ignatius
(Philad. iv.) does not appear to mean tlie Lord's Table, cf.
Up. Lightfoot Ap. Fathers, pt. II, ii. p. 25S.

3 arr6(Cpi(7-t9,


H 2


lOO


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[III. lO, II,


you would never have known who it is who
is being attacked by you if with his wonted
long suffering he had refrained from visiting
you with these heaven-sent plagues." Then
by these words and the heavy weight of his
woes the wretched man perceived the cause
of his disease, and besought the emperor
to restore the church to those who had been
deprived of it. He could not however gain
his petition, and so ended his da3'S.

Felix too was himself suddenly struck down
by a heaven-sent scourge, and kept vomiting
blood from his mouth, all day and all night,
for all the vessels of his body poured their
convergent streams to this one organ : so
when all his blood was shed he died, and
was delivered to eternal death.

Such were the penalties inflicted on these
men for their wickedness.


CHAPTER X.

Of the Son of the Priest.

A YOUNG man who was a priest's son, and
brought up in impiety, about this time went
over to the true religion. For a lady re-
markable for her devotion and admitted to
the order of deaconesses ^ was an intimate
friend of his mother. When he came to
visit her with his mother, while yet a tiny
lad, she used to welcome him with aflection
and urge him to the true religion. On the
death of his mother the young man used to
visit her and enjoyed the advantage of her
wonted teaching. Deeply impressed by her
counsels, he enquired of his teacher by what
means he miglit both escape the superstition
of his father and have part and lot in the
truth which she preached. She replied that
he must flee from his father, and honour
rather the Creator both of his father and
himself; that he must seek some other city
wherein he might lie hid and escape the vio-
lence of the impious emperor ; and she
promised to manage this for him. Then,
said the young man, " henceforward I shall
come and commit my soul to you." Not
many days afterwards Julian came to Daphne
to celebrate a public feast. With him came
the young man's father, both as a priest, and
as accustomed to attend the emperor ; and
with their father came the young man and
his brother, being appointed to the service
of the temple and charged with the duty of
ceremonially sprinkling the imperial viands.
It is the custom for the festival of Daphne

1 The earliest authorities for the oilier are St. Paul, Kom.
xvi.i, and probably I. Tim. iii. ii ; and Pimy in his letter to
Trajan, if ministr£( = JiaicofOf,


to last for seven days. On the first day the
young man stood by the emperor's couch,
and according to the 2:)rcscribed usage as-
persed the meats, and thorouglily polluted
them. Then at full speed he ran to Antioch,^
and making his way to that admirable lad}-,
" I am come," said he, " to you ; and I have
kept my promise. Do you look to the sal-
vation of each and fulfil your pledge." At
once she arose and conducted the young man
to Meletius the man of God, who ordered him
to remain for awhile upstairs in the inn. His
father after wandering about all over Daphne
in search of the bov, then returned to tlie
city and explored the streets and lanes, turn-
ing his eyes in all directions and longing to
light upon his lad. At length he arrived at
the place where the divine Meletius had his
hostelry ; and looking up he saw his son
peeping through the lattice. He ran up,
drew him along, got him down, and carried
him oft' home. Then he first laid on him
many stripes, then applied hot spits to his
feet and hands and back, then shut him up
in his bedroom, bolted the door on the out-
side, and returned to Daphne. So I myself
have heard the man himself narrate in his
old age, and he added further that he was
inspired and filled with Divine Grace, and
broke in pieces all his father's idols, and
made mockery of their helplessness. After-
wards when he bethought him of what he
had done he feared his father's return and
besought his Master Christ to nod approval
of his deeds," break the bolts, and open the
doors. " For it is for thy sake," said he, " that
I have thus suftered and thus acted." " Even
as I thus spoke," he told me, " out fell the
bolts and open flew the doors, and back I ran
to my instructress. She dressed me up in
women'sgarments and took mewith herin her
covered carriage back to the divine Meletius.
He handed me over to tlie bishop of Jeru-
salem, at that time Cyril, and we started
by night for Palestine." After the death of
Julian this young man led his father also
into the way of truth. This act he told
me with the rest. So in this fashion these
men were guided to the knowledsre of God
and were made partakers of Salvation.


CHAPTER XI.

Of the Holy Martyrs Juventinus and
Maximinus.

Now Julian, with less restraint, or shall I
say, less shame, began to arm himself against

? Vide note on page 98, * FeCcrau


III. 12.]


OF THEODORET.


101


true religion, wearing indeed a mask of
moderation, but all the while preparing gins
and traps which caught all who were
deceived by them in the destruction of
iniquity. He began by polluting with foul
sacrifices the wells in the city and in Daphne,
that every man who used the fountain
might be partaker of abomination. Then he
thoroughly polluted the things exposed in
the Forum, for bread and meat and fruit
and vegetables and every kind of food were
aspersed. When those who were called by
the Saviour's name saw what was done,
they groaned and bewailed and expressed
their abomination ; nevertheless they par-
took, for they remembered the apostolic
law, "Everything that is sold in the sham-
bles eat, asking no question for conscience
sake." ^ Two officers in the army, who were
shield bearers in the imperial suite, at a
certain banquet lamented in somewhat warm
language the abomination of what was being
done, and employed the admirable language
of the glorious youths at Babylon, " Thou
hast given us over to an impious Prince,
an apostate beyond all the nations on the
earth." ^ One of the guests gave infor-
mation of this, and the emperor arrested
these right worthy men and endeavoured
to ascertain by questioning them what
was the language they had used. They
accepted the imperial enquiry as an oppor-
tunity for open speech, and with noble enthu-
siasm replied " Sir we were brought up in
true religion ; we were obedient to most
excellent laws, the laws of Constantine and
of his sons ; now we see the world full of
pollution, meats and drinks alike defiled
with abominable sacrifices, and we lament.
We bewail these things at home, and now
before thy face we express our grief, for this
is the one thing in thy reign which we take
ill." No sooner did he whom sympathetic
courtiers called most mild and most philo-
sophic hear these words than he took off his
mask of moderation, and exposed the coun-
tenance of impiety. He ordered cruel and
painful scourgings to be inflicted on them
and deprived them of their lives ; or shall we
not rather say freed them from that sorrowful
time and gave them crowns of victory .f" He
pretended indeed that punishment was in-
flicted upon them not for the true religion
for sake of which they were really slain, but
because of their insolence, for he gave out


1 1. Cor. X. 25.

5 Sonof of the Three Children, v. S, quoted not quite ex-
actly from the Septuagint, which runs napi'6o>Ka<; rj/oias . . .
PatTL\.€i a6iKto Kai not^TjpoTaTw napa. jraaac Tr}v yrjv. The text is,
irape6(0Kas rjfid? ^acTL^el napavofxtu anotrTaTif) wapd TrdvTa rd (dvt)


that he had punished them for insulting the
emperor, and ordered this report to be pub-
lished abroad, thus grudging to these cham-
pions of the truth the name and honour ot
martyrs. The name of one was Juventinus ;
of the other Maximinus. The city ot
Antioch honoured them as defenders of true
religion, and deposited them in a magnificent
tomb, and up to this day they are honoured
by a yearly festival.^

Other men in public office and of distinc-
tion used similar boldness of speech, and won
like crowns of martyrdom.


CHAFTER XH.

0/ Valetitinianus the great Emperor.

Valentinianus,^ who shortly afterwards
became emperor, was at that time a Trib-
une and commanded the Hastati quartered
in the palace. He made no secret of his
zeal for the true religion. On one occasion
when the infatuated emperor was going
in solemn procession into the sacred enclo-
sure of the Temple of Fortune, on either
side of the gates stood the temple servants
purifying, as they supposed, all who were
coming in, with their sprinkling whisks.
As Valentinianus walked before the em-
peror, he noticed that a drop had fallen on
his own cloak and gave the attendant a blow
with his fist, "for," said he, "I am not
purified but defiled." For this deed he won
two empires. On seeing what had hap-
pened Julian the accursed sent him to a
fortress in the desert, and ordered him there
to remain, but after the lapse of a year and
a few months he received the empire as a
reward of his confession of the faith, for not
only in the life that is to come does the just
Judge honour them that care for holy things,
but sometimes even here below He bestows
recompense for good deeds, confirming the
hope of guerdons yet to be received by
what he gives in abundance now.

But the tyrant devised another contrivance
against the truth, for when according to
ancient custom he had taken his seat upon
tlie imperial throne to distribute gold among
the ranks of his soldiery, contrary to cus-
tom he had an altar full of hot coals in-
troduced, and incense put upon a table, and
ordered each man who was to receive the


' cf. St. Chrvsostom's homily in their honour. The
Basilian menology mentions Juventinus under Oct. g,

2 Valentinianus, a native of Cibalis (on the Save; in Panno-
nia (Bosnia) was elected Feb. 26, 364, and reigned till Nov.
'7' 37S' Though a Christian, he was tolerant of paganism,
or tlie peasant's religion, as in his reign heathenism began to
be named (Codex Theod. xvj. ii. iS). The " shortly after "
of the text means some two years.


102


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[III. 13, 14.


gold first to throw incense on the altar, and
then to take the gold from his own right
hand. The majority were wholly unaware
of the trap thus laid ; but those who were
forewarned feigned illness and so escaped
this cruel snare. Others in their eagerness
for the money made light of their salvation,
while another group abandoned their faith
through cowardice.

CHAPTER XIII.

Of other confessors.

After this fatal distribution of money
some of the recipients were feasting together
at an entertainment. One of them who had
taken the cup in his hand did not drink
before making on it the sign of salvation.^

One of the guests found fault with him for
this, and said that it was quite inconsistent
with what had just taken place. " What,"
said he, "have I done that is inconsistent?"
Whereupon he was reminded of the altar
and the incense, and of his denial of the
faith ; for these things are all contrary to the
Christian profession. When they heard this
the greater number of the feasters moaned
and bewailed themselves, and tore out
handfuls of hair from their heads. They
rose from the banquet, and ran through the
Forum exclaiming that they were Christians,
that they had been tricked by the emperor's
contrivances, that they retracted their apos-
tasy, and were ready to try to undo the
defeat which had befallen them unwittingly.
With these exclamations they ran to the
palace loudly inveighing against the wiles
of the tyrant, and imploring that they
might be committed to the flames in order
that, as they had been befouled by fire, by
fire they might be made clean. All these
utterances drove the villain out of his senses,
and on the impulse of the moment he
ordered them to be beheaded ; but as they
were being conducted without the city the
mass of the people started to follow them,
wondering at their fortitude and glorying in
their boklness for the truth. When, they
had reached the spot where it was usual to
execute criminals, the eldest of them
besought the executioner that he would first
cut off the head of the youngest, tliat he
miglit not be unmanned by beholding the
slaughter of the rest. No sooner had he
knelt down upon the ground and the heads-

_ • " The oriffin:iI mode of makinc: the sigri of the Cross was
with tlie thuinb of the rii^ht liand, i<^cncrariy on the forehead
only, or on other ohiects, once or ihrlce. (Chrvsost. Horn,
ad pop. Art. xl.) ' Thrice he made the sign of the cross on
the chalice with his finger.' (Sophron. in Prat. Spirit.)" Diet.
Christ. Ant. s. v.


man bared his sword, than up ran a man
announcing a reprieve, and while yet afar
oft' shouting out to stop the execution. Then
the youngest soldier was distressed at his
release from death. "Ah," said he, " Ro-
manus " (his name was Romanus) " was not
worthy of being called Christ's martyr."
What influenced the vile trickster in stoppino-
the execution was his envy : he grudged the
champions of the faith their glory. Their
sentence was commuted to relegation beyond
the city walls and to the remotest regions of
the empire.

CHAPTER XIV.

Of Artemius the Duke.'^ Of Publia the Deacon-
ess and her divine boldness.

Artemius' commanded the troops in Egypt.
He had obtained this command in the time
of Constantine, and had destroyed most of
the idols. For this reason Julian not only
confiscated his property but ordered his de-
capitation.

These and like these were the deeds of the
man whom the impious describe as the
mildest and least passionate of men.

I will now include in my history the noble
story of a right excellent woman, for even
women, armed with divine zeal, despised
the mad fury of Julian.

In those days there was a woman named
Publia, of high reputation, and illustrious for
deeds of virtue. For a short time she wore the
yoke of marriage, and had offered its most
goodly fruit to God, for from this fair soil
sprang John, who for a long time was chief
presbyter at Antioch, and was often elected
to the apostolic see, but from time to time de-
clined the dignity. She maintained a com-
pany of virgins vowed to virginity for life,
and spent her time in praising God who had
made and saved her. One day the emperor
was passing by, and as they esteemed the
Destroyer an object of contempt and deris-
ion, they struck up all the louder music,
chiefly chanting those psalms which mock
the helplessness of idols, and saying in the
words of David " The idols of the nations are
of silver and gold, the work of men's hands," ^
and after describing their insensibility,
they added "like them be they that make
them and all those that trust in them."*


1 By the Constitution of Constantine the supreme niiUtary
command was given to a " Magistcr equitum " and a " Matr-
istcr pcditum." Under them were .1 number of "Duces"
and "ComitLS," Dukes and Counts, with territorial titles.

^Ainmianus ISIarccllinus (XXII. 1 1 ) says, " Artemius eX
ducc Afgypti, Alcxandrinis urgentibus, atrociuni crimiuuiii
mole, suppliclocapitall inultatus est."

' Psalm cxv. 4.

* Psalm cxv. 8.


III. 15.]


OF THEODORET.


103


Julian heard them, and was very angrj-, and
told them to hold their peace while he was
passing by. She did not however pay the
least attention to his orders, but put still
greater energy into their chaunt, and when
the emperor passed by again told them to
strike up " Let God arise and let his ene-
mies be scattered." ^ On this Julian in
wrath ordered the choir mistress to be
brought before him ; and, though he saw
that respect was due to her old age, he
neither compassionated her gray hairs, nor
respected her high character, but told some
of his escort to box both her ears, and by
their violence to make her cheeks red. She
however took the outrage for honour, and
returned home, where, as was her wont, she
kept up her attack upon him with her spirit-
ual songs, ^ just as the composer and
teacher of the song laid the wicked spirit
that vexed Saul.


CHAPTER XV.

Of the Jews ; of fhcir attempt at building,
and of the heaven-sent plagues that befel
them.

Julian, who had made his soul a home
of destroying demons, went his corybantic
way, ever raging against true religion. He
accordingly now armed the Jews too against
the believers in Christ. He began by en-
quiring of some whom he got together why,
though their law imposed on them the duty
of sacrifices, they offered none. On their
reply that their worship was limited to one
particular spot, this enemy of God immedi-
ately gave directions for the re-erection
of the destroyed temple,^ supposing
in his vanity that l•^e could falsify the
prediction of the Lord, of which, in
reality, he exhibited the truth.* The Jews
heard his words with delight and made
known his orders to their countrymen
throughout the world. They came with
haste from all directions, contributing alike
money and enthusiasm for the work ; and
the emperor made all the provisions he
could, less from the pride of munificence
than from hostility to the truth. He de-
spatched also as governor a fit man to carry


out his impious orders. It is said that they
made mattocks, shovels, and baskets of silver.
When they had begun to dig and to carry
out the earth a vast multitude of them went
on with the work all day, but by night the
earth which had been carried away shifted
back from the ravine of its own accord.
They destroyed moreover the remains of the
former construction, with the intention of
building everything up afresh ; but when
they had got together thousands of bushels
of chalk and lime, of a sudden a violent
gale blew, and storms, temj^ests and whirl-
winds scattered everything far and wide.
They still went on in their madness, nor
were they brought to their senses by the di-
vine longsufiering. Then first came a great
earthquake, fit to strike terror into the hearts
of men quite ignorant of God's dealings ;
and, when still they were not awed, fire run-
ning from the excavated foundations burnt
up most of the diggers, and put the rest to
flight. Moreover when a large number of
men were sleeping at night in an adjacent
building it suddenly fell down, roof and all,
and crushed the whole of them. On that
night and also on the following night the
sign of the cross of salvation was seen
brightly shining in the sky, and the very
garments of the Jews were filled with crosses,
not bright but black. ^ When God's enemies
saw these things, in terror at the heaven-
sent plagues they fled, and made their way
home, confessing the Godhead of Him who
had been crucified by their fathers. Julian
heard of these events, for they were re-
peated by every one. But like Pharaoh he
hardened his heart. ^


1 Psalm Ixvii. i.

2Cf. Eph. V. ig.

3 Bp. Wordsworth (Diet. Chris. Biog. iii, goo) is in fa-
vour of the letter (Ep. 24, Ed. Didot 350) in which Julian
desires the prayers of the Creator and professes a wish to
rebuild and inhabit Jerusalem with them after his return from
the Persian war and there g^ive glory to the Supreme Being-.
It is addressed to his "brother Julus, the very venerable
patriarch."

* This is the motive ascribed by the Arian Philostorgius
(vii. 9) .


i"The curious statement that crosses were imprinted on
the bodies and clothes of persons present, Is illustrated in the
original edition of Ncwn".an's Essay (clxxxii.)" (i.e. on eccle-
siastical miracles) "by some parallel instances quoted by War-
burton from Casaubon and from Boyle. Such crosses, or
cross-like impressions, are said to havi: followed not only a
thunderstorm, but also an eruption of Vesuvius ■ these crosses
were seen on linen garments, as shirt sleeves, \vomen's
aprons, that had lain open to the air, and upon the exposed
parts of sheets." "Chrysostom (Ed. Montfaucon, vol. v.
271, etc.) mentions 'crosses imprinted upon garments,* as a
sign that had occurred in his generation, close to the men-
tion of the Temple of Apollo that was overthrown by a
tliunderbolt, and separated from the wonders in Palestine that
he mentions subsequently." Dr. E. A. Abbott. Philomythtis,
1S9.

2 This event " came like the vision of Constantine, at a criti-
cal epoch in the world's Iiistory. It was, as the heathen jjoet has
it, a ' dignus vindice nodus.' All who were present or heard
of the event at the time, thought, we may be sure, that it was
a sign from God. As a miracle then it ranges beside those
biblical miracles in which, at some critical moment, the forces
of nature are seen to work strikingly for God's people or
against their enemies. In the O. T. we have for example, the
instances of the plagues of Egypt, the passage of the Red Sea
and the drowning of Pharaoh's host, tlie crossing of the Jor-
dan, the prolongation of sunlight" (? darkness. Vide" A mis-
understood miracle" by the Rev. A. Smythe Palmer) " the de-
struction of Sennacherib's army; in the N. T. the stilling of
the storm, and the earthquake and the darkness at tlie cruci-
fixion." Bp. Wordsworth. Diet. Ch. Biog. Ii. 513. To bibli-
cal instances may be added the defeat of Sisera and the fall of
Aphek. But, too, for " the forces of nature," when tlie Ar-
mada was scattered, or when the siege of Leyden was raised


104


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[III. i6, 17.


CHAPTER XVI.
Of the expedition against the Persians.

No sooner had the Persians heard of the
death of Constantius, than they took heart,
proclaimed war, and marched over the fron-
tier of the Roman empire. Julian therefore
determined to muster his forces, though they
were a host without a God to guard them.
First he sent to Delphi, to Delos and to
Dodona, and to the other oracles ' and en-
quired of the seers if he shoukl march.
They bade him march and promised him
victory. One of these oracles I subjoin in
proof of their falsehood. It was as follows.
" Now we gods all started to get trophies of
victory by the river beast and of them I
Ares, bold raiser of the din of war, will be
leader."- Let them that style the Pythian a
God wise in word and prince of the muses
ridicule the absurdity of the utterance. I who
have found out its falsehood will rather pity
him who was cheated by it. The oracle
called the Tigris " beast " because the river
and the animal bear the same name. Rising
in the mountains of Armenia, and flowing
through Assyria it discharges itself into the
Persian gulf. Beguiled by these oracles the
unhappy man indulged in dreams of victory,
and after fighting with the Persians had
visions of a campaign against the Galileans,


the course nf inoclc-rn history would have been changed.
Cressy may also be cited.

On the evidence for this event as contrasted with the so-
called ecclesiastical miracles, accepted and defended by
the late Cardinal Newman, vide Dr. E. A. Abbott's Philomy-
thus p|). I and s et seq. "There is better evidence for this
than for any of the precedin<^ miracles." "The real solid
testimony is that of Ammiaims Marcelliniis (xxiii.i). An
im|)artial hislori.in, who served under Julian in the Persian
campaifiifn, and who, twenty years afterwards, recorded the
interruption of the building of the Temple by terrible balls of
fire." " If Ammianiis had lived nearer the time of the alleged
incident, or had added a statement of the evidence on which
he based his stories, the details might have been defended. As
it is, the circumstances, while favouring belief in his veracity,
do not justify us in accepting anything more than the fact that
the rebuilding of the Temjile was generally believed to have
been stopped by some supernatural fiery manifestation."
"The rebuilding was probably stopped by a violent thunder-
storm or thunderstorms."

' This is probably th^ last occasion on which the moribund
oracles were consulted by any one of imiwrtance. Of Delphi,
the "nivelofthe earth" (Strabo ix. 505) in I'hocis, Cicero
had written some four centuries earlier " Cur isto modo jam
or.icula Delphi non eduntur, non modo nostra a;tate, scd jam
dm, ut nihil possit esse contemptius : " Div. ii. 57. Plu-
tarch, who died about A.D. 120, wrote already " de defectu
oraculorum."

Tlie oracle of Apollo at Delos was consulted only in the
summer months, as in the winter the god was supposed to be
at Patara : so Virgil (iv. 143) writes

" Qiialis ubi hibernam Lyciam Xanthitpie fluenta
Deserit, ac Delum maternam invisit Apoll"."
Dodona in Epirus was the most ancient of the oracular
shrines, where the su))pliant went

oc^pa flcoio


Od.


327-
with


" The oracles " were potentially" dumb,"" Ajxillo
hollow shriek the steep of Delphos ieavinja^," as Milton sings,
at the Nativity, but it was not till the reign of Theodosius that
they were finally silenced.

' vvv TroifTe! <op(i>j0f)(uei' 6(o\ vCkt)^ Tponaia KOti.i<Ta<rdat napa Srjpl
nOTanif tCiv S' iyit iJYCfxoi'ei/o'u Oovpoi Tro^eixoKKarot '.^pij?.


for so he called the Christians, thinking thus
to bring discredit on them. But, man of
education as he was, he ought to have be-
thought him that no mischief is done to
reputation by change of name, for even had
Socrates been called Critias and Pythagoras
Phalaris they would have incurred no dis-
grace from the change of name — nor yet
would Nireus if he had been named Ther-
sitesMiave lost the comeliness with which
nature had gifted him. Julian had learned
about these things, but laid none of them to
heart, and supposed that he could wrong us
by using an inappropriate title. He be-
lieved the lies of the oracles and threatened
to set up in our churches the statue of the
goddess of lust.

CHAPTER XVII.

0/ the boldness of speech of the decurion of
Bercea?

After starting with these threats he was
put down by one single Berocan. Illustrious
as this man was from the fact of his holding
the chief place among the magistrates, he
was made yet more illustrious by his zeal.
On seeing his son falling into the prevailing
paganism, he drove him from his home and
publicly renounced him. The youth made
his way to the emperor in the near neigh-
bourhood of the city and informed him both
of his own views and of his father's sentence.
The emperor bade him make his mind easy
and promised to reconcile his father to him.
When he reached Beroea, he invited the men
of office and of high position to a banquet.
Among them was the young suppliant's
father, and both father and son were ordered
to take their places on the imperial couch.
In the middle of the entertainment Julian


'These four illustrations, occurring in a single sentence,
indicate a certain breadth of reading on the part of the writer,
and bear out his character for learning, (cf. Gibbon and
Jortin, remarks on Eccl. Hist. ii. ii,v) Socrates, the best of
the philosophers, is set against Critias, one of the worst of the
politicians of Hellas; Pythagoras, the Samian sage of Magna
Gra;cia, against Phalaris, the Sicilian tyrant who
"tauro violent! membra Perilli
Torruit; " (Ovid. A. A. i. 653)
but did not write the Epistles once ascribed to him. Theo-
doretus probablv remembered his Homer when he cited Ther-
sites as the ugliest man of the old world; —

" He was squint-eyed, and lame of either foot;
So crook-back'd that he had no breast; sharji-headed, where

did shoot
Here and there spersed, thin mossy hair."

II. li. 219. Chapman's Trans.
And the juxtaposition of Pythagoras and Nireus suggests
that it may jjossibly have been Horace who suggested Nireus
as the type of beauty : —

" Nee te PythagorjE fallant arcana renati,
Formaque vincas Nirea," (Hor. Epod. xv.)

thiniirh Nireus appears as »caAAi<rT05 avr\p in the same book of
the Iliad as that in which Thersites is derided, and Theodoret
is said to have known no I^atin.

" \^alesius points out that iroAiTeuEo-floi means to hold the rank
of Curiales or Decuriones. The Hertea mentioned is pre-
sumably the Syrian Bcrcea now Haleb or Aleppo.


III. i8, 19.]


OF THEODORET.


105


said to the father, " It does not seem to me
to be i-ight to force a mind otherwise in-
clined and having no wish to shift its
allegiance. Your son does not wish to
follow your doctrines. Do not force hnn.
Even I, though I am easily able to compel
you, do not try to force you to follow mine."
Then the father, moved by his faith in divine
truth to sharpen the debate, exclaimed
" Sir," said he " are you speaking of this
wretch whom God hates ^ and who has pre-
ferred lies to truth ? "

Once more Julian put on the mask of
mildness and said " Cease fellow from
reviling," and then, turning his face to the
youth, "I," said he, "will have care for
you, since I have not been able to persuade
your father to do so." I mention this cir-
cumstance with a distinct wish to point out
not only this worthy man's admirable bold-
ness, but that very many persons despised
Julian's sway.

CHAPTER XVIII.

0/ the prediction of the pedagogue.

Another instance is that of an excellent
man at Antioch, entrusted with the charge
of young lads, who was better educated than
is usually the case with pedagogues,^ and
was the intimate friend of the chief teacher
of that period, Libanius the far-famed soph-
ist.

Now Libanius * was a heathen expecting
victory and bearing in mind the threats of
Julian, so one day, in ridicule of our belief,
he said to the pedagogue, "What is the car-
penter's son about now?" Filled with
divine grace, he foretold what was shortly to
come to pass. " Sophist," said he, " the
Creator of all things, whom you in derision
call carpenter's son, is making a coffin." *


1 The word thus translated is either active or passive accord-
ing^ to its accentuation, ©eo^io-rj? =r hated by God; Weoini'crijs =:
hating God.

2 The word seems here used in its strictly Athenian sense
of a slave who took charge of boys on their way between
school and home (Vide Lycias 910. 2 and Plat. Rep. 373. C.)
rather than in the more general sense of teacher. In Xen.
Lac. 3. I. it is coupled with StSacrKaAos : here it is contrasted
with it.

3" One of the most noteworthy and characteristic figures of
expiring heathenism." J.R. Mozley, Diet. Christ. Biog. s. v.
Born ill Antioch A.D. 314, he died about the close of the
century. He was a voluminous author, and wrote among
other things a " vain, prolix, but curious narrative of his own
life." Gibbon. The most complete account of him will be
found in E. R. Siever's Das Leben des Libanius.

*The form in the text (yAocro-oKOMoi') is rejected by Attic
purists, but is used twice by St. John, as well as in the
Septuagint. In II. Chron. xxiv. 8 (cf. II. Kings xii. q) it
means a chest. In St. John's Gospel xii. 6 and xiii. 29 it
is "the bag," properly (xi. 3) "box," which Judas carried.
In the Palatine anthology Nicanor the coffin maker makes
these " glossokoma " or coffins. Derivatively the word
means " tongue.cases," i.e. cases to keep the tongues or
reeds of musical instruments. An instance of similar
transfer of meaning is our word " coffin ; " derivatively
a wicker basket; — at one time any case or cover, and in


After a few days the death of the wretch
was announced. He was carried out lying
in his coffin. The vaunt of his threats was
proved vain, and God was glorified.^


CHAPTER XIX.

Of the Prophecy of St. Julianus the monk.

A MAN who in the body imitated the lives
of the bodiless, namely Julianus, surnamed in
Syrian Sabbas, whose life I have written in
my " Religious History," continued all the
more zealously to offer his prayers to the
God of all, w^hen he heard of the impious
tyrant's threats. On the very day on which
Julian was slain, he heard of the event while
at his prayers, although the Monastery
was distant more than twenty stages from
the army. It is related that while he was
invoking the Lord with loud cries and sup-
plicating his merciful Master, he suddenly
checked his tears, broke into an ecstasy of
delight, while his countenance was lighted
up and thus signified the joy that possessed
his soul. When his friends beheld this
change they begged him to tell them the
reason of his gladness. "The wild boar,"
said he, " the enemy of the vineyard of the
Lord, has paid the penalty of the wrongs he
has done to Him ; he lies dead. His mischief
is done." The whole company no sooner
heard these words than they leaped with joy
and struck up the song of thanksgiving to
God, and from those that brought tidings of
the emperor's death they learnt that it was
the very day and hour when the accursed
man was slain that the aged Saint knew it
and announced it.'^

Shakespeare (Titus Andronicus Act V. 2, 1S9) pie crust.
Perhaps " casket," which now still holds many things, maj
one day only hold a corpse.

' In times and circumstances totally different, it may seem
that Julian's courtesy and moderation contrast favourably witli
the fierce zeal of the Cliristians. A modern illustration of the
temper of the Church in Julian's reign may be found in the
following account given of his dragoman by the late authoi
of "Eothen." "Religion and the literature of the Church
which he served had made him a man, and a brave man too.
The lives of his honored Saints were full of heroic actions
provoking imitation, and since faith in a creed involves faith
in its ultimate triumph, Dtliemetri was bold from a sense of
true strength; his education too, though not very general in its
character, had been carried quite far enough to justify him in
pluming himself upon a very decided advantage over the great
bulk of the Mahometan population, including the men in au-
tiiority. AVith all this consciousness of religious and intellect-
ual superiority, Dthemetri had lived for the most part jn
countries lying under Mussulman governments, and had wit-
nessed (perhaps too had suffered from) their revolting cruel-
tics; the result was that he abliorred and despised the
Mussulman faith and all who clung to it. And this hate was
not of the dull, dry, and inactive sort; Dthemetri was in his
wav a true crusader, and whenever there appeared a fair open-
ing in the defence of Islam, he was ready and eager to make
the assault. Such feelings, backed bv a consciousness of under-
standing the people with whom he had to do, made Dthemelri
not only firm and resolute in his constant interviews with men
in authority, but sometimes also verv violent and very insult-
ing." Kinglake's " Eothen," ^tli Ed., p. 270.

2The eniperor Julian was wounded in the neighbourhood
of Symbria or Hucumbra on the Tigris on the morning of June


io6


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[III. 20-22.


CHAPTER XX.

Of the death of the Evipcror Julian in Persia.

Julian's folly was yet more clearly mani-
fested by his death. He crossed the river
that separates the Roman Empire from the
Persian,^ brouglit over his army, and then
forthwith burnt his boats, so inaking his
men iiijht not in williiisf but in forced obedi-
ence.- The best generals are wont to fill their
troops with enthusiasm, and, if they see
them growing discouraged, to cheer them
and raise their hopes ; but Julian by burning
the bridge of retreat cut oti" all good hope.
A further proof of his incompetence was his
failure to fulfil the duty of foraging in all
directions and providing his troops with
supplies. Julian had neither ordered sup-
plies to be brought from Rome, nor did he
make any bountiful provision by ravaging
the enemy's country. He left the inhabited
world behind him, and persisted in march-
inof throusfh the wilderness. His soldiers
had not enough to eat and drink ; they w^ere
without guides ; they were marching astray
in a desert land. Thus they saw the folly
of their most wise emperor. In the midst
of their murmuring and grumbling they
suddenly found him who had struggled in
mad rage against his Maker wounded to
death. Ares who raises the war-din had
never come to help him as he promised ;
Loxias had given lying divination ; he who
glads him in the thunderbolts had hurled
no bolt on the man who dealt the fatal blow ;
the boasting of his threats was dashed to
the ground. The name of the man who
dealt that righteous stroke no one knows to
this day. Some say that he was wounded
by an invisible being, others by one of the
Nomads who were called Ishmaelites ; others
by a trooper who could not endure the pains
of famine in the wilderness. But whetlier
it were man or angel who plied the steel,
without doubt the doer of the deed was the
minister of the will of God. It is related
that when Julian had received the wound,
he filled his hand with blood, flung it into

26th, 363, and died at midnight. On ihc somewhat similar
stories of ApoUonius of Tyana mountiiiii!- a lofty rock in Asia
Minor and shoutin'^ to the crowd aboul liini ' well done, Steph-
anus; excellent, Stephanus; smite the blood-stained wretch;
thou hast struck, thou hast wounded, thou hast slain,' at the
very moment when Doinitian was beinij murdered at Home
(Dion Cass, 67. iS) ; and of Irena.'us at Home hearing a voice as
of a trumpet at the exact hour when Polycarp suffered at Smyrna
nroclaimmg ' Polycarp has been martyred ' (Vid. Ep. Smyrn.).
lip. Lightfoot (Apostolic Fathers i . 45!;) writes " The analogies
of autlienticated records of ajiparitions seen and voices heard at
a distance at the moment of death have been too frequent in all
ages to allow us to dismiss the story at once as a pure fiction."
Such narratives at all events testify to a wide-spread belief.

' There seems to be an allusion to Cxsar's passage of the
Rubicon in 49 H.C.

I Jlis fleet, with the exception of a few vessels, was burned
at Abuzatha, where he halted five days (Zos 3. 26).


the air and cried, " Thou hast won, O Gali-
lean." Thus he gave utterance at once to a
confession of the victory and to a blasphemy.
So infatuated was he.'


CHAPTER XXI.

Of the sorcery at Carrce which was detected
after his death. After he was slain the Jug-
glery of his sorcery was detected. For Carrce
is a city tahich still retai7is the relics of his
false religion.

Julian had left Edessa on his left because
it was adorned with the grace of true relig-
ion, and while in his vain folly he was
journeying through Carras, he came to the
temple honoured by the impious and after
going tlirougli certain rites with his com-
panions in defileinent, he locked and sealed
the doors, and stationed sentinels with orders
to see that none came in till his return.
When news came of his death, and the
reign of iniquity was succeeded by one of
piety, the shrine was opened, and w-ithin
was found a proof of the late emperor's man-
liness, wisdom, and piety." For there was
seen a woman hung up on high by the hairs
of her head, and w^th her hands out-
stretched. The villain had cut open her
belly, and so I suppose learnt from her
liver his victory over the Persians.^

This was the abomination discovered at
Carrse.

CHAPTER XXII.

Of the heads discovered in the palace at Anti-
och and the public rejoicings there.

It is said that at Antioch a number of
chests were discovered at the palace filled
with human heads, and also many wells full
of corpses. Such is the teaching of the evil
deities.

1 The exclamation was diflcrcntly reported. Sozomen vi.
2. says that some thought he lifted his hand to chide the sun
for failing to help him. It lias been observed that the sound
of i/ti'iKTjxas" raAiAoie and ijirartjica? >jAie would not be so dissimi-
lar in Greek as in English. Ammianus Marcellinus (x.xv. 3.
q.) says that he lost all hope of recovery when he heard that
the place w'here he lay was called Phrygia, for in Phrygia he
liad been told that he would die. So it befell with Canibyses
at Ecbatana (Iler. iii. 64), Alexander King of Epirus at the
Acheron (Livy viii. 24) and Menry IN' in the Jerusalem Cham-
ber, when he asked " Doth any name particuhir belong unto
this lodging where I first did swoon?" and on hearing that
the chamber was called Jerusalem, remembered the old pre-
diction that in Jerusalem lie must die, and died.

- The reading (.iitji^tiixv for acre^eiai' seems to keep up the
irony.

8 rjTfaToo-icon-ia, or " inspection of the liver," was a recog-
nized form of divination, cf. the Sejjt. of Ez. xxi.21. " /cai
eTTtpioT^croi iv ToiT -yAi'TTToii;, xal r\t:aLTO%KO-nr\aa.aSai " and Cic.'.
de div. ii. 13, " Cajmt jecoris ex omni parte diligentissimc'
considerant ; si vero id non est inventuni, nihil putant accidcrc
potuissc tristius." Vide also ^*;sch. Pr. V. 503, and Paley's
note.


IV. I.]


OF THEODORET.


107


When Antioch heard of Julian's death she
gave herself up to rejoicing and festivity ;
and not only v^as exultant joy exhibited in
the churches, and in the shrines of martyrs,
but even in the theatres the victory of the
cross vi^as proclaimed and Julian's vaticina-
tion held up to ridicule. And hei-e I will
record the admirable utterance of the men at
Antioch, that it may be preserved in the
memory of generations yet to come, for with
one voice the shout was raised, " Maximus,
thou fool, where are thy oracles? for God
has conquered and his Christ." This was
said because there lived at that time a man of
the name of Maximus, a pretender to philoso-
phy, but really a worker of magic, and
boastins: himself to be able to foretell the
future. But the Antiochenes, who had re-
ceived their divine teaching from the glori-
ous yokefellows Peter and Paul, and were
full of warm affection for the Master and
Saviour of all, persisted in execrating Julian
to the end. Their sentiments were perfect-
ly well known to the object of them, and so
he wrote a book against them and called it
"Misopogon." ^

> " The residence of Julian at Antioch was a disappointment
to himself, and disagreeable to almost all the inhabitants."
" He had anticipated much more devotion on the part of the
pagans, and much less force and resistance on that of the
Christians than he discovered in reality. He was disgusted
at findinir that both parties regretted the previous reign.
' Neither the Chi nor the Kappa' (that is neither Christ nor
Constantius) ' did our city any barm' became a common saying


This rejoicing at the death of the tyrant
shall conclude this book of my history, for it
were to my mind indecent to connect with a
righteous reign the impious sovereignty of
Julian.

(Misopogon p. 357). To the heathens themselves the enthu-
siastic form of religion to which Julian was devoted was little
more than an unpleasant and somewhat vulgar anachro-
nism. His cynic asceticism and dislike of the theatre and
the circus was unpopular in a city particularly addicted to
public spectacles. His superstition was equally unpala-
table. The short, untidy, long-bearded man, marching
pompously in procession on the tips of his toes, and
swaying his shoulders from side to side, surrounded by
a crowd of abandoned characters, such as formed the
regular attendants upon many heathen festivals, ap-
peared seriouslv to compromise the dignity of the empire.
(Ammianus xxii. 14. 3. His words *stipatus mulierculis' etc.
go far to justify Gregory's Sijjiocrta rais 7ropi'ai<; Trpovnii'f in
Orat. V. 2Z. p. 161, and Chrysostom's more highly coloured
description of the same sort of scene, for the accuracy of which
he appeals to an eye witness still living, de S. Babyla in
Julianuin § 14. p. 667. The blood of countless victims (lowed
everywhere, but, to all appearance, served merely to gorge his
foreign soldiery, especially the semi-barbarous Gauls; and
the streets of Antioch were' disturbed by their revels and by
drunken parties carrying one another home to their barracks.
(Amm. xxii. 12.6.)" " More secret rumours were spread of
horrid nocturnal sacrifices, and of the pursuits of those arts
of necromancy from wliich the natural heathen conscience
shrank only less than the Christians." " He discharged his
spleen upon the general body of the citizens of Antioch by
writing one of the most remarkable satires that has ever
been published which he entitled the Misopogon. ' He had
been insulted,' says Gibbon, ' by satire and libels, in his turn
he composed under the title of The Enemy of the Beard, an
ironical confession of his own faults, and a severe satire on
the licentious and effeminate manners of Antioch. The impe-
rial reply was publicly exposed before the gates of the palace,
and the Misopogon still remains a singular monument of the
resentment, the wit, the Inhumanity, and the indiscretion of
Julian. Gibbon, Chap, xxiv.' It is of course Julian's own
philosophic beard that gives the title to the pamphlet." " This
pamphlet was written in the seventh month of his sojourn at
Antioch, probably the latter half of January." (1.6.364.) Bp
J. Wordsworth in Diet. Ch. Biog. iii. 507,, 509.


BOOK IV.


CHAPTER I.

Of the reign and piety of Joviamis.

After Julian was slain the generals and
prefects met in council and deliberated who
ought to succeed to the imperial power and
effect both the salvation of the army in the
campaign, and the recovery of the fortunes
of Rome, now, by the rashness of the de-
ceased Emperor, placed, to use the common
saying, on the razor edge of peril. ^ But
while the chiefs were in deliberation the
troops met together and demanded Jovianus
for emperor, though he was neither a gen-
eral nor in the next highest rank ; a man
however remarkably distinguished, and for
many reasons well known. His stature
was great ; his soul lofty. In war, and in
grave struggles it was his wont to be first.


1 The common proverbial saying,_ from Homer downwards ;
fri ^vpoi! l^rarai aKfx^; 6Ac9pot <]^ /Siui/ai. II, 10. 173.


Against impiety he delivered himself cour-
ageously with no fear of the tyrant's power,
but with a zeal that ranked him among the
martyrs of Christ. So the generals accepted
the unaniinous vote of the soldiers as a divine
election. The brave man was led forward
and placed upon a raised platform hastily
constructed. The host saluted him with the
imperial titles, calling him Augustus and
Caesar. With his usual bluntness, and fear-
less alike in the presence of the commanding
officers and in view of the recent apostasy
of the troops, Jovianus admirably said " I am
a Christian. I cannot govern men like these.
I cannot command Julian's army trained as
it is in vicious discipline. Men like these,
stripped of the covering of the providence
of God, will fall an easy and ridiculous prey
to the foe." On hearing this tiie troops
shouted with one voice, " Hesitate not, O
emperor; think it not a vile thing to com-
mand us, You shall reign over Christians


io8


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[IV. 2, 3.


nurtured in the trainin<^ of truth ; our vet-
erans were taught in the school of Constan-
tine himself; younger men among us were
taught by Constant! us. This dead man's
empire lasted but a few years, all too few to
stamp its brand even on those whom it
deceived." ^

CHAPTER II.

Of the return of Athanasius.

Delighted with these words the emperor
undertook for the future to take counsel for
the safety of the state, and how to bring
home the army without loss from tlie cam-
paign. He was in no need of much delib-
eration, but at once reaped the fruit sprung
from the seeds of true religion, for the God
of all gave proof of His own providence, and
caused all difficulty to disappear. No
sooner had the Persian sovereign been made
acquainted with Jovian's accession than he
sent envoys to treat for peace ; nay more,
he despatched provisions for the troops and
gave directions for the establishment of a
market for them in the desert. A truce was
concluded for thirty years, and the army
brought home in safety from the war.- The
first edict of the emperor on setting foot
upon his own territory was one recalling
the bishops from their exile, and announc-
ing the I'estoration of the churches to the
congregations who had held inviolate the
confession of Nicaea. He further sent a
despatch to Athanasius, the famous cham-
pion of these doctrines, beseeching that a
letter mi^jcht be written to him containing
exact teaching on matters of religion.
Athanasius summoned the most learned
bishops to meet him, and wrote back ex-
horting the emperor to hold fast the faith
delivered at Nictea, as being in harmony
with apostolic teaching. Anxious to benefit
all who may meet with it I here subjoin the
letter.'


'Jovianus, son of Count Varronianus of Singidunum (Hcl-
prade), was born in 330 or 331 and reijjncd from June 3<'3 -o
February 564. His hasty acceptance ny apart of the army
may have been dueto the mistake of the sounci of'Jovianus
Aui^ustus " for that of " julianus Augustus" and a belief
that Julian survived. " Oentilitate cnim propc perciti noniinis,
quod una littera discernebat, Juliamim recreatuni arbilrati
sunt deduci magiiis favoribus, ut solebat." Amm. xxv. v. 6.

"Jovian was i brilliant colonel of the guards. In all the
army there was not a goodlier person than he. Julian's purple
was'too sm.ill for his gigantic limbs. r?ul that stately form was
animated by a spirit of cowardly selfishness. Jovian was also
a decided Christian," but " even the heatlien soldiers con-
demned his low amours and vulgar tippling." Gwatkin,
" Arian Controversy," 1 ig.

-The terms were in fact humiliating, " paccni cum Sapore
nccesp.iriam (piidem sed ignobilem fecit; multatus tinibus, ac
nonnulla imperii llomani parte traditarquod ante tum aiinis
miUe centum et duobus de viginti fere ex quo Uoinanum im-
Dcrium conditum erat, nunquam accidit." Kut. brev x. 17.

■'"Gibbon (Chap. xxv> sneers at Athanasius for assuring
Jovian ' that his orthodox faith would be lewardetl with a long
and peaceful reign,' and remarks that after his death this charge


CHAPTER III.

Synodical letter to the E)nperor Jovian concern-
ing the Faith.

To Jovianus Augustus most devout, most
humane, victorious, Athanasius, and the rest
of the bishops assembled, in the name of all
the bishops from Egypt to Thebaid and
Libya. The intelligent preference and pur-
suit of holy things is becoming to a prince
beloved of God. Thus may you keep your
heart in truth in God's hand and reign for
many years in peace.' Since your piety has
recently expressed a wish to learn from us
the faith of the Catholic Church, we have
given thaiaks to the Lord and have determined
before all to remind your i^everence of the
faith confessed by the fathers at Nica^a. This
faith some have set at nought, and have de-
vised many and various attacks on us, be-
cause of our refusal to submit to the Arian
heresy. They have become founders of
heresy and schism in the Catholic Church.
The true and pious faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ has been made plain to all as it is
known and read from the Holy ScrijDtures.
In this faith the martyred saints were per-
fected, and now departed are with the Lord.
This faith was destined everywhere to stand
unharmed, had not the wickedness of certain
heretics dared to attempt its falsification ; for
Arius and his party endeavoured to corrupt
it and to bring in impiety for its destruction,
alleging the Son of God to be of the non-
existent, a creature, a Being made, and
susceptible of change. By these means they
deceived many, so that even men who
seemed to be somewhat,^ were led away by
them. Then our holy Fathers took the ini-
tiative, met, as we said, at Nicica, anathe-
matized the Arian heresy, and subscribed the
faith of the Catholic Church so as to cause
the putting out of the flames of heresy by
proclamation of the truth throughout the
world. Thus this faith throughout the whole
church was known and preached. But since
some men who wished to start the Arian

was omitted from some MSS., referring to \'alesius on the
passage of Theodoret, and Jortin's Rt-marks:, iv. p. 38. But
the expression is nd that of a prophet who stakes his credit
on the truth of his ])rediction, but little more than .a pious
reflection, of the nature ofa wish." I5p. J. Wordsworth, Diet.
Christ. liiog. iii. 463. n. Jortin says "the good bishi)|)'s
fiaiTLKri failed him sadly; and the emperor reigned only one
year, and died in the flower of his age " Tlie note of \''alesius
will be found below.

' Scarcely a prophecy, even if we read tffi?, " you shall
keep; " a bare wisli if we read t^ois, " m.iy you keep." Vide
preceding note. In Athanasius we find i|ti?. ^'alesius says
" The latter part of this sentence is wanting in the common
editions of Athanasius, and IJaronius supposes it to have been
added by some Arian, with the object of riiliculing Athanasius
as a false prophet. As a tact the reign of Jovian w,is short.
IJut I see nothing low, spurious or factitious. Athanasius is
not in fault because Joviau did not live as long as he had
wished."

2 Gal. vi. 3.


IV. 4.]


OF THEODORET.


109


heresy afresh have had the hardihood to set
at naught the faith confessed by the Fathers
at Nicaea, and others are pretending to accept
it, while in reality they deny it, distorting
the meaning of the ofioovawv and thus blas-
pheming the Holy Ghost, by alleging it to
be a creature and a Being made through the
Son's means, we, perforce beholding the
harm accruing from blasphemy of this kind
to the people, have hastened to offer to your
piety the faith confessed at Nicaea, that your
reverence may know with what exactitude
it is drawn up, and how great is the error of
them whose teaching contradicts it. Know,
O holiest Augustus, that this faith is the
faith preached from everlasting, this is the
faith that the Fathers assembled at NicEea
confessed. With this faith all the churches
throughout the world are in agreement, in
Spain, in Britain,^ in Gaul, in all Italy and
Campania, in Dalmatia and Mysia, in Mace-
donia, in all Hellas, in all the churches
throughout Africa, Sardinia, Cyprus, Crete,
Pamphylia and Isauria, and Lycia, those of
all Egypt and Libya, of Pontus, Cappadocia
and the neighbouring districts and all the
churches of the East except a few who have
embraced Arianism. Of all those above
mentioned we know the sentiments after
trial made. We have letters and we know,
most pious Augustus, that though some few
gainsay this faith they cannot prejudice- the
decision of the whole inhabited world.

After being long inider the injurious in-
fluence of the Arian heresy they are the more
contentiously withstanding true religion.
For tlie information of your piety, though
indeed you are already acquainted with it,
we have taken pains to subjoin the faith
confessed at Nic^a by the three hundred and
eighteen bishops. It is as follows.

We believe in one God, Father Almighty,
maker of all things visible and invisible ;
and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of
God, begotten of the Father, that is of the
substance of the Father, God of God, Light
of Light, very God of very God : begotten
not made, being of one substance with the
Father, by whom all things were made both
in Heaven and in earth. Who for us men
and for our salvation came down from
Heaven, was incarnate and was made man.


1 Christianity thus appears more or less constituted in Britain
more than 200 years before the mission of Augustine. But by
about 208 the fame of British Christianity had reached Tertul-
lian in Africa. The date, that of tlie first mention of the
Church in Britain, indicates a probable connexion of its foun-
dation with the dispersion of the victims of the persecution
of the Rhone cities. The phrase of Tertullian, " places be-
yond the reach of the Romans, but subdued to Christ," points
to a rapid spread into the remoter parts of the island. Vide
Rev. C. Hole's " Early Missions," S. P. C. K.


He suffered and rose again the third day.
He ascended into Heaven, and is coming to
judge both quick and dead. And we be-
lieve in the Holy Ghost; the Holy Catholic
and Apostolic Church anathematizes those
who say there was a time when the Son of
God was not ; that before He was begotten
He was not ; that He was made out of the
non-existent, or that He is of a different
essence or different substance, or a creature or
subject to variation or change. In this faith,
most religious Augustus, all must needs
abide as divine and apostolic, nor must any
strive to change it by persuasive reasoning
and word battles, as from the beginning did
the Arian maniacs in their contention that
the Son of God is of the non existent, and
that there was a time when He was not, that
He is created and made and subject to varia-
tion. Wherefore, as we stated, the council
of Niciea anathematized this heresy and con-
fessed the faith of the truth. For they have
not simply said that the Son is like the Father,
that he may be believed not to be simply
like God but very God of God. And
they promulgated the term " Homoiision "
because it is peculiar to a real and true son
of a true and natural father. Yet they did
not separate the Holy Spirit from the Father
and the Son, but rather glorified It together
with the Father and the Son in the one
faith of the Holy Trinity, because the God-
head of the Holy Trinity ^ is one.


CHAPTER IV.

0/ the rcst07-ation of allowances to the
churches ; and of the Emperoj'^s death.

When the emperor had received this
letter, his former knowledge of and disposi-
tion to divine things was confirmed, and he
issued a second edict w^herein he ordered the
amount of corn which the great Constantine
had appropriated to the churches to be re-
stored." For Julian, as was to be expected
of one who had gone to war with our Lord
and Saviour, had stopped even this mainten-

1 " Tpc'as is either the number Three, or a triplet of similar
objects, as in the phrase Kaaiyvrtnav rpioi? (Rost u. Palm's
Lexicon, s. v.) In this sense it is applied by Clement of
Alexandria (Strom. IV. vii. 55) to the Triad of Christian
graces, P'aith, Hope, and Charity. As Gregory of Nazianzus
says (Orat. xiii. p. 24) Tpia? ov npayfi-dToiv aviciav aTrapiOnricn^,
a\\' Icriuv Kal ofj-oTi/xiav (TvAA7)i|«5. The first instance of its
application to the Three Persons in the one God is in The-
ophilus of Antioch (Ad Autol. ii. 15) " [t- c. iSj] " Similarly
the word Trinitas, in its proper force, means either the num.
ber Three or a triad. It is first applied to the mystery of the
Three in One by Tertullian, who says that the Church ' proprie
et spiritualiter ipse est spiritus, in quo est Trinitas unius
divinitatis. Pater, et Filius, et Spiritus Sanctus.' De Pudi-
citazi." [t c. 240] Archd. Cheetham. Diet. Christ. Biog.
S. V.

2 of. III. S page 99.


no


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[IV. 5. 6.


ance, and since the famine which visited the
empire in ccniseqiience of Julian's iniquity
prevented the collection of the contribution
of Constantine's enactment, Jovian ordered
a third part to be supplied for the present,
and promised that on the cessation of the
famine he would give the whole.

After distinguishing tlie beginning of his
reign by edicts of this kind, Jovian set out
from Antioch for the Bosphorus ; but at
Dadastante, a village lying on the confnies
of Bithynia and Galatia, he died.' He set
out on his journey from this world with the
grandest and fairest support and stay, but all
who had experienced the clemency of his
sway were left behind in pain. So, me-
thinks, the Supreme Ruler, to convict us of
our iniquity, both shews us good things and
again deprives us of them ; so by the former
means He teaches us how easily He can give
us what He will ; by the latter He convicts
us of our unworthiness of it, and points us
to the better life.


CHAPTER V.

Of the reign of Valeniinia?ius, and how he
associated Valcns his bt'other with hitn.

When the troops had become acquainted
with the emperor's sudden death, they wept
for the departed prince as for a father, and
made Valentinian emperor in his room. It
was he who smote the officer of the temple -
and was sent to the castle. Pie was distin-
guished not only for his courage, but also for
prudence, temperance, justice, and great
stature. He was of so kingly and magnan-
imous a character that, on an attempt being
made by the army to appoint a colleague to
share his throne, he uttered the well-known
words which are universally repeated, "Be-
fore I was emperor, soldiers, it was yours
to give me the reins of empire : now that I
have taken them, it is mine, not yours, to
take counsel for the state." The troops were
struck with admiration at what he said, and
contentedly followed the guidance of his au-
thority. Valentinian, however, sent for his
brother from Pannonia, and shared the em-

' At an obscure place called Dadastanse, halfway behvcen
Ancyra and Nicxa, after a hearty siipptr he went to bed in a
room newly built. The plaster was still damp, and a brazier of
charcoal wiis brought in to warm the air. In the morninjj he
was fourul (lead in his bed. (Amm. xxv. lo. 12. 13.) This was
in February or March, ^64.

2 Vide iiage loi. " Valentinian belonfjs to the better
class of Kinperors. lie was a soldier like lovian, and held
the same rank at his election. He was a decided Christian
like Jovian, and, like him, free from the stain of persecution.
Jovian's rouijh good humour was replaced in Valentinian by
a violent ana sometimes cruel temper, but he had a sense of
duty, and was free from Jovian's vices." Gwatkin, Arian Cont,
121.


pi re with him. Would that lie had never
done so ! To Valcns,' who had not yet ac-
cepted unsound doctrines, was committed the
charge of Asia and of Egypt, while Valen-
tinian allotted Europe to himself. He jour-
neyed to the Western provinces, and begin-
ning with a proclamation of true religion,
instructed tliem in all rigliteousness. \\ hen
the Arian Auxentius, bishop of Milan, who
was condemned in several councils, departed
this life,- the emperor summoned the bishops
and addressed them as follows : " Nurtined
as you have been in holy writ, you know full
well what should be the character of one
dignified by the episcopate, and how he
should rule his subjects aright, not only with
his lip, but with his life ; exhibit himself as
an example of every kind of virtue, and
make his conversation a witness of his teach
ing. Seat now upon your archiepiscopal
throne a man of such character that we who
rule the realm may honestly bow our heads
before him and welcomeh is reproofs, — for,
in that we are men, it needs must be that we
sometimes stumble, — as a physician's heal-
ing treatment."

CHAPTER VI.

Of the election of Ambrosiiis, the Bishop of
Milan.

Thus spoke the emperor, and then the
council begged him, beinga wise and devout
prince, to make the choice. He then re-
plied, " The responsibility is too great for
us. You who have been dignified with
divine grace, and have received illumination
from above, will make a better choice." So
they left the imperial presence and began to
deliberate apart. In the meanwhile the
people of Milan were torn by factions, some
eager that one, some that another, should be
promoted. They who had been infected
with the unsoundness of Auxentius were for
clioosing men of like opinions, while they of
the orthodox party were in their turn anx-
ious to have a bishop of like sentiments with
themselves. When Ambrosius, who held
the chief civil magistracy ^ of the district,

' " Valcns was timid, suspicious, and slow, yet not ungentle
In private life. He was as uncultivated as his brother, but not
inferior to him in scrupulous can- for his subjects. He pre-
ferred remitting taxation to lighting at the head of the le
gi<uis. In both wars he is entitled to head the series of finan-
cial rather than unwarlike sovereigns whose cautious policy
broughtthe Kastern Empire safelythrough the great barbarian
invasions of the fifth century." Gwatkin, p. 121.

2 Vide note on page 81.

3 I?y the constitution of Constantlne, beneath the governors
of the twelve dioceses of the Empire were the provincial gov.
ernors of 116 provinces, rectores, correctores, pr.\;sides, and
consulares. Ambrosius had been appointed by Probus Con-
sularis of Liguria and ^•Emilia. Probus, In fjiving him the
appointment, was believed to have " prophesied," and said
" Vade; age non ut judex, sed ut episcopus." PauHnus S.


IV. 7.]


OF THEODORET.


Ill


was apprised of the contention, being afraid
lest some seditious violence should be at-
tempted he hurried to the church ; at once
there was a lull in the strife. The people
cried with one voice "Make Ambrose our
pastor," — although up to this time he was
stilP unbaptized. News of what was being
done was brought to the emperor, and he at
once ordered the admirable man to be bap-
tized and ordained, for he knew that his
judgment was straight and true as the rule
of the carpenter and liis sentence more exact
than the beam of the balance. Moreover
he concluded from the agreement come to by
men of opposite sentiments that the selection
was divine. Ambrose then received the
divine gift of holy baptism, and the grace of
the archiepiscopal office. The most excel-
lent emperor was present on the occasion,
and is said to have offered the following
hymn of praise to his Lord and Saviour.
" We thank thee, Almighty Lord and Sa-
viour; I have committed to this man's keep-
ing men's bodies ; Thou hast entrusted to
him their souls, and hast shown my choice
to be righteous."

Not many days after the divine Ambro-
sius addressed the emperor with the utmost
freedom, and found fault with certain pro-
ceedings of the magistrates as improper.
Valentinian remarked that this freedom was
no novelty to him, and that, well acquainted
with it as he was, he had not merely offered
no opposition to, but had gladly concurred
in, the appointment to the bishopric. " Go
on," continued the emperor, " as God's law
bids you, healing the errors of our souls."

Such were the deeds and words of Valen-
tinian at Milan.

CHAPTER VII.

Letters of the Emperors Valentinianus and
Valens, written to the diocese ^ of Asia about
the Homoilsion, on hearing that some men
in Asia and in Phrygia were in dispute
about the divine decree.

Valentinian ordered a council to be held in
Illyricum ^ and sent to the disputants the
decrees ratified by the bishops there assem-
bled. They had decided to hold fast the
creed put forth at Nicoea and the emperor
himself wrote to them, associating his


2 The twelve dioceses of the Empire, as constituted under
Diocletian, were (i) Oxiens; (2) Ponticii; (3) Asiana;
(4) Thracia; (5I Mcesia; (6) Pannonia; (7) IJntannia;; (S)
Gallia;; (9) Viennensis; (10) Italiciana; (11) Hispania;
(12) Africa.

3 Under Constantine Illyricum Occidentale included Dal-
matia, Pannonia, Noricum, and Savia; Illyricum Orientale,
Dacia, Mctsia, Macedonia and Thrace,


brother with him in the dispatch, urging
that the decrees be kept.

The edict clearly proclaims the piety of
the emperor and similarly exhibits the
soundness of Valens in divine doctrines at
that time. I shall therefore give it in full.

The mighty emperors, ever august, au-
gustly victorious, Valentinianus, Valens, and
Gratianus,^ to the bishops of Asia, Phrygia,
Carophrygia Pacatiana,- greeting in the
Lord.

A great council having met in Illyricum,^
after much discussion concerning the word
of salvation, the thrice blessed bishops have
declared that the Trinity of Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost is of one substance.*

This Trinity they worship, in no wise re-
mitting the service which has duly fallen to
their lot, the worship of the great King.
It is our imperial will that this Trinity be
preached, so that none may say " We accept
the religion of the sovereign who rules this
world without regard to Him who has given
us the message of salvation," for, as says the
gospel of our God which contains this judg-
ment, " we should render to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's and to God the
things that are God's."*

What say you, ye bishops, ye champions
of the Word of salvation.'' If these be
your professions, thus then continue to love
one another, and cease to abuse the imperial
dignity. No longer persecute those who
diligently serve God, by whose prayers both
wars cease upon the earth, and the assaults
of apostate angels are repelled. These
striving through supplication to repel all
harmful demons both know how to pay
tribute as the law enjoins, and do not gain-
say the power of their sovereign, but with
pure minds both keep the coinmandment of
the heavenly King, and are subject to our
laws. But ye have been shewn to be dis-
obedient. We have tried every expedient
but you have given yourselves up.^ We

1 Eldest son of Valentinian I. Born A.D. 359. Named
Augustus 367. Succeeded his father 375; his uncle Valens
37S. Murdered 3S3. The synod was convoked in the year of
Valentinian's death.

- Phrygia Pacatiana was the name given in the fourth cen-
tury to the province extending from Hithynia to Pamphylia.
" Cum in veterum libris non nisi dua; Phrygia occurrant,
Pacatiana et salutaris, mavult Valesius h. 1. scribere, /capias
(f>pv7ias TraFcaTcaf^s. Sed consenlientibus in vulgata lectione
omnibus libris mallem servare xapoippvyia'; TraKaTiarJ;!, quam
Pacatianam Kapo4>pvyiav dictam esse putaverim quod Caria;
proxiine adha:resceret." Schulze.

3 The date of this Council is disputed. " Pagi contending
for 373, others for 375, Cave for367." Diet. Ch. Ant. i. S13.

"* o^oovaiov.

^ Matt. 22. xxi.

•J YjiJiiK; i\pi)<r6.iJ.e0a. TiS aK<j>a eo)? ToO 01 Vfj.ei'; 5e dauroi/?
a7rc5u)»caT€.

The passage is obscure and perhaps corrupt. Schulze's note
is " Nisi mendosus sit locus, quod quideni suspicabatur Cam-
erarius, sensus talis esse videtur : ' Nos qtiidetn primis usi
suintis ad extrema,^ h.e. omnia adhibuimus et tentavimus ad
pacein restituendam et cohibendas vexationes, ' vos vero im


112


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[IV. 7.


however wish to be pure from you, as
Pilate at the trial of Christ when He lived
among us, was unwilling to kill Him,
and when they begged for His death,
turned to the East,^ asked water for his
hands and washed his hands, saying I am in-
nocent of the blood of this righteous man.-

Thus our majesty has invariably charged
that those who are working in the field ot
Christ are not to be persecuted, oppressed, or
ill treated ; nor the stewards of the great
King driven into exile ; lest to-day under our
Sovereign you may seem to flourish and
abound, and then together with your evil
counsellor trample on his covenant,^ as in the
case of the blood of Zacliarias,'' but he and
his were destroyed by our Heavenly King
Jesus Christ after (at) His coming, being de-
livered to death's judgment, they and the
deadly fiend who abetted them. We have
given these orders to Amegetius, to Ceronius,
to Damasus, to Lampon and to Brentisius
by word of mouth, and we have sent the
actual decrees to you also in order that you
may know what was enacted in the honour-
able synod.

To this letter we subjoin the decrees of
the synod, which are briefly as follows.

In accordance with the great and orthodox
synod we confess that the Son is of one sub-


potentia ohseaiii estis.'' Alias inteq^retationes collegit suam-
que addidit Valesius." The note of Valesius is as follows ;
hie locus valde obscurus est. Et Epiphanius quidem scho-
lasticus ita eum vertit : et nos quidem subjiciinur ci qui primus
est et novissimus : vos autem vobismet arrofj^atis. Qua; inter-
pretatio, meo quidem iudicio, ferri non potest. Camerarius
vero sic interpretatur ■ nos quidem ordine a primo ad ultimuni
processimus tractatione nostra: ipsi vero vosmel ipsos
abalicnastis. At Chnstophersonus ita vertit: nos patientia
semper a principio usque ad tinem usi sumus: vos contra
animi vestri impotentiw obsecuti estis . . . mihi videtur
verbum xpijo-tfai hoc loco idem significari quod communicare
et comniercium habere. Cujus modi est illud in Evangelio :
non coiitunlur Judx'i Samaritanis. (Johan IV. 9.)

' Tlieturniuif to the East is not .nentioncd in the Gospel of
St. Matthew or in the Apocryphal Acts of I'ilate; and the Im-
perial Decree seems hereto import a Christian practice into the
pagan Procurator s tribunal. Orientation was sometimes ob-
serve<l in Pagan temples and the altar placed at the east end ;
perhaps in connexion with the ancient worship of the sun. cf.
tEbcIi. Ag. 502; Paus. V. i\. i; Cic. Cat. iii. §43. In. Virg.
J&w. viii. 6S /Eneas turns to the East when he prays to the
Tiber, cf. Liv 1. iS. But praying towards the East is specially
a primitive Christian custom, among the earliest authorities
being Tertullian (Apol. XV^I.) and Clemens Al. (Stromat.
VII .7).

2 M.atthew xxvii. 24.

s " Locus densis," says Valeiius, " tenebris obvolutus "...
The note of Schulze is "primum o TrapaKeKArj^ifi'ot videtur
malus genius esse (t^dopt^ato; tia.iix.iav postea dicitur) qui exci-
taverat (jrape(caAe<re) cpiscopos ad dissentientes vexandos plane
ut crudeles Juda;i excitaverant Pilatum ut Christum iiiterime-
rent; sic cnim in superioribus Valentinianus dixerat. Porro
Valent. non modo ad historiam Zacharix a Jud-tls in templo
intcrfecti alludit, sed, si quid video, etiam ad verba ea quibus
Utitur Paulus, Heb. x. 29 toc vCov toO 0cou Ka.ta.Ka.Tnv xai to
oina T^5 Sta9riKri<; Koivhv i^yijcrao-Oai, quare placet conjcctura Va-
lesii narelv " (the reading adopted in the translation above),
** TO. TY]^ StaOrJKrjt; auToO ui<; eyrt ToO Za\apLOV tou a'tfiaTO?, ut tota
sentcntia sit : ne hodie sub nostro imperio incremenla capiaiis
et cum eo qui vos incitat conculcetis sanguinem fcederis, fere
ut Zachariie tempore factum est a Judxis."

< It is to be observed that the imperial letter does not add
theprobably interpolated words " son of IJarachias " which are
a difficulty in Matt, xxiii. 35, and do not appear in the Codex
Sinaiticus,


stance with the Father. And we do not so
understand the term ' of one substance ' as
some formerly interpreted it who signed their
names with feigned adhesion ; nor as some
who now-a-days call the drafters of the old
creed Fathers, but make the meaning of the
word of no eftect, following the authors of the
statement that " of one substance" means
" like," with the understanding that since the
Son is comparable to no one of the creatures
made by Him, He is like to the Father alone.
For those who thus think irreverently define
the Son "as a special creation of the Father,"
but we, with the present synods, both at
Rome and in Gaul, hold that there is one and
the same substance of Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, in three persons, that is in three per-
fect essences.^ And we confess, according to
the exposition of Nica^a, that the Son of God
being of one substance, was made flesh of
the Holy Virgin Mary, and hath tabernacled
among men, and fulfilled all the economy ^
for our sakes in birth, in passion, in resurrec-
tion, and in ascension into Heaven ; and that
He shall come again to render to us according
to each man's manner of life, in the day of
judgment, being seen in the flesh, and show-
ing forth His divine power, being God bear-
ing flesh, and not man bearing Godhead.

Them that think otherwise we damn, as
we do also them that do not honestly damn
him that said that before the Son was begotten
He was not, but wrote that even before He
was actually begotten He was potentially in
the Father. For this is true in the case of
all creatures, who are not for ever with God
in the sense in which the Son is ever with


1 Here for the first time in our author we meet with the word
Hypostasis 10 denote each distinct person. Compare note on
page 36. "Origen had already described Father, Son and Holy
Spirit as three \nso(J^6.at^<; or Beings, in opposition to the Mon-
archians, who s.aw in them only three modes of manifestation
of one and the same Being. And as Sabellius had used the
words Tpia wpoo-wTra f<ir these modes of manifestation, this form
of expression naturally fell into disfavour with the Catholics.
But when Arius insisted on (virtually) three different hypos-
tases in the Holy 'I'rinity, Catholics began to avoid applying
the word hypostases to the Persons of the Godhead. To this
was added a ditVicully arising from tl:e fact, that the Eastern
Church used Greek as the official language of its theology,
while the Western Church used Latin, a language at that tiine
much less well provided with abstract theological terms. Dis-
putes were Ciiused, says Gregory of Nazianzus (Orat.xxi.p.
395), 5ca orei'dTTjTa t^? irapa TOi? 'IraAoi? yAcoTTTjs (cal oio^aTuji'
viviav. (Compare Seneca Epist. 5S.) The Latins used essen-
tia and substantia as equivalent to the Greek ou<ria and vTioa-ra.-
<ri?, but interchanged them, as we have seen in the translation
of the Nicene Creed with little scruple, regarding them as syn-
onyms. They used both expressions to describe the Divine
Xature common to the Three. It followed that they looked
upon the expression "Three Hypostases" as implyinp^ a division
of the substance of the Deity, and therefore as Arian. They
preferred to speak of " tres Personx." Athanasius also spoke
of rpia TrpocrwTra, and thus the words irpoaioTra and Persona; be-
came current among the Nicene party. But about the year
360, the Neo-Niccne party, or Meletians, as they are sometimes
called, became scrupulous about the use of such an expression
as Tpca Trpbo-ujjra, which seemed to them to savour of Sabellian-
ism. Thus a difference arose between the old Athanasian
party and the Meletians." Archd. L heetham in Diet. Christ.
Biog. Art." Trinity."

i Compare note on page 71.


IV. 8.]


OF THEODORET.


113


the Father, being begotten by eternal genera-
tion.

Such was the short summary of the
emperor. I will now subjoin the actual dis-
patch of the synod.


CHAPTER VIII.

Synodical Epistle of the Synod in Jllyricmn
concerning the Faith.

" The bishops of Illyricum to the churches
of God, and bishops of the dioceses of Asia, of
Phrygia, and Carophrygia Pacatiana, greet-
ing in the Lord.

" After meeting together and making long
enquiry concerning the Word of salvation,
we have set forth that the Trinity of
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is of one
substance. And it seemed fitting to pen a
letter to you, not that we write what con-
cerns the worship of the Trinity in vain
disputation, but in humility deemed worthy
of the duty.

" This letter we have sent by our beloved
brother and fellow labourer Elpidius the
presbyter. For not in the letters of our
hands, but in the books of our Saviour Jesus
Christ, is it written ' I am of Paul and I of
Apollos and I of Cephas and I of Christ.
Was Paul crucified for you.'' Or were ye
baptized in the name of Paul.'"^

" It seemed indeed fitting to our humility
not to pen any letter to you, on account of the
great terror which your preaching causes to
all the region under your jurisdiction, sepa-
rating as you do the Holy Spirit from the
Father and Son. We were therefore con-
strained to send to you our lord and fellow
labourer Elpidius to ascertain if your preach-
ing is really of this character and to carry
this dispatch from the imperial government
of Rome.

" Let them who do not regard the Trinity
as one substance be anathema, and if any
man be detected in communion with them
let him be anathema.

" But for them that preach that the Trinity
is of one substance the Kingdom of Heaven
is prepared.

" We exhort you therefore brethren to teach
no other doctrine, nor even hold any other
and vain belief, but that always and every-
where, preaching the Trinity to be of one
substance, ye may be able to inherit the
Kingdom of Heaven.

" While writing on this point we have


1 I. Cor. 1. 12.


also been reminded to pen this letter to
you about the present or future appointment
of our fellow ministers as bishops, if there
be any sound men among the bishops who
have already discharged a public office ; ^
and, if not, from the order of presbyters : in
like manner of the appointment of pres-
byters and deacons out of the actual priestly ^
order that they may be in every way blame-
less, and not from the ranks of the senate
and army.

" We have been unwilling to pen you a
letter at length, because of the mission of
one representative of all, our lord and fellow
labourer Elpidius, to make diligent enquiry
about your preaching, if it really is such as
we have heard from our lord and fellow
labourer Eustathius.

" In conclusion, if at any time you have
been in error, put off' the old man and put
on the new. The same brother and fellow
labourer Elpidius will instruct you how to
preach the true faith that the Holy Trinit}',
of one substance with God the Father, to-
gether with the Son and H0I3' Ghost, is hal-
lowed, glorified, and made manifest. Father
in Son, Sen in Father, with the Holy Ghost
for ever and ever. For since this has been
made manifest, we shall manifestly be able
to confess the Holy Trinity to be of one
substance according to the faith set forth
formerly at Nicaea which the Fathers con-
firmed. So long as this faith is preached we
shall be able to avoid the snares of the deadly
devil. When he is destroyed we shall be
able to do homage to one another in letters
of peace while we live in peace.

" We have therefore written to you in
order that ye may know the deposition of
the Ariomaniacs, who do not confess that
the Sou is of the substance of the Father nor
the Holy Ghost. We subjoin their names,
— Polychronius, Telemachus, Faustus, As-
clepiades, Amantius, Cleopater.

"This we thus write to the glory of
Father and Son and Holy Ghost for ever
and ever, amen. We pray the Father and
the Son our Saviour Jesus Christ with the
Holy Ghost that you may fare well for many
vears."


'The original is here obscure, and has been altered an din
terpreted in various ways.

2 f'f aiiToO ToO iepariKoO Tay/aaToy. It is noticeable that the
word ifpaTiKoi/ is used here of the clerical order generally, in-
clusive of lower ranks, 6uch as the readers, singers, door-
keepers and orphans enumerated in the Apostolic Constitutions
from whom deacons and presbyters were to be appointed. For
illustrations of the phrases iepan/cr) ra^i? and iepariKoi' -raytxa
vide Diet. Christ. Ant. ii. 1470. The exclusively sacrificial
sense sometimes given to Xtpiv^; and sacerdos, with their cor.
relatives, is modified by the fact that derivatively botli only
mean " the man concerned with the sacred." (.'fpo? z= vigor-
ous, divine. ^isT; sacer = inviolate, holy, ^SAK", fasten;
of the latter the suffix adds the idea oi giver.


VOL. III.


I


114


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[IV. 9, 10.


CHAPTER IX.

Of the heresy of the Audiani.

The illustrious emperoi- thus took heed of
the apostolic decrees, but Audtcus, a Syrian
alike in race and in speech, appeared at that
time as an inventor of new decrees. He had
long ago begun to incubate iniquities and
now appeared in his true character. At
first he understood in an absurd sense the
passage " Let us make man in our image,
after our likeness." ' From want of appre-
hension of the meaning of the divine Scripture
he understood the Divine Being to have a
human form, and conjectured it to be envel-
oped in bodily parts ; for Holy Scripture
frequently describes the divine operations
under the names of human parts, since by
these means the providence of God is made
more easily intelligible to minds incapable of
perceiving any immaterial ideas. To this
impiety Audteus added others of a similar
kind. By an eclectic process he adopted
some of the doctrines of Manes ^ and denied
that the God of the universe is creator of
either fire or darkness. But these and all
similar errors are concealed by the adherents
of his faction.

They allege that they are separated from
the assemblies of the Church. But since
some of them exact a cursed usury, and
some live unlawfully with women with-
out the bond of wedlock, while those who
are innocent of these practices live in free
fellowship with the guilty, they hide the
blasphemy of their doctrines by accounting
as they do for their living by themselves.
The plea is however an impudent one, and
the natural result of Pharisaic teachinsr,
for the Pharisees accused the Physician of
souls and bodies in their question to the holy
Apostles " How is it that your Master
eateth with publicans and sinners.''"^ and,
through the prophet, God of such men says
" Which say, ' come not near me for I am
pure ' this is smoke of my wrath." * But
this is not a time to refute their unreasonable
error. I therefore pass on to the remainder of
my narrative.*

1 Gen. I. 26.

' Vide note on page 75.

3 Mark ii. 16. Observe verbal inaccuracy of quotation.

* Is ; 65. 5. The Greek of the text is oi AeyovTcs xaSapiSt ei^i,
/Aij /iou aiTTou oJto? KaTTTOs ToG Su/ioO /lou. In the Sept. the
passajje stanrl oi AeyocTt? Troppco an-' f\i.ov, firi eyyio-/)? /^toi on
(caflapo? (itii, etc. The O. T. is ciuotcd as loosely as the New.

" Anthropomorphism, or the attribution to God of a human
form is the frequent result of an unintelligent anthropopath-
ism, which ascribes to God human Jeelings. Paganism did
not rise higher than the material view. Judaism, sometimes
apparently anthropomorphic, lauglit a Spiritual God. Ter-
tuUian uses expressions which exposed him to the charge of
anthropomorphism, and the Pseudo Clementines (xvii. 2) go
farther. The Au(la;us of the text appears to be the first
founder of anything like an anthropomorphic sect.


CHAPTER X.

Of the heresy of the Afessaiiani.

At this time also arose the heresy of
the Messaliani. Those who .translate their
name into Greek call them Euchitae.^

They have also another designation which
arose naturally from their mode of action.
From their coming under the influence of a
certain demon, which they supposed to be
the advent of the Holy Ghost, they are called
enthusiasts.^

Men who have become infected with this
plague to its full extent shun manual
labour as iniquitous ; and, giving themselves
over to sloth, call the imaginations of
their dreams prophesyings. Of this heresy
Dadoes, Sabbas, Adelphius, Hermas, and
Simeones were leaders, and others besides,
who did not hold aloof from the communion
of the Church, alleging that neither good nor
harm came of the divine food of which
Christ our Master said " Whoso eateth my
flesh and drinketh my blood shall live for
ever."^

In their endeavour to hide their un-
soundness they shamelessly deny it even
after conviction, and abjure men whose
opinions are in harmony with their own
secret sentiments.

Under these circumstances Letoius, who
was at the head of the church of Melitine,''
a man full of divine zeal, saw that many
monasteries, or, shall I rather say, brigands'
caves, had drunk deep of this disease. He
therefore burnt them, and drove out the
wolves from the flock.

In like manner the illustrious Amphi-
lochius* to whom was committed the charge
of the metropolis of the Lycaonians and
who ruled all the people, no sooner learnt
that this pestilence had invaded his diocese
than he made it depart from his borders and
freed from its infection the flocks he fed.

Flavianus,^ also, the far famed high-priest
of the Antiochenes, on learning that these
men were living at Edessa and attacking
with their peculiar poison all with whom


' The Syriac name whence comes " Messaliani " or " Mas-
saliani" means praying people /p^yjj, {<7^ Dan. vi. i\

Epiphanius rendered the name €ux''/^'''°'> but they were soon
generally known in Greek as euv^roi or (vxiTai.

- The form tr9ou<TiacrTr)s is ecclesiastical, and late Greek, but
the verb ecfloucrid^eii' occurs at least as early as .^schylus.
(Kr.64.a.)

3 Compare John vi. 54 and 51 ; the citation as before is in-
exact.

■•Melitine (Malatia). metropolis of lesser Armenia; the
scene of the defeat of Chosroes Nushirvan by the Romans
A.D.S77.

"Archbishop of Iconium, the friend of Basil and first cousin
of Gregory of Nazianzus, B. probably about 344. He is not
mentioned after the beginning of the 5th century.

" cf. ii. 19, and iv, a, lie was not consecrated bishop
until 3S1.


IV. II, 12.]


OF THEODORET.


115


they came in contact, sent a company of
monks, brought them to Antioch, and in the
following manner convicted them in their de-
nial of their heresy. Their accusers, he said,
were calumniating them, and the witnesses
giving false evidence ; and Adelphius, who
was a very old man, he accosted with expres-
sions of kindness, and ordered to take a seat
at his side. Then he said " We, O venerable
sir, who have lived to an advanced age, have
more accm-ate knowledge of human nature,
and of the tricks of the demons who oppose
us, and have learnt by experience the char-
acter of the gift of grace. But these younger
men have no clear knowledge of these mat-
ters, and cannot brook to listen to spiritual
teaching. Wherefore tell me in what sense
you say that the opposing spirit retreats, and
the grace of the Holy Ghost supervenes."
The old man was won over by these words
and gave vent to all his secret venom, for he
said that no benefit accrues to the recipients
of Holy Baptism, and that it is only by
earnest prayer that the in-dwelling demon is
driven out, for that every one born into the
world derives from his first father slavery to
the demons just as he does his nature ; but
that when these are driven away, then comes
the Holy Ghost giving sensible and visible
signs of His presence, at once freeing . the
body from the impulse of the passions and
wholly ridding the soul of its inclination to
the worse ; with tlie result that there is no
more need for fasting that restrains the body,
nor of teaching or training that bridles it and
instructs it how to walk aright. And not
only is the recipient of this gift libei-ated
from the wanton motions of the body, but
also clearly foresees things to come, and with
the eyes beholds the Holy Trinity.

In this wise the divine Flavianus dug into
the foul fountain-head and succeeded in lay-
ing bare its streams. Then he thus addressed
the wretched old man. "O thou that hast
grown old in evil days, thy own mouth con-
victs thee, not I, and thou art testified against
by thy own lips." After their unsoundness
had been thus exposed they were expelled
from Syria, and withdrew to Pamphylia,
which they filled with their pestilential doc-
trine.

CHAPTER XI.

In what manner Valens fell into heresy.

I WILL now pursue the course of my nar-
rative, and will describe the beginning of
the tempest which stirred up many and great
billows to buffet the Church. Valens, when
he first received the imperial dignity, was


distinguished by his fidelity to apostolic doc-
trine. But when the Goths had crossed the
Danube and were ravaging Thrace, he de-
termined to assemble an army and march
against them ; and accordingly resolved not
to take the field without the garb of divine
grace, but first to protect himself with the
panoply of Holy Baptism.^ In forming
this resolution he acted at once well and
wisely, but his subsequent conduct betrays
very great feebleness of character, resulting
in the abandonment of the truth. His fate
was the same as that of our first father,
Adam ; for he too, won over by the argu-
ments of his wife, lost his free estate and
became not merely a captive but an obedient
listener to woman's wily words. His wife^
had already been entrapped in the Arian
snare, and now she caught her husband, and
persuaded him to fall along with her into
the pit of blasphemy. Their leader and
initiator was Eudoxius, who still held the
tiller of Constantinople, with the result that
the ship was not steered onwards but sunk ^
to the bottom.


CHAPTER XII.

How Valens exiled the virtuous bishops.

At the very time of the baptism of Valens
Eudoxius bound the unhappy man by an
oath to abide in the impiety of his doctrine,
and to expel from every see the holders of
contrary opinions. Thus Valens abandoned
the apostolic teaching, and went over to the
opposite faction ; nor was it long before he
fulfilled the rest of his oath ; for from Anti-
och he expelled the great Meletius, from Sa-
mosata the divine Eusebius, and deprived
Laodicea of her admirable shepherd Pela-
gius.'' Pelagius had taken on him the yoke
of wedlock when a very young man, and in
the very bridal chamber, on the first day of
his nuptials, he persuaded his bride to prefer
chastity to conjugal intercourse, and taught
her to accept fraternal affection in the place
of marriage union. Thus he gave all honour
to temperance, and possessed also within
himself the sister virtues moving in tune
with her, and for these reasons he was unan-
imously chosen for the bishopric. Neverthe-
less not even the bright beams of his life and
conversation awed the enemy of the truth.
Him, too, Valens relegated to Arabia, the
divine Meletius to Armenia, and Eusebius,


1 Valens was baptized in 36S. 2 Albia Dominica.

3 Tiie use of tlie word baptized for submerged is significant.
Polyb. I : 51. 6 uses it of sinking a ship. It first appears with
the teclinical sense oi baptized in the Evangelists.

4 Present at Antiocli in 363; banished to Arabia in 367.
Present at Constantinople in 3S1.


I 2


ii6


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[IV. 13.


that unflagging labourer in apostolic work,
to Thrace. Unflagging he was indeed, for
when apprised that many churches were now
deprived of their shepherds, he travelled about
Syria, Phoenicia and Palestine, wearing the
garb of war and covering his head with a
tiara, ordaining presb3'ters and deacons and
filling up the other ranks of the Church ; and
if haply he lighted on bishops with like senti-
ments with his own, he appointed them to
empty churches.

CHAPTER XIII.

Of EusehiuSf bishop of Samosata, and others.

Of the courage and prudence shewn by
Eusebius after he had received the imperial
edict which commanded him to depart into
Thrace, I think all who have been hitherto
ignorant should hear.^

The bearer of this edict reached his desti-
nation in the evening, and was exhorted by
Eusebius to keep silent and conceal the
cause of his coming. "For," said the
bishop, " the multitude has been nurtured in
divine zeal, and should they learn why you
have come they will drown you, and I shall
be held responsible for your death." After
thus speaking and performing evening ser-
vice, as he was wont, the old man started out
alone on foot, at nightfall. He confided his
intentions to one of his household servants
who followed him carrying nothing but a
cushion and a book. When he had reached
the bank of the river (for the Euphrates
runs along the very walls of the town) he
embarked in a boat and told the oarsmen to
vow to Zeugma.- When it was day the
bishop had reached Zeugma, and Samosata
was full of weeping and wailing, for the
above mentioned domestic reported the
orders given him to the friends of Eusebius,
and told them whom he wished to travel
with him, and what books tliey were to con-
vey. Then all the congregation bewailed
the removal of their shepherd, and the stream
of the river was crowded with voyagers.

When they came where he was, and saw
their beloved pastor, with lamentations and
groanings they shed floods of tears, and tried
to persuade him to remain, and not abandon
the sheep to the wolves. But all was of no
avail, and he read them the apostolic law
which clearly bids us be subjects to magis-

1 Samosata, the capitnl of Conimagcnc on the Hiiphrates, is
of interest as the biitliphice of Lucian (c. uo) as well as the
see of this Eusebius, the valued fricml of I?asil anil of Gregory
of Nazianzus. We shall *in(l him mentioned au:;iin v. 4.

2 Zeugma was on the right bank of the Euplnates, nearly
opposite the ancient Apamea and Seloicia and the modern
Biredjik. The name is derived from the " Zeugma " or I!i idge
of Boats built here by Alexander. Strabo xvi. 2. 3.


trates and authorities.^ When they had
heard him some brought him gold, some
silver, some clothes, and others servants, as
though he were starting for some strange, and
distant land. The bishop refused to take
anything but some slight gifts from his more
intimate friends, and then gave the whole
company his instruction and his prayers, and
exhorted them to stand up boldly for the
apostolic decrees. . ." •.

Then he set out for the Danube, while his
friends returned to their own town, and en-
couraged one another as they waited for the
assaults of the wolves.

In the belief that I should be wronging
them were the warmth and sincerity of their
faith to lack commemoration in my history I
shall now proceed to describe it.

The Arian faction, after depriving the
flock of their right excellent shepherd, set
up another bishop in his place; but not an
inhabitant of the city, were he herding in
indigence or blazing in wealth, not a ser-
vant, not a handicraftsman, not a hind, not
a gardener, nor man nor woman, whether
young or old, came, as had been their wont,
to gatherings in church. The new bishop
lived all alone ; not a soul looked at him, or
exchanged a word with him. Yet the re-
port is that he behaved with courteous
moderation, of which the following instance
is a proof. On one occasion he had ex-
pressed a wish to bathe, so his servants shut
the doors of the bath, and kept out all who
wished to come in. When he saw the
crowd before the doors he ordered them to
be thrown open, and directed that every one
should freely use the bath. He exhibited
the same conduct in the halls within ; for on
observing certain men standing by him
while he bathed he begged them to share
the hot water with him. They stood silent.
Thinking their hesitation was due to a
respect for him, he quickly arose and made
his way out, but these persons had really
been of opinion that even the water was
aflected with the pollution of his heresy, and
so sent it all down the sinks, while they
ordered a fresh supply to be provided for
themselves. On being informed of this the
intruder departed from the city, for he.
iudgcd that it was insensate and absurd on
his part to continue to reside in a city which
detested him, and treated him as a common
foe. On the departure of Eunomius (for this
was his name) from Samosata, Lucius, an
unmistakable wolf, and enemy of the sheep,
was appointed in his place. But the sheep,


.1 Titus, UK J.


IV. 14, 15.]


OF THEODORET.


117


all shephercUess as they wei'e, shepherded
themselves, and persistently preserved the
apostolic doctrine in all its purity. How
the new intruder was detested the following
relation will set forth.

Some lads were playing ball in the mar-
ket place and enjoying the game, when
Lucius was passing by. It chanced that
the ball was dropped and passed between
the feet of the ass. The boys raised an
outcry because they thought that their ball
was polluted. On perceiving this Lucius
told one of his suite to stop and learn what
was going on. The boys lit a fire and
tossed the ball through the flames with the
idea that by so doing they purified it. I
know indeed that this was but a boyish act,
and a survival of the ancient ways ; but it
is none the less sufficient to prove in what
hatred the town held the Arian faction.

Lucius however was no follower of the
mildness of Eunomius, but persuaded the
authorities to exile many others of the cler-
gy, and despatched the most distin-
guished champions of the divine dogmas
to the furthest confines of the Roman Em-
pire ; Evolcius, a deacon, to Oasis, to an
abandoned village ; Antiochus, who had the
honour of being related to the great Eusebius,
for he was his brother's son, and further
distinguished by his own honourable char-
acter, and of priestly rank, to a distant part
of Armenia. How boldly this Antiochus
contended for the divine decrees will be
seen from the following facts. When the
divine Eusebius after his many conflicts,
whereof each was a victory, had died a mar-
tyr's death, the wonted synod of the people
was held, and among others came Jovinus
then bishop of Perrha ^ who for some little
time had held a communion with the
Arians. Antiochus was unanimously chosen
as successor to his uncle. When brought
before the holy table and bidden there to
bend the knee, he turned round and saw
that Jovinus had put his right hand on his
head. Plucking the hand away he bade
him be gone from among the consecrators,
saying that he could not endure a right hand
which had received mysteries blasphemously
celebrated.

These events happened somewhat later.
At the time I am speaking of he was re-
moved to the interior of Armenia.

The divine Eusebius was living by the
Danube where the Goths were ravaging


1 Jovinus was a friend of Basil (Ep. i:S) as well as of
Eusebius of Samosata.

Perrha, a town of Euphratensis, is more likely to have been
his see than the Perga of the commoner reading;.


Thrace and besieging cities, as is described
in his own woiks.

CHAPTER XIV.

Of the holy Barses, and of the exile of the
bishop of Edessa and his companions.

Barses, whose fame is now great not only
in his own city of Edessa, and in neighbouring
towns, but in Phoenicia, in Egypt, and in the
Thebaid, through all which regions he had
travelled with a high reputation won by his
great virtue, had been relegated by Valens
to the island of Aradus,^ but when the
emperor learnt that innumerable multitudes
streamed thither, because Barses was full of
apostolic grace, and drove out sicknesses
with a word, he sent him to Oxyrynchus ^ in
Egypt ; but there too his fame drew all men
to him, and the old man, worthy of heaven,
was led oft' to a remote castle near the coun-
try of the barbarians of that district, by name
Pheno. It is said that in Aradus his bed
has been preserved to this day, where it is
held in very great honour, for many sick
persons lie down upon it and by means of
their faith recover.

CHAPTER XV.

Of the persecution which took place at Edessa^
and of Eulogius andProtogenes, presbyters of
Edessa.

Now a second time Valens, after depriv-
ing the flock of their shepherd, had set over
them in his stead a wolf. The whole popu-
lation had abandoned the city, and were
assembled in front of the town, when he
arrived at Edessa. He had given orders
to the prefect, Modestus by name, to as-
semble the troops under his orders who
were accustomed to exact the tribute, to
take all who were present of the armed
force, and by inflicting blows with sticks
and clubs, and using if need be their other
weapons of war, to disperse the gathering
multitude. Early in the morning, while the
prefect was executing this order, on his way
through the Forum he saw a woman holding
an infant in her arms, and hurrying along at
great speed. She had made light of the
troops, and forced her way through their
ranks : for a soul fired with divine zeal
knows no fear of man, and looks on terrors
of this kind as ridiculous sport. When the


1 An island off the coast of Phoenicia; nowRuad. The town
on the opposite mainland was Antaradus.

2 Oxyrynchus on the Nile, at or near the modern Behnese ( f)
was so called because the inhabitants worshipped the ■' sharp
snout," or pike, Strabo xvii. i . 40.


ii8


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[IV. 15.


prefect saw her, and understood what had
happened, he ordered her to be brought
before him, and enquired whither she was
going. "I have heard," said she, "that
assaults are being phuined against the ser-
vants of the Lord ; I want to join my friends
in the faith that I may share with them the
slaughter inflicted by you." " But the baby,"
said the prefect, " what in the world are
you carrying that for?" "That it may
share with me," said she, " the death I long
for."

When the prefect had heard this from the
woman and through her means discovered
the zeal which animated all the people,
he made it known to the emperor, and
pointed out the uselessness of the intended
massacre. " We shall only reap," said he,
" a harvest of discredit from the deed, and
shall fail to quench these people's spirit."
He then would not allow the tnultitude to
undergo the tortures which they had ex-
pected, and commanded their leaders, the
priests, I mean, and deacons, to be brought
before him, and offered them a choice of
two alternatives, either to induce the flock
to communicate with the wolf, or be ban-
ished from the town to some remote region.
Then he summoned the mass of the people
before him, and in gentle terms endeavoured
to persuade them to submit to the imperial
decrees, urging that it was mere madness for
a handful of men who might soon be counted
to withstand the sovereign of so vast an
empire. The crowd stood speechless. Then
the prefect turned to their leader Eulogius,
an excellent man, and said, " Why do you
make no answer to what you have heard me
say?" "I did not think," said Eulogius,
"that I must answer, when I had been
asked no question." " But," said the pre-
fect, " I have used many arguments to urge
you to a course advantageous to yourselves."
Eulogius rejoined that these pleas had
been ur^ed on all the multitude and that he
thought it absurd for him to push himself
forward and reply; "but," he went on,
" should you ask me my individual opinion
I will give it you." "Well," said the
prefect, " communicate with the emperor.
With pleasant irony Eulogius contiiuicd,
" Has he then received the pricsthootl as
well as the empire.''" The prefect then
perceiving that he was not speaking seri-
ously took it ill, and after heaping reproaches
on the old man, added, " I did not say so,
you fool ; I exhorted you to communicate
with those with whom the Emperor commu-
nicates." To this the old man replied that
they had a shepherd and obeyed his direc-


tions, and so eighty of them were arrested,
and exiled to Thrace. On their way thither
they were everywhere received with the
greatest possible distinction, cities and vil-
lages coming out to meet them and honour-
ing them as victorious athletes. But envy
armed their antagonists to report to the
emperor that what had been reckoned dis-
grace had really brought great honour on
these men ; thereupon Valens ordered that
they were to be separated into pairs and
sent in different directions, some to Thrace,
some to the furthest regions of Arabia, and
others to the towns of the Thebaid ; and the
saying was that those whom nature had
joined together savage men had put asunder,
and divided brother from brother. Eulo-
gius their leader with Protogenes the next in
rank, were relegated to Antinone.^

Even of these men I will not sufier the
virtue to fall into oblivion. They found that
the bishop of the city was of like mind with
themselves, and so took part in the gather-
ings of the Church ; but when they saw very
small congregations, and on enquiry learnt
that the inhabitants of the city were pagans,
they were grieved, as was natural, and de-
plored their unbelief. But they did not think
it enough to grieve, but to the best of their
ability devoted themselves to making these
men whole. The divine Eulogius, shut up in
a little chamber, spent day and night in put-
ting up petitions to the God of the universe ;
and the admirable Protogenes, who had re-
ceived a good education - and was practised
in rapid writing, pitched on a suitable spot
which he made into a boys' school, and, set-
ting up for a schoolmaster, he instructed his
pupils not only in the art of swift penman-
ship, but also in the divine oracles. He
taught them the psalms of David and gave
them to learn the most important articles of
the apostolic doctrine. One of the lads fell
sick, and Protogenes went to his home, took
the sutlercr by the hand and drove away the
malady by prayer. When the parents of the
other boys heard this they brought him to
their houses and entreated him to succour
the sick ; but he refused to ask God for the
expulsion of the malady before the sick had
received the gift of baptism ; urged by their
longing for the children's health, the parents
readily acceded, and won at last salvation
both for body and soul. In every instance
wliere he persuaded any one in health to re-
ceive the divine grace, he led him ofl' to
Eulogius, and knocking at the door besought
him to open, and put the seal of the Lord on

1 Antinoopolis, now Ensench on the right bank of the Nile.
- The manuscripts here vary considerably.


IV. i6.]


OF THEODORET.


119


the pi'ey. When Eulogius was annoyed at
the interruption of his prayer, Protogenes
used to say that it was much more essential
to rescue the wanderers. In this he was
an object of admiration to all who beheld
his deeds, doing such wondrous works, im-
parting to so many the light of divine know-
ledge and all the while yielding the first
place to another, and bringing his prizes to
Eulogius. They rightly conjectured that the
virtue of Eulogius was by far the greater
and higher.

On the quieting of the tempest and resto-
ration of complete calm, they were ordered
to return home, and were escorted by all
the people, wailing and weeping, and spe-
cially by the bishop of the church, who was
now deprived of their husbandry. When they
reached home, the great Barses had been re-
moved to the life that knows no pain, and
the divine Eulogius was entrusted with the
rudder of the church which he had piloted ; ^
and to the excellent Protogenes was assigned
the husbandry of Charrte,- a barren spot
full of the thorns of heathendom and need-
ing abundant labour. But these events
happened after peace was restored to the
churches.

CHAPTER XVI.

Of the holy Basilitis, Bishop of Ccesarea,
and the measures taken against him by
Valens and the prefect Modesties.

Valens, one might almost say, deprived
every church of its shepherd, and set out for
the Cappadocian Caesarea,'' at that time the
see of the great Basil, a light of the world.
Now he had sent the prefect before him with
orders either to persuade Basil to embrace
the communion of Eudoxius, or, in the
event of his refusal, to pvmish him by exile.
Previously acquainted as he was with the
bishop's liigh reputation, he was at first un-
willing to attack him, for he was apprehen-
sive lest the bishop, by boldly meeting and
withstanding his assault, should furnish an
example of bravery to the rest. This artful
stratagem was as ineffective as a spider's


1 Eulogius was at Rome in 369, at Antioch in 379, and Con-
stantinople in 3S1.

2 CharrDB, now Harran, in Mesopotamia, on the point of di-
verg;enci" of the main caravan routes, is the Haran to which
Terah travelled from Orfah. It was afterwards made famous
by the defeat of the Romans in B.C. 53, when

" miserando funere Crassus,
"Assyrias Latio maculavit sanguine Carras."

Lucan. i. 104.

3 Caesarea Ad Argseum (now Kasaria) at the foot of Mount
Arggeus, was made a Roman province by Tiberius A.D. iS.
The progress of Valens had hitherto been successful, and tlie
Catholic cause was endangered. Bithynia had been coerced,
and the mobile Galatians had given in. "The fate of Cappa-
docia depended on Basil." cf. Diet. Ch. Biog. i. 289.


web. For the stories told of old were quite
enough for the rest of the episcopate, and
they kept the wall of the faith unmoved like
bastions in the circle of its walls.

The prefect, however, on his arrival at
Caesarea, sent for the great Basil. He
treated him with respect, and, addressing
him with moderate and courteous language,
urged him to yield to the exigencies of the
time, and not to forsake so many churches
on account of a petty nicety of doctrine. He
moreover promised him the friendship of the
emperor, and pointed out that through it he
might be the means of conferring great ad-
vantages upon many. " This sort of talk,"
said the divine man, " is fitted for little boys,
for they and their like easily swallow such
inducements. But they who are nurtured
by divine words will not suffer so much as a
syllable of the divine creeds to be let go, and
for their sake are ready, should need require,
to embrace every kind of death. The em-
peror's friendship I hold to be of great value
if conjoined with true religion ; otherwise I
doom it for a deadly thingf."

Then the prefect was moved to wrath, and
declared that Basil was out of his senses.
" But," said the divine man, "this madness
I pray be ever mine." The bishop was
then ordered to retire, to deliberate on the
course to be pursued, and on the morrow to
declare to what conclusion he had come.
Intimidation was moreover joined with
argument. The reply of the illustrious
bishop is related to have been " I for my
part shall come to you tomorrow the same
man that I am today ; do not yourself change,
but carry out your threats." After these
discussions the prefect met the emperor and
reported the conversation, pointing out the
bishop's virtue, and the undaunted manliness
of his character. The emperor said nothing
and passed in. In his palace he saw that
plagues from heaven had fallen, for his son ^
lay sick at the very gates of death and his
wife ^ was beset by many ailments. Then
he recognised the cause of these sorrows, and
entreated the divine man, whom he had
threatened with chastisement, to come to his
house. His officers performed the imperial
behests and then the great Basil came to the
palace.

After seeing the emperor's son on the
point of death, he promised him restoration
to life if he should receive holy baptism at
the hands of the pious, and with this pledge
went his way. But the emperor, like the
foolish Herod, remembered his oath, and


1 Galates. cf. Soc. iv. 26.

2 Dominica, cf. Soc, iv. »6,


I20


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[IV. 17, 18.


ordered some of the Ariau faction who were
present to baptize the boy, who immediately
died. Then Valens repented ; he saw how
fraught with danger the keeping of his oath
had been, and came to the divine temple and
received the teaching of the great Basil, and
offered the customary gifts at the altar. The
bishop moreover ordered him to come
within the divine curtains where he sat and
talked much with him about the divine de-
crees and in turn listened to him.

Now there was present a certain man of
the name of Demosthenes,^ superintendent of
the imperial kitchen, who in rudely chiding
the man who instructed the world was guilty
of a solecism of speech. Basil smiled and
said " we see here an illiterate Demosthenes ; "
and on Demosthenes losing his temper and
uttering threats, he continued " your business
is to attend to the seasoning of soups ; you
cannot understand theology because your
ears are stopped up." So he said, and the
emperor was so delighted that he gave him
some fine lands which he had there for the
poor under his care, for they being in griev-
ous bodily affliction were specially in need
of care and cure.

In this manner then the great Basil
avoided the emperor's first attack, but when
he came a second time his better judgement
was obstructed by counsellors who deceived
him ; he forgot what had happened on the
former occasion and ordered Basil to gfo
over to the hostile faction, and, failing to
persuade hi in, commanded the decree of exile
to be enforced. But when he tried to affix his
signature to it he could not even form one
tittle of a word,^ for the pen broke, and when
the same thing happened to the second and
to tlic third pen, and he still strove to sign
that wicked edict, his hand shook ; he quaked,
his soul was filled with fright ; he tore the
paper with both his hands, and so proof was
given by the Ruler of the world that it was
He Himself who had permitted these sufler-
ings to be undergone by the rest, but had
made Basil stronger than the snares laid
against him, and, by all the incidents of
Basil's case, had declared His own almighty
power, while on the other hand He had


' If this Demosthenes " is the same person with the Demos-
thenes who four years later held the office of vicar of I'ontus
wc have in him one of the many examples presented by the
history of the Kastern empire of the manner in which base
arts raised the meanest persons to llie highest dij^nities." Diet.
Chris. Biog. s. v. But the chief cook may have been a high
functionary like the chief baker at the court of the Pharaohs
or the Lord High Steward at that of St. James's. Of the eleva-
tion of a menial to power many parallels may be found. De-
mosthenes of Pontus afterwards became a partisan of the Semi-
arians and accused Basil's brother, Gregory of Nyssa, of dis-
honesty. Basil. Epist. 264, 3S5, 405.

= o'Toixeioi' is a simple sound of the voice as distinguished
from ypnixna, a letter.


proclaimed abroad the courage of good men.
Thus Valens was disappointed in his attack.

CHAPTER XVII.

0/ the death of the great Athanasius and the
electio7i of Petrus.

At Alexandria, Athanasius the victorious,
after all his struggles, each rewarded with a
crown, received release from his labours and
passed away to the life which knows no toil.
Then Peter, a right excellent man, received
the see. His blessed predecessor had first
selected him, and every suffrage alike of the
clergy and of men of rank and office con-
curred, and all the people strove to show
their delight by their acclamations. He had
shared the heavy labours of Athanasius ; at
home and abroad he had been ever at his
side, and with him had undergone manifold
perils. Wherefore the bishops of the neigh-
bourhood hastened to meet ; and those who
dwelt in schools of ascetic discipline left
them and joined the company, and all joined
in begging that Peter might be chosen to suc-
ceed to the patriarchal chair of Athanasius.^

CHAPTER XVIII.

On the overthrow of Petrus and the introduc-
tion of Lucius the Arian.

No sooner had they seated him on the
episcopal throne than the governor of the
province assembled a mob of Greeks and
Jews, surrounded the walls of the church,^
and bade Peter come forth, threatening him
with exile if he refused. He thus acted on
the plea that he was fulfilling the emperor's
good pleasure by bringing those of opposite
sentiments into trouble, but the truth was that
he was carried away by his impious passion.
For he was addicted to the service of the
idols, and looked upon the storms which be-
set the Church as a season of brilliant fes-
tivity. The admirable Peter, however, when
he beheld the unforeseen conflict, secretly
withdrew, and embarked in a vessel bound
for Rome.

After a few days Euzoius came from An-
tioch with Lucius, and handed over the
churches to him. This was he of whose im-


' " The discussions about the year of his death may be con-
sidered as practically closed; the Festal Index, although its
chronology is sometimes faulty, confirming the date oi 373,
given in the MatTeian fragment. The exact day, we may be-
lieve, was Thursday, May 2, on which day of the month Ath-
anasius is venerated in the Western Church. He liad sat on
the Alexandrian throne forty-six complete years. He died
tranquilly in his own house." Canon Bright in Diet. Clirist.
Biog^S.V.

2 The church Thconas, where Syrianus nearly seized Atha-
nasius in 356.


IV. 19.]


OF THEODORET.


121


piety and lawlessness Samosata had already
had experience. But the people nurtured in
the teaching of Athanasius, when they now
saw how different was the spiritual food
oflered them, held aloof from the assemblies
of the Church.

Lucius, who employed idolators as his at-
tendants, went on scourging some, imprison-
ing others ; some he drove to take to flight,
others' homes he rifled in rude and cruel
fashion. But all this is better set forth in the
letter of the admirable Peter. After recount-
ing an instance of the impious conduct of
Lucius I shall insert the letter in this work.

Certain men in Egypt, of angelic life and
conversation, fled from the disquiet of the
state and chose to live in solitude in the wil-
derness. There they made the sandy and
barren soil bear fruit ; for a fruit right sweet
and fair to God was the virtue by whose law
they lived. Among many who took the lead
in this mode of life was the far-famed Anto-
nius, most excellent master in the school of
mortification, who made the desert a training
place of virtue for his hermits. He after all
his great and glorious laboui's had reached
the haven where the winds of trouble blow no
more, and then his followers were persecuted
by the wretched and unhappy Lucius. All
the leaders of those divine companies, the
famous Macarius, his namesake, Isidorus,
and the rest ^ were dragged out of their caves
and despatched to a certain island inhabited
by impious men, and never blessed with any
teacher of piety. When the ship drew near
to the shore of the island the demon rever-
enced by its inhabitants departed from the
image which had been his time-old home,
and filled with frenzy the daughter of the
priest. She was driven in her inspired fury
to the shore where the rowers were bringing
the ship to land. Making the tongue of the
girl his instrument, the demon shouted out
through her the words uttered at Philippi
by the woman possessed with the spirit of
Python,- and was heard by all, both men and


1 There are traces of some confusion about the saints and
solitaries of this name at this period. " There were two her-
mits or monks of this name both of the 4th c, both living in
Egypt, whose character and deeds are almost indistinjfuish-
able." " One of them is said to have been the disciple of
Anthony, and the master of Evagrius." "The name of Ma-
carius, like a double star, shines as a central light in the
monkish history, and is enshrined alike in the Roman martyr-
ologies, and in the legends of the Greek church. Macarius is
a favourite saint in Russia." (Canon Fremantle, Diet. Christ.
Biog. iii. 774.) cf. Soc. iv. 23. In iv. 24 Soc. describes both
the Macani as banished to the island "which had not a single
Christian inhabitant." Sozomen (vi. 20) has the same story.

There was an Isidorus, bishop of Cyrus in 37S, mentioned by
Theodoretus in his Religious History (1143), and an Isidorus,
bishop of Athribis in Egypt, cf. Diet. Christ. Biog. s. v. But
the Isidorus of the text appears to have been a monk.

2 Acts xvi. 16, where the reading irvevtia nvOuiva recommended
on the overwhelming authority of {<ABCD is adopted by the
R. V.,and rendered in the margin " a spirit, a python." In
the text it is to irvivna tov irvduivoi.


women, saying, " Alas for your power, ye
servants of the Christ ; everywhere we have
been driven forth by you from town and
hamlet, from hill and height, from wastes
where no men dwell ; in yon islet we had
hoped to live out of the reach of your shafts,
but our hope was vain ; hither you have been
sent by your persecutors, not to be harmed
by them, but to drive us out. We are quit-
ting the island, for we are being wounded by
the piercing rays of your virtue." With
these words, and words like these, they
dashed the damsel to the ground, and them-
selves all fled together. But that divine com-
pany prayed over the girl and raised her up,
and delivered her to her father made whole
and in her right mind.

The spectators of the miracle flung them-
selves at the feet of the new comers and im-
plored to be allowed to participate in the
means of salvation. They destroyed the
idol's grove, and, illuminated by the bright
rays of instruction, received the grace of
holy baptism. On these events becoming
known in Alexandria all the people met to-
gether, reviling Lucius, and saying that
wrath from God would fall upon them, were
not that divine company of saints to be set
free. Then Lucius, apprehensive of a tu-
mult in the city, suflered the holy hermits to
go back to their dens. Let this suffice to
give a specimen of his impious iniquity.
The sinful deeds he dared to do will be more
clearly set forth by the letter of the admirable
Peter. I hesitate to insert it at full length,
and so will only quote some extracts from it.

CHAPTER XIX.

Narrative of events at Alexandria in the time
of Lucius the Arian, taken from a letter oj
Petrus, Bishop of Alexandria.

Palladius governor of the province, by
sect a heathen,^ and one who habitually
prostrated himself before the idols, had fre-
quently entertained the thought of waging
war against Christ. After collecting the
forces already enumerated he set out against
the Church, as though he were pressing for-
ward to the subjugation of a foreign foe.
Then, as is well known, the most shocking
deeds were done, and at the bare thought of
telling the story, its recollection fills me with
ano-uish. I have shed floods of tears, and I

1 iBviKo^, " foreigner " a " gentile." Another common term
for " heathen " in ecclesiastical Greek is" EAArjf, but neither
"Gentile "nor " Greek" expresses the required sense so well as
"Heathen," which, like the cognate 'Pagan," simply denotes
a countryman and villager, and marks the age when Christian-
ity was found to be mainly in towns.


122


THE ECCLESIASTICAT. HISTORY


[IV. 19.


should have long remained thus bitterly
aflected had I not assuaged my grief by
divine meditation. The crowds intruded
into the churcli called Thconas^and there
instead of holy words were uttered the
praises of idols ; there where the Holy Scrip-
tures had been read might be heard imscemly
clapping of hands with unmanly and inde-
cent utterances ; there outrages were oflered
to the Virgins of Christ which the tongue
refuses to utter, for " it is a shame even to
speak of them." ^ On only hearing of these
wrongs one of the well disposed stopped
his ears and prayed that he might rather
become deaf than have to listen to their
foul language. Would that they had been
content to sin in word alone, and had not
surpassed the wickedness of word by deed,
for insult, however bad it be, can be borne by
them in whom dwells Christ's wisdom and
His holy lessons. But these same villains,
vessels of wrath fitted for destruction,^
screwed up their noses and poured out, if I
may so say, as from a well-head, foul noises
through their nostrils, and rent the raiment
from Christ's hoi}' virgins, whose conversa-
tion gave an exact likeness of saints ; they
dragged them in triumph, naked as when
they were born, through all the town ; they
made indecent sport of them at their pleas-
ure ; their deeds were barbarous and cruel.
Did any one in pity interfere and urge to
mercy he was dismissed with wounds. Ah !
woe is me. Many a virgin underwent
brutal violation ; many a maid beaten on the
head with clubs lay dumb, and even their
bodies were not allowed to be given up for
burial, and their grief-stricken parents can-
not find their corpses to this day. But why
recount woes which seem small when com-
pared with greater.'' Why linger over these
and not hurry on to events more urgent.?
When you hear them I know that you will
wonder and will stand with us long dumb,
amazed at the kindness of the Lord in not
bringing all things utterly to an end. At the
very altar the impious perpetrated what, as
it is written,* neither happened nor was
heard of in the days of our fathers.

A boy who had forsworn his sex and
would pass for a girl, with eyes, as it is
written, smeared with antimony,* and face
reddened with rouge like their idols, in wo-
man's dress, was set up to dance and wave
his hands about and whirl round as though


• Vide note on page 120.
- Epii. V. xii.

3 Romans ix. ta.

* loci I. a.


f' I adopt Iho readiiie aTt/S/j for
(Sept.). itrri^iivv To6f o4>0a\n6ui at


(TTtlilJH, cf. Kz. xxiu. 40
<xov.


he had been at the front of some disreputa-
ble stage, on the holy altar itself where we
call on the coming of the Holy Ghost, while
the by-standers laughed aloud and rudely
raised unseemly shouts. But as this seemed
to them really rather decorous than im-
proper, they went on to proceedings which
they reckoned in accordance with their in-
decency' ; they picked out a man who was
very famous for utter baseness, made him
strip oft' at once all his clothes and all his
shame, and set him up as naked as he was
born on the throne of the church, and dubbed
him a vile advocate against Clirist. Then
for divine words he uttered shameless wick-
edness, for awful doctrines wanton lewdness,
for piety impiety, for continence fornication,
adulter)', foul lust, theft ; teaching that glut-
tony and drunkenness as well as all the rest
were good for man's life.^ In this state of
things when even I had withdrawn from the
church^ — for how could I remain where
troops were coming in — where a mob was
bribed to violence — where all were strivingfor
gain — where mobs of heathen were making
mighty promises? — forth, forsooth, is sent
a successor in my place. It was one named
Lucius, who had bought the bishopric as he
might some dignity of this world, eager to
maintain the bad character and conduct of a
wolf.^ No synod of orthodox bishops had
chosen him ; ■* no vote of genuine clergy ; no
laity had demanded him ; as the laws of the
church enjoin.

Lucius could not make his entrance into
the city without parade, and so he was ap-
propriately escorted not by bishops, not by
presbyters, not by deacons, not by multi-
tudes of the laity ; no monks preceded him
chanting psalms from the Scriptures ; but
there was Euzoius, once a deacon of our
cit}' of Alexandria, and long since degraded
along with Arius in the great and holy
synod of Nicasa, and more recently raised to
rule and ravage the see of Antioch, and
there, too, was Magnus the treasurer," notori-
ous for every kind of impiety, leading a vast
body of troops. In the reign of Julian this
Magnus had burnt the church at Berytus,®

> cf. Greg. Naz. Oral. xxv. 12. p. 464 Ed. Migne.

» cf. Soc. 21.

3 Observe the pun.

■• On the subject of episcopal election, vide Diet. Christ.
Bio),'. iy. 335.

'• o Tu)i'Ko^i)TaTj)(n(oi'5e AapyiTid>'<oi'Kd/xT)?. Valesius says,"lhc-
sauri principis.dui vulgo sacra; largitiones dicebantur, alii urant
per siiifjulas dittceses quibus pra.'erant comitcs. Alii erant in
Cdinitatu una cum principc, qui comitatenses largitioncs dice-
bantur. His pmcerat comes largitionum coniitatensium."

" Beyrout, between the ancient Byblus and Sidon. Near
here St. (jcorge killed the dragon, according to ihe legend.
Our patron saint's dragon does not seem to have been, as may
possibly have been the case in some similar stories, a surviv-
ing Saurian, but simply a materialization of some picture of
George vanquishing the old'dragon, the Devil.


IV. 19.]


OF THEODORET.


123


the famous city of Phoenicia ; and, in the
reign of Jovian of blessed memory, after
barely escaping decapitation by numerous
appeals to the imperial compassion, had
been compelled to build it up again at his
own expense.

Now I invoke your zeal to rise in our
vindication. From what I write you ought
to be able to calculate the character and
extent of the wrongs committed against the
Church of God by the starting up of this
Lucius to oppose us. Often rejected by
your piety and by the orthodox bishops 01
every region, he seized on a city which had
just and righteous cause to regard and treat
him as a foe. For he does not merely say
like the blasphemous fool in the psalms
" Christ is not true God." ^ But, corrupt
himself, he con-upted others, rejoicing in
the blasphemies uttered continually against
the Saviour by them who worshipped the
creature instead of the Creator. The
scoundrel's opinions being quite on a par
with those of a heathen, why should he not
venture to worship a new-made God, for
these were the phrases with which he was
publicly greeted "Welcome, bishop, be-
cause thou deniest the Son. Serapis loves
thee and has brought thee to us." So they
named their native idol. Then without an
interval of delay the afore-named Magnus,
inseparable associate in the villainy of Lu-
cius, cruel body-guard, savage lieutenant,
collected together all the multitudes com-
mitted to his care, and arrested presbyters
and deacons to the number of nineteen, some
of whom were eighty years of age, on the
charge of being concerned in some foul
violation of Roman law. He constituted a
public tribunal, and, in ignorance of the
laws of Christians in defence of virtue, en-
deavoured to compel them to give up the
faith of their fathers which had been handed
down from the apostles through the fathers
to us. He even went so far as to maintain
that this would be gratifying to the most
merciful and clement Valens Augustus.
" Wretched man" he shouted " accept, ac-
cept the doctrine of the Arians ; God will
pardon you even though you worshij? Vv^ith
a true worship, if you do this not of your
own accord but because you are compelled.
There is always a defence for irresponsible
compulsion, while free action is responsible
and much followed by accusation. Consider
well these arguments ; come willingly ; away
with all delay ; subscribe the doctrine of
Arius preached now by Lucius," (so he

1 Ps. xiv. I. The Sept. reads EiTref a4>/>(ov ev KapSia auroC ovk
«»-Ti ©edy, which admits of the translation *' He is not God."


introduced him by name) "being well as-
sured that if you obey you will have wealth
and honour from your prince, while if you
refuse you will be punished by chains, rack,
torture, scourge and cruel torments ; you will
be deprived of your property and posses-
sions ; you will be driven into exile and con-
demned to dwell in savage regions."

Thus this noble character mixed intimi-
dation with deceit and so endeavoured to
persuade and compel the people to aposta-
tise from true religion. They however
knew full well how true it is that the pain
of treachery to right religion is sharper than
any torment ; they refused to lower their
virtue and noble spirit to his trickery and
threats, and were thus constrained to answer
him. " Cease, cease trying to frighten us
with these words, utter no more vain words.
We worship no God of late arrival or of
new invention. Foam at us if you will
in the vain tempest of your fury and dash
yourselves against us like a furious wind.
We abide by the doctrines of true religion
even unto death ; we have never regarded
God as impotent, or as unwise, or untrue,
as at one time a Father and at another not
a Father, as this impious Arian teaches,
making the Son a being of time and transi-
tory. For if, as the Ariomaniacs say, the
Son is a creature, not being naturally of one
substance with the Father, the Father too
will be reduced to non-existence by the non-
existence of the Son, not being as they
assert at one period a Father. But if He is
ever a Father, his offspring being truly of
Him, and not by derivation, for God is im-
passible, how is not he mad and foolish who
says of the Son through whom all things
came by grace into existence, "there was
a time when he was not."

These men have truly become fatherless
by falling away from our fathers throughout
the world who assembled at Nicsea, and
anathematized the false doctrine of Arius,
now defended by this later champion. They
laid down that the Son was not as you are
now compelling us to say, of a different
substance from the Father, but of one and
the same. This their pious intelligence
clearly perceived, and so from an adequate
collation of divine terms they owned Him
to be consubstantial.

Advancing these and other similar argu-
ments, they were imprisoned for many days
in the hope that they might be induced to
fall away from their right mind, but the
rather, like the noblest of the athletes in a
Stadium, they crushed all fear, and from
time to time as it were anointing themselves


124


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[IV. 19.


with the thought of the bold deeds done by
their fathers, through the help of holy
thoughts maintained a nobler constancy in
piety, and treated the rack as a training
place for virtue. While they were thus
struggling, and had become, as writes the
blessed Paul, a spectacle to angels and to
men,^ the whole city ran up to gaze at
Christ's athletes, vanquishing by stout en-
durance the scourges of the judge who was
torturing them, winning by patience trophies
against impiety, and exhibiting triumphs
against Arians. So their savage enemy
thought that by threats and torments he
could subdue and deliver them to the
enemies of Christ. Thus therefore the sav-
age and inhuman tyrant evilly entreated
them by inflicting on them the tortures that
his cruel ingenuity devised, while all the
people stood wailing and shewing their
sorrow in various ways. Then he once more
mustered his troops, who were disciplined
in disorder, and summoned the martyrs to
trial, or as it might rather be called, to a
foregone condemnation, by the seaport,
while after their fashion liired cries were
raised against them by the idolaters and
the Jews. On their refusal to yield to the
manifest heresy of the Ariomaniacs they
were sentenced, while all the people stood
in tears before the tribunal, to be deported
from Alexandria to the Phcenician Heliopo-
lis," a place where none of the inhabitants,
who are all given over to idols, can endure
so much as to hear the name of Christ.

After giving them the order to embark,
Magnus stationed himself at the port, for
he had delivered his sentence against them
in the neighbourhood of the public baths.
He showed them his sword unsheathed,
thinking that he could thus strike terror into
men who had again and again smitten hos-
tile demons to the ground with their two-
edged blade. So he bade them put out to
sea, though they had got no provisions on
board, and were starting without one single
comfort for their exile. Strange and almost
incredible to relate, the sea was all afoam ;
grieved, I think, and unwilling, if I may so
say, to receive the good men upon its sur-
face, and so have part or lot in an unright-
eous sentence. Now even to the ignorant
was made manifest the savage purpose of
the judge and it may truly be said " at this
the heavens stood astonished." "*


' I. Cor.iv. g.

' In Cdic Syria, near tlie sources of the Orontes, where the
ruins of tlie temple of the sun built bv Antoninus I'ius are
known by tlie modern equivalent of the older title — Baal-
Bek, " the city of the sun."

•■^ jer. ii. 12. A y. "Be astonished, O ye heavens.'*
But in Sept. as in text ffiart} 6 ovpavbi inl tovtcji.


The whole city groaned, and is lament-
ing to this day. Some men beating on
their breast with one hand after another
raised a mighty noise ; others lifted up at
once their hands and eyes to heaven in testi-
mony of the wrong inflicted on them, and so
saying in all but words, " Hear, O heavens,
and give ear, O earth," ^ what unlawful
deeds are being done. Now all was weeping
and wailing; singing and sighing sounded
through all the town, and from ever}' eye
flowed a river of tears which threatened to
overwhelm the very sea with its tide. There
was the aforesaid Magnus on the port order-
ing the rowers to hoist the sails, and up went
a mingled cry of maids and matrons, old
men and young, all sobbing and lamenting
together, and the noise of the multitude
overwhelmed the roar raised by the waves
on the foaming sea. So the martyrs sailed
oft' for Heliopolis, where every man is given
over to superstition," w'here flourish the
devil's ways of pleasure, and where the sit-
uation of the cit}', surrounded on all sides by
mountains that approach the sky, is fitted for
the terrifying lairs of wild beasts. All the
friends they left behind now alike in public
in the middle of the town and each in private
apart groaned and uttered words of grief,
and were even forbidden to weep, at the
order of Palladius, prefect of the city, who
happened himself to be a man quite given
over to superstition. Many of the mourners
were first arrested and thrown into prison,
and then scourged, torn with carding combs,
tortured, and, champions as they w^ere of
the church in their holy enthusiasm, were
despatched to the mines of Phennesus ^ and
Proconnesus.''

Most of them were monks, devoted to a
life of ascetic solitude, and were about
twenty-three in number. Not long after-
wards the deacon who had been sent by our
beloved Damasus, bishop of Rome, to bring
us letters of consolation and communion,
was led publicly through the town by
executioners, with his hands tied behind his
back like some notorious criminal. After
sharing the tortures inflicted on murderers,
he was terribly scourged with stones and
bits of lead about his ver}' neck.* He went
on board ship to sail, like the rest, with the


1 Isaiah 1.2.

2 Here the obvious sense of Seio-iSai/j.oi'uii' matches the "su-
perstitious" of A. V. in Acts 17. 22.

3 Valesius identifies Phennesus with Phynon in Arabia
Petr;ea, now 'rafileh.

♦The island of Marmara in the sea of that name.

''The Roman " I'"laf^cllum " was a frightful instrument of
torture, and is distin<;uislied from the " scutica," or whip, and
" virf;a," or rod. It was knotted with bones and bits of metal.
and sometimes ended in a hook. Horace (Sat. I. lii. 119)
calls it " horribile."


IV,. 20,]


OF THEODORET.


125


mark of the sacred cross upon his brow ; with
none to aid and none to tempt him he was
despatched to the copper mines of Phen-
nesus. During the tortures inflicted by the
magistrate qn the tender bodies of little
boys, some have been left lying on the
spot deprived of holy rites of burial, though
parents and brothers and kinsfolk, and in-
deed the whole city, begged that this one con-
solation might be given them. But alas for
the inhumanity of the judge, if indeed he
can be called judge who only condemns !
They who had contended nobly for the true
relisfion were assigned a worse fate than a
murderer's, their bodies lying, as they did,
unburied. The glorious champions were
thrown to be devoured by beasts and birds
of prey.^ Those who were anxious for con-
science' sake to express sympathy with the
parents were punished by decapitation, as
though they had broken some law. What
Roman law, nay what foreign sentiment,
ever inflicted punishment for the expression
of sympathy with parents? What instance
is there of the perpetration of so illegal a
deed by any one of the ancients ? The male
children of the Hebrews were indeed once
ordered to be slain by Pharaoh, but his edict
was suggested by envy and by fear. How
far greater the inhumanity of our day than
of his. How preferable, if there be a choice
in unrighteousness, their wrongs to ours.
How much better ; if what is illegal can be
called good or bad, though in truth iniquity
is always iniquity.

I am writing what is incredible, inhuman,
awful, savage, barbarous, pitiless, cruel.
But in all this the votaries of the Arian
madness pranced, as it were, with proud
exultation, while the whole city was lament-
ing; for, as it is written in Exodus, " there
was not a house in which there was not one
dead." 2

The men whose appetite for iniquity was
never satisfied planned new agitation. Ever
wreaking their evil will in evil deeds, they
darted the peculiar venom of their iniquity
at the bishops of the province, using the
aforesaid treasurer Magnus as the instrument
of their unrighteousness.

Some they delivered to the Senate, some
they trapped at their good pleasure, leaving
no stone unturned in their anxiety to hunt in


*cf. Soph. Ant. 30, Where the corpse of Polyneikes is
described as left

" unwept unsepulchred

A prize full rich for birds." (Plumptre.)
Christian sentiment is still affected by the horror felt by the
Greeks at deprivation of the rites of burial which finds striking
expression in the dispute between Teucer and Menelaos about
the burial of Ajax.

2 Ex. xii. 30, ■ . - ■ ■- - •■


all from every quarter to impiety, going
about in all directions, and like the devil, the
proper father of heresy, they sought whom
they might devour.^

In all, after many fruitless eflbrts, they
drove into exile to Dio-Caesarea,^ a city in-
habited by Jews, murderers of the Lord,
eleven of the bishops of Egypt, all of them
men who from childhood to old age had
lived an ascetic life in the desert, had sub-
dued their inclinations to pleasure by reason
and by discipline, had fearlessly preached
the true faith of piety, had imbibed the
pious doctrines, had again and again won
victory against demons, were ever putting
the adversary out of countenance by their
virtue, and publicly posting the Arian heresy
by wisest argument. Yet like Hell,'^ not
satisfied with the death of their brethren,
fools and madmen as they were, eager to win
a reputation by their evil deeds, they tried to
leave memorials in all the world of their
own cruelty. For lo now they roused the
imperial attention against certain clerics of
the catholic church who were living at An-
tioch, together with some excellent monks
who came forward to testify against their evil
deeds. They got these, men banished to
Neoccesarea ^ in Pontus, where they were
soon deprived of life in consequence of the
sterility of the countiy. Such tragedies
were enacted at this period, fit indeed to be
consigned to silence and oblivion, but given a
place in history for the condemnation of the
men who wag their tongues against the Only
begotten, and infected as they were with the
raving madness of blasphemy, strive not
only to aim their shafts at the Master of the
universe, but further waged a truceless war
against His faithful servants.

CHAPTER XX.

Of Mavia,^ Queen of the Saracens, and the
ordination^ of Moses the monk.

At this time ' the Ishmaelites were devas-
tating the country in the neighbourhood of


I I. Peter v.S.

• Now Sefurieh, anciently Sepphoris; an unimportant place
till erected by Herod Antipas into Ihe capital of Galilee.

3 Proverbs xxvii. 20.

^ Now Niksar, on the river Lykus, the scene of two councils ;
(i.) a.d. 315, when the first canon ordered every priest to forfeit
his orders on marriage (Mansi ii. 539) (ii.) a.d. 350, when
Eustathius of Sebastu was condemned (Mansi, iii. 291).

5 cf. Soz. vi. 38, and Soc. iv. 36.

6 The word used is xf'poToj'ia, of which it is well to trace the
varying usages. These are given by the late Rev. E, Hatch
(Diet. Christ. Ant. ii. 1501) as follows. "This word is used
(a) in the N. T. Acts xiv, 24, x^'Pororrjo-ai'Te? hk aurois kot'
iKKKi\aia.v vpecrpvTipov<; : II. Cor. viii. 19 (of Titus) xecpoTOfrjSel;
VTTO Tiif iKK\r]<Ti.oji' ; (b) in sub-apostolic Greek, Ignat. ad
Philad. c. 10; (c) in the Clementines, Clement. Ep. ad Jacob,
c. 2; (d) in the Apostolical Constitution; (e) in the Canon
Law; (f) in the Civil Law. Its meaning was originally "to

1 7i. e. about 375. -•


;I26


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[IV. 21, 22.


the Roman frontier. They were led by
Mavia, a princess who regarded not the sex
which nature had given her, and disphiyed
the spirit and courage of a man. After
many engagements she made a truce, and,
on receiving the light of divi^ie knowledge,
begged that to the dignity of high priest of
her tribe might be advanced one, Moses by
name, who dwelt on the confines of Egypt
and Palestine. This request Valens granted,
and ordered the holy man to be conveyed to
Alcwindria, and there, as the most con-
venient place in the neighbourhood, to receive
episcopal grace. When he had arrived and
saw Lucius endeavouring to lay hantls on
him — " God forbid " said he '' that I should
be ordained by thine hand : the grace of
the Spirit visits us not at thy calling."
"Whence," said Lucius, "are you led to
conjecture this.''" He rejoined "I am not
speaking of conjecture but of clear know-
ledge ; for thou fightest against the apostolic
decrees, and speakest words against them,
and for thy blasphemous utterances thy law-
less deeds are a match. For what impious
man has not on thy account mocked the
meetings of the Church.'' What excellent
man has not been exiled.'' What barbarous
savagery is not thrown into the shade by
thy daily deeds .^ " So the brave man said,
and the murderer heard him and desired
to slay him, but was afraid of kindling
once again the war which had come to an
end. Wherefore he ordered other bishops
to be produced whom Moses had requested.
After receiving the episcopal grace of the
right worthy faith Moses returned to the
people who had asked for him, and by his
apostolic teaching and miracles led them in
the way that leads to truth. ^

elect," but it came afterwards to mean even in classical Greek,
simply "to appoint to otlice," without itself indicating the
particular mode of appointment (cf. Schomann de Comitiis, p.
\2i) . That the latter was its ordinary meaninj^ in Hellenistic
Greek, and consccpiently in the (irst ages of church history, is
clear from a large number of instances; e. g. in Josephus vi.
II, 9, it is used of the appointment of Davia as King by God;
id. xiii, 22, of the appointment of Jonathan as High Priest by
Alexander; in Philo li, 76 it is used of the appointment of
Joseph as governor by I'haraoli ; in Lucian, de morte Pere-
griru c. 41 of the appnintinent of ambassadors. " In Sozomen
vii, 24 of the appointment of Arcadius as Augustus by Theo-
dosius." " In later times a new connotation apiiears of which
there is no early trace; it was used of the stretching out of the
bighop's hands in the rite of imposition of hands." The writer
of the above seems hardly to do justice to its early use for or-
dination as well as for appointment. In the Pseudo-Ig. ad.
Her. c. iii, it is said of bishops exeii'oi xf'PO''o»'0"<'''i X"P°^*''°''''''
antl Up. Lightfoot comments " while x^'po^f"''" 'S used of
laying on of hands, e. g. in confirmation, xfiporovia is said of
ordination, c. g. Ap. Const, viii. 27. ' e'lrio-KOTro! vtto rpLuiv 17
&V0 inKTKonMV y^ipoTovtlaeto.' Referring originally to the
election of the Clergy xfi-porovia Came afterwards to be applied
commonly, as here, to their ordination." Thendoretus uses
the word in both senses, and sometimes either will fit in with
the context.

* Sozomen (vi. 3S) describes Lucius as remonstrating in
moderate language. " Do not judge of mc before you know
what my creed is." Socrates (iv. 36) makes Moses charge
Lucius with condemning the orthodo.x to exile, beasts, and
burning. On Socrates Valesius annotates " Banc narrationem


These then were the deeds done by Lucius
in Alexandria under the dispensation of the
providence of God.

CHAPTER XXL

At Constantinople the Arians filled a boat
with pious presbyters and drove her without
ballast out to sea, putting some of their own
men on another craft with orders to set the
presbyters' boat on fire. So, fighting at the
same time against both sea and flames, at
last they were delivered to the deep, and
won the martyrs' crown.

At Antioch Valens spent a considerable
time, and gave complete license to all who,
under cover of the Christian name, pagans,
Jews and the rest, preached doctrines contrary
to those of the gospel. The slaves of this
error even went so far as to perform pagan
rites, and thus the deceitful fire which, after
Julian, had been quenched by Jovian, was
now rekindled by permission of Valens. The
rites of Jews, of Dionysus, and of Demeter
were now no longer performed in a corner,
as they would be in a pious reign, but by
revellers running wild in the forum. Valens
was a foe to none but them that held the
apostolic doctrine. First he drove them
from their churches, the illustrious Jovian
having given them also the new built church.
And when they assembled close up to the
mountain clift' to honour their Master in
hymns, and enjoy the word of God, putting
up with all the assaults of the weather, now
of rain, now of snow and cold, and now of
violent heat, they were not even suffered this
poor protection, and troops were sent to
scatter them far and wide.

CHAPTER XXII.

How Flaviamis and Diodorus gathered the
church of the orthodox in Antioch.

Now Flavianus and Diodorus, like break-
waters, broke the force of the advancing
waves. Meletius their shepherd had been
constrained to sojourn far away. But these
looked after the flock, opposing their own
courage and cunning to the wolves, and
bestowing due care upon the sheep. Now
that they were driven away from under the
cliff' they fed their flocks by the banks of the
neighbouring river. They could not brook,
like the captives at Babylon, to hang their

de episcopo Saracenis dato et de pace cum iisdem facta,
desumpsit quidem Socrates, ex Rufini lib. ii. 6." Lucius was
ejected from Alexandria when the reign of Valens ended with
his death in37S. Theodoretus appears to confound this Lucius
with an Arian Lucius who usurped the see of Samosata. Vide
chap, xviii.

iCf. ante, ii. 19. page 85.


IV. 23.]


OF THEODORET.


127


harps upon the willows,^ but they continued
to hymn their maker and benefoctor in all
places of his dominion.- But not even in
this spot was the meeting of the pious pas-
tors of them that blessed the Lord sufiered
by the foe to be assembled. So again this
pair of excellent shepherds gathered their
sheep in the soldiers' training ground and
there tried to show them their spiritual food
in secret. Diodorus, in his wisdom and
courage, like a clear and mighty river,
watered his own and drowned the blasphe-
mies of his opponents, thinking nothing of
the splendour of his birth, and gladly under-
going the sufferings of the faith.

The excellent Flavianus, who was also of
the highest rank, thought piety the only
nobility,'^ and, like some trainer for the
games, anointed the great Diodorus" as
though he had been an athlete for five con-
tests.*

At that time he did not himself preach at
the services of the church, but furnished an
abundant supply of arguments and scriptural
thoughts to preachers, who were thus able
to aim their shafts at the blasphemy of
Arius, while he as it were handed them
the arrows of his intelligence from a quiver.
Discoursing alike at home and abroad he
easily rent asunder the heretics' nets and
showed their defences to be mere spiders'
webs. He was aided in these contests by
that Aphraates whose life I have written in
my Religious History,^ and who, preferring
the welfare of the sheep to his own rest,
abandoned his cell of discipline and retire-
ment, and undertook the hai'd toil of a
shepherd. Having written on these matters
in another work I deem it now superfluous
to recount the wealth of virtue which he
amassed, but one specimen of his good
deeds I will proceed now to relate, as spe-
cially appropriate to this history.

CHAPTER XXIII.

Of the holy monk Aphraates.

On the north of the river Orontes lies the
palace. On the South a vast two storied
portico is built on the city wall with lofty

1 Psalm cxxxvii.

2 Psalm ciii. 22.

3 cf. " Virtus sola nobilitas."

* Diodorus was now a presbyter. Chrysost. (Laus Diodori
§ 4. tom. iii. p. 749) describes how the whole city assembled
and were fed by his tongue flowing- with milk and honey,
themselves meanwhile supplyintj his necessities with their
gifts. Valens retorted with redoubled violence, and antici-
pated the " noyades " of Carrier at Lyons, cf. Socrates iv. 17
and Diet. Christ. Biog. ii. 529.

"The five contests of the complete athlete are summed up
in the line

oXjia, TTOoioKeir)^, SivKOV, aKOvra, nd\riv.

' Relig. Hist, viii.


towers on either side. Between the palace
and the river lies a public way open to
passengers from the town, through the gate
in this quarter, and leading to the country in
the suburbs. The godly Aphraates vv^as once
passing along this thoroughfare on his way
to the soldiers' training ground, in order to
perform the duty of serving his flock. The
emperor happened to be looking down
from a gallery in the palace, and saw him
going by wearing a cloak of undressed
goat's skin,^ and walking rapidly, though of
advanced age. On its being remarked that
this was Aphraates to whom all the town
was then attached, the emperor cried out
" Where are you going.-* Tell us." Readily
and cleverly he answered "To pray for
your empire." "You had better stop at
home " said the emperor " and pray alone
like a monk." "Yes," said the divine
man, " so I was bound to do and so
I always did till now, as long as the
Saviour's sheep were at peace ; but now
that they are grievously disturbed and in
great peril of being caught by beasts, I
needs must leave no means untried to save
the nurslings. For tell me, sir, had I been
a girl sitting in my chamber, and looking
after the house, and had seen a flash of
flame fall and my father's house on fire,
what ought I to do .'' Tell me ; sit within
and never mind the house being on fire, and
wait for the flame to approach ? or bid my
bower good bye and run up and down and
get water and try to quench the flame.'' Of
course you will say the latter, for so a quick
and spirited girl would do. And that is
what I am doing now, sir. You have set
fire to our Father's house and we are run-
ning about in the endeavour to put it out."
So said Aphi'aates, and the emperor threat-
ened him and said no more. One of the
grooms of the imperial bedchamber, who
threatened the godly man somewhat more
violently, met with the following fate. He
was entrusted with the charge of the bath,
and immediately after this conversation he
came down to get it ready for the emperor.
On entering he lost his wits, stepped into
the boiling water before it was mixed with
the cold, and so met his end. The emperor
sat waiting for him to announce that the
bath was ready for him to enter, and after a
considerable time had gone by he sent other
officers to report the cause of the delay.
After they had gone in and looked all about
the room they discovered the chamberlain

'The word Sisura was used for a common upper garment,
but according to the grammarian Tzetzes (Schol. Ad. Lye.
634) its accurate meaning is the one given in the text.


128


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[IV. 24, 25;


filain by the heat, and lying dead in the
boiling water. On this becoming known to
the emperor they perceived the force of the
prayers of Aphraates. Nevertlieless they
did not depart from the impious doctrines
but hardened their heart like Pharaoh, and
the infatuated emperor, though made aware
of the miracle of the holy man, persisted in
his mad rage against piety.

CHAPTER XXIV.

Of the holy monk Jiilianus.

At this time too the celebrated Julianus,
whom I have already mentioned, was forced
to leave the desert and come to Antioch, for
when the foster children of lies, the facile
framers of calumny, I mean of course the
Arians, were maintaining that this great
man was of their faction, those lights of the
truth Flavianus, Diodorus, and Aphraates sent
Acacius,^ an athlete of virtue who afterwards
very wisely ruled the church at Beroea, to
the famous Julianus^ with the entreaty that
he would take pity on so many thousands of
men, and at the same time convict the enemy
of lies and confirm the proclamation of the
truth. The miracles worked by Julianus
on his way to and from Antioch and in that
vast city itself are described in my Religious
History, which is easily accessible to all who
wish to become acquainted with them. But
I am sure that no one who has enquired into
human nature will doubt that he attracted all
the population of the city to our assembly, for
the extraordinary is generally sure to draw all
men after it. The fact of his having wrought
great marvels is attested even by the enemies
of the truth.

Before this time in the reign of Constan-
tius the great Antonius ^ had acted in the
same way in Alexandria, for he abandoned
the desert and went up and down that city,
telling all men that Athanasius was the
preacher of the true doctrine and that the


1 A monk of Gindarus near Antiocli (Theod.Vit. Pat. ii.) af-
terward envoy from the Syrian churches to Rome, and Bishop
of Berffia, (Aleppo) A.D. 37S. He was at Constantinople in
3S1, (cf. V. S.) and is famous for his opposition to Chrysos-
tom.

- Julianus Sabas (i.e. Abba) an ascetic solitary of Osrhoene,
the district south of the modern Harran. He is the second of
tlie saints of Theodoret's " KcliKious History," where we read
tliat he lived on millet bread, which he ate once a week, and
performed various miracles, which are recorded by Theodoret
on the authority of Acacius.

3 Antonius, St. Anthony, the illustrious and illiterate as-
cetic, friend and correspondent of Constantino (Soc. i. 13), the
centre of many wild le<;ends, was born in 250 A.D. in upper
Egypt. Athanasius calls him the " founder of Asceticism."
In 33s he revisited Alexandria to oppose the Arians, as nar-
r,itid in the text. He died in his cell in 355, bequeathing,^ his
" hair shirt, his two woollen tunics, and his bed, among
Amathas and Macarius who watched his last hours, Serapion,
and Athanasius."

Vide Ath. Vit. S. Ant.


Arian faction were enemies of the truth. So
those godly men knew how to adapt them-
selves to each particular opportunity, when
to remain inactive, and at rest, and when to
leave the deserts for towns.


CHAPTER XXV.

Of what other monks were distinguished at
this pe7-iod.

There were also other men at this period
who emitted the bright rays of the philoso-
phy of solitary life. In the Chalcidian ^ des-
ert Avitus, Marcianus^ and Abraames,' and
more besides whom I cannot easily enumer-
ate, strove in their bodies of sense to live a
life superior to sense. In the district of
Apamea,^ Agapetus,^ Simeon,^ Paulus and
others reaped the fruits of the highest wis-
dom.

In the district of the Zeugmatenses' were
Publius** and Paulus. In the Cyrestian*
the famous Acepsemas had been shut
up in a cell for sixty years without being
either seen or spoken to. The admirable
Zeumatius, though bereft of sight, used to go
about confirming the sheep, and fighting
with the wolves; so they burnt his cell, but
the right faithful general Trajanus got an-
other built for him, and paid him besides
other attentions. In the neighbourhood of
Antioch, Marianus,^" Eusebius,'^ Ammia-
nus,'- Palladius,^'^ Simeon," Abraames,'* and
others, preserved the divine image unim-
paired ; but of all these the lives have been
recorded by us. But the mountain which is
in the neighbourhood of the great city was
decked like a meadow, for in it shone Petrus,
the Galatian, his namesake the Egyptian,

• i.e. the district round Chalcis in Syria, to be distinguished
from the Macedonian Chalcidice.

2 Native of Theodoret's see of Cyrus. He built himself a
cell like the " Little Ease " of the Tower of London, and
promoted orthodoxy by the inHuence of his austerities. \ c.
385. cf. Tilleinont, viii. 483.

s A. went on missionary journeys disguised as a pedlar, and
eventually unwillingly became bishop of Carras. Theod.
Relig. Hist. 3.

* Presumably Apamea ad Orontem. (Famiah.)

0 Bishop of Apamea, a comrade and disciple of Marcianus.
(Relig. Hist, iii.)

"Also a disciple of Marcian. For fifty years he maintained
a school of ascetic philosophy, cf . Chrysost. Ep. 55. and Til-
lemont. ix. 304. Apparently not the same as Simeones Priscus
of Relig. Hist. vi.

'i.e. near Zeugma, on the Euphrates, opposite Apamea.

8 vide Relig. Hist. v.

" i.e. round Theodoret's see of Cyrus.

"> Uncle of Eusebius, a " faithful servant of God." Relig.
Hist. iv.

" Relig. Hist. iv. Abbot of Mt. Coryphe, nephew of Mari-
anus. He chained his neck to his girdle that he might be
compelled to violate the prerogative of his manhood (cf. Ovid.
Met i. 8^) and keep his eyes on the ground.

12 Vide Relig. Hist. iv. He had a monastery near Antioch.

" Relig. Hist. vii.

i< cf. the Symeoncs Priscus of Relig. Hist. vi.

"The disciple of Ephrem Syrus, Vide Soz. iii. 16, and
Eph. Syr. Act. S. Abraam.


IV. 26-28.]


OF THEODORET.


129


Romanus Severus, ^ Zeno, - Moses, and
Malchus,^ and many others of whom the
world is ignorant, but who are known to
God.

CHAPTER XXVI.

Of Didynuts of Alexandria a?id Ephraiin
the Syrian.

At that period at Edessa flourished the
admirable Ephraim, and at Alexandria
Didymus,* both writers against the doc-
trines that are at variance with the truth.
Ephraim, employing the Syrian language,
shed beams of spiritual grace. Totally un-
tainted as he was by heathen education ^
he was able to expose the niceties of
heathen error, and lay bare the weakness
of all heretical artifices. Harmonius^ the
son of Bardesanes^ had once composed cer-
tain songs and by mixing sweetness of
melody with his impiety beguiled the
hearers, and led them to their destruction.
Ephraim adopted the music of the songs,
but set them to piety, and so gave the
hearers at once great delight and a healing
medicine. These songs are still used to en-
liven the festivals of our victorious martyrs.

Didymus, however, who from a child had
been deprived of the sense of sight, had
been educated in poetry, rhetoric, arith-
metic, geometry, astronomy, the logic of
Aristotle, and the eloquence of Plato. In-
struction in all these subjects he received by
the sense of hearing alone, — not indeed as
conveying the truth, but as likely to be
weapons for the truth against falsehood. Of
holy scriptures he learnt not only the sound
but the sense. So among livers of ascetic
lives and students of virtue, these men at
that time were conspicuous.

CHAPTER XXVII.

Of what bishops were at this time distinguished
in Asia and Pontiis.

Among the bishops were the two Gregorii,

1 Born at Rhosus. His life is given in Relig-. Hist. xi.

2 Relig. Hist. xii. He lived "without bed, lamp, fire,
pitcher, pot, box, or book, or anything."

3 Met in his old age by Jerome, to whom he told the story
of his life. Born at Edessa, he ended his days at Maronia,
near Antioch. Vide Jer. vita Malchi.

^ Flourished c. 309-399. Blind from the age of four, he edu-
cated himself witii marvellous patience, and was placed "by
Athanasius at the head of the catechetical school of Alex-
andria. Jerome called liim his teacher and seer and translated
his Treatise on the Holy Spirit. Jer. de Vir. Illust. log.

5 " TratSeia; 'EAArjj'iK^T." His ignor.ance of languages
weakens the force of his dialectic and illustrations. Vid. Diet.
Christ. Biog. s. v.

<> Harmonius wrote about the end of the 2nd century, both in
Greek and in Syriac. cf. Theod. Ha;ret. Fabul. Compend. i.
22, where he is said to have learned Greek at Athens.

' Bardesanes, or Bar Daisan, the great Syrian gnostic, was
born in 155. cf. the prologue to the " Dialogues."


the one of Nazianzus ^ and the other of
Nyssa,^ the latter the brother and the former
the friend and fellow worker of the ereat
Basilius. These were foremost champions
of piety in Cappadocia ; and in front rank
with them was Peter, born of the same
parents with Basilius and Gregorius, who
though not having received like them a for-
eign education, like them lived a life of bril-
liant distinction.

In Pisidia Optimus,'^ in Lycaonia Amphi-
lochius,'' fought in the front rank on behalf
of their fathers' faith, and repelled the ene-
mies' assaults.

In the West Damasus,* Bishop of Rome,
and Ambrosius, entrusted with the govern-
ment of Milan, smote those who attacked
them from afar. In conjunction with these,
bishops forced to dwell in remote regions,
confirmed their friends and undid their foes
by writings — thus pilots able to cope with
the greatness of the storm were granted b}'
the governor of the universe. Against the
violence of the foe He set in battle array the
virtue of His captains, and provided means
meet to ward oft' the troubles of these diffi-
cult times, and not only were the churches
granted this kind of protection by their lov-
ing Lord, but deemed worthy of yet another
kind of guidance.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

Of the letter written by Valens to the great Val-
entinianus about the war, and how he re-
plied.

The Lord roused the Goths to war, and
drew on to the Bosphorus him who knew
only how to fight against the pious. Then
for the first time the vain man became aware
of his own weakness, and sent to his brother
to ask for troops. But Valentinian replied
that it were impious to help one fighting
against God, and right rather to check his
rashness. By this the unhappy man was
filled with yet greater infatuation, yet he did
not withdraw from his rash undertaking,


^ Gregorius of Nazianzus (in Cappadocia, on the Halys)
was so called not as bishop of Nazianzus. He was bisho;!
successively of Sasima, " a detestable little village," — (Carm.
xi. 439-446) — and of Constantinople, and was called " Nazi
anzenus" because his father and namesake was bishop ot
that see. On his acting as bishop at Nazianzus after his with-
drawal from Constantinople, vide note on page 136.

2 A younger brother of Basil, bishop of Ccesarea, born about
335; he was bishop of Nyssa, an obscure town of Cappadocia.
from 372 to 395. Their parents were Basil, an advocate^ and
Emmelia. 'Petrus, the youngest of ten children, was bisho])
of Sebaste.

3 Bishop of Antioch in Pisidia; was presenl at Constant!
nople in 3S1. He was a witness to the will of Gregory ot
Nazianzus.

^ Vide note on p. 114.
0 Vide note on p. 82.


VOL. HI,


K


130


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[IV. 29-32.


and persisted in ranging himself against
the truth. 1

CHAPTER XXIX.

Of the piety of Count Terentius.

Terentius, an excellent general, distin-
guished for his piety, had set up trophies of
victory and returned from Armenia. On
being ordered by Valens to choose a boon,
he mentioned one which it was becoming in
a man nurtured in piety to choose, for he
asked not gold nor yet silver, not land, not
dignity, not a house, but that one church
might be granted to them that were risking
their all for the Apostolic doctrine. Valens
received the petition, but on becoming ac-
quainted with its contents he tore it up in a
rage, and bade Terentius beg some other
boon. The count, however, picked up the
pieces of his petition, and said, '' I have my
reward, sir, and I will not ask another. The
Judge of all things is Judge of my inten-
tion."

CHAPTER XXX.
Of the bold titterance of Trajanus the general.

After Valens had crossed the Bosphorus
and come into Thrace he first spent a consid-
erable time at Constantinople, in alarm as to
the issue of the war. He had sent Trajaiuis
in command of troops against the barbarians.
When the general came back beaten, the
emperor reviled him sadly, and charged him
with infirmity and cowardice. Boldly, as
became a brave man, Trajanus replied : ''I
have not been beaten, sir, it is thou who
hast abandoned the victory by fighting
against God and transferring His support to
the barbarians. Attacked by thee He is
taking their side, for victory is on God's side
and comes to them whom God leads. Dost
thou not know," he went on, "whom thou
hast expelled from their churches and to
whose government these churches have been
delivered by thee.?" Arintheus and Victor,^
generals like Trajanus, confirmed the truth
of what he said, and implored the emperor
not to be angered by reproaches which were
founded upon fact.'^

1 On this Valesius remarks that Valcntininn was already
dead (t57S) when tlie Goths crossed the Danube and ravaged
Thrace'(376). Theodoretus sliould have written "Gratianus "
for " Valentinianus," and " nepliew" for " brother."

2 Mai;^ister equitum. Amin. xxxi. 7.

3 Gibbon (chap, xxvi) records tlie conduct of the war by
"Trajan and Profuturus, two generals who indulged themselves
in a very false and favourable opinion of their own abilities."
" Anhelantes allius. sed imbellcs." Amm.

The battle alluded to is presumably the doubtful one of
Salices. Ammianus does not, as Gibbon supposes, imply that
he had himself visited this particular battlefield, but speaks
generally of carrion birds as " adsuotx illo tempore cada-
vcribus pasci, ut indicant nunc usqiu albentes ossibtts campi"
Amm. xxxi. 7. 16,


CHAPTER XXXI.

Of Isaac ^ the jnojik of Constantinople and Bre-
tanio the Scythia^i Bishop.

It is related that Isaac, who lived as a
solitary at Constantinople, when he saw
Valens marching out with his troops, cried
aloud, "Whither goest thou, O emperor.'*
To fight against God, instead of having Him
as thy ally.'' 'Tis God himself who has
roused the barbarians against thee, because
thou hast stirred many tongues to blasphemy
against Him and hast driven His worship-
pers from their sacred abodes. Cease then
thy campaigning and stop the war. Give
back to the flocks their excellent shepherds
and thou shalt win victory without trouble,
but if thou lightest without so doing thou
shalt learn by experience how hard it is to
kick against the pricks.^ Thou shalt never
come back and shalt destroy thy army."
Then in a passion the emperor rejoined,
" I shall come back ; and I will kill thee,
and so exact punishment for thy lying
prophecy." But Isaac undismayed by the
threat exclaimed, " If what I say be proved
false, kill me."

Bretanio, a man distinguished by various
virtues, and entrusted with the episcopal
government of all the cities of Scythia, fired
his sold with enthusiasm, and protested
against the corruption of doctrines, and the
emperor's lawless attacks upon the saints,
crying in the words of the godly David, " I
spoke of thy testimonies also before Kings and
was not ashamed."^


CHAPTER XXXII.

Of the expedition of Valetis against the Goths
and hoiv he paid the penalty of his impiety.

Valens, however, spurned these excellent
counsellors, and sent out his troops to join
battle while he himself sat waiting in a
hamlet for the victory. His troops could
not stand against the barbarians' charge,
turned tail and were slain one after another
as they fled, the Romans fleeing at full
speed and the barbarians chasing them with
all their might. When Valens heard of the
defeat he strove to conceal himself in the
village where he lay, but when the. barba-
rians came up they set the place on fire and
together with it burnt the enemy of piety.

1 Possibly the Isaac who opposed Chrysostom. Soz. viii. 9.

2 Acts ix. J.

3 Psalm cxix. 46. The text quotes the Sept. i\a.\ovv Iv toiS
^opTupioi5 (Tou kvavriov fia(n.\eu>v Kat ovK jjax,"VOiJ.riv.


IV. 33-]


OF THEODORET.


131


Thus in this present life Valens paid the
penalty of his errors.^

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Hojii the Goths became tainted by the Ana7i

erfor.

To those ignorant of the circumstances it
may be worth while to explain how the
Goths got the Arian plague. After they
had crossed the Danube, and made peace
with Valens, the infamous Eudoxius, who
was on the spot, suggested to the emperor
to persuade the Goths to accept communion
with him. They had indeed long since
received the rays of divine knowledge and
had been nurtured in the apostolic doctrines,
"but now," said Eudoxius, " community of
opinion will make the peace all the firmer."
Valens approved of this counsel and pro-
posed to the Gothic chieftains an agreement
in doctrine, but they replied that they would
not consent to forsake the teaching of their


1 "On the 9th August, 37S, a'daylongf and fatally memorable
in tlie annals of the empire, the legions of Valens moved
forth from their entrenched camp under the walls of Hadrian-
ople, and after a march of eight miles under the hot sun of
August came ia sight of the barbarian vanguard, behind
which stretched the circling line of the waggons that guarded
the Gothic host. The soldiers of the empire, hot, thirsty,
wearied out with hours of waiting under the blaze of an
August sun, and only half understanding that the negotiations
were ended and the battle begun, fought at a terrible disad-
vantage but fought not ill. The infantry on the left wing
seem even to have pushed back their enemies and penetrated
to the Gothic waggons. But they were for some reason not
covered as usual by a force of cavalry and they were jammed
into a too narrow space of ground where they could not use
their spears with effect, yet presented a terribly easy mark to
the Gothic arrows. They fell in dense masses as they had
stood. Then the whole weight of the enemy's attack was
directed against the centre and right. When the evening
began to close in, the utterly routed Roman soldiers were
rushing in disorderly flight from the fatal field. The night,
dark and moonless, may have protected some, but more met
their death rushing blindly over a rugged and unknown
country.

" Meanwhile Valens had sought shelter with a little knot of
soldiers (the two regiments of " Lancearii and Mattiarii"),
who still remained unmoved amidst the surging sea of ruin.
When their ranks too were broken, and when some of his
bravest officers had fallen around him, he joined the common
soldiers in their headlong flight. Struck by 9. Gothic arrow
he fell to the ground, but was carried off^ by some of the
eunuchs and life-guardsmen who still accompanied him, to a
peasant's cottage hard by. The Goths, ignorant of his rank,
but eager to strip the gaily-clothed guardsmen, surrounded
the cottage and attempted in vain to burst in the doors. Then
mountmg to the roof they tried to smoke out the imprisoned
inmates, but succeeding beyond their desires, set fire to the
cottage, and emperor, eunuchs, and life-guardsmen perished
in the flames. Only one of the body-guard escaped, who
climbed out through one of the blazing windows and fell into
the hands of the barbarians. He tolcfthem when it was too
late what a prize they had missed in their cruel eagerness,
nothing less than the emperor of Rome.

Ecclesiastical historians for generations delighted to point
the moral of the story of Valens, that he who had seduced the
whole Gothic nation into the heresy of Arius, and thus caused
them to suflFer the punishment of everlasting fire, was himself
W those very Goths burned alive on the terrible 9th of August.
Thomas Hodgkin — "The Dynasty of Theodosius," page 97.


fathers. At the period in question their
Bisliop Ulphilas was implicitly obeyed by
them and they received his words as laws
which none might break. Partly by the
fascination of his eloquence and partly by
the bribes with which he baited his pro-
posals Eudoxius succeeded in inducing him
to persuade the barbarians to embrace com-
munion with the emperor, so Ulphilas won
them over on the plea that the quarrel
between the different parties was really one
of personal rivalry and involved no difference
in doctrine. The result is that up to this
day the Goths assert that the Father is
greater than the Son, but they refuse to
describe the Son as a creature, although they
are in communion with those who do so.
Yet they cannot be said to have altogether
abandoned their Father's teaching, since
Ulphilas in his efforts to persuade them to
join m communion with Eudoxius and
Valens denied that there was any difference
in doctrine and that the difference had arisen
from mere empty strife.^


1 Christianity is first found among the Goths and some
German tribes on the Rhine about A.D. 300, the Visigoths
taking the lead, and being followed by the Ostrogoths. They
were converted under Arian influences, and simply accepted an
Arian creed. So Salvian writes of them with singular charity,
in a passage partly quoted by Milman (Lat. Christ. I. p.
349.) " IL-eretici sunt sed non scientes. Denique apud nos
sunt hsretici, apud se non sunt. Nam in tantum se
catholicos esse judicant ut nos ipsos titulo hasretica; appella-
tionis infament. Qiiod ergo illi nobis sunt, hoc nos illis.
Nos eos injuriam divinse generationis facere certi sumus,
quod_ minorem patre filium dicant. Illi nos injuriosos patri
existimant, quia Kquales esse credamus. Veritas apud
nos est. Sed illi apud se esse proesumunt. Honor Dei
apud nos est, sed illi hoc arbitrantur honorem divinitatis
esse quod credunt. Inofliciosi sunt; sed illis hoc est
summum religionis oflScium. Impii sunt; sed hoc putant
veram esse pietatem. Errant ergo, sed bono animo
errant, non odio, sed affectu Dei, iionorare se dominum
atque amare credentes." (Salvianus de Gub. Dei V. p. 87.)
The spirit of this good Presbyter of Marseilles of the 5th
century might well have been more often followed in Christian
controversy.

" Of the early Arian missionaries the Arian Records, if they
ever existed, have almost entirely perished. The church was
either ignorant of or disdained to preserve their memory.
Ulphilas alone," — himself a semi-Arian, and accepter of the
creed of Ariminum, — " the apostle of the Goths, has, as it were,
forced his way mto the Catholic records, in which, as in the
fragments of his great work, his translation of the Scriptures
into the Mceso-Gothic language, this admirable man has de-
scended to posterity." " While in these two great divisions, the
Ostrogoths and Visigoths, the nation gathering its descend-
ants from all quarters, spread their more or less rapid con-
quests over Gaul, Italy, and Spain Ulphilas formed a
peaceful and populous colony of shepherds and herdsmen on
the pastures below Mt. Hjemus. He became the primate of
a simple Christian nation. For them he formed an alphabet of
twenty- four letters, and completed all but the fierce books
of Kings " — which he omitted, as likely 10 whet hi.; wild folks'
warlike passions, — "his translation of the Scriptures." Mil-
man Lat. Christ. III. Chap. ii.

The fragments of the work of Ulphilas now extant are (i)
Codex Argenteus, at Upsala. (2) Codex Carolinus. (3)
Ambrosian fragments published by Mai. cf. Philost. ii. 5,
Soc. ii. 41 and iv. 33.

On Eudoxius, who baptized Valens, and was " the worst of
the Arians," cf. note on page S6.


K 2


132


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[V. I-:


BOOK V.


CHAPTER L

Of the piety of the emperor Gratianus.

How the Lord God is long suffering
towards those who rage against him, and
chastises those who abuse his patience, is
plainly taught by the acts and by the fate of
Valens. For the loving Lord uses mercy
and justice like weights and scales ; when-
ever he sees any one by the greatness of his
errors over-stepping the bounds of loving
kiiulness, by just punishment He hinders him
from being carried to further extremes.

Now Gratianus, the son of Valentinianus,
and nephew of Valens, acquired the whole
Roman Empire. He had already assumed
the sceptre of Europe on the death of his
father, in whose life-time he had sliared the
throne. On the death of Valens without
issue he acquired in addition Asia, and the
portions of Libya. ^

CHAPTER II.

Of the return of the bishops.

The emperor at once gave plain indica-
tions of his adherence to true religion, and
offered the first fruits of his kingdom to the
Lord of all, by publishing an edict com-
manding the exiled shepherds to return,
and to be restored to their flocks, and order-
ing the sacred buildings to be delivered to
congregations adopting communion with
Damasus.-

This Damasus, the successor of Liberius
in the see of Rome, was a man of most
praiseworthy life and by his ov^^n choice
alike in word and deed a champion of
Apostolic doctrines. To put his edict in
force Gratianus sent Sapor the general,
a very famous character at that time, with
orders to expel the preachers of the blasplie-
mies of Arius like wild beasts from the
sacred folds, and to efiect the restoration of
the excellent shepherds to God's flocks.

In every instance this was effected without
dispute except in Antioch, the Eastern capi-
tal, where a quarrel was kindled which I
shall proceed to describe.

' Gratian was proclaimed Auffustus by Valcntininn in 367.
(Soc. iv. II. Soz. vi. 10.) He came to the throne on the death
of Valentinian at Hre^etio, Nov. 17,375. He associated liis
brother Valentinian H. with him, and succeeded his uncle
Valens Aug. 9, 378. On Jan. 19, 379 he nominated Tlieodosius
Augustus.

*Cf. note on page Sa.


CHAPTER III.

Of the dissensio7i caused by Paulinus ; of the
innovation by Apoilinarius of Laodicea, and
of the philosophy of Meletius.

It has been already related how the de-
fenders of the apostolic doctrines were
divided into two parties ; how immediately
after the conspiracy formed against the great
Eustathius, one section, in abhorrence of
the Arian abomination, assembled together
by themselves with Paulinus for their bishop,
while, after the ordination of Euzoius, the
other party separated themselves from the
impious with the excellent Aleletius, under-
went the perils previously described, and
were guided by the wise instructions which
Meletius gave them. Besides these Apoilin-
arius of Laodicea constituted himself leader
of a third party, and though he assumed a
mask of piety, and appeared to defend apos-
tolic doctrines, he was soon seen to be an
open foe. About the divine nature he used
unsound arguments, and originated the idea
of certain degrees of dignities. He also had
the hardihood to render the mystery of the in-
carnation^ imperfect and affirmed that the rea-
sonable soul, which is entrusted with tlie
guidance of the body, was deprived of the
salvation effected. For according to his ar-
gument God the Word did not assume this
soul, and so neither granted it His liealing
gift, nor gave it a portion of His dignity.
Thus the earthly body is represented as wor-
shipped by invisible powers, while the soul
which is made in the image of God has re-
mained below invested with the dishonour of
sin.^ Many more errors did he utter in his
stumbling and blinded intelligence. At one
time even he was ready to confess that of the
Holy Virgin the flesh had been taken, at an-
other time he represented it to have come
down from heaven with God the Word, and
yet again that He had been made flesh and
took nothing from us. Other vain tales and
trifles which I have thought it superfluous to
repeat he mixed up with God's gospel prom-
ises. By arguments of this nature he not
only filled his own friends with dangerous

• TO T)J9 oiKoroHia? \s.vuTr\p\.ov, Vide note on page 72.

- Adopting I'iatonic and Pauline psychology giving body,
soul and sjiiiit (cf. I. Thess. v. 23, and Gal. v. 17) Aiiolli-
narius attributed to Christ a human body and a human soul or
annua aiiimaiis shared by man with brutes, but not the re.ison-
able soul, spirit or aiiima rationalis. In [ilace of this he put
the Divine I>ogos. The Word, he said, was made Flesh not
Spirit, God was manifest in the Flesh not Spirit.


V. 4]


OF THEODORET.


133


doctrine but even imparted it to some among
ourselves. As time went on, when they saw
their own insignificance, and beheld the
splendour of the Church, all except a few
were gathered into the Church's communion.
But they did not quite put away their former
unsoundness, and with it infected many of
the sound. This was the origin of the
growth in the Church of the doctrine of the
one nature of the Flesh and of the Godhead,
of the ascription to the Godhead of the
Passion of the only begotten, and of other
points which have bred differences among
the laity and their priests. But these belong
to a later date. At the time of which I am
speaking, when Sapor the General had
arrived and had exhibited the imperial edict,
Paulinus atlirmed that he sided with Dama-
sus, and Apollinarius, concealing his un-
soundness, did the same. The divine Mele-
tius, on the other hand, made no sign, and
put up with their dispute. Flavianus, of
high fame for his wisdom, who was at that
time still in the ranks of the presbyterate, at
first said to Paulinus in the hearing of the
officer '^ If, my dear friend, you accept
communion with Damasus, point out to us
clearly how the doctrines agree, for he
though he owns one substance of the Trinity
openly preaches three essences.^ You on the
contrary deny the Trinity of the essences.
Shew us then how these doctrines are in har-
mony, and receive the charge of the chui'ches,
as the edict enjoins." After so silencing
Paulinus by his arguments he turned to
Apollinarius and said, " I am astonished, my
friend, to find you waging such violent war
against the truth, when all the while you
know quite clearly how the admirable Da-
masus maintains our nature to have been
taken in its perfection by God the Word ;
but you persist in saying the contrary, for
you deprive our intelligence of its salvation.
If these our charges against you be folse,
deny now the novelty that you have origi-
nated ; embrace the teaching of Damasus, and
receive the charge of the holy shrines."

Thus Flavianus in his great wisdom
stopped their bold speech with his true


reasonmg.


Meletius, who ot all men was most meek,
thus kindly and gently addressed Paulinus.
" The Lord of the sheep has put the care of
these sheep in my hands : you have received
the charge of the rest : our little ones are in
communion with one another in the true
religion. Therefore, my dear friend, let us
join our flocks ; let us have done with our

1 rpels U7ro<rTa<7«i?.


dispute about the leading of them, and,
feeding the sheep together, let us tend them
in common. If the chief seat is the cause
of strife, that strife I will endeavour to put
away. On the chief seat I will put the
Holy Gospel ; let us take our seats on each
side of it ; should I be the first to pass away,
you, my friend, will hold the leadership of
the flock alone. Should this be your lot
before it is mine, I in my turn, so far as I
am able, will take care of the sheep." So
gently and kindly spoke the divine Meletius.
Paulinus did not consent. The officer
passed judgment on what had been said and
gave the churches to the great Meletius.
Paulinus still continued at the head of the
sheep who had originally seceded.


CHAPTER IV.

Of Etisebius ^ Sishop of Satnosata.

Apollinarius after thus failing to get the
government of the churches, continued, for
the future, openly to preach his new fangled
doctrine, and constituted himself leader of
the heresy. He resided for the most part at
Laodicea ; but at Antioch he had already
ordained Vitalius, a man of excellent charac-
ter, brought up in the apostolic doctrines,
but afterwards tainted with the heresy. Dio-
dorus, whom I have already mentioned,^
who in the great storm had saved the ship
of the church from sinking, had been ap-
pointed by the divine Meletius, bishop of
Tarsus, and had received the charge of the
Cilicians. The see of Apamea^ Meletius
entrusted to John, a man of illustrious birth,
more distinguished for his own high qualities
than for those of his forefathers, for he was
conspicuous alike for the beauty of his teach-
ing and of his life. In the time of the tem-
pest he piloted the assembly of his fellows
in the faith supported by the worthy Stepha-
nus. The latter was however translated by
the divine Meletius to carry on another con-
test, for on the arrival of intelligence that
Germanicia had been contaminated by the
Eudoxian pest he was sent thither as a phy-
sician to ward off' the disease, thoroughly
trained as he had been in a complete heathen
education as well as nurtured in the Divine
doctrines. He did not disappoint the ex-
pectations formed of him, for by the power


' cf. page 93.

- Vide pages Sj and 126.

3 Ad Orontem, now Famiah. This John was prefect at Con.
stantinople in 3S1. A better known John of Apamea is an
ascetic of the 5th c, fragments of whose works are among the
Syriac MSS. in the British Museum.


i34


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[V. 5.


of his spiritual instruction he turned the
wolves into sheep. ^

On the return of the great Eusebius from
exile he ordained Acacius whose fame is
o-reat at Beroea,- and at Hierapolis Theodo-
tus,'"* whose ascetic life is to this day in all
men's mouths. Eusebius * was moreover ap-
pointed to the see of Chalcis, and Isidorus °
to our own city of Cyrus ; both admirable
men, conspicuous for tiieir divine zeal.

Meletius is also reported to have ordained
to the pastorate of Edessa, where the godly
Barses had already departed this life, Eulo-
gius," the well known champion of apostolic
doctrines, who had been sent to Antinone
with Protogenes. Eulogius gave Protogenes,*^
his companion in hard service, the charge of
Carrae, a healing physician for a sick city.

Lastly the divine Eusebius ordained Maris,
Bishop'of Doliche,' a little city at that time
infected with the Arian plague. With the
intention of enthroning this Maris, a right
worthy man, illustrious for various virtues,
in the episcopal chair, the great Eusebius
came to Doliche. As he was entering into
the town a woman thoroughly infected with
the Arian plague let fall a tile from the roof,
which crushed in his head and so wounded
him that not long after he departed to the
better life. As he lay a-dying he charged
the bystanders not to exact the slightest
penalty from the woman who had done the
deed, and bound them under oaths to obey
him. Thus he imitated his own Lord, who
of them that crucified Him said "Father
forgive them for they know not what they
do." "

Thus, too, he followed the example of
vStephanus, his fellow slave, who, after the
stones had stormed upon him, cried aloud,
" Lord lay not this sin to their charge." "
So died the great Eusebius after many and
various struggles.


He had escaped the bar-


1 This sccrns to be all that is known of Stcplianus of Ger-
manicia (now Marash or Banicia in Svria) mentioned also as
tlie sec of Eudoxius. cf. Hook II. p. §6.

2 Acacius of Berota (Aleppo) was later an opponent of
Chrysostoni and of Cyril, but in his old age reconciled John of
Antioch with Cyril, and died at the age of more than loo in

3 Theodotus is mentioned also in the Relig. Hist. c. iii. as
paying an Easter visit to the hermit Marcian. Hierapolis, or
Bainhyce, is now Bumbouch in tlie Pachalic of Aleppo.

« Similarly mentioned in Kclig. Hist. c. iii. Chalcis is in
Coele Syria. . „ ^,

i"' Also one of Marcian's Easter party. As well as these
bishops there were present some men of hiijh rank and position,
who wore earnest Christians. When all were seated, Marcian
was asked to address them. " But he fetched a deep sigh and
said 'the God of all dav by dav utters his voice by means of
the visible world, and iii the divine scriptures discourses with
us, urpincr on us our duties, telling us what is befitting, tern,
lying us bv threats, winning us by promises, and all tlie wlule
we get nogood. Marcian turns awav this good like the rest
nf his kind, and docs not care to enjoy its b cssNing. AA hat
could be the use of his lifting up his voice?"' Relig. Hist.

"oVide Book iv. 15, p. 1x8. 'Doliche is In Commagene.
•Luke xxUi. 34. »Act8vii. S9-


barians in Thrace, but he did not escape the
violence of impious heretics, and by their
means won the martyr's crown. ^

These events happened after the return of
the bishops, and now Gratian learnt that
Thrace was being laid waste by the barbari-
ans who had burnt Valens, so he left Italy
and proceeded to Pannonia.

CHAPTER V.

0/ the campaign of Theodosius.

Now at this time Theodosius, on account
alike of the splendour of his ancestry,^ and
of his own courage, was a man of high
repute. For this reason being from time
to time stricken by the envy of his rivals,
he was living in Spain, where he had been
born and brought up.^ The emperor,
being at a loss what measures to take, now
that the barbarians, puffed up by their vic-
tory, both were and seemed well nigh invin-
cible, formed the idea that away out of his
difficulties would be found in the appoint-
ment of Theodosius to the supreme com-
mand. He therefore lost no time in sending
for him from Spain, appointing ^ him com-
mander in chief and despatching him at the
head of the assembled forces.

Defended by his faith Theodosius marched
confidently forth. On entering Thrace,
and beholding the barbarians advanc-
ing to meet him, he drew up his troops in
order of battle. The two lines met, and the
enemy could not stand the attack and broke.
A rout ensued, the foe taking to flight and
the conquerors pursuing at full speed.
There was a great slaughter of the barba-
rians, for they were slain not only by
Romans but even by one another. After
the greater number of them had thus fallen,
and a few of those who had been able to es-
cape pursuit had crossed the Danube, the
great captain dispersed the troops which he
commanded among the neighbouring towns,
and forthwith rode at speed to this emperor
Gratianus, himself the messenger of his own
triumph. Even to the emperor himself,
astounded at the event, the tidings he car-
ried seemed incredible, while others stung

1 The Martyrdom of Eusebius is commemorated in the East-
ern Churches on June 22; in the Roman Kalendar on June 2i.

We compare tlie fate of Abimelech at Thebez (Judges ix.
S3, and II. Sam. xi. 21) and Pyrrhus, VJ\x\^, of Epirus, at Argos,
B.C. 272. " Inter confertissimos violentissime dimicans, saxo
do nuiris ictus occiditur." Justin, xxv. j. The story is given
at greater length by Plutarcn. V'it : Pyrrh :

'■i His father, a distinguished general in Britain and else-
wliere, was treacherously slain in 376, probably because an
oracle warned Valens of a successor with a name beginning
" 0EOA." cf. Soc. iv. 19. Soz. vi. 35. Amniian. xxix. 1 . 29.

3 At his paternal estate at Cauca in Spain; to the east of the
Vaccxi in Tarraconensis.

* X«'/'OToc>j(7os. Vide note on page 125.


V. 6-S.]


OF THEODORET.


135


with envy, gave out that he had run away and
lost his army. His only reply was to ask
his gainsayers to send and ascertain the
number of the barbarian dead, " For," said
he, " even from their spoils it is easy to learn
their number." At these words the em-
peror gave way and sent officers to investi-
gate and report on the battle.^

CHAPTER VI.
0/ the reign of Theodosius and of his dream.

The great general remained, and then
saw a wonderful vision clearly shewn him
by the very God of the universe himself.
In it he seemed to see the divine Meletius,
chief of the church of the Antiochenes,
investing him with an imperial robe, and
covering his head with an imperial crown.
The morning after the night in which he
had seen the vision he told it to one of his
intimate friends, who pointed out that the
dream was plain and had nothing obscure or
ambiguous about it.

A few days at most had gone by when the
commissioners sent to investigate the battle
returned and reported that vast multitudes
of the barbarians had been shot down.

Then the emperor was convinced that he
had done right well in selecting Theodosius
for the command, and appointed him em-
peror and gave him the sovereignty of the
share of Valens.

Upon this Gratian departed for Italy and
despatched Theodosius to the countries com-
mitted to his charge. No sooner had
Theodosius assumed the imperial dignity
than before everything else he gave heed to
•the harmony of the churches, and ordered the
bishops of his own realm to repair with
haste to Constantinople. That division of
the empire was now the only region in-
fected with the Arian plague, for the west
had escaped the taint. This was due to the


' Theodoret's is the sole authority for this connexion of the
association of Theodosius in the Empire with a victory,
and liis alleged facts do not fit in with others which are better
supported. Gratian, a vigorous and sensible lad of nineteen,
seems to have felt that the burden was too big for his shoul-
ders, and to have looked out for a suitable colleague. For the
choice which he made, or was advised to make, he had good
ground in the reputation already won by Theodosius in
Britain and in the campaign of 373 against the Sarniatians and
Q^iadi, and the elevation of the young genera! (born in 346, he
was thirty-two when Grali; 1 declared him Augustus at Sir-
mium, Jan. 19, 379) was sptedily vindicated. Theodoret, with
his contempt for exact chronology, may have exaggerated one
of the engagements of the guerrilla warfare wa^ed by the new
emperor after his accession, when he carefully avoided the
error of Valens in risking all on a pitched brittle. By the end of
379 he had driven the barbarians over tlie Balkan range. Dr.
Stokes (Diet. Christ. Biog. iv. 960) points out that Detween
Aug. 9, 37S, and Jan. ig, 379, there was not time for news to
travel from Hadrianople to Mitrovitz, where Gratian was,
for couriers to fetch Theodosius thither from remoter Spain,
for Theodosius then in the winter montlis to organize and
carry out a campaign.


fact that Constantlne the eldest of Constan-
tine's sons, and Constans tjie youngest, had
preserved their father's faith in its integrity,
and that Valentin ian, emperor of the West,
had also kept the true religion undefiled.

CHAPTER VII.

Of famous leaders of the Arian faction.

The Eastern section of the empire had
received the infection from many quarters.
Arius, a presbyter of Alexandria in Egypt,
there begat the blasphemy. Eusebius, Patro-
philus, andAetius of Palestine, Paulinus and
Gregorius of Phoenicia, Theodotus of Lao-
dicea and his successor Georgius, and after
him Athanasius and Narcissus of Cilicia,
had nurtured the seeds so foully sown.
Eusebius and Theognis of Bithynia ; Men-
ophantus of Ephesus ; Theodorus of Perin-
thus and Maris of Chalcedon, and some
others of Thrace famous only for their vices,
had for a long time gone on watering and
tending the crop of tares. These bad
husbandmen were aided by the indifference
of Constantius and the malignity of Valens.

For these reasons only the bishops of his
own empire were summoned by the emperor
to meet at Constantinople. They arrived,
being in all one hundred and fifty in number,
and Theodosius forbade any one to tell him
which was the great Meletius, for he wished
the bishop to be recognized by his dream.
The whole companyof the bisho^DS entered the
imperial palace, and then without any notice
of all the rest, Theodosius ran up to the
great Meletius, and, like a boy who loves his
father, stood for a long space gazing on him
with filial joy, then flung his arms around
him, and covered eyes and lips and breast and
head and the hand that had given him the
crown, with kisses. Then he told him of
his dream. All the rest of the bishops were
then courteously welcomed, and all were
bidden to deliberate as became fathers on
the subjects laid before them.

CHAPTER VIII.

The council assembled at Constantinople.

At this time the recent feeder of the flock
at Nazianzus^ was living at Constantino-

' " Cave credas episcopum Nazianzi his verbis deslgnari,"
says Valesius ; — because before 3S1 the great Gregory of Nazi-
anzus had at the most first helped his father in looking after the
church at Nazianzus, and on his father's death taken tenijio-
rary and apparently informal charge of the see. But in tlic
latter part of his note Valesius suggests that ra reAeuraia may
refer to the episcopate of Gregory at Nazianzus in his last
davs, after his abdication of the see of Constantinople, —
" Atque hie sensus magis placet, magis enim convenire vide-
tur verbis Theodoreti;" " Recent feeder," then, or "he who


136


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[V. 8.


pie,' continually withstanding the blasphemies
of the Arians, watering the holy people with
the teaching of the Gospel, catching wan-
derers outside the flock and removing them
from poisonous pasture. So that flocl-c once
small he made a great one. When the di-
vine Mclctius saw hini, knowing as he did
full well the object which the makers of the
canon - had before them when, with the
view of preventing the possibility of am-
bitious eflbrts, they forbade the translation
of bishops, he confirmed Gregory in the
episcopate of Constantinople. '^ Shortly af-
terwards tlie divine Meletius passed away to
the life that knows no pain, crowned by the
praises of the funeral eloquence of all the
great orators.

Timotheus, bishop of Alexandria, who
liad followed Peter, the successor of Atha-
nasius in the patriarchate, ordained in place
of the admirable Gregorius, Maximus — a
cynic who had but recently suffered his
cynic's hair to be shorn, and had been car-
ried away by the flimsy rhetoric of Apolli-
narius. But this absurdity was beyond the
endurance of the assembled bishops — ad-
mirable men, and full of divine zeal and
wisdom, such as Helladius, successor of the
great Basil, Gregorius and Peter, brothers of
Basil, and Amphilochius from Lycaonia, Op-
timus from Pisidia, Diodorus from Cilicia.*


most recently fed," will nie;in " he who after the events at Con-
stantinople which I ;iin about to relnte, acted as bishop of N:i-
zianziis." Gregory left Constantinople in June 3S1, repaired
to N'azianzus, and aftcrfindiusi; a suitable man to occupy the
see, retired to Ariarizus, but was pressed to return and take a
leading post in order to check ApoUmarian heretics. His
health broke down, and he wished to letire. He would have
voted in the election of his successor, but his opponents ob-
jected on the ground that he either was bishop of Nazianzus,
or not; if he was, there was no vacancy; if he was not, he
had no vote. Eulalius was chosen in 3S3, and Gregory spent
six weary years in wanderings and troubles, and at last found
rest in 3SC).

1 It was probably in 379 tliat Gregory first went to Constanti-
no]ile and preached in a private house whieli was to him a
" Sliiloh, where the ark re^^ted, an Anastiisia, a place of resur-
rection " (Orat.42.6). Hence the name "Anastasia" given
to the famous church built on the site of the too strait house.

" i.e. the xvtii of Nica;a, forbidding any bishop, presbyter
or deacon, to pass from one city to another. Gregory him-
self classes it among " N6/xous TraAot TfflijjKoTas " (Carm.
iSio-ii).

3 Gregory had been practically acting as bishop, when an
intriguing party led by Peter of Alexandria tried to force
Maximus, a cynic professor, who was one of Gregory's ad-
miring hearers, on the (.'onstaiilinoiiolitan Church. " At this
time," i.e. probably in the middle of 3S0, and certainly before
Nov. 24, when Theodosius entered the capital, "A priest
from Thasco had come to Constantinople willi a larsrc sum of
money to buy Froconnesian marble for a church. He too was
beguiled by the specious hope held out to him. Maximus and
his party thus gained the jiower of purchasing the service of
a mob, which was as forward to attack (jregory as it had been
to praise liim. It was night, and the bishoj) was ill in bed,
when Maximus with liis followers went to the church to be
consecrated by five suffragans who had been sent from Alex-
andria for the purpose. Day began to dawn while they were
still preparing for the consecration. They had but half fin-
ishcn the tonsure of the cynic philosopher, who wore the flow-
ing hair common to his sect, when a mob, excited by the sud-
den news, rushed in upon them, and drove them from the
church. They retired to a (lute jilaycr's shop to complete their
work, and Maximus, compelled to flee from Constantinople,
went to Thessalonica with the hope of gaining over Theodosius
himself." Archdeacon Watkins. Diet. Christ. Biog. ii. 752.

* Helladius, successor of Basil at the Cappadocian Cxsurca,


The council was also attended by Pelagius
of Laodicea, ' Eulogius of Edessa,- Acacius,"*
our own Isidorus,^ Cyril of Jerusalem,
Gelasius of Cajsarea in Palestine," who was
renowned alike for lore and life and many
other athletes of virtue.

All these then whom I have named sepa-
rated themselves from the Egyptians and
celebrated divine service with the great
Gregory. But he himself implored them,
assembled as they were to promote harmony,
to subortlinate all question of wrong to an
individual to the promotion of agreement
with one another, " For," said he, " I shall
be released fi"om many cares and once more
lead the quiet life I hold so dear; while you,
after your long atid painful warfare, will
obtain the longed for peace. What can be
more absurd than for men who have just
escaped the weapons of their enemies to
waste their own strength in wounding one
another ; by so doing we shall be a laughing
stock to our opponents. Find then some
worthy man of sense, able to sustain heavy
responsibilities and discharge them well, and
make him bishop." The excellent pastors
moved by these counsels appointed as bishop
of that mighty city a man of noble birth and
distinguished for every kind of virtue as well
as for the splendour of his ancestry, by name
Nectarius. Maximus, as having partici-
pated in the insanity of Apollinarius, they
stripped of his episcopal rank and rejected.
They next enacted canons concerning the
good government of the church, and pub-
lished a confirmation of the faith set forth at
Nictea. Then they returned each to his
own country. Next summer the greater
number of them assembled again in the same
city, summoned once more by the needs of
the church, and received a synodical letter
from the bishops of the west inviting them to
come to Rome, where a great synod was
being assembled. They begged however to
be excused from travelling thus far abroad ;
their doing so, they said, would be useless.
They wrote however both to point out the
storm which had risen against the churches,
and to hint at the carelessness with which
the western bishops had treated it. They
also included in their letter a summary of tl^e
apostolic doctrine, but the boldness and wis-
dom of tiicir expressions will be more clearly
sliown b\- the letter itself.

was orthodox, but on important occasions clashed unhappily
with each of the two great Gregories of Nyssa and Nazianzus.
On Gregorius of Nyssa and Petrus his brother, vide page
129. .Vmphilochius, vide note on page 114. Optimus, vide note
on page 129. Diodorus, vide note on pages 85, 126 and 133.

1 cf. note on Chap. iv. 12, page 115.

2 cf. note on iv. 15, page 119.

3 Of Berci-a, vide page 12S. * I.e. of Cyrus, cf. p. 134.
^ For fragments of his writings vide Dial. i. and iii.


V. 9-]


OF THEODORET.


137


CHAPTER IX.

Synodical kiier from the council at
Consta n tin ople.

" To the right honourable lords our right
reverend brethren and colleagues Damasus,
Ambrosius, Britton, Valerianus, Ascholius,
Anemius, Basilius and the rest of the holy
bishops assembled in the great city of Rome,
the holy synod of the orthodox bishops
assembled at the great city of Constantinople,
sends greeting in the Lord.

" To recount all the sufferings inflicted on
us by the power of the Arians, and to attempt
to give information to your reverences, as
though you wei"e not already well acquainted
with them, might seem superfluous. For we
do not suppose your piety to hold what is be-
folling us as of such secondary importance as
that vou stand in any need of information on
matters which cannot but evoke your sympa-
thy. Nor indeed were the storms which beset
us such as to escape notice from their insignifi-
cance. Our persecutions are but of yesterday.
The sound of them still rings in the ears alike
of those who suflered them and of those whose
love made the sufterers' pain their own. It
was but a day or two ago, if I may so say,
that some released from chains in foreign
lands returned to their own churches through
manifold afllictions ; of others who had died
in exile the relics were brought home ; others
again, even after their return from exile,
found the passion of the heretics still at
boiling heat, and, slain by them with stones as
was the blessed Stephen, met with a sadder
fate in their own than in a stranger's land.
Others, worn away with various cruelties,
still bear in their bodies the scars of their
wounds and the marks of Christ.^

" Who could tell the tale of fines, of disfran-
chisements, of individual confiscations, of
intrigues, of outrages, of prisons? In truth
all kinds of tribulation were wrought out
beyond number in us, perhaps because we
were paying the penalty of sins, perhaps
because the merciful God was trying us by
means of the multitude of our sufferings.
For these all thanks to God, who by means
of such afflictions trained his servants and,
according to the multitude of his mercies,
brought us again to i"efreshment. We indeed
needed long leisure, time, and toil to restore
the church once more, that so, like physi-
cians healing the body after long sickness
and expelling its disease by gradual treat-
ment, we might bring her back to her ancient
health of true religion. It is true that on


» Gal. vi. 17.


the whole we seem to have been delivered
from the violence of our persecutions and to
be just now recovering the churches which
have for a long time been the prey of the
heretics. But wolves ai"e troublesome to us
who, though they have been driven from the
byre, yet harry the flocks up and down the
glades, daring to hold rival assemblies, stirring
seditions among the people, and shrinking
from nothing which can do damage to the
churches.

" So, as we have ah-eady said, we needs
must labour all the longer. vSince how-
ever you showed your brotherly love to us
by inviting us (as though we were your own
members) by the letters of our most religious
emperor to the synod which you are gather-
ing by divine permission at Rome, to the
end that since we alone were then con-
demned to suffer persecution, you should not
now, when our emperors are at one with us
as to true religion, reign apart from us, but
that we, to use the apostle's phrase,' should
reign with you, our pra}er was, if it
were possible, all in company to leave our
churches, and rather gratify our longing to
see you than consult their needs. For who
will give us wings as of a dove, and we will
fly and be at rest.''^ But this course seemed
likely to leave the churches who were just
recovering quite undefended, and the under-
taking was to most of us impossible, for, in
accordance with the letters sent a year ago
from your holiness after the synod at
Aquileia to the most pious emperor Theo-
dosius, we had journeyed to Constantinople,
equipped only for travelling so far as Con-
stantinople, and bringing the consent of the
bishops remaining in the provinces for this
synod alone. We had been in no expecta-
tion of any longer journey nor had heard a
word about it before our arrival at Con-
stantinople. In addition to all this, and on
account of the narrow limits of the appointed
time which allowed of no preparation for a
longer journey, nor of communicating with
the bishops of our communion in the prov-
inces and of obtaining their consent, the jour-
ney to Rome was for the majority impossible.
We have therefore adopted the next best
course open to us under the circumstances,
both for the better administration of the
church, and for manifesting our love towards
you, by strongly urging our most venerated,
and honoured colleagues and brother bishops
Cyriacus, Eusebius and Friscianus, to con-
sent to travel to you.

" Through them we wish to make it plain


1 1. Cor. iv. 8.


» Ps. Iv. 6.


138


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[V. 9-


that our disposition is all for peace with
unity for its sole object, and that we are full
of zeal for the rii^ht faith. For wc, whether
we sullered persecutions, or afflictions, or
the threats of emperors, or the cruelties
of 231'iiices or any other trial at the hands of
heretics, have undergone all for the sake of
the evangelic faith, ratified by the three
hundred and eighteen fatliers at Nicaeu in
Bithvnia. This is the faith which ou<iht to
be suthcient for you, for us, for all who
wrest not the word of the true faith ; for
it is the ancient faitli ; it is the faith of our
baptism ; it is the faith that teaclies us to
believe in the name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

"According to this faith there is one God-
head, Power and Substance of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost ; the
dignity being equal, and the majesty being
equal in three perfect essences ^ and three
perfect persons.- Thus there is neither room
for the heresy of Sabellius by the confusion
of the essences or destruction of the indi-
vidualities ; thus the blasphemy of the Eu-
nomians, of the Arians, and of the Pneu-
matomachi is nullified, which divides the
substance, the nature and the godhead and
superinduces on the uncreated consubstantial
and co-eternal trinity a nature posterior,
created and of a different substance. We
moreover preserve unpcrverted the doctrine
of the incarnation of the Lord, holding the
tradition that the dispensation of the flesh is
neither soulless nor mindless nor imperfect ;
and knowmg full well that God's Word was
perfect l^efore the ages, and became perfect
man in the last days for our salvation.

" Let this suffice for a summary of the doc-
trine which is fearlessly and frankly preached
by us, and concerning whicli you will be able
to be still further satisfied if you will deign to
road the report of the synod of Antioch, and
also that issued last year bv the oecumenical
council held at Constantinople, in which we
have set forth our confession of the faith at
greater length, and have appended an anathe-
ma against the heresies which innovatoi's have
recently inscril^ed.

" Now as to the particular administration
of individual churches, an ancient custom, as
you know, has obtained, confirmed by the
enactment of the holy fatliers at Nic^ea, that,
in every province, the bishops of the province,
and, with their consent, the neighbouring
l)ishops with them, should perfjrm ordina-
tions as expediency may require. In con-
forming with these customs note tiiat other

^ uTToaTaaetrt,
* TrpovuTTOCf.


churches have been administered by us and
the priests of the most famous churches pub-
licly appointed. Accordingly over the new
made (if the expression be allowable) church
at Constantinople, which, as though from a
lion's mouth, we have lately snatched by
God's mercy from the blasphemy of the
heretics, we have ordained bisliop the right
reverend and most religious Nectarius, in
the presence of the oecumenical council,
with common consent, before the most relie-
lous emperor Theodosius, and with the
assent of all the clergy and of the whole
city. And over the most ancient and truly
apostolic church in Syria, where first the
noble name of Christians ^ was given them,
the bishops of the province and of the east-
ern diocese - have met together and canoni-
cally ordained bishop the right reverend
and most religious Flavianus, with the con-
sent of all the church, who as though with one
voice joined in expressing their respect for
him. This rightful ordination also received
the sanction of the general council. Of the
church at Jerusalem, mother of all the
churches, we make known that the right
reverend and most religious Cyril is bishop,
who was some time ago canonicallv ordained
by the bishops of the province, and has in
several places fought a good fight against
the Arians. We beseech your reverence to
rejoice at what has thus been rightly and
canonically settled by us, by the intervention
of spiritual love and by the influence of the
fear of the Lord, compelling the feelings of
men, and making the edification of churches
of more importance than individual grace or
favour. Thus since among us there is
agreement in the faith and Christian charity
has been established, we shall cease to use
the phrase condemned by the apostles, ' I
am of Paul and I of Apollos and I of
Cephas,'*' and all appearing as Christ's, who
in us is not divided, by God's grace we will
keep the body of the church unrent, and
will boldlv stand at the judgment seat of
the Lord.''

These things they wrote against the mad-
ness of Arius, Aetius, and Eunomius ; and
moreover against Sabellius, Photinus, Mar-
cellus, Paul of Samosata, and Macedonius.
Similarly they openly condemned the inno-
vation of ApoUinarius in the phrase, "And
we preserve the doctrine of the incarnation
of the Lord, holding the tradition that the
dispensation of the flesh is neither soulless,
nor mindless, nor imperfect."


1 Acts xi. 26.

' Vide note on p. 53.

3 I. Cor. i. 13.


V. 10, II.]


OF THEODORET.


139


CHAPTER X.

Synodical letter of Damasiis bishop of Rome
against Apollinarius and Timotheus.

When the most praiseworthy Damasus
had heard of the rise of this heresy, he pro-
claimed the condemnation not only of Apol-
linarius but also of Timotheus his follower.
The letter in which he made this known to
the bishops of the Eastern empire I have
thought it well to insert in my history.

Letter of Damasus bishop of Rome.

"Most honourable sons: Inasmuch as
your love renders to the apostolic see the
reverence which is its due, accept the same
in no niggard measure for yourselves.' For
even though in the holy church in which the
holy apostle sat, and taught us how it be-
comes us to manage the rudder which has
been committed to us, we nevertheless con-
fess ourselves to be unworthy of the honour,
we yet on this very account strive by every
means within our power if haply we may be
able to achieve the glory of that blessedness.
Know then that we have condemned Timo-
theus, the unhallowed, the disciple of Apol-
linarius the heretic, together with his impious
doctrine, and are confident that for the future
his remains will have no weight whatever.
But if that old serpent, though smitten once
and again, still revives to his own destruc-
tion, who though he exists without the church
never ceases from the attempt by his deadly
venom to overthi'ow certain unfaithful men,
do you avoid it as you would a pest, mind-
ful ever of the apostolic faith — that, I mean,
which was set out in writing by the Fathers
at Nicaea ; do you remain on steady ground,
firm and unmoved in the faith, and hence-
forward sufter neither your clergy nor laity
to listen to vain words and futile questions,
for we have already given a form, that he
who professes himself a Christian may keep
it, the form delivered by the Apostles, as
says St. Paul, ' if any one preach to you
another gospel than that you have received
let him be Anathema.' ^ For Christ the Son
of God, our Lord, gave by his own passion
abundant salvation to the race of men, that
he might free from all sin the whole man in-
volved in sin. If any one speaks of Christ
as having had less of manhood or of Godhead,
he is full of devils' spirits, and proclaims
himself a child of hell.


I This rendering seems ihe sense of the somewhat awkward
Greek o' the text, and obviates the necessity of adopting^ Vale-
sius' cor.jecture that the " nobis " of the original Latin had
been altered by a clerical error into " vobis." If we read
nobis, we may translate " you shew it in no niggard measure
to ourselves."

> Gal. i. S.


" Why then do you again ask me for the
condemnation of Timotheus.'' Here, by the
judgment of the apostolic see, in the pres-
ence of Peter, bishop of Alexandria, he was
condemned, together with his teacher,
Apollinarius, who will also in the day of
judgment undergo due punishment and
torment. But if he succeeds in persuading
some less stable men, as though having
some hope, after by his confession changing
the true hope which is in Christ, with him
shall likewise perish whoever of set purpose
withstands the order of the Church, May
God keep you sound, most honoured sons."

The bishops assembled in great Rome
also wrote other things against other heresies
which I have thought it necessary to insert
in my history.

CHAPTER XI.

A confession of the Catholic faith which Pope
Damasus sent to Bishop Paulinus in Mace-
donia luheti he was at Thessalonica.

After the Council of Nicsea there sprung
up this error. Certain men ventured with
profane mouths to say that the Holy Spirit
is made through the Son. We therefore
anathematize those who do not with all
freedom preach that the Holy Spirit is of
one and the same substance and power
with the Father and the Son. In like
manner we anathematize them that follow
the error of Sabellius and say that the
Father and the Son are the same. We
anathematize Arius and Eunomius who
with equal impiety, though with differences
of phrase, maintain the Son and the Holy
Spirit to be a creature. We anathematize the
Macedonians who, produced from the root of
Arius, have changed the name but not the
impiety. We anathematize Photinus who,
renewing the heresy of Ebion, confessed
that our Lord Jesus Christ was only of
Mary.^ We anathematize them that main-

lAs to who this Paulinus was, and when this confession
was sent to him, there has been some confusion. Theodoret
has been supposed to write " bishop of Thessalonica," and
then has been found fault with by Baronius for describing the
Paulinus the Euslathian bishop of Antioch as of Thessalonica
in order to conceal the fact of Damasus and the Antiochene
Paulinus being in communion. But the patronage ol tliis
Paulinus by Damasus was notorious, and if Theodoret wanted
to ignore it, he need not have inserted this document at all.
But, as Valesius points out, all that Theodoret says is that
Damasus sent it to bishop Paulinus, when he was at Thessa-
lonica, and calls attention to the recognition of this by
Baronius (ann. 37S. 44). The letter is in the Holsteinian Col-
lection, with the heading " Dilectissimo fratri Paulino
Damasus." Paulinus was probably at Thessalonica on his
way from Rome in 3S3.

- Photinus, the disciple of Marcellus of Ancyra, was con.
demned at the synod of Sirmium in 349. Diet. Christ. Ant.
(" Sirmium, Councils of.") Sulpicius Severus writes (II. 52)
" Photinus vero novam hajresmi jam ante protulerat, a Sabellio
quidem in unions dissentiens, sed initiura Christi ex Maria
praedicabat."


140


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[V. II.


tain that there are two sons — one before
the ages and another after the assumption
of the flesh from Mary. We anathematize
also all who maintain that the Word of
God moved in human flesh instead of a rea-
sonable soul. For this Word of God Him-
self was not in His own body instead of a
reasonable and intellectual soul, but assumed
and saved our soul, both reasonable and in-
tellectual, without sin.^ We anathematize
also them that say that the Word of God
is separated from the Father by extension
and contraction, and blasphemously afiirm
that He is without essential being or is des-
tined to (lie.

Them that have gone from churches to
other churches we so far hold alien from
our communion till tbey shall have re-
turned to those cities in which they were
first ordained.

If any one, when another has gone from
place to place, has been ordained in his stead,
let him who abandoned his own city be held
deprived of his episcopal rank until such
time as his successor shall rest in the
Lord.

If any one denies that the Father is eternal
and the .Son eternal and the Holy Ghost eter-
nal, let him be anathema.

If any one denies that the Son was be-
gotten of the Father, that is of His divine
substance, let him be anathema.

If any one denies that the Son of God is
very God, omnipotent and omniscient, and
equal to the Father, let him be anathema.

If any one says that the Son of God, living
in the flesh when he was on the earth, was
not in heaven and with the Father, let him
be anathema.^

If any one says that in the Passion of the
Cross the Son of God sustained its pain by
Godhead, and not by reasonable soul and
flesh which He had assumed in the form of
a servant,^ as saith the Holy Scripture, let
him be anathema.

If any one denies that the Word of God
suffered in the flesh and tasted death in the
flesh, and was the first-born of the dead,"^
as the Son is life and giver of life, let him be
anathema.

If any one deny that He sits on the right
hand of the Father in the flesh which He as-
sumed, and in which He shall come to judge
quick and dead, let him be anathema.

If any one deny that tlie Holy Spirit is
truly and absolutely of the Father, and that


' Vide note on ApoUinarlus, p, 13a.

2 John in, 13.

8 Phil, ii- 7.

*Coloss. i. iS. Rev. i. g.


the Son is of the cli\ ine substance and very
God of God,' let liim be anathema.

If any one deny that the Holy .Spirit is
omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent, as
also the vSon of the Father, let him be anath-
ema.

If any one say that the Holy Spirit is a
created being or was made through the Son,
let him be anathema.

If any one den}' that the Father made all
things visible and invisible, through the Son
who was made Flesh, and the Holy Spirit,
let him be anathema.

If any one deny one Godhead and power,
one sovereignty and glory, one lordship, one
kingdom, will and truth of the Father and
of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, let him
be anathema.

If any one deny three very persons of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost,
living for ever, containing all things visible
and invisible, omnipotent, judging all things,
giving life to all things, creating all things
and preserving all things,^ let him be an-
athema.

If any one denies that the Holy Ghost
is to be worshipped by all creation, as the
Son, and as the Father, let him be anathema.

If any one shall think aright about the
Father and the Son but does not hold aright
about the Holy Ghost, anathema, because he
is a heretic, for all the heretics who do not
think aright about God the Son and about
the Holy Ghost are convicted of being in-
volved in the unbelief of the Jews and the
heathen ; and if any one shall divide God-
head, saying that the Father is God apart
and the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God,
and should persist that they are called Gods
and not God, on account of the one Godhead
and sovereignty which we believe and know
there to be of the Father and of the Son
and of the Holy Ghost — one God in three
essences,^ — or withdrawing the Son and the
Holy Ghost so as to suggest that the Father
alone is called God and believed in as one
God, let him be anathema.

For the name of gods has been bestowed
by God upon angels and all saints, but of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost on account of their one and equal
Godhcatl, not the names of " gods " but the
name of " our God " is predicated and pro-
claimed, that we may believe that we are
baptized in Father and Son and Holy Ghost
and not in the names of arcliangels or

' Valesius siipposcs the Greek translator to have read Detent
verbiiiii (or Den in z'l/iim, which is found in Col. Rom,, and
whiili 1 liavc folUnvcd.

-Latin, " Oiniua qua; sunt salvanda salvantes."
^ Stof fva (V Tpttrtv xjiroaTauiaiv. The last iliree words are
wantintr in the Latin version.


V. 12-14.]


OF THEODORET.


141


angels, like the heretics or the Jews or
foolish heathen.

This is the salvation of the Christians,
that believing in the Trinity, that is in the
Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, and
being baptized into the same one Godhead
and power and divinity and substance, in
Him we may trust.

These events happened during the life of
Gratianus.

CHAPTER XII.

Of the death of Gratianus and the sovereignty'
of Maxinuts.

Gratianus in the midst of his successes
in war and wise and prudent government
ended his life by conspiracy.^ He left no
sons to inherit the empire, and a brother of
the same name as their father, Valentinianus,"
who was quite a youth. So Maximus,^ in
contempt of the youth of Valentinianus, seized
the throne of the West.

CHAPTER XIII.

Of Justina, the ivife of Valentinianus, and
of her plot against Amb?'osius.

At this time Justina,* wife of Valentini-
anus the great, and mother of the young
prince, made know^n to her son the seeds of
the Arian teaching which she had long ago
received. Well knowing the w^armth of her
consort's faith she had endeavoured to conceal
her sentiments during the whole of his life,
but perceiving that her son's character was
gentle and docile, she took courage to bring
her deceitful doctrine forward. The lad
supposed his mother's counsels to be wise
and beneficial, for nature so disposed the
bait that he could not see the deadly hook
below. He first communicated on the sub-
ject with Ambrosius, under the impression
that, if he could persuade the bishop, he
would be able without difficulty to prevail


' Gratianus made himsel-f unpopular (i) by his excessive ad-
iction to sport, playing- the Coinmodus in the "Vivaria," when
not even a Marcus Aurelius could have answered all the calls
of the Empire. (Anim. xxxi. x. ig) and (ii) by affecting the
society and customs of barbarians (Aur. Vict, xlvii. 6). The
troops in Britain rose ag^ainst him, gathered aid in the Low
Countries, and defeated him near Paris. He fled to Lyons,
where he was treacherously assassinated Aug. 25, 383. He
was only twenty-four. (Soc. v. 11.)

2 Valentinianus IL, son of Valentinianus I. and Justina
was born c. 371.

3 Magnus Maximus reigned from 3S3 to 3S8. Like Theodo-
sius, he was a Spaniard.

^Justina, left widow bv Magnentius in 353, was married to
Valentinian I. (we may dismiss the story ot Socrates (iv. 31)
tnat he legalized bigamy in order to marry her in the lifetime
of Severa) probably in 36S. Her first conflict with Ambrose
was probably in 3S0 at Sirmium. On tlie murder of Gratian in
3S3 Maximus for four years left the young Valentinian in pos-
session of Italy, in deference to the pleading of Ambrose. It
was during this period, at Easter, 3S5, that Justina ungratefully
attacked the bishop and demanded a church for Arian wor-
ship.


over the rest. Ambrosius, however, strove
to remind him of his father's piety, and ex-
horted him to keep inviolate the heritage
which he had received. He explained to
him also how one doctrine differed from the
other, how the one is in agreement with the
teaching of the Lord and with the teaching
of his apostles, while the other is totally op-
posed to it and at war with the code of the
laws of the spirit.

The young man, as young men will,
spurred on moreover by a mother herself
the victim of deceit, not only did not assent
to the arguments adduced, but lost his tem-
per, and, in a passion, was for surrounding
the approaches to the church with companies
of legionaries and targeteers. When, how-
ever, he learnt that this illustrious champion
was not in the least alarmed at his proceed-
ings, for Ambrosius treated them all like the
Sfhosts and hobgoblins with which some
men try to frighten babies, he was exceed-
ingly angry and publicly ordered him to de-
part from the church. "I shall not," said
Ambrosius, "do so willingly. I will not
yield the sheepfold to the wolves nor betray
God's temple to blasphemers. If you wish
to slay me drive your sword or your spear
into me here within. I shall welcome such
a death."!

CHAPTER XIV.

Of the information given by Maximus the
tyra7it to Valentinianus.

After a considerable time Maximus^
was informed of the attacks which were being
made upon the loud-voiced herald of the
truth, and he sent dispatches to Valentini-
anus charging him to put a stop to his war
against true religion and exhorting him not
to abandon his father's faith. In the event
of his advice being disregarded he further
threatened war, and confirmed what he
wrote by what he did,^ for he mustered his
forces and marched for Milan where Valen-
tinianus was then residing. When the latter
heard of his approach he fled into Illyri-

1 This contest is described by Ambrose himself in letters to
Valentinian and to his sister Marcellina, Epp. xx. xxi, and
in the " Sermo de basilicis tradcndis." On the apparent error
of Gibbon in confusing the " vela" which were hung outside a
building to mark it as claimed for the imperial property, with
the state liangings of the emperor's seat inside, vide Diet.
Christ. Biog.i. 95.

2 After Easter, 3S7.

3 The motives here stated seem to have had little to do witli
the march of Maximus over the Alps. Indeed so far from
enthusiasm for Ambrose and the Ambrosian view of the faith
being conspicuous in the invader, he had received the bishop
at Treves as envoy from Valentinian, had refused to lie
diverted from his purpose, and had moreover taken offence at
the objection of Ambrose to communicate with the bishops
who had been concerned in the first capital punishment of a
heretic — i.e. Priscillian.


142


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[V. 15, 16.


cum.' He had learnt by experience what
good he had got by following his mother's
advice.

CHAPTER XV.

Of the Letter written by the Emperor Theo-
dosius concerning the same.

When the illustrious emperor Theodo-
sius had heard of the emperor's doings and
what the tyrant Maximus had written to him,
he wrote to the fugitive youth to this effect :
You must not be astonished if to you has
come panic and to your enemy victory ; for
you have been fighting against piety, and
he on its side. You abandoned it, and are
running away naked. He in its panoply is
getting the mastery of you stripped bare of
it, for He who hath given us the law of true
religion is ever on its side.

So wrote Theodosius when he was yet
afar of^', but when he had heard of Valen-
tinian's flight, and had come to his aid, and
saw him an exile, taking refuge in his own
empire, his first thought was to give suc-
cour to his soul, drive out the intruding
pestilence of impiety, and win him back to
the true religion of his fathers. Then
he bade him be of good cheer and marched
against the tyrant. He gave the lad his
empire again without loss of blood and
slew Maximus. For he felt that he should
be guilty of wrong and should violate the
terms of his treaty with Gratianus were he
not to take vengeance on those who had
caused his ally's death. ^

CHAPTER XVI.

Of Afnphilochius, bishop of Iconium.

On the emperor's return the admirable
Amphilochius, whom I have often mentioned,
came to beg that the Arian congregations
might be expelled from the cities. The em- 1
peror thought the petition too severe, and
refused it. The very wise Amphilochius at
the moment was silent, for he had hit upon
a memorable device. The next time he en-


1 Valentininn and his mother fled to Thcssalonica.

2 Zosiinus (iv. 44) represents Theodosius, now fur two years
widowed, as won over to the cause of Valeiitiiii;in by the
loveliness of the younjj princess Galla, whom lie iiKuried.

"He was some time in preparinjf for the camjiaifin, but,
when it was opened, he conducted it with vis'our and decision.
His troops passed up the Save Valley, defeated those of Maxi-
mus in two engafjements, entered i-Emona (Laybach) in tri-
umph, and soon stood before the walls of Aquileia, behind
which Maximus was sheltering himself. . . . The soldiers of
Theodosius poured into the city, of which the gates had been
opened to them by the mutineers, and dragged off the
usurper, barefooted, with tied hands, in slave's attire, to the
tribunal of Theodosius and his young brother in law at the
third milestone from the city. After Theodosius had in a short
harangue reproaclied him with the evil deeds whicli he had
wrought against the Roman Commonwealth, he handed him
over to the executioner," Hodgkin, " Dynasty of Theodo-
sius," p. 127.


tered the Palace and beheld standing at the
emperor's side his son Arcadius, who had
lately been appointed emperor, he saluted
Theodosius as was his wont, but did no
honour to Arcadius. The emperor, thinking
that this neglect was due to forgetfulness,
commanded Amphilochius to approach and
to salute his son. "Sir," said he, " the
honour which I have paid you is enough."
Theodosius was indignant at the discourtesy,
and said, " Dishonour done to my son is a
rudeness to myself." Then, and not till then,
the very wise Amphilochius disclosed the
object of his conduct, and said with a loud
voice, " You see, sir, that you do not brook
dishonour done your son, and are bitterly
angry with those who are rude to him. Be-
lieve then that the God of all the world
abominates them that blaspheme the Only
begotten Son, and hates them as ungrateful
to their Saviour and Benefactor."

Then the emperor understood the bishop's
drift, and admired both what he had done
and what he had said. Without further de-
lay he put out an edict forbidding the congre-
gations of heretics.^

But to escape all the snares of the common
enemy of mankind is no easy task. Often it
happens that one who has kept clear of las-
civious passion is fixed fast in the toils of
avarice ; and if he prove superior to greed
there on the other side is the pitfall of envy,
and even if he leap safe over this he will find
a net of passion waiting for him on the other
side. Other innumerable stumblinsr blocks
the enemy sets in men's paths, trying to catch
them to their ruin.^

Then he has at his disposal the bodily
passions to help the wiles which he lays
against the soul. The mind alone, if it
keep awake, gets the better of him, frus-
trating the assault of his devices by its incli-
nation to what is Divine. Now, since this
admirable emperor had his share of human
nature,^ and was not free from its emotions,
his righteous anger passed the bounds of
moderation, and caused the perpetration of
a savage and lawless deed. I must tell this
story for the sake of those into whose hands
it will fall ; it does not, indeed, only involve
blame of the admirable emperor, but so re-
dounds to his credit as to deserve to be re-
membered.

• Arcadius was declared Augustus early in3S3 (Clinton Fast.
Rome, I. !>. 504). Theodosius issued his edict against the
heretics in September of same year. Sozomen (7. 6) tells the
story of an anonymous old man, priest of an obscure city,
simple and unworldly; "this," remarks Bishop I^ightfoot
(Die. Christ. Hiog. i. io6),"is as unlike Amphilochius as it can
possibly he."

- "avptuoji"." cf. Mark xii. 13.

3"irasci sane rebus indigms, sed flecti ctto," Aur, Vict,
xlviii.


V. 17.]


OF THEODORET.


143


CHAPTER XVII.

Of the massacre of Thessalonica; the boldness
of Bishop Ambrosias, and the piety of the
E?nperor,

Thessalonica is a large and very popu-
lous city, belonging to Macedonia, but the
capital of Thessaly and Achaia, as well as
of many other provinces which are gov-
erned by the prefect of Illyricum. Here arose
a great sedition, and several of the magis-
trates were stoned and violently treated.^

The emperor was fired with anger when
he heard the news, and unable to endure
the rush of his passion, did not even check
its onset by the curb of reason, but allowed
his rage to be the minister of his vengeance.
When the imperial passion had received its
authority, as though itself an independent
prince, it broke the bonds and yoke of reason,
unsheathed swords of injustice right and left
without distinction, and slew innocent and
guilty together. No trial preceded the sen-
tence. No condemnation was passed on the
perpetrators of the crimes. Multitudes were
mowed down like ears of corn in har-
vest-tide. It is said that seven thousand per-
ished.

News of this lamentable calamity reached
Ambrosius. The emperor on his arrival at
Milan wished according to custom to enter
the church. Ambrosius met him outside
the outer porch and forbade him to step over
the sacred threshold. "You seem, sir, not
to know," said he, "the magnitude of the
bloody deed that has been done. Your rage
has subsided, but your reason has not
yet recognised the character of the deed.
Peradventure your Imperial power prevents
your recognising the sin, and power stands
in the light of reason. We must however
know how our nature passes away and
is subject to death ; we must know the an-
cestral dust from which we sprang, and to
which we are swiftly returning. We must
not because we are dazzled by the sheen of
the purple fail to see the weakness of the body
that it robes. You are a sovereign, Sir, of
men of like nature with your own, and who
are in truth your fellow slaves ; for there is
one Lord and Sovereign of mankind, Creator
of the Universe. With what eyes then will
you look on the temple of our common
Lord — with what feet will you tread that
holy threshold, how will you stretch forth

1 " Botheric, the Gothic general, shut up in prison a certain
scoundrel of a charioteer who had vilely insulted him. At the
next races the mob of Thessalonica tumultuously demanded
the charioteer's liberation and when Botheric refused rose in
insurrection and slew both him and several magistrates of the
City." Hodgkin m. This was in 390.


your hands still dripping with the blood of
unjust slaughter.? How in such hands will
you receive the all holy Body of the Lord ?
How will you who in your rage unrighteously
poured forth so much blood lift to your
lips the precious Blood.? Begone. Attempt
not to add another crime to that which you
have committed. Submit to the restriction
to which the God the Lord of all agrees that
you be sentenced. He will be your physi-
cian. He will give you health."^

Educated as he had been in the sacred
oracles, Theodosius knew clearly what be-
longed to priests and what to emperors.
He therefore bowed to the rebuke of
Ambrose, and retired sighing and weeping
to the palace. After a considerable time,
when eight months had passed away, the
festival of our Saviour's birth came round
and the emperor sat in his palace shedding
a storm of tears.

Now Rufinus, at that time controller of
the household,^ and, from his familiarity
with his imperial master, able to use great
freedom of speech, approached and asked
him why he wept. With a bitter groan
and yet more abundant weeping " You are
trifling, Rufinus," said the emperor, " be-
cause you do not feel ray troubles. I am
groaning and lamenting at the thought of
my own calamity ; for menials and for
beggars the way into the church lies open ;
they can go in without fear, and put up
their petitions to their own Lord. I dare
not set my foot there, and besides this for me
the door of heaven is shut, for I remember
the voice of the Lord which plainly says,
' Whatsoever ye bind on earth shall have
been bound in heaven.' " ^

Rufinus replied "With your permission
I will hasten to the bishop, and by ray en-
treaties induce him to remit your penalty."
" He will not yield " said the emperor. " I
know the justice of the sentence passed by
Ambrose, nor will he ever be moved by
respect for my imperial power to transgress
the law of God."

Rufinus urged his suit again and again,
promising to win over Ambrosius ; and at
last the emperor commanded him to go
with all despatch. Then, the victim of false


:ell-known picture of Vandyke in the National Gallery,
kfith some variations of a larger picture at Vienna by


' A wel
a copy wi

Rubens, represents the famous scene of the excommunication
of Theodosius.

2" mayicTTpos," i.e. " magister officiorum."

3 Matt, xviii. iS. In its primary sense the binding and
loosing of the Gospels is of course the binding and loosing of
the great Jewish schools, i.e. prohibition and permission.
The moral and spiritual binding and loosing of the scribe,
to whom a key was given as a symbol of his authority to
open the treasures of divine lore, has already in the time of
Theodoret become the dooming or acquitting of a Janitor
commanding the gate of a more material heaven.


144


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[V. 17.


hopes, Theodosius, in reliance on the prom-
ises of Rufinus, followed in person, himself.
No sooner did the divine Ambrose perceive
Rufinus than he exclaimed, " Rufinus, your
impudence matches a dog's, for you were
the adviser of this terrible slaughter; you
have wiped shame from your brow, and
guilty as you are of this mad outrage on tlie
image of God you stand here fearless, with-
out a blush." Then Rufinus began to beg
and pray, and announced the speedy approach
of the emperor. Fired with divine zeal
the holy Ambrosius exclaimed " Rufinus,
I tell you beforehand ; I shall prevent him
from crossing the sacred threshold. If he is
for changing his sovereign power into that
of a tyrant I too will gladly submit to a
violent death." On this Rufinus sent a
messenger to inform the emperor in what
mind the archbishop was, and exhorted him
to remain within the palace. Theodosius
liad already reached the middle of the forum
when he received the message. " I will
go," said he, " and accept the disgrace I
deserve." He advanced to the sacred pre-
cincts but did not enter the holy building.
The archbishop was seated in the house of
salutation' and there the emperor approached
liim and besought that his bonds might be
loosed.

"Your coming" said Ambrose "is the
coming of a tyrant. You are raging against
God; you are trampling on his laws."
"No," said Theodosius, "I do not attack
laws laid down. I do not seek wrongfully to
cross the sacred threshold ; but I ask you to
loose my bond, to take into account the
mercy of our common Lord, and not to shut
against me a door which our master has
opened for all them that repent. " The
archbishop replied " What repentance have
you shown since your tremendous crime?
You iiave inflicted wounds right hard to
heal; what salve have you applied.^"
" Yours " said the emperor " is the duty
alike of pointing out and of mixing the salve.
It is for me to receive what is given me."
Then said the divine Ambrosius " You let
your passion minister justice, your passion
not your reason gives judgment. Put forth
therefore an edict which shall make the sen-
tence of your passion null and void ; let the
sentences which have been published inflict-
ing death or confiscation be suspended for
thirty days awaiting the judgment of reason.
When the days shall have elapsed let them

' Valesius says that this " house of salutation " according
to Scaligcr was the episcopal hospitium or g:uest quarters. His
own opinion however is that it was tlic audience chamber or
chapter-house of the church where the bishop with his presby-
ters received the faithful who came to his church.


that wrote the sentences exhibit their orders,
and then, and not till then, when passion lias
calmed down, reason acting as sole judge
shall examine the sentences and will see
whether they be right or wrong. If it find
them wrong it will cancel the deeds ; if they
be righteous it will confirm them, and the
interval of time will inflict no wronsf on them
that have been rightly condemned."

This suggestion the emperor accepted and
thought it admirable. He ordered the edict
to be put out forthwith and gave it the
authority of his sign manual. On this the
divine Ambrosius loosed the bond.

Now the very faithful emperor came
boldly within the holy temple but did not
pray to his Loid standing, or even on his
knees, but lying prone upon the ground he
uttered David's cry " My soul cleaveth unto
the dust, quicken thou me according to thv
word." 1

He plucked out his hair; he smote his
head ; he besprinkled the ground with drops
of tears and prajed for pardon. When the
time came for him to bring his oblations to
the holy table, weejoing all the while he
stood up and approached the sanctuary.^

After making his ofiering, as he was wont,
he remained within at the rail, but once
more the great Ambrosius kept not silence
and taught him the distinction of places.
First he asked him if he wanted anything;
and when the emperor said that he was
waiting for participation in the divine mys-
teries, Ambrose sent word to him by the
chief deacon and said, " The inner place,
sir, is open only to priests ; to all the rest it
is inaccessible ; go out and stand where
others stand; purple can make emperors, but
not priests." This instruction too the faithful
emperor most gladly received, and inti-
mated in reply that it was not from any
audacity that he had remained within the
rails, but because he had understood that
this was the custom at Constantinople. " I
owe thanks," he added, " for being cured
too of this error."

So both the archbishop and the emperor
showed a mighty shining light of virtue.
Botli to me are admirable ; the former for
his brave words, the latter for his docility ;


' Ps. cxix. 25.

- Tujv ai'aKTopMf. AfOLKTopov in classical Greek =^ temple or
shrine, e. g. Eur. And. 43 " ©fTi6o5 aroiicTopoi'." Archd.
Cheetham fDict. Christ. Ant. i. 79), quoting: Lobcck, says
"also the innermost recess of a temple." Eusebius (Orat.
ix) uses it of the great church built by Constantine at
Antioch. Theodoretus in the text applies it to " the innermost
recess," for Theodosius was alre.idy within the Church. The
sacrarium was in Greek commonly to ayioi', or to icpoTfioi'.
The 31st canon ot the first Council of Braga ordains " ingredi
sacrarium ad communicanduin non liceat iaicis nisi Untum
clericis."


V. i8, 19.]


OF THEODORET.


145


the archbishop for the warmth of his zeal,
and the prince for the purity of his faith.

On his return to Constantinople Theodosius
kept within the bounds of piety which he
had learnt from the great archbishop. For
when the occasion of a feast brought him
once again into the divine temple, after
bringing his gifts to the holv table he
straightway went out. The bishop at that
time was Ncctarius, and on his asking the
emperor what could possibly be the reason
of his not remaining within, Theodosius
answered with a sigh " I have learnt after
great difficulty the diflerences between an
emperor and a priest. It is not easy to find a
man capable of teaching me the truth. Am-
brosius alone deserves the title of bishop."

So great is the gain of conviction when
brought home by a man of bright and shin-
ing goodness.

CHAPTER XVIII.

0/ the Empress Placilla}

Yet other oi:)portunities of improvement
lay within the emperor's reach, for his wife
used constantly to put him in mind of the
divine laws in which she had first carefully
educated herself. In no way exalted by her
imperial rank she was rather fired by it with
greater longing for divine things. The great-
ness of the good gift given her made her love
for Him who gave it all the greater, so she
bestowed every kind of attention on the
maimed and the mutilated, declining all aid
from her household and her guards, herself
visiting the houses where the sufferers lodged,
and providing every one with what he
required. She also went about the guest
chambers of the churches and ministered to
the wants of the sick, herself handling pots
and pans, and tasting broth, now bringing
in a dish and breaking bread and ofieri ng
morsels, and washing out a cup and going
through all the other duties which are sup-
posed to be proper to servants and maids.
To them who strove to restrain her from
doing these things with her own hands she
would say, " It befits a sovereign to distribute
gold ; I, for the sovereign power that has
been given me, am giving my own service to
the Giver." To her husband, too, she was
ever wont to say, " Husband, you ouglit

1 Valesius remarks on this " Vera quidem sunt qnee de
FlaccillcE AtigHstce znrtulibus hie refert Tlieodorctns. Sed
7iihil perlinetil ad hitnc loctim ; 7iam Flaccilla diti ante cladem
Thessalonicensium ex hac luce migraverat, et post ejus ubituin
Theodosius Gallam uxorem dttxerat."

JEVi^x Flaccilla Augusta, Einpre^^s and Saint, is Plakilla in
the Greek historians, Placidia in Philostorgius. She died at
Scituinis in Thrace, Sept. 14, 3S5. The outbreak at Thessa-
lonica occurred in 390,

VOL. III.


always to bethink you what you were once
and what you have become now ; by keeping
this constantly in mind you will never grow
ungrateful to your benefactor, but will guide
in accordance with law the empii'e bestowed
upon you, and thus you will worship Him
who gave it." By ever using language of
this kind, she with fair and wholesome care,
as it were, watered the seeds of vii'tue planted
in her husband's heart.

She died before her husband, and not long
after the time of her death events occurred
which showed how well her husband loved
her.

CHAPTER XIX.

0/ the sedition of Antioeh}

In consequence of his continual wars the
emperor was compelled to impose heavy
taxes on the cities of the empire.^

The city of Antioeh refused to put up
with the new tax, and when the people saw
the victims of its exaction subjected to tor-
ture and indignity, then, in addition to the
usual deeds which a mob is wont to do when
it is seizing an opportunity for disorder, they
pulled down the bronze statue of the illus-
trious Placilla, for so was the empress
named, and dragged it over a gi^eat part of
the town.^ On being informed of these
events the emperor, as was to be expected, was
indignant. He then deprived the city of her
privileges, and gave her dignity to her
neighbour, with the idea that thus he could
inflict on her the greatest indignity, for Anti-
oeh from the earliest times had had a rival in
Laodicea.* He further threatened to burn and
destrov the town and reduce it to the rank
of a village. The magistrates however had
arrested some men in the very act, and had
put them to death before the tragedy came
to the emperor's ears. All these orders had
been given by the Emperor, but had not
been carried out because of the restriction
imposed by the edict which had been made
by the advice of the great Ambrosius.^ On
the arrival of the commissioners who

1 Flaccilla died, as has been said, in Sept. 385. The revolt at
Thessalonica was in 390, and the disturbances at Antioeh in
3S7- '^''^ chapters of Theodoret do not follow chronological
order.

2 More probably the money was wanted to defray the ex-
penses of magnificent fetes in honour of the young Arcadius,
including a liberal donation to the army. On the whole inci-
dent see'Chrysostom's famous Homilies on the Statues.

3 The mob looted the baths, smashed the hanging lamps,
attacked the pra;torium, insulted the imperial portrait, and
tore down the bronze statues of Theodosius and his deceased
wife from their pedestals, and dragged them through the
streets. A " whiff" of arrows from the guard calmed the
oriental Paris of the 4th century.

■1 i.e. the Laodicea on the Syrian co.ast, so called after the
mother of Seleucus Nicator, and now Latakia.

0 Theodoret apparently refers to the advice given by Am-
brosius after the massacre of Thessalonica, which, as we have
said, took place three years (7/j(e;-the insurrection at Antioeh.


146


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[V. 20, 21.


brought the emperor's tlireats, Elebichus,
then a mihtary commander, and Ca^sariiis
prefect of the palace, styled by tlic Romans
magister ojficioriiin^ tlie whole popula-
tion shuddered in consternation. But the
athletes of virtue,'' dwelling at the foot of
the hill, of whom at that time there were
many of the best, made many supplica-
tions and entreaties to the imperial officers.
The most holy Macedonius, who was quite
unversed in the things of this life, and alto-
gether ignorant of the sacred oracles, living
on the tops of the mountains, and night and
day oflering up pure prayers to the Saviour
of all, was not in the least dismayed at the
imperial violence, nor at all aiVected by the
power of the commissioners. As they rode
into the middle of the town he caught hold
of one of them by the cloak and bade both of
them dismount. At the sight of a little old
man, clad in common rags, they were at first
indignant, but some of those who were con-
ducting them informed them of the high
character of Macedonius, and then they
sprang from their horses, caught hold of his
knees, and asked his pardon. The old man,
urged on by divine wisdom, spoke to them
in the following terms: " Say, dear sirs, to
the emperor ; you are not only an emperor,
you are also a man. Bethink you, there-
fore, not only of your sovereignty, but also
of your nature. You are a man, and you
reign over your fellow men. Now the
nature of man is formed after the image and
likeness of God. Do not, therefore, thus
savagely and cruelly order the massacre of
God's image, for by punishing His image
you will anger the Maker. Think how you
are acting thus in your wrath for the sake of
a brazen image. Now all who are endued
with reason know how far a lifeless image
is inferior to one alive and gifted with soul
and sense. Take into account, too, that for
one image of bronze we can easily make
many more. Even you yourself cannot make
one single hair of the slain."

After the good men had heard these words
they reported them to the emperor, and
quenched the flame of his rage. Instead of
his threats he wrote a defence, and explained
the cause of his anger. " It was not right,"
said he, " because I was in error, that in-
dignity should be inflicted after her death on
a woman so worthy of the highest praise.
They that were aggrieved ought to have
armed their anger against me." The em-
peror further added that he was grieved and
distressed when he heard that some had been


' i.e. master of the household,
s i.e. the ascetic monks.


executed by the magistrates. In relating
these events I have had a twofold object. I
did not think it right to leave in oblivion the
boldness of the illustrious monk, and I wished
to point out the advantage of the edict which
was put out by the advice of the great
Ambrosius.'

CHAPTER XX.

Of the dcsfniction of the tanpks all over the
E)npirc.

Now the right faithful emperor diverted
his energies to resisting paganism, and
published edicts in which he ordered the
shrines of the idols to be destroyed. Con-
stantino the Great, most worthy of all eulogy,
was indeed the first to grace his empire with
true religion ; and when he saw the world
still given over to foolishness he issued a
general prohibition against the oflering of
sacrifices to the idols. He had not, how-
ever, destroyed the temples, though he
ordered them to be kept shut. His sons
followed in their father's footsteps. Jidian
restored the false faith and rekindled the
flame of the ancient fraud. On the accession
of Jovian he once more placed an interdict
on the worship of idols, and Valentinian the
Great governed Europe with like laws.
Valens, however, allowed every one else to
worship any way they would and to honour
their various objects of adoration. Against
the champions of the Apostolic decrees alone
he persisted in waging war. Accordingly
during the whole period of his reign the altar
fire was lit, libations and sacrifices were
oflered to idols, public feasts were celebrated
in the forum, and votaries initiated in the
orgies of Dionysus ran about in goat-skins,
mangling hounds in Bacchic frenzy, and
generally behaving in such a way as to show
the iniquity of their master. When the
right faithful Theodosius found all these
evils he pulled them up by the roots, and
consigned them to oblivion.^

CHAPTER XXL

Of Marcellus, bishop of Apainea, and the idols*
temph's destroyed by him.

The first of the bishops to put the edict
in force and destroy the shrines in the city

1 cf. note on page 145.

Valesius remarks " Lotin't^ hie falh'tur Thcodorcliis quasi
acditio Aniiochcna post TUt-ssaloniccnsem cladem contigerit."

- '"■ Extal oratio Libanii ad tmperatoretn Theodosium pro
teinplts in qua docet quomodo se gesserint impcraiores
Christiani erga paffanos. El ConstantiiiHm quidem Magnum
ait duntaxat spoliasse tcmpla. Const ant turn vera ejus jfilium
prohilnnssc Sacrificia : rjusque legem a secutis imperatoribus
et ah ipsomet Tlieodosio esse observatam ; re/iqua vera
permissa Juissc paganis, id est turificationem et publicas
epn/as." Valesius.


V. 22.]


OF THEODORET.


147


committed to his care was Marcellus, trust-
ing rather in God than in the hands of a
multitude. The occurrence is remarkable,
and I shall proceed to narrate it. On the
death of John, bishop of Apamea, whom I
have already mentioned, the divine Mar-
cellus, fervent in spirit,^ according to the
apostolic law, was appointed in his stead.

Nov^ there had arrived at Apamea the pre-
fect of the East'- with two tribunes and their
troops. Fear of the troops kept the people
quiet. An attempt was made to destroy the
vast and magnificent shrine of Jupiter, but
the building was so firm and solid that to
break up its closely compacted stones seemed
beyond the power of man ; for they were
huge and well and truly laid, and moreover
clamped fast with iron and lead.^

When the divine Marcellus saw that the
prefect was afraid to begin the attack, he
sent him on to the rest of the towns, while he
himself prayed to God to aid him in the
work of destruction. Next morning there
came uninvited to the bishop a man who was
no builder, or mason, or artificer of any
kind, but only a labourer who carried stones
and timber on his back. " Give me," said
he, "two workmen's pay; and I promise
you I will easily destroy the temple." The
holy bishop did as he was asked, and the
following was the fellow's contrivance.
Round the four sides of the temple went a
portico united to it, and on wdiich its upper
story rested.* The columns were of great
bulk, commensurate with the temple, each
being sixteen cubits in circumference. The
quality of the stone was exceptionally hard,
and offering great resistance to the masons'
tools. In each of these the man made an
opening all round, propping up the super-
structure with olive timber before he went on
to another. After he had hollowed out three
of the columns, he set fire to the timbers.
But a black demon appeared and would not
suffer the wood to be consumed, as it naturally
would be, by the fire, and stayed the force of
the flame. After the attempt had been made
several times, and the plan was proved
ineffectual, news of the failure was brought
to the bishop, who was taking his noontide


* Romans xii. 11.

2 Valesius points out that this was Cynegius, prefect of the
East, who was sent by Theodosius to effect the closin<^ of the
idols' temples, cf. Zos : iv.

2 Kal olSijpu Kai ti.o\ifi&{o wpoaSeSefjLti'oi. We arc reminded of
the huge cramps whicli must at one time have bound the stones
of the Colosseum, — the ruins being pitted all over by the
holes made by the middle-age pillagers who lore them away.

* I do not understand the description of this temple and its
destruction precisely as (Jibbon does. " SiopvTTuii' " does not
seem to mean " undermining the foundalinns " ; St. Matthew
and St. Luke use it of the thieves who "dig thiou>;h" or
" brealt in." The word = dig through, and so into.


sleep. Marcellus forthwith hurried to the
church, ordered water to be poured into a
pail, and placed the water upon the divine
altar. Then, bending his head to the ground,
he besought the loving Lord in no way to
give in to the usurped power of the demon,
but to lay bare its weakness and exhibit His
own strength, lest unbelievers should hence-
forth find excuse for greater wrong. With
these and other like words he made the sign
of the cross over the water, and ordered
Equitius, one of his deacons, who was
armed with faith and enthusiasm, to take
the water and sprinkle it in faith, and then
apply the flame. His orders were obeyed,
and the demon, unable to endure the approach
of the water, fled. Then the fire, affected
by its foe the water as though it had been
oil, caught the wood, and consumed it in an
instant. When their support had vanished
the columns themselves fell down, and
dragged other twelve with them. The
side of the temple which was connected
with the columns was dragged down by the
violence of their fall, and carried away with
them. The crash, which was tremendous,
was heard throughout the town, and all ran
to see the sight. No sooner did the multi-
tude hear of the flight of the hostile demon
than they broke out into a hymn of praise to
God.

Other shrines were destroyed in like
manner by this holy bishop. Though I have
many other most admirable doings of this
holy man to relate, — for he wrote letters to
the victorious martyrs, and received replies
from them, and himself won the martyr's
crown, — for the present I hesitate to nar-
rate them, lest by over prolixity I weary the
patience of those into whose hands my
history may fall.

I will therefore now pass to another sub-
ject.

CHAPTER XXII.

0/ Thcophilus, bisJwp of Alexandria, and what
happened at the demolition of the idols in that
city.

The illustrious Athanasius was succeeded
by the admirable Fetrus, Petrus by Timo-
theus, and Timotheus by Theophilus, a man
of sound wisdom and of a lofty courage.*
By him Alexandria was set free from the
error of idolatry ; for, not content with razing
the idols' temples to the ground, he exposed
the tricks of the priests to the victims of
their wiles. For they had constructed

' " The perpetual enemy ot peace and virtue." Gibbon,
High office deteriorated his character, cf. Newman. Hist.
Sketches iii.


L 2


148


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[V. 23.


statues of bronze and wood hollow within,
and fastened the backs of thcni to the temple
walls, leaving in these walls certain invisi-
ble openings. Then coming up from their
secret chambers they got inside the statues,
and through them gave anv order they
liked and the hearers, tricked and cheated,
obeyed.^ These tricks the wise Theophilus
exposed to the people.

Moreover he went up into the temple of
Serapis, which has been described by some as
excelling in size and beauty all the temples in
the world.- There he saw a huge image of
which the bulk struck beholders with terror,
increased by a lying report which got abroad
that if any one approached it, there would be
a great eartliquake, and that all the people
would be destroyed. The bishop looked on
all these tales as the mere drivelling of tipsy
old women, and in utter derision of the lifeless
monster's enormous size, he told a man who
had an axe to give Serapis a good blow with
it.^ No sooner had the man struck, than all
the folk cried out, for they were afraid of the
threatened catastrophe. Serapis however,
who had received the blow, felt no pain,
inasmuch as he was made of wood, and ut-
tered never a word, since he was a lifeless
block. His head was cut off, and forthwith
out ran multitudes of mice, for the Egyptian
god was a dwelling place for mice. Serapis
was broken into small pieces of which some
were committed to the flames, but his head
was carried through all the town in sight of
his worshippers, who mocked the weakness
of him to whom they had bowed the knee.

Thus all over the world the shrines of the
idols were destroyed.^

I In the museum at Naples is shewn part of a statue of
Diana, found near the Forum at Pompeii. In the back of
the head is a hole by means of a tube in connexion with
which, — tlie image standing against a wall, — the priests were
supposed to deliver the oracles of the I luntress-Maid.

It is curious to note tliat just at this period when the Pagan
idols were destroyed, faint traces of image worship begin to
appear in the Church. In ;mother two centuries and a half it was
becoming common, and in this particular point, Christianitv
relapsed into paganism. Littledalc Plain Reasons, p. 47.

' " A great number of plates of diflerent metals, artificially
joined together, composed the majestic figure of the deity,
who touched on either side the walls of the sanctuary.
Serapis was distinguished from Jupiter by the basket or
bushel which was placed on his head, and by tlie emblematic
monster which he held in his right hand ; the head and body
of a serpent branching into three tails, which were again ter-
minated by the triple heads of a dog, a lion, and a wolf."
Gibbon, on the authority of .Macrobius Sat. i. 20.

s Gibbon ijuotcs the story of Augustus in Plin. Nat. Hist,
xxxiii. 24. " Is it true," said the emperor to a veteran
at whose home he supped, " that the man who gave the first
blow to the golden statue of Anaitis was instantly deprived
of his eyes and of his life.' " " I was that man," replied the
clear sighted veteran, " and you now sup on one of the legs of
the goddess." cf. the account in IJcde of the destruction
l>y the priest Coify of the great image of the Sa.xon god at
Goodmanham in Yorkshire.

•• " Some twenty years before the Koman armies with-
drew from Britain tlie triumph of Christianity was completed.
Then ,1 (piestion occurs whether archaeology casts any
light on the discomfiture of Roman paganism in Britain. In
proof of the affirm.ative a curious fact has been adduced, that
the statues of pagan divinities discovered in Britain are al-


CHAPTER XXHL

0/ Flavianus bishop of Aittioch and of the
scditio7i which arose i}i the westei-t2 Church
on account of Paidinus.

At Antioch the great Meletius had been
succeeded by Flavianus who, together with
Diodorus, had undergone great struggles for
the salvation of the sheep. Paulinus had
indeed desired to receive the bishopric, but
he was withstood by the clergy on the
ground that it was not right that Meletius
at his death should be succeeded by one
who did not share his opinions, and that
to the care of the flock ought to be advanced
he who was conspicuous for man}' toils,
and had run the risk of many perils for the
sheeps' sake. Thus a lasting hostility arose
among the Romans and the Egyptians
against the East, and the ill feeling was not
even destroyed on the death of Paulinus.
After him when Evagrius had occupied his
see, hostility was still shewn to the great
Flavianus, notwithstanding the fact that the
promotion of Evagrius was a violation of the
law of the Church, for he had been promoted
by Paulinus alone in disregard of many
canons. For a dying bishop is not per-
mitted to ordain another to take his place,
and all the bishops of a province are ordered
to be convened ; again no ordination of a
bishop is permitted to take place without three
bishops. Nevertheless they refused to take
cognizance of any of these laws, embraced
the communion of Evagrius, and filled the
ears of the emperor with complaints against
Flavianus, so that, being frequently im-
portuned, he summoned him to Constan-
tinople, and ordered him to repair to Rome.

Flavianus, however, urged in reply that
it was now winter, and promised to obey the
command in spring. He then returned
home. But when the bishops of Rome,
not only the admirable Damasus, but also
Siricius his successor and Anastasius the
successor of Siricius, importuned the em-
peror more vehemently and represented
that, while he put down the rivals against
his own authority, he suffered bold rebels
against the laws of Christ to maintain their
usurped authority, then he sent for him
again and tried to force him to undertake
the journey to Rome. On this Flavianus

ways or mostly broken. At Binchester, for instance, the
Roman Vinovium, not far from Durham, tliere was found
among the remains of an important Roman building a stone
statue of the goddess Flora, with its legs broken, lying face
downward across a drain as a support to the masonry above.
It would certainly not be wise to press arcliwological facts too
far; but the broken gods in Britain curiously tally with the
edicts of 'I'hcodosius and the shattered Serapis at Alexandria,"
Hole Early Missions, p. 24.


V. 24.]


OF THEODORET.


149


in his great wisdom spoke very boldly, and
said, "• If, sir, there are some who accuse
me of being unsound in the faith, or of life
and conversation unworthy of the priest-
hood, I vvill accept my accusers themselves
for judges, and will submit to whatever
sentence they may give. But if they are
contending about see and primacy I will not
contest the point ; I will not oppose those
who wish to take them ; I will give way and
resign my bishopric. So, sir, give the epis-
copal throne of Antioch to whom you will."

The emperor admired his manliness and
wisdom, and bade him go home again, and
tend the chinxh committed to his care.

After a considerable time had elapsed the
emperor arrived at Rome, and once more
encountered the charges advanced by the
bishops on the ground that he was making
no attempt to put down the tyranny of
Flavianus. The emperor ordered them to
set forth the nature of the tyranny, saying
that he himself v/as Flavianus and had be-
come his protector. The bishops rejoined
that it was impossible for them to dispute
with the emperor. He then exhorted them
in future to join the churches in concord,
put an end to the quarrel, and quench the
fires of an useless controversy. Paulinus, he
pointed out, had long since departed
this life ; Evagrius had been irregularly
promoted ; the eastern churches accepted
Flavianus as their bishop. Not only the
east but all Asia, Pontus, and Thrace were
united in communion with him, and all
Illyricum recognised his authority over the
oriental bishops. In submission to these
counsels the western bishops promised to
bring their hostility to a close and to receive
the envoys who should be sent them.

When Flavianus had been informed of
this decision he despatched to Rome certain
worthy bishops with presbyters and deacons
of Antioch, giving the chief authority among
them to Acacius bishop of Beroea, who was
famous throughout the world. On the
arrival of Acacius and his party at Rome
they put an end to the protracted quarrel,
and after a war of seventeen years ' gave
peace to the churches. When the Egyptians
were informed of the reconciliation they too
gave up their opposition, and gladly ac-
cepted the agreement which was made.

At that time Anastasius had been suc-
ceeded in the primacy of the Roman Church
by Innocent, a man of prudence and ready
wit. Theophilus, whom I have previously
mentioned, held the see of Alexandria.^

' i.e. from 3S1, when Flavianus was appointcil to the see of
Antioch, to 39S, the date of the mission of Acacius,
2 vide Chap. xxii. He succeeded in July, 385.


CHAPTER XXIV.

Of the tyranny of Eugenius and the victory
won through faith by the emperor Theodosius.

In this manner the peace of the churches
was secured by tlie most religious emperor.
Before the establishment of peace he had
heard of the death of Valentinianus and of
the usurpation of Eugenius and had marched
for Europe.^

At this time there lived in Egypt" a man
of the name of John, who had embraced the
ascetic life. Being full of spiritual grace, he
foretold many future events to persons who
from time to time came to consult him. To
him the Christ-loving emperor sent, in his
anxiety to know whether he ought to make
war against the tyrants. In the case of the
former war he foretold a bloodless victory.
In that of the second he predicted that the
emperor would only win after a great
slaughter. With this expectation the em-
peror set out, and, while drawing up his
forces, shot down many of his opponents,
but lost many of his barbarian allies.'^

When his generals represented that the
forces on their side were few and recom-
mended him to allow some pause in the
campaign, so as to muster an army at the
beginning of spring and out-number the
enemv, Theodosius refused to listen to their
advice. " For it is wrong," said he, " to
charge the Cross of Salvation with such
infirmity, for it is the cross which leads our
troops, and attribute such power to the
image of Hercules which is at the head of
the forces of our foe." Thus in right faith
he spoke, though the men left him were few
in number and much discouraged. Then
when he had found a little oratory, on the
top of the hill where his camp was pitched,
he spent the whole night in prayer to the
God of all.

About cock-crow sleep overcame him, and
as he lay upon the ground he thought he saw

' Valentinian II. was strangled while bathing in the Rhone
at Viennc, May 15, 392. Philost. xi. i. cf. Soc.v.25; Soz. vii. 22.

Arbogastes, his Prankish Master of the Horse, who had
instigate'tl his murder, set up the pagan professor Eugenius to
succeed him. Theodosius did not march to meet the murderer
of his young brother-in-law till June, 394, and meanwhile his
Empress Galla died, leaving a little daughter, Galla Placidia.

2 i.e. at Lycopolis, the modern Siut, in the Thebaid. The
envoy was the Eunuch Eutropius. Soz. vii. 22. Claud, i. 312.

3 " Theodosius marclied north-westwards, as before, up the
valley of the Save, and to the city of .ACmona." (Laybach.)
" Not there did he meet his foes, but at a place about thirty
miles off, half-way between ^mona and Aquileia, where the
Julian Alps are crossed, and where a little stream called the
"Frigidus, (now the Wipbach, or Vipao) bursts suddenly from
a limestone hill. Mere the battle was joined between Eugenius
and his prankish ])atron and Theodosius with his 20,000
Gothic fcederati and the rest of the army of the East. Gainas,
Saul, Bacurius, Alaric, were the chief leaders of the Teutonic
troops. The first day of battle fell heavily on the fotderati of
Theodosius, half of whom were left dead upon the field."
Hodgkin Dynasty of Theodosius, p. 131. This was Sept.
S. 394-


ISO


THE TXCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[V. 24.


two men in white raiment riding upon white
horses, who bade him be of good cheer, (hive
away his fear, and at dawn arm and marshal
his men for battle. "For," said they, "we
have been sent to fight for you," and one
said, " I am John the evangelist," and the
other, " I am Philip the apostle."

After he had seen this vision the emperor
ceased not his supplication, but pursued it
with still greater eagerness. The vision was
also seen by a soldier in the ranks who re-
ported it to his centurion. The centurion
brought him to the tribune, and the trilnnic
to the general. The general supposed that
he was relating something new, and re})(n-ted
the story to the emperor. Then said Theo-
dosius, " Not for my sake has this vision
been seen by this man, for I have put my
trust in them that promised me the victory.
But that none may have supposed me to have
invented this vision, because of my eagerness
for the battle, the protector of my empire has
given the information to this man too, that
he may bear witness to the truth of what I
say when I tell you that fust to me did our
Lord vouchsafe this vision. Let us then
fling aside our fear. Let us follow our front
rank and our generals. Let none weigh the
chance of victory by the number of the men
engaged, but let every man bethink him of
the power of the leaders."

He spoke in similar terms to his men,
and after thus inspiring all his host with high
hope, led them down from the crest of the
hill. The tyrant saw the army coming to
attack him from a distance, and then armed
his forces and drew them up for battle. He
himself remained on some elevated ground,
and said that the emperor was desirous of
death, and was coming into battle because
he wished to be released from this present
life : so he ordered his generals to bring him
alive and in chains. When the forces were
drawn up in battle array those of the enemy
appeared by far the more luimerous, and tlie
tale of the emperor's troops might be easily
told. Hut when botli sides had begun to dis-
charge their weapons the front rank proved
their promises true. A violent wind blew
right in the faces of the foe, and diverted
their arrows and javelins and spears, so that
no missile was of any use to them, and
neither trooper nor arclier nor spearman was
able to inflict any damage upon the empe-
ror's army. Vast clouds of dust, too, were
carried into their faces, compelling them to
shut their eyes and protect them from attack.


The imperial forces on the otlier hand did
not receive the slightest injury from the
storm, and vigorously attacked and slew the
foe. The vanquished tiien recognised tlie di-
vine help given to their conquerors, flung
away their arms, and begged the emperor
for quarter. Theodosius then yielded to
their entreaty and had compassion on them,
and ordered them to bring the tyrant imme-
diately before him. Eugenius was ignorant
of how the day had gone, and when he saw
his men running up the hillock where he sat,
all out of breath, and shewing their eagerness
by their panting, he took tiieni for messengers
of victory, and asked if they had brought The-
odosius in chains, as he had ordered. " No,"
said they, "we are not bringing him to you,
but we are come to carry you oil" to him, for
so the great Ruler has ordained." Even as
they spoke they lifted him from his chariot,
put chains upon him, and carried him ofl'
thus fettered, and led away the vain boaster
of a short hour ago, now a prisoner of war.

The emperor reminded him of the wrongs
he had done Valentinianus, of his usurped au-
thority, and of the wars which he liad waged
against the tightful emperor. He ridiculed
also the figure of Hercules and the foolish
confidence it had inspired and at last pro-
nounced the sentence of right and lawful
punishment.

vSuch was Theodosius in peace and in war,
ever asking and never refused tiie help of
God.'

' Here was a crucial contest between pag-anisiii and Chris
ti.inity, wliich niipfht seem a " iioiiiis Jii^nits vindicc Deo."
On tlio p:iit phiyed by storms in hislnry vide note on page 103.
Claudian, a pagan, was content to aclcnowledge tlie fintrer of
providence in llie rout of Kugcnius, and, apostrophizing
Ilonorius, exclaims

" Te propter ffcUJh Aijiiilo dc moult' froccllis
Ohritit in/rir\iis <icics, rLi'o/iidn/iw tela
Vcrtit ill mil lores, el tnrhiiie repnlit /iiislas.
O iiiiiiirnii dileete J>eo, ei/i Imii/il n/^ mitris
yEoliis tirinnliis hyemes' etii nii/iliil telJier
Ei coiijiiruli remi'iil ad elassiea ve/ill." vii. .jv

Augustine says be heard of tho " revo/uia tela" fmui a
soldiir oni;aircil in Hie b.iltle. The appearance of St.]ohn
and St. IMiilip tinds a paL;:iM parallel ui that of the "great
twin brcllaeii " at Lake liegillus.

" So like they were, no mortal
Might one from other know :
While as snow their armour was,
Their steeds were white as snow."

Accoriling to Spanish story St. James the Great fought on a
milk-white cliarger, waving a white Hag, at the battle of
C'lavijo, in 939. cf. Mrs. Jameson Sacred and Legendary Art,

Sozomen (vii. 24) relates how at the very hour of the hght,
at the church which Theodosius had built near Constantinople
to enshrine tlii' head of lnhn the IJaptist Ccf. note on p. >)6j, a
demoniac insulted the saint, taunting him with having had his
head cut oil, and said " ymi conquer me and ensnare my
army." On this jortin remarks " either the devil and Sozo-
men, or else 'riicodorel, seem to have made a mistake, for the
two first ascribe the victorv to John the Baptist and the third
to John the Evangelist." Rcinlirks ii. 165,


V. 25-27.]


OF THEODORET.


151


CHAPTER XXV.

Of the death of the Emperor Thcodosius}

After this victory Theoclosius fell sick
and divided his empire between his sons,
assigning to the elder the sovereignty which
he had wielded himself and to the younger
the throne of Europe.^

He charged both to hold fast to the true
religion, " for by its means," said he, " peace
is' preserved, war is stopped, foes are
routed, trophies are set up and victory is
proclaimed." After giving this charge to
his sons he died, leaving behind him imper-
ishable fame.

His successors in the empire were also
inheritors of his piety.


CHAPTER XXVI.

Of Honorius the emperor and Telemachus the

monk.

Honorius, who inherited the empire of
Europe, put a stop to the gladiatorial com
bats which had long been held at Rome.
The occasion of his doing so arose from the
following circumstance. A certain man of
■the name of Telemachus had embraced the
ascetic life. He had set out from the East
and for this reason had repaired to Rome.
There, when the abominable spectacle was
being exhibited, he went himself into the
stadium, and, stepping down into the arena,
endeavoured to stop the men who were
wielding their weapons against one another.
The spectators of the slaughter were indig-
nant, and inspired by the mad fury of the
demon who delights in those bloody deeds,
stoned the peacemaker to death.

When the admirable emperor was in-
formed of this he numbered Telemachus in
the army of victorious martyrs, and put an
end to that impious spectacle.


iTheodosius died of dropsy at Milan, Jan. 17,395. "The
character of Thcodosius is one of the most perplexing in
history. The church historians have hardly a word of blame for
him except in tlie matter of the massacre of Thessalonica, and
that seems to be almost atoned for in their eyes by its perpe-
trator's penitent submission to ecclesiastical censure. On the
other hand the heathen historians, represented by Zosimus,
condemn in the most unmeasured terms his insolence, his love
of pleasure, his pride, and hint at the scandalous immorality of
his life." " It is the fashion to call him the Great, and we
may admit that he has as good a right to that title as Lewis
XIV., a monarch whom in some respects he pretty closely re-
sembles. But it seems to me that it would be safer to withhold
this title from both sovereigns, and to call them not the Great,
but the Magnificent." Hodgkin, Dynasty of Theodosins . 133.

The great champion of orthodoxy, he was no violent per-
secutor, and received at his death from a grateful paganism
the official honours of apotheosis.

^ Arcadius was now eighteen, and Honorius eleven. Arca-
dius reigned at Constantinople, the puppet of Rufinus, the
Eunuch Eutropius, and liis Empress, Eudoxia.

Honorius was established at Milan, till the approach of
Alaric drove him to Ravenna. (402.)


CHAPTER XXVn.

Of the piety of the emperor Areadius and the

ordination of John Chrysostoni.

On the death at Constantinople of Nee- .
tarius, bishop of that see, Arcadius, who
had succeeded to the Eastern empire, sum-
moned John, the great luminary of the
world. He had heard that he was numbered
in the ranks of the presbyterate, and now
issued orders to the assembled bishops to
confer on him divine grace, and appoint him
shepherd of that mighty city.^

This fact is alone sufficient to show the
emperor's care for divine things. At the
same time the see of Antioch was held by
Flavianus, and that of Laodicea by Elpidius,
who had formerly been the comrade of
the great Meletius, and had received the
impress of his life and conversation more
plainly than wax takes the impression of a
seal ring.-

He succeeded the great Pelagius ; ^ and
the divine Marcellus* was followed by the
illustrious Agapetus ^ whom I have already
described as conspicuous for high ascetic
virtue. In the time of the tempest of heresy,
of Scleucia ad Taurum, Maximus,® the com-
panion of the great John, was bishop, and
of Mopsuestia Theodorus,' both illustrious
teachers. Conspicuous, too, in wisdom and
character was the holy Acacius,® bishop of
Beroca.

Leontius,^ a shining example of many
virtues, tended the flock of the Galatians.


1 Nectarius died in Sept. 397, and John Chrysostom was
appointed in Feb. 39S. cf. Soc. vi. 2 and Soz. viii. 2.

"The only difficulty lay with Chrysostom himself and the
people ol Antioch. The double danger of a decided ' nolo
episcopari^ on Chrysostom's part, and of a public commotion
when tlie Antiocheans heard of the intention of robbing them
of their favourite preacher was overcome by stratagem.
Asterius, the Comes Orientis, in accordance with instruc-
tions received from Eutropius, induced Chrysostom to
accompany him to a martyr's chapel outside the city walls.
There he was appreliended by the officers of the government,
and conveyed to Papae, the first post station on the road to
Constantinople. His remonstrances were unheeded; his
enquiries met with obstinate silence. Placed in a public chariot,
and hurried on under a military escort from stage to stage, the
Soo miles traversed with the utmost dispatch, the future bishop
reached his imperial see a closely guarded prisoner. However
unwelcome the dignity thrust on him was, Chrysostom, know-
ing that resistance was useless, felt it more dignified to submit
without further struggle."

" Chrysostom was consecrated February 26th A.D. 39S, in the
presence of a vast multitude assembled not only to witness the
ceremony but also to listen to the Inaugural sermon of one of
whose eloquence they had heard so much. This ' sermo enthron-
isticns' is lost." Diet. Christ. Biog. s. v. " Chrysostom."

- Elpidius, possibly a kind of domestic chaplain (o-uo-ktji/os)
to Meletius, was afterwards a warm friend and advocate of
Chrysostom. In 406 he was deposed and imprisoned for three
years, and not restored till 414.

3 Vide note on p. 1 15.

^ Marcellus was bishop of Apamea.

' Succeeded his brother Marcellus in 39S. cf. note on p. 12S
and Relig. Hist. 3.

° Soc. vi. 3 ; Soz. viii, 2. ' Vide p. 159. » Vide p. laS.

8 Of Ancyra cf. Soii. vi, iS; and viii, 30.


152


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[V. 28-32.


CHAPTER XXVIIL

Of Johu^s boldness for God.

When the great Jolin had received the
tiller of the Church, he boldly convicted
certain wrong doers, made seasonable exhor-
tations to the emperor and empress, and
admonislied the clergy to live according to
the laws laid down. Transgressors against
these laws he forbade to approach the
churches, urging that they who shewed no
tlesire to live the life of true priests ought
not to enjoy priestly honour. He acted with
this care for the church not only in Constan-
tinople, but throughout the whole of Thrace,
which is divided into six provinces, and like-
wise of Asia, which is governed by eleven
governors. Pontica too, which has a like
number of rulers with Asia, was happily
brought by him under the same discipline.'

CHAPTER XXIX.

Of the idol temples which were destroyed
by John in Phccnicia.

On receiving information that Phoenicia
was still sulfering from the madness of the
demons' rites, John got together certain
monks who were fired with divine zeal,
armed them with imperial edicts and
despatched them against the idols' shrines.
The money which was required to pay the
craftsmen and their assistants who were en-
gaged in the work of destruction was not
taken by John from imperial resources, but
he persuaded certain wealthy and faithful
women to make liberal contributions, point-
ing out to tiieni how great would be the
blessing their generosity would win.

Thus the remaining shrines of the demons
were utterly destroy cd."

CHAPTER XXX.

Of the church of the Goths.

It was perceived by John that the
vScythians were involved in the Arian net ;
he therefore devised counter contrivances
and discovered a means of winning them


' Valcsius points out that those comnicntntors have been in
error wlio have ."-iippiiscd Tlicixiorctiis to be referring iicrc to
eccUniaslical divisions and ollicers.

Chrysostoiii is liere distinctly described as asscrtinj;' and
exercising a jurisdiction over the civil " diiLceses " of Fontica,
Asia, and 'rhrace. But tlic quasi patriarcliatewas at tliis time
only honorary. Only so late as at the recent council at Constan-
tinople (,?Si) had its bishop, previously under the metropolitan
of Perinthus, been declared to rank next after the liisliop of
Kome, the metropolitans of Alexandria and Antioch standing
next, but it was not till the Council of Chalccdon that the
]' dicpccses " of Pontus, Asia, and Thrace were formally sub-
jected to the see of Constantinople.

2 The imperial edict for the destruction of the Phoenician
Temples was obtained in 399.


over. Appointing presbyters and deacons
and readers of the divine oracles who spoke
the Scythian tongue, he assigned a church
to them,' and by their means won many
from their error. He used freciucntly him-
self to visit it and preach there, using an
interpreter who was skilled in both lan-
guages, and he got other good speakers to
do the same. This was his constant practice
in the city, and many of those who had
been deceived he rescued by pointing out to
them the truth of the aj^ostolic preaching.

CHAPTER XXXI.

Of his care for the Scythians and his zeal
against the Marcionists.

On learning that some of the Nomads en-
camped along the Danube were thirsty for
salvation, but had none to bring them the
stream, John sought out men who were filled
with a love of labour like that which had
distinguished the apostles, and gave them
charge of the work. I have myself seen a
letter written by him to Leontius, bishop of
Ancyra, in which he described the conver-
sion of the Scythians, and begged that fit
men for their instruction might be sent.

On hearing that in our district" some men
were infected with the plague of Marcion he
wrote to the then bishop charging him to
drive out the plague, and proffering him the
aid of the imperial edicts. I have said
enough to show how, to use the words of the
divine apostle, he carried in his heart " the
care of all the churches." ^

His boldness may also be learnt from other
sources.

CHAPTER XXXII.

Of the demand made by Gain as and of John
ChrysostonCs reply.

One Gainas, a Scythian, but still more
barbarous in character, and of cruel and vio-
lent disposition, was at that time a military
commander. Pic had inider him many of
his own fellow-countrymen, and with them
commanded the Roman cavalry and infantry.
He was an object of terror not only to all
the rest but even to the emperor himself,
who suspected him of aiming at usurpation.

He was a participator in the Arian pest,
and requested the emperor to grant him the
use of one of the churches. Arcadius re-
plied that he would see to it and have it done.
He then sent for the divine John, told him

1 The Church of St. Paul. Horn. xii. pp. 512-526.

2 i.e. at Cyrus.

' II. Cor.xi. 28.


V.


0J»


14.]


OF THEODORET.


153


of the request that had been made, reminded
him of the power of Gainas, hinted at the
usurpation which was being aimed at, and
besought him to bridle the anger of the bar-
barian by this concession.^ " But," said that
noble man, " attempt, sir, no such promise,
nor order what is holy to be given to the
dogs.- I will never suffer the worshippers
and praisers of the Divine Word to be ex-
pelled and their church to be given to them
that blaspheme Him. Have no fear, sir, of
that barbarian ; call us both, me and him, be-
fore you ; listen in silence to what is said,
and I will both curb his tongue and persuade
him not to ask what it is wrong to grant."

The emperor was delighted with what
Chrysostom said, and on the next day sum-
moned both the bishop and the general be-
fore him. Gainas began to request the ful-
filment of the promise, but the great John
said in reply that the emperor, who pro-
fessed the true religion, had no right to ven-
ture on any act against it. Gainas rejoined
that he also must have a place to pray in.
" Why," said the great John, " every church
is open to you, and nobody prevents you
from praying there when you are so dis-
posed." " But I," said Gainas, " belong to
another sect, and I ask to have one church
vvith them, and surely I who undergo so
many toils in war for Romans may fairly
make such a request." " But," said the
bishop, "you have greater rewards for your
labours, you are a general ; you are vested
in the consular robe, and you must consider
what you were formerly and what you are
now — your indigence in the past and your
present prosperity ; what kind of raiment
you wore before you crossed the Ister, and
what you are robed in now. Consider, I
say, the littleness of your labours and the
greatness of your rewards, and be not un-
thankful to them who have shewn you hon-
our." With these words the teacher of the
world silenced Gainas, and compelled him to
stand dumb. In process of time, however,
he made known the rebellion which he had
long had at heart, gathered his forces in
Thrace, and went out ravaging and plunder-
ing in very many directions. At news of
this there arose an universal panic among
both princes and subjects, and no one was
found willing to march against him ; no one
thought it safe to approach him with an am-
bassage, for every one suspected his barba-
roufj character.


1 The three great officials, Aurelianus, Satuminus, and the
Count John had already surrendered themselves to the arrogant
Got 1, and their lives had only been spared at the entreaty of
Chrysostom.

sMatt. vii,6.


CHAPTER XXXIII.

Of the ambassagc of Clujsostovi to Gainas.

Then when every one else was passed
over because of the universal panic, this
great chief was persuaded to undertake the
ambassage. He took no heed of the dis-
pute which has been related, nor of the ill
feeling which it had engendered, and readily
set out for Thrace. No sooner did Gainas
hear of the arrival of the envoy than he
bethought him of the bold utterance which
he had made on behalf of true religion. He
came eagerly from a great distance to meet
him, placed his right hand upon his eyes,
and brought his children to his saintly knees.
So is it the nature of goodness to put even
those who are most opposed to it to the
blush and vanquish them. But envy could
not endure the bright rays of his philosophy.
It put in practice its wonted wiles and
deprived of his eloquence and his wisdom
the imperial city — aye indeed the whole
world. ^

CHAPTER XXXIV.

Of the events which happened on account of
Chrysostom.

At this part of my history I know not
what sentiments to entertain ; wishful as I
am to relate the wrong inflicted on Chrysos-
tom, I yet regard in other respects the high
character of those who wronged him. I
shall therefore do my best to conceal even
their names.^ These persons had different
reasons for their hostility, and were unwilling
to contemplate his brilliant virtue. They
found certain wretches who accused him,
and, perceiving the openness of the calumny,
held a meeting at a distance from the city
and pronounced their sentence.^

The emperor, who had confidence in the
clei'gy, ordered him to be banished. So
Chrysostom , without having heard the charges
brought against him, or brought forward his

1 It is not clear where the mission of Chrysostom to Gainas
should be placed. Gainas attacked the capital by sea and by
land, but his Gotlis were massacred in their own church, and
he was repulsed. He was finally defeated and slain in
Jan. 401.

2 The foes of Chrysostom were

(i) The empress Eudoxia, jealous of his power;

(ii) The jjreat ladies on whose toilettes of artifice and
extravasant licentiousness he had poured his sdorn ; among
them being Marsa, Castricia, and Eugraphia;

(iii) The baser clergy whom his simplicity of life shamed,
notably Acncius of Heroea, whose hostility is traced by
Palladius to the meagre hospitality of the archiepiscopa'l
palace at Constantinople, when the hungry guest exclaimed
" eyu) oiiTaj apri/w \vjf>a.v" — "I'll pepper a pot for him!"
(Pall. 4Q.) and Theophilus of Alexandria, who had never for-
given his elevation to the see, and Gerontius of Nicomedia
whom he had deposed.

" i.e. at the suburb of Chalcedon known as " the Oak." The
charges included his calling the Empress Jezebel, and eating
a lozenge after the Holy Communion. Pallad. 66.


154


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[V. 35.


defence, was forced as though convicted on
the accusations advanced against him to quit
Constantinople,^ and departed to Hieron at
the mouth of the Euxine, for so the naval
station is named.

In the night there was a great earthquake
and the empress" was struck with terror.
Envoys were accordingly sent at daybreak
to the banished bishop beseeching him to
return without delay to Constantinople, and
avert the peril from the town. After these
another party was sent and yet again others
after them and the Bosphorus was crowded
with the couriers. When the faithful
people learned what was going on they
covered the mouth of the Propontis with
their boats, and the whole population lighted
up waxen torches and came forth to meet
him. For the time indeed his banded foes
were scattered.^

But after the interval of a few months
they endeavoured to enact punishment, not
for the forged indictment, but for his taking
part in divine service after his deposition.
The bishop represented that he had not
pleaded, that he had not heard the indict-
ment, that he had made no defence, that he
had been condemned in his absence, that
he had been exiled by the emperor, and by
the emperor again recalled. Then another
vSynod met, and his opponents did not ask
for a trial, but persuaded the emperor that
the sentence was lawful and right. Chrys-
ostom was then not merely banished, but
relegated to a petty and lonely town in Ar-
menia of the name of Cucusus. Even from
thence he was removed and deported to
Pityus, a place at the extremity of the Euxine
and on the marches of the Roman Empire,
in the near neighbourhood of the wildest
savages. But the loving Lord did not suffer
the victorious athlete to be carried oM" to
this islet, for when he had reached Comana
he was removed to the life that knows nor
age nor pain."


' For three clays the people withstood his reinoval. At last
lie slipped out by a postern, and, when a nod would liavc roused
rebellion, submitted to exile. But he was only deported a
very little way.

2 Eudoxia was the daughter of Banto, a prankish general.
I'hilostorgius (xi. 6), says that she " ov Kara Ttjv tou avipb?
*ccKecTO vuBiiav, a\\' ivr)v avTrj tou |3ap/3apiKoi/ i?pd<rous ovk
oAt'yoi'."

3 The proceedings of "the Oak" were declared null and
void, and the bishop was formally reinstated. 403.

< Tlicodoret omits the second ortcnce to Eudoxia — his in-
vectives on the dedication of her silver statue in front of St.
Sophia in Sept. 403. (Soc. vi. iS. So/,, viii. 20.) " Once
aifain Ilcrodias runs wild; once again she dances; once again
she is in a hurry to get the head of ]ohn on a charger." Or
does the description of Ilerodias, and not Salome, as dancing,
indicate that the calumnious sentence was not really uttered
by Chrysostom, but said to have been uttered by informers
whose Knowledge of the Gospels was incomplete?

The discourse " in decollationew Baptislic yodiniis " is in
Migne Vol. viii. 485, but it is generally rejected as spurious.

The circumstances of the deposition will be found in
Palladius, and in Chrysostoin's Ep. ad Innocent. The edict


The body that had struggled so bravely
was buried by the side of the coffin of the
martyred Basiliscus, for so the martyr had
ordained in a dream.

1 think it needless to prolong my narrative
by relating how many bishops were ex-
pelled from the church on Chrysostom's
account, and sent to live in the ends of the
earth, or how many ascetic philosophers
were involved in the same calamities, and all
the more because I think it needful to cur-
tail these hideous details, and to throw a veil
over the ill deeds of men of the same faith
as our own. Punishment however did fall
on most of the guilty, and their sulferings
were a means of good to the rest. This
great wrong was regarded with special detes-
tation by the bishops of Europe, who sepa-
rated themselves from communion with the
guilty parties. In this action they were
joined by all the bishops of Illyria. In the
East most of the cities shrank from participa-
tion in the wrong, but did not make a rent
in the body of the church.

On the death of the great teacher of the
world, the bishops of the West refused to
embrace the communion of the bishops of
Egypt, of the East, of the Bosphorus, and in
Thrace, until the name of that holy man
had been inserted among those of deceased
bishops. Arsacius his immediate successor
they declined to acknowledge, but Atticus the
successor of Arsacius, after he had frequently
solicited the boon of peace, was after a time
received when he had inserted the name in
the roll.^

CHAPTER XXXV.

Of Alexander, bishop of Antioch.

At this time the see of Alexandria was
held by Cyril, " brother's son to Theophilus
whom he succeeded ; at the same time Jeru-

was issued June 5, 404. Cucusus (cf. p. ii. 4) is on the borders
of Cilicia and Armenia jNIinor. Gibbon says the three years
spent here were the " most glorious of his life," so great was
the influence he wielded.

In the winlei of 405 lie was driven with other fugitives from
Cucusus through fear of Isaurian banditti, and tied some 60
miles to Arabissus. Harly in 406 he returned. Eudoxia was
dead (t Oct. 4. 404) but other enemies were impatient at the
old man's resistance to hardship. An Edict was procured
transferring the exile to Pityus, in the N.E. corner of the
Black Sea (now Soukoum in Transcaucasia) but Chrysostom's
strength was imequal to the cruel hardships of the journey.
Some five miles from Comana in Pontus (Tokat), clothed in
white robes, he expired in the chapel of the martyred bishop
Basiliskus, Sept. 14. 407. Basiliskus was martyred in 312.

•Atticus (l?p. of Constanlinopie 405-426) was forced by
fear alike of tlie mob and the Emperor to consent to the resti-
tution. His letters to Peter and ^'Edesius, deacon of Cyril of
Alexandria, and Cyril's reply, (Niceph. xiv. 26-27) -^""^ inter-
I'stiiig. Cyril " would as soon put the name of Judas on the
rolls as that of Chrysostom." Diet. Christ. Biog. i. 209.

2 Cyril occupied the Episcojial throne of Alexandria from
413 to 444. 'I'lieodorctus could not be expected to allude to the
withdrawal of the Roman legions from Britain in 401, or the
release of Britoins from their allegiance by Honorius in 410.
The sack of Home by the Goths in the latter year might have
however claimed a passing notice.


V. z6.-\


OF THEODORET.


155


salem was occupied by John ^ in succession
to Cyril wlioni we have formerly mentioned.
Tlie Antiochenes were under the care of
Alexander " whose life and conversation
were of a piece with his episcopate. Before
his consecration he passed his time in ascetic
training and in hard bodily exercise. He
was known as a noble champion, teaching by
word and confirming the word by deed.
His predecessor was Porphyrins who guided
that church after Flavianus, and left behind
him many memorials of his loving character.^
He was also distinguished by intellectual
power. The holy Alexander was specially
rich in self discipline and philosophy ; his
life was one of poverty and self denial ; his
eloquence was copious and his other gifts
were innumerable ; by his advice and exhor-
tation, the following of the great Eustathius
which Paulinus, and after him Evagrius, had
not permitted to be restored, was united to
the rest of the body, and a festival was cele-
brated the like of which none had ever seen
before. The bishop gathered all the faith-
ful together, both clei-gy and laity, and
marched with them to the assembly. The
procession was accompanied by musicians ;
one hymn was sung by all in harmony, and
thus he and his company went in procession
from the western postern to the great church,
filling the whole forum with people, and
constituting a stream of thinking living
beings like the Orontes in its course.

When this was seen by the Jews, by the
victims of the Arian plague, and by the
insignificant remnant of Pagans, they set up
a groaning and wailing, and were distressed
at seeing the rest of the rivers discharging
their waters into the Church. By Alexander
the name of the great John was first in-
scribed in the records* of the Church,

CHAPTER XXXVI.

0/ the removal of the remains of John and
of the faith of Theodosius and his sisters.

At a later time the actual remains of the
great doctor were conveyed to the imperial

1 Of the five Johns more or less well known as bishop of
Jerusalem this was the second — from 3S6 to 417. He is chiefly
known to us from the severe criticisms of Jerome.

2 Bp. from 413 to 421.

3 Palladius (Dial. 143 et Seqq,) describes Porphyrias as a
monster of frivolity, iniquity, and bitterness. It is interesting
to hear both sides.

* Theodoret here uses the word hi-mvxov. Other words in
use were iepal, SeVvTot and KaraAoyoi. The names engraved on
these tablets were recited during the celebration of the Holy
Eucharist, e. g. at Carthage in 411 we find it said of Cajcllia-
nus : " III ecclesia sumus In qua efiscopatum g'essit et diem
obiit. Ejus }ioinen ad altare recitamus ejus memoriis com-
municamus tanqnam memorice fratris." (Diet. Christ. Ant. i.
561. Labbe ii. 1490.) Names were sometimes erased from un-
worthy motives. A survival of the use obtains in the English
Church in the Prayer for the Church Militant, and more speclfii.
cally in the recitation of names in the Bidding Prayer.


city, and once again the faithful crowd turn-
ing the sea as it were into land by their close
packed boats, covered the mouth of the
Bosphorus towards the Propontis with their
torches. The precious possession was
brought into Constantinople by the present
emperor,^ who received the name of his
grandfather and preserved his piety mule-
filed. After first gazing upon the bier he
laid his head against it, and prayed for his
parents and for pardon on them who
had ignorantly sinned, for his parents had
long ago been dead, leaving him an orphan
in extreme youth, but the God of his fathers
and of his forefathers permitted him not to
suffer trial from his orphanhood, but pro-
vided for his nurture in piety, protected his
empire from the assaults of sedition, and
bridled rebellious hearts. Ever mindful of
these blessings he honours his benefactor
with hymns of praise. Associated with him
in this divine worship are his sisters,^ who
have maintained virginity throughout their
lives, thinking the study of the divine
oracles ^ the greatest delight, and reckoning
that riches beyond robbers' reach are to be
found in ministering to the poor. The
emperor himself was adorned by many
graces, and not least by his kindness and
clemency, an unruffled calm of soul and
a faith as undefiled as it is notorious. Of
this I w^ill give an vmdeniable proof.

A certain ascetic somewhat rough of
temper came to the emperor with a petition.
He came several times without attaining his
object, and at last excommunicated the
emperor and left him under his ban. The
faithful emperor returned to his palace, and
as it was the time for the banquet, and his

1 Theodosius W. succeeded his father May i, 40S, at the age
of eight. The translation of the remains of Chrysostom took
place at the beginning of 43S. Theodosius died in 450, and
the phrase "'6 rui' ^acriAeuwi' " thus limits the composition of
the History. As however Theodoret does not continue his
list of bishops of Rome after Ca;lestinus, who died in 440, we
may conclude that the History was written in43S-439. But the
mention of Isdigirdes II. in Chap, xxxviii. carries us some-
wliat further. Possibly the portions of the work were jotted
down from time to time.

2 Theodosius II. had four sisters, Flaccilla, Pulcheria,
Arcadia, and Marina. Pulcheria was practically empress-
remnant for a considerable period. She was only two years
older than her brother, but was declared Augusta and empress
July 14, 414, at the age of 15 '3. On his death in 450 she mar-
ried Marcianus a general. Besides the relics of Chrysostom
she translated in 446 those of the martyrs of Sebaste. Soz.
ix. 2.

3 " ra ffeia AoYia." This is the common phrase in our
author for the Holy Scriptures. According to the interpreta-
tion given by Schleieiniacher and like theologians to the title of
the work of Papias, " Aoyi'wi' Kvpiaxuiv tf rjyijcrei? " and to the
passage of Euscbius (Ecc. Hist. iii. 39) in which Papias is
quoted as saying tliat Mattliew " 'Eppatfii SiaAeKTw Td Adyio
<Tvi'(y p6.4ia.ro." Pulcheria and her sisters did not study the
Scriptures, but only " the divine discourses," to the exclusion
of anythintj that was not a discourse, cf. Salmon Introduction
to the IV. T. 4tli Ed. pp. 95, q6, and Bp. Lightlool's Essays in
reply to the anonymous author of " Supernatural Religion."
cf. Rom. iii. 21, Ileb. v. 12, I. Pet. iv. 1 1, and Clem, ad Cor.
lili. " For beloved you know, aye, and well know, the sacred
Scriptures, and have pored over i/ic oracles of God"


156


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[V. 37.


guests were assembled, he said that he could
not partake of the entertainment before the
interdict was taken off. On this account he
sent the most intimate of his suite to the
bishop, beseeching him to order the imposer
of the interdict to remove it. The bishop
replied that an interdict ought not to be
accepted from every one, and pronounced it
not binding, but the emperor refused to
accept this remission until the imposer of it
had after much difliculty been discovered,
and had restored the communion withdrawn.
So obedient was he to divine laws.

In accordance with the same principles he
ordered a complete destruction of the remains
of the idolatrous shrines, that our posterity
might be saved from the sight of even a trace
(jf tlie ancient error, this being the motive
which he expressed in the edict published on
the subject. Of this good seed sown he is
ever reaping the fruits, for he has the Lord
of all on his side. So when Rhoilas,^ Prince
of the Scythian Nomads, had crossed the
Danube with a vast host and was ravaging
and plundering Thrace, and was threatening
to besiege the imperial city, and summarily
seize it and deliver it to destruction, God
smote him from on high with thunderbolt
and storm, burning up the invader and
destroying all his host. A similar provi-
dence was shewn, too, in the Persian war.
The Persians received information that the
Romans were occupied elsewhere, and so in
violation of the treaty of Peace, marched
against their neighbours, who found none to
aid them under the attack, because, in reli-
ance on the Peace, the emperor had de-
spatched his generals and his men to other
wars. Then the further march of the
Persians was stayed by a very violent storm
of rain and hail ; their horses refused to
advance ; in twenty days they had not
succeeded in advancing as many furlongs.
Meanwhile the generals returned and mus-
tered their troops.

In the former war, too, these same Per-
sians, when besieging the emperor's epony-
mous city," were providentially rendered
ridiculous. For after Vararanes' had beset
the aforesaid city for more tlian thirty days
with all his forces, and had brought up many


> Supposed to be identified with Rop^as, Rugilas, or Roas, a
prince said by Priscus in liis Hist. Gotli. to have preceded
Attila in the sovereignty of the Huns. cf. Soc. vii, 4.V

- i.e. Rhccsina, or Tneodosiopolis in Osriiocna, now Erze-
rouin.

^ Vararanes V. son of Isdigirdes I. persecuted Christians
in the beginning of the 5th c. cf. Soc. vii. iS. 20.
Sapor III. 3SS-390

Vararanes IV. Isdigirdes 1 . 399-420.
390-39Q, Vararanes V. 420-440.

Isdigirdes 11. 440-457.


helepoles, and employed innumerable en-
gines, and built up lofty towers outside the
wall, resistance was oftered, and the assault of
the attacking engines rei^elled, by the bishop
Eunomius alone. Our men had refused to
fight against the foe, and were shrinking
from bringing aid to the besieged, when the
bishop, by opposing himself to them, pre-
served the city from being taken. When
one of the barbarian chieftains ventured on
his wonted blasphemy, and with words like
those of Rabshakeh and Sennacherib, madly
threatened to burn the temple of God, the
holy bishop could not endure his furious
wrath, but himself commanded a balista,'
which went by the name of the Apostle
Thomas, to be set up upon the battlements,
and a mighty stone to be adjusted to it.
Then, in the name of the Lord who had
been blasphemed, he gave the word to let
go, — down crashed the stone on that impious
chief and hit him on his wicked mouth, and
crushed in his face, and broke his head in
pieces, and sprinkled his brains upon the
Sfround. When the commander of the
army who had hoped to take the city
saw what was done, he confessed himself
beaten and withdrew, and in his alarm
made peace.

Thus the universal sovereign protects the
faithful emperor, for he clearly acknowledges
whose slave he is, and performs fitting ser-
vice to his Master.^

CHAPTER XXXVII.

0/ Tlieodotus bishop of Antioch.

Theodosius restored the relics of the
great luminary of the world to the city
which deeply regretted his loss. These
events however happened later. ^

Innocent the excellent bishop of Rome

' It is inlerestinartofind in the fifth century an instance of the
sacred noinenchiture with wliich we liave familiar instances in
the " San Josef" and tlie " Salvador del niundo " of Cape St.
Vincent, and the " Santa Anna " and '* Santissima Trinidad "
ofTrafalgar. (Southey, Z//*? o/AV/jro;;, Chap iv.andix.) On
the north side of Sebastopol there was an earthwork called
"The Twelve Apostles." (Kinglake, Crimea, Vol. iv. P.4S.)
St. Thomas was tlie supposed founderof the church of Edcssa.

2 This might have been written before the weaker elements
in the character of Theodosius II. produced their most dis-
astrous results. Hut he was not a satisfactory sovereign, nor
a desirable cJiampion of Christendom. In some respects like
our Edward the Confessor and Henry VI. he had, in thewords
of Leo, "the heart of a priest as well as of an emperor." " He
had fifteen prime ministers in twenty-five years, the last of
whom, the Eunuch Chrysaphius, retained his power for the
longest period. A. D. 443-450. During that time the empire
was rapiiUv hurrying to destruction. The Vandals in Airica
and the Hiins under Attila in Europe were ravaging some of
his fairest provinces while the emperor was attending to palace
intrigues. . . . Clirysaphius made him favourable to
Eutychcs, and thus largely contributed to the establishment
of the monophysite heresy." Dr. Stokes in Diet. Christ. Biog.
iv. 966.

3 This paragraph belongs more appropriately to the pre-
ceding chapter. The relics of Chrysostom were translated
in 43S.


V. 38.]


OF THEODORET.


157


was succeeded by Bonifacius, Bonifacius by
Zosimus and Zosimus by Ctelestinus.^

At Jerusalem after the admirable John
the charge of the church was committed to
Praylius, a man worthy of his name."

At Antioch after the divine Alexander
Theodotus, the pearl of purity, succeeded to
the supremacy of the church, a man of con-
spicuous meekness and of exact regularity of
life. By him the sect of Apollinarius was
admitted to fellowship with the rest of the
sheep on the earnest request of its members
to be united with the flock. Many of them
however continued marked by their former
unsoundness.'^

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

Of the persecutions in Persia and of them that
were martyred thei-e.

At this time Isdigirdes," King of the
Persians, began to wage war against the
churches and the circumstances which caused
him so to do were as follows. A certain
bishop, Abdas by name," adorned with many
virtues, was stirred with undue zeal and
destroyed a Pyreum, Pyreum being the
name given by the Persians to the temples
of the fire which they regarded as their
God.«

On being informed of this by the Magi
Isdigirdes sent for Abdas and first in moder-
ate language complained of what had taken
place and ordered him to rebuild the Pyreum.

This the bishop, in reply, positively re-
fused to do, and thei"eupon the king
threatened to destroy all the churches, and
in the end carried out all his threats, for first
he gave orders for the execution of that hol}^
man and then commanded the destruction of
the churches. Now I am of opinion that to
destroy the Pyreum was wrong and inex-
pedient, for not even the divine Apostle,
when he came to Athens and saw the city

1 The accepted order is Innocent I. 402-417; Zosimus 417-
418 ; Boniface I. 4 iS-422 ; Caelestinus 422-432.

The decision of Honorius in favour of Bonifacius as against
Eulalius, both elected by their respective supporters on the
death of Zosimus in 41S, marks an important point in the
interference of temporal princes in the appointments of
bishops of Rome. cf. Robertson, i. 49S.

~ Ilpaus := meek, gentle.

3 Apollinarians survived the condemnation of Apollinarius
at Constantinople in 3S1.

The unsoundness, i.e. the denial of the rational soul, and so
of the perfect manhood of the Saviour, is discussed in Dial. 1.

* Vezdegerd I. son of Sapor III. Vide note on p. 156.

° Abdas was bishop of Susa. In Soc. vii. 8 he is " bishop of
Persia."

" The second of the six supreme councillors of Ahuramazda
in the scheme of Zarathustra Spitama (Zoroaster) is Ardebe-
hesht, light or lightness of any kind and representing the
omnipresence of the good power. Hence sun, moon and stars
ai'e symbols of deity and the believer is enjoined to face fire or
light in his worship. Temples and altars must be fed with
holy fire. In their reverence for fire orthodox Parsees
abstained from smoking, but alike of old and today they would
deny the charge of worshipping fire in any other sense than as
an honoured symbol.


wholly given to idolatry, destroyed any one
of the altars which the Athenians honoured,
but convicted them of their ignorance bv his
arguments, and made manifest the truth.
But the refusal to rebuild the fallen temple,
and the determination to choose death rather
than so do, I greatly praise and honour, and
count to be a deed worthy of the martyr's
crown ; for building a shrine in honour of
the fire seems to me to be equivalent to
adoring it.

From this beginning arose a tempest which
stirred fierce and cruel waves against the
nurslings of the true faith, and when thirty
years had gone by the agitation still remained
kept up by the Magi, as the sea is kept in
commotion by the blasts of furious winds.
Magi is the name given by the Persians to
the worshippers of the sun and moon ^ but
I have exposed their fabulous system in
another treatise and have adduced solutions
of their difficulties.

On the death of Isdigirdes, Vararanes,
his son, inherited at once the kingdom and
the war against the faith, and dying in his
turn left them both together to his son.- To
relate the various kinds of tortures and cruel-
ties inflicted on the saints is no easy task.
In some cases the hands were flayed, in
others the back ; of others they stripped the
heads of skin from brow to beard ,• others
were enveloped in split reeds with the cut
part turned inwards and were surrounded
with tight bandages from head to foot ; then
each of the reeds was dragged out by force,
and, tearing away the adjacent portions
of the skin, caused severe agony ; pits
were dug and carefully greased in which
quantities of mice were put ; then they let
down the martyrs, bound hand and foot, so as
not to be able to protect themselves from the
animals, to be -food for the mice, and the
the mice, under stress of hunger, little by
little devoui-ed the flesh of the victims, caus-
ing them long and terrible sufl^ering. By
others sufierings were endured even more
terrible than these, invented by the enemy of
humanity and the opponent of the truth, but
the courage of the martyrs was unbroken,
and they hastened unbidden in their eager-
ness to win that death which ushers men
into indestructible life.


' The word in the original is (rroixf '« ,' on th's Valesius
annotates "This does not mean the four elements, for the Per-
sian Magi did not worship the four elements but only fire and
the sun and nmon." In illustration of this use of the word he
qiiotes Chrysostom. Hom. 58 in Matth.

6 7ctp Satjuwr en-t fitajSoA^' toG O'T0t;(et0v KoX eTTtTi^erat Tor?
aXoO<ri, K.aL ai'iridii' aiiTou? Kara Toi)? tIj? (TcAiji't)? Sp6fj.ov<;: and
St. Jerome Ep. ad Ilcdyb. 4 where he speaks of the days of the
week as hcinir described by the heathen " Idoloruni tt etemen-
to mm }iomi>iihiis."

2 1. e. Isdigirdes II. 440-457.


158


THE ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY


[V. 38.


Of these I will cite one or two to serve as '
examples of the courage of the rest. Among
the noblest of the Persians was one called
Ilormisdas, by race an AchicmenicP and the
son of a Prefect. On receiving information
that he was a Christian the king summoned
him and ordered him to abjure God his
Saviour. He replied that the royal orders
were neither right nor reasonable, " for he,"
so he went on, " who is taught to find no
difhcultv in spurning and denying the God
of all, will haply the more easily despise a
king who is a man of mortal nature; and if,
sir, he who denies thy sovereignty is deserv-
ing of the severest punishment, how much
more terrible a chastisement is not due to
him who denies the Creator of the world.?"
The king: ought to have admired the wisdom
of what was said, but, instead of this, he
stripped the noble athlete of his wealth and
rank, and ordered him to go clad in nothing
save a loin ch^th, and drive the camels of the
army. After some days had gone b}', as he
looked out of his chamber, he saw the ex-
cellent man scorched by the rays of the sun,
and covered with dust, and he bethought
him of his father's illustrious rank, and
sent for him, and told him to put on a tunic
of linen. Then thinking the toil he had
sutTered, and the kindness shewn him, had
softened his heart, " Now at least," said he,
"give over your opposition, and deny the
carpenter's son." Full of holy zeal Hor-
misdas tore the tunic and flung it away
saying, "If you think that this will make
one give up the true faith, keep your present
with your false belief." When the king saw
how V)old he was he drove him naked from
the palace.

One Suenes, who owned a thousand slaves,
resisted the King, and refused to deny his
master. The King therefore asked him
which of his slaves was the vilest, and to this
slave handed over the ownership of all the
rest, and gave him .Suenes to be his slave.
He also gave hun in marriage Suenes' wife,
supposing that thus he could bend the will
of tlie chamj)ion of the truth. But he was
disappointed, for he had built his house upon
the rock.^

The king also seized and imprisoned a
deacon of the name of Benjamin. After
two years there came an envoy from Rome,
to treat of other matters, who, when he was
informed of this imprisonment, petitioned
the king to release the deacon. The king
ordered Benjamin to promise that he would

' Achxmcnes was the name of the Grandfather of Cambyses,
father ot Cyrus, and also of a son of Darius, son of Hystaspes.
Hence the Ach.-emenidac were the noblest stock ol Persia.

> Matt. vii. 24.


not attempt to teach the Christian religion
to any of the Magi, and the envoy exhortetl
Benjamin to obey, but Benjamin, after he
heard what the envoy had to say, replied,
"It is impossible for me not to impart the
light which I have received ; for how great
a penalty is due for the hiding of our talent
is taught in tlic history of the holy gospels." '
Up to this time the King had not been
informed of this refusal and ordered him
to be set free. Benjamin continued as
he was wont seeking to catch them that
were held down by the darkness of igno-
rance, and bringing them to the light of
knowledge. After a year information of his
conduct was given to the king, and he was
summoned and ordered to deny Him whom
he worshipped. He then asked the king
" What punishment should be assigned to
one who should desert his allegiance and
prefer another.?" " Deatli and torture,"
said the king. "How then " continued the
wise deacon " should he be treated who
abandons his Maker and Creator, makes a
God of one of his fellow slaves, and oilers
to him tlie honour due to his Lord.?" I'hen
the king was moved with wrath, and had
twenty reeds pointed, and driven into the
nails of his hands and feet. When he saw
that Benjamin took this torture for child's
play, he pointed another reed and drove it
into his privy part and by working it up and
down caused unspeakable agony. After this
torture the impious and savage tyrant
ordered him to be impaled upon a stout
knotted staff", and so the noble sufferer gave
up the ghost.

Innumerable other similar deeds of vio-
lence were committed by these impious men,
but we must not be astonished that the Lord
of all endures their savagery and impiety,
for indeed before the reign of Constantine
the Great all the Roman emperors wreaked
their wrath on the friends of the truth, and
Diocletian, on the day of the Saviour's pas-
sion, destroyed the churches throughout the
Roman Empire, but after nine years had
gone by they rose again in bloom and
beauty many times larger and more splendid
than before, and he and his iniquity
perished. -

These wars and the victory of the church
had been predicted by the Lord, and the
event teaches us that war brings us more
blessing than peace. Peace makes us deli-

1 Malt. XXV. 25.

2 The edict of Diocletian against the Christians was issued
on the feast of the Teruiinalia, Feb. 2,^, .v^^. Good Friday,
here »j toO <7wTr)piou ndOovi rj^e'po, was comnionly known as
Tjptpa TOM (TTavpov, na(T\a o'Tavpioo'iixot'y and TrapatjKf r//.

Tertullian speaks of its early observance as a general fast,
and Kusebius conlirms his testimony.


V. 39-]


OF THEODORET.


159


cate, easy and cowardly. War whets our
courage and makes us despise this present
world as passing away. But these are ob-
servations which we have often made in


other writings.


CHAPTER XXXIX.

Of Theodorus, bishop of Mopsucstia.

When the divine Theodorus was ruling
the church of Antioch, Theodorus, bishop
of Mopsucstia, a doctor of the whole church
and successful combatant against every he-
i-etical phalanx, ended this life. He had en-
joyed the teaching of the great Diodorus,
and was the friend and fellow -worker of the
holy John, for they both together benefited
by the spiritual draughts given by Diodorus.
Six-and-thirty years he had spent in his
bishopric, fighting against the forces of
Arius and Eunomius, struggling against the
piratical band of ApoUinarius, and finding
the best pasture for God's sheep. ^ His
brother Polychronius ' was the excellent
bishop of Apamea, a man gifted with great
eloquence and of illustrious character.

I shall now make an end of my history,
and shall entreat those who meet with it to
requite my labour with their prayers. The
narrative now embraces a period of 105 years,
beginning from the Arian madness and end-
insr with the death of the admirable Theo-


dorus and Theodotus.


I will give


a list of


Of Antioch : —

Vitalius ^ . . .

Philogonius \ Orthodox

Eustathius J . . .

Eulalius ■] . . .

Euphronius | . . .
Placidus


}> Arians.


the bishops of great cities after the persecu-
tion.

List of the bishops of great cities.

Of Rome : —
Miltiades . . [Melchiades. 311-314]

Silvester [3H-335]

Julius . [337-352. Mark Jan. to Oct., 336]

Liberius . ' [352-366]

Damasus [366-3S4]

Siricius [3S4-39S]

Anastasius [39S-401]

Innocentius [402-417]

Bonifacius ^[418-422]

Zosimus [4i7~4^^]

Caelestinus [422-432]

> Theodorus was born at Antioch in 350, consecrated bishop
of Mopsuestia in 392, and died in 42S in Cilicia.

2The evidence is in favour of distinguishing- this Polycliro
nius from the monk described in the Religious History.

3 " The date of the death of Theodotus is fixed for A.D. 429
by a passage of Thcodoret's letter to Dioscorus, where, when
speaking of his having taught for six years und-jr him at
Antioch, he refers to his blessed and holy memory, combined
with one in his history, stating that the death of Theodore of
Mopsuestia took place in the episcopate of Theodotus." Diet.
Christ. I?iog. iv. 9S5.

The last event referred to by Theodoretus seems to be the
accession of Isdigirdes II. in 440. Vide pp. igS. 'S'J-

*of. note on p. 156.


Stephanus

Leontius

Eudoxius

Meletius

Flavianus

Porphyrins ^Orthodox.

Alexander

Theodotus


J
1


[36'


o


Paulinus III. ] T-, . ,1 •

T^ . > Eustathians.

Evagruis ]


Of Alexandria : —

Peter

Achillas

Alexander

Athanasius

Gregory (Arian) .....
Athanasius .......

George (heretic)

Athanasius

Peter (disciple of Athanasius) .
Lucius (Arian) .....

Peter

Timothy

Theophilus

Cyril

Of Jerusalem : —

Macarius

Maximus

Cyril

John

Praylius

Juvenalius

Of Constantinople : —

Alexander

Eusebius of Nicomcdia (Arian)
Paul the Confes.sor ....
Macedonius the enemy of the

Holy Ghost ....
The impious Eudoxius .
Demophilus of Beroea in Thrace

(heretic)

Gregory of Nazianzus

Nectarius

John Chrysostom

Arsacius

Atticus

Sissinnius


[3 1 2-3 1 S]
[31S-323]

'[325-328]
'[328-330]

'[330-332]

[332-342]

[342-34SJ

[348-357]

[357-359]
(died) 381]

[38 I -404]

[404-4x3]

[413-419]
[419-429]

[362-388]

[388- ]

[301-312]
[312-313]
[313-326]
[326-341]

[341-347]
[347-356]
[356-363]

[363-373]
[373-373]
[373-377]
[377-378]
[37S-385]
[385-412]
[412-444]

[324-336]

[336-350]
[350-3SS]
[388-416]
[416-425]
[425-458]

[326-340]

[34'o-342]
[342-342]

[342-360]
[360-370]

[370- ]
T380-381]

[381-39S]
[39S-404]
[404-406]
[406-426]
[426-428]


1 Paulinus I. intervenes, 321-325.

2 Paulinus H., 32S-329, intervenes.

s On the diflicul'ty of the Paulini, cf. Diet, of Christ. Biog.
iv. 232 and ii. 332.

■* Evagrius intervenes 370.


DIALOGUES.


THE "ERANISTES"^ OR " POLYMORPHUS " - OF THE BLESvSED
THEODORETUS, BISHOP OF CYRUS.


PROLOGUE.

Some men, distinguished neither hy
family nor education, and without any of
the honourable notoriety that comes of an
upright life, are ambitious of achieving fiime
by wicked ways. Of these was the famous
Alexander, the coppersmith,^ a man of no
sort of distinction at all, — no nobility of
birth, no eloquence of speech, who never led
a political party nor an army in the field ;
who never played the man in fight, but plied
from day to day his ignominious craft, and
won fame for nothing but his mad violence
against Saint Paul.

Shimei,'' again, an obscure person of ser-
vile rank, has become very renowned for
his audacious attack on the holy David.

It is said too that the originator of the
Manichaean heresy was a mere whipping-
block of a slave, and, from love of notoriety,
composed his execrable and superstitious
writings.

The same line of conduct is pursued by
many now, who after turning their backs on
the honourable glory of virtue on account of
the toil to be undergone ere it be won, pur-
chase to themscK^es the notoriety that comes
of shame and disgrace. For through eager-
ness to pose as champions of new doctrines
they pick up and get together the impiety
of many heresies, and compile this heresy of
death.


' tpavot — a meal to which every one contributes a share ;
a club feast, or picnic, and eponaxr)? is in classical Greek a
conlrihulor to such a feast. I?ut epai-t^ia = (a) " contribulc,"
and O) " licj; for contributions." So tpafcffrJ)? is by some
leudcred "bcf^gar." The idea of Theodoretus seems rather
that his worse character is a picker up of various scra|)s of
heresy from diflirent quarters, and this explanation ot the
name is borne out by his use of the connate verb tpai'i^'ofiat in
reference tti the selection by Audxus of some of the doctrines
ot Manes in I list. iv. y


- Polyiuorphus := Multiform.
'11. Tim. iv. 14.


* II. Kings xvi. 5.


Now I will endeavour briefly to dispute
with them, with the double object of curing
them, if I can, of their unsoundness, and of
giving a word of warning to the whole.

I call my work " Eranistes, or Polymor-
phus," for, after getting together from many
unhappy sources their baleful doctrines, they
produce their patchwork and incongruous
conceit. For to call our Lord Christ God
only is the way of Simon, of Cerdo, ot
Marcion,! and of others who share this
abominable opinion.

The acknowledgment of His birth from a
Virgin, but coupled with the assertion that
this birth was merely a process of transition,
and that God the VVord took nothing of the
Virgin's nature, is stolen from Valentinus and
Bardesanes and the adherents of their fables.-

To call the godhead and the manhood of
the Lord Christ one nature is the error filched
from the follies of Apollinarius.^

Again the attribution of capacity of sufler-
ing to the divinity of the Christ is a theft
from the blasphemy of Arius and Eunomius.
Thus the main principle of their teaching is
like beggars' gabardines — a cento of ill-
matched rags.

So I call this work Eranistes or Poly-
morphus. I shall write it in the form of a
dialogue with questions and answers, pro-

1 Cerdo, the gnostic teacher of the middle of the 2nd c, and
placed by Theodoretus (Ilxr. Fab. i. 24) in the reign of
Antoninus, A.D. 13S-161, is described by the Ps. Tertullian as
denying that Christ came in the substance of the flesh, but in
appearance only. According to Marcion the greater follower
of Cerdo, Christ was not born at all, but came down from
heaven to Capernaum A.D. 2c), his body being an appearance
and his death an illusion. Simon Magus, the " f.atlier ol all
heretics" of Irenxus (adv. Ilajr. pr. in lib. iii.) is ai)parently
cjuoted rather as the supposed originator of Gnosticism, than
from any definite knowledge of his tenets.

2 Valentinus (taught at Rome c. 140') the arch gnostic is
identified with the doctrine of emanation. Bardesanes (Bar
Daisan), who lived some thirty years later at Kdessa, was a
great leader of the Syrian school of oriental dualism. For
mention of his son Harmonius vide Hist. p. 129.

^Condemned at Constantinople in 3S1.


DIALOGUES.


i6i


positions, solutions, and antitheses, and all
else that a dialogue ought to have. I shall
not insert the names of the questioners and
respondents in the body of the dialogue as
did the wise Greeks of old, but I shall write
them at the side at the beginning of the para-
graphs. They, indeed, put their writings in
the hands of readers highly and variously
educated, and to whom literatui'e was life.
I, on the contrary, wish the reading of
what I write, and the discovery of what-
ever good it may give, to be an easy
task, even to the illiterate. This I think
will be facilitated if the characters of the
interlocutors are plainly shown by their
names in the margin, so the disputant who
argues on behalf of the apostolical decrees is
called " Orthodoxos," and his opponent
" Eranistes." A man who is fed by the
charity of many we commonly call "Beg-
gar ; " a man who knows how to get money
together we call a " Chrematistes." So we
have given our disputant this name from his
character and pursuits.

I beg that all those into whose hands
my book may fall will lay aside all precon-
ceived opinion and put the truth to the test.
For clearness' sake I will divide my book into
three dialogues. The first will contain the
contention that the Godhead of the only-be-
gotten Son is immutable. The second will
by God's help show that the union of the
Godhead and the manhood of the Lord
Christ is without confusion. The third will
contend for the impassibility of the divinity
of our saviour. After these three disputa-
tions we will subjoin several others as it were
to complete them, giving formal proof under
each head, and making it perfectly plain that
the apostles' doctrine is preserved by us.


DIALOGUE I.

THE IMMUTABLE.

Orthodoxos and Eranistes.

OrtJi. — Better were it for us to agree
and abide by the apostolic doctrine iu its pu-
rity. sBut since, I know not how, you have
broken the harmony, and are now offering
us new doctrines, let us, if you please, with
no kind of quarrel, investigate the truth.

Eran. — We need no investigation, for we
exactly hold the truth.

Ort/i. — This is what every heretic sup-
poses. Aye, even Jews and Pagans reckon
that they are defending the doctrines of the
truth ; and so also do not only the followers
of Plato and Pythagoras, but Epicureans too,

VOI,. Ill,


and they that are wholly without God or be-
lief. It becomes us, however, not to be the
slaves of a j^riori assumption, but to search
for the knowledge of the truth.

Eran. — I admit the force of what you
say and am ready to act on your suggestion.

Orth. — Since then you have made no
difficulty in yielding to this my preliminary
exhortation, I ask you in the next place not
to suffer the investigation of the truth to de-
pend on the reasonings of men, but to track
the footprints of the apostles and prophets,
and saints who followed them. For so way-
farers when they wander from the high-road
are wont to consider w^ell the pathways, if
haply they shew any prints of men or horses
or asses or mules going this way or that, and
when they find any such they trace the tracks
as dogs do and leave them not till once more
they are in the right road.

Erait. — So let us do. Lead on yourself,
as you began the discussion.

Orth. — Let us, therefore, first make care-
ful and thorough investigation into the divine
names, — I mean substances, and essences,
and persons, and proprieties, and let us learn
and define how they differ the one from the
other. Then let us thus handle afterwards
what follows.

Eran. — You give us a very admirable
and proper introduction to our argument.
When these points are clear, our discussion
will go forward w ithout let or obstacle.

Orth. — Since we have decided then that
this must be our course of procedure, tell me,
my friend, do we acknowledge one substance
of God, alike of Father and of the only be-
gotten Son and of the Holy Ghost, as we
have been taught by Holy Scripture, both
Old and New, and by the Fathers in Coun-
cil in Nicaia, or do we follow the blasphemy
of Arius ?

Eran. — We confess one substance of the
Holy Trinity.

Orth. — And do we reckon hypostasis to
signify anything else than substance, or do
we take it for another name of substance .''

Eran. — Is there any difference between
substance and hypostasis? '

Orth. — In extra Christian philosophy
there is not, for ohcia signifies rh oi-, that which
is, and vKoaramg that which subsists. But ac-
cording to the doctrine of the Fathers there
is the same difference between ovaia and
vnoa-aaiq as between the common and thepai*-
ticular, and the species and the individual.

Eran. — Tell me more clearly what is
meant by race or kind, and species and
individual.

>Cf. note p. 36, History.


M


1 62


THEODORET.


Orth. — Wc speak of race or kind with
regard to the animal, for it means many
tilings at once. It indicates both the rational
and the irrational ; and again there are many
species of irrational, creatures that lly, creat-
ures that are amphibious, creatures that go
on foot, and creatures that swim. And of
these species each is marked by many sub-
divisions ; of creatures that go on foot there
is the lion, the leopard, the bull, and countless
others. So, too, of flying creatures and the
rest there are many species; yet all of them,
though the species are the aforesaid, belong
to one and the same animal race. Similarly
the name man is the common name of man-
kind ; for it means the Roman, the Athenian,
the Persian, the Sauromatian,^ the Egyptian,
and, in a word, all who are human, but the
name Paulus or Fetrus does not signify what
is common to the kind but some particular
man ; for no one on hearing of Paul turns in
thought to Adam or Abraham or Jacob, but
thinks of him alone whose name he has
heard. But if he hears the word man sim-
ply, he docs not fix his mind on tlie individ-
ual, but bethinks him of the Indian, the
Scythian, and the Massagete, and of all the
race of men together, and we learn this not
only from nature, but also from Holy Script-
ure, for God said, we read, " I will destroy
man from the fiice of the earth," ^ and this
he spake of countless multitudes, and when
more than two thousand and two hundred
years had gone by after Adam, he brought
universal destruction on men through the
flood, and so the blessed David says : " Man
that is in honour and imderstandeth not," ^
accusing not one here nor one there, but all
men in common. A thousand similar ex-
amples might be found, but we must not be
tedious.

Era?i. — The diftcrence between the com-
mon and the proper is shewed clearly. Now
let us return to discussion about oi-tr/a and

Orth. — As then the name man is com-
mon to human nature, so we understand the
divine substance to indicate the Holy Trinity ;
but the hypostasis denotes any peison,as the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost ; for,
following the definitions of the Holy Fathers,
we say that hypostasis and individuality
mean the same thing.

Eran. — We agree that this is so.

Orth. — Whatever then is predicated of
the divine nature is common both to the
Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost,


' " Sauromalas /renl,-!: Scylliaruni Gr<eci vacant, ijitos Saf-
matas JioiiKini." I'liiiy iii. '

- Gen. vi. 7. » Vs. xlix. io.


as for instance " God," " Lord," " Creator,"
"Almighty," and so forth.

Era7i. — Without question these words
are common to the Trinity.

Orth. — But all that naturally denotes the
hypostasis ceases to be common to the Holy
Trinity, and denotes the hypostasis to which
it is proper, as, for instance, the names
" Father," " Unbegotten," are peculiar to
the Father; while again the names "Son,"
" Only Begotten," " God the Word," do not
denote the Father, nor yet the Holy Ghost,
but the Son, and the words " Holy Ghost."
"Paraclete," naturally denote the h^'postasis
of the Spirit.

Eran. — But does not Holy Scripture
call both the Father and the Son " Spirit "?

Orth. — Yes, it calls both the Father and
the Son " Spirit," signifying by this term
the incorporeal illimitable character of the
divine nature. The Holy Scripture only
calls the hypostasis of the Spirit " Holy
Ghost."

Eran. — This is indisputable.

Orth. — Since then we assert that some
terms are common to the Holy Trinity, and
some peculiar to each hypostasis, do we
assert the term " immutable " to be common
to the substance or peculiar to any h3'pos-
tasis.?

Eran. — The term " immutable" is com-
mon to the Trinity, for it is impossible for
part of the substance to be mutable and part
immutable.

Orth. — You have well said, for as the
term mortal is common to mankind, so are
" immutable " and " invariable" to the Holy
Trinity. So the only-begotten Son is immu-
table, as are both the Father that begat Him
and the Holy Ghost.

Eran. — Immutable.

Orth. — How then do you advance the
statement in the gospel " the word became
flesh," ' and predicate mutation of the immu-
table nature.''

Eran. — We assert Him to have been
made flesh not by mutation, but as He Him-
self knows.

Orth. — If He is not said to have become
flesh by taking flesh, one of two things must
be asserted, either that he underwent the
mutation into flesh, or was only so seen in
appearance, and in reality was God with-
out flesh.

Eran. — This is the doctrine of the dis-
ciples of Valcntinus, Marcion, and of the
Mauichees, but we have been taught without
dispute that the divine Word was made flesh,

'John i. 14.


DIALOGUES.


163


Orth. — • But ill what sense do you mean
" was made flesh " ? " Took flesh," or " was
changed into flesh"?

Era7i. — As we have heard the evangelist
say, " the word was made flesh."

Orth. — In what sense do you understand
" was made "?

Era7i. — He who underwent mutation into
flesh was made flesli, and, as I said just now,
as He knows. But we know that with Him
all things are possible,^ for He changed the
water of the Nile into blood, and day into
night, and made the sea dry land, and filled
the dry wilderness with water, and we hear
the prophet saying "Whatsoever the Lord
pleased that did He in heaven, and in earth,
in tlie seas and all deep places."^

Orth. — The creature is transformed by the
Creator as He will, for it is mutable and obeys
the nod of Him that fashioned it. But His
nature is immutable and invariable, where-
foi-e of the creature the prophet saith " He
that maketh and transformeth all things."^
But of the divine Word the great David says
" Thou art the same and thy years shall not
fail." ■* And again the same God says of
Himself " For I am the Lord and I change
not." '"

Ermi. — What is hidden ought not to "be
enquired into."

Orth. — Nor yet what is jolain to be alto-
gether ignored.

Eran. — I am not aware of the manner of
the incarnation. I have heard that the Word
was made flesh.

Orth. — If He was made flesh by mutation
He did not remain what He was before, and
this is easily intelligible from several analo-
gies. Sand, for instance, when it is subjected
to heat, first becomes fluid, tiien is changed
and congealed into glass, and at the time of
the change alters its name, for it is no longer
called sand but glass.

Eran. — So it is.

Orth. — And while we call the fruit of the
vine grape, when once we have pressed it, w^e
speak of it no longer as grape, but as wine.

Eran. — Certainly.

Orth. — And the wine itself, after it has
undergone a change, it is our custom to name
no longer wine, but vinegar.

Eran. — True.

Orth. — And similarly stone when burnt
and in solution is no longer called stone, but
lime. And innumerable other similar in-


I Matt. xix. 26. =Ps.cxxxv. 6.

3 The reference in Schulze's edition is to Jeremiah x. 16, but
here the Septuagint 6 TrAacra! Td -navTo. does not bear out the
point. The quotation is no doubt of Amos v. S, where the
LXX is 6 TTOLwr Trai'Ta koX fji€Ta(TKevd<^o}U ,

* Ps. iii. 27. oMal. iii. 6.


stances might be found where mutation in-
volves a chano;e of name.

Eran. — Agreed.

Orth. — If tlierefore you assert that the
Divine Word underwent the change m the
flesh, why do you call Hun God and not
flesh.'' for change of name fits hi with the
alteration of nature. For if where the thines
which undergo change have some relation to
their former condition (for there is a certain
approximation of vinegar to wine and of wine
to the fruit of the vine, and of glass to sand)
they receive anotlicr name after their alter-
ation, how, where the diflerence between
them is infinite and as wide as that
which divides a gnat from the whole visible
and invisible creation (for so wnde, nay
much wider, is the diflerence between the
nature of flesh and of Godhead) is it possi-
ble for the same name to obtain after the
change ?

Eran. — I have said more than once that
He was made flesh not by mutation, butcon-
tinuing still to be what He was, He was
made what He was not.

Orth. — But unless this word " was made"
becomes quite clear it suggests mutation and
alteration, for unless He was made flesh by
taking flesh He was made flesh by undergo-
ing mutation.

Eran. — But the word " take " is your
own invention. The Evangelist says the
Word was made flesh. ^

Orth. — You seem either to be ignorant
of the sacred Scripture, or to do it wrong
knowingly. Now if you are ignorant, I will
teach you ; if 3'ou are doing wrong, I will
convict you. Answer then ; do you acknow-
ledge the teaching of the divine Paul to be of
the Spirit.'*

Era II. — Ce rta i n ly .

Orth. — And do you allow that the same
Spirit wrought through both Evangelists and
Apostles }

Era)i. — Yes, for so have I learnt from the
Apostolic Scripture " There are diversities
of gifts but the same spirit," ^ and again
" All these things worketh that one and the
selfsame spirit, dividing to every man sev-
erally as He will,"^ and again "Having the
same Spirit of the Faith." "

Orth. — Your introduction of the apostolic
testimony is in season. If we assert that the
instruction alike of the evangelists and of
the apostles is of the same spirit, listen how
the apostle interprets the words of the Gos-
pel, for in the Epistle to the Hebrews he
says, " Verily he took not on him the


' Jolin i. 14.
- I. Cor. xii. 4.


s I. Cor. xii. 11.
* II. Cor. iv. 13.


M 2


164


THKODORET.


nature of angels, but he took on him the
seed of Abraham."' Now tell me what you
mean by the seed of Abraham. Was not
that which was naturally proper to Abraham
joroper also to the seed of Abraham ?

Eran. — No; not without exception, for
Christ did no sin.

Orth. — Sin is not of nature, but of cor-
rupt will.- On this very account, therefore,
I did not say indefinitely what Abraham
had, but what he had according to nature,
that is to say, body and reasonable soul.
Now tell me plainly ; will you acknowledge
that the seed of Abraham was endowed with
body and reasonable soul? If not, in this
point you agree with the ravings of Apol-
linarius. But I will compel you to confess
this by other means. Tell me now ; had
the Jews a body and a reasonable soul?

Era7i. — Of comse they had.

Orth. — So when we hear the prophet
saying, " But thou, Israel, art my servant,
Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of
Abraham my friend," ^ are we to understand
the Jews to be bodies only ? Are we not to
understand them to be men consisting of
bodies and souls ?

Eran. — True.

Orth. — And the seed of Abraham not
without soul nor yet intelligence, but with
everything which characterizes the seed of
Abraham ?

Eran. — He who so says puts forward two
sons.

Orth. — But he who says that the Divine
Word is changed into the flesh does not even
acknowledge one Son, for mere flesh by
itself is not a son ; but we confess one Son
who took upon Him the seed of Abraham,
according to the divine apostle, and
wrought the salvation of mankind. But if
you do not accept the apostolic preaching,
say so openly.

Eran. — But we maintain that the utter-
ances of the apostles are inconsistent, for
there appears to be a certain inconsistency
between " the Word was made flesh" and
" took upon Him the seed of Abraham."

Orth. — It is because you lack intelligence,
or because you are arguing for arguing's
sake, that the consistent seems inconsistent.
It does not so appear to men who use sound
reasoning ; for the divine apostle teaches
that the Divine Word was made Flesh, not
by mutation, but by taking on Him the seed


1 Heb. ii. 16.

2 cf. Article ix. of the English Church. Sin is not a part
of ipan's nature, but the fault or corruption of it. If in one
sense the fallen Ailam is the natural man, in a liiuher sense
Christ, the Son of man, is the natural man; i.e. in Him the
manhood is seen incorrupt, cf. p. 1S3 and note.

•• l>aiah xli. S.


of Abraham. At the same time, too, he
recalls the promise given to Abraham. Or
do you not remember the promises given to
the Patriarch by the God of the Universe?

Eran. — What promises?

Orth. — When He brought him out of his
father's house, and ordered him to come into
Palestine, did He not sav to him " I will
bless them that bless thee, and curse him
that curseth thee, and in thy seed' shall all
families of the earth be blessed "?

Eran. — I remember these promises.

Orth. — Remember, too, the covenants
made by God with Isaac and Jacob, for He
gave them, too, the same promises, confirm-
ing the former by the second and the third.

Eran. — I remember them too.

Orth. — It is in relation to these covenants
that the divine apostle writes in his Epistle
to the Galatians " Now to Abraham and his
seed were the promises made." He saith
not " seeds " as of many, but as of one . . .
which is Christ,- very plainly showing
that the manhood of Christ sprang from the
seed of Abraham, and fulfilled the promise
made to Abraham.

Eran. — So the apostle says.

Orth. — Enough has been said to remove
all the controversy raised on this point. But
I will nevertheless remind you of another
prediction. The blessing given to the Patri-
arch Jacob and to his father and his grand
father was given by him to his son Judah
alone. He said " A Prince shall not fail
Judah, nor a leader from his loins, until he
shall have come to whom it is in store, and
he is the expectation of the Gentiles."^ Or
do you not accept this prediction as spoken
of the Saviour Christ?

Eran. — Jews give erroneous interpreta-
tions of prophecies of this kind, but I am a
Christian ; I trust in the Divine word ; and
I receive the prophecies without doubt.

Orth. — Since then you confess that you
believe the prophecies and acknowledge the
predictions have been divinely uttered about
our Saviour, consider what follows as to the
intention of the words of the apostle, for
while pointing out that the promises made to
the patriarchs have reachctl their fulfilment,
he uttered those remarkable words * " He


1 Gen. xii. 3. The Ixx. has kvivKoyr\dri<TovTa.L iv croi. In Acts
iii. 21;, it is T(u anipnaTi arov : in Gal. iii. S, tV o-ou

'Gal. iii. 16. There is here an omission of the four words
" Ka\ Tu) o-TTt'pMaTi' o-ou." Of the difficulty of the passage a full
discussion will be found in Bishop Lightfoot's " Galatians " —
page 141.

■* Gen. xlix. 10. Here the text follows the Alexandrine
Septuagint substituting €u>s av cAflf) o awo/ceiTai for cios av tf^Oji
Td. airOKeifieva avTt^.

The Vulgate runs " JVoii aiiferHur scettrum de IitJa, el dux
defemorc ciiis, donee venial qui millenatis etl el ipse eiit ex-
pcclatio ffenliti m."

* Hebrews ii, 16.


DIALOGUES.


165


took not on Him the nature of angels," all
but saying the promise is true ; the Lord
has fulfilled His pledges ; the fount of bless-
ing is open to the gentiles ; God had taken
on Him the seed of Abraham ; through it
He brings about the promised salvation ;
through it He confirms the promise of the
gentiles.

Bran. — The words of the Prophet fit in
admirably with those of the apostle.

Orih. — So again the divine apostle,
reminding us of the blessing of Judah, and
pointing out how it received its fulfilment,
exclaims' " For it is evident that our Lord
sprang out of Judah." So too the Prophet^
Micah and the evangelist ^ Matthew. For
the former spoke bis prediction, and the latter
connects the prophecy with his narrative.
What is extraordinary is that he says that
the open enemies of the truth plainly told
Herod that the Christ is born in Bethlehem,
for it is written, he says, " And thou Bethle-
hem in the land of Judah art not the least
among the Princes of Judah for out of thee
shall come a Governor who shall rule
my people Israel." * Now let us subjoin
what the Jews in their malignity omitted and
so made the witness imperfect. For the
prophet, after saying " Out of thee shall he
come forth unto me that is to be Ruler in
Israel " adds " Whose goings forth have been
of old, from everlasting." *

Eran. — You have done well in adducing
the whole' evidence of the Prophet, for he
points out that He who was born in Bethle-
hem was God.

Orth. — Not God only but also Man ; Man
as sprung from Judah after the flesh and
born in Bethlehem ; and God as existing be-
fore the ages. For the words " Out of thee
shall he come forth unto me that is to be
Ruler," shew his birth after the flesh
which has taken place in the last days ; while
the woi'ds " Whose goings forth have been
of old, from everlasting" plainly proclaim
Hisexistence before the ages. In like man-
ner also the divine apostle in his Epistle to
the Romans bewailing the change to the
worse of the ancient felicity of the Jews,
and calling to mind their divine promises
and legislation, goes on to say " Whose are
the fathers, and of whom concerning the
flesh Christ came, who is over all God
blessed for ever Amen," ^ and in this same
passage he exhibits Him both as Creator of
all things and Lord and Ruler as God and
as sprung from the Jews as man.


1 Hebrews vii. 14.

* Micah V. 2.

* Matthew ii. 5, 6.


6.


* Matthew ii
5 Micah V. 2.
8 Romans ix. 5


Eraii. — Well ; you have explained these
passages, what should you say to the pro-
phecy of Jeremiah ? For this proclaims him
to be God only.

Orth. — Of wliut prophecy do you speak .'

Eran. — " This is our God and there
shall none other be accounted of in compari-
son to him — he hath found out all the way
of knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob
his servant and to Israel his beloved. Af-
terward did he shew himself upon earth and
conversed with men." '

In these words the Prophet speaks neither
of the flesh, nor of manhood, nor of man,
but of God alone.

Orth. — What then is the good of reason-
ing.'* Do we say that the Divine nature is
invisible.'' or do we dissent from the Apostle
when he says^ " Immortal, invisible, the
only God."

Eran. — Indubitably the Divine nature is
invisible.

Orth. — How then was it possible for the
invisible nature to be seen without a body.''
Or do you not remember those words of the
apostle in which he distinctly teaches the
invisibility of the divine nature.'' He says
" Whom no man hath seen nor can see." ^
If therefore the Divine Nature is invisible
to men, and I will add too to Angels, tell me
how he who cannot be seen or beheld vv^as
seen upon earth .''

Eran. — The Prophet says'* he was seen
on the earth.

Orth. — And the apostle says "" Immor-
tal, invisible, the only God" and ®"Whom
no man hath seen and can see."

Eran. — What then? is the Prophet
lying.?

Orth. — God forbid. Both utterances are
the words of the Holy Ghost.

Erafz. — Let us inquire then how the in-
visible was seen.

Orth. — Do not, I beg you, bring in human
reason. I shall yield to scripture alone.

Eran. — You shall receive no argument
unconfirmed by Holy Scripture, and if you
bring me any solution of the question deduced
from Holy ScrijDture I will receive it, and
will in no wise gainsay it.

Orth. — You know how a moment ago we

» Baruch, lii, 35, 37.

"The ascription of the prophecy of Baruch to Jeremiah
may be explained by tlie fact tliat in the Ixx Baruch was
phiced eitlier before or after Lanientalions, and was regarded
in the early church as an appendix to, and of equal author-
ity with, Jeremiah. It is so quoted by Irenaeus, Clemens
Alexandrinus, and Tertullian."

Augustine de Civ. xviii, 33. quotes Baruch iii, 16. with the
remarli " Hoc testimonium quidem nnn Hieremia: sed Scribes
eius attrihitrait giii vocabatur Baruch, sed Hieremice celebra-
tills hahctiir."

2 I. Tim. i. 17. ■» Baruch iii. 3S. « I. Tim. vi. 16.

3 I. Tim. vi. 16. si.Tim. i. 17.


1 66


THEODORET.


made tlie word of the evangelist clear by
means of tlie testimony of tlie apostle; and
that the divine apostle showed us how the
Word became Flesh, saying plainly "for
verily lie took not on Ilim the nature of
angels but He took on Ilim the seed of Abra-
ham." ' The same teacher will teach us how
the divine Word was seen upon the earth and
dwelt among men.

Eran. — I submit to tlie words both of
apostles and of prophets. Shew me then in
accordance with your promise the interpre-
tation of the prophecy.

Orth. — The divine apostle, writing to
Timothy, also says " without controversy
great is the mystery of godliness. God was
manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit,
seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles,
believed on in the world, received up into
glory." ^

It is therefore plain that the divine nature
is invisible, but the flesh visible, and that
through the visible the invisible was seen, by
its means working wonders and unveiling its
own power, for with the hand He fashioned
the sense of seeing and healed him that was
blind from birth. Again He gave the power of
hearing to the deaf, and loosed the fettered
tongue, using his fingers for a tool and
applying his spittle like some healing medi-
cine. So again when He walked upon
the sea He displayed tlie almighty power
of the Godhead. Fitly, therefore, did the
apostle say " God was manifest in the flesh."
For through it appeared the invisil)le nature
beheld by its means by the angel hosts, for
" He was seen," he says, " of angels."

The nature then of bodiless bein<rs has
shared with us the enjoyment of this boon.

Eran. — Then did not the angels see God
before the manifestation of the Saviour.'*

Orth. — The apostle says that He "was
made manifest in tlie flesh and seen of
angels."

Eran. — But the Lord said, " Take heed
that ye despise not one of these little ones,
for I say unto you that their angels do always
behold the face of my Father which is in
heaven." '^


1 Ilcb. ii. i6.

* l.Tiin. iii. \(i. Thcodnrctus shews no knowliilj^e nf the
reatlinj^ OC f'"" ®C '" this fiimoiis pnssngo accepted by our
revisers with tlic niarf^inril conniieiit " The word God in place
of He ivho rests on no siitlicienl ancient evidence." Macedo-
nius II, patriarch of Constantinople, is said to have been
accused by his enemy the liinperor Anastasius of falsifyinsj
this particular passage. Hut if rheodorctus, who died c. 45S,
really wrote ©c copies of the npistles containing this road,
ing must have existed some halt century before the dispute
between Maccdonius and Anastasius. Gregory of Nyssa also
uses the passage as does Theodoretus; Greg. Nyss. cont.
Eun. iv. I. The accepted opinion now regards the Codex of
Alcxandrinus as reading in.

^ Matt, xviii. 10. Observe the omission of the words " In
heaven," which A. V. inserts with N B D, etc.


Orth. — But the Lord said again, "Not
that any man hath seen the Father save he
which is of God, he hath seen the Father." ^
Wherefore the evangelist plainly exclaims,
" No man hath seen God at any lime," - and
confirms the word of the Lord, for he says,
" The only begotten Son which is in the
bosom of the Father He hath declared Him,"
and the great Moses, when he desired to see
the invisible nature, heard the Lord God
saving, " There shall no man see me and
live."^

Eran. — How then are we to under-
stand the words, " Their angels do always
behold the face of my Father which is in
heaven " }

Orth. — Just as we commonly understand
what is said about men who have been sup-
posed to see God.

Erau. — Pi'ay make this plainer, for I
do not understand. Can God be seen of
men also.''

Orth. — Certainly not.

Eran. — Yet we hear the divine scripture
saying God appeared unto Abraham at the
oak of Mamre ; * and Isaiah says " I saw the
Lord sitting upon a throne high and lifted
up," ^ and the same thing is said by Micah,
by Daniel and Ezekiel. And of the law-
giver Moses it is related that " The Lord
spake to Moses face to face as a man speaketh
unto liis friend," " and the God of the universe
Himself said, " With him will I speak
mouth to mouth, even apparently and not in
dark speeches." ' What then shall we say ;
did they bchoUl the divine nature?

Orth. — By no means, for God Himself
said, " There shall no man see me and live."

Eran. — Then they who say that they
have seen God are liars.''

Orth. — God forbid — they saw what it
was possible for them to see.

Eran. — Then the loving Lord accommo-
dates his revelation to the capacity of them
that see Him.''

Orth. — Yes; and this He has shewn
through the Prophet, " for I," He says,
" have multiplied visions and by the hands of
the Prophets was made like." **

He does not say "was seen" but "was
made like." And making like does not shew
the very nature of the thing seen. For even
the image of the emperor does not exhibit
tlie emperor's nature, though it distinctly
preserves his features.

Eran. — This is obscure and not siifli-


1 Tolin vi. 46.

2 John i. iS.

3 Kxodus xxxiii. 20.
•■ Genesis xviii. i. Sept.

8 Hosca xii. 10. Sept. A. V. has " used similitudes."


I"' Isaiah vi. i.

<■ Kxodus xxxiii. 11.

' Numbers xii. S.


DIALOGUES.


167


ciently plain. Was not then the substance
of God seen by them who beheld those reve-
lations?

Orth. — No; for who is mad enough to
dare to say so?

Eraii. — But yet it is said that they saw.

Orth. — Yes; it is said; but we both in
the exercise of reverent reason, and in reli-
ance on the Divine utterances, which exclaim
distinctly, " No man hath seen God at any
time," affirm that they did not see the Divine
Nature, but certain visions adapted to their
capacity.

Era7t. — So we say.

Orth. — So also then let us understand of
the angels when we hear that they daily see
the face of your Father.^ For what they see
is not the divine substance which cannot be
circumscribed, comprehended, or appre-
hended, which embraces the imiverse, but
some glory made commensurate with their
nature.

Eran. — This is acknowledged.

Orth. — After the incarnation, however.
He was seen also of angels, as the divine
apostle says, not however by similitude of
glory, but using the true and living covering
of the flesh as a kind of screen. " God," he
says, " was made manifest in the flesh, justi-
fied in the Spirit, seen of angels."^

Eran. — I accept this as vScripture, but I
am not prepared to accept the novelties of
phrase.

Orth. — What novelties of phrase have
we introduced?

Eran. — That of the " screen." What
Scripture calls the flesh of the Lord a screen?

Orth. — You do not seem to be a very dili-
gent reader of your Bible ; if you had been
you would not have found fault with what
we have said as in a figure. For first of all
the fact that the divine apostle says that the
invisible nature was made manifest through
the flesh allows us to understand the flesh as
a screen of the Godhead. Secondly, the
divine apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews,
distinctly uses the phrase, for he says,
" Having therefore, brethren, boldness to
enter into the Holiest by the blood of Jesus
by a new and living way, which he hath con-
secrated for us, through the veil, that is to say
his flesh ; and having an High Priest over
the House of God. Coming with truth
drawing near with a true heart in fulness of
faith." 3

Eraii. — Your demonstration is unanswer-
able, for it is based on apostolic authority.


1 Matthew xviii. 10. - I. Tim. iii. :6.

3 Hebrews x. iQ-32. In iii. 607. ed. Migne this passage
is quoted by Theodoret as in A. V.


Orth. — Do not then charge us with inno-
vation. We will adduce for you yet another
prophetic authority, distinctly calling the
Lord's flesh a robe and mantle.

Eran. — Should it not appear obscure
and ambiguous we will say nothing against
it, and be thanktul for it.

Orth. — I will make you yourself testify
to the truth of the promise. You know how
the Patriarch Jacob, when he was address-
ing Judah, limited the sovereignty of Judah
by the birth of the Lord.^ "A prince shall
not fail Judah, nor a leader from his loins
until he shall have come to whom it is in
store and he is the expectation of the
Gentiles." You have already confessed
that this prophecy was uttered about the
saviour.

Eran. — I have.

Orth. — Remember then what follows ;
for he says " And imto him shall the gather-
ing of the people be . . . he shall wash
his robe in wine and his mantle in the
blood of the grape." ^

Eran. — The Patriarch spoke of gar-
ments, not of a body.

Orth. — Tell me, then, when or where
he washed his cloak in the blood of the


grape \


Eran. — Nay; tell me you when he
reddened his body in it?

Orth. — Answer I beseech you moi'e
reverently.^ Perhaps some of the uninitiated
are within hearing.

Eran. — I will both hear and answer in
mystic language.

Orth. — You know that the Lord called
himself a vine ?

Eran. — Yes I know that he said " I am
the true vine." *

Orth. — Now what is the fruit of a vine
called after it is pressed?

Eran. — It is called wine.

Orth. — When the soldiers wounded the
Saviour's side with the spear, what did the
evangelist say was poured out from it?

Eran. — Blood and water.*

Orth. — Well, then; he called the
Saviour's blood blood of the grape, for if
the Lord is called u vine, and the fruit of
the vine wine, and from the Lord's side
streams of blood and water flowed down-
wards over the rest of his body, fitly and
appropriately the Patriarch foretells " He
shall wash his robe in wine and his mantle
in blood of the grape." For as we after the
consecration call the mystic fruit of the vine


1 Gen. xUx. 10.

2 Gen. xlix. 11.

3 /llfO'TtKtOTepOI'.


Compare note on p. 6.

* John XV. I.
5 John xix. 34.


1 68


THEODORET.


the Lord's blood, so he called the blood of
the true vine blood of the grape.

Eraii. — The point before us has been
set forth in language at once mystical and
clear.

Orth. — Although what has been said is
enough for your faith. I will, for confirmation
of the faith, give you yet another proof.

JBran. — I shall be grateful to you for so
doing, for you will increase the favour done
mc.

Ori/i. — You know how God called His
own body bread.'

Erati. — Yes.

Orth. — And how in
called His flesh corn.''

Eran. — Yes, I know.


another place he


Him saying " The hour


For I have heard
is come that the


Son of man should be glorified,"^ and " Ex-
cept a corn of wheat fall into the ground
and die, it abidcth alone ; but if it die it
bringeth forth much fruit." ^

Orth. — Yes ; and in the giving of the
mysteries He called the bread, body, and
what had been mixed, blood.

Eratt. — He so did.

Orth. — Yet naturally the body would
properly be called body, and the blood,
blood.

Eran. — Agreed.

Orth. — But our Saviour changed the
names, and to His body gave the name of
the symbol and to the symbol that of his
body. So, after calling himself a vine, he
spoke of the symbol as blood.

Eran. — True. But I am desirous of
knowing the reason of the change of names.

Orth. — To them tliat are initiated in di-
vine tilings the intention is plain. For he
wished the partakers in the divine mysteries
not to give heed to the nature of the visible
objects, but, by means of the variation of the
names, to believe the change wrought of
grace. For He, we know, who spoke of his
natural body as corn and l)read, and, again,
called Himself a vine, dignified the visible
symbols by the appellation of the body and
blood, not because He had changed their na-
ture, but because to their nature He had added
grace.''

Eran. — The mysteries are spoken of in
mystic language, and there is a clear declara-
tion of that which is not known to all.


Orth. — Since then it is acrreed that ll


le


* John xii. 23.


2JoIin xii. 24.


' This passage and a parallel passage fniin Dial. TI. were
quoted with force in tlie discussions of the luiglisli Kclonna.
lion. T?p. Ridley on the foregoing writes {A Brief Ihclara-
tion of the Lor'd'x Supper, I'arker Soc. Kd. p. ^5.) " What
can be more plainly said than this that this old writer saith?
That althoii_'h the Sacraments bear the name of the bodv and
blood of Christ, yet is not their nature changed, but abiileth
Still. And where is then the Papists' transubstantiation.' "


body of the Lord is called by the patriarch
"robe" and " mantle " ' and we have reached
the discussion of tlie divine mysteries, tell me
truly, of what do you understand the Holy
Food to be a symi)ol and type.' Of the god-
head of the Lord Christ, or of His body and
His blood.'

Eran. — Plainly of those things of which
they received the names.

Orth. — You mean of the body and of the
blood .'

Eran. — I do.

Orth. — You have spoken as a lover of
truth should speak, for when the Lord had
taken the symbol, He did not say " this is
my godhead," but "this is my body ; " and
again "this is my blood " ^ and in another
place " the bread that I will give is my flesh
which I will give for the life of the world." ^
Eran. — These words are true, for they
are the divine oracles.

Orth. — If then they are true, I supjjose
the Lord had a body.

Erati. — No; for I maintain him to ])e
bodiless.

Orth. — But you confess that He had a
body .'

Eran. — I say that the Word was made
flesh, for so I have been taught.

Orth. — It seems, as the proverb has it,
as if we are drawing water in a pail with a
hole in it.* For after all our demonstrations
and solutions of difliculties, you are bring-
ing the same arguments round again.

Eran. — I am not giving you my argu-
ments, but those of the gospels.

Orth. — And have I not given you the
interpretation of the words of the gospels
from those of prophets and apostles.'

Eran. — They do not serve to clear up the
point at issue.

Orth. — And yet we shewed how, being
invisible. He was made manifest through
flesh, and the relationship of this very flesh
we have been taught by the sacred writers —
" He took on Him the seed of Abraham." '"
And the Lord God said to the patriarch, "in
thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed," " and the apostle, " It is evident
our Lord sprang out of Judah." ' We ad-
duced further several similar testimonies;
but, since you are desirous of hearing yet
others, listen to the apostle when he says,
" For every high priest taken from among
men is ordained that he may ofler both gifts
and sacrifices, wherefore it is of necessity that
this man have somewhat also to ofler." "

' Gen. xlix. 2.^ 2 Matt. xxvi. 2S. sjohnvi. 51.

* Aristotle (OJc : 1.6. i .) uses the proverb as we sav in Eng-
lish " to draw water in a sieve." '• ]Ieb. ii.'io.

"Gen.ii. iS. ' Heb. vii. 14. 8 iii;ij. y. 1. viii. 3.


DIALOGUES.


169


Eran. — Point out, then, how He offered
after taking a body.

Orth. — The divine apostle himself clearly
teaches in the very passage, for after a few
words he says: "Wherefore, when He com-
eth into the world, He saith, sacrifice and
offering thou wouldst not, but a body hast
thou prepared me." ' He does not say " into
a body hast thou changed," but " a body
hast thou prepared," and he shows plainly
that the formation of the body was wrought
by the Spirit in accordance with the utter-
ance of the gospel, " Fear not to take unto
thee Mary thy wife ; for that which is
generated in her is of the Holy Ghost." ^

Eran. — The virgin then gave birth only
to a body 1

Orth. — It appears that you do not even
understand the composition of words,
much less their meaning, for he is teaching
Joseph the manner, not of the generation,
but of the conception. For he does not say
that which is generated of her, i. e. made,
or formed, is of the Holy Ghost. Joseph,
ignorant of the mystery, was suspicious
of adultery ; he was therefore plainly taught
the formation by the Spirit. It is this which
He signified through the prophet when He
said " A body hast thou prepared me" •' for
the divine Apostle being full of the Spirit
interpreted the prediction. If then the ofter-
ing of gifts is the special function of priests
and Christ in His humanity was called priest
and offered no other sacrifice save ''His own
body, then the Lord Christ had a body.

Eran. — This even I have repeatedly af-
firmed, and I do not say that the divineWord
appeared without a body. What I main-
tain is not that He took a bod}^ but that He
was made flesh.

Orth. — So far as I see our contest lies
with the supporters of Valentinus, of Mar-


J Heb.x. s.

2 Matt. i. 20. The rendering oiyivvrfiiv by " conceived " in
the A. V. somewhat obscures the arg-ument of Theodoret.
The R. V. has " begotten " in the margin.

3 Ps. xl. 7. Septuagint. The difficulty how to account for
the rendering of lSn"13 DDIN i- e. "My ear hast thou

• T - Jt

dug" by " <rw|u.a KaT>)pTio-io " is an old one. Did HOEAHCA-
CnXIAAEKATHPTlCn get altered by mistake into H0EAHCA-
CCnMAAEKATHPTICn? " How the word a^txa. came into the
Ixx we cannot say; but being there it is now sanctioned for us
by the citation here ; not as the, or even a proper rendering of
the Hebrew, but as a prophetic utterance." Alford ad loc.

* I have no hesitation in translating iAAa here by " save,"
in spite of the purist prejudice which has led even the revisers
of iSSi to retain something of the awkward periphrasis by
which the meaning of Matt. XX. 23 and Mark x. 40. is con-
fused in A. v., and an Arian sense given to our Lord's dec-
laration, "To sit on my right hand and my left is not mine
to give save to them for whom it is prepared." i. e. It is His
to give, but not to give arbitrarily or of caprice. Liddell and
Scott, Ed. 1SS3, recognise and illustrate this use of dAAa
(Vide s. V. I. 3.) which in classical Greek is vindicated by
such a passage as Soph. O. T. 1331. en-ixiac 6' aurdxeip vi.v
ouTts aXA' eyuj, and in N. T. Greek, as well as by the crucial pas-
sage in question, in Mark ix. S. oixeTi. ouSiva tlSov d\Kli t6>'
I>)<7oi/»' /udi'oj', " They no longer saw any one save ]esvis only."


cion, and of Manes ; but even they never
had the hardihood to say that the immutable
nature underwent mutation into flesh.

Eran. — Reviling is unchristian.

Orth. — We do not revile, but we are
fighting for truth, and we are vexed at your
arguing about the indisputable as though it
could be disputed. However, I will endeav-
our to put an end to your ungracious conten-
tion. Answer now ; do you remember the
promises which God made to David.''

Eran. — Which }

Orth. — Those which the prophet inserted
in the SSth Psalm.

Eran. — I know that many promises were
made to David. Which are you enquiring
about now?

Orth. — Those which refer to the Lord
Christ.

Eran. — Recall the utterances yourself,
for you promised to adduce your proofs.

Orth. — Listen now how the prophet
praises God at the very beginning of the
Psalm. He saw with his prophetic eyes the
future iniquity of his people, and the cap-
tivity that was in consequence foredoomed ;
yet he praised his own Lord for unfailing
promises. "I will sing," he says, "of the
mercies of the Lord forever, with my mouth
will I make known Thy faithfulness to all
generations, for thou hast said, Mercy shall
be built up for ever, Thy faithfulness shalt
Thou establish in the very heavens."*

Through all this the prophet teaches that
the promise was made by God on account of
lovingkindness, and that the promise is
faithful. Then he goes on to say what He
promised, and to whom, introducing God
Himself as the speaker. (" I have made a
covenant with my chosen." -) It is the Patri-
archs that He called chosen ; then He goes
on " I have sworn unto David my servant," ^
and He states concerning what He swore,
" Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build
up thy throne to all generations."*

Now whom do you suppose to be called
the seed of David }

Eran. — The promise was made about
Solomon.

Orth. — Then he made his covenant with
the Patriarchs about Solomon, for before
what was said about David he mentioned the
promises made to the Patriarchs " I have
made a covenant with my chosen," and He
promised the Patriarchs that in their seed He
would bless all nations. Kindly point out
how the nations were blessed through Solo-
mon.


1 Ps. Ixxxix. I. 2.
" Ps. Ixxxix. 3.


* Ps. Ixxxix. 3.
*Ps. Ixxxix. 4.


170


THEODORET.


Eran. — Then God fulfilled this promise,
not by means of Solomon, but of our Sa-
viour.

Orth. — So then our Lord Christ gave the
fullllnient to the pron/ises made to David.

Eran. — I hold that these promises were
made by God, either about Solomon, or about
Zerubbabel.

Orth. — Just now you used the argu-
ments of Marcion and Valentinus and of
Manes. Now you have gone over to the
directly opposite faction, and arc adv^ocating
the im])udcnce of the Jews. This is just like
all those who turn out of a straight road ;
they err and stray first one way and then
another, wandering in a wilderness.

Bra7i. — Revilers are excluded by the
Apostle from the kingdom.^

Orth. — Yes, if their revilings are vain.
Sometimes the divine Apostle himself oppor-
tunely uses this mode of speech. He calls
the Galatiaus "foolish,"- and of others he
says " men of corrupt minds, reprobate con-
cerning the faith," ■' and again of another set,
" Whose God is their belly, whose glory is
in their shame," ^ and so forth.

Eraii. — What occasion did I give you for
reviling?

Orth. — Do you really not think that the
willing advocacy of the declared enemies of
the truth furnishes the pious with very
reasonable ground of indignation?

Eraii. — And what enemies of the truth
have I patronized?

Orth. — Now, Jews.

Erati. — How so ?

Orth. — Jews connect prophecies of this
kind with Solomon and Zerubbabel, in order
to exhibit the groundlessness of the Chris-
tian position ; l)ut the mere words are quite
enough to convict them of their ini(|uity, for
it is written " I will establish my throne
for ever." '" Now not only Solomon and
Zerubbabel, to wliom such prophecies are
ap[)licd by the Jews, have lived out their
appointed time, and reached the end of life,
but the whole race of David has become
extinct ; for who ever heard of any one at the
l)resent day descended from the root of
David?

Eran. — But are not, then, those who are
called Patriarchs of the Jews of the family
of David ?

Orth. — Certainly not.

Eraii. — Whence, then, are they sprung?

Orth. — From the foreigner Herod, who,
on his father's side, was an Ascalonite, and


1 1. Cor. VI, 10.

2Gul. iii. I.


" Ps. Ixxxix. 4


8 2. Tim. iii.S.
< Phil. iii. 19.


on his mother's an Iduma^an ; ' but they, too,
have all disappeared, and many years have
gone by since their sovereignty came to an
end. But our Lord God promised not only
to maintain the seed of David for ever, but
to establish his kingdom undestroyed ; for
He said, " I will build up my throne to all
generations."

But we see that his race is gone, and his
kingdom come to an end. Yet though we
see this, we know that the God of the Uni-
verse is true.

Era?z. — That God is true is plain.

Orth. — If, then, God is true, as in truth
He is, and promised David that He would
establish His race for ever, and keep his king-
dom through all time, and if neither race nor
kingdom are to be seen, for both have come
to an end, how can we convince oiu" oppo-
nents that God is true ?

Eran. — I suppose, then, the prophecy
really points to the Lord Christ.

Orth. — If, then, you confess this, let us
investigate together a passage in the middle
of the Psalm ; we shall then more clearly
see what the prophecy means.

Eran. — Lead on ; I will religiously fol-
low in your footsteps.

Orth. — After making many promises
about this seed that it should be Lord both
by sea and land- and higher than the kings
of the earth and be called the first beo-otten
of God,-' and should boldly call God, Father*
God also added this, " My mercy will I keep
for him for evermore and my covenant shall
stand fast with him. His seed also will I
make to endure for ever and his throne as
the days of heaven." "

Eran. — The promise goes beyond the
bounds of human nature, for both the life
and the honour are indestructible and eternal.
But men endure but for a season ; their
nature is short lived and tlieir kingdom even
during its lifetime undergoes many and vari-
ous vicissitudes, so that truly the greatness
of the prophecy befits none but the Saviour
Christ.

Orth. — Go on then to what follows and
your opinion upon this point will be in every
way confirmed, for again saith the God of
the universe, " Once have I sworn by my

• Antipatcr or Antipas, a = Cypros, an Idumxan.
wealthy Iduina;an. |

Ilcrod the Great ~ Mariaiiinc, Princess of
the Maccabees.


Alexander


Herod Agrippa 1


Ilerodias.


llcrod K. of

, Chalcis.

Herod Agrippa H. Bernice. Dnisilla.
2 Ps. Ixxxix. 25. 3 Ps. Ixxxix. 27. * Ps. Ixxxix. 26.

^ Ps. Ixxxix. 2S, 29.


DIALOGUES.


171


holiness, if I lie unto David, his seed shall
endure for ever and his throne as the sun be-
fore me. It shall be established for ever as
the moon." '

Then, pointing out the truth of the prom-
ise He adds, "And the witness is faithful in
heaven."

Eran. — We must believe without doubt
in the promises given by the faithful witness,
for, if we are wont to believe men who have
promised to speak the truth even if they do
not confirm their words with an oath, who
can be so mad as to disbelieve the Creator of
the Universe, when He adds an oath to his
words .-^ For He who forbids others to swear
confirmed the immutability of his counsel by
an oath,- " that by two immutable things in
which it was impossible for God to lie we
might have a strong consolation who have
fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before us." ^

Orth. — If then the promise is irrefraga-
ble, and among the Jews there is now
neither family nor kingdom of the prophet
David to be seen, let us believe that our Lord
Jesus Christ is plainly called seed of David
in His humanity, for of Him the life and the
kingdom are both alike eternal.

Eran. — We have no doubt; and this I
own to be the truth.

Orth. — These proofs then are sufficient
to show clearly the manhood which our Lord
and Saviour took of David's seed. But to
remove all possibility of doubt by the wit-
ness of the majority, let us hear how God
makes mention of the promises given to
David through the voice of the jDrophet
Isaiah. " I will make," he says, " an ever-
lasting covenant with you," and, signifying
the law-giver, he adds, " even the sure mer-
cies of David." ''

Since He made this promise to David, and
spoke through Esaias, He will assuredly
bring the promise to pass. And what fol-
lows after the prophecy is in harmony with
what I say, for he saith *■' Behold I have given
him for a witness to the people, a leader and
commander to the people. Behold nations
that know thee not shall call upon thee, and
peoples that understand thee not shall run
unto thee." '' Now this fits in with none that
are sprung from David, for who of David's
descendants, as Esaias says, was made a ruler
of nations? And what nations in their
prayers ever called on David's descendants
as God?

Eran. — About what is perfectly clear it


' Ps. Ixxxix. 35. 36. 37. 3 Heb. vi. iS. ^ Is. Iv. 4. j. Ixx.
' Heb. vi. 17. * Is. Iv. 3.


is unbecoming to dispute, and this planily re-
fers to the Lord Christ.

Orth. — Then let us pass on to another
prophetic testimony and let us hear the same
prophet saying " There shall come forth a
rod out of the stem of Jesse and a branch
shall grow out of his roots." ^

Eran. — I think this prophecy was de-
livered about Zerubbabel.

Orth. — If you hear what follows, you
will not remain in your opinion. The Jews
have never so understood this prediction, for
the prophet goes on, "and the Spirit of the
Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of wis-
dom and understanding, the spirit of counsel
and might, the spirit of knowledge and the
fear of the Lord." - This would never be at-
tributed by any one to a mere man, for even
to the very holy the gifts of the .Spirit are
given by division, as the divine apostle wit-
nesses when he says, " To one is given by
the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the
word of knowledge by the same Spirit,"^
and so on. The prophet describes Him who
sprang from the root of Jesse as possessing
all the powers of the spirit.

Eran. — To gainsay this were sheer folly.

Orth, — Now hear what follows. You
will see some things that transcend human
nature, he goes on. " He shall not judge
after the sight of His eyes, neither reprove
after the hearing of His ears, but with right-
eousness shall He judge the poor, and re-
prove with equity the mighty '' of the earth,
and He shall smite the earth with the word
of His mouth, and with the breath of His
lips shall he slay the wicked." " Now of
these predictions some are human and some
divine. Justice, truth, equity, and rectitude
in giving judgment exhibit virtue in human
nature.

Eran. — We have so far clearly learned
that the prophet predicts the coming of our
Saviour Christ.

Orth. — The sequel will shew you yet
more plainly the truth of the interpretation.
For he goes on, " The wolf shall dwell with
the lamb," ^ and so on, whereby he teaches
at once the distinction of modes of life and the
harmony of faith ; and experience furnishes
a proof of the prediction, for they that abound
in wealth, they that live in poverty, servants
and masters, rulers and ruled, soldiers and
citizens and they that wield the sceptre of
the world are received in one font, ai'e all
taught one doctrine, are all admitted to one


' Isaiah xi. i. - Isaiah xi. 2. 3 1. Cor. xii. S.

•> A. V. " reprove with equity for the meek of the earth; "
Sept. eAeyfei, Toi/j Ta;rcii'oi>s T^s y^%.

^ Isaiah xi. 4. ® Is. xi. 6.


1/2


THEODORET.


mystic table, and each of the believers enjoys
an c(jual share.

JSran. — It is thus shewn that God is
spoken of.

Ort/i. — Not only God but man. So at
the very beginninj^ of this prediction he says
that a rod shall grow out of the root of Jesse.
Then at the conclusion of the prediction he
takes up once more the strain with wliich he
began, for he says " There sliall be a root of
Jesse which shall stand for an ensign of the
people, to it shall the Gentiles seek and his
rest shall be glorious." ^ Now Jesse was the
father of David, and the promise with an oath
was made to David. The prophet would
not have spoken of the Lord Christ as a rod
growing out of Jesse if he had only known
Him as God. The prediction also foretold
the change of the world, for "the earth"
he says " shall be full of the knowledge of
the Lord as the waters cover the sea." -

JSran. — I have licard the prophetic utter-
ances. But I was anxious to know clearly
if the divine company of the apostles also
says that the Lord Christ sprang from the
seed of David according to the flesh.

Orth. — You have asked for information
which so far from being hard is exceedingly
easy to give you. Only listen to the first of
the apostles exclaiming " David being a
prophet and knowing that God had sworn an
oath to him that of the fruit of his loins, ac-
cording to the flesh. He would raise up
Christ to sit upon His throne ; he seeing
this before spake of the resurrection of
Christ, that His soul was not left in hell
neither His flesh did see corruption.""^

Hence you may perceive that of the seed
of David according to the flesh sprang the
Lord Christ, and had not flesh only but also
a soul.

Era7i. — • What other apostle preached
this.?

Orth. — The great Peter alone was suffi-
cient to testify to the truth, for the Lord after
receiving the confession of the truth given by
Peter alone confirmed it by a mem.orable
approval. But since you are anxious to hear
others proclaiming this same thing, hear
Paul and Barnabas preaching in Antioch in
Pisidia ; for they, when they had made men-
tion of David, continued " Of this man's
seed hath God according to his promise
raised unto Israel a Saviour, Jesus," ■* and so
on. And in a letter to Timothy the divine
Paul says " Remember that Jesus Christ of
the seed of David was raised from the dead
according to my gospel." '' And, when


' Isaiiih xi. lo.
2 Isaiah xi. 9.


* Acts ii. _^o-3i.

* Acts xiii. 23.


6 2 Tim. ii.S.


writing to the Romans, at the very outset he
calls attention to the Davidic kin, for he says
'• Paul a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be
an apostle, separated unto the gospel of God
which He had promised before by his prophets
in the holy scriptures concerning His Son
which was made of the seed of David ac-
cording to the flesh," ^ and so on.

Eran. — Your proofs are numerous and
convincing ; but tell me why you have omitted
what follows.'*

Orth. — Because it is not about the God-
head, but about the manhood, that you are
in difficulties. Had you been in doubt about
the Godhead, I would have given you proof
of it. It is enough to say '' according to the
Flesh" to declare the Godhead which is not
expressed in terms. When speaking of a re-
lationship of man in general I do not say the
son of such an one " according to the flesh,"
but simply "son," so the divine Evange-
list writing his genealogy says "■ Abraham
begat Isaac " ^ and does not add according to
the flesh, for Isaac was merely man, and he
mentions the rest in like manner, for they
were men and had no qualities transcending
their nature. But when the heralds of the
truth are discoursing of our Lord Christ, and
are pointing out to the ignorant His lower
relation, they add tlie words •' according to
the flesh," thus indicating His Godhead and
teaching that the Lord Christ was not only
man but also Eternal God.

Eran. — You have adduced many proofs
from the apostles antl prophets, but I follow
the words of the Evangelist " The Word
was made Flesh." ^

Orth. — I also follow this divine teaching,
but I understand it in a pious sense, as mean-
ing that He was made Flesh by taking flesh
and a reasonable soul. But if the divine
Word took nothing of our nature, then the
covenants made with the patriarchs by the
God of all with oaths were not true, and the
blessing of Judah was vain, and the promise
to David was false, and the Virgin was su-
perfluous, because she did not contribute
anything of our nature to the Incarnate God.
Then the predictions of the prophets have no
fulfilment. Then vain is our preaching, vain
our faith and vain the hope of the resurrec-
tion'' for the Apostle, it appears, lies when he
says " and hath raised us up together and made
us sit together in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus." * For if the Lord Christ had nothing


• Romans j. 1-3. 2 Matt. i. 2. •'' Jolin i. 14.

•• A Kti'ij eATTicro ttiVti? would be a faith which could not pos-
sibly be realized; and inarota eAjri? a hope of not impossible
but very improbable fulfilment. But the distinction between
xevo? and naraco? is hardly borne out by their use in the text.

" Eplies. ii. 6.


DIALOGUES.


173


of our nature then He is folsely described as
our first fruits, and His bodily nature has not
risen from tlie dead and has not taken the
seat in Heaven on tlie right hand ; and if He
has obtained none of these things, how hath
God raised us up together and made us sit
together with Christ, when we in no wise
belong to Him in Nature? But it is impious
to say this, for the divine apostle, though the
general resurrection has not yet taken place,
thougrh the kingrdom of heaven has not vet
been bestowed upon the faithful, exclaims,
" He hatii I'aised us up together and made us
sit together in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus," in order to teach that since the resur-
rection of our first fruits, and His sitting on
the right hand has come to pass, we too in
general shall attain the resurrection, and that
all they who share in His nature and have
adopted His faith, share too in the first fruits
of His glory.

Erau. — We have gone through many and
sound arguments, but I was anxious to know
the force of the Gospel saying.

Orth. — -You stand in need of no interpre-
tation from without. The evangelist him-
self interprets himself. For after saying
" the Word was made flesh," he goes on
" and dwelt among us."^ That is to say by
dwelling in us, and using the flesh taken
from us as a kind of temple, He is said to
have been made flesh, and, teaching that He
remained unchanged, the evangelist adds
" and we beheld His glory — the glory as of
the only begotten of the Father, full of grace
and truth." ^ For though clad with flesh He
exhibited His Father's nobility, shot forth the
beams of the Godhead, and emitted tlie ra-
diance of the power of the Lord, revealing
by His works of wonder His hidden nature.
A similar illustration is afforded by the words
of the divine apostle to the Philippians :
" Let this mind be in you which was also in
Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God
thought it not robbery to be equal with God,
but made Himself of no reputation and took
upon Him the form of a servant and was
made in the likeness of men, and being
found in fashion as a man he humbled Him-
self and became obedient unto death even the
death of the cross." ^ *

Look at the relation of the utterances.
The evangelist says " the Word was made
flesh and dwelt among us," the apostle,
" took upon him the form of a servant ; " the
evangelist " We beheld His glory, the glory
as of the only begotten of the Father " — the
apostle, "who being in the form of God


'John i. 14.


2 John i. 14.


'Phil. ii.j.S.


thought it not robbery to be equal with
God." To put the matter briefly, both teach
that being God and son of God, and clad
v/ith His Father's glory, and having the same
nature and power with Him that begat Him,
He that was in the beginning and was with
God, and was God, and was Creator of the
world, took upon Him the form of a servant,
and it seemed that this was all which was
seen ; but it was God clad in human nature,
and working out the salvation of men. This
is what was meant by " The word was made
flesh " and " was made in the likeness of men
and being found in fashion as a man."
This is all that was looked at by the Jews,
and therefore they said to him " For a good
work we stone Thee not but for blasphemy
and because that Thou being a man makest
Thyself God," ^ and again " This man is not
of God because He keepeth not the Sabbath
Day."-

Eraii. — The Jews were blind on account
of their unbelief, and therefore used these
words.

Orth. — If you find even the apostles be-
fore the resurrection thus saying, will you re-
ceive the interpretation.'' I hear them in the
boat, after the mighty miracle of the calm,
saying " what manner of man is this, that
even the vvinds and the sea obey Him.''"^

Eran. — This is made plain. But now
tell me this; — the divine apostle says that
He " was made in the likeness of man."

Orth. — What was taken of him was not
man's likeness, but man's nature. For " form
of a servant " is understood just as " the
form of God " is understood to mean God's
nature. He took this, and so was made in
the likeness of man, and was found in fashion
as a man. For, being God, He seemed to
be man, on account of the nature which He
took. The evangelist, however, speaks of
His being made in the likeness of man as
His being made flesh. But that you may
know that they who deny the flesh of the
Saviour are of the opposite spirit, hear the
great John in his Catholic Epistle saying
" Ever}' spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ
is come in the flesh is of God, and every
spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh is not of God, and this is
that spirit of Anti-Christ." '

Eran. — • You have given a j^lausible in-
terpretation, but I was anxious to know how
the old teachers of the Chui"ch have under-
stood the passage "the word was made
flesh."

Orth. — You ought to have been persuaded


1 John X. 33.
- John ix. 16.


3 Matt. viii. 27.
* I.John iv. 2, 3.


174


THEODORET.


by the apostolic and prophetic proofs ; but
since you require further the interpretations
of the holy Fathers I will also furnish you,
God helping me. this medicine.

Eran. — Do not bring me men of obscure
position or doubtful doctrine. I shall not
receive tiic interpretation of such as these.

Orth. — Does tlie far famed Athanasius,
brightest light of the church of Alexandria,
seem to you to be worthy of credit.''

Eraii. — Certainly, for he ratified his
teaching by the suftbring he underwent for
the Truth's sake.

Orth. — Hear then how he wrote to Epic-
tetus.' " The expression of Joim ' the Word
was made flesh ' has this interpretation, so
far as can be discovered from tiie similar pas-
sage which we hnd in St. Paul ' Clirist was
made a curse for us.' - It is not because He
was made a curse but because He received the
curse on our behalf that He is said to have
been made a curse, and so it is not because
He was turned into flesh, but because He
took flesh on our behalf, that He is said to
have been made flesh." So far the divine
Athanasius. Gregory, too, whose glory
among all men is great, who formerly ruled
the Imperial city at the moutli of the Bos-
phorus and afterwards dwelt at Nazianzus,
thus wrote to Cledonius against the specious
fallacies of Apollinarius.

Eran. — He was an illustrious man and a
foremost fighter in the cause of piety.

Orth. — Hear him then. He says^ " the
expression ' He was made Flesh ' seems to be
parallel to His being said to have been made
sin and a curse, ^ not because the Lord was
transmuted into these, — for how could He?
— but because He accepted these when He
took on Him our iniquities and bore our in-
firmities." *

Eran. — The two interpretations agree.

Orth. — We have shown you the pastors
of the south and north in harmony ; now
then let us introduce too the illustrious teach-
ers of the west, who have written their in-
terpretation, if with another tongue, yet with
one and the same mind.

Erati. — I am told that Ambrosius, who
adorned the episcopal throne at Milan, fought
in the first ranks against all heresy, and
wrote works of great beauty and in agree-
ment with the teaching of the apostles.

Orth. — I will give you his interpretation.
Ambrosius says in his work concerning the
faith "It is written tliat the Word was made
flesh. I do not deny that it is written, but


1 Ed. Ben. I. 2. 207. * II. Cor. v. 21.

* r.:il. iii. i^^. " Isaiah liii. .;.

* 1 lij). ad Cled. i. Ed. Paris. ]>. 744.


Gal. iii. 13.


look at the terms used ; for there follows
*• and dwelt among us,' that is to say dwelt
in human flesh. You are therefore aston-
ished at the terms in which it is written that
the Word was made flesh, on the assmnption
of flesh, by the di\ine Word, when also con-
cerning sin which He had not, it is said that
He was made sin, that is to say not that He
was made the nature and operation of sin,
but that he might crucify our sin in the flesh ;
let them then give over asserting that the
nature of the Word has undergone change
and alteration, for He wdio took is one and
that which was taken other." ^

It is now fitting that you should hear the
teachers of the east, this being the only
quarter of the world which we have hitherto
left unnoticed, though they indeed might
well have first witnessed to the truth, for to
them w^as first imparted the teaching of the
apostles. But since you have sharpened
your tongues against the first-born sons of
piety by whetting them on the hone of false-
hood, we have reserved for them the last
place, that after first hearing the rest, you
might lay witness by the side of witness, and
so at once admire their harmony, and cease
from your own interminable talk. Listen
then to Flavianus who for a long time right
wisely moved the tiller of the church of An-
tioch, and made the churches which he
guided ride safe over the Arian storm, by
expounding to them the word of the gospel.
" The Word was made flesh and dwelt among
us; He is not turned into flesh, nor yet did
he cease from being God, for this he was
from all eternity and became flesh in the dis-
pensation of the incarnation 2 after himself
building his own temple, and taking up his
abode in the passible creature." And if you
desire to hear the ancients of Palestine, lend
your ears to the admirable Gelasius, who
(lid diligent husbandry in the church of
Caesarea. Now these are his words in his
homily on the festival of the Lord's epiphany.^

1 de Incar. Doin. Sac. vi.II. Ed. Ben. p. 716. Tlie I^atin of
Ainbrcisc, wliich is not exactly rendered by Tlieodoret, is as
tiillows: — ".SVf scriplion est, iiujiiiinit, tjiiin Verbiim caro

foclum est {loan /, 14). Scriptuiii est, noii nego: scd consid-
era quid seqiiatiir; seqiiitur eniin : lit habilavit in nohis,hoc
est, itlud ^ crhitm quod carncm sitseepit, hoc hahitavit in nobis,
hoc est, in carne habilavit humana.

" Miraris erffo quia scriptum est: Verbum caro factum est,
cum caro assumpta sit a Dei Verba: quando de peccato quod
non habiiit, scriptum est quia peccatiim /actus est, hoc est, non
natura operationeque peccati, utpote in similitudinem carnis
pcccati /actus: sedut peccatum nostrum in sua carne crucifi-
fferet, susceptinnem pro tinbis injirmitatum obnoxii jam cor-
poris peccati carnal IS assumpsit.

llesinant erffo dicere jtaturam Verbi in corporis naturam
esse mulatam; ne pari inierpretatione videatiir natura Verbi
in coiitagium mulat a peccati Aliud est enim quod assumpsit,
et aliud quod assiimptum est."

2 Compare note on page 72.

•'"' In tl)c Eastern church till nearly tlie end of the fourth
centnrv we find, as lias been said, the divine celebration of
Christ's nativity and baptism on January ^ith. The date of the
severance of tlie two can be approximately tixe<l, for Ghrysos-


DIALOGUES.


175


" Learn the truth from the words of John
the Fisherman, ' And the word was made
flesh,' not having himself undergone change,
but having taken up his abode with us. The
dwelling is one thing; the Word is another;
the temple is one thing, and God who dwells
in it, another."

Eran. — I am much struck by the agree-
ment. ,

Orth. — Now do you not suppose that the
rule of the apostolic faith was kept by John,
who first nobly watered the field of the
church of the Antiochenes, and then was a
wise husbandman of that of the imperial
city .?

Eraji. — I hold this teacher to be in all
respects an admirable one.

Orth. — Well, this most excellent man has
interpreted this passage of the Gospel. He
writes,^ " When you hear that the Word was
made flesh, be not startled or cast down, for
the substance did not deteriorate into flesh —
an idea of the uttermost impiety — but con-
tinuing to be just what it is, so took the form
of a servant. For just as wdien the apostle
says ' Christ hath redeemed us from the
curse of the law, being made a curse for
us,' ~ he does not say that the substance of
Christ departed from His own glory, and
took the substance of a ciuse, a position
which not even devils would imagine, nor
the utterly senseless, and the naturally idiotic
— so I'emarkable being the connection be-
tween impiety and insanity. But what he
does assert is that after receiving the curse
due to us. He does not suffer us to be cursed
for the future. It is in this sense that He
is stated to have been made flesh, not be-
cause he had changed the substance into
flesh, but because he had assumed the flesh,
the substance remaining all the while un-
impaired."^

You may like to hear also Severianus,
Bishop of Gabala.'' If so, I will adduce his
testimony and do you lend your ears.

" The text ' the Word was made flesh '
does not indicate a deterioration of nature


torn refers to it as a matter of merely a few years' standing-, in
a sermon probably delivered on the Christmas day of 3S6 A.D.
How far back we are to refer the origin of this two-fold festi-
val it is not easy to determine, the earliest mention of any
kind being the allusion by Clement of Ale.xandria to the
annual commemoration of Christ's baptism by the Basilid-
ians (Stromata, lib. i. c. 21 )• At any rate by the latter part of
the fourth century the Epiphany had become one of the most
important and venerable festivals in the Eastern church."
Diet. Christ. Ant. i. 617.

1 Chrys. Ed. Sav. II. p. 598.

2 Gal. iii. 13.

3 The modern reader will not omit to note the bearing of
these patristic interpretations of the scriptural statements that
the word was " made " tlesh and that Christ was " made " a
curse on later controversies concerning Transubstantiation.

* On the northern seaboard of Syria. Severianus was at
one time Chrysostom's commissary and afterwards his deter-
mined opponent.


but the assumption of our nature. Suppose
you take the word 'was made' to indicate
a change ; then when you hear Paul saying
' Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of
the law being made a curse for us,' do you
understand him to mean a change into the
nature of a curse.'' Just as being made a
curse had no other meaning than that He
took our curse upon Himself, so the words
was made flesh and dwelt among us mean
nothing other than the assumption of flesh."

Eran. — I admire the exact agreement'
of these men. For they are as unanimous
in giving the same interpretations of evan-
gelical writings as if they had met in the
same place and written down their opinion
together.

Orth. — Mountains and seas separate them
very far from one another, yet distance does
not damage their harmony, for they were all
inspired by the same gift of the spirit. I
would also have oflered you the interpreta-
tions of the victorious champions of piety
Diodoius and Theodorus, had I not seen
that you were ill disposed towards them, and
had inherited the hostility of Apollinarius ;
you would have seen that they have expressed
similar experiences, drawing water from the
divine Fount, and becoming themselves too,
streams of the spirit. But I will pass them
by, for you have declared a truceless war
against them. I will, however, shew you
the famous teacher of the Church, and his
mind about the divine incarnation, that you
may know what opinion he held concerning
the assumed nature. You have no doubt
heard of the illustrious Ignatius, who re-
ceived episcopal grace by the hand of the
great Peter, ^ and after ruling the church of
Antioch, wore the crown of martyrdom.
You have heard too of Irenseus, who enjoyed
the teaching of Polycarp, and became a light
of the western Gauls; — of Hippolytus and
Methodius, bishops and martyrs, and the
rest, whose names I will append to their
expressions of opinion.

Eraii. — I am exceedingly desirous of
hearing their testimony too.

OrtJi. — Hear them now bringing forward
the apostolic teaching. Testimony of Saint
Ignatius., bishop of Antioch, and martyr.

From the letter to the Smyrna;ans (I.) : —

" Having a full conviction with respect to
our Lord as being truly descended from David


1 The value of Chrysostom and Severianus as independent
witnesses is somewhat weakened by the fact, pointed out by
Schulze, that amnng the writings of the former some are
attributed to the latter.

- The Apost. Const, vii. 46. represent Ignatius as ordained by
St. Paul. Malalas describes St. Peter as ordaining Ignatius
on'the death of Euodius. Vide article " Euodius " in Diet.
Christ. Biog.


176


THEODORET.


according to the flesh, son of God accurding
t) Godhead' and power, born really of a
virgin, baptized by John that all righteous-
ness migiit be fulfilled - by Him, really in
the time of Pontius Pilate and of Herod
the tetraich crucitied for our sake in the
flesh.""

Of the same in the same epistle : —

" For what advantageth it me if a man
praises me but blasphemes my Lord, in not
confessing him to be a bearer of flesh? but
he who does not make this confession really
denies Him and is himself bearer of a
corpse.'"'

Of the same from the same epistle : —

"For if these things weic done by our
Lord in appearance only, then it is in appear-
ance onl)" that I am a prisoner in chains ; and
why Iiave I delivered myself to death, to
fire, to sword, to the beasts? But he who
is near to the sword is near to God.* Only
in the name of Jesus Christ that I may
share his suflerings I endure all things
while He, Perfect Man whom some in their
ignorance deny, gives me strength.""

From the same in the letter to the Ephe-
siatis : —

" For our God Jesus Christ was born in
Mary's womb by dispensation of God of the
seed of David ' and of the Holy Ghost who
was born and was baptized that our mortality
might be i^urified." **

From the same epistle : —

" If ye all individually come together by
grace naine by name in one faith, and in one
Jesus Christ according to the flesh of David's
race Son of God and Son of man.^

Of the same from the sajue epistle : —

'• There is one Physician of flesh and of
spirit generate and ingenerate, God in man,
true life in death, Son of Mary and of God,
first passible and then impassible, Jesus
Christ our Lord." '"

Lastly of the satne in his epistle to the
Trallians : —

" lie ye made deaf therefore when any
man speaks to you apart from Jesus Christ,


' Bp. LighUoot {,Ap. Fathers ft. If. I'i. 200.) ndopts the
rcndiM;^ Kara i>eAj)/ia koi bvvaixiv for KajH tttoTijra, and notes
" 'riiiodoict stranj^cly sulistitutcs liedxrjTa for t^tAijua. This
reading . . . in:iy be dueto . . . ignorance of the abso-
lute use of t*cAi)»ia. The Armenian transhitor likewise has
substituted another word."

2 Matt. ill. 15.

' Ig. ad Sinyrn. I.

^'fhcre is a play here on the crrtpKO</)opo<r. rfxpoc/iopo^, and,
possibly, dfof/iopo?. Vide Pearson and I.ightfoot ad loc. (Ignat.
ad Sinyrn. V.)

"•" A saying to tliis effect is attributed to Our Lord by
Didyiniis on I's : Ixxxviii. S. It is nieiitioned also bv Origen
llom.XX. In Jcrein:Sec. III." Bp. I.ightfoot 1. c'

" Ignat. ad Sinyrn. W .

' Coinpaie note on page ^2.

" Up. I.ightfnot adopts tlic reading of Cod. Med. "that by
his passion he might cleanse the water." Ig. ad ICph. XVIII.

'•' Ig. ad Kph. XX.
"Ignat. ad Kph. VII.


who was of David's race and of Mary, who
was really born and really ate and drank
and was persecuted in the time of Pontius
Pilate, was crucified and died, while beings
on earth and beings in heaven and beings
under the earth were looking on."'

Testimo7iy of Jrenccies bishop of Lyons,
from his third book Against the heresies : —
'' Why then did they add the words ' Li
the city of David, ^ save to proclaim the
good news that the promise made by God to
David, that of the Iruit of his loins should
come an everlasting king, was fulfilled ;
a promise which indeed the Creator of the
world had made." "

Of the same from the same book : —
" And when he says ' Plear ye now, Oh
House of David ' '' he means that the ever-
lasting King whom God promised to Da\id
that he would raise up from his body is He
who was born of David's Virgin."

Of the same from the sa?ne book : —
" If then the first Adam had had a human
father and had been begotten of seed, it
would have been reasonable to say that the
second Adam had been begotten of Joseph.
But if the former was taken from earth, and
his creator was God, it was necessary also
that He who renews in himself the man
created by God should have the same
likeness of generation with that former.
Why then did not God again take dust?
Why did he on the other hand ordain that
the formation should be made of Mary?
That there might be no other creation ; that
that which was being saved might be no
other thing; but that the former might him-
self be renewed without loss of the likeness.
For then do they too fall away who allege
that He took nothing from the Virgin, that
they may repudiate the inheritance of the
flesh and cast ofl' the likeness." ''

Of the same from the same book : —
" Since his going down into Mary is use-
less ; for why went He down into her if He
was designed to take nothing from her?
And further, if He had taken nothing from
Mary He would not have accepted the food
taken from earth whcrebv is nourished the
body taken from earth, nor would He like
Moses and Elias, after fasting forty days,
have himgered, on account of His body de-
manding its own food, nor vet would John
his disciple when writing about him have
said — ' Jesus being wearied from his jour-
ney sat,'® nor would David have uttered the
prediction about him 'And tliey added to


1 Ig. ad Trail, i:

- I, like ii. 4.

s Ps. cxxxii. II.


* Is. vii. i_v
""Cont. H.-cr. iii. 31 .
'■John iv. 6.


DIALOGUES.


177


the pain of my wounds,'^ nor would He
have wept over Lazarus," nor would He have
sweated drops of blood, '^ nor would He
have said, ' my soul is exceedingly sorrow-
ful,' * nor yet when He was pierced would
blood and water have issued from His side."
For all these things are proofs of the flesh
taken from earth, which He had renewed in
Himself in the salvation of his own ciea-
ture." ^

Of the same from the sa?ne book : —
" For as by the disobedience of the one
man who was first formed from rude earth
the many were made sinners ' and lost their
life, so also was it fitting that through
obedience of one man, the firstborn of a
virgin, many should be made righteous and
receive their salvation. " **

Of the same fi'om the same work : —
" ' I have said ye are gods and all of you
children of the Most High but ye shall die
like man.' ^ This He says to them that did
not accept the gift of adoption, but dishonour
the incarnation of the pure generation of the
word of God, deprive man of his ascent to
God, and are ungrateful to the Word of God
who for their sakes was made flesh. For
this cause was the word made man that man
receiving the word and accepting the adop-
tion should be made God's son."^"
Of the sajue from the same book : —
" Since then on account of the fore-
ordained dispensation •' the spirit came
down, and the only begotten Son of God,
who also is Word of the Father, when the
fulness of time was come, was made flesh
in man and our Lord Jesus Christ — being
one and the same — fulfilled all the human
dispensation as the Lord himself testifies,
and the apostles confess, all the teachings
of men who invented the ogdoads and
tetrads and similitudes are proved plainly
false." 12

Testimony of the Holy Hlppolytus^ Bishop


^ Ps. Ixix. 26. A. V. They talk to the ^rief of those whom
thou hast wounded. Ixx. R. V. They tell of the sorrow of those
whom thou hast wounded.

2 John xi. 35. 7 Rom. v. 19.

3 I^uke xxii. 44. 8 Cont. Haer. iii. 20.
* Mat. xxvi. 2S. 9 Ps. lxxxii.67.

0 John xix. 34. '0 Cont. Haer. iii. 21.

<i Cont. H.xr. iii. 32. n Vide note on page 72.

'2 Adv. Hair. iii. 26. The allusion is to the gnostics and
mainly to Valentinus and his school who imagined seven
heavens, and a supercelestial space termed " Ogdoad." " The
doctrine of an Ogdoad of the commencement of finite exist-
ence having been established by Valentinus, those of his fol-
lowers who had been imbued with the Pythagorean philosophy
introduced a modification. In that philosophy the tetrad was
regarded with peculiar veneration, and held to be the founda-
tion of the sensible world." Cf. Hippolytus Ref. vi. 23, p. 179
"We read there (Iren. i. xi.) of Secundus as a Valentinian
who divided the Ogdoad into a right hand and a left hand
tetrad, and in the case of Marcus who largely uses Pyth-
agorean specul.ations about numbers the tetrad holds the
highest place in the system." Dr. Salmon, Diet. Christ. Biog.
iv. 72. Irenasus wrote a work, no longer extant, " on the Og-
doad." Euseb. H. E. v. 20.


and Martyr^ from his discourse on^ " The
Lord is my shepherd " ; —

"And an ark of incorruptible wood was
the Saviour Himself, for the incorruptibility
and indestructibility of His Tabernacle
signified its producing no corruption of sin.
For the sinner who confesses his sin says
' My wounds stink and are corrupt because
of my foolishness.' - But the Lord was
without sin, made in His human nature of
incorruptible wood, that is to say, of the
Virgin and tlie Holy Ghost, overlaid within
and without, as it were, by purest gold of
the word of God."

Of the same from his discourse on El-
kanah and Hannah : —

" Bring me then, O Samuel, the Heifer
drawn to Bethlehem, that you may shew the
King begotten of David, and anointed King
and Priest by the Father."

Fro7n the same discourse : —

" Tell me, O Blessed Mary, what it was
that was conceived by thee in the womb ;
what it was that was borne by thee in a
Virgin's womb. It was the Word of God,
firstborn from Heaven, on thee descending,
and man firstborn being formed in a womb,
that the first born Word of God might be
shewn united to a firstborn man."

From the sajtie discourse : —

" The second, which was through the
prophets as through Samuel, he revokes,
and turns his people from the slavery of
strangers. The third, in which He took the
manhood of the Virgin and was present in
the flesh ; who, when He saw the city wept
over it."

Of the same from his discourse on the
beginnijig of Isaiah '."^ —

" He likens the world to Egypt ; its idola-
try, to images ; its removal and destruction to
an earthquake. The Word he calls the
' Lord ' and by a ' swift cloud ' he means
the right pure tabernacle enthroned on which
our Lord Jesus Christ entered into life to
undo the fall."

Testijnony of the Holy Methodius^'' bishop
and martyr^ from his discourse on the
martyrs : —

" So wonderful and precious is martyr-
dom that our Lord Jesus Christ Himself,
the Son of God, testified in its honour that
He thought it not robbery to be equal with
God, that He might crown with this grace
the Manhood into whom He had come
down."

Testimo7iy of the holy Eustathius^ bishop

1 Ps. xxiii. I. 2 Ps. xxxviii. 5. s Vide Isaiah xix. i.

■• Hishcip fust of Olympus and then of Patara at the be-
ginnmg of the 4th c. This is the only fragment preserved by
Theodoret.


VOL. HI.


N


178


THEODORET.


of Antioch^ confessor. Froju his interpre-
tation of the xvith Psalm : —

" The soul of Jesus experienced both.
For it was in the place of tlie souls of men
and being made without the flesh, lives and
survives. So it is reasonable and of the same
substance as the souls of men, just as the
flesh is of the same substance as the flesh of
men, coming forth from Mary."

Of the satne froJU his zvork about the
so7il : —

" On looking at the education of the child,
or at the increase of his stature, or at the
extension of time, or at the growth of the
body, what would they say.'' But, to omit
the miracles wrought upon earth, let them
behold the raisings of the dead to life, the
signs of the Passion, the marks of the
scourges, the bruises and the blows, the
wounded side, the prints of the nails,
the shedding of the blood, the evidences
of the death, and in a word the actual resur-
rection of the very body."

From the same work : —

" Indeed if any one looks to the gener-
ation of the body, he would clearly discover
that after being born at Bethlehem He was
wrapped in swaddling clothes, and was
brought up for some time in Egypt, because
of the evil counsel of the cruel Herod, and
grew to man's estate at Nazareth."

From the same work : —

" For the tabernacle of the Word and of
God is not the same, wherebv the blessed
Stephen beheld the divhie glory." ^

Of the same fro?ii his sermon on " the
Lord created me in the beginning of His
way" :^ —

" If the Word received a beginning of
His generation from the time when pass-
ing through His mother's womb He wore
the human frame, it is clear that He was
made of a woman ; but if He was from the
first Word and God with the Father, and
if we assert that the universe was made by
Him, then He who is and is the cause of all
created things was not made of a woman,
but is by nature God, self existent, infinite,
incomprehensible ; and of a woman was
made man, formed in the Virgin's womb by
the Holy Ghost."

From the same work : —

" For a temple absolutely holy and unde-
filed is the tabernacle of the word according
to the flesh, wherein God visibly made his
habitation and dwelt, and we assert this not
of conjecture, for He who is by nature the
Son of this God when predicting the destruc-


1 Acts vii. 57.


" I'rov. viii. ^z. Sc|)t.


tion and resurrection of the temple distinctly
instructs us by His teaching when He says to
the murderous Jews, ' Destroy this temple
and in three days I will raise it up.' " ^

F^om the same work : —

" When then the Word built a temple and
carried the manhood, companying in a body
with men. He invisibly displayed various
miracles, and sent forth the apostles as her-
alds of His everlasting kingdom."

Of the same from his intrepretation of
Psalm xcii : —

"It is plain then if 'He that anointeth *
means God whose throne He calls * ever-
lasting,' the anointcr is plainly by nature
God, begotten of God. But the anointed
took an acquired virtue, being adorned with
a chosen temple of the Godhead dwelling
in it."

Fhe testimony of the holy Aihanasizis^
Bishop of Alexandria and Confessor. From
the defence of Dionysius Bishop of Alex-
andria : —

" ' I am the vine, ye are the branches My
Father is the husbandman.' ^ For we accord-
ing to the body are of kin to the Lord, and
for this reason He himself said ' I will de-
clare thy name unto my brethren." ^ And
just as the branches are of one substance
with the vine, and of it, so too we, since we
have bodies akin to the bod}^ of the Lord,
receive them of His fulness, and have it as a
root for our resurrection and salvation. And
the Father is called a husbandman, for He
Himself through the Word tilled the vine
which is the Lord's body.''

Of the samefrofn the sa?ne treatise : —

"The Lord was called a vine on account
of His bodily relationship to the branches
which are ourselves,"

Of the same from his greater oration con'
cerning the faith : —

" The scripture ' in the beginning was the
Word ' ■* clearly indicates the Godhead. The
passage ' the Word was made flesh ' '" shews
the human nature of the Lord."

From the same discourse: —

" ' He shall wash His garments in wine'*
that is His body, which is the vestment of
the Godhead in His own blood."

Of the samefrojn the same discourse : —

" The Word ' was" is referred to His divin-
ity, the words ' was made flesh ' " to His body,
the Word was made flesh not by being
reduced to flesh, but by bearing flesh, just as
any one might say such an one became or
was made an old man, though not so born


' John ii. 19.

2 John XV. sand i.


2

= Ps. xii. 22

•John i. I


ojohn 1. 14.
" Gen. xlix. II,
'John i. I.
6 John i, 14.


Ixx.


DIALOGUES.


179


from the beginning, or the soldier became a
veteran, not being previously such as he be-
came. John says, ' I became,' or ' was in
the island of Patmos on the Lord's day.' ^ Not
that he was made or born there, but he says
' I became or was in Patmos ' instead of say-
ing ' I arrived ; ' so the Word ' arrived ' at
flesh, as it is said ' the Word was made flesh.'
Hear the words ' I became like a broken ves-
sel,' ^ and ' I became like a man that hath no
strength, free among the dead.' ""

Of the same from his letter to Eficte-
iiis : —

"Whoever heard such things? Who
taught them.? Who learnt them.'' ' Out of
Zion shall go forth the law and the Word of
the Lord from Jerusalem.' " But whence did
these things come forth ? What hell vomited
them out.'' To say that the body taken of
Mary was of the same substance as the God-
head of the Word, or that the Word was
chansred into flesh and bones and hairs and
a whole body ; whoever heard in a church
or at all among: Christians that God bore a
body by adoption and not by birth? "

Of the same from the same Epistle : —

"But who, hearing that the Word made
for Himself a passible body, not of Mary,
but of His own substance, would call the
sayer of these things a Christian.'' Who
has invented so unfounded an impiety, as
even to think and to say that they who affirm
the Lord's body to be of Mary, conceive no
longer of a Trinity, but of a quaternity in
the godhead.'' As though they that are of
this opinion described the flesh which the
Saviour clothed himself with of Mary as of
the substance of the Trinity.

" Whence further have some men vomited
forth an impiety as bad as the foregoing, and
alleged that the body is not of later time than
the godhead of the Word, but has always
been co-eternal with it, since it is formed of
the substance of wisdom."

Of the same f rout the same letter : —

" So the body taken of Mary was human
according to the scriptures, and real in that
it was the same as our own. For Mary was
our sister, since we are all of Adam, a fact
which no one could doubt who remembers
the w-ords of Luke." "

Testimony of the holy Busily bishop of
Ccesarea : —

From the interpretation of Psahn LX.

" All strangers have stooped and been put
under the yoke of Christ, wherefore also ' over

1 Rev. 1.9. 3 ps. Ixxxviii. 4. 5.

2Ps. xxi.i2. 4 Isaiah ii. 13.

" The antithesis Is between tlie Greek words t*ecri? unci
■tiio-i?. cf. " Kpti'OTtA))!' IlirSapou, i^etrtt 6e <I>iAoft>ou." Corp.
Ins. (add.) 24S0. d. cLuke lii. 3$.

N


Edom' does he ' cast out' his 'shoe." Now
the shoe of the Godhead is the flesh which
bore God whereby he came among men."

Of the same from his writing's about the
Holy Ghost to Amphilochius : —

" He uses the phrase ' of whom ' instead
of ' through whom ; ' as when Paul says
' made of a woman.' - He clearly made
this distinction for us in another place where
he says that the being made of the man is
proper to a woman, but to a man the being
made by the woman, in the words ' For as
the woman is of the man so is the man by
the woman.' '^ But with the object at once
of pointing out the dift'erent use of these ex-
pressions, and of collecting obiter an error
of certain men who supposed the body of the
Lord to be spiritual, that he may shew how
the God-bearing flesh was composed of
human matter, he gives prominence to the
more emphatic expression, for the expression
' by a woman ' was in danger of suggesting
that the sense of the word generation was
merely in passing through, while the phrase
' of the woman ' makes the common nature
of the child and of the mother plain
enough."

Testimony of the holy Gregory bishop
of Naziamis. From thefor?ner exposition
to Cledoniits : —

" If any one says that the flesh came down
from heaven, and not from this earth, and
from us, let him be Anathema. For the
words 'The second man is from heaven,"*
and ' as is the heavenly such ai'e they also
that are heavenly ' * and ' no man hath as-
cended up to heaven but the son of man that
came down from heaven,' ^ and any other
similar passage, must be understood to be
spoken on account of the union with man,
as also the statement that ' all things were
made by Christ,' ' and that ' Christ dwells
in our hearts,' ^ must be understood not ac-
cording to the sensible, but according to the
intellectual conception of the Godhead, the
terms being commingled together just as are
the natures."

Of the same from the same work : —

" Let us see from their own words what
reason they give for the being made man,
that is for the incarnation. If indeed it was
that God otherwise not contained in space,
might be contained in space and, as it
were under a veil, might converse with men
in the flesh, then their mask and their
stage play are exquisite : not to say that it
was possible for Him otherwise to converse


1 Ps. Ix.S.

2 Gal. iv. 4.

3 I. Cor. xi. 12.
* I. Cor, XV. 47.


CI. Cor. XV. 48.
" John iii. 13.
'John i. 3.
8 Ephes. iii. 17.


i8o


THEODORET.


with us, as of yore, in a burning bush and in
human form, but if that He might undo the
damnation of sin by taking like to like ' then
just as He required flesh on account of tlic
condemned flesh, and a soul on account of
the soul, so too he required a mind on ac-
count of the mind, which in Adam not
only fell but, — to employ a term which
physicians are accustomed to use about dis-
eases— was affected with original malady. -
For that which did not keep the command-
ment was what had received the command-
ment; and that which dared transgression
was what had not kept the commandment ;
and that which specially needed salvation
was what had transgressed, and that which
was assumed was what needed salvation ; so
the mind was assumed. Now this point has
been demonstrated, whether they will or no,
by proofs which are so to say mathematical
and necessary. But you are doing just as
though, if a man were to have a diseased
eye and a limping foot you were to cure the
foot but leave the eye uncured ; or, if a
painter had painted a picture badlv, were to
alter the picture, but leave the painter alone,
as thousfh he were doinjj his work well.
But if they are so constrained by these argu-
ments as to take refuge in the statement that
it is possible for God to save man, even
without a mind, why then clearly He might
have done so even without flesh, by the mere
expression of His will, just as He works and
has worked in the universe without a body.
Away then with the flesh as well as with
the mind ! Let there be no inconsistency in
your absurdity."

Testhnony of the Holy Gregory ^bishop of
Nyssa. From his sermon on Abraham : —

" So the Word came down not naked, but
after having been made flesh, not in the form
of God, but in the form of a servant.^ This
then is He who said that He could do noth-
iner of Himself.' For the not beinsf able is
the part of powerlessness. For as darkness
is opposed to light, and death to life, so
is weakness to power. But yet Christ is
Power of God. Power is wholly incon-
sistent with not being able. For if power
were powerless what is powerful ? When
then the Word declares that He can do
nothing it is plain that He does not attribute
his powerlessness to the Godhead of the
Only-begotten, but connects his not being
able with the powerlessness of our nature.


1 The original for apTrao-a^, " seizing " has ayiao-a; i. c. Iial-
lowing.

- The worJ used is Tj-pwroTrafltii', a late and rare one. Galen
uses the correlative wpuiTOTraOiia to express a condition distin-
guished from <Tvij.TTd.0eia,


Phi


♦John V. 19.


The flesh is weak, as it is written, ' The
spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.' " ^

Of the sajnefrom his Book ' ' on the Per-
fection of Life " ; —

"Again the true lawgiver, of whom Moses
was a type, hewed for Himself out of our
earth the slabs of nature. No wedlock fash-
ioned for Him the flesh that was to receive
tlie godhead, but He Himself is made the
hewer of His own flesh, graven as it is by
the finger of God. For the Holy Ghost came
upon the Virgin, and the power of the High-
est overshadowed her." And when this had
come to pass, nature once again took its inde-
structible character, being made immortal by
the marks of the divine finger."

Of the sa?ne frojn his Book against
Eunomius : —

"W^e assert therefore that when He said
above that wisdom built for herself a house,^
he intimates by the phrase the formation of
the flesh of the Lord, for the very wisdom
made its home in no strange dwelling, but
built itself its dwelling of the Virgin's
body."

Of the same frofn the same treatise: —

" The Word was before the ages, but
the flesh was made in the last times, and no
one would say on the contrary cither that
the flesh was before the ages, or the Word
made in the last times,"

Of the same frojn the same treatise : —

"The expression 'created me'"* is not to
be understood of the divine and the unde-
filed, but, as has been said, of our created
nature, according to the dispensation of the
incarnation." '"

Of the sajne from the frst discourse on
the Beatitudes : —

" ' Who being in the form of God, thought
it not robbery to be equal with God, but
emptied himself, and took the form of a ser-
vant.' " What poorer, in respect of God,
than the form of a servant.'' What more
lowly, in respect of the King of all, than
approach to fellowship in our poor nature.?
The King of Kings and Lord of Lords'
voluntarily dons tlie form of servitude."

Testimony of the Holy JFlavianics^ bishop
of Antioch. From his sermon on John the
Baptist : —

" Do not think of connexion in any physi-
cal sense, nor entertain the idea of conjugal
intercourse. For thy Creator is creating His
own bodily temple now being born of thee."

Of the same from, his book on " The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me*^ : —


1 Matt. xxvi. 41.

» Luke i. 35.

^ Prov. ix. I.

* Prov. viii. 2t; Ixx.


oi(cofo/oiia. cf. note on p. 72.

Phil. ii. 6. 7.

Dent. X. 17; Rev. xvii. 14. andxix. 16.


DIALOGUES.


i8i


"Hear Him saying, 'The Spirit is upon
me because He hath anointed me.' ^ You
do not know, He says, what you read, for
I, the anointed with the Spirit, am come
to you. Now what is alvin to us, and not
the invisible nature, is anointed with the
Spirit." 2

Testimony of Amphilochms^ bishop of
Iconiiun. From his Discourse on " My
Father is greater than I : " ^ —

" Distinguish me now tlie natures, the
Divine and the human. For man was not
made from God by falling away, nor w^as
God made of man by advancement. I am
speaking of God and man. When, how-
ever, you attribute the passions to the flesh
and the miracles to God, you of necessity
and involuntarily assign the lowly titles to
the man born of Mary, and the exalted and
divine to the Word Who in the beginning
was God. Wherefore in some cases I utter
exalted words, in others lowly, to the end
that by means of the lofty I may shew the
nature of the indwelling Word, and by the
lowly, own the weakness of the lowly flesh.
Whence sometimes I call myself equal to
the Father and sometimes greater than the
Father, not contradicting myself, but shew-
ing that I am God and man, for God is of
the lofty, man of the lowly ; but if you wish
to know how my Father is greater than I, I
spoke of the flesh and not of the person of
the Godhead."

Of the same from his discourse on " The
Son can do nothing of Himself : " ■* —

" How was Adam disobedient in Heaven,
and how of heavenly body was he formed
first-formed beside the first formation.'' But
it was the Adam of the earth who was
formed at the beginning; the Adam of the
earth disobeyed ; the Adam of the earth was
assumed. Wherefore also the Adam of the
earth was saved that thus the reason of the
incarnation * may be proved necessary and
true." ^

Testnnony of the Holy John Bishop of
Constantinople. From the speech which he
made when the Gothic envoy had spoken
before hi?n : —

" See from the beginning what He
does. He clothes Himself in our nature,
powerless and vanquished, that by its
means He may fight and struggle and from
the beginning He uproots the nature of
rebellion."

* Is. Ixi. I.

2 Of these two works no fragments exist but these two
preserved by Theodoretus.

3 John xiv. 23.

* John V. 19.

s oiKoi'o/u.ia. cf. note on p. 72.
*cf. I. Cor. XV. 47.


Of the same from his discourse on ^ The
Festival of the Nativity : —

"For is it not of the very last stupidity for
them to bring down their own gods into
stones and cheap wooden images, shutting
them up as it were in a kind of prison, and
to fancy that there is nothing disgraceful in
what they either say or do, and then to find
fault with us for saying that God made a
living temple for Himself of the Holy Ghost,
by means of which he brought succour to the
world .^ For if it is disgraceful for God to
dwell in a human body, then in projDortion
as the stone and the wood are more worth-
less than man is it much more disgraceful for
him to dwell in stone and wood. But per-
haps mankind seems to them to be of less
value than these senseless objects. They
bring down the substance of God into stones
and into dogs ; - but many heretics into fouler
things than these. But we could never en-
dure even to hear of these things.^ But
what we say is that of a virgin's womb the
Christ took pure flesh, holy and without
spot, and made impervious to all sin, and
restored the body ■* that was His own."

A little further on : " And we assert that
when the divine Word had fashioned for
Himself a holy temple by its means he
brought the heavenly state into our life."

Of the same from the oration : That the
lowly words and deeds of Christ were not
spoken and done through lack of power^
but throitgh distinctions of dispensation.

" What then are the causes of many
humble things having been said about Him
both by Himself and by His apostles? The
first and greatest cause is the fact of His
having clothed Himself with flesh, and
wishing all his contemporaries and all who
have lived since, to believe that He was not
a shadow, nor what was seen merely a form,
but reality of nature. For if when He Him-
self and His apostles had spoken about Him
so often in humble and in human sense, the
devil yet had power to persuade some
wretched and miserable men to deny the rea-
son of the incarnation, and dare to say that
He did not take flesh and so to destroy all
the ground of His love for man, how many
would not have fallen into this abyss if He
had never said anything of the kind.^"

I have now produced for you a few out of
many authorities of the heralds of the truth,

1 Migne II. 356.

2 e.g. Anubis, the barker Anubis — cf. Virg. ^n. viii.
69S, and the common oath " by the dog," unless indeed the
common adjuration of Socrates vr\ toc Kvva may have been
only a vernacular substitute for >/>) toi' Aia, like the vulgar
" law " for " Lord." The Benedictine Ed. adds " cats."

* cf. Ephes. V. 12.

* (TKeT'o?. cf. 2 Cor. iv. 7. i Thess. iv. 4. 1 Peter iii. 7.
Cicero. Tusc. i . 22 calls the body " vas animi."


l82


THEODORET.


not to stun you with too many. They are
quite enough to show the bent of the mind
of the excellent writers. It is now for you
to say what force their writings seem to have.

Erati. — They have all spoken in har-
mony with one another, and the workers in
the vineyard of the West agree with them
whose husbandry is done in the region of
the rising sun. Yet I perceived a consider-
able difference in tlieir sayings.

Orth. — They are successors of the divine
apostles ; some even of those apostles were
privileged to hear the holy voice and see the
goodly sight. The majority of them too
were adorned with the crown of martyrdom.
Does it seem right for you to wag the tongue
of blasphemy against them 'i

Eran. — I shrink from doing this ; at the
same time I do not approve of their great
divergence.

Orth. — But now I will bring you an
unexpected remedv. I will adduce one of
your own beautiful heresy — your teacher
Apollinarius,' and I will shew you that he
understood the text " The Word was made
flesh " just as the holy Fathers did. Hear
now what he wrote about it in his " vSum-
mary."

The testimony of Apollinarms from his
" Sii/nmary " ; —

" If no one is turned into that which he
assumes, and Christ assumed flesh, then He
was not turned into flesh."

And immediately afterward he contin-
ues : —

" For also He gave himself to us in rehx-
tionship by means of the body to save us.
Now that which saves is far more excellent
than that which is being saved. Far more
excellent then than we are, is He in the
assumption of a body! But He would not
have been more excellent had He been
turned into flesh."

A little further on he says : —

"The simple is one, but the complex can-
not be one ; he then that alleges that He was
made flesh aftirms the mutation of the one
Word. But if the complex is also one, as
man, then he who on account of the union
with the flesh says the Word was made flesh
means tiie one in complexity."

And again a little further on he says —
"To be made flesh is to be made empty ,-'
but the being made empty declares not
man, but the Son of man, who ' emptied
Himself not by undergoing change, but by
investiture."

There ; you see the teacher of your own


1 cf. p. 132.


' o-apKuait KtVu)<Ti9. cf. I'liil. li. 7.


doctrines has introduced the word ' investi-
ture ' and indeed in his little work upon
the faith he says — "We then believe that
he was made flesh, while His Godhead re-
mained unchanged for the renewal of the
manhood. For in the holy power of God
there has been neither alteration nor change
of place, nor inclusion" — and then shortly
again — " We worship God who took flesh
of the blessed virgin, and on this account in
the flesh is man, but in the spirit God."
And in another exposition he says —
"We confess the Son of God to have been
made the Son of man, not nominally but
verily, on taking flesh of the Virgin j\Iary."

Eran. — I did not suppose that Apolli-
narius held these sentiments. I had other
ideas about him.

Orth. — Well; now you have learnt that
not only the prophets and apostles, and they
who after them were ordained teachers of
the world, but even Apollinarius, the writer
of heretical babbling, confesses the divine
Word to be immutable, states that He was
not turned into flesh but assumed flesh, and
this over and over again, as you have heard.
Do not then struggle to throw yoiu' master's
blasphemy into the shade by your own.
For, says the Lord " the disciple is not
above his master." ^

Eran. — Yes, I confess that the divine
Word of God is immutable and took flesh.
It were the uttermost foolishness to with-
stand authorities so many and so great.

Orth. — Do you wish to have a solution
of the rest of the difliculties.''

Eran. — Let us put off their investiga-
tion until to-morrow.

Orth. — Very well ; our synod is dis-
missed. Let us depart, and bear in mind
what we have agreed upon.


DIALOGUE II.

THE UNCONFOUNDED.

Eranlstcs and Orthodoxus,

Eran. — I am come as I promised. 'Tis
yours to adopt one of two alternatives, and
either furnish a solution of my difficulties,
or assent to what I and my friends lay
down.

Orth. — I accept your challenge, for I
think it right and fair. But we must first
recall to mind at what point we left ofl' our
discourse yesterday, and what was the con-
clusion of our argument.

1 Matt. X. 24.


DIALOGUES.


1^3


Eran. — I will remind you of the end.
I remember our agreeing that the divine
Word remained immutable, and took flesh,
and was not himself changed into flesh.

Orth. — You seem to be content with the
points agreed on, for you have faithfully
called them to mind.

Eran. — Yes, and I have already said
that the man that withstands teachers so
many and so great is indubitably out of his
mind. I was moreover put to not a little
shame to find that Apollinarius used the
same terms as the orthodox, although in his
books about the incarnation his drift has
distinctly been in another direction.

Orth. — Then we affirm that the Divine
Word took flesh .?

Eran. — We do.

Orth. — And what do we mean by the
flesh? A body only, as is the view of Arius
and Eunomius, or body and soul.'*

Eran. — Body and soul.

Orth. — What kind of soul.'* The reason-
able soul, or that which is by some termed
the phytic^ vegetable,Mhat is, vital.'* for the
fable-mongering quackery of the Apolli-
narians compels us to ask unseemly ques-
tions.

.Eran. — Does then Apollinarius make a
distinction of souls? "^

Orth. — He says that man is composed of
three parts, of a body, a vital soul, and further
of a reasonable soul, which he terms mind.
Holy Scripture on the contrary knows only
one, not two souls ; and this is plainly
taught us by the formation of the first man.
For it is written God took dust from tlie
earth and " formed man," and " breathed
into his nostrils the breath of life, and man
became a living soul." ^ And in the gospels
the Lord said to the holy disciples " Fear
not them which kill the body, but are not
able to kill the soul ; but rather fear him
which is able to destroy both soul and body
in hell." "

And the very divine Moses when he told
the tale of them that came down into Egypt
and stated with whom each tribal chief had
come in, added, " All the souls that came
out of Egypt were seventy-five," " reckoning
one soul for each immigrant. And the
divine apostle at Troas, when all supposed

1 <|)utik:o?, of or belonging to ^viov, or plant; but though
<J>uTbi' is opiiosed to ^C>av, it is also used of any creature, and
here seems to mean no more than the soul of physical life, and
nothing beyond.

- cf. p. 132.

3 Gen. ii. 7.

* Matt. X. 2S. of. J.uke xii. 4. 5.

sGen. xlvi. 20. Ixx. In the Hebrew the number is but
seventy, including Jacob himself. St. Stephen, as was natural
in a Hellcnized jew follows the Ixx. (Acts vii. 14.) For the
number 75 there were doubtless important traditional author-
ities known to the Ixx.


Eutychus to be dead, said "Trouble not
yourselves for his soul is in him." ^

Eran. — It is shewn clearly that each
man has one soul.

Orth. — But Apollinarius says two ; and
that the Divine Word took the unreason-
able, and that instead of the reasonable, he
was made in the flesh. It was on this ac-
count that I asked what kind of soul you
assert to have been assumed with the body.

Eran. — I say the reasonable. For I
follow the Divine Scripture.

Orth. — We agree then that the " form
of a servant " assumed by the Divine Word
was complete.

Eran. — Yes ; complete.

Orth. — And rightly; for since the whole
first man became subject to sin, and lost the
impression of the Divine Image, ^ and the
race followed, it results that the Creator,
with the intention of renewing the blurred
image, assumed the nature in its entirety,
and stamped an imprint far better than the
first.

Eran. — True. But now I beg you in
the first place that the meaning of the terms
employed may be made quite clear, that thus
our discussion may advance without hin-
drance, and no investigation of doubtful points
intervene to interrupt our conversation.

Orth. — What you say is admirable.
Ask now concerning whatever point you
like.

Eran. — What must we call Jesus the
Christ? Man?

Orth. — By neither name alone, but by
both. For the Divine Man after being made
man was named Jesus Christ. " For," it is
written, " Thou shalt call His name Jesus for
he shall save His people from their sins,"^
and unto you is born this day in the city of
David Christ the Lord.* Now these are
angels' voices. But before the Incarnation
he was named God, son of God, only be-
gotten. Lord, Divine Word, and Creator.
For it is written "In the beginning was the
Word, and the word was with God, and the
word was God," '' and " all things were made
by Him,"* and " He was life,"' and "He

1 Acts XX. JO.

2 This "lost" must be qualified. The Scriptural doc-
trine is that the " image of God " though defaced and marred,
is not lost or destroyed. After the flood the " image of God "
is still quoted as against murder Gen. ix. 6. St. James urges
it as a reason against cursing (iv. 9). cf. I. Cor. xi. 7. So the
IXth Article declares original sin to be, not the nature, which
is good, but the " fault and corruption of the nature of every
man ; " in short the " image of God," like the gifts of God, as
David in Browning's "Saul" has it, "a man may waste,
desecrate, never quite lose." cf. p. 164 and note.

3Matt. i. 21.

* Luke ii. 11. riicTfTai is substituted for erex^?), in addition to
the omission of " a Saviour which is." In this verse the MSS.
do not vary.

"John i. I. ejohni. 3. ' John i. 4.


1^4


TPIEODORET.


was the true light which Hghtcth every man
that Cometh into the world." There are
also other similar passages, declaring the
divine nature. But after the Incarnation
He was named Jesus and Christ.

Eran. — Therefore the Lord Jesus is God
only.

Orth. — You hear tliat the divine Word
was made man, and do you call him Gotl
only .'

Eran. — .Since He became man without
being changed, Init remained just what He
was before, we must call Him just what He
was.

Orth. — The divine Word was and is
and will be immutable. But when He had
taken man's nature He became man. It
behoves us therefore to confess both natures,
both tliat which took, and that which was
taken.

Eran. — We must name Him by the
nobler.

Orth^ — Man, — I mean man the animal,
— is he a simple or a composite being.''

Eran. — Composite.

Orth. — Composed of what component
parts .''

Erg.Jt. — Of a body and a soul.

Orth. — And of these natures wMiether is
nobler ?

Eran. — Clearly the soul, for it is reason-
able and immortal, and has been entrusted
with the sovereignty of the animal. But the
body is mortal and perishable, and without
the soul is unreasonable, and a corpse.

Orth. — Then the divine Scripture ought
to have called the animal after its more
excellent j:)art.

Eran. — It does so call it, for it calls
them that came out of Egypt souls. For
with seventy-five souls, it says, Israel came
down into Egypt.

Orth. — But does the divine .Scriptine
never call any one after tlic botly ?

Eran. — It calls them that are the slaves
of flesh, flesh. For " God," it is written,
" said my spirit shall not always remain in
these men, for they are flesh." '

Orth. — But without blame no one is
called flesh ?

Eran. — I do not remember.

Orth. — Then I will remind you, and
point out to you that even the very saints
are called " flesh." Answer now. What
would you call the apostles.'' Spiritual, or
fleshly ?

Eran. — Spiritual ; — and leaders and
teachers of the spiritual.

Orth. — Hear now the holy Paul when

^Gen. vi. s. Ixx. and Marg. ia R. V.


he says " But when it pleased God who
separated me from my mother's womb, and
called me by his grace, to reveal his son in
me that I might preach him among the
heathen, immediately I conferred not with
flesh and blood neither went I up to them
that were apostles before me." ' Does he
so style the apostles because he blames
them .''

Eran. — Certainly not.

Orth. — Is it not that he names them after
their visible nature, and comparing the
calling which is of men with that which is
of heaven ?

Eran. — True.

Orth. — Then hear too the psalmist
David — " Unto thee shall all flesh come." ^
Hear too, the prophet Isaiah foretelling
" All flesh shall see the salvation of our
God." 3

Eran. — It is made perfectly plain that
Holy Scripture names human nature from
the flesh without the least blame.

Orth. — I wmU proceed to give you the
yet furtlicr proof.

Eran. — What further?

Orth. — The fact that sometimes when
giving blame the divine Scripture uses only
the name of soul.

Era7i. — And where will you find this in
holy Scripture.-*

Orth. — Hear the Lord God speaking
through the prophet Ezekiel " The soul that
sinneth it shall die."* Moreover through tlie
great Moses He saith " If a soul sin — "*
And again " It shall come to pass that every
soul that will not hear that prophet shall be
cut oflV ** And many other passages of the
same kind may be found.

Eran. — This is plainly proved.

Orth. — In cases, then, where there is a
certain natural union, and a combination of
created things, and of beings connected by
service and by time, it is not the custom of
holy Scripture to use a name for this being
derived only from the nobler nature ; it
names it indiscriminately both by the meaner
and by the nobler. If so, how can you find
fault with us for calling Christ the Lord,
man, after confessing Him to be God, when
many things combine to compel us to do so.-*

Era?i. — What is there to compel us to
call the .Saviour Christ, " man " .?

Orth. — The diverse and mutually incon-
sistent opinions of the heretics.

Eran. — What opinions, and contrary to
what?

■0:11.1.15-17. ^Is.xl.j. i^Lev. V. I.

2 I's. l.w. 2. ♦ Ez. xviii. 4 and 20.

• The reference seems to be a loose combination of Numbers
ix. 13. with Deut. xviii. 19.


DIALOGUES.


185


Orth. — That of Arius to that of Sabel-
lius. The one divides the substances : the
other confounds the hypostases. Alius intro-
duces three substances, and Sabellius makes
one hypostasis instead of three. ^ Tell me
now, how ought we to heal both maladies?
Must we apply the same drug for both ail-
ments, or for each the proper one.''

Eran, — For each the proper one.

Orih. — We shall therefore endeavour to
persuade Arius to acknowledge the sub-
stance of the Holy Trinity, and we shall
adduce proofs of this position from Holy
Scripture.

Eran. — Yes : this ought to be done.

Orth. — But in arguing with Sabellius we
shall adopt the opposite course. Concerning
the substance we shall advance no argument,
for even he acknowledges but one.

Eran. — Plainly.

Orth. — But we shall do our best to cure
the unsound part of his doctrine.

Eran. —~y^e say that where he halts
is about the hypostases.

Orth. — Since then he asserts there to be
one hypostasis of the Trinity, we shall point
out to him that the divine Scripture pro-
claims three hypostases.

Eran. — This is the course to take. But
we have wandered from the subject

Orth. — Not at all. We are
proofs of it, as you will learn in a moment.
But tell me, do you understand that all the
heresies which derive their name from
Christ, acknowledge both the Godhead of
Christ and His manhood ?

Eran. — By no means.

Orth. — Do not some acknowledge the
godhead alone, and some the manhood
alone ?

Eran. — Yes.

Orth. — And some but a part of the
manhood "^

Eran. — I think so. But it will be well
for us to lay down the names of the holders
of these different opinions, that the point
under discussion may be made plainer.

Orth. — I will tell you the names. Simon,
Menander, Marcion, Valentinus, Basilides,
Bardesanes, Cerdo, and Manes, openly
denied the humanity of Christ. On the
other hand Artemon, Theodotus, Sabellius,
Paul of Samosata, Marcellus, and Photinus,
fell into the diametrically opposite blas-
phemy ; for they preach Christ to be man only,
and deny the Godhead which existed before
the ages. Arius and Eunomius make the
Godhead of the only begotten a created God-

1 Vide note on page 36.


collecting


head, and maintain that He assumed only a
body. Apollinarius confesses that the as-
sumed body was a living ^ body, but in his
work deprives the reasonable soul alike of
its honour and of its salvation. This is the
contrariety of these corrupt opinions. But
do you, with all due love of truth, tell us,
must we institute a discussion with these
men, or shall we let them go dashed down
headlong and howling to their doom?

Eran. — It is inhuman to neglect the sick.

Orth. — Very well; then we must com-
passionate them, and do our best to heal
them.

Eran. — By all means.

Orth. — If then you had scientifically
learned how to cure the body, and round
you stood many men asking you to cure
them, and shewing you their various ailments,
such as arise from running at the eyes, injury
to the ears, tooth-ache, conti'action of the
joints, palsy, bile, or phlegm, what would
you have done ? Tell me ; would you have
applied the same treatment to all, or to each
that which w^as appropriate?

Era7t. — I should certainly have given
to each the appropriate remedy.

Orth. — So by applying cold treatment to
the hot, and heating the cold, and loosing
the strained, and giving tension to the loose,
and drying the moist, and moistening the
dry, you would have driven out the diseases
and restored the health which they had ex-
pelled.

Eraiz. — This is the treatment prescribed
by medical science, for contraries, it is said,
are the remedies of contraries.

Orth. — If you were a gardener, would
you give the same treatment to all plants?
or their own to the mulberry and the fig, and
so to the pear, to the apple, and to the vine
what is fitting to each, and in a word to each
plant its own proper culture ?

Eran. — It is obvious that each plant re-
quires its own treatment.

Orth. — And if you undertook to be a
ship builder, and saw that the mast wanted
repair, would you try to mend it in the same
way as you would the tiller? or would you
give it the proper treatment of a mast?

Eran. — There is no question about these
things : everything demands its own treat-
ment, be it plant or limb or gear or tackle.

Orth. — Then is it not monstrous to apply
to the body and to things without life to each
its own appropriate treatment, and not to
keep this rule of treatment in the case of
the soul?

' iixifivxov.


186


THEODORET.


Era7t. — Most unjust; nay, rather stupid
than unrighteous. They who adopt any
other method are quite unskilled in the heal-
ing art.

Orth. — Then in disputing against each
heresy we shall use the appropriate remedy "i

Eran. — By all means.

Orth. — And it is fitting treatment to add
what is wanting and to remove what is
superfluous.''

Era7i. — Yes.

Orth. — In endeavouring then to cure
Photinus and Marcellus and their adherents,
in order to carry out the rule of treatment,
what shoiild we add .''

Eran. — The acknowledgment of the
Godhead of Christ, for it is this that they
lack.

Orth. — But about the manhood we will
say nothing to them, for they acknowledge
the Lord Christ to be man.

Eran. — You are right.

Orth. — And in arguing with Arius and
Eunomius about the nicarnation of the only
begotten, what sliould we persuade them to
add to their own confession?

Eran. — The assumption of the soul , for
they say that the divine Word took only a
body.

Orth. — And what does Apollinarnis lack
to make his teachnig accurate about the
incarnation ?

Eran. — Not to separate the mind from
the sold, but to confess that, with the body,
was assumed a reasonable soul.

Orth. — Then shall we dispute with him
on tills point?

Eran. — Certainly.

Orth. — But under this head what did we
assert to be confessed, and what altogether
denied, by Marcion, Valentinus, Manes and
their adherents?

Eran. — That they admitted their belief
in the Godhead of Christ, but do not accept
the doctrine of His manhood.

Orth. — We shall therefore do our best to
persuade them to accept also the doctrine
of the manhood, and not to call the divine
incarnation ' a mere appearance.

Erati. — It will be well so to do.

Orth. — We will therefore tell them that
it is right to style the Christ not only God,
but also man.

Eran. — By all means.

Orth. — And how is it possible for us to
induce others to style the Christ ' man ' while
we excuse nmselves from doing so? They
will not yield to our persuasion, but on the


• olKoi'Ofi^ai', cf. p. 72, note.


contrary will convict us of agreeing with
them.

Eran. — And how can we, confessing as
we do that the divine Word took flesh and a
reasonable soul, agree with them ?

Orth. — If we confess the fact, why then
shun the word?

Eran. — It is right to name the Christ
from His nobler qualities.

Orth. — Keep this rule then. Do not
speak of liim as crucified, nor yet as risen
from the dead, and so on.

Eran. — But these are the names of the
sufferings of salvation. Denial of the suffer-
ings implies denial of the salvation.

Orth. — And the name Man is the name
of a nature. Not to pronounce the name is
to deny the nature : denial of the nature is
denial of the sufferings, and denial of the
sufferings does away with the salvation.

Eran. — I hold it profitable to acknowl-
edge the assumed nature ; but to style the
Saviour of the world man is to belittle the
glory of the Lord.

Orth. — Do you then deem yourself wiser
than Peter and Paul ; aye, and than the
Saviour Himself? For the Lord said to the
Jews " Why do ye seek to kill me, a man
that hath told you the truth, which I heard
of my Father? " ' And He frequently called
Himself Son of Man.

And the meritorious Peter, in his sermon
to the Jewish people, says, — "Ye men
of Israel, hear these words. Jesus of Naz-
areth, a man approved of God among you." *
And the blessed Paul, when bringing the
message of salvation to the chiefs of the
Areopagus, among many other things said
this, —

"And the times of this ignorance God
winked at; but now commandeth all men
everywhere to repent : Because he hath ap-
pointed a day in the which he will judge the
world in righteousness by that man whom
he hath ordained, whereof he hath given
assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised
him from the dead."^ He then who excuses
himself from using the name appointed and
preached by the Lord and his Apostles
deems himself wiser than even these great
instructors, aye, even than the very well-
spring of the wisest.

Eran. — They gave this instruction to
the unbelievers. Now the greater part of
the world * has professed the faith.

Orth. — But we have still among us Jews


' John viii. 40. Note the looseness of citation.
= Acts ii. 22. 3 Acts xvii. 30, 31 .

' 17 oi.Kovii.ivn means of course the Empire and the adjacent
countries, the " orbis veteiibus notus."


DIALOGUES.


187


and pagans and of heretics systems innumer-
able, and to each of these we must give fit
and appropriate teaching. But, supposing
we were all of one mind, tell me now, what
harm is there in calling the Christ both God
and man.^ Do we not behold in Him perfect
Godhead, and manhood likewise lacking in
nothing.?

Mr an. — This we have owned again and
again.

Orth. — Why then deny what we have
again and again owned?

Eran. — I hold it unnecessary to call the
Christ ' man,' — especially when believer is
conversing with believer.

Orth. — Do you consider the divine
Apostle a believer ?

Eran. — Yes: a teacher of all believers.

Orth. — And do you deem Timothy
worthy of being so styled.''

Eran. — Yes : both as a disciple of the
Apostle, and as a teacher of the rest.

Orth. — Very well : then hear the teacher
of teachers writing to his very perfect dis-
ciple. " There is one God, and one medi-
ator between God and man, the man Christ
Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all." ^
Do stop your idle pratmg, and laying down
the law about divine names. Moreover in
this passage that very name ' mediator ' stands
indicative both of Godhead and of manhood.
He is called a mediator because He does not
exist as God alone ; for how, if He had had
nothing of our nature could He have medi-
ated between us and God? But since as
God He is joined with God as having the
same substance, and as man with us, be-
cause from us He took the form of a servant.
He is properly termed a mediator, uniting in
Himself distinct qualities by the unity of
natures of Godhead, I mean, and of man-
hood.^

Eran. — But was not Moses called a
mediator, though only a man?^

Orth. — He was a type of the reality:
but the type has not all the qualities of the
reality. Wherefore though Moses was not
by nature God, yet, to fulfil the type, he was
called a god. For He says " See, I have
made thee a god to Pharaoh." * And then
directly afterwards he assigns him also a
Prophet as though to God, for " Aaron thy
brother," He says, " shall be thy Prophet." '"
But the i"eality is by nature God, and by
nature man.

Eran. — But who w^ould call one not


1 I. Tim. ii. 5, 6.

2cf. Job ix. 33. "daysman betwixt us that might lay his
hand upon us both."

3 Gal. iii. 19. cf. Deut. v. 5.

^ Exodus vii. I. ^ Ex. vii, i.


having the distinct characteristics of the
archetype, a type?

Orth. — The imperial images, it seems,
you do not call images of the emperor.

Erati. — Yes, I do.

Orth. — Yet they have not all the charac-
teristics which their archetype has. For in the
first place they have neither life nor reason ;
secondly they have no inner organs, heart, I
mean, and belly and liver and the adjacent
parts. Further they present the appearance
of the organs of sense, but perform none of
their functions, for they neither hear, nor
speak, nor see ; they cannot write ; they can-
not walk, nor peiform any other human
action ; and yet they are called imperial
statues. In this sense Moses was a medi-
ator and Christ was a mediator ; but the
former as an image and type and the latter
as reality. But that I may make this point
clearer to you from yet another authority,
call to mind the words used of Melchisedec
in the Epistle to the Hebrews.

Eran. — What words?

Orth. — Those in which the divine
Apostle comparing the Levitical priesthood
with that of the Christ likens Melchisedec
in other respects to the Lord Christ, and says
that the Lord had the priesthood after the
order of Melchisedec*

Eran. — I think the words of the divine
Apostle are as follows ; — " For this Melchis-
edec, king of Salem, priest of the most
high God who met Abraham returning from
the slaughter of the kings, and blessed him ;
to whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of
all ; first being by interpretation king of
righteousness, and after that also king of
Salem, which is king of peace ; without
father, without mother, without descent,
having neither beginning of days, nor end of
life ; but made like unto the son of God ;
abideth a priest continually."^ I presume
you spoke of this passage.

Orth. — Yes, I spoke of this; and I must
praise you for not mutilating it, but for
quoting the whole. Tell me now, does each
one of these points fit Melchisedec in nature
and reality?

Eran. — Who has the audacity to deny a
fitness where the divine apostle has asserted
it?

Orth. — Then you say that all this fits
Melchisedec by nature?

Eran. — Yes.

Orth. — Do you say that he was a man,
or assumed some other nature?

Eran. — A man.


Hebrews vi. ao.


s Hebrews vii. i| 2, 3.


i88


THI':ODORET.


Orth. — Begotten or unbegotten?

Eraii. — You are asking very absurd
questions.

Orth. — The fault lies with you for openly
opposing the truth. Answer then.

Eran. — There is one only unbegotten,
who is God and Father.

Orth. — Then we assert that Melchisedec
was begotten ?

Eran. — Yes.

Orth. — But the passage about him teaches
the opposite. Remember the words which
you quoted a moment ago, " Without father,
without mother, without descent, having
neither beginning of days nor end of life."
How then do the words "Without fother
and without motlier " fit him ; and how the
statement that he neither received beginning
of existence nor end, since all this transcends
humanity.''

Erati. — These things do in fact overstep
the limits of human nature.

Orth. — Then shall we say that the Apostle
told lies?

Eran. — God forbid.

Orth. — How then is it possible both to
testify to the truth of the Apostle, and apply
the supernatural to Melchisedec.''

Eran. — The passage is a very difficult
one, and requires much explanation.

Orth. — For any one willing to consider
it with attention it will not be hard to attain
perception of the meaning of the words.
After saymg " without father, without
mother, without descent, having neither
beginning of days nor end of life," the
divine Apostle adds " made like unto the
Son of God, abideth a priest continually." ^
Here he plainly teaches us that the Lord Christ
is archetype of Melchisedec in things con-
cerning the human nature. And he speaks
of Melchisedec as " made like unto the Son
of God." Now let us examine the point in
this manner ; — do you say that the Lord had
a father according to the flesh.''

Eran. — Certainly not.

Or//^. — Why.?

Eran. — He was born of the holy Virgin
alone.

Orth. — He is therefore properly styled
"without father".?

Eran. — True.

Orth. — Do you say that according to the
divine Nature He had a mother.?^

Erati. — Certainly not.

Orth. — For He was begotten of the Father
alone before the ages.?


1 Heb. vii. 3.

2 The hearing of this on Theodoret's relation to Nestorianism
will be observed.


Eran. — Agreed.

Orth. — And yet, as the generation He
has of the Father is ineffable, He is spoken
of as " without descent." " Who " says the
prophet "shall declare His generation.? '" ^

Eran. — You are right.

Orth. — Thus it becomes Him to have
neither beginning of days nor end of life ; for
He is without beginning, indestructible, and,
in a word, eternal, and coeternal with the
Father.

Eran. — This is my view too. But we
must now consider how this fits the admirable
Melchisedec.

Orth. — As an image and type. The
image, as we have just observed, has not all
the properties of the archetype. Thus to the
Saviour these qualities are proper both by
nature and in reality ; but the story of the
origin of the race has attributed them to
Melchisedec. For after telling us of the
father of the patriarch Abraham, and of the
father and mother of Isaac, and in like man-
ner of Jacob and of his sons, and exhibiting
the pedigree of our first forefathers, of Mel-
chisedec it records neither the father nor the
mother, nor does it teach that he traced
his descent from any one of Noah's sons, to
the end that he may be a type of Him who
is in reality without father, and without
mother. And this is what the divine Apos-
tle would have us understand, for in this
very passage he says further, " But he whose
descent is not counted from them received
tithes of Abraham, and blessed him that had
the promises."^

Eran. — Then, since Holy Scripture has
not mentioned his parents, can he be called
without father and without mother.?

Orth. — If he had really been without
father and without mother, he would not
have been an image, but a reality. But since
these are his qualities not by nature, but ac-
cording to the dispensation of the Divine
Scripture, he exhibits the type of the reality.

Eran. — The type must have the charac-
ter of the archetype.

Orth. — Is man called an image of God .?

Eran. — Man is not an image of God, but
was made in the image of God. ^

Orth. — Listen then to the Apostle. He
says : " For a man indeed ought not to cover
his head, forasmuch as he is the image and
glory of God." ^

Eran. — Granted, then, that he is an
image of God.

Orth. — According to your argument then
he must needs have plainly preserved the


«Is. liii.8.
2 Heb. vii. 6.


8 Gen. i. 27.
» I. Cor. xi. 7.


DIALOGUES.


189


characters of the archetype, and have been
uncreate, uncompounded, and infinite. He
ought in like manner to have been able to
create out of the non existent, he ought to
have fashioned all thirigs by his word and
without labour, in addition to this to have
been free from sickness, sorrow, anger, and
sin, to have been immortal and incorruptible
and to possess all the qualities of the arche-
type.

Eraii. — Man is not an image of God in
every respect.

Orth. — Though truly an image in the
qualities in which you would grant him to
be so, you w^ill find that he is separated by a
wide interval from the reality.

Eraii. — Agreed.

Orth. — Consider now too this point. The
divine Apostle calls the Son the image of the
Father; for he says "Who is the image of
the invisible God.?" '

Eran. — What then ; has not the Son all
the qualities of the Father.''

Orth. — He is not Father. He is not un-
caused. He is not unbegotten.

Eran. — If He were He would not be Son.

Orth. — Then does not what I said hold
good ; the image has not all the qualities of
the archetype.''

Eran. — True.

Orth. — Thus too the divine Apostle said
that Melchisedec is made like unto the Son
of God.2

Eran. — Suppose we grant that he is
without Father and without Mother and
without descent, as you have said. But how
are we to understand his having neither
beginning of days nor end of life.''

Orth. — The holy Moses when writing
the ancient genealogv tells us how Adam
being so many years old begat Seth,^ and
when he had lived so many years he ended
his life.'* So too he writes of Seth, of Enoch,
and of the rest, but of Melchisedec he men-
tions neither beginning of existence nor end
of life. Thus as far as the story goes he has
neither beginning of days nor end of life, but
in truth and reality the only begotten Son of
God never began to exist and shall never
have an end.

Era7z. — Agreed.

Orth. — Then, so far as what belongs to
God and is really divine is concerned, Mel-
cliisedec is a type of the Lord Christ ; but as
far as the priesthood is concerned, which
belongs rather to man than to God, the Lord
Christ was made a priest after the order of
Melchisedec* For Melchisedec was a high


1 Coloss. I. 15.
* Hebrews vii. 3.


3 Gen. iv. 25.
♦ Gen. V. 5.


6 Heb, vi. 20.


priest ot the people, and the Lord Christ
for all men has made the right holy oflering
of salvation.

Eraii. — We have spent many words on
this matter.

Orth. — Yet more were needed, as you
know, for you said the point was a difficult
one.

Eran. — Let us return to the question be-
foi-e us.

Orth. — What was the question?

Eran. — On my remarking that Christ
must not be called man, but only God, you
yourself besides many other testimonies ad-
duced also the well known words of the
Apostle which he has used in his epistle to
Timothy — " One God, one mediator be-
tween God and men, the man, Christ Jesus,
who gave himself a ransom for all to be tes-
tified in due time." '

Orth. — I remember from what point we
divei'ged into this digression. It was when
I had said that the name of mediator exhibits
the two natures of the Saviour, and you said
that Moses was called a mediator though he
was only a man and not God and man. I
was therefore under the necessity of following
up these points to show that the type has not
all the qualities of the archetype. Tell me,
then, whether you allovv that the Saviour
ought also to be called man.

Eran. — I call Him God, for He is God's
Son.

Orth. — If you call him God, because you
have learnt that he is God's Son, call him
also man, for he often called Himself " Son
of Man."

Eran. — The name man does not apply
to Him in the same way as the name God.

Orth. — As not really belonging to Him
or for some other reason }

Eran. — God is his name by nature ; man
is the designation of the Incarnation.-

Orth. — But are we to look on the Incar-
nation as real, or as something imaginary and
false .''

Eran. — As real.

Orth. — If then the grace of the Incarna-
tion is real, and what we call Incarnation
is the divine Word's being made man, then
the name man is real ; for after taking man's
nature He is called man.

Eran. — Before His passion He was
styled man, but afterward He was no longer
so styled.

Orth. — But it was after the Passion and
the Resurrection that the divine Apostle wrote
the Epistle to Timothy wherein he speaks of


1 Tim. ii. 5,6.


* oiicovoiaia. Vide p. 72 n.


I90


THEODORET.


the Saviour Christ as man,' and writing after
the Passion and the Resurrection to the
Corinthians he exclaims " For since by
man came death, by man came also the
resurrection of the dead." - And in order
to make his meaning clear he adds, *■' For
as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall
all be made alive." ^ And after the Passion
and the Resurrection the divine Peter, in
his address to the Jews, called Him man.''
And after His being taken up into heaven,
Stephen the victorious, amid the storm of
stones, said to the Jews, " Behold, I see the
heavens oixmcd, and the Son of man stand-
ing on the right hand of God." * Are we to
suppose ourselves wiser than the illustrious
heralds of the truth ?

Eran. — I do not suppose myself wiser
than tlie holy doctors, but I fail to find the
use of the name.

Orth. — How then could you persuade
them that deny the incarnation of the Lord,
Marcionists, I mean, and Manichees, and all
the rest who arc thus unsound, to accept the
teaching of the truth, imless you adduce
these and similar proofs with the object of
shewing tliat the Lord Christ is not God only
but also man ?

Eran. — Perhaps it is necessary to adduce
them.

Orth. — Why not then teach the faithful
tlic reality of the doctrine? Are you forget-
ful of tiie apostolic precept enjoining us to
be " ready to give an answer." *^ Now let us
look at the matter in this light. Does the
best general engage the enemy, attack with
arrows and javelins, and endeavour to break
their column all alone, or does he also arm
his men, and marshal them, and rouse their
hearts to play the man ?

Eran. — He ought rather to do this latter.

Orth. — Yes; for it is not the part of a
general to expose his own life, and take his
place in the ranks, and let his men go fast
asleep, but ratlier to keep them awake for
their work at their post.

Eran. — True.

Orth. — This is what the divine Paul
did, for in writing to them wlio had made
profession of their faith he said, " Take uiato
you the whole armour of God tliat ye be able
to stand against the wiles of tlie Devil.' And
again, " Stand therefore with your loins girt
about with truth,"' and so on. Bear in
mind too what we have already said, that a
physician supplies what nature lacks. Does


* Acts ii. 22.


1 I Tim 11.5.

'Coi. XV.21. *Actsvii. 56

' 1 Cor. XV. 22. 8 1 Peter lii. 15.

' Epii. vi. II .nnd 13, and observe looseness of ([uotalion.

• Eph. vi. \/i^.


he find the cold redundant.'* He supplies the
hot, and so on with the rest ; and this is what
the Lord does.

Eran. — And where will you show that
the Lord has done this.-*

Orth. — In the holy gospels.

Eran. — Show me then and fulfil your
promise.

Orth. — What did the Jews consider our
Saviour Christ.''

Eran. — A man.

Orth. — And that He was also God they
were wholly ignorant.

Eraii. — Yes.

Orth. — Was it not then necessary for the
ignorant to learn }

Eran. — Agreed.

Orth. — Listen to Him then saying to
them: "Many good works have I shewed
you from my Father ; for which of these
works do ye stone me.''"' And when they
replied: "For a good work we stone thee
not, but for blasphemy, and because that
thou being a man makest thyself God," -
He added " It is written in your law I said
ye are gods. If he called them gods unto
whom the word of God came and the script-
ure cannot be broken, say ye of Him whom
the Father hath sanctified and sent into the
world thou blasphemest, because I said I
am the vSon of God.'* If I do not the works
of my fatlier believe me not . . . that I
am in the Father and the Father is in me." ^

Eran. — In the passages you have just
read you have shewn that the Lord shewed
Himself to the Jews to be God and not man.

Orth. — Yes, for they did not need to
learn what they knew ; that He was a man
they knew, but they did not know that He
was from the beginning God. He adopted
this same course in the case of the Pharisees ;
for when He saw them accosting Him as a
mere man He asked them " What think ye
of Christ } Whose son is He } " ■* And when
they said " Of David " He went on " How
then doth David calling him Lord say ' The
Lord said unto my Lord sit thou on my
right hand.' " ^ Then He goes on to argue,
" If then He is His Lord how is He His
Son .? "

Eran. — You have brought testimony
against yourself, for the Lord plainly taught
the Pharisees to call Him not "Son of David,"
but " Lord of David." Wherefore He is
distinctly shown wishing to be called God
and not man.

Orth. — I am afraid you have not attended


2 John X


the


' John X. 32.

=* John X. 3.^, 35, 36, 37, 3S. Observe tlie variation in 3), anj
llu' iimission in 3S.

•• Matt. xxil. 42. 5 Matt. xxii. 43 and 44.


DIALOGUES.


IQt


to the divine teaching. He did not repudi-
ate the name of "Son of David," but He
added that He ought also to be believed to
be Lord of David. This He clearly shews
in the words " If He is his Lord how is He
then his Son?" He did not say " if He is
Lord He is not Son," but " how is He his
Son?" instead of saying in one respect He is
Lord and in another Son. These passages
both distinctly show the Godhead and the
manhood.

Eran. — There is no need of argument.
The Lord distinctly teaches that He does not
wish to be called Son of David.

Orth. — Then He ought to have told the
blind men and the woman of Canaan and
the multitude not to call Him Son of David,
and yet the blind men cried out " Thou Son
of David have mercy on us." ^ And the
woman of Canaan "Have mercy on me O Son
of David ; my daughter is grievously vexed
with a Devil."- And the multitude: " Ho-
sanna to the Son of David ! Blessed is He
that Cometh in the name of the Lord." ^
And not only did He not take it ill, but even
praised their faith ; for the blind He freed
from their long weary night and granted
them the power of sight ; the maddened and
distraught daughter of the woman of Canaan
He healed and drove out the wicked demon ;
and when the chief priests and Pharisees
were oftended atthem that shouted "Hosanna
to the Son of David " He did not merely
not prevent them from shouting, but even
sanctioned their acclamation, for, said He,
" I tell you that if these should hold their
peace the stones would immediately cry
out.""

Eran. — He put up with this style of ad-
dress before the resurrection in condescension
to the weakness of them that had not yet
properly believed. But after the resurrec-
tion these names are needless.

Orth. — Where shall we rank the blessed
Paul? among the perfect or the imperfect?

Eran. — It is wrong to joke about sei-ious
things.

Orth. — It is wrong to make light of the
reading of the divine oracles.

Eraji. — And who is such a wretch as to
despise his own salvation ?

Orth. — Answer my question, and then
you will learn your ignorance.
Eran. — What question?
Orth. — Where are we to rank the divine
Apostle ?

Eran. — Plainly among the most perfect,
and one of the perfect teachers.


1 Matt. XX. 31.
* Matt. XV. 22.


8 Matt. xxi. 9.
* Luke xix. 40.


Orth. — And when did he begin his teach-


ing:


Eran. — After the ascension of the Sav-
iour, the coming of the Spirit, and the ston-
ing of the victorious Stephen.

Orth. — Paul, at the very end of his life,
when writing his last letter to his disciple
Timothy, and in giving him, as it were, his
paternal inheritance by will, added "Re-
member that Jesus Christ of the seed of
David was raised from the dead according
to my gospel." ^ Then he went on to men-
tion his sufferings on behalf of the gospel,
and thus showed its truth saying, " Wherein
I suffer trouble as an evil doer even unto
bonds." ''

It were easy for me to adduce many
similar testimonies, but I have judged it
needless to do so.

Eraji. — You promised to prove that the
Lord supplied the lacking instruction to
them that needed, and you have shown that
He discoursed about His own Godhead to
the Pharisees, and to the rest of the Jews.
But that He gave also His instruction about
the flesh you have not shewn.

Orth. — It would have been quite super-
fluous to have discoursed about the flesh
which was before their eyes, for He was
plainly seen eating and drinking and toiling
and sleeping. Furthermore, to omit the
many and various events before the passion,
after His resurrection He proved to His dis-
believing disciples not His Godhead but His
manhood; for He said, "Behold my hands
and my feet that it is I myself. Handle me
and see for a spirit hath not flesh and bones
as ye see me have." '

Now I have fulfilled my promise, for we
have proved the giving of instruction about
the Godhead to them that were ignorant
of the Godhead, and about the resurrection
of the flesh to them that denied this latter.
Cease therefore from contending, and con-
fess the two natures of the Saviour.

Eran. — There were two before the
union, but, after combining, they made one
nature.

Orth. — When do you say that the union
was effected ?

Eran. — I say at the exact moment of
the conception.

Orth. — And do you deny that the divine
Word existed before the conception ?

Eran. — I say that He was before the
ages.

Orth. — And that the flesh was co-exist-
ent with Him ?


1 II. Tim. li.S.

2 II. Tim. ii. 9,


* Luke xxiv, 39.


192


THEODORET.


Era7i. — By no means.

Orth. — But was formed, after the salu-
tation of the angel, of the Holy Ghost?

ErciJZ. — So I say.

OrtJi. — Therefore before the union there
were not two natures but only one. For if
the Goclliead pre-existed, but the manhood
was not co-existent, being formed after the
angelic salutation, and the union being co-
incident with the formation, then before the
union there was one nature, that which ex-
ists always and existed before the ages.
Now let us again consider this point. Do
you understand the making of flesh or be-
coming man to be anything other than the
union?

Eraii. — No.

Orth. — For when He took flesh He was
made flesh.

Erait. — Plainly.

Orth. — And the union coincides with
the taking flesh.

Eran. — So I say.

Orth. — So before the making man there
was one nature. For if both union and
making man are identical, and He was
made man by taking man's nature, and the
form of God took the form of a servant, then
before the union the divine nature was one.

Eran. — And how are the union and the
making man identical?

Orth. — A moment ago you confessed
that there is no distinction between these
terms.

Eran. — You led me astray by your argu-
ments.

Orth. — Then, if you like, let us go over
the same ground again.

Eraji. — We had better so do.

Orth. — Is there a distinction between the
incarnation and the union, according to the
nature of the transaction?

Eran. — Certainly ; a very great distinc-
tion.

Orth. — Explain fully the character of
this distinction.

Eran. — Even the sense of the terms
shows the distinction, for the word " incar-
nation " shows the taking of the flesh, while
the word " union " indicates the combina-
tion of distinct things.

Orth. — Do you represent the incarnation
to be anterior to the union ?

Eran. — By no means.

Orth. — You say that the union took
place in the conception?

Eran. — I do.

Orth. — Therefore if not even the least
moment of time intervened between the
taking of flesh and the union, and the as-


sumed nature did not precede the assump-
tion and the union, then incarnation and
union signify one and the same thing, and so
before the union and incarnation there was
one nature, while after the incarnation we
speak properly of two, of that which took
and of that which was taken.

Eran. — I say that Christ was of two
natures, but I deny two natures.

Orth. — Explain to us then in what sense
you understand the expression " of two
natures;" like gilded silver? like the com-
position of electron?^ like the solder made
of lead and tin?

Eran. — I deny that the union is like any
of these; it is ineffable, and passes all under-
standing.

Orth. — I too confess that the manner of the
union cannot be comprehended. But I have
at all events been instructed by the divine
Scripture that each nature remains unim-
paired after the union.

Eran. — And where is this taught in the
divine Scripture?

Orth. — It is all full of this teaching.

Eran. — Give proof of what you assert.

Orth. — Do you not acknowledge the prop-
erties of each nature?

Eran. — No : not, that is, after the
union.

Orth. — Let us then learn this very point
from the divine Scri^Dture.

Eran. — I am ready to obey the divine
Scripture.

Orth. — When, then, you hear the divine
John exclaiming "In the beginning was the
word, and the word was with God, and the
word was God " ^ and " By Him all things
wei-e made " ^ and the rest of the parallel
passages, do you aflSrm that the flesh, or the
divine Word, begotten befoi'e the ages of
the Father, was in the beginning with God,
and was by nature God, and made all
things?

Eran. — I say that these things belong to
God the Word. But I do not separate Him
from the flesh made one with Him.

Orth. — Neither do we separate the flesh
from God the Word, nor do we make the
union a confusion.

Eran. — I recognise one nature after the
union.

Orth. — When did the Evangelists write
the gospel? Was it before the union, or a
very long time after the union?

1 The metallic compound called electron is described by
Straho p. 146 as the mixed residuum, or scourinp, (icaflopfia)
lifl after the first smcltinfj of gold ore. Pliny (H. N. xxxiii. 2.U
describes it as ooiitaininir I part silver to 4 gold. cf. Soph.
Antiu;. io_^S, and Herod, i. 50.

' Jolini. 1. s John i. 3.


DIALOGUES.


193


Era7i. — Plainly after the union, the na-
tivity, the miracles, the passion, the resur-
rection, the taking up into heaven, and the
coming of the Holy Ghost.

Orth. — Hear then John saying " In the
beginning was the w^ord, and the word was
with God, and the word was God. He was
in the beginning with God. All things were
made by Him, and without Him was not
anything made " ^ and so on. Hear too Mat-
thew, " The book of the generation of Jesus
Christ, Son of David, — Son of Abraham,"

— and so on.^ Luke too traced His geneal-
ogy to Abraham and David. ^ Now make the
former and the latter quotation fit one nature.
You will find it impossible, for existence in
the beginning, and descent from Abraham,

— the making of all things, and derivation
from a created forefather, are inconsistent.

Eran. — By thus arguing you divide the
only begotten son into two Persons.

Orth. — One Son of God I both know
and adore, the Lord Jesus Christ ; but I
have been taught the difference between His
Godhead and his manhood. You, how-
ever, who say that there is only one nature
after the union, do you make this agree with
the introductions of the Evangelists.

Eran. — You appear to assume the pro-
position to be hard, nay impossible. Be it,
I beg, short and easy ; — only solve our
question.

OrtJi. — Both qualities are proper to the
Lord Christ, — existence from the beginning,
and generation, according to the flesh, from
Abraham and David.

Eran. — You laid down the law that
after the union it is not right to speak of
one nature. Take heed lest in mentioning
the flesh you transgress your own law.

Orth. — Even without mentioning the
flesh it is quite easy to explain the point in
question, for I am applying both to the
Saviour Christ.

Eran. — I too assert that both these qual-
ities belong to the Lord Christ.

Orth. — Yes ; but you do so in contem-
plation of two natui'es in Him, and applying
to each its own properties. But if the
Christ is one nature, how is it possible to
attribute to it properties which are incon-
sistent with one another? For to have
derived origin from Abraham and David,
and still more to have been born many
generations after David, is inconsistent with
existence in the beginning. Again to have
sprung from created beings is inconsistent
with being Creator of all things ; to have had
human fathers with existence derived from


>Johnl. 1-3.
VOL. Ill,


2 Matt. i. I.


3 Luke Jii. 23.


God. In short the new is inconsistent with
the eternal.

Let us also look at the matter in this way.
Do we say that the divine Word is Creator
of the Universe .''

Eran. — So we have learnt to believe
from the divine Scriptures.

Orth. — And how many days after the
creation of heaven and earth are we told
that Adam was formed .''

Eran. — On the sixth day.

Orth. — And from Adam to Abraham
how many generations went by ?

Eran. — I think twenty.

Orth. — And from Abraham to Christ
our Saviour how many generations are
reckoned by the Evangelist Matthew.

Eran. — Forty-two.^

Orth. — If then the Lord Christ is one
nature how can He be Creator of all things
visible and invisible and, at the same time,
after so many generations, have been formed
by the Holy Ghost in a virgin's womb?
And how could He be at one and the same
time Creator of Adam and Son of Adam's
descendants ?

Eran. — I have already said that both
these properties are appropriate to Him as
God made flesh, for I recognise one nature
made flesh of the Word.

Orth. — Nor yet, my good sir, do we say
that two natures of the divine Word were
made flesh, for we know that the nature of
the divine Word is one, but we have been
taught that the flesh of which He availed
Himself when He was incarnate is of an-
other nature, and here I think that you too
agree with me. Tell me now; after what
manner do you say that the making flesh
took place?

Eran. — I know not the manner, but I
believe that He was made flesh.

Orth. — You make a pretext of your
ignorance unfairly, and after the fashion of
the Pharisees. For they when they beheld
the force of the Lord's enquiry, and suspect-
ing that they were on the point of conviction,
uttered their reply " We do not know." ^ But
I proclaim quite openly that the divine
incarnation is without change. For if by
any variation or change He was made flesh,
then after the change all that is divine in
His names and in His deeds is quite in-
appropriate to Him.

Eran. — We have agreed again and
again that God the Word is immutable.

Orth. — He was made flesh by taking
flesh.


1 Matt. i. 17.

» Matt. xxi. 27. A. V. " We cannot tell."


194


THEODORET.


Eran. — Yes.

Oi'th. — The nature of God the Word
made flesh is different from that of the flesh,
by assumption of which the nature of the
divine Word was made flesh and became
man.

Eran. — Agreed.

Orth. — Was He then changed into flesh ?

Eran. — Certainly not.

Orth. — If then He was made flesh, not
by mutation, but by taking flesh, and both
the former and the latter qualities are appro-
priate to Him as to God made flesh, as you
said a moment ago, then the natures were
not confounded, but remained imimpaired.
And as long as we hold thus we shall perceive
too the harmony of the Evangelists, for while
the one proclaims the divine attributes of the
one only begotten — the Lord Christ — the
other sets forth His human qualities. So too
Christ our Lord Himself teaches us, at one
time calling Himself Son of God and at
another Son of man : at one time He giv^es
honour to His Mother as to her that gave
Him birth ;^ at another He rebukes her as
her Lord.^ At one time He finds no foult
with them that style Him Son of David ; at
another He teaches the ignorant that He is
not only David's Son but also David's Lord.^
He calls Nazareth and Capernaum His coun-
try,* and again He exclaims " Before Abra-
ham was I am." ' You will find the divine
Scripture full of similar passages, and they
all point not to one nature but to two.

Eran. — He who contemplates two
natures in the Christ divides the one only
begotten into two sons.

Orth. — Yes; and he who says Paul is
made up of soul and body makes two Pauls
out of one.

Eran. — The analogy does not hold good.

Orth. — I know it does not,^ for here the
union is a natural union of parts that are
coa3val, created, and fellow slaves, but in
the case of the Lord Christ all is of good
will, of love to man, and of grace. Here
too, though the union is natural, the proper
qualities of the natures remain unimpaired.

Eran. — If the proper qualities of the
natures remain distinct, how does the soul
together with the body crave for food-f*

Orth. — The soul does not crave for food.
How could it when it is immortal "^ But
the body, which derives its vital force from
the soul, feels its need, and desires to receive
what is lacking. So after toil it longs for
rest, after waking for sleep, and so with the

iLukeii.si. » Matt. xxii. 42. J' John viii. jS.

* John 11.4. < Mark vi. I.

"This, it will be remembered is the analogy employed in
the- " iQ^iiictiiiqiie villi."


rest of its desires. So forthwith after its
dissolution, since it has no longer its vital
energy, it does not even crave for what is
lacking, and, ceasing to i-eceive it, it under-
goes corruption.

Eran. — You see that to thirst and to
hunger and similar appetites belong to the
soul.

Orth. — Did these belong to the soul
it would suffer hunger and thirst, and the
similar wants, even after its release from the
body.

Eran. — What then do you say to be
proper to the soul .'' ^

Orth. — The reasonable, the absolute, the
immortal, the invisible.

Era?z. — And vi^hat of the body.''

Orth. — The com^Dlex, the visible, the
mortal.

Eran. — And we say that man is com-
posed of these.''

07-th. — Yes.

Eran. — Then we define^ man as a mor-
tal reasonable being.

Orth. — Agreed.

Eran. — And we give names to him from
both these attributes.

Orth. — Yes.

Eran. — As then in this case we make no
distinction, but call the same man both
reasonable and mortal, so also should we do
in the case of the Christ, and apply to Him
both the divine and the human.

Orth. — This is our argument, although
you do not accurately express it. For look
you. When we are pursuing the argument
about the human soul, do we only mention
what is appropriate to its energy and nature }

Eran. — This only.

Orth. — And when our discussion is
about the body, do we not only recall what is
appropriate to it.''

Era?i. — Qiiite so.

Orth. — But, when our discourse touches
the whole being, then we have no difficulty
in adducing both sets of qualities, for the


' All through the arg-ument there seems to be some confu.
sion between the two senses of i//ux>j as denoting the inimnrtnl
and the animal part of man, and so between the \^vxik6v and
the irvivnariKov. Accordin<^ to the Pauline psycholog^y, (cf. in
I. Cor. 15) the immortal and in^'isible could not be said to be
proper to the o-iu^a i|/ux"«>i'. This " natural body" is a body
of death (Rom. vii. 24) and requires to be redeemed (Rom. viii.
23) and changed into the " house which is from heaven." (II.
Cor. V. 2.) Something of the same confusion attaches to the
common use of the word "soul" to which we find the lan-
guage of Holy Scripture frequently .accommodated. On the
|)opular language of the dichotomy and the more exact trichot-
omy of I. Thess. V. 23 a note of Bp. Ellicott on that passage
may well be consulted.

2 " ^liof AoyiKoi' ^vr]r6v." The definition m.ay be compared
with those of —

Plato. — ^iaov anTepov, SCnow, TT\aTvuivv\ov o fiovov
Ttou ovTiov eni.<TTy}fi.r)(; r^t Kari Adyou?

SeKTiKOV €(TTt. OcflT.

AllISTOTLS. — TToKiTiKuf i'ujov. Pol. I. ii. 9.


DIALOGUES.


195


properties both of the body and of the soul
are applicable to man.

Eran. — Unquestionably.

Orth. — Well ; just in this way should we
speak of the Christ, and, when arguing
about His natures, give to each its own,
and recognise some as belonging to the God-
head, and some as to the manhood. But
when we are discussing the Person we must
then make what is proper to the natures
common, and apply both sets of qualities to
the Saviour, and call the same Being both
God and Man, both Son of God and Son of
Man — both David's Son and David's Lord,
both Seed of Abraham and Creator of Abra-
ham, and so on.

Eran. — That the person of the Christ is
one, and that both the divine and the human
are attributable to Him, you have quite
rightly said, and I accept this definition of
the Faith ; but your real position, that in dis-
cussing the natures we must give to each its
own properties, seems to me to dissolve the
iniion. It is for this reason that I object to
accept these and similar arguments.

Orth. — • Yet when we were enquiring
about soul and body you thought the distinc-
tion of these terms admirable, and forthwith
gave it your approbation. Why then do you
refuse to receive the same rule in the case of
the Godhead and manhood of the Lord
Christ? Do you go so far as to object to
comparing the Godhead and the manhood of
the Christ to soul and body? So, while you
grant an unconfounded union to soul and
body, do you venture to say that the God-
head and manhood of the Christ have under-
gone commixture and confusion?

Erajz. — I hold the Godhead of the
Christ aye, and His flesh too, to be infinitely
higher in honour than soul and body; but
after the union I do assert one nature.

Orth, — But now is it not impious and
shocking, while maintaining that a soul
united to a body is in no way subject to con-
fusion, to deny to the Godhead of the Lord
of the universe the power to maintain its
own nature unconfounded or to keep within
its pioper bounds the humanity which He
assumed ? Is it not, I say, impious to mix
the distinct, and to commingle the separate?
The idea of one nature gives ground for sus-
picion of this confusion.

Eran. — I am equally anxious to avoid the
term confusion, but I shrink from asserting
two natures lest I fall into a dualism of sons.

Orth. — I am equally anxious to escape
either horn of the dilemma, both the impious
confusion and the impious distinction ; for to
me it is alike an unhallowed thought to split

O


the one Son in two and to gainsay the dual-
ity of the natures. But now in truth's name
tell me. Were one of the faction of Arius or
Eunomius to endeavour, while disputing
with you, to belittle the Son, and to descril)e
Him as less than and inferior to the Father,
by the help of all their familiar arguments
and citations from the divine Scripture of
the text "Father, if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me " ^ and that other, " Now
is my soul troubled " - and other like pas-
sages, how would you dispose of his ob-
jections? How could you show that
the Son is in no way diminished in dignity
by these expressions and is not of another
substance, but begotten of the substance of
the Father?

Eran. — I should say that the divine
Scripture uses some terms according to the
theology and some according to the 03con-
omy, and that it is wrong to apply what be-
longs to the ccconomy to what belongs to the
theology.^

Orth. — But your opponent would retort
that even in the Old Testament the divine
Scripture says many things oeconomically, as
for instance, " Adam heard the voice of the
Lord God walking,'"' and " I will go down
now and see whether they have done alto-
gether according to the cry of it which has
come to me ; and if not I will know," * and
again," Now I know that thou fearest God " ®
and the like.

Eran. — I might answer to this that there
is a great distinction between the ceconomies.
In the Old Testament there is an cEConomy
of words ; in the New Testament of deeds.

Orth. — Then your opponent would ask
of what deeds?

Eran. — He shall straightway hear of the
deeds of the making flesh. For the Son of
God on being made man both in word and
deed at one time exhibits the flesh, at an-
other the Godhead : as of course, in the pas-
sage quoted. He shews the weakness of the
flesh and of the soul, the sense namely of fear.

Orth. — But if he were to go on to say,
" But he did not take a soul but only a body ;
for the Godhead instead of a soul being
united to the body performed all the func-
tions of the soul," with what arguments could
you meet his objections?

Eran. — I could bring proofs from the
divine Scripture shewing how God the Word
took not only flesh but also soul.

Orth. — And what proofs of this shall we
find in Scripture ?


1 Miitt. xxvi. 39.

2John xii. 27.

3 Consult note on page 72.


4 Gen. iii.S.
s Gen. xviii. 21
" Gen. xxii. (2


196


THEODORET.


Eran. — Have you not heard the Lord
saying " I have power to hiy it down, and I
have power to take it again. ... I hiy
it down of mvscif that I might take it asfain." ^
And again, "Now is my soul troubled." -
And again, " My soul is exceeding sorrowful
even unto death," ^ and again David's words
as interpreted by Peter " His soul was not
left in hell neither did His flesh see corrup-
tion." '' These and similar passages clearly
pohit out that God the Word assumed not
only a body but also a soul.

Orth. — You have quoted this testimony
most appositely and properly, but your op-
ponent might reply that even before the in-
carnation God said to the Jews, " Fasting
and holy day and feasts my soul hateth." '"
Then he might go on to argue that as in the
Old Testament He mentioned a soul, though
.He had not a soul, so He does in the New.

^r«/z. ^Buthe shall be told again how
the divine Scripture, when speaking of God,
mentions even parts of the body as " In-
cline thine ear and hear" ^ and " Open thine
eyes and see " ' and " The mouth of the Lord
hath spoken it"® and "Thy hands have
made me and fashioned me " ® and countless
other passages.

If then after the incarnation we are for-
bidden to understand soul to mean soul, it
is equally forbidden to hold body to mean
body. Thus the great mystery of the (Eco-
nomy will be found to be mere imagination ;
and we shall in no way diflcr from Marcion,
Valentinus and Manes, the inventors of all
these figments.

Orth. — But if a follower of Apollinarius
were suddenly to intervene in our discussion
and were to ask " Most excellent Sir; what
kind of soul do you say that Christ as-
sumed.''" what would you answer.^

Eraji. — I should first of all say that I
know only one soul of man; then I should
answer, " But if you reckon two souls, the
one reasonable and the other without reason,
I say that the soul assumed was the reason-
able. Yours it seems is the unreasonable,
inasmuch as you think that our salvation
was incomplete."

Orth. — But suppose he were to ask for
proof of what you say }

Eran. — I could very easily give it. I
shall quote the oracles of the Evangelists
" The Child Jesus grew and waxed strong
in spirit and the grace of God was upon
him"'" and again "Jesus increased in wis-


' John X. iS, 17.

s John xii. 27.

s Matt. xxvi. 3S.

« Psahn xvi. lo and Acts il. 31.

'■ Isaiah i. 13, 14. Sept.


8 Daniel Ix. iS.
' n^id.

8 Isaiali Iviii. 14.
" Ps. cxix. 73,
1" Luke ii, 40.


dom and in stature and in favour with God
and men."^ I should say that these have
nothing to do with Godhead for the body
increased in stature, and in wisdom the
soul — not that which is without reason, but
the reasonable. God the Word then took
on Him a reasonable soul.

Orth. — Good Sir, you have bravely
broken through the three fold phalanx of
your foes ; but that union, and the famous
commixture and confusion, not in two ways
only but in three, 3'ou have scattered and
undone ; and not only have you pointed out
the distinction between Godhead and man-
hood, but you have in two ways distinguished
the manhood by pointing out that the soul
is one thing and the body another, so that
no longer two, according to our argument,
but three natures of our Saviour Jesus Christ
may be understood.

Eran. — Yes ; for did not you say that
there is another substance of the soul besides
the nature of the body .'*

Orth. — Yes,

Eran. — How then does the argument
seem absurd to you ?

Orth. — Because while 3'ou object to two,
you have admitted three natures.

Eran. — The contest with our antagonists
compels us to this, for how could any one in
any other way argue against those who deny
the assumption of the flesh, or of the soul,
or of the mind, but by adducing j^roofs on
these points from the divine Scripture? And
how could any one confute them who m
their madness strive to belittle the Godhead
of the only Begotten hut by pointing out that
the divine Scripture speaks sometimes theo-
logically and sometimes CEConomically.

Orth. — What you now say is true. It is
what I, nay what all say, who keep whole
the apostolic rule. You yourself have be-
come a supporter of our doctrines.

Era?i. — How do I support yours, while I
refuse to acknowledge two sons.''

Orth. — When did you ever hear of our
affirming two sons .''

Eran. — He who asserts two natures as-
serts two sons.

Orth. — Then you assert three sons, for
you have spoken of three natures.

Eran. — In no other way was it possible
to meet the argument of my opponents.

Orth. — Hear this same thing from us too ;
for both you and I confi'ont the same antag-
onists.

Erafz. — But I do not assert two natures
after the union.

Orth. — And yet after many generations

'Luke jl, 52.


DIALOGUES.


197


of the union a moment ago you used the
same words. Explain to us however in what
sense you assert one nature after the union.
Do you mean one nature derived from both
or that one nature remains after the destruc-
tion of the other.?

Eran. — I maintain that the Godhead re-
mains and that the manhood was swallowed
up by it.^

Orth. — Fables of the Gentiles, all this,
and follies of the Manichees. I am ashamed
so much as to mention such things. The
Greeks had their gods' swallowings '^ and the
Manichees wrote of the daughter of light.
But we reject such teaching as being as
absurd as it is impious, for how could a
nature absolute and uncompounded, compre-
hending the universe, unapproachable and
infinite, have absorbed the nature which it
assumed ?

Eran. — Like the sea receiving a drop of
iioney, for straightway the drop, as it min-
gles with the ocean's water, disappears.

Orth. — The sea and the drop are differ-
ent in quantity, though alike in equality ; the
one is greatest, the other is least ; the one is
sweet and the other is bitter ; but in all other
respects you will find a very close relation-
ship. The nature of both is moist, liquid,
and fluid. Both are created. Both are life-
less yet each alike is called a body. There
is nothing then absurd in these cognate
natures undergoing commixture, and in the
one being made to disappear by the other.
In the case before us on the contrary the dif-
ference is infinite, and so great that no figure
of the reality can be found. I will however
endeavour to point out to you several instances
of substances which are mixed without being
confounded, and remain unimpaired.

Eran. — Who in the world ever heard
of an unmixed mixture?

Orth. — I shall endeavour to make you
admit this.

Eran. — Should what you are about to
advance prove true we will not oppose the
truth.

Orth. — Answer then, dissenting or as-
senting as the argument may seem good to
you.

Eran. — I will answer.

Orth. — Does the light at its rising seem
to you to fill all the atmosphere except
where men shut up in caverns might remain
bereft of it.^*

Eran. — Yes.


1 KaToTro^^i/ai i.e., was absorbed and made to disappear.
Contrast the adsumptione Humanitatis in Deiim (or " in Deo,'
as the older MSS. read) of the Athanasian Creed.

2 The allusion is to the fable of Saturn devouring his chil-
dren at their birth.


be diffused through all the atmos-


Orth. — And does all the light seem to
you to
phere }

Eran. — I am with you so far.

Orth. — And is not the mixture diffused
through all that is subject to it.''

Eran. — Certainly.

Orth. — But, now, this illuminated atmos-
phere, do we not see it as light and call it
light }

Eran. — Qiiite so.

Orth. — And yet when the light is present
we sometimes are aware of moisture and
aridity ; frequently of heat and cold.

Eran. — Yes.

Orth. — And after the departure of the
light the atmosphere afterwards remains
alone by itself.

Eran. — True.

Orth. — Consider this example too.
When iron is brought in contact with fire
it is fired.

Eran. — Certainly.

Orth. — And the fire is diffused through its
whole substance.''

^ra;?. — Well.?

Orth. — How, then, does not the com-
plete union, and the mixture universally
diflused, change the iron's nature.?

Eran. — But it changes it altogether.
It is now reckoned no longer as iron, but as
fire, and indeed it has the active properties
of fire.

Orth. — But does not the smith call it
iron, and put it on the anvil and smite it with
his hammer.?

Eran. — Unquestionably.

Orth. — Then the nature of the iron was
not damaged by contact with the fire. If
then, in natural bodies, instances may be
found of an unconfounded mixture, it is
sheer folly in the case of the nature which
knows neither corruption nor change to en-
tertain the idea of confusion and destruction
of the assumed nature, and all the moi'e so
when this nature was assumed to bring bless-
ing on the race.

Erajz. — What I assert is not the destruc-
tion of the assumed nature, but its change
into the substance of Godhead.

Orth. — Then the human race is no
longer limited as heretofore?
Eran. — No.

Orth. — When did it undergo this
change .?

Eran. — After the complete union.

Orth. — And what date do you assign to
this .?

Eran. — I have said again and again, that
of the conception.


198


TIIEODORET.


Orth. — Yet after the conception He was
an unborn babe in the womb ; after His birth,
Pic was a babe ' and was called a babe, and
was worshipped by shepherds, and in like
manner became a boy, and was so called by
the angel. ^ Do you acknowledge all this?
or do you think I am inventing fables?

Eratt. — This is taiiglit in the history of
the divine gospels, and cannot be gainsaid.

Orth. — Now let us investigate what fol-
lows. We acknowledge, do we not, that the
Lord was circumcised?

Eran. — Yes.

Orth. — Of what was there a circum-
cision ? Of (Icsh or Godhead ?

Eran. — Of the flesh.

Orth. — Of what was then the growth
and increase in wisdom and stature?

Eran. — This, of course, is not applicable
to Godhead.

Orth. — Nor hunger and thirst?

Eran. — No.

Orth. — Nor walking about, and being
weary, and falling asleep?

Eran. — No.

Orth. — If then the union took place at
the conception, and all these things came to
pass after the conception and the birth, then,
after the union, the manhood did not lose its
own nature.

Eran. — I have not stated my meaning
exactly. It was after the resurrection from
the dead that the flesh underwent the chansfe
into Godhead.

Orth. — Then, after the resurrection,
nothing of all that indicates its nature re-
mained in it?

Eran. — If it remained, the divine change
did not take place.

Orth. — How then was it that He shewed
His hands and His feet to tlic disciples who
disbelieved ?

Eran. — Just as He came in when the
doors were shut.

Orth. — But He came in when the doors
were shut Just as He came out from the
womb, though the virgin's l)olts and bars
were undrawn, and just as He walked upon
the sea. Then according to 3'our argument
not even yet had tlie change of nature taken
place ?

Eran. — The Lord shewed His hands to
the Apostles in the same way as He wrestled
with Jacob.

Orth. — No; the Lord does not allow us
to understand it in this sense. The disciples
thought they saw a spirit, but the L(jrd dis-
pelled this idea, and shewed the nature of


^ I^uke ii. 13 and i6.


» Matt. ii.


>3-


the flesh, for He said "Why are ye troubled ?
and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?
' Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I
m3'sclf: handle me, and see; for a spirit
hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me
have." ^ And observe the exactness of the
language. He does not say " is not flesh
and bones," but " has not flesh and bones,"
in order to point out that the nature of the
possessor and the nature of that which is
possessed are distinct and separate. Just in
the same way that which took and that
which was taken are separate and distinct,
and the Christ is beheld made one of both.
Thus the part i:)ossessing is entirely diflerent
from the part possessed, and yet does not
divide into two persons Him who is an ob-
ject of thought in them. The Lord, indeed,
while the disciples were still in doubt, asked
for food and took and ate it, not consuming
the food only in a])2oearance, nor satisfying
to the need of the body.

Eran. — But one of these alternatives
must be accepted ; either He partook because
He needed, or else, needing not, He seemed
to cat, and did not really partake of food.

Orth. — His body now become immortal
required no food. Of them that rise the
Lord says: "they neither marry nor are
given in marriage but are as Angels."- The
apostles however bear witness that He partook
of the food, for the blessed Luke in the pref-
ace to the Acts says "being assembled
together with the apostles the Lord com-
manded them that they should not depart
from Jerusalem "^ and the very divine Peter
says more distinctly: "Who did eat and
drink with Him after He rose from the
dead."* For since eating is proper to them
that live this present life, of necessity the
Lord by means of eating and drinking proved
the resurrection of the flesh to them tliat did
not acknowledge it to be real. This same
course He pursued in the case of Lazarus
and of Jairus' daughter. For when He had
raised up the latter He ordered that some-
thing should be given her to eat* and He
made Lazarus sit with Him at the table" and
so shewed the reality of the rising again.

Eran. — If we grant that the Lord really
ate, let us grant that after the resurrection all
men partake of food.

Orth. — What was done by the Saviour
through a certain occonom)'- is not a rule and
law of nature. This follows from the fact
that He did other things by occonomv which
shall by no means be the lot of them that live
again.


1 Luke xxiv. 3S, 39.
s M;irk xii. 25.


3 Acts i. 4.
♦ Acts X. 41.


■• Mark v. 43.
''John xii. 21.


DIALOGUES.


199


Eran. — What do you mean ?

Orth. — Will not the bodies of them that
rise become incorruptible and immortal?

Eran. — So the divine Paul has taught us.
" It is sown " he says "in corruption; it is
raised in iacorruption ; it is sown in dishon-
our ; it is raised in glory ; it is sown in weak-
ness ; it is raised in power ; it is sown a natural
body ; it is raised a spiritual body." ^

Orth. — But the Lord, who raises the
bodies of all men, unmaimed and unmarred
(for lameness of limb and blindness of eye
are unknown among them that are risen),"
left in His own body the prints of the nails,
and the wound in His side, whereof are wit-
nesses both the Lord Himself and the hand
of Thomas.

Eran. — True.

Orth. — If then after the resurrection the
Lord both partook of food, and shewed His
hands and His feet to His disciples, and in
them the prints of the nails, and His side with
the mark of the wound in it, and said to
them, " Handle me and see for a spirit hath
not flesh and bones as ye see me have " ^ it
follows that after His resurrection the nature
of His body was preserved and was not
changed into another substance.

Eran. — Then after the resurrection it is
mortal and subject to suffering.''

Orth. — By no means ; it is incorruptible,
impassible, and immortal.

Eran. — If it is incorruptible, impassible,
and immortal, it has been changed into
another nature.

Orth. — Therefore the bodies of all men
will be changed into another substance, for all
will be incorruptible and immortal. Or have
you not heard the words of the Apostle, " For
this corruptible must put on incorruption, and
this mortal must put on immortality"?"

Eran. — I have heard.

Orth. — Therefore the nature remains, but
its corruption is changed into incorruption,
and its mortal into immortality. But let us
look at the matter in this way ; we call a
body that is sick and a body that is whole, in
the same way, a body.

Eran. — Unquestionably.

Orth. — Wherefore?

Era?z. — Since both partake of the same
substance.

Orth. — Yet we see in them a very great
difference, for the one is whole, perfect, and
unhurt ; the other has either lost an eye, or


1 I.Cor. XV. 42, 43, 44.

2 Contrast Plato Gorgias § 169 Kareayora. re el rov rjv ixeXt] ij
SLe<rTpa.f/ilxei'a ^ucTOs xai re^reuiTOs ravra evS-qKa, and Virgil ^n.

" Atque hie Priamiden lafiiatum corpore toto
Deiphphum vidit lacerum crudeliter ota."
* Luke xxiv. 39. * I. Cor. xv. 53.


or


has


undergone


some


has a broken leg,
other suffering.

Eran. — But to the same nature belong
both health and sickness.

Orth. — So the body is called substance;
disease and health are called accident.

Era7i. — Of course. For these things are
accidents of the body, and again cease to be
so.

Orth. — In the same way corruption and
death must be called accidents, and not sub-
stances, for thev too are accidents and cease
to be so.

Eran. — True.

Orth. — So the body of the Lord rose
incorruptible, impassible, and immortal, and
is worshipped by the powers of heaven, and is
yet a body having its former limitation.

Eran. — In these points you seem to say
sooth, but after its assumption into heaven I
do not think that you will deny that it was
changed into the nature of Godhead.

Orth. — I would not so say persuaded only
by human arguments, for I am not so rash
as to say anything concerning which divine
Scripture is silent. But I have heard the
divine Paul exclaiming "God hath appointetl
a day in the which He will judge the world
in righteousness by that man whom He hath
ordained whereof He hath given assurance
unto all men in that He hath raised Him
from the dead,"-^ and I have learnt from the
holy Angels that He will come in like manner
as the disciples saw Him going into heaven.^
Now they saw His nature not unlimited.
For I have heard the words of the Lord,
"Ye shall see the Son of Man coming in the
clouds of heaven," ^ and I acknowledge that
what is seen of men is limited, for the unlim-
ited nature is invisible. Furthermore to
sit upon a throne of glory and to set the
lambs upon the right and the kids upon the
leff* indicates limitation.

Eran. — Then He was not unlimited even
before the incarnation, for the pro^^het saw
Him surrounded by the Seraphim."

Orth. — The prophet did not see the sub-
stance of God, but a certain appearance ac-
commodated to his capacity. After the resur-
rection, however, all the world will see the
very visible nature of the judge.

Eran. — You promised that you would
adduce no argument without evidence, but
you are introducing arguments adapted to us.

Orth. — I have learnt these things from
the divine Scripture. I have heard the
words of the prophet Zechariah "They
shall look on Him whom they pierced,"*


1 Acts xvii. 31.

2 Acts i. II.


* Matt. xxvi. 64.

* Matt. XXV. 31-33.


5 Isaiah vi. 3.
^ Zech. xii. 10.


200


THEODORET.


and how shall the event follow the prophecy
unless the crucifiers recognise the nature
which they crucified? And I have heard
the cry of the victorious martyr Stephen,
" Behold I see the heavens opened and the
Son of Man standing on the right hand of
God,"^ and he saw the visible, not the invis-
ible nature.

Era)i. — These things are thus written,
but I do not think that you will be able to
show that the body, after the ascension
into heaven, is called body by the inspired
writers.

OrtJi. — What has been already said indi-
cates the body perfectly plainly ; for what is
seen is a body ; but I will nevertheless point
out to you that even after the assumption the
body of the Lord is called a bod}'. Hear
the teaching of the Apostle, " For our con-
versation is in Heaven from whence also we
look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus, who
shall change our vile body that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body." " It
was not changed into another nature, but
remained a body, full however of divine
glory, and sending forth beams of light.
The bodies of the saints shall be fashioned
like unto it. But if it was changed into
another nature, their bodies will be like-
wise changed, for they shall be fashioned
like unto it. But if the bodies of the saints
preserve the character of their nature, then
also the body of the Lord in like manner
keeps its own nature unchanged.

Eran. — Then will the bodies of the
saints be equal with the ])ody of the Lord?

Orth. — In its incorruption and its im-
mortality they too will share. Moreover in
its glory they will participate, as says the
Apostle, " If so be that we suffer with Him,
that we may be also glorified together." ^ It
is in quantity that the vast difference may be
found, a difference as great as between sun
and stars, or rather between master and
slaves, and that which gives and that which
receives light. Yet has He given a share of
His own name to His servants and as He
is Light, calls His saints light, for "Ye,"
He says, "are the Light of the world," ^ and
being named servants and being named
"Sun of Righteousness"* He says of his
servants " Then shall the righteous shine
forth as the Sun." "^ It is therefore according
to quality, not according to quantity, that the
bodies of the saints shall be fashioned like
unto the body of the Lord. Now I have
shewn you plainly what you bade me.

1 Acts vii. 56.

' Phil. iii. 20, 21. Observe omission of " Christ."
8 Rom. viii. 17. B Malachi iv. 2.

* Matt. V. 14. 6 Matt. xiii. 43.


Further, if you please, let us look at the
matter in yet another way.

Eran. — One ought "to stir every
stone," as the proverb says,' to get at the
truth ; above all when it is a question of di-
vine doctrines.

Orth. — Tell me now; the mystic sym-
bols which arc offered to God by them who
perform priestly rites, of what are they sym-
bols?

Eran. — Of the body and blood of the
Lord.

Orth. — Of the real body or not?

Eran. — The real.

Orth. — Good. For there must be the
archetype of the image. So painters imi-
tate nature and paint the images of visible
objects.

Eran. — True.

Orth. — If, then, the divine mysteries are
antitypes of the real body,- therefore even
now the body of the Lord is a body, not
changed into nature of Godhead, but filled
with divine glory.

Era?!. — You have opportunely intro-
duced the subject of the divine mysteries for
from it I shall be able to show you the
change of the Lord's body into another
nature. Answer now to my questions.

Orth. — I will answer.

Eran. — What do you call the gift which
is offered before the priestly invocation ?

Orth. — It were wrong to say openly ;
perhaps some uninitiated are present.

Eran. — Let your answer be put enigmat-
ically.

Orth. — Food of grain of such a sort.

Eran. — And how name we the other
symbol ?

Orth. — This name too is common, signi-
fying species of drink.

Eran. — And after the consecration how
do you name these?

Orth. — Christ's body and Christ's blood.

Eran. — And do you believe that you
partake of Christ's body and blood?

Orth.— I do.

Eran. — As, then, the symbols of the
Lord's body and blood are one thing before
the priestly invocation, and after the invoca-
tion are changed and become another thing ;
so the Lord's body after the assumption is
changed into the divine substance.

Orth. — You are caught in the net 3'ou
have woven yourself. For even after the
consecration the mystic symbols are not de-

• Probably the Ai'So? in the stone on the Draiig:ht Board. So
navTa Kivilv KiOov is to make every effort in the jjame.

2 ToO OfTw? (TiOfxaTUi^ at'TLTVird eari Ti Beta fXV<TTrjpia, The
view of Orthodoxus, it will be seen, is not that of the Roman
confession, cf. note on p. 2o6.


DIALOGUES.


201


prived of their own nature ; they remain in
their former substance figure and form ; tliey
are visible and tangible as they were before.
But they are regarded as what they are be-
come, and believed so to be, and are wor-
shipped ^ as being what they are believed to
be. Compare then the image with the arche-
type, and you will see the likeness, for the
type must be like the reality. For that
body preserves its former form, figure, and
limitation and in a word the substance of the
body ; but after the resurrection it has be-
come immortal and superior to corruption ;
it has become worthy of a seat on the right
hand ; it is adored by every creature as being
called the natural body of the Lord.

Erati, — Yes ; and the mystic symbol
changes its former appellation ; it is no longer
called by the name it went by before, but is
styled body. So must the reality be called
God, and not body.

Orth. — You seem to me to be ignorant —
for He is called not only body but even bread
of life. So the Lord Himself used this
name' and that very body we call divine
body, and giver of life, and of the Master and
of the Lord, teaching that it is not common
to every man but belongs to our Loi*d Jesus
Christ Who is God and Man. " For Jesus
Christ" is "the same yesterday, to-day, and
forever." ^

Eran. — You have said a great deal about
this, but I follow the saints who have shone
of old in the Church ; show me then, if you
can, these in their writings dividing the
natures after the union.

Orth. — I will read you their works, and
I am sui'e you will be astonished at the
countless mentions of the distinction which
in their struggle against impious heretics
they have inserted in their writings. Hear
now those whose testimony I have already
adduced speaking openly and distinctly on
these points.

Testimony of the holy Ignatius.^ bishop of
Antioch^ atzd martyr : —

From the Epistle to the Smyrnseans : * " I
acknowledge and believe Him after His
resurrection to be existent in the flesh : and
when He came to hem that were with Peter
He said to them ' Take ; handle me and see,
for I am not a bodiless daemon.' * And straight-
way they took hold of him and believed."


TrpocTKUveiTai.


SHeb. xiii.8.

^Tohnvi. SI. «AdSmjr. III.

6 The quotation is not from the canonical gospels. Eusebius
(iii. 36) says he does not know from what source it comes. Jerome
states it to be derived from the gospel lately translated by him,
the gospel according to the Hebrews (Vir. 111. 2) Origen
ascribes the words to the " Doctrina Petri." (de Princ. Praaf.
8) Bp. Lightfoot, by whom the matter is fully discussed, ( Ap.
Fath. pt. II. Vol. ii. p. 295) thinks that either Jerome, mort
euo, was forgetful, or had a different recension of the gospel


Of the same from the same epistle : —

" And after His Resurrection He ate with
them, and drank with them, as being of the
flesh, although He was spiritually one with
the Father."

Testimony of Irencetts^ the ancient bishop
of Lyons : —

From the third Book of his work " Against
Heresies." (Chap. XX.)

" As we have said before. He united man
to God. For had not a man vanquished
man's adversary, the enemy would not have
been vanquished aright; and again, had not
God granted the boon of salvation we should
not have possessed it in security. And had
not man been united to God, he could not
have shared in the incorruption. For it
behoved the mediator of God and men, by
means of His close kinship to either, to bring
them both into friendship and unanimity, and
to set man close to God and to make God
known to men."

Of the same from the third book of the
same treatise (Chapter XVIII) : —

" So again in his Epistle he says 'Whoso-
ever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born
of God,' ^ recognising one and the same Jesus
Christ to whom the gates of heaven were
opened, on account of His assumption in the
flesh. Who in the same flesh in which He
also suffered shall come revealing the glory
of the Father."

Of the same from the fourth book (Chap-
ter VII) : —

"As Isaiah saith 'He shall cause them
that come of Jacob to take root. Israel shall
blossom and bud and fill the face of the world
with fruit.' ^ So his fruit being scattered
through the whole world, they who erst
brought forth good fruit (for of them was
produced the Christ in the flesh and the apos-
tles) were abandoned and removed. And
now they are no longer fit for bringing forth
fruit."

Of the same from the same book (Chapter
LIX) : —

"And he judges also them of Ebion.^
How can they be saved unless it was God
who wrought their salvation on earth, or how
shall man come to God unless God came to
man.'"'

Of the same from the same book (Chapter
LXIV) : —

to the Hebrews from that used by Origen and Eusebius.
Ignatius may be quoting a verbal tradition. Bp. Lightfoot
further points out that Origen (1. c.) supposes the author of
the Doctrina Petri to use this epithet a.<Ju>^l.a^ov not in its philo-
sophical sense (= incorporeal) but as meaning composed of
some subtle substance and without a gross body like man.
Further Origen (c. Cels. V. J) warns us that to Christians the
word daemon has a special connotation, in reference to the
powers that deceive and distract men.

X I.John V.I, 2 Xsaiah xxvii. 6. ^ Vide note on page 38


202


THEODORET.


" The}' who preach that Emmanuel was of
the Virgin set forth the union of God the
Word with His creature."

Of the same from the same treatise (Book
V. Ciuip. I.) : —

" Now these tilings came to pass not in
seeming but in essential truth, for if He ap-
peared to be man though He was not man
then the Spirit of Gut! did not continue to be
what in truth It is ; for the Spirit is invisible ;
nor was there any truth in llim, for He was
not what He appeared to be. And we have
said before that Abraham and the rest of the
prophets beheld Him in j^rophecy propliesy-
ing what was destined to come to pass in act-
ual sight. If then now too He appeared to
be of such a character, though in reality He
was not what He appeared, then a kind of
prophetic vision would have been given to
men, and we must still look for yet another
advent in which He will really be what He
is now seen to be in prophecy. Now we
have demonstrated that there is no difference
between the statements that He only appeared
in seeming and that He took nothing from
Mary, for He did not really even possess flesh
and blood whereby He redeemed us, unless
He renewed in Himself the old creation of
Adam. The sect of Valentinus are therefore
vain in teaching thus that they may cast out
the life of the flesh."

Testi77io7iy of the holy Hippolytus^ bishop
and martyr^ fro7n his work on the disf/'ib?i-
tio7i of the talents : ^ —

"Any one might say that these and those
who uphold otherwise are neighbours, erring
as they do in the same manner, for even they
either confess that the Christ appeared in life
as mere man, denying the talent of His God-
head, or else acknowledging Him as God,
on the other hand they deny the man, repre-
senting that He deluded the sight of them
tliat beheld Him by unreal appearances ;
and that He wore manhood not as a Man
but was rather a mere imaginary semblance,
as Marcion and Valentinus and the Gnostics
teach, wrenching away the Word from the
flesh, and rejecting the one talent, the incar-
nation."

Of the same from his letter to a certain
Qiieen : - —

'^ He calls Him ' the first fruits of them
that sleep,' as being ' the first born from the
dead,' ' and He, after Ilis resurrection, wish-
mg to show that tliat which was risen was
the same as that which had undergone death,


III


1 The only frat^ment <if this work.

2 Several fragments of this letter will be found in Dialogue

■» Coloss. i. i8.


when the disciples were doubting, called
Thomas to Hitn, and said, ' Come hither
handle me and see for a spirit hath not flesh
and blood as ye see me have.'"^

Of the same from his discourse on Elka-
nah and Hannah : —

"Wherefore three seasons of the year
typified the Saviour Himself that He might
fulfil the mysteries predicted about Him.
In the Passover, that He might shew Him-
self as the sheep doomed to be sacrificed and
shew a true Passover as says the Apostle,
' Christ, God,^ our Passover was sacrificed
for us.' At Pentecost that He might an-
nounce the kingdom of heaven ascending
Himself first into heaven and oflering to
God man as a gift."

Of the same from his work on the great
Psalm : ^ —

" He who drew from the nethermost hell
man first formed of the earth when lost and
held fast in bonds of death ; He who came
down from above and lifted up him that was
down ; He who became Evangelist of the
dead, ransomer of souls and resurrection of
them that were entombed ; this was He
who became succourer of vanquished man
in Himself, like man firstborn Word ; visit-
ing the first formed Adam in the Virgin ;
the spiritual seeking the earthy in the womb ;
the ever-living him who by disobedience
died ; the heavenly calling the earthly to
tlie world above, the highborn meaning to
make the slave free by His own obedi-
ence ; He who turned to adamant man
crumbled into dust and made serpents*
meat ; He who made man hanging on a tree
of wood Lord over him who had conquered
Him and so by a tree of wood is proved
victorious."

Of the same from the same book : —

" They who do not now recognise the
Son of God in the flesh will one day recog-
nise Him when He comes as judge in glory,
though now in an inglorious body suflermg
wrong."

Of the same from the same book : —

"Moreover the apostles when they had
come to the sepulchre on the third day did
not find the body of Jesus, just as the chil-
dren of Israel went up on the mountain, and
could not find the tomb of Moses."

Of the same from his interpretation of
Psalm II. : —

" When He had come into the world He


' Vide John xx. 27 and I.ukc xxiv. 39. The (iiiotntioii con-
fuses the words of the resurrection day and of the week after.

- I. Cor. V.7. The addition of o S^n<: has no authority.

' Probably the cxixth Ps. It is doubtful whether the work
forms part of a Commentary on the Pss. or is quoted from a
homily on this special Psalm.


DIALOGUES.


203


was manifested as God and Man. His man-
hood is easy of perception because He is
ahungered and aweary, in toil He is athirst,
in fear He flees/ in prayer He grieves ; He
falls asleep upon a pillow, He prays that the
cup of sutfering may pass from Him, being
in an agony He sweats, He is strengthened
by an angel, betrayed by Judas, dishonoured
byCaiaphas, set at nought by Herod, scourged
by Pilate, mocked by soldiers, nailed to a
cross by Jews, He commends His spirit to
the Father with a cry, He leans His head as
He breathes His last, He is pierced in the
side with a spear and rolled in fine linen, is
laid in a tomb, and on the third day He is
raised by the Father. No less plainly may
His divinity be seen when He is worshipped
by angels, gazed on by shepherds, waited
for by Simeon, testified to by Anna, sought
out by Magi, pointed out by a Star, at the
wedding feast makes water wine, rebukes
the sea astir by force of winds, and on the
same sea walks, makes a man blind from
birth see, raises Lazarus who had been four
days dead, works many and various wonders,
remits sins and gives power to His disciples."

Of the same from his work on Psalm
XXIV. : —

" He comes to the heavenly gates, angels
travel with Him and the gates of the heavens
are shut. For He hath not yet ascended
into heaven. Now first to the heavenly
powers flesh appears ascending. The Word
then goes forth to the powers from the
angels that speed before the Lord and
Saviour, ' Lift the Gates ye princes and be
ye lift up ye everlasting doors and the King
of glory shall come in.' "^

Testimony of the holy Sustathius, bishop
oj" Antloch and confessor.

From his work on The Titles of the
Psalms : —

" He predicted that He would sit upon a
holy throne, shewing that He has been set
forth on the same throne as the divine Spirit
on account of the God that dwells in Him
continually."

Of the same from his work upon the
Soul : —

" Before His passion in each case He pre-
dicted His bodily death, saying that He
would be betrayed to the father of the High
Priest, and announcing the trophy of the
Cross. And after the passion, when He had
risen on the third day from the dead, His
disciples being in doubt as to His resurrec-

1 The word i^euyen' is not used of the Saviour in the Gospel.
Joseph was bidden (^eOye ei? Slyvmov, When our Lord was
Drought to the cliff overhanging Nazareth SicAflwi' 6ia nivov

aUTUiU ilTOpeutTO.

* Ps. xxiv. Sept.


tion. He appeared to them in His very body
and confessed that He had complete flesh and
bones, submitting to their sight His wounded
side and shewing them the prints of the
nails."

Of the same from his discourse on " The
Lord formed me in the beginning of His
ways " : 1 —

" Paul did not say ' conformed to the Son
of God ' but ' conformed to the image of
His Son ' ^ in order to point out a distinction
between the Son and His image, for the Son,
wearing the divine tokens of His Father's
Excellence, is an image of His Father ; for
since like are generated of like, ofl'spring
appear as very images of their parents, but
the manhood which He wore is an image of
the Son, as images even of different
colours are painted on wax,^ some being
wrought by hand and some by nature and
likeness. Moreover the very law of truth
announces this, for the bodiless spirit of
wisdom is not conformed to bodily men,
but the express image "* made man by the
spirit bearing the same number of mem-
bers with all the rest, and clad in similar
form."

Of the same from the same work : —
" That he speaks of the body as conformed
to those of men he teaches more clearly in
his Epistle to the Philippians, ' our conversa-
tion ' he says ' is in Heaven from whence also
we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall change our vile body that
it may be fashioned like unto His glorious
body.' ^ And if by changing the form of
the vile body of men He fashions it like unto
His own body, then the false teaching of our
opponents is shewn to be in every way
worthless."

Of the same from the same work : —
" But as being born of the Virgin He is
said to have been made man of the woman,®
so He is described as being made under the
law because of His sometimes walking by
the precepts of the law, as for instance
when His parents zealously urged His circum-
cision, when He was a child eight days old,
as relates the evangelist Luke, afterwards
' they brought Him to present Him to the
Lord,' ' bringing the offerings of purification '
' to offer a sacrifice according to that which
is said in the law of the Lord a pair of
turtle doves or two young pigeons.' ' As
then the gifts of purification were offered on

1 Proverbs viii. 22. Sept. 2 Romans viii. 29.

3 The original here is corrupt.

* XapaKT-qp cf. Heb. i. 3. I have used the equivalent given
in A. V. for the Greek word of the text meaning literally
stamp or impression, as on coin or seal, and so exact represen-
tation.

5 Phil. iii. 20, ai. « Gal. iv. 4. ' Luke ii. 22, 24.


204


THEODORET.


His behalf according to tlie law, and He
underwent circumcision on the eighth day,
tlie Apostle very properly writes that He was
thus brought under the law. Not indeed
that the Wonl was subject to the law, (as
our calumnious opponents suppose) being
Himself the law, nor did God, who by one
breath can cleanse and hallow all things,
need sacrifices of purification. But He took
from the Virgin the members of a man and
became subject to the law and was purified
according to the rite of the firstborn, not be-
cause He submitted to this treatment from
any need on His part of such observance, but
in order that He might redeem from the
slavery of the law them that were sold to the
doom of the curse."

Tcstii)io7iy of the holy Athaizasius, bishop
of Alexandria.

From his Second Discourse against here-
sies : ^ —

" We should not have been redeemed
from sin and the curse had not the flesh
which tlie Word wore been by nature that
of man, for we should have had nothing
in common with that which was not our
own ; just so man would not have been
made God, had not the Word whicli was
made flesh been by nature of the Father
and verily and properly His. And the com-
l)ination is of this character that to the natural
God may be joined the natural man, and
so his salvation and deification be secure.
Therefore let them that deny Him to be
naturally of the Father, and own Son of His
substance, deny too that He took very flesh
of man from the Virgin ISIary."

Of the same from his Epistle to Epicte-
tus : —

" If on accomit of the Saviour's Body
being, and being described in the Scriptures
as being, derived from Mary, and a human
Body, they fancy that a quaternity is substi-
tuted for a Trinity, as though some addi-
tion were made by the body, they are quite
wrong ; they put the creature on a par with
the Creator, and suppose that the Godhead
is capable of being added to. They fail to
see that the Word was not made flesh on
account of any addition to Godhead, but
that the flesh may rise. Not for the aggran-
disement of the Word did He come forth
from Mary, but that the human race may be
redeemed. How can they think that the
body ransomed and quickened by the Word
can add anything in the way of Godhead to
the Word that quickened it.?"

Of the same from the same Epistle : —

Oratio Secitnda contra Arianos. Ben. Ed. I. i- 53S.


"Let them be told that if the Word had
been a creature, the creature would not have
assumed a body to quicken it. For what
help can creatures get from a creature stand-
ing itself in need of salvation? But the
Word, Himself Creator, was made maker of
created things, and therefore in the fulness
of the ages He attached the creature to
Himself, that once more as a Creator He
might renew it, and might be able to create
it afresh."

From the longer Discourse " De Fide " : —

" This also we add concerning the words
' Sit thou on my right hand,' ^ that they are
said of the Lord's body. For if ' the Lord
saith, do not I fill heaven and earth,' ^ as says
Jeremiah, and God contains all things, and
is contained of none, on what kind of throne
does He sit? It is therefore the body to
which He says ' Sit thou on my right hantl,'
of which too the devil with his wicked
powers was foe, and Jews and Gentiles
too. Through this body too He was made
and was called High Priest and Apostle
through the mystery whereof He gave to
us, saying 'This is my Body for you'^
and ' my Blood of the New Testament'
(not of the Old), shed for you.''' Now God-
head hath neither body nor blood ; but the
manhood whicli He bore of Mary was the
cause of them, of whom the Apostles said
' Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God
among you.' " *

Of the same from his book against the
Arians : —

'■'• And when he says ' Wherefore God
hath also highly exalted Him and given
Him a name which is above every name'"
he speaks of the temple of the body, not of
the Godhead, for the Most High is not
exalted, but the flesh of the Most High is
exalted, and to the flesh of the Most High
He gave a name which is above every name.
Nor did the Word of God receive tlie desig-
nation of God as a favour, but His flesh was
held divine as well as Himself."

Of the same from the same work : —

"And when he says 'the Holy Ghost was
not yet because that Jesus was not yet glori-
fied,' ' he says that His flesh was not yet
glorified, for the Lord of glory is not
glorified, but the flesh itself receives glory
of the glory of the Lord as it mounts with
Him into Heaven; whence he says the
spirit of adoption was not yet among men,
because the first fruits taken from men had
not yet ascended into heaven. Wherever

>Ps. ex. I. BActsii.23.

2 Jerein. xxiii. 24. sphil.ii.g.

3 I. Cor. xi. 24. 'Johnvii. 39.
* Matt, xxvi, 23; Mark xiv. 24.


DIALOGUES.


205


then the Scripture snys that the Son received,
and was glorified, it speaks because of His
manhood, not His Godhead."

Of the same from the same work : —
" So that He is very God both before His
being made man and after His being made
mediator of God and men, Jesus Christ
united to the Father in spirit, and to us in
flesh, who mediated between God and men,
and who is not only man but also God."

Test/?}iony of the Holy Ajubrosius^ bisJiop
of Milan.

In his Exposition of the Faith : —
" We confess that our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Only Begotten Son of God, was begotten
before all ages, without beginning, of the
Father, and that in these last days the same
was made flesh of the holy Virgin Mary,
assumed the manhood, in its perfection, of a
reasonable soul and body, of one substance
with the Father as touching His Godhead
and of one substance with us as touching
His manhood. For union of two perfect
natures hath been after an ineffable manner.
Wherefore we acknowledge one Christ, one
Son, our Lord Jesus Christ; knowing that
being coeternal with His own Father as
touching His Godhead, by virtue of which
also He is creator of all, He deigned, after
the assent of the Holy Virgin, when she
said to the angel ' Behold the handmaid of
the Lord, be it unto me according to thy
word '^ to build after an ineffable fashion a
temple out of her for Himself, and to unite
this temple to Himself by her conception,
not taking and uniting with Himself a body co-
eternal with His own substance, and brought
from heaven, but of the matter of our sub-
stance, that is of the Virgin. God the Word
was not turned into flesh ; His appearance
was not unreal ; keeping ever His own
substance immutably and invariably He
took the first fruits of our nature, and united
them to Himself. God the Word did not
take His beginning from the Virgin, but
being coeternal with His own Father He of
infinite kindness deigned to unite to Himself
the first fruits of our nature, undergoing no
mixture but in either substance appearing
one and the same, as it is written ' Destroy
this temple and in three days I will raise it
up.'" For the divine Christ, as touching my
substance which he took is destroyed, and
the same Christ raises the destroyed temple
as touching the divine substance in which
also He is Creator of all things. Never at
any time after the Union which He deigned
to make with Himself from the moment of


> Luke i." 38.


'John ii. 19.


the conception did He depart from His own
temple, nor indeed through His ineft'able
love for mankind could depart.

" The same Christ is both passible and im-
passible ; as touching His manhood passible
and as touching His Godhead impassible.
' Behold behold me, it is I, I have undergone
no change ' — and when God the Word had
raised His own temple and in it had wrought
out the resurrection and renewal of our nat-
ure, He shewed this tiature to His disciples
and said ' Handle me and see for a spirit hath
not flesh and bones as ye see me,' not ' be '
but 'have.'^ So He says, referring to both
the possessor and the possessed in order that
you may perceive that what had taken place
was not mixture, not change, not variation,
but union. On this account too He shewed
the prints of the nails and the wound of the
spear and ate before His disciples to convmce
them by every means that the resurrection of
our nature had been renewed in Him ; and
further because in accordance with the blessed
substance of His Godhead unchanged, impas-
sible, immortal, He lived in need of nought.
He by concession permitted all that can be
felt to be brought to His own temple, and by
His own power raised it up, and by means of
His own temple made perfect the renewal of
our nature.

"■ Them therefore that assert that the Christ
was mere man, that God the Word was pas-
sible, or changed into flesh, or that the body
which He had was consubstantial, or that
He brought it from Heaven, or that it was
an unreality ; or assert that God the Word
being mortal needed to receive His resurrec-
tion from the Father, or that the body which
He assumed was without a soul, or manhood
without a mind, or that the two natures of
the Christ became one nature by confusion
and commixtui'e ; them that deny that our
Lord Jesus Christ was two natures uncon-
founded, but one person, as He is one Christ
and one Son, all these the catholic and apos-
tolic Church condemns."

Of the same : - —

'' If then the flesh of all was in Christ or
hath been in Christ subject to wrongs, how
can it be held to be of one essence with the
Godhead? For if the Word and the flesh
which derives its nature from earth are of
one essence, then the Word and the soul
which He took in its perfection are of one
essence, for the Word is of one nature with
God both according to the Word of the
Father, and the confession of the Son Him-
self in the words, ' I and my Father are one.' ^

1 Luke xxiv. 39. *Johnx. 30.

2 De incarnat. sacram. Chap. 6.


206


THEODORET.


Thus the Father must be held to be of the
same substance with the body. Why any
longer are ye wroth with the Arians, who
say that the Son is a creature of God, while
you assert yourselves that the Father is of one
substance witii His creatures?"

Of the same from his letter to the Emperor
Gratianus : ' —

" Let us preserve a distinction between
Godhead and flesh. One Son of God speaks
in l)otIi, since in Ilim both natures exist.
The same Christ speaks, yet not always in
the same but sometimes in a different man-
ner. Observe how at one time He expresses
divine glory and at another human feeling.
As God He utters the things of God, since He
is tlie Word ; as man He speaks with humil-
ity because He converses in my essence."

On the same from the same book : - —

" As to the passage where we read that the
Lord of glory was crucified,'^ let us not sup-
pose that He was crucified in His own glory.
But since He is both God and man, as touch-
ing His Godliead God, and as touching the
assumption of the flesh, a man, Jesus Christ,
the Lord of Glory, is said to have been cruci-
fied. For He partakes of either nature — that
is the human and the divine. In the nature
of manhood He imderwent the passion in
order that He who suffered mi^jht be said to
be without distinction both Lord of Glory
and Son of Man. As it is written ' He that
came down from Heaven.' " ''

Similarly of the same : * —

" Let then vain questions about words be
silent, as it is written, the kingdom of God is
not in ' enticing words ' but in ' demonstra-
tion of the spirit.' " For there is one Son of
God who speaks in both ways, since both
natures exist in Him; but although He Him-
self speaks He does not speak alwavs in the
same way; for you see in Him at one time
God's glory, at another time man's feeling.
As God He utters divine things, beinsf the
Word ; as man He utters human things,
since in this nature He spoke."

Of the same from his work on the Incar-
nation of the Lord against the Apollinari-


ans :


" Rut while we are confuting these, another
set spring up who assert the body of the
Christ and His godhead to l)e of one nature.
What hell hath vomited forth so terrible a
blasphemy ? Really Arians are more tolera-
ble, whose infidelity, on account of these men,
is strengthened, so that with greater opposi-
tion they deny Father, Son and Holy Ghost


1 De Fide ii. Chap. 9.
s Chap. 7.
' I.Cor. ii.8.
* John iii. 13.


' Id. Chap. 9.
« I.Cor. ii.4.
" De Incarn. Sac.


to be of one substance, for they did at least
endeavour to maintain the Godhead of the
Lord and His ffcsh to be of one nature."
Of the same (from the same chapter) : —
" He has frequently told me that he main-
tains the exposition of the Nicene Council,
but in that examination our Fathers laid
down that the Word of God, not the flesh, was
of one substance with the Father, and they
confessed that the Word came from the sub-
stance of the Father but that the flesh is of
the Virgin. Why then do they hold out to
us the name of the Nicene Council, while in
reality they are introducing innovations of
which our forefathers never entertained the
thought.^ "

Of the same against Apollinarius : * —
"■ Refuse thou to allow that the body is by
nature on a par with the Godhead. Even
though thou believe the body of the Christ to
be real and bring it to the altar for trans-
formation,- and fail to distinguish the nature
of the body and of the Godhead we shall say
to thee, ' If thou offer rightly and fail to
distinguish rightly, thou sinnest ; hold thy
peace."* Distinguish what belongs nat-
urally to us, and what is peculiar to the
Word. For I had not what was naturally
His, and He had not what was naturally
mine, but He took what was naturally mine
in order to make us partakers of what was
His. And He received this not for con-
fusion but for completion."

Of the same, a little further on : * —
" Let them who saj' that the nature of the
Word has been changed into natui'e of the body
say so no more, lest by the same interpreta-
tion the nature of the Word seem to have
been clianged into the corruption of sin. For
there is a distinction between what took, and
what was taken. Power came over the
Virgin, as in the words of the angel to her,
' The power of the highest shall overshadow
thee.' * But what was born was of the body
of the Virgin, and on this account the de-


J De incarn. sacram. Chap. 4.

2 " Offeras transfigurmidiim allaribu!:.'" Tlie Benedictine
Kditors, by a curious anachronism, see here a reference to
transuhstantiation. But mran-onjo-i?, tlie word transhited
" transfonnatinn " implies no more than the beini^ made to
underjjo a change, which may be a chanfje in dijfnity without
invedvini^ a clians:^e of substance, cf. jip. JO:) and 201, where
Ortliodoxus distinctly asserts that the substance remains un-
chanj^^ed. Transubstantiation, definitely declared an article of
faith in 1215, seems to have been first taught early in the yth c.
Vide I5p. Harold Browne on Art. xxviii.

3 Gen. iv. 7. Sept. * Id. Chap. 6.

<■' I>uke 1 . 35. The Latin of the Benedictine edition of Am-
brose is : —

DesinanI ergo dicere nattiram Veihi in Corporis natttram
esse viutatam ; fie pari interprctatinne videatiir nnliirn Verhi
in cnntai^iiiin miitala peccnti. Aliiidesl enim quod assii»i/>sit ,
rt aliiid quod assiimptum est. Virtus Tenit in Viroriiiem, siriit
et Auffelus ad earn dixit " quia Virtus Attissiini ohumhrabit
te." Sed natnm est corpus e\ Viri^iiie ; et idea coc/estis qui
dein desrensio, sed liumana conreptio est. Nan ergo eadeiii
carnis potuit esse divinitatisque uatiira.


DIALOGUES.


207


scent was divine but the conception human.
Therefore the nature of the flesh and of the
godhead could not be the same." '

The testimony of St. Basil, Bishop of
Ccesarea.
From his homily on Thanksgiving : —
'• Wherefore when He wept over His
friend He shewed His participation in human
nature and set us free from two extremes,
sufleri ng us neither to grow over soft in suf-
fering nor to be insensible to pain. As then
the Lord suffered hunger after solid food had
been digested, and thirst when the moisture
in His body was exhausted ; and was aweary
when His nerves and sinews were strained l:)y
His journeying, it was not that His divinity
was weighed down with toil, but that His
body showed the wonted symptoms of its
nature. Thus too when He allowed Himself
to weep He permitted the flesh to take its
natural course."

From the same against Eunomius : —
" I say that being in the form of God has
the same force as being in God's substance,
for as to have taken the form of a servant
shews our Lord to have been of the substance
of the manhood, so the statement that He
was in the form of God attributes to Him the
peculiar qualities of the divine substance." ^
The testimony of the holy Gregorius,
bishop of Nazianzus.

From his discourse De nova dominica : ^ —
" Believe that He will come again at His
glorious advent judging quick and dead,* no
longer flesh but not without a body."

" In order that He may be seen by them
that pierced Him "^ and remain God without


grossness.


Of the same from his Epistle to Cledo-
nius : —

" God and man are two natures, as soul
and body are two ; but there are not two
sons, nor yet are there here two men al-
though Paul thus speaks of the outward man
and the inward man.® In a word the
sources of the Saviour's being are of two
kinds, since the visible is distinct from the
invisible and the timeless from that which is


1 In the Greek text the last sentence is unintelligible and
apparently corrupt. The translation follows the Latin text
from which the version in the citation of Thc-odoret varies in
important particulars. The Greek text of the quotation runs : —

\\(iV(ja.fxQoi(Ta,v tqLvov ot Aeyoi/re? 015 ii) toO -Voyou (/)i'o"i.9 ti?
srapKu? ,a6Ta|8e(3ArjTat ^v<J\.v iva. ix'i] So^r) ixeTaPArjOelcra Kara, ri^v
auTrjV ipiJ-rjueiav yeyevrjadai Kai rj Toii \6yov f/)vo"t? Tot^ toO
iru)/xdT09 Traflij^tatrt cruji(f)9opo?. 'Erepoi' ydp ecTi to trpocrKafi'ov
(cai irepov iari to Trpocr\riif>6ev. Avva/ui? ri\6tv iirt t'tji' napOevoi',
u>? 6 a-yyeAos Trpo? avTrju Aeyet oTt AvpafXi^ v\pL<rrov eTTto'/ctao'et aoi I
aAA' CK Tou orcufxaro? tJi' ttj? Hap^eVou to r€;(0tV' Kal Sta toOto
&eia /X6V rj KaTafiacrig rj Se (nJAAjji|(i? avOpuinivny oiiK ain'r] ovv
t]SvvaTO Tov Te <Tu)/xaT09 Tri/cD/na ical ttjs i^cottjtos (|)ucri9.

2 Cf. Phil. ii. 6.

3 The passag-e quoted is not in the 43rd discourse de nova
dominica but in the 40th on Holy Baptism.

^ Acts i. II. '^ Zechariah xii, 10. « II. Cor. iv. 16.


of time, but He is not two beings. God
forbid."

Of the same from the same Exposition to
Cledonius : —

" If any one says that the flesh has now
been laid aside, and that the Godhead is bare
of body, and that it is not and will not come
with that which was assumed, let him be de-
prived of the vision of the glory of the ad-
vent ! For where is the body now, save
with Him that assumed \t? For it assuredly
has not been, as the Manichees fable, swal-
lowed up by the Son, that it may be honoured
through dishonour ; it has not been poured
out and dissolved in the air like a voice and
stream of pei'fu me or flash of unsubstantial
lightning. And where is the capacity of
being handled after the resurrection, vshercin
one day it shall be seen by them that
pierced Him.^ For Godhead of itself is in-
visible,"

Of the same from the second discourse
about the Son : —

" As the Word He was neither obedient
nor disobedient, for these qualities belong to
them that are in subjection and to inferiors ;
the former of the more tractable and the
latter of them that deserve condemnation.
But in the form of a servant He accommo-
dates Himself to his fellowservants and puts
on a form that was not His own, bearing in
Himself all of me with all that is mine, that
in Himself He may waste and destroy the
baser parts as wax is wasted by fire or the
mist of the earth by the sun."

Of the same from his discourse on the
Theophany : —

" Since He came forth from the Virgin
with the assumption of two things mutually
opposed to one another, flesh and spirit,
whereof the one was taken into God and the
other exhibited the grace of the Godhead."

Of the same a little further on : —

" He was sent, but as Man. For Hi.s
nature was twofold, for without doubt He
thenceforth was aweary and hungered and
thirsted and suffered agony and shed tears
after the custom of a human bod}'."

Of the same from his second discourse
about the Son : —

" He would be called God not of the
Word, but of the visible creation, for how
could He be God of Him that is absolutely
God.^ Just so He is called Father, not of
the visible creation, but of the Word. For
He was of two-fold nature. Wherefore the
one belongs absolutely to both, but the
other not absolutely.^ For He is absolutely

1 Here the text is corrupt.


208


THEODORET.


our God, but not absolutely our Father.
And it is this conjunction of names which
gives rise to the error of heretics. A proof
of this lies in the fact that when natures are
distinguished in thought, there is a distinc-
tion in names. Listen to the words of Paul.
' The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, The
Father of Glory,' ^ — of Christ He is God,
of glory Father, and if both are one this is
so not by nature but by conjunction. What
can be plainer than this? Fifthly let it be
said that He receives life, authority, inheri-
tance of nations, power over all flesh, glory,
disciples or what you will ; all these belong
to the manhood."

Of the same from the same work : —
" ' For there is one God and one Mediator
between God and men the man Christ
Jesus.' - As man He still pleads for my
salvation, because He keeps with Him the
body which He took, till he made me God
by the power of the incarnation — though
He be no longer known according to the
flesh that is by aflections of the flesh and
though He be without sin."

Of the same from the same work: —
" Is it not plain to all that as God He
knows, and is ignorant. He says, as man.? If,
that is, anyone distinguish the apparent from
that which is an object of intellectual per-
ception. For what gives rise to this opinion
is the fact that the appellation of the Son is
absolute without relation, it not being added
of whom He is the Son ; so to give the most
pious sense to this ignorance we hold it
to belong to the human, and not to the
divine."

Testimony of the Holy Gregorius^ bishop
of Nyssa.

From his catechetical discourse : —
" And who says this that the infinity of the
Godhead is comprehended by the limitation
of the flesh, as by some vessel? "

Of the same from the same work : —
" But if man's soul by necessity of its nature
commingled with the body, is everywhere
in authority, what need is there of asserting
that the Godhead is limited by the nature of
the flesh ? "

Of the same from the same work : —
" What hinders us then, while recognis-
ing a certain unity and approximation of a
divine nature in relation to the human, from
retaining the divine intelligence even in this
approximation, believing that the divine
even when it exists in men is beyond all
limitation ? "

Of the same from his work against
Eunomius : —


Ephes. i 17.


» I. Tim. ii. 5.


" The Son of Mary converses with broth-
ers, but the only begotten has no brothers,
for how could the name of only begotten be
preserved among brothers? And the same
Christ that said 'God is a spirit'^ says to
His disciples ' Handle me,'- to shew that the
human nature only can be handled and that
the divine is intangible : and He that said ' I
go '^ indicates removal fi'om place to place,
while He that comprehends all things and
' by Whom,' as says the Apostle, ' all things
were created and by Whom all things
consist,' '' had among all existing things
nothing without and beyond Himself which
can stand to Him in tiie relation of motion
or removal."

Of the same from the same work : —

" *■ Being by the right hand of God ex-
alted.'^ Who then was exalted? The
lowly or the most high ? And what is the
lowly if it be not the human? And what is
the most high save the divine? But God
being most high needs no exaltation, and so
the Apostle says that the human is exalted,
exalted that is in being ' made both Lord and
Christ."* Therefore the Apostle does not
mean by this term ' He made ' the everlasting
existence of the Lord, but the change of the
lowly to the exalted which took place on the
right hand of God. By this word he de-
clares the mystery of piety, for when he says
' by the right hand of God exalted ' he
plainly reveals the ineflable occonomy of the
mystery that the right hand of God which
created all things, which is the Lord by
whom all things were made and without
whom nothing consists of things that were
made,' through the union lifted up to Its own
exaltation the manhood united to It."

Testimony of St. Amphilochitis^ bishop of
Ico7iiuin.

From his discourse on " My Father is
greater than I " : ** —

"Henceforth distinguish the natures;
that of God and that of man. For He was
not made man by falling away from God,
nor God by increase and advance from
man."

Of the same from his discourse on " the
Son can do nothing of Himself" : ® —

" For after the resurrection the Lord shews
both — both that the body is not of this
nature, and that the body rises, for remem-
ber the history. After the passion and the
resurrection the disciples were gathered
together, and when the doors were shut the
Lord stood in the midst of them. Never at


'John iv. 24.

2 Luke xxiv. 39.

3 Joliu xiv. 2S.


* Coloss. i. 16, 17.
'■ Acts ii. 33.
" Acts ii. 3().


' Cf.John i.2.
" John xiv. 2S.
'■> John V. ig.


DIALOGUES.


?Q9


any time before the passion did He do this.
Could not then the Christ have done this
even long before.'' For all things are pos-
sible to God.^ But before the passion He
did not do so lest you should suppose the
incarnation an unreality or appearance, and
think of the flesh of the Christ as spiritual,
or that it came down from heaven and is of
another substance than our flesh. Some
have invented all these theories with the
idea that thereby they reverence the Lord,
forgetful that through their thanksgiving
they blaspheme themselves, and accuse the
truth of a lie : for I say nothing of the lie
being altogether absurd. For if He took
another body how does that affect mine,
which stands in need of salvation.'' If He
brought down flesh from heaven, how does
this affect my ffesh which was derived from
earth ? "

Of the same from the same work : —
" Wherefore not before the passion, but after
the passion, the Lord stood in the midst of the
disciples when the doors were shut, that
thou mayest know that thy natural body after
being sown is ' raised a spiritual body,'" and
that thou mayest not suppose the body that is
raised to be a different body. When Thomas
after the resurrection doubted. He shews him
the prints of the nails. He shews him the
marks of the spears. But had He not power
to heal Himself after the resurrection too,
when even before the resurrection He had
healed all men.'' But by shewing the prints
of the nails He shews that it is this very
body ; by coming in when the doors were
shut He shews that it has not the same quali-
ties ; the same body to fulfil the work of the
incarnation by raising that which had become
a corpse, but a changed body that it fall not
again under corruption nor be subject again
to death."

Testimony of the blessed Theophilus^
bishop of Alexandria.

From his work against Origen : —
"Our likeness which He assumed is not
changed into the nature of Godhead nor is
His Godhead turned into our likeness. For
He remains what He was from the begin-
ning God, and He so remains preserving our
subsistence in Himself."

Of the same from the same treatise : —
" But you persist continually in your blas-
phemies attacking the Son of God, and using
these words ' as the Son and the Father are
one, so also are the soul which the Son took
and the Son Himself one.' You are ignorant
that the Son and the Father are one on


> Matt, xix 36. Mark x. 27.
VOL. III.


2 I. Cor. XV.


account of their one substance and the same
Godhead ; but the soul and the Son are each
of a different substance and different nature.
For if the soul of the Son and the Son Him-
self are one in the same sense in which the
Father and the Son are one, then the Father
and the Soul will be one and the soul of the
Son shall one day say ' He that hath seen
Me hath seen the Father; ' ' but this is not
so ; God forbid. For the Son and the Father
are one because there is no distinction be-
tween their qualities, but the soul and the
Son are distinguished alike in nature and sub-
stance, in that the soul which is naturally of
one substance with us was made by Him.
For if the soul and the Son are one in the
same manner in which the Father and the
Son are one, as Origen would have it, then
the soul equally with the Son will be ' the
brightness of God's glory and express im-
age of His person.' ^ But this is impossible ;
impossible that the Son and the soul should
be one as He and the Father are one. And
what will Origen do when again he attacks
himself.'' For he writes, never could the
soul distressed and ' exceeding sorrowful ' ^
be the 'firstborn of every creature.''' For
God the Word, as being stronger than the
soul, the Son Himself, says ' I have power
to lay it down and I have power to take it
If then the Son is stronger than His


agam.


own soul, as is agi^eed, how can His soul be
equal to God and in the form of God.'' For
we say that ' He emptied Himself and took
upon Him the form of a servant.' ® In the
extravagance of his impieties Origen sur-
passes all other heretics, as we have shewn,
for if the Word exists in the form of God
and is equal to God and if he supposes thus
daring to write the soul of the Saviour to be
in the form of God and equal with God, how
can the equal be greater, when the inferior
in nature testifies to the superiority of what
is beyond it.'' "

Testimony of the Holy John Chrysostom^
bishop of Constantinople.

From the Discourse held in the Great
Church : —

"Thy Lord exalted man to heaven,
and thou wilt not even give him a share of
the agora. But why do I say ' to heaven ' }
He seated man on a kingly throne. Thou
expellest him from the city."

Of the same, on the beginning of Ps.
xlii. : —

" Up to this day Paul does not cease to say
' We are ambassadors for Christ as though
God did beseech you by us ; we pray you in


P


1 John xiv. q.

2 Hebrews i. 3.


3 Matt. xxvi. 38.
* Coloss. i. ij.


6 John X. 18-
«Phil. ii.7.


210


THEODORET.


Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.' ^
Nor did He stand here, but taking the first
fruits of thy nature He sat down ' above all
principality and power and might, and every
name tliat is named not only in this world
but in the world to come.' ^ What could be
equal to this honour? The first fruits of
our race which has so much olfcndcd and is
so dishonoured sits so high and enjoys
honour so vast."

Of the same about the division of
tongues : —

"For bethink thee what it is to see our
nature riding on the Cherubim and all the
power of heaven mustered round about it.
Consider too Paul's wisdom and how many
terms he searches for that he may set forth
the love of Christ to men, for he does not
say simply the grace, nor yet simply the
riches, but the ' exceeding great riches of His
grace in His kindness.'"^

Of the same from his Dogmatic Oration,
on the theme that the word spoken and
deeds done in humility by Christ were not so
spoken and done on account of infirmity,
but on account of diflei*enccs of dispen-
sation : —

" And after His resurrection, when He
saw His disciple disbelieving. He did not
shrink from shewing him both wound and
print of nails, and letting him lay his hand
upon the scars, and said ' Examine and see,
for a spirit hath not flesh and bones.'* The
reason of His not assuming the manhood of
full age from the beginning, and of His
deisfiiin": to be conceived, to be born, to be
suckled, and to live so long upon the earth,
was that by the long period of the time and
all the other circumstances. He might give a
warranty for this very thing."

Of the same against those who assert that
demons rule human affairs : —

" Nothing was more worthless than man
and than man nothing has become more
precious. He was the last part of the
reasonable creation, but the feet have been
made the head, and through the firstfruits
have been borne up to the kingly throne.
Just as some man noble and bountiful, on
seeing a wretch escaped from shipwreck
who has saved nothing but his bare body
from the waves, welcomes him with open
hands, clothes him in a radiant robe, and
exalts him to the highest honour, so too
hath God done towards our nature. Man
had lost all that he had, his freedom, his
intercourse with God, his abode in Paradise,


335-


' II. Cor. V. 20. ^Ephes.i. 21. •■' Kphcs. ii. 7.

* Cf. Iwuke xxiv. 39. and John xx. 27. and cf. note on page


his painless life, whence he came forth like a
man all naked from a wreck, but God
received him and straightway clothed him,
and, taking him by the hand, led him
onward step by step and brought him up to
heaven."

Of the same from the same work ; —

"But God made the gain greater than the
loss, and exalted our nature to the royal
throne. So Paul exclaims ' And have
raised us up together and made us sit to-
gether in heavenly places' ^ at His right
hand."

Of the same from his Hlrd oiation against
the Jews : —

" He opened the heavens; of foes he made
friends ; He introduced them into heaven ;
He seated our nature on the right hand of the
throne ; He gave us countless other good
things."

Of the same from his discourse on the As-
cension : —

" To this distance and height did He ex-
alt our nature. Look where low it lay,
and where it mounted up. Lower it was
impossible to descend than where man de-
scended ; higher it was impossible to rise than
where He exalted him."

Of the same from his interpretation of the
Epistle to the Ephesians : —

" According to His good pleasure, which
He had proposed in himself, that is which
He earnestly desired, He was as it were in
labour to tell us the mystery. And what is
this mystery.? That He wishes to seat man
on high ; as in truth came to pass."

Of the same from the same interpre-
tation : —

" God of our Lord Jesus Christ speaks of
this and not of God the Word."

Of the same from the same interpreta-
tion : —

" ' And when we were dead in sins He
quickened us together in Christ ; ' * again
Christ stands in the midst, and the work is
wonderful. If the first fruits live we live
also. He quickened both Him and us.
Seest thou that all these things are spoken
according to the flesh?"

Of the same from the gospel according to
St. John : —

"Why docs he add 'and dwelt among
us'.?^ It is as though he said: Imagine
nothing absurd from the phrase ' was made.'
For I have not mentioned any change in that
unchangeable nature, but of tabernacling*
and of inhabiting. Now that which taber-
nacles is not identical with the tabernacle,


' Eplies. ii. 6.
2 Ephes, ii. 5.


8 John i. 14, co-Kijcwd'ci',


DIALOGUES.


211


but one thing tabernacles in another ; other-
wise there would be no tabernacling. Noth-
ing inhabits itself. I spoke of a distinction
of substance. For by the union and the
conjunction God the Word and the flesh are
one without confusion or destruction of the
substances, but by ineffable and indescrib-
able union."

Of the same from the gospel according to
St. Matthew : —

" Just as one standing in the space between
two that are separated from one another,
stretches out both his hands and joins them,
so too did He, joining the old and the new,
the divine nature and the human, His own
with ourSo"

Of the same from the Ascension of Christ : —
" For so when two champions stand ready
for the fight, some other intervening between
them, at once stops the struggle, and puts an
end to their ill will, so too did Christ. As
God He was wroth, but we made light of His
wrath, and turned away our faces from our
loving Lord. Then Christ flung Himself in
the midst, and restored both natures to
mutual love, and Himself took on Him the
weight of the punishment laid by the Father
on us."

Of the same from the same work : —
" Lo He brought the first fruits of our
nature to the Father and the Father Llimself
approved the gift, alike on account of the
high dignity of Him that bought it and of
the faultlessness of the offering. He received
it in His own hands. He made a chair
of His own throne ; nay more He seated
it on His own right hand, let us then
recognise who it was to who m it was said
' Sit thou on my right hand '^ and what was
that nature to which God said ' Dust thou
art and to dust thou shalt return.' " ^
Of the same a little further on : —
" What arguments to use, what words to
utter 1 cannot tell ; the nature which was
rotten, worthless, declared lowest of all,
vanquished everything and overcame the
world. To-day it hath been thought worthy
to be made higher than all, to-day it hath
received what from old time angels have
desired; to-day it is possible for archangels
to be made spectators of what has been for
ages longed for, and they contemplate our
nature, shining on the throne of the King
in the glory of His immortality."

Testitnony of St. Flaviaiius., bishop of
Antioch.

From the Gospel according to St. Luke : —
" In all of us the Lord writes the express


' Psalm ex. I.


* Gen. iii. 19.


image of His holiness, and in various ways
shows our nature the way of salvation.
Many and clear proofs does He give us both
of His bodily advent and of His Godhead
working by a body's means. For He wished
to give us assurance of both His natures."

Of the same on the Theophany : —

" ' Who can express the noble acts of the
Lord, or shew forth all His praise .^'^ who
could express in words the greatness of His
goodness toward us.'' Human nature is
joined to Godhead, while both natures re-
main independent."

Testimony of Cyril., bishop of ferzcsalefji.

From his fourth catechetical oration con-
cerning the ten dogmas.

Of the birth from a virgin : —

" Believe thou that this only begotten Son
of God, on account of our sins, came down
from heaven to earth, having taken on Him
this manhood of like passions with us, and
being born of holy Virgin and of Holy Ghost.
This incarnation was effected, not in seeming
and unreality, but in reality. He did not
only pass through the Virgin, as through a
channel, but was verily made flesh of her.
Like us He really ate, and of the Virgin was
really suckled. For if the incarnation was an
unreality, then our salvation is a delusion.
The Christ was twofold — the visible man,
the invisible God. He ate as man, verily
like ourselves, for the flesh that He wore
was of like passions with us ; He fed the five
thousand with five loaves- as God. As man
He really died. As God He raised the dead
on the fourth day.^ As man He slept in the
boat. As God He walked upon the waters." *

Testimony of Antiochus^ bishop of Ptole-
mais : ^ —

" Do not confound the natures and you will
have a lively apprehension of the incarnation."

Testimony of the holy Hilarius., bishop
and confessor^ in his ninth book, " de Fide" :

iPs. cvi. 2.

2 Matt. xiv. IS, etc., Mark vi. 35, etc., Luke ix. 9, etc., John
vi. S,etc.

sjohn xi. 43. *Matt. vii. 24; John vi. 19.

0 This and another fragment in the Catena on St. John xix.
443, is all that survives oftheworks of Antiochus of Ptolemais,
an eloquent opponent of Chrysostom at Constantinople, and
like him, said to have a " mouth of gold."

0 Hilary of Poictiers, f A.D. 36S. The treatise quoted is
known as " de Trinitate," and " contra Ariaiios," as well as
"de Fide." The Greek of Theodoret differs considerably
from the Latin. Of the first extract the original is nescit
plane viiam sicam nescit qui Christum Jesnm tit verum Deum
itaetvertim hominem ignorat. El ejusdem fericuli res est,
Christtan yesum vet Spiritum Deum, vel carnem nostri cor-
poris denegare. Omnis ergo qui C07ijitebit!(r 7ne coram homi-
nibus, confitebor et ego eum coram patre meo qui est in coelis.
^ui auteni negaverit me coram hominihus, negabo et ego eum
coram patre meo, qui est in coelis. Haec Verbnm caro factum
loquebatur, et homo Jesus Christus dominus majestatis doce-
bat; Mediator ipse in se ad salutem Ecclesiae constitulus et
illo ipso inter Deum et homines mediatoris Sacramento utrum-
que unus existeus, dum ipse ex unitis ifi idipsum naturts
naturae utriusque res eadem est ; itatamen, ut neutro careret in
utroque, ne forte Deus esse homo nascendo desineret, et homo
rursus Deus manendo non esset. Haec itaque humanae beati-


P 2


212


THEODORET.


"lie who knoweth not Jesus the Christ
as very God and as very man, knoweth not
in reality liis own life, for we incur the same
peril if we deny Christ Jesus or God the
spirit, or tlie flesli of our own body. ' Wlio-
soever therefore shall confess me before men
him will I confess also before my Fatlicr
which is in Heaven, but whosoever shall
deny me before men him will I also deny
before my Father which is in Heaven.'^
These things spoke the Word made flesh;
these things the man Christ Jesus, Lord of
Glorv, taught, being made Mediator for the
salvation of the Churcli in the very mystery
whereby He mediated between God and men.
Both being: made one out of the natures united
for this very purpose, He was one and the
same through either nature, but so that in
both He fell short in neither, lest haply by
being born as man He should cease to be
God, or by remaining God should not be
man. Therefore this is the blessedness of the
true faith among men to preach both God
and man, to confess both word and flesh, to
recognise that God was also man, and not
to be ignorant that the flesh is also Word."
Of the same from the same book : ^ —
" So the only begotten God being born
man of a Virgin and in the fulness of the
time, being Himself ordained to work out
the advance of man to God, observed this

tudinis fides vera est, Deum et hominem praedicare, Verhum
etcaniem rotifiteri: neque Deum nescire quod homo sit, neqiie
carnem fffnortire quod Verbum sit.

1 Matt. X. 32, 33.

''^ Natus igilur iiniffettitus Deus ex Virgine homo, et secun-
dum plcnitudinem temporum in semetipso provecturus in
Deum hominem hunc per omniii evangelici ^ermonis modum
tenuit, ut se Ulium Dei credi doceret, et hominis filium prae-
dicari admoneret; loculus et gerens homo universa quae Dei
sunt, loqucns deinde et gerens Deus universa quae hominis
sunt; ita tamen, ut ipso illo utriusque generis sermone num-
quam nisi cum significatione et hominis loculus et Dei sit;
uno tamen Deo palre semper ostenso, et se in natura unius Dei
per nativitatis veritatem professo; nee tamen se Deo patri non
etfilii honore et hominis conditione suhdente : cum et nativilas
omnis se referat ad auctorem, it caro se unix>ersa secundum
Deum profiteatur infirmam. llinc itaque fallendi simpliccs
alque ignorantes haereticis occasio est, ut quae ab eo secun-
dum hominem dicta sunt, dicta esse secundum naturae divinae
infirmitatem mentianlur ; et quia unus alque idem est Isquens
omnia quae loquitur de se ipso omnia cum locutum esse con-
lendant.

Ncc sane negamus, totum ilium qui ejus manet, naturae
suae esse sermonem. Sed si yesus Christus et homo et Deus
est ; et neque cum homo, turn primum Deus ; neque cum homo,
ium non etiam et Deus; neque post hominem in Deo non lotus
homo totus Deus ; unum alque idem necesse est dictorum ejus
sacramentum esse, quod generis. Et cum in eo secundum
tempus discernis hominem a Deo, Dei tamen alque hominis
discerne sermonem. Et cum Deum alque hominem in tempore
confiteberis, Dei at^ue liominis in tempore dicta dijudica.
Cum vera ex homtne et Deo rursus tolius hominis, lotius
etiam Dei tempus intelligis, si quid illud ad demonstra-
tionem ejus temporis dictum est, tempori coaplato quae dicta
sunt: ut cum aliud sit ante hominem Deus, aliud sit homo et
Deus, aliud sit post hominem et Deum totus homo totus Deus ;
non confiindas temporibus; et generibus dispcnsationis sacra-
mentum, cum pro qualitate generuiH ac nalurarum, alium ci in
Sacramento liominis necesse est sermonem j'uisse non nolo,
alium adhuc morituro, alium jam aeterno. Nosiri ii.'itur
causa haec omnia Vesus Christus manens et corporis nostri
ho»io natus secundum consuetudinem natunc nostrte loculus
est, non tamen omittens nalurce suae esse quod Deus est. Nam
tametsi in partu ac passione ac morte naluru- nostra rem
feregit, res tamen ipsus omnes virlule natura sua; gessi't.


order of things, through all the words of the
gospels, that He might teach belief in Him-
self, as Son of God, and keep us in mind to
preach Him as Son of Man. As being man
He always spoke and acted as is proper to
man, but in such a manner as never to speak
in this same mode of speech as touching both
save with the intention of signifying both
God and Man. But hence the heretics
derive a pretext for catching in their traps
simple and ignorant men : what was spoken
by our Lord in accordance with His man-
hood they falsely assert to have been uttered
in the weakness of His divine nature, and
since one and the same person spake all the
words He used they urged that all He uttered
He uttered about Himself. Now even we
do not deny that all His extant words are
of His own nature. But granted that the
one Christ is man and God ; granted that
when man He was not then first God ;
granted that when man He w^as then also
God, granted that after the assumption of
the manhood In the Lord, the Word was
man and the Word was God, it follows of
necessity that there is one and the same
mystery of His woi'ds as there is of His gen-
eration. Whenever in Him, as occasion may
require, you distinguish the manhood from
the Godhead, then also endeavour to separate
the words of God from the words of man.
And whenever you confess God and man,
then discern the words of God and man.
And when the words are spoken of God and
man, and again of man wholly and wholly of
God, consider carefully the occasion. If any-
thing was spoken to signify what was appro-
priate to a particular occasion, apply the
woi'ds to the occasion. A distinction must
be observed l^etween God before the man-
hood, man and God, man wholly and God
wdiolly after the union of the manhood and
Godhead. Take heed therefore not to con-
fuse the m3'stery of the incarnation in the
words and acts. For it must needs be that
according to the quality of the kinds of
natures a distinction lies in the manner of
speech, before the manhood was born, in ac-
cordance with the mystery when it was still
approaching death, and again when it was
everlasting. ' For if in His birth and in His
passion and in His death He acted in ac-
cordance with our nature He nevertheless
ellected all this by the power of His own
nature.' "

Of the same in the same book : —

" Do you then see that thus God and man

are confessed, so that death is predicated of

man, and the resurrection of the flesh, of

God ; for consider the nature of God and the


DIALOGUES.


213


power of the resurrection, and recognise in
the death the CEConomy as touching man.
And since both death and resurrection have
been brought about in their own natures,
bear in mind, I beg you, the one Christ
Jesus, who was of both. I have shortly
demonstrated these points to you to the end
that we may remember both natures to have
been in our Lord Jesus Christ ' for being in
the form of God He took the form of a
servant.' " ^

Testimony of the very holy bishop Augus-
tinus.

From his letter to Volusianus. Epistle III :

" But now He appeared as Mediator be-
tween God and man, so as in the unity of
His person to conjoin both natures, by com-
bining the wonted with the unwonted, and
the unwonted with the wonted."

Of the same from his exposition of the
Gospel according to John : - —

" What then, O heretic? Since Christ is
also man, He speaks as man ; and dost thou
slander God? He in Himself lifts man's
nature on high, and thou hast the hardihood
to cheapen His divine nature."

Of the same from his book on the Expo-
sition of the Faith : —

" It is ours to believe, but His to know, and
so let God the Word Himself, after receiving
all that is pi'oper to man, be man, and let
man after His assumption and reception
of all that is God, be no other than God.
It must not be supposed because He is
said to have been incarnate and mixed,
that therefore His substance was dimi-
nished. God knows that He mixes Him-
self without the natural corruption, and
He is mixed in reality. He knows also that
He so received in Himself as that no ad-
dition of increment accrues to Himself, as
also He knows He infused His whole self
so as to incur no diminution. Let us not
then, in accordance with our weak intelli-
gence, and forming conjectures on the teach-
ing of experience and the senses, suppose
that God and man are mixed after the man-
ner of things created and equal mixed to-
gether, and that from such a confusion as
this of the Word and of the flesh a body as
it were was made. God forbid that this
should be our belief, lest we should suppose
that after the manner of things which are
confounded together two natures were
brought into one hypostasis.^ For a men-
tion of this kind implies destruction of both
parts ; but Christ Himself, containing but
not contained, who examines us but is Him-

iPhil, ii.7. « Tract 78.

3 cf. p. 36. Here ujrd<rTocris ■=■ person.


self beyond examination, making full but not
made full, everywhere at one and the same
time being Himself whole and pervading the
universe, through His pouring out His own
power, as being moved with mercy, was
mingled with the nature of man, though the
nature of man was not mingled with the
divine."

Testimony of Scveriaims^ bishop of Ga-
bala}

From " the Nativity of Christ " : —

" O mystery truly heavenly and yet on earth
— mystery seen and not apparent for so was
the Christ after His birth ; heavenly and yet
on earth ; holding and not held ; seen and
invisible ; of Heaven as touching the nature
of the Godhead, on earth as touching the
nature of the manhood ; seen in the flesh, in-
visible in the spirit ; held as to the body not
to be holden as to the Word."

Testimo)iy of Atticics^ bishop of Cotistati-
tinople.

From his letter to EujDsychius : —

" How then did it behove the Most Wise
to act.? By mediation of the flesh assumed,
and by union of God the Word with man
born of Mary, He is made of either nature,
so that the Christ made one of both, as con-
stituted in Godhead, abides in the proper dig-
nity of His impassible nature, but in flesh,
being brought near to death, at one and the
same time shews the kindred nature of the
flesh how through death to despise death,
and by His death confirms the righteousness
of the new covenant."

Testimony of Cyril^ bishop of Alexandria.

From his letter to Nestorius : ^ —

" The natures which have been brought
together in the true unity are distinct, and of
both there is one God and Son, but the dif-
ference of the natures has not been removed
in consequence of the union."

Of the same from his letter against the
Orientals : ■* —

" There is an union of two natures, where-
fore we acknowledge one Christ, one Son,
one Lord. In accordance with this percep-
tion of the unconfounded union we acknowl-
edge the Holy Virgin as Mother of God *

1 Severianus, like Antiochus of Ptolemais, was moved to
leave his remote diocese (Gabala is now Gibili, not far south of
Latakia) to try his fortunes as a popuhir preacher at Constanti-
nople: There he met with success, and was kindly treated by
Chrysostom, but he turned against his friend, and was a prime
agent in the plots against him. The date of his death is un-
known.

2Cf. p. 154, note. Atticus was a determined opponent of
heresy as well as of Chrysostom.

3 Ep. iv. Ed. Aub. V. ii. 23. ■» id. vi. 157.

''The word in the text is the famous iJcotokos, the watch-
word of the Nestorian controversy. It may be doubtful
whether either the English " Mother of God " or the Latin
"[Deipara " exactly represents the idea intended to be ex-
pressed by the subtler Greek. Even Nestorius did not object
to the ©toVo/cos when rightly understood. The explanation of.


214


THEODORRT.


because the Word of God was made flesh
and was made man, and from the very con-
ception united to Himself the temper taken
from her." ^

Of the same : —

" There is one Lord Jesus Christ, even if
the difference be recognised of the natures
of which we assert the inelllible union to
have been made."

Of the same : —

"Therefore, as I said, while praising the
manner of the incarnation, wc see that two
natures came together in inseparable union
without confusion and without division,- for
the flesh is flesh and no kind of Godhead, al-
though it was made flesh of God ; in like
manner the Word is God, and not flesh, al-
though He made the flesh His own accortling
to the occonomy."

Of the same from his interpretation of the
Epistle to the Hebrews : —

" For altIiou<rh the natures which came
together in unity are regarded as diflbrent and
unequal with one another, I mean of flesh
and of God, nevertheless the Son, Who was
made of both, is one."

Of the same from his interpretation of the
same Epistle : —

" Yet though the only begotten Word of
God is said to be united in hypostasis to
flesh, we deny there was any confusion of the
natures with one another, and declare each to
remain what it is."

Of the same from his commentaries : —

" The Father's Word, born of the Virgin,

the symbolum drawn up by Theodorct himself at Ephcsus for
prcscnt^ition to the Kinpcror is "'Era xpio-rbf, era uib>/, eVa
Kvptov otJ.o\oyoufJi(f- KardL rayjTqv T»J9 atrvy^vrov tr^Jo'eio? errotai'
otko\oyovtJ^tv TT()v ayiavt irapBtvov t^toTOKOi', 6t4 to lav Qahv \6yov
uafiKxiiBi)vai KaX ^vavOfnatir^vai Kat c'^ nvTr]<; T~)<; (rvWrf^iutt; trwcrat
tauTiJj Tof f f ttuTij? \rirl>9fVTa vanv." The fircat point souijhl to be
asserted was, the union of the two Natures. Gregory of Nazi-
anzus (li. 73^) says 'Ei ti? ov BtoToKuv ti)i> Maptav vno\afijidvi.t,

1 Here Cyril adopts the terms of the document given in the
preceding note.

^ afTvyyvTiot Kal aStaiptTux;, These adverbs recall the famous
words of I looker. Kcc. I'ol. v. 54. 10.

" There are but four things wliicli c oncur to make complete
the whole state of our Lord Jesus Christ : his Dcilv, his man-
hood, the conjunction of bolh,antl the distinction of the one from
the other being joined in f>ne. Four principal heresies there
are which have in those things wilh>lood the truth ' Arians, by
bending themselves .against the Deity of Christ; Apollinarians,
by maiming and misinterpreting that which belongeth to Iiis
human nature; Nestorians, by rending Christ asuiuUr, and
dividing him into two persons; the followers of Kutyches, by
confounding in his person those natures which they should
distinguish. Against these there have been four most famous
ancient general councils : the council of Nice to define against
Arians; against Apollinarians the Council of Constantinople;
the council of Ephesus against Nestorians; against Kutychi-
ans the Chalcedon Council. In four words, a\j]9u>^, reXnu?.
dSiaLpfTuK; , ii(Tvyxvn>i; , truly, perfcctlv, indivisibly, distinctly;
the first applied to his being God, and the second to his beinu^
Man, the third to his being of boiii One, and the fourth to his
continuing in that one Moth: wc may fully by way of Abridge-
ment comprise whatsoever antiquity hath at larire handled
cither in declaration of Christian belief, or in reful;ition of the
foresaid heresies. Within the compass of which four heads, I
may truly aftirm, that all heresies which touch but the person
of Jesus Christ, whether they have risen in these later days, or
in any age heretofore, may be with great facility brought to
confine themselves."


is named man, though being by nature God
as partaking of flesh and blood like us' for
thus He was seen by men upon earth, with-
out getting rid of His own nature, but assum-
ing our Manhood perfect according to its
own reason."

Of the same concerning the Incarnation
(Schol. c. 13) : —

" Then before the incarnation there is one
Very God, and in manhood He remains
what He was and is and will be ; the one
Lord Jesus Christ then must not be separated
into man apart and into God apart, but re-
cognising the diflerence of the natures and
preserving them unconfounded with one
another, we assert that there is one and the
same Christ Jesus."

Of the same after other commentaries : —
"There is plain perception of one thing
dwelling in another, namely the divine nature
in manhood, without undergoing commixture
or any confusion, or any change into what it
was not. For what is said to dwell in another
does not become the same as that in which
it dwells, but is rather regarded as one thing
in another. But in the nature of the Word
and of the manhood the diflerence points out
to us a diflerence of natures alone, for of both
is perceived one Christ. Therefore he savs
that the Word ' Tabernacled among us,'^
carefully observing the freedom from confus-
ion, for he recognises one only begotten Son
who was made flesh and became man."

Now, my dear sir, you have heard the
great lights of the world ; you have seen the
beams of their teaching, and j'ou have re-
ceived exact instruction how, not only after
the nativity, but after the passion which
wrought salvation, and the resurrection, and
the ascension, they have shewn the union of
the Godhead and of the manhood to be
without confusion.

Eran. — I did not suppose that they dis-
tinguished the natures after the union, but I
have found an iiifinite amount of distinction.
Ortli. — It is mad and rash against those
noble champions of the faith so much as to
wag your tongue. l>ut I will adduce for
you the words of ApoUinarius, in order that
you may know that he too asserts the union
to be without confusion. Now hear his
words.

Tcsttmoiiy of ApoUinarius.
From his summary : —
" There is an union between what is of
God and what is of the body. On the one
side is the adorable Creator Who is wisdom
and power eternal ; these are of the God-


' Hebrews ii. 14.


* John i. 14.


DIALOGUES.


21


head. On the other hand is the Son of
Mary, horn at the last time, worshipping
God, advancing in wisdom, strengthened in
power ; these are of the body. The sufler-
ing on behalf of sin and the curse came and
will not pass away nor yet be changed into
the incorporeal."

And again a little further on : —
" Men are consubstantial with the un-
reasoning animals as far as the unreasoning
body is concerned ; they are of another sub-
stance in so far forth as they are reasonable.
Just so God who is consubstantial with men
according to the flesh is of another substance
in so far forth as He is Word and Man."
And in another place he says : —
"Of things which are mingled together
the qualities are mixed and not destroyed.
Thus it comes to pass that some ai'e sepa-
rate from the mixed parts as wine from
water, nor yet is there mingling with a body,
nor yet as of bodies with' bodies, but the
mingling preserves also the unmixed, so that,
as each occasion may require, the energy of
the Godhead either acts independently or in
conjunction, as was the case when the Loid
fasted, for the Godhead being in conjunction
in proportion to its being above need, hun-
ger was hindered, but when it no longer
opposed to the craving its superiority to need,
then hunger arose, to the undoing of the
devil. But if the mixture of the bodies suf-
fered no change, how much more that of the
Godhead.?"

And in another place he says : —
" If the mixture with iron which makes
the iron itself fire does not change its nature,
so too the union of God with the body im-
plies no change of the body, even though
the body extend its divine energies to what
is within its reach."

To this he immediately adds: —
" If a man has both soul and body, and
these remain in unity, much more does the
Christ, who has Godhead and body, keep
both secure and unconfounded."
And again a little further on : —
"For human nature is partaker of the
divine energy, as far as it is capable, but it
is as distinct as the least from the greatest.
Man is a servant of God, but God is not ser-
vant of man, nor even of Himself. Man is a
creature of God, but God is not a creature
of man, nor even of Himself."
And again : —

" If any one takes in reference to Godhead
and not in reference to flesh the passage the
' Son doeth what He seeth the Father do,'^
wherein He Who was made flesh is distinct

* John V. 19.


from the Father Who was not made flesh,
divides two divine energies. But there is no
division. So He does not speak in reference
to Godhead."

Again he says : —

"As man is not an unreasoning being,
on account of the contact of the reasoning
and the unreasoning, just so the Saviour is
not a creature on account of the contact of the
creature v/ith God uncreate."

To this he also adds : —

"The invisible which is united to a visible
body and thereby is beheld, remains navis-
ible, and it remains without composition
because it is not circumscribed with the botly,
and the body, remaining in its own measure,
accepts the union with God in accordance
with its being quickened, nor is it that which
is quickened which quickens."

And a little further on he says: —

" If the mixture with soul and body,
although from the beginning they coalesce,
does not make the soul visible on account
of the body, nor change it into the other
properties of the body, so as to allow of its
being cut or lessened, how much rather God,
who is not of the same nature as the body,
is united to the body without undergoing
change, if the body of man remains in its
own nature, and this when it is animated by
a soul, then in the case of Christ the com-
mingling does not so change the body as that
it is not a body."

And further on he says again : —

" He who confesses that soul and body are
constituted one by the Scripture, is incon-
sistent with himself when he asserts that this
union of the Word with the body is a change,
such change being not even beheld in the
case of a soul."

Listen to him again exclaiming clearly : —

" If they are impious who deny that the flesh
of the Lord abides, much more are they who
refuse wholly to accept His incarnation."

And in his little book about the Incarnation
he has written : —

" The words ' Sit thou on my right hand ' ^
He speaks as to man, for they are not spoken
to Him that sits ever on the throne of glory,
as God the Word after His ascension from
earth, but they are said to Him who hath
now been exalted to the heavenly glory as
man, as the Apostles say 'for David is not
ascended into the heavens, but he saith him-
self the Lord said unto my Lord sit thou
on my right hand.'- The order is human,
giving a beginning to the sitting; but it is
a divine dignity to sit together with God
'to whom thousand thousands minister and


1 Ps. ex. I.


a Acts li. 34.


2l6


THEODORKT.


before whom ten thousand times ten thousand
stand.'" 1

And again a little further on: —

" He does not put His enemies under Him
as God but as man, but so that the God who
is seen and man are the same. Paul too
teaches us that the words ' until I make
thy foes thy footstool ' - are spoken to men,
describing the success as His own of course
in accordance with His divinity 'According
to tlie working whereby He is able even to
subdue all things unto Himself.' ^ Behold
Godhead and manhood existing inseparably
in one Person."

And again : —

" ' Glorify me with thine own self with the
glory which I had with thee before the world
was. ' * The word ' glorify ' He uses as
man, but His having this glory before the
ages He reveals as God."

And again : —

" But let us not be humiliated as thinking
the worship of the Son of God humiliation,
even in His human likeness, but as though
honouring some king appearing in poor rai-
ment with his royal glory, and above all
seeing that the very garb in which He is
clad is glorified, as became the body of God
and of the world's Saviour which is seed
of eternal life, instrument of divine deeds,
destroyer of all wickedness, slayer of death,
and prince of resurrection ; for though it had
its nature from man it derived its life from
God, and its power and divine virtue from
heaven."

And again : —

" Whence we worship the body as the
Word ; we partake of the body as of the
spirit."

Now it has been plainly shewn you that
the author who was first to introduce the
mixture of the natures openly uses the argu-
ment of a distinction between them : thus he
has called the body garb, creature and in-
strument; he even went so far as to call it
slave, which none of us has ever ventured
to do. He also says that it was deemed
worthy of the seat on the right hand, and
uses many other expressions which are re-
jected by your vain heresy.

Eran. — But why then did he who was
the first to introduce the mixture insert so
great a distinction in his arguments.^

Orth. — The power of truth forces even
them that vehemently fight against her to
agree with what she says, but, if you will,
let us now begin a discussion about the im-
passibility of the Lord.


I Dan. vii. lo.
» Acts ii. 3S.


3 Phil. iii. 21.
♦John xvii, 5.


Eran. — You know that musicians are
accustomed to give their strings rest, and
they slacken them by turning the pegs ; if
then things altogether void of reason and
soul stand in need of some recreation, we
who partake of both shall do nothing absurd
if we mete out our labour in proportion to
our power. Let us then put it off till to-
morrow.

Orth. — The divine David charges us to
give heed to the divine oracles by night and
b}' day ; but let it be as you say, and let us
keep the investigation of the remainder of
our subject till to-morrow.


DIALOGUE HL

THE IMPASSIBLE.

Orthodoxus and Eranistes.

Orth. — In our former discussions we
have proved that God the Word is im-
mutable, and became incarnate not by being
changed into tlesh, but by taking perfect
human nature. The divine Scripture, and
the teachers of the chinxhes and luminaries
of the world have clearly taught us that,
after the union, He remained as He was,
unmixed, impassible, unchanged, uncircum-
scril)ed ; and that He preserved unimpaired
the nature which He had taken. For the
future then the subject before us is that of
His passion, and it will be a very profitable
one, for thence have been brought to us the
waters of salvation.

Eran. — I am also of opinion that this
discourse will be beneficial. I shall not
however consent to our former method, but
I propose myself to ask questions.

Orth. — And I will answer, without
making any objection to the change of
method. lie who has truth on his side, not
only when he questions but also when he is
questioned, is supported by the might of the
truth. Ask then what you will.

Eran. — Who, according to your view,
suHcred the passion.?

Orth. — Our Lord Jesus Christ.

Eran. — Then a man gave us our sal-
vation.

Orth. — No; for have we confessed that
our Lord Jesus Christ was only man .''

Eran. — Now define what you believe
Christ to be.

Orth. — Incarnate Son of the living God,

Eran. — And is the Son of God God?

Orth. — God, having the same substance
as the God Who begat Him.


DIALOGUES.


217


Eran. — Then
sion.

Orth. — \i He
witlioLit a body, ;
Godhead ; but if
taking flesh, why


God Liudervvent the pas-
was nailed to the cross
ipply the passion to the

he was made man by
then do you exempt the

passion and subject the


passible from the
impassible to it?

Eran. — -But the reason why He took
flesh was that the impassible might undergo
the passion by means of the passible.

Orth. — You say impassible and apply
passion to Him.

Eran. — T said that He took flesh to suff"er.

Orth. — If He had had a nature capable
of the Passion He would have suflered with-
out flesh ; so the flesh becomes superfluous.

Eran. — The divine nature is immortal,
and the nature of the flesh mortal, so the
immortal was united with the mortal, that
through it He might taste of death.

Orth. — That which is by nature immor-
tal does not undergo death, even when con-
joined with the mortal ; this is easy to see.

Eran. — Prove it ; and remove the difii-
culty.

Orth. — Do you assert that the human
soul was immortal, or mortal.''

Eran. — Immortal.

Orth. — And is the body mortal or im-
. mortal .?

Eran. — Indubitably mortal.

Orth. — And do we say that man consists
of these natures.''

Eran. — Yes.

Orth. — So the immortal is conjoined
with the mortal?

Eran. — True.

Orth. — But when the connexion or union
is at an end, the mortal submits to the law of
death, while the soul remains immortal,
though sin has introduced death, or do you
not hold death to be a penalty ?

Eran. — So divine Scripture teaches.
For we learn that when God forbade Adam
to partake of the tree of knowledge He added
'' on the day that ye eat thereof ye shall
surely die." ^

Orth. — Then death is the punishment of
them that have sinned?

Eran. — Agreed.

Orth. — Why then, when soul and body
have both sinned together, does the body
alone undergo the punishment of death?

Eran. — It was the body that cast its evil
eye upon the tree, and stretched forth its
hands, and plucked the forbidden fruit. It
was the mouth that bit it with the teeth, and

1 Gen. ii. 17.


ground it small, and tlien the gullet com-
mitted it to the belly, and the belly digested
it, and delivered it to the liver ; and the liver
turned what it had received into blood and
passed it on to the hollow vein^ and the vein
to the adjacent parts and they through the
rest, and so the theft of the forbidden food
pervaded the whole body. Very properly
then the body alone underwent the punish-
ment of sin.

Orth. — You have given us a physiological
disquisition on the nature of food, on all the
parts that it goes through and on the modifica-
tions to which it is subject before it is assimi-
lated with the body. But there is one point
that you have refused to observe, and that is
that the body goes through none of these pro-
cesses which you have mentioned without the
soul. When bereft of the soul which is its
yoke mate the body lies breathless, voiceless,
motionless ; the eye sees neither wrong nor
aright ; no sound of voices reaches the ears,
the hands cannot stir ; the feet cannot walk ;
the body is like an instrument without music.
How then can you say that only the body
sinned when the body without the soul can-
not even take a breath ?

Eran. — The body does indeed receive
life from the soul, and it furnishes the soul
with the penal possession of sin.

Orth. — How, and in what manner?

Eran. — Through the eyes it makes it see
amiss ; through the ears it makes it hear un-
profitable sounds ; and through the tongue
utter injurious words, and through all the
other parts act ill.

Orth. — Then I suppose we may say
Blessed are the deaf; blessed are they that
have lost their sight and have been deprived
of their other faculties, for the souls of men
so incapacitated have neither part nor lot
in the wickedness of the body. And why,
O most sagacious sir, have you men-
tioned, those functions of the body which
are culpable, and said nothing about the
laudable? It is possible to look with eyes
of love and of kindliness ; it is possible to
wipe away a tear of compunction, to hear
oracles of God, to bend the ear to the poor,
to praise the Creator with the tongue, to give
good lessons to our neighbour, to move the
hand in mercy, and in a word to use the parts
of the body for complete acquisition of good-
ness.

Eran. — This is all true.

Orth. — Therefore the observance and


1 The vena cava^ by which the blood returns to the heart.
The physiology of Kranistes would be held in the main " ortho-
dox " even now, ^nd shews that Theodoret was well abreast of
the science accepted before the discovery of the circulation of
the blood.


2l8


THEODORET.


transgression of law is common to both soul
and body.

Eran. — Yes.

Orth. — It seems to me that the soul
takes the leading part in both, since it uses
reasoning before the body acts.

Eran. — In what sense do you say this?

Orth. — First of all the mind makes, as
it were, a sketch of virtue or of vice, and
then gives to one or the other form with ap-
propriate material and colour, using for its
instruments the parts of the body.

Eran. — So it seems.

Orth. — If then the soul sins with the
body ; nay rather takes the lead in the sin, for
to it is entrusted tlie bridling and direction
of the animal part, why, as it shares the sin,
does it not also share the punishment?

Erajt. — But how were it possible for the
immortal soul to share death?

Orth. — Yet it were just that after sharing
the transgression, it should share the chas-
tisement.

Eran. — Yes, just.

Orth. — But it did not do so.

Eran. — Certainly not.

Orth. — At least in the life to come it will
be sent with the body to Gehenna.

Eran. — So He said " Fear not them
which kill the body, but are not able to kill
the soul ; but rather fear him which is able
to destroy both soul and body in hell." ^

Orth. — Therefore in this life it escapes
death, as being immortal; in the life to
come, it will be punished, not by under-
going death, but by suffering chastisement in
life.

Eran. — That is what the divine Scripture
says.

Orth. — It is then impossible for the im-
mortal nature to undergo death.

Eran. — So it appears.

Orth. — How then do you say, God the
Word tasted death? For if that which was
created immortal is seen to be incapable of
becoming mortal, how is it possible for him
that is without creation and eternally immor-
tal, Creator of mortal and immortal natures
alike, to partake of death?

Eran. — We too know that His nature is
immortal, but we say that He shared death in
the flesh.

Orth. — But we have plainly shewn that
it is in no wise possible for tiiat which is by
nature immortal to share death, for even the
soul created together with, and conjoined
with, the bod3and sharing in its sin, does not
share death with it, on account of the immor-


tality of its nature alone. But let us look at
this same position from another point of
view.

Eran. — There is every reason why we
should leave no means untried to arrive at
the truth.

Orth. — Let us then examine the matter
thus. Do we assert that of virtue and vice
some are teachers and some are followers ?

Era7i. — Yes.

Orth. — And do we say tliat the teacher
of virtue deserves greater recompense?

Erati. — Certainl}'.

Orth. — And similarly the teacher of vice
deserves twofold and thi'eefold punish-
ment ?

Eran. — True.

Orth. — And what part shall we assign
to the devil, that of teacher or disciple?

Eran. — Teacher of teachers, for he him-
self is father and teacher of all iniquity.

Orth. — And who of men became his first
disciples?

Eran. — Adam and Eve.

Orth. — And who received the sentence
of death?

Eran. — Adam and all his race.

Orth. — Then the discijoles were punished
for the bad lessons they had learnt, but the
teacher, whom we have just declared to de-
serve two-fold and three-fold chastisement,
got off the punishment?

Eran. — Apparently.

Orth. — And though this so came about
we both acknowledge and declare that the
Judge is just.

Eran. — Certainly.

Orth. — But, being just, why did He not
exact an account from him of his evil teach-


ing ?


» Matt. X. aS.


Eran. — He prepared for him the un-
quenchable flame of Gehenna, for, He says,
" Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire prepared for the devil and his angels." ^
And the reason why he did not here share
death with his disciples is because he has an
immortal nature.

Orth. — Then even the greatest trans-
gressors cannot incur death if they have an
immortal nature.

Eran. — Airreed.

Orth. — If then even the very inventor and
teacher of iniquity did not incur death on
account of the immortality of his nature, do
you not shudder at the thought of saying
that the fount of immortality and righteous-
ness shared death ?

Eran, — Had we said that he underwent

' Matt. XXV. 41.


DIALOGUES.


219


the passion involuntarily, there would have
been some just ground for the accusation
which you bring against us. But if the
passion which is preached by us was spon-
taneous and the death voluntary, it becomes
you, instead of accusing us, to praise the im-
mensity of His love to man. For He suffered
because He willed to suffer, and shared death
because He wished it.

OrtJi. — You seem to me to be quite
ignorant of the divine nature, for the Lord
God wishes nothing inconsistent with His
nature, and is able to do all that He wishes,
and what He wishes is appropriate and
agreeable to His own nature.

Eran. — We have learnt that all things
are possible with God.^

Orth. — In expressing yourself thus indefi-
nitely you include even what belongs to the
Devil, for to say absolutely all things is to
name together not only good, but its oppo-
site.

Eran. — But did not the noble Job speak
absolutely when he said " I know that thou
canst do all tilings and with thee nothing is
impossible"? -

Orth. — If you read what the just man
said before, you will see the meaning of the
one passage from the other, for he says
'•' Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast
made me as the clay and wilt thou bring me
into dust again } Hast thou not poured me
out as milk and curdled me like cheese?
Thou hast clothed me with skin and flesh
and hast fenced me with bones and sinews,
thou hast granted me life and favour." ^

And then he adds : —

" Having this in myself I know that thou
canst do all things and that with thee noth-
ing is impossible." ■* Is it not therefore all
that belongs to these things that he alleges
to belong to the incorruptible nature, to the
God of the universe?

Eran. — Nothing is impossible to Al-
mighty God.

Orth. — Then according to your defini-
tion sin is possible to Almighty God?

Eran. — By no means.

Orth. — Wherefore ?

Eran, — Because He does not wish it.

Orth. — Wherefore does He not wish it?

Eran. — Because sin is foreign to His
nature.

Orth. — Then there are many things
which He cannot do, for there are many
kinds of transgression.

Eran. — Nothing of this kind can be
wished or done by God.


1 Matt. xix. 26; Mark x. 27.
* Job X. 13. Ixx.


•5 Job X. 9-12.
* Job X. 13. IxXt


Orth. — Nor can those things which are
contrary to the divine nature.

Eran. — What are they?

Orth. — As, for instance, we have learnt
that God is intelligent and true Light.

Eran. — True.

Orth. — And we could not call Him dark-
ness or say that He wished to become, or
could become, darkness.

Eran. — By no means.

Orth. — Again, the Divine Scripture calls
His nature invisible.

Eran. — It does.

Orth. — And we could never say that It
is capable of being made visible.

Eran. — No, surely.

Orth. — Nor comprehensible.

Eran. — No ; for He is not so.

Orth. — No ; for He is incom.prehensible,
and altogether unapproachable.

Eran. — You are right.

Orth. — And He that is could never
become non-existent.

Eran. — Away with the thought !

Orth. — Nor yet could the Father become
Son.

Era7z. — Impossible.

Orth. — Nor yet could the unbegotten
become begotten.

Eran. — How could He.

Orth. — And the Father could never
become Son?

Eran. — By no means.

Orth. — Nor could the Holy Ghost ever
become Son or Father.

Eran. — All this is impossible.

Orth. — And we shall find many other
things of the same kind, which are similarly
impossible, for tlie Eternal will not become
of time, nor the Uncreate created and
made, nor the infinite finite, and the like.

Eran. — None of these is possible.

Orth. — So we have found many things
which are impossible to Almighty God.

Eran. — True.

Orth. — But not to be able in any of these
respects is proof not of weakness, but of in-
finite power, and to be able would certainly
be proof not of power but of impotence.

Eran. — How do you say this?

Orth. — Because each one of these pro-
claims the unchangeable and invariable char-
acter of God. For the impossibility of good
becoming evil signifies the immensity of the
goodness ; and that He that is just should
never become unjust, nor He that is true a
liar, exhibits the stability and the strength
that there is in truth and righteousness.
Thus the true light could never become dark-
ness ; He that is could never become non-


220


THEODORET.


existent, for the existence is perpetual and
the hght is naturally invariable. And so,
after examining all other examples, you will
find that the not being able is declaratory ot
the highest power. That tilings of this kind
are impossible in the case of God, the divine
Apostle also both perceived and laid down,
for in his Epistle to the Hebrews ' he says,
*' that by two immutable things, in which it
was impossible for God to lie we might have
a strong consolation." - He shews that this
incapacity is not weakness, but very power,
for he asserts Him to be so true that it is im-
possible for there to be even a lie in Him.
So the power of truth is signified through its
want of power. And writing to the blessed
Timothy, the Apostle adds -'It is a faithful
saying, for if we be dead with Him we shall
also live with Him, if we suffer we shall also
reign with Him; if we deny Him He will
also deny us, if we believe not yet He abideth
faithful, He cannot deny Himself."^ Again
then the phrase "He cannot" is indicative
of infinite power, for even though all men
deny Him He says God is Himself, and can-
not exist otherwise than in His own nature,
for His being is indestructible. This is
what is meant by the words " He cannot
deny Himself." Therefore the impossibility
of change for the worse proves infinity of
jDOwer.

Erati. — This is quite true and in har-
mony with the divine words.

Oi'th. — Granted then that with God many
things are impossible, — everything, that is,
which is repugnant to the divine nature, —
how comes it that while you omit all the other
qualities which belong to the divine nature,
goodness, righteousness, truth, invisibility,
incomprelicnsibility, infinity, and eternity,
and the rest of the attributes which we assert
to be proper to God, you maintain that His
immortality and impassibility alone are sub-
ject to change, and in them concede the pos-
sibility of variation and give to God a capac-
ity indicative of weakness.''

Bran. — We have learnt this from the
divine Scripture. The divine John exclaims
"■ God so loved the world that He gave His
only begotten Son," ■" and the divine Paul,
"■ For if when we were enemies we were
reconciled to God by the death of His Son,
much more being reconciled we shall be
saved by His life." '

Orth. — Of course all this is true, for these

IC. f. note on Pasre -^7. From the middle of the Ilird ccn-
tury on\v:ird wo find acceptiition of the Pauline authorship
Among- writers who quote the Ep. as St. Paul's are Cyril of
Jerusalem, the two Gregorics, Basil, and Chrysostoni, as well
as Theodoret.

= Hch. vi. iS. « T"'in iii. 16.

* U. 1. Tim. ii. 11-13. ' Romans v. 10.


are divine oracles,' but remember what we
have often confessed.

Fyran. — What.^

Orth. — We have confessed that God the
Word the Son of God did not appear without
a body, but assumed perfect human nature.

Eran. — Yes ; this we have confessed.

Orth. — And He was called Son of Man
because He took a body and human soul.

Eran. — True.

Orth. — Therefore the Lord Jesus Christ
is verily our God ; for of these two natures
the one was His from everlasting and the
other He assumed.

Eran. — Indubitably.

Orth. — While, then, as man He under-
went the passion, as God He remained in-
capable of suffering.

Eran. — How then does the divine Script-
ure say that the Son of God suffered }

Orth. — Because the body which suffered
was His body. But let us look at the mat-
ter tlius ; when we hear the divine Scripture
saying " And it came to pass when Isaac
was old his eyes were dim so that he coidd
not see,"^ whither is our mind carried and
on what does it rest, on Isaac's soul or on
his body?

Eran. — Of course on his body.

Orth. — Do we then conjecture that his
soul also shared in the affection of blind-
ness .''

Eran. — Certainly not.

Orth. — We assert that only his body was
deprived of the sense of sight.'*

Eran. — Yes.

Orth. — And again when we hear Amaziah
saying to the prophet Amos, " Oh thou seer
go flee away into tlie land of Judah," ^ and
Saul enquiring : " Tell me I pray thee where
the seer's house is," ■* we understand nothing
bodily.

Eran. — Certainly not.

Orth. — And yet the words used are sig-
nificant of the health of the organ of sight.

Eran. — True.

Orth. — Yet we know that the power
of the Spirit when given to purer souls
inspires prophetic grace and causes them to
sec even hidden things, and, in consequence
of tlieir thus seeing, they are called seers and
beholders.

Eran. — What you say is true.

Orth. — And let us consider this too.

Eran. — What?

Orth. — When we hear the story of the
divine evangelists narrating how they brought
to God a man sick of the palsy, laid upon a


• cf. note on page 155.
> Gen. xxvii. 1.


3 Amos vii. 12.
* I. Sam. ix. iS.


DIALOGUES.


221


bed, do we say that this was paralysis of the
parts of the soul or of the body ?

Efan. — Plainly of the body.

Orth. — And when while reading the Epis-
tle to the Hebrews we light upon the passage
where the Apostle says "Wherefore lift up
the hands which hang down and the feeble
knees and make straight paths for your feet
lest that which is lame be turned out of the
way, but let it rather be healed," ^ do we say
that the divine Apostle said these things
about the parts of the body?

Eran. — No.

Orth. — Shall we say that he was for
removing the feebleness and infirmity of
the soul and stimulating the disciples to
manliness?

Eran. — Obviously.

Orth. — But we do not find these things
distinguished in the divine Scripture, for in
describing the blindness of Isaac he made no
reference to the body, but spoke of Isaac as
absolutely blind, nor in describing the proph-
ets as seers and beholders did he say that
their souls saw and beheld what was hidden,
but mentioned the persons themselves.

Eran. — Yes ; this is so.

Orth — And he did not point out that the
body of the paralytic was palsied, but called
the man a paralytic.

Eran, — True.

Orth. — And even the divine Apostle made
no special mention of the souls, though it
was these that he purposed to strengthen and
to rouse.

Eran. — No ; he did not.

Orth. — But when we examine the meaning
of the words, we understand which belongs
to the soul and which to the body.

Eran. — And very naturally ; for God
made us reasonable beings.

Orth. — Then let us make use of this rea-
soning faculty in the case of our Maker and
Saviour, and let us recognise what belongs to
His Godhead and what to His manhood.

Eran. — But by doing this we shall destroy
the supreme union.

Orth. — In the case of Isaac, of the proph-
ets, of the man sick of the palsy, and of the
rest, we did so without destroying the natural
union of the soul and of the body ; we did
not even separate the souls from their proper
bodies, but by reason alone distinguislied
what belonged to the soul and what to the
body. Is it not then monstrous that while
we take this course in the case of souls and
bodies, we should refuse to do so in the case
of our Saviour, and confound natures which
differ not in the same proportion as soul from

iHeb.xii. 12. 13.


body, but in as vast a degree as the temporal
from the eternal and the Creator from the
created ?

Eran. — The divine Scripture says that the
Son of God underwent the passion.

Oi'th. — We deny that it was suflered by
any other, but none the less, taught by the
divine Scripture, we know that the nature of
the Godhead is impassible. We are told of
impassibility and of passion, of manhood and
of Godhead, and we therefore attribute the
passion to the passible body, and confess that
no passion was undergone by the nature that
was impassible.

Eran. — Then a body won our salvation
for us.

Orth. — Yes ; but not a mere man's body,
but that of our Lord Jesus Christ, the only
begotten Son of God. If you regard this
body as insignificant and of small account,
how can you hold its type to be an object of
worship and a means of salvation? and how
can the archetvpe be contemptible and insig-
nificant of tliat of which the type is adorable
and honourable ?

Eran. — I do not look on the body as of
small account, but I object to dividing it from
the Godhead.

Orth. — We, my good sir, do not divide
the union but we regard the pecidiar proper-
ties of the natures, and I am sure that in a
moment you will take the same view.

Eran. — You talk like a prophet.

Orth. — No; not like a prophet, but as
knowing the power of truth. But now an-
swer me this. When you hear the Lord say-
ing " I and my Father are one," and " He
that hath seen me hath seen the Father," ^
do you say that this refers to the flesh or to
the Godhead?

Eran. — How can the flesh and the Father
possibly be of one substance?

Orth. — Then these passages indicate the
Godhead ?

Eran. — True.

6>r///.— And so with the text, "In the
beginning was the Word and the Word was
God," 3 and the like.

Eran. — Agreed.

Orth. — Again when the divine vScripture
says, " Jesus therefore being wearied with
his journey sat thus on the well," ■* of what
is the weariness to be understood, of the
Godhead or of the body?

Eran. — I cannot bear to divide what is
united.

Orth. — Tlien it seems you attribute tiie
weariness to the divine nature?


1 John X. 30.

2 John xlv. 9.


3 John i. I.
* John iv. 6.


222


THEODORET.


Eran. — I think so.

OrtJi. — But then you directly contradict
the cxchunation of the prophet " He faintcth
not neither is weary ; there is no searching
of His understanding. He giveth power to
the faint and to them that liave no might he
incrcasctli strcngtli." ^ And a little luither
on "But they that wait upon the Lord shall
renew their strength, they shall mount up
with wings as eagles, they shall run and not
be weary and they sliall walk and not faint." -
Now how can He who bestows upon others
the boon of freedom from weariness and want,
possibly be himself sul^ject to hunger and
thirst.?

E7-an. — I hav'c said over and over again
that God is impassible, and free from all
want, but after the incarnation He became
capabk' of suffering.

OrtJi. — liut did He do this by admitting
the sulFcrings in His Godhead, or by per-
mitting tlie passible natui'e to undergo its
natural sulferings and by suflering proclaim
that what was seen was no unreality, but
was really assumed of human nature.? But
now let us look at the matter thus : we say
that the divine nature was uncircumsci-ibed.

Eran. — Aye.

Orth. — And uncircumscribed nature iscii*-
cumscribed by none.

Ei-an. — Of course not.

Orth. — It therefore needs no transition for
it is everywhere.

E}-an. — True.

Orfk. — And that which needs no tran-
sition needs not to travel.

Eran. — That is clear.

Orth. — And that which does not travel
does not grow weary.

Eran. — No.

Orth. — It follows then that the divine
nature, which is uncircumscribed, and needs
not to travel, was not weary.

Eran. — But the divine Scripture says
that Jesus was weary, and Jesus is God ;
" And our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are
all things.'"'

Orth. — But the exact expression of the
divine Scripture is that Jesus "■ was wearied "
not " is wearied."'' We must consider how
one and the other can be applied to the same
person.

Eran. — Well ; try to point this out, for j'ou


' Isahih xl. 2S, 29. cf. Sept.

- Isaiah xl. 31. s j. Cor. viii. 6.

* The text of John iv. 6 is (ceKon-iaKws tuaflt^'cTo, i.e., after
boinji^ woary sate down, kottiuiv e(ca0eC,'tTo would = "\vliilc beinj;!;
wcarv s^ito down." The force of the passasjc sccins to lie-
that Scripture states our Lord to have heen wearied once, —
iiolio In- wearied now; though of course in classical Greek Kiyn.
(hisloricc) aiiriii' Koiriur luitlht mean " said that he was in a
slati- of weariness."


are always for forcing on us the distinction
of terms.

Orth. — I think that even a barbarian might
easily make this distinction. The union of
unlike natures being conceded, the person of
Clirist on account of the union receives both ;
to each nature its own properties are attrib-
uted ; to the uncircumscribed immunity
from weariness, to that which is capable of
transition and travel weariness. For travel-
ling is the function of the feet; of the muscles
to be strained by over exercise.

Eran. — There is no controvcrs}' about
these being bodily affections.

Orth. — Well then ; the prediction which I
made, and you scofled at, has come true ; for
look ; you have shewn us what belongs to
manhood, and what belongs to Godhead.

Eran. — But I have not divided one son
into two.

Orth. — Nor do we, my friend ; but giving
heed to the difference of the natures, we con-
sider what beiits godhead, and what is proper
to a body.

Eran. — This distinction is not the teach-
ing of the divine Scripture; it says that the
Son of God died. So the Apostle ; — " For
if when we were enemies we were recon-
ciled to God by the death of His Son.''^
And he says that the Lord was raised from
the dead for "God" he says "raised the
Lord from the dead."-

Orth. — And when the divine Scripture
says " And devout men carried Stephen to
his burial and made great lamentation over
him " ^ would any one say that his soul was
committed to the grave as well as his body ?

E7-an. — Of course not.

Orth. — And when you hear the Patriarch
Jacob saying " Bury me with my Fathers" ^
do you suppose this refers to the body or to
the soul }

Eran. — To the body ; without question.

Orth. — Now read what follows.

Eran. — " There they bmied Abraham and
Sarah his wife. There they buried Isaac and
Rebekah his wife and there I buried Leah."^

Orth. — Now, in the passages which you
have just read, the divine Scripture makes
no mention of the body, but as far as the
words used go, signifies soul as well as body.
We however make the proper distinction and
say that the souls of the patriarchs were im-
mortal, and that only their bodies were buried
in the double cave."


' Rom. V. 10. s Acts viii. 2. " Gen. xlix. 31.

2 Acts xiii. 30. -^ Gen. xlix. 29.

'■"'rhe Machpelah," always in Hebrew with the article
n/DDDH — " the double (cave')."

It is interestinjj to contrast the heathen idea, that the shadow
goes to Hades while the self is identified with the bodv, with


DIALOGUES.


223


Eran. — True.

Orth. — And when we read in the Acts
how Herod slew James the brother of John
with a sword, ^ we are not likely to liold that
his soul died.

Ei-an. — No ; how could we ? We remem-
ber the Lord's warning " Fear not them
which kill the body but are not able to kill
the soul." -

Oi'th. — But does it not seem to you im-
pious and monstrous in the case of mere men
to avoid the invariable connexion of soul and
body, and in the case of scriptural references
to death and burial, to distinguish in thought
the soul from the body and connect them
only with the body, while in trust in the
teaching of the Lord you hold the soul to be
immortal, and then when you hear of the
passion of the Son of God to follow quite a
different covu'se ? Are you justified in making
no mention of the body to which the passion
belongs, and in representing the divine nature
which is impassible, immutable and immor-
tal as mortal and passible? While all the
while you know that if the nature of God
the Word is capable of suffering, the assump-
tion of the body was superfluous.

Eran. — We have learnt from the Divine
Scriptures that the Son of God suffered.

. Orth. — Butthedivine apostle interprets the
Passion, and shews what nature suffered.

Eran. — Show me this at once and clear
the matter up.

Orth. — Are you not acquainted with the
passage in the Epistle to the Hebrews in
which the divine PauP says "For which
cause He is not ashamed to call them breth-
ren saying 'I will declare thy name unto
my brethi'en, in the midst of the Church
will I sing praise unto Thee.' And again,
' Behold I and the children which God hath


given me.


Eran. — Yes, I know this, but this does
not give us what you promised.

Orth. — Yes: even these suggest what I
promised to shew. The word brotherhood
signifies kinship, and the kinship is due to the
assumption of the nature, and the assumption
openly proclaims the impassibility of the
Godhead. But to understand this the more
plainly read what follows.

Ei'an. — " Forasmuch then as the children
are partakers of flesh and blood. He also
Himself likewise took part of the same that
through death He might destroy him that hath


the Christian belief, that the self lives while the body is buried
e.g. Homer (II. i. 4) says that while the famous "wrath"
sent many heroes' souls to Hades, it made "them " a prey to
dogs and birds, cf. xxiii.72. " ;//uxai e'iSioKa xa/iidi'Tioi'."

1 Acts xii. 2. ^ Vide note on Pages 37 and 220.

2 Matt. X. 28. * Heb. ii. u, 12, 13.


the power of death . . . and deliver them
who through fear of death were all their life
subject to bondage." ^

Orth. — This, I think, needs no explana-
tion ; it teaches clearly the mystery of the
OGConomy.

Eran. — I see nothing here of what you
promised to prove.

Orth. — Yet the divine Apostle teaches
plainly that the Creator, pitying this nature
not oidy seized cruelly by death, but through-
out all life made death's slave, effected the
resurrection through a body for our bodies,
and, by means of a mortal body, undid the
dominion of death ; for since His own natiu'e
was immortal He righteously wished to stay
the sovereignty of death by taking tlic first
fruits of them that were subject to death, and
while He kept these firstfruits (i e. the
body) blameless and free from sin, on the one
hand He gave death license to lay hands on
it and so satisfy its insatiability, while on the
other, for the sake of the wrong done to this
body, he put a stop to the unrighteous sov-
ereignty usurped over all the rest of men.
These firstfruits unrighteously engulfed He
raised again and will make the race to follow
them.

Set this explanation side by side with the
words of the Apostle, and you will understand
the impassibility of the Godhead.

Eran. — In what has been read there is no
.proof of the divine impassibility.

Orth. — Nay : does not the statement of the
divine Apostle, that the reason of His making
the children partakers of the flesh and blood
was that through death He might destroy
him that hath the power of death, distinctly
signifv the impassibility of the Godhead,
and the passibility of the flesh, and that
because the divine nature could not suffer He
assumed the nature that could and through it
destroyed the power of the devil ?

Eran. — How did He destroy the power
of the devil and the dominion of death through
the flesh.?

Orth. — What arms did the devil use at
the besfinnins' when he enslaved the nature
of men .?

Eran. — The means by which he took caj")-
tive him who had been constituted citizen
of Paradise, was sin.

Orth. — And what punishment did God
assig-n for the transgression of the command-
ment }

Eran. — Death.

Orth. — Then sin is the mother of death,
and the devil its father.

1 Heb. ii. 14, rg.


224


THEODORET.


Eran. — True.

OrtJi. — War then was waged against
human nature by sin. Sin seduced thein that
obeyed it to slavery, brought them to its vile
father, and delivered them to its very bitter
offspring.

Eran. — That is plain.

Orth. — So with reason theCreator, with the
intention of destroying either power, assumed
the nature against whicli war was being
waged, and, by keeping it clear of all sin,
both set it free from the sovereignty of the
devil, and, by its means, destroyed the devil's
dominion. For since death is the punish-
ment of sinners, and death lun-ighteously and
against the divine law seized the sinless body
of the Lord, He first raised up that which
was unlawfully detained, and then prom-
ised release to them that were with justice
imprisoned.

Eran. — But how do you think it just that
tlic resurrection of Him who was unlaw-
fullv detained should be shared by the bodies
which had been righteously delivered to
death ?

Orfh. — And how do you think it just that,
when it was Adam who transgressed the
commandment, his race should follow their
forefather?

Eran. — Although the race had not par-
ticipated in the famous transgression, yet
it committed other sins, and for this cause
incurred death.

Orfh. — Yet not sinners only but just men,
patriarchs, prophets, apostles, and men who
have shone bright in many kinds of virtue,
have come into death's meshes.

Eran. — Yes; for how could a family
sprung of mortal parents remain immortal.'*
Adam after the transgression and the di-
vine sentence, and after coming vmder the
power of death, knew his wife, and was
called father; having himself become mor-
tal he was made fother of mortals ; reason-
ably then all who have received mortal nature
follow their forefather.

Orth. — You have shewn very well the
reason of our being partakers of death.
The same however must be granted about
the resurrection, for the remedy must be meet
for the disease. When the head of the race
was doomed, all the race was doomed with
him, and so when the Saviour destroyed the
curse, human nature won freedom ; and just
as they that shared Adam's nature followed
him in his going down into Hades, so all the
nature of men will share in newness of life
with the Lord Christ in His resurrection.

Eran. — 'The decrees of the Church must
be given not only declaratorily but demon-


stratively. Tell me then how these doctrines
are taught in the divine Scripture.

Orth. — Listen to the Apostle writing to
the Romans, and through them teaching all
mankind : " For if through the otlence of one
many be dead, much more the grace of God,
and the gift by grace, which is by one man,
Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many- And
not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift ;
tor the judgment was by one to condemna-
tion, but the free gift is of many oflbnces
unto justification. For if by one man's ofibnce
death reigned bv one ; much more they which
receive abundance of grace and of the gift
of righteousness shall reign in life by one,
Jesus Christ"^ and again: "Therefore as
by the ofience of one judgment came upon
all men to condemnation ; even so by the
righteousness of one the free gift came upon
all men unto justification of life. For as by
one man'« disobedience many were made
sinners so by the obedience of one shall many
be made rigfhteous." - And when introduc-
ing to the Corinthians his argument about
the resurrection he shortly reveals to them the
mystery of the oeconomy, and sa^'S : " But
now is Christ risen from the dead and become
the first fruits of them which slept. For
since by man came death by man came also
the resurrection of the dead. For as in
Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all
be made alive." ^ So I have brought you
proofs from the divine oracles. Now look at
what belongs to Adam compared with what
belongs to Christ, the disease with the rem-
edy, the wound with the salve, the sin with
the wealth of righteousness, the ban with the
blessing, the doom with the delivery, the
transgression with the observance, the death
with the life, hell with the kingdom, Adam
with Christ, the man with the Man. And
yet the Lord Clirist is not only man but eter-
nal God, but the divine Apostle names Him
from the nature which He assumed, because
it is in this nature that he compares Him
with Adam. The justification, the struggle,
the victory, the death, the resurrection, arc
all of this human nature ; it is this nature
which we share with Him ; in this nature the}-
who have exercised themselves beforehand
in the citizenship of the kingdom shall reign
with Him. Of this nature I spoke, not divid-
ing the Godhead, but referring to what is
proper to the manhood.

Eran. — You have gone through long dis-
cussions on this point, and have strengthened
your argument by scriptural testimony, but if
the passion was really of the flesh, how is it


' Roin. V. ii;, i6, 17.
-' Koiu. V. 18, 19.


S I. Cor. XV. 20, 21, 23o


DIALOGUES.


225


that when he praises the divhie love to men, the
Apostle exclaims, " lie that spared not His
own Son but delivered Him up for us all," ^
what son does he say was delivered up ?

Orth. — Watch well your words. There
is one .Son of God, wherefore He is called
only begotten.

Eran. — If then there is one Son of God,
the divine Apostle called him own Son.

Orth. — True.

E7-an. — Then he says that He was de-
livered up.

Orth. — Yes, but not without a body, as
we have agreed again and again.


Eran. — It has been ao:reed


again


and


again that He took body and soul

Orth. — Therefore the Apostle spoke of
what relates to the body.

Eran. — The divine Apostle says dis-
tinctly " Who spared not his own Son."

Orth. — When then you hear God saying
to Abraham "Because thou hast not with-
held thy son thy only son,"^ ^q you allege
that Isaac was slain }

Eran. — Of course not.

Orth. — And yet God said "Thou hast
not withheld," and the God of all is true.

Eran. — The expression " thou hast not
withheld " refers to the readiness of Abraham,
for he was ready to sacrifice the lad, but
God prevented it.

Orth. — Well ; in the story of Abraham
you were not content with the letter, but
unfolded it and made the meaning clear.
In pi'ecisely the same manner examine the
meaning of the words of the Apostle. You
will then see that it was by no means the
divine nature which was not withheld, but
the flesh nailed to the Cross. And it is
easy to perceive the truth even in the type.
Do you regard Abraham's sacrifice as a
type of the oblation offered on behalf of the
world }

Era7i. — Not at all, nor yet can I make
words spoken rhetorically in the churches
a rule of faith.

Orth. — You ought by all means to follow
teachers of the Church, but, since you im-
properly oppose yourself to these, hear the
Saviour Himself when addressing the Jews ;
*' Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my
day and he saw it and was glad."-^ Note
that the Lord calls His passion " a day."

Eran. — I accept the Lord's testimony
and do not doubt the type.

Orth. — Now compare the type with the
reality and you will see the impassibility of
the Godhead even in the type. Both in the


1 Rom. xiii. 32.
' Gen. xxii. 16.


3 John viii. 56.


former and in the latter there is a Father ;
both in the former and the latter a well be-
loved Son, each bearing the material for the
sacrifice. The one bore the wood, the other
the cross upon his shoulders. It is said that
the top of the hill was dignified by the sacri-
fice of both. There is a correspondence
moreover between the number of days and
nights and the resurrection which followed,
for after Isaac had been slain by his father's
willing heart, on the third day after the
bountiful God had ordered the deed to be
done, he rose to new life at the voice of Him
who loves mankind.! A lamb was seen
caught in a thicket, furnishing an image of
the cross, and slain instead of the lad. Now
if this is a type of the reality, and in the type
the only begotten Son did not undergo sacri-
fice, but a lamb was substituted and laid upon
the altar and completed the mystery of the
oblation, why then in the reality do you hesi-
tate to assign the passion to the flesh, and to
proclaim the impassibility of the Godhead.?

Eran. — In your observations upon this
type you represent Isaac as living again at
the divine command. There is nothing
therefore unseemly if, fitting the reality to
the type, we declare that God the Word
suffered and came to life agrain.

Orth. — I have said again and again that
it is quite impossible for the type to match
the archetypal reality in every respect, and
this may also be easily understood in the
present instance. Isaac and the lamb, as
touching the difference of their natures,
suit the image, but as touching the sei^aration
of their divided persons^ they do so no longer.
We preach so close an union of Godhead
and of manhood as to understand one person ^
undivided, and to acknowledge the same to
be both God and man, visible and invisible,
circumscribed and uncircumscribed, and we
apply to one of the persons all the attributes
which are indicative alike of Godhead and of
manhood. Now since the lamb, an unreason-
ing being, and not gifted with the divine
image,* could not possibly prefigure the res-
toration to life, the two divide between them
the type of the mystery of the oeconomy, and
while one furnishes the image of death, the
other supplies that of the resurrection. We
find precisely the same thing in the Mosaic
sacrifices, for in them too may be seen a


1 The sacrifice of Isaac so far as his father's part in it is
concerned is regarded as having actually taken place at the
moment of his felt willingness to obey. In the interval of the
journey to Mount Moriah Isaac is dead to his father.

2 UTTOCTTacrt?. ^ TTfi6(TljiTrOV.

* It is to be noted that Theodoret thus apparently regards
the divine image as consisting in the intelligence or A670S.
And in the implication that Isaac had the divine image he ex-
presses the Scriptural view that this was marred, not lost, by
the fail.


VOL. III.


226


TIIEODORET.


type outlined in anticipation of the passion
of salvation.

Eran. — What Mosaic sacrifice foreshad-
ows the reality?

Orth. — All the Old Testament, so to say,
is a type of the New. It is for this reason
that the divine Apostle plainly says — "■ the
Law having a shadow of good things to
come " 1 and again " now all tlicse things hap-
pened unto them for ensamples."- Tiic image
of the archetype is very distinctl\- exhibited In'
the lamb slain in Egypt, and by the red heifer
burned without tlic camp, and moreover re-
ferred to by the Apostle in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, where he writes " Wherefore
Jesus also that he might sanctify the people
with his own blood, sutlcrcd without the
gate." 3

But of this no more for the present. I
will however mention the sacrifice in which
two goats were oficrcd, the one being slain,
and the other let go.** In these two goats
there is an anticipativc image of the two
natures of the vSaviour ; — in the one let go,
of the impassible Godhead, in the one slain,
of the passible manhood.

Jiraii. — Do you not think it irreverent to
liken the Lord to goats.''

Orth. — Which do you think is a fitter
object of avoidance and hate, a serpent or a
goat .''

Eran. — A serpent is plainly hateful, for
it injures those who come within its reach,
and often hurts people who do it no harm.
A goat on the other hand comes, according
to the Law, in the list of animals that arc
clean and may be eaten.

Orth. — Now hear the Lord likening the
passion of salvation to the brazen serpent.
He says: "As Moses lifted up the serpent
in the wilderness even so must the Son of
man be lifted up : that whosoever believeth
in Him should not perish, but have eternal
life. " * If a brazen serpent was a type of
the crucified Saviour, of what impropriety
arc we guilty in comparing the passion of
salvation with the sacrifice of the goats.''

Eran. — Because John called the Lord
" a lamb," " and Isaiah called Him " lamb"
and " sheep." '

Orth. — But the blessed Paul calls Him
"sin"** and "curse."" As curse therefore
He satisfies the type of the accursed serpent ;
as sin He explains the figure of the sacrifice
of the goats, for on behalf of sin, in the Law, a
goat, and not a lamb, was oflcred. So the Lord
in the Gospels likened the just to lambs, but


MIcb. X. I.
2 I Cnr. X. II.
•■^ I lib. xiii. 12.


* Lev. xvi.

' Jnlin iii. 14, 15.
" John i. 29, jCi.


' Is. liii. 7.

8 II. ("i>r. V. 21.

" Gnl. iii. 13.


sinners to kids ; ^ and since He was ordained
to undergo the passion not only on behalf of
just men, but also of sinners, He appropri-
ately foreshadows His own offering through
lambs and goats.

Eran. — ]?ut the type of the two goats
leads us to think of two persons.

Or.th. — The passibility of the manhood
and the impassibility of the Godhead could
not jDossibly be i^rcfigured both at once by
one goat. The one which was slain could
not have shewn the living nature. So two
were taken in order to explain the two
natures. The same lesson may well be
learnt from another sacrifice.

Eran. — From which.?

Orth. — From that in which the lawgriver
bids two pure birds be ottered — one to be
slain, and the other, after having been dipped
in the blood of the slain, to be let go. Here
also we see a type of the Godhead and of the
manhood — of the manhood slain and of the
godhead appropriating the passion.

Eran. — You have given us many types,
but I object to enigmas.

Orth. — Yet the divine Apostle says that
the narratives are types.- Ilagar is called a
type of the old covenant ; Sarah is likened
to the heavenly Jerusalem ; Ishmael is a
type of Israel, and Isaac of the new people.
vSo you must accuse the loud trumpet of the
.Spirit for giving its enigmas for us all.

Eran. — Though you urge any number
of arguments, you will never induce me to
divide the passion. I have heard the voice of
the angel saying to Mary and her companions,
" Come, see the place where the Lord lay." ^

Orth. — This is quite in accordance with
our common customs ; we speak of the part
by the name which belongs to all the parts.
When we go into the churches where arc
buried the holy apostles or prophets or
martyrs, we ask from time to time, " Who
is it who lies in the shrine } " and those who
are able to give us information say in reply,
Thomas, it may be, the Apostle,'* or John
the Baptist,^ or Stephen the protomartyr,® or
any other of the saints, mentioning them by
name, though perhaps only a few scanty
relics of them lie here. But no one who
hears these names which are common to
both body and soul will imagine that the
souls also are shut up in the chests ; every-
body knows that the chests contain only the
bodies or even small portions of the bodies.


1 Matt. XXV. 32. 2 Gal. iv. 24 et scqq. ' Matt, xxviii. 6.

< St. Thomas was buried at Edessa. Soc. iv. iS, Chrys.
Ilom. in Heb. 26.

" Vide p. 96.

" St. Stephen's remains were said to have been found at
Jerusalcin, :md widely dispersi'd. cf. Diet. Christ. Ant. II. 1929.


DIALOGUES.


227-


The holy angel spoke in precisely the same
manner when he described the body by the
name of the person.

Eran. — But how can you prove that the
angel spoke to the women about the Lord's
body ?

Orth. — In the first place, the tomb itself
suffices to settle the question, for to a tomb
is committed neither soul nor Godhead
whose nature is uncircumscribed ; tombs
are made for bodies. Furthermore this is
plainly taught by the divine Scripture, for
so the holy Matthew narrates the event,
" When the even was come there came a
rich man of Arimathrea named Joseph who
also himself was Jesus' disciple : he went
to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus.
Then Pilate commanded the body to be
delivered, and when Joseph had taken the
body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,
and laid it in his own new tomb, which he
had hewn out in the rock : and he rolled a
great stone to the door of the sepulchre and
departed." ^ See how often he mentions
the body in order to stop the mouths of them
who blaspheme the Godhead. The same
course is pursued by the thrice blessed Mark,
whose narrative I will also quote. " And
now when the even was come, because it was
the preparation, that is, the day before the
Sabbath, Joseph of Arimathtea, an honour-
able counsellor, which also waited for the
kingdom of God, came, and went in boldly
unto Pilate, and craved the body of Jesus.
And Pilate marvelled if He were already
dead ; and calling unto him the centurion, he
asked him whether He had been any while
dead. And when he knew it of the cen-
turion, he gave the body to Joseph, and he
brought fine linen, and took him down, and
wrapped Him in the linen, and laid Him in a
sepulchre," ^ and so on. Observe with ad-
miration, the harmony of terms, and how
consistently and continuously the word body
is introduced. The illustrious Luke, too,
relates just in the same way how Joseph
begged the body and after he had received
it treated it with due rites. ^ By the divine
John we are told yet more, " Joseph of
Arimatha^a being a disciple of Jesus, but
secretly for fear of the Jews, besought Pilate
that he might take away the body of Jesus ;
and Pilate gave him leave. He came there-
fore and took the body of Jesus. And there
came also Nicodemus, which at the first
came to Jesus by night, and brought a
mixture of myrrh and aloes about a hundred
pound weight. Then took they the body of


1 Matf. xxvii. S7-6o.
^ Mark xv. 43-46.


* Luke xxiii. 50 et Seqq.


Jesus and wound it in linen clothes with the
spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury.
Now in the place where He was crucified
there was a garden ; and in the garden a new
sepulchre, wherein was never man yet laid.
There laid they Jesus therefore because of the
Jews' preparation day, for the sepulchre was
nigh at hand." ^ Observe how often mention
is made of the body ; how the Evangelist
shows that it was the body which was nailed
to the cross, the body begged by Joseph of
Pilate, the body taken down from the tree,
the body wrapped in linen clothes with the
myrrh and aloes, and then the name of the
person given to it ; and Jesus said to have
been laid in a tomb. Thus the angel said,
" Come see the place where the Lord lay," ^
naming the part by the name of the whole ;
and we constantly do just the same. In this
place, we say, such an one was buried ; not
the body of such an one. Every one in his
senses knows that we are speaking of the
body, and such a mode of speech is custom-
ary in divine Scripture. Aaron, wc read,
died and they buried him on Mount Hor.^
Samuel died and they buried him at Ramali,'*
and there are many similar instances. The
same use is followed by the divine Apostle
when speaking of the death of the Lord.
" I delivered unto you first of all," he writes,
" that which I also received how that Christ
died for our sins according to the Scriptures ;
and that He was buried, and that He rose
again the third day according to the Script-
ures," ^ and so on.

Eran. — In the passages we have just now
read the Apostle does not mention a body,
but Christ the Saviour of us all. You have
brought evidence against your own side, and
wounded yourself with your own weapon.

Oith. — You seem to have very quickly
forgotten the long discourse in which I
proved to you over and over again that the
body is spoken of by the name of the person.
This is what is now done by the divine
Apostle, and it can easily be proved from this
very passage. Now let us look at it. Why
did the divine writer write thus to the Corin-
thians ?

Eran. — They had been deceived by some
into believing that there is no resurrection.
When the teacher of the world learnt this he
furnished them with his arguments about the
resurrection of the bodies.

Orth. — Why then does he introduce the
resurrection of the Lord, when he wishes to
prove the resurrection of the bodies?


1 John xix. 3S-42.

2 'M;itt. xxviii. 6.
s Dcut. X. 6.


^ I. Sam. XXV. 1.
^ I. Cor. XV. 3,4.


Q 2


228


THEODORET.


Eran. — As sufficient to prove the resur-
rection of us all.

Orth. — In what is His death like the
death of the rest, that by His resurrection
may be proved the resurrection of all ?

Eran. — The reason of the incarnation,
sutVering, and death of the only begotten Son
of God, was that lie might destroy death.
Thus, after rising, by His own resurrection
He preaches the resurrection of all.

Orth. — But who, hearing of a resurrec-
tion of God, would ever believe that the
resurrection of all men would be exactly
like it? The difVerence of the natures does
not allow of our believinir in the argument
of the resurrection. He is God and they are
men, and the ditt'erencc between God and
men is incalculable. They are mortal, and
subject to death, like to the grass and to the
flower. He is almighty.

Eran. — But after His incarnation God
the Word had a body, and through this He
proved His likeness to men.

Orth. — Yes ; and for this reason the
su fieri ng and the death and the resurrection
are all of the body, and in proof of this the
divine Apostle in another place pi-omises re-
newal of life to all, and to them that believe
in the resurrection of their Saviour, yet look
upon the general resurrection of all as a
fable, he exclaims, " Now if Christ be
preached that He rose from the dead, how
say some among you that there is no resiu-
rection of tlie dead.'' But if there is no
resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not
risen, and if Christ be not risen
your foith is vain, you are yet in your sins." ^
And from the past he confirms the future,
and from what is disbelieved he disproves
what is believed, for he says, If the one
seems impossible to you, then the otlier will
be false ; if the one seems real and true, then
let the other in like manner seem true, for
here too a resurrection of the body is
preached, and this body is called the first
fruits of those. The resurrection of this
body after many arguments he affirms di-
rectly, " But now is Christ risen from the
dead and become the firstfruits of them that
slept, for since by man came death, by man
came also the resurrection of the dead, for
as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall
all be made alive," ~ and he docs not only
confirm the argument of the resurrection, but
also reveals the mystery of the OGConomy.
He calls Christ man that he may prove the
remedy to be appropriate to the disease.

Eran. — Then the Christ is only a man.


• I. Cor. XV. 12, i,^, 17.


' I. Cor. XV. 21, 23.


Orth. — -God forbid. On the contrary,
we have again and again confessed tliat He
is not only man but eternal God. But He
sulTered as man, not as God. And this the
divine Apostle clearly teaches us when he
says " For since by man came death, by
man came also the resurrection of the
dead." ^ And in his letter to the Thessa-
lonians, he strengthens his argument con-
cerning the general resurrection by that of
our Saviour in the passage " For if we be-
lieve that Jesus died and rose again, even
them also which sleep in Jesus will God
bring with him." ^

Eran. — The Apostle proves the general
resurrection by means of the Lord's resur-
rection, and it is clear that in this case also
what died and rose was a body. For he
would never have attemjDted to prove the
general resurrection by its means luiless
there had been some relation between the
substance of the one and the other. I shall
never consent to apply the passion to the
human nature alone. It seems agreeable to
my view to say that God the Word died in
the flesh.

Orth. — We have frequently shewn that
what is naturally immortal can in no way
die. If then He died He was not immortal ;
and what perils lie in the blasphemy of the
words.

Eran. — He is by nature immortal, but
He became man and suft'ered.

Orth. — Therefore He underwent change,
for how otherwise could He being immortal
submit to death .'' But we have agreed that
the substance of the Trinity is immutable.
Having therefore a nature superior to
change, He by no means shared death.

Eran. — The divine Peter says "Christ
hath suftered for us in the flesh." ^

Orth. — This agrees with what we have
said, for we have learnt the rule of dogmas
from the divine Scripture.

Eran. — How then can you deny that
God the Word suffered in the flesh .'*

Orth. — Because we have not found this
expression in the divine Scripture.

Eran. — But I have just quoted you the
utterance of the great Peter.

Orth. — You seem to ignore the distinction
of the terms.

Eran. — What terms. ^ Do you not re-
gard the Lord Christ as God the Word.?

Orth. — The term Christ in the case of
our Lord and Saviour signifies the incarnate
Word, the Immanuel, God with us,'' both
God and man, but the term "God the


' I. Cor. XV. 21.
= I. Thess. iv. 14,


8 I. Pet-cr iv.i.
< Matt. i. 23.


DIALOGUES.


229


Word " so said signifies the simple nature,
before the world, superior to time, and incor-
poreal. Wherefore the Holy Ghost that
spake through the holy Apostles nowhere at-
tributes passion or death to this name.

Eran. — If the passion is attributed to
the Christ, and God the Word after being
made man was called Christ, I hold that he
who states God the Word to have suffered
in the flesh is in no way unreasonable.

Orth. — Hazardous and rash in the ex-
treme is such an attempt. But let us look
at the question in this way. Does the divine
Scripture state God the Word to be of God
and of the Father.?

Eran. — True.

Orth. — And it describes the Holy Ghost
as being in like manner of God.''

Eran. — Agreed.

Orth. — But it calls God the Word only
begotten Son.

Eran. — It does.

Orth. — It nowhere so names the Holy
Ghost.

Eran. — No.

Orth. — Yet the Holy Ghost also has Its
subsistence of the Father and God.

Eran. — True.

Orth. — We grant then that both the Son
and the Holy Ghost are both of God the
Father ; but would you dare to call the Holy
Ghost Son.-*

Eran. — Certainly not.

Or///.— Why.?

Eran. — Because I do not find this term
in the divine Scripture.

Oi-th. — Or begotten.?

Eran. — No.

Orth. — Wherefore .?

Eran. — Because I no more learn this in
the divine Scripture.

Orth. — But what name can properly be
given to that which is neither begotten nor
created .?

Eran. — We style it uncreated and un-
begotten.

Orth. — And we say that the Holy Ghost
is neither created nor begotten.

Eran. — By no means.

Orth. — Would you then dare to call the
Holy Ghost unbegotten .?

Eran. — No.

Orth. — But why refuse to call that which
is naturally uncreate, but not begotten, un-
begotten .?

Eran. — Because I have not learnt so
from the divine Scripture, and I am greatly
afraid of saying or using language which
Scripture does not use.

Orth. — Then, my good sir, I maintain the


same caution in the case of the passion of
salvation ; do you too avoid all the divine
names which Scripture has avoided in the
case of the passion, and do not attribute the
passion to them.

Eran. — What names.?

Orth. — The passion is never connected
with the name " God."

Eran. — But even I do not affirm that God
the Word suffered apart from a body, but
say that He suffered in flesh.

Orth. — You affirm then a mode of pas-
sion, not impassibility. No one would ever
say this even in the case of a human body. For
who not altogether out of his senses would
say tliat the soul of Paul died in flesh.? This
could never be said even in the case of a
great villain ; for the souls even of the wicked
are immortal. We say that such or such a
murderer has been slain, but no one would
ever say that his soul had been killed in the
flesh. But if we describe the souls of mur-
derers and violators of sepulchres as free
from death, far more right is it to ac-
knowledge as immortal the soul of our
Saviour, in that it never tasted sin. If the
souls of them who have most greatly e'-red
have escaped death on account of their
nature, how could that soul, whose nature
was immortal and who never received the
least taint of sin, have taken death's hook.?

Eran. — It is quite useless for you to give
me all these long arguments. We are
agreed that the soul of the Saviour is im-
mortal.

Orth. — But of what punishment are you
not deserving, you who say that the soul,
which is by nature created, is immortal, and
are for making the divine substance mortal
for the Word ; you who deny that the soul
of the Saviour tasted death in the flesh, and
dare to maintain that God the Word, Creator
of all things, underwent the passion.?

Eran. — We say that He underwent the
passion impassibly.

Orth. — And what man in his senses
would ever put up with such ridiculous
riddles.? Who ever heard of an impassible
passion, or of an immortal mortality.? The
impassible has never undergone passion, and
what has undergone passion could not
possibly be impassible. But we hear the
exclamation of the divine Paul : " Who
only hath immortality dwelling in the light
which no man can approach unto." ^

Eran. — Why then do we say that the
invisible powers too and the souls of men,
aye and the very devils, are immortal .?

1 1. Tim. vi, 16.


230


THEODORET.


Orth. — Wc do say so ; that God is ab-
solutely immortal. lie is immortal not by
partaking of substance, but in substance ;
He does not i^ossess an immortality which
He has received of another. It is He Him-
self who has l)cstovved their immortality on
the angels and on them that thou hast just
now mentioned. How, moreover, when the
divine Paul styles Him immortal and says
that He only hath immortality, can you
attribute to Him the passion of death .''

Rran. — We say that He tasted death
after the incarnation.

Orth. — But over and over again we have
confessed Him immutable. If being pre-
viously immortal He afterwards underwent
death through the flesh, a change having
preceded His undergoing death ; if His life
left Him for three days and three nights, how
do such statements fall short of the most
extreme impiety.'' For I think that not
even they that are struggling against impiety
can venture to let such words fall from their
lips without peril.

Eran. — Cease from charging us with
impiety. Even we say that not the divine
nature suflered but the human ; but we do
say that the divine shared with the body in
suffering.

Orth. — What can yon mean by sharing
in sullering.'' Do you mean that when the
nails were driven into the body the divine
nature felt the sense of pain.?

Eran. — I do.

Orth. — Both now and in our former in-
vestigations we have shewn that the soul
does not share all the faculties of the body ;
but that the body while it receives vital force
has the sense of suffering through the soul.
And even supposing us to grant that the
soul shares in pain with the body we shall
none the less find the divine nature to be
impassible, for it was not united to the body
instead of a soul. Or do you not acknowl-
edge that He assumed a soul.''

Eran. — I have often acknowledged it.

Orth. — And that He assumed a reason-
able Soul ?

Eran. — Yes.

Orth. — If then together with the body
He assumed tlie soid, and wc grant tliat the
soul shared in suflering with the botly, then
the soul, not the Godhead, shared the passion
with the body ; it shared the passion, receiv-
ing pangs by means of the body. But pos-
sibly somebody might agree to the soul
sharing suffering with the body, but might
deny its sharing death, because of its having
an immortal nature. On this account the
Lord said " Fear not them which kill the


body but are not able to kill the soul." ' If
then we deny that the soul of the Saviour
shared death with the body, how could any
one accept the blasphemy you and your
friends presumptuously promulgate when
you dare to say tliat the divine nature partici-
pated in death.'' This is the moie inex-
cusable when the Lord points out at one
time that the body- was being offered, at
another that the soul was being troubled.'^

Eran. — And where doth the Lord shew
that the body was being offered.'' Or are
you going to bring me once more tliat well
worn passage " Destroy this temple and in
three days I will raise it up".'''' Or with
your conceited self-sufficiency are you going
to quote me the words of the Evangelist?
" But He spake of the temple of his body.
When therefore He was risen from the dead
His disciples remembered that He had said
this unto them and they believed the
Scripture and the words which He had
said." '

Orth. — If you have such a detestation of
the divine words which preach the mystery
of the incarnation, why, like Marcion and
Valentinus and Manes, do you not destroy
texts of this kind .? For this is what they
have done. But if this seems to you rash
and impious, do not turn the Lord's words
into ridicule, but rather follow the Apostles
in their belief after the resurrection that the
Godhead raised again the temple which the
Jews had destroyed.

Eran. — If you have any good evidence
to adduce, give over gibing and fuHll your
promise.

Orth. — Remember specially those words
of the gospels in which the Lord made a
comparison between manna and the true
bread.

Eran. — I remember.

Orth. — In that passage
at some length about the
he adtled, " The bread that
my flesh which I will give for the life of the
world." " In these words may be under-
stood alike the l)ounty of the Godhead and
the boon of the flesh.

Eran. — One quotation is not enough to
settle the question.

Orth. — The Ethiopian eunuch had not
read much of the Bible, but when he had
found one witness from the prophets he was
guided by it to salvation. But not all
Apostles and prophets and all the preachers
of the truth who have lived since then are


after speaking
bread of life,
I will o-ive is


' M;ltt. X. 2S.
5 Ilcb.X. lO.

3 Joliii xii. 27.


* John ii. ig.
'■'John ii. 21. 22.
<! John vi. 21.


DIALOGUES.


231


enough to convince you. Nevertheless I
will bring you some furthei* testimony about
the Lord's body. You cannot but know
that passage in the Gospel history where,
after eating the passover with His disciples,
cur Lord pointed to the death of the typical
lamb and taught what body corresponded
with that shadow. 1

Eraii. — Yes I know it.

Orth. — Remember then what it was
which our Lord took and broke, and what
He called it when He had taken it.

Eran. — I will answer in mystic language
for the sake of the uninitiated. After taking
and breaking it and giving it to His disciples
He said, " This is my body which was given
for you " '^ or according to the apostle
"broken"^ and again, "This is my blood
of the New Testament which is shed for
many." **

Orth. — Then when exhibiting the type
of the passion He did not mention the God-
head ?

Eran. — No.

Orth. — But He did mention the body and
blood.

Eran. — Yes.

Orth. — And the body was nailed to the
Cross ?

Eran. — Even so.

Orth. — Come, then ; look at this. When
after the resurrection the doors were shut
and the Lord came to the holy disciples and
beheld them affrighted, what means did He
use to destroy their fear and instead of fear
to infuse faith ?

Eran. — He said to them "Behold my
hands and my feet that it is I myself; handle
me and see ; for a spirit hath not flesh and
bones as ye see me have." *

Orth. — So when they disbelieved He
shewed them the body?

Eran. — He did.

Orth. — Therefore the body rose?

Eran. — Clearly.

Orth. — And I suppose what rose w^as
what had died?

Eran. — Even so.

Orth. — And what had died was what
was nailed to the cross?

Eran. — Of necessity.

Orth. — Then according to your own ar-
gument the body suffered?

Eran. — Your series of arguments forces
us to this conclusion.

Orth. — Consider this too. Now I will


1 Matt. xvii. 26. Mark xiv. 22. Luke xxii. 19. I. Cor. xi. 24.

2 Luke xxii. 19. ^ I. Cor. xi. 24.

* Matt. xxvi. 28 and Mark xiv. 24.

* Luke xxiv. 39.


be questioner, and do you answer as becomes
a lover of the truth.

Eran. — I will answer.

Orth. — When the Holy Ghost came
down upon the Apostles, and that wonderful
sight and sound collected thousands to the
house, what did the chief of the apostles in
the speech he then made say concerning the
Lord's resurrection?

Eran. — He quoted the divine David, and
said that he had received promises from God
that the Lord Christ should be born of the
fruit of his loins and that in trust in these
promises he prophetically foresaw His resur-
rection, and plainly said that His soul was
not left in Hades and that His flesh did not
see corruption.^

Orth. — His resurrection therefore is of
these.

Eran. — How can any one in his senses
say that there is a resurrection of the soul
which never died?

Orth. — How comes it that you who attrib-
ute the passion, the death and the resurrec-
tion to the immutable and uncircumscribed
Godhead have suddenly appeared before us in
your right mind and now object to connect-
ing the word resurrection with the soul?

Eran. — Because the word resurrection is
applicable to what has fallen.

Orth. — But the body does not obtain re-
surrection apart from a soul, but being re-
newed by the divine will, and conjoined with
its yokefellow, it receives life. Was it not
thus that the Lord raised Lazarus ?

Eran. — It is plain that not the body alone
rises.

Orth. — This is more distinctly taught by
the divine Ezekiel,- for he points out how the
Lord commanded the bones to come together,
and how all of them were duly fitted together,
and how He made sinews and veins and ar-
teries grow with all the flesh pertaining to
them and the skin that clothes them all, and
then ordered the souls to come back to their
own bodies.

Eran. — This is true.

Orth. — But the Lord's body did not un-
dergo this corruption, but remained unim-
paired, and on the third day recovered its
own soul.

Eran. — Agreed.

Orth. — Then the death was of what had
suffered ?

Eran. — Without question.

Orth. — And when the great Peter men-
tioned the resurrection, and the divine David
too, they said that His soul was not left in

1 Acts ii. 20 et seqq. aad Ps. xvi. 10.

2 £2. xxxvii. 7 et seq^.


232


THEODORET.


Hell, but that His body did not undergo cor-
ruption ?

JEran. — They did.

Ori/i. — Then it was not the Godhead
which underwent death, but the body by sev-
erance from the soul ?

Eran. — I cannot brook these absurdities.
Orth. — But you are fighting against your
own arguments ; it is your own words which
you are calling absurd.

Eran. — You slander me; not one of
these words is mine.

Orth. — Suppose any one to ask what is
the animal which is at once reasonable and
mortal, and suppose some one else to answer,
— man ; which of the two would you call
interpreter of the saying.'' The questioner
or the answerer.''

Eran. — The answerer.

Orth. — Then I was quite right in calling
the arguments yours.'* For you, I ween, in
your answers, by rejecting some points and
accepting others, confirmed them.

Eran. — Then I will not answer any
longer ; do you answer.

Orth. — I will answer.

Eran. — What do you say to those words
of the Apostle " Had they known it they
would not have crucified the Lord of
glory ".? 1 in this passage he mentions neither
body nor soul.

Orth. — Therefore you must not jDut the
words "■ in the flesh " in it, — for this is your
ingenious invention for decrying the Godhead
of the Word — but must attribute the passion
to the bare Godhead of the Word.

Eran. — No; no. He sufiered in the
flesh, but His incorporeal nature was not
capal)le of sufiering by itself.

Orth. — Ah! but nothing must be added
to the Apostle's words.

Eran. — When we know the Apostle's
meaning there is nothing absurd in adding
what is left out.

Orth. — But to add anything to the divine
words is wild and rash. To explain what
is written and reveal the hidden meaning: is
holy and pious.

Eran. — Qiiite right.

Orth. — We two then shall do nothing
unreasonable and unholy in examining the
mind of the Scriptures.

Eran. — No.

Orth. — Let us then look together into
what seems to be hidden.

Eran. — By all means.

Orth. — Did the great Paul call the divine
James the Lord's brother } ^


U.Cor. ii.S.


- Gal. i. 19.


Eran. — He did.

Orth. — But in what sense are we to re-
gard him as brother? By relationship of
His godhead or of His manhood.^

Eran. — I will not consent to divide the
united natures.

Orth. — But you have often divided them
in our previous investigations, and you shall
do the same thing now. Tell me ; do you say
that God the Word was only begotten Son }

Eran. — I do.

Orth. — And only begotten means only
Son.

Eran. — Certainly.

Orth. — And the only begotten cannot
have a brother.''

Eran. — Of course not, for if He had had
a brother He would not be called the only
begotten.

Orth. — Then they were wrong in calling
James the brother of the Lord. For the
Lord was only begotten, and the only begot-
ten cannot have a brother.

Eran. — No, but the Lord is not incor-
poreal and the proclaimers of the truth are
referring only to what touches the godhead.

Orth. — How then would you prove the
word of the apostle true.''

Eran. — By saying that James was of kin
with the Lord according to the flesh.

Orth. — See how you have brought in
again that division which you object to.

Eran. — It was not possible to explain
the kinshij^ in any other way.

Orth. — Then do not find fiuilt with those
who cannot explain similar difliculties in any
other way.

Eran. — Now you are getting the argu-
ment ofl' the track because you want to shirk
the question.

Orth. — Not at all, my friend. That will
be settled too by the points we have investi-
gated. Now look ; when you were re-
minded of James the brother of the Lord,
you said that the relationship referred not to
the Godhead but to the flesh.
Eran. — I did.

Orth. — Well, now that you are told of
the passion of the cross, refer this too to the
flesh.

Eran. — The Apostle called the crucified
" Lord of Glory," ' and the same Apostle
called the Lord " brother of James."

Orth. — And it is the same Lord in both
cases. If then you are right in referring the
relationship to the flesh you must also refer
the passion to the flesh, for it is perfectly
ridiculous to regard the relationship without

» I. Cor. ii.S.


DIALOGUES.


233


distinction and to refer the passion to Christ
without distinction.

Eran. — I follow the Apostle who calls
the crucified " Lord of glory."

Orth. — I follow too, and believe that He
was "Lord of glory." For the body which
was nailed to the wood was not that of any
common man but of the Lord of glory. But
we must acknowledge that the union makes
the names common. Once more : do you
say that the flesh of the Lord came down
from heaven.''

Eran. — Of course not.

Orth. — But was formed in the Virgin's
womb }

Eran. — Yes.

Orth. — How, then, does the Lord say
" If ye shall see the Son of man ascend up
where He was before," ^ and again " No man
hath ascended up to heaven but He that
came down from heaven, even the Son of
man which is in heaven .'* " ^

Eran. — He is speaking not of the flesh,
but of the Godhead.

Orth. — Yes ; but the Godhead is of the
God and Father. How then does He call
him Son of man.'*

Eran. — The peculiar properties of the
natures are shared by the person, for on ac-
count of the union the same being is both
Son of man and Son of God, everlasting
and of time, Son of David and Lord of
David, and so on with the I'est.

Orth. — Very right. But it is also im-
portant to recognise the fact that no confu-
sion of natures results from both having one
name. Wherefore we are endeavouring to
distinguish how the same being is Son of
God and also Son of man, and how He is
" the same yesterday, to-day, and for
ever," 3 and by the reverent distinction of
terms we find that the contradictions are in
agreement.

Eran. — You are right.

Orth. — You say that the divine nature
came down from heaven and that in conse-
quence of the union it was called the Son of
man. Thus it behoves us to say that the
flesh was nailed to the tree, but to hold that
the divine nature even on the cross and in
the tomb was inseparable from this flesh,
though from it it derived no sense of suffer-
ing, since the divine nature is naturally in-
capable of undergoing both suffering and
death and its substance is immortal and im-
passible. It is in this sense that the crucified
is styled Lord of Glory, by attribution of the
title of the impassible nature to the passible.


' John vi. 63.


•John iii. 13.


^ Heb. xiii. S.


since, as we know, a body is described as
belonging to this latter.

Now let us examine the matter thus. The
words of the divine Apostle are " Had they
known it they would not have crucified the
Lord of Glory." 1 They crucified the nature
which they knew, not that of which they were
wholly ignorant : had they known that of
which they were ignorant they would not
have crucified that which they knew : they
crucified the human because they were igno-
rant of the divine. Have you forgotten their
own words. " For a good work we stone
thee not but for blasphemy, and because that
thou, being a man, makest thyself God." ^
These words are a plain proof that they
recognised the nature they saw, while of
the invisible they were wholly ignorant : had
they known that nature they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory.

Eran. — That is very probable, but the
exposition of the faith laid down by the
Fathers in council at Nicaea says that
the only begotten Himself, very God, of one
substance with the Father, suffered and was
crucified.

Orth. — You seem to forget what we have
agreed on again and again.

Eran. — What do you mean?

Orth. — I mean that after the imion the
holy Scripture applies to one person terms
both of exaltation and of humiliation. But
possibly you are also ignorant that the illus-
trious Fathers first mentioned His taking
ffesh and being made man, and then after-
wards added that He suffered and was cruci-
fied, and thus spoke of the passion after they
had set forth the nature capable of passion.

Eran. — The Fathers said that the Son of
God, Light of Light, of the substance of the
Father, suffered and was crucified.

Orth. — I have observed more than once
that both the Divine and the human are
ascribed to the one Person. It is in accord-
ance with this position that the thrice blessed
Fathers, after teaching how we should believe
in the Father, and then passing on to the
person of the Son, did not immediately add
" and in the Son of God," although it would
have very naturally followed that after de-
fining what touches God the Father they
should straightway have introduced the
name of Son. But their object was to give
us at one and the same time instruction on
the theology and on the ceconomy,^ lest there
should be supposed to be any distinction
between the Person of the Godhead and the
Person of the Manhood. On this account


U.Cor. ii.8.
'John X.33.


3 Vide note on page 72.


234


THEODORET.


they added to their statement concerning the
Father that \vc must believe also in our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of God. Now after
the incarnation God the Word is called
Christ, for this name includes alike all that
is proper to the Godhead and to the man-
hood. We recognise nevertheless that some
properties belong to the one nature and
some to the other, and this may at once be
understood from the actual terms of the
Creed. For tell me : to what do you apply
the phrase " of the substance of the Father".^
to the Godhead, or to the nature that was
fashioned of the seed of David.''

Eran. — To the Godhead, as is plain.

Orth. — And the clause " Veiy God of
very God " ; to which do you hold this be-
longs, to the Godhead or to the manhood.'*

Eran. — To the Godhead.

Orth. — Therefore neither the flesh nor
the soul is of one substance with the Father,
for they are created, but the Godhead which
formed all things.

Eran. — True.

Orth. — ■ Very well, then. And when we
are told of passion and of the cross we must
recognise the nature which submitted to the
))assion ; we must avoid attributing it to the
impassible, and must attribute it to that
nature which was assumed for the distinct
piu^pose of suffering. The acknowledgment
on the part of the most excellent Fathers that
the divine nature was impassible ; and their
attribution of the passion to the flesh is
proved by the conclusion of the creed, which
runs " But tliey who state there was a time
when He was not, and before He was begot-
ten He was not, and He was made out of the
non-existent, or who allege that the Son of
God was of another essence or substance
mutable or variable, these the holy catholic
and apostolic Church anathematizes." See
then what penalties are denounced against
them that attribute the passion to the divine
nature.^

Eran. — They are speaking in this place
of mutation and variation.

Orth. — But what is the passion but muta-
tion and variation.'' For if, being impassible
before His incarnation. He suffered after His
incarnation, He assuredly suffered by under-
going mutation ; and if being immortal before
He became man, He tasted death, as you say,
after being made man. He underwent a com-
plete alteration by being made mortal after
being immortal. But expressions of this kind,
and their authors with them, have all been
expelled by the illustrious Fathers from the

> See the Creed as published by the Council, p. 50.


I bounds of the Church, and cut off' like rotten
; limbs from the sound body. We therefore
exhort you to fear the punishment and abhor
the blasphemy.

Now I will show you that in their own
writings the holy Fathers have held the opin-
ions we have expressed. Of tlie witnesses I
shall bring forward some took part in that
great Council ; some flourished in the Church
after their time ; some illuminated the world
long before. But their harmony is broken
neither by dilVerence of periods nor by diver-
sity of language ; like the harp their strings
are several and separate but like the harp they
make one harmonious music.

Eran. — I was anxious for and shall be
delighted at such citations. Instruction of
this kind cannot be gainsaid, and is most
useful.

Orth. — Now ; open your ears and receive
the streams that flow from the spiritual
springs.

Testimony of the holy Ignatius., bishop of
Antioch., and martyr.

From his Epistle to the Smyrnaeans : —

"They do not admit Eucharists and obla-
tions, because they do not confess the Eucha-
rist to be flesh of our Saviour Jesus Christ
which suffered for our sins and which of His
goodness the Father raised." ^

Testimony of Ircna:us., bishop of Lyons.

From his third book against heresies (Chap.
XX.):-

"It is clear then that Paul knew no other
Christ save Him that suffered and was
buried and rose and was born, whom he calls
man, for after saying, ' If Christ be preached
that He rose from the dead,'- he adds, giving
the reason of His incarnation, ' For since by
man came death by man came also the re-
surrection of the dead,' "^ and on all occasions
in reference to the passion, the manhood and
the dissolution of the Lord, he uses the name
of Christ as in the text, ' Destroy not him
with thy meat for whom Christ died,' ■* and
again, ' But now in Christ ye who sometimes
were far off' are made nigh in the blood of
Christ,' " and again, '• Christ hath redeemed
us from the curse of the law, being made a

'The quotation is not quite exact, " "EirYapto-Tias koX Trpoo--
<t>opai oOk aiToSexovTai. " being' substituted for tvxapi.<Tria'; kol
TTpo<Ttvxfi<; airexovTaL. Bp. I>ightfoot (Ap. Fath. II. ii. 307)
notes, " the argument is much tlie same as Tertullian's airainst
the Docctism of Marcion (adv. Marc. iv. 40), 'Aerr/>liim
t>anem el distributum discipulis corpus sicuin ilium fecit.
Hoc est corpus meuvt dicendo, id est Ji^oura iiiei corporis.
Fis^ura aulem nan fnissct, nisi veritatis esset corpus, cetcrum
vacua res quod est phantasma, figuram capere non posset.'
The Eucharist implies the reality of Clirist's flesh. To those
who deny this reality it has no meaninsif at all ; to tliem Christ's
words of instituticm are false; it is in no sense the flesh
of Christ." Cf. Ircn. iv. iS, 5.

2 1. Cor. XV. 12. 3 I. Cor. XV. ai.

* Rom. xiv. 15.

^ Epbes. ii. 13. Observe slight differences.


DIALOGUES.


235


IS


curse for us : for it is written, Cursed
every one that hangeth on a tree.'" ^

Of the same from the same work. (Chap-
ter xxi.) : —

" For as He was Man that He might be
tempted, so was He Word that He might
be glorified. In His temptation, His cruci-
fixion and His dying, the Word was in-
operative ; but in His victory, His patience,
His goodness, His resurrection and His as-
sumption it was co-operative with the man-
hood."

Of the same from the fifth book of the
same work : —

" When with His own blood the Lord had
ransomed us, and given His soul on behalf
of our souls, and His flesh instead of our
flesh."

The testimony of the holy Hippolytus^
bishop and martyr.

From his letter to a certain Queen : —

"So he calls Him ' The firstfruits of them
that slept,' '-^ and ' The first born of the
dead.' ^ When He had risen and was wish-
ful to show that what had risen was the
same body which died, when the Apostles
doubted, He called to Him Thomas and
said ' Handle me and see ; for a spirit hath
not flesh and bones as ye see me have.' " ■*
• Of the same from the same letter : —

" By calling Him firstfruits He bore wit-
ness to what we have said, that the Saviour,
after taking the flesh of the same material,
raised it, making it firstfruits of the flesh of
the just, in order that all we that believe
might have expectation of our resurrection
through trust in Him that is risen."

Of the same from his discourse on the two
thieves : —

" The body of the Lord gave both to the
world, — the holy blood and the sacred water."

Of the same from the same discourse : —

" And the body being, humanly speaking,
a corpse, has in itself great power of life, for
there flowed from it what does not flow from
dead bodies — blood and water, — that we
might know what vital force lies in the in-
dwelling power in the body, so that it is a
corpse evidently unlike others, and is able to
pour forth for us causes of life." *

Of the same from the same discourse : —

" Not a bone of the holy Lamb is broken.
The type shews that the passion cannot


' Gal. iii. 13 and Deut. xxi. 23.

2 I. Cor. XV. 20. sCoIoss. i. iS.

* cf. Luke xxiv. 39. And for the application of these words
to St. Thomas cf. page 210.

s The effusion of water and blood is now well known to have
been a natural consequence of the " broken heart." On the rup-
ture of the heart the blood fills the pericardium, and then coaj^u-
lates. The wound of the lance gave p;issage to the collected
blood and serum, cf. Dr. Stroud's '^Physical Cause of the
Deathof Christ" first published in 1S47.


g,ht, unless He
own body to the


touch the power, for the bones are the power
of the body."

Testimony of the holy Eustathius, bisliop
of Antioch, and confessor.

From his book on the soul : —

"Their impious calumny can be refuted in
a few words ; they may be ricj
voluntarily gave up His
destruction of death for the sake of the salva-
tion of men. First of all they attribute to
Him extraordinary infirmity in not being-
able to repel His enemies' assault."

Of the same from the same book : —

" Why do they, in the concoction of their
earth-born deceits, make much of proving
that the Christ assumed a body without a
soul.? In order that if they could seduce any
to lay down that this is the case, then, by at-
tributing to the divine Spirit variations of
affection, they might easily persuade them
that the mutable is not begotten of the im-
mutable nature."

Of the same from his discourse on "the
Lord created me in the beginning of His
ways " : 1 —

" The man Who died rose on the third day,
and, when Mary was eager to lay hold of His
holy limbs, He objected, and cried ' Touch me
not.2 For I am not yet ascended to my Father ;
but go to my brethren and say unto them, I
ascend unto my Father and your Father and to
my God and your God.' ^ Now the words ' I
am not yet ascended to my Father,' were not
spoken by the Word and God, who came down
from heaven, and was in the bosom of the
Father, nor by the Wisdom which contains all
created things, but were uttered by the man
who was compacted of various limbs, who had
risen from the dead, who had not yet after His
death gone back to the Father, and was re-
serving for Himself the first fruits of His
progress."

Of the same from the same work : —

" As he writes he expressly describes the
man who was crucified as Lord of Glory, de-
claring Him to be Lord and Christ, just as the
Apostles with one voice when speaking to
Israel in the flesh say ' Therefore let all the
house of Israel know assuredly that God hath
made that same Jesus, Whom ye have cruci-
fied, both Lord and Christ.' ■* He so made
Jesus Christ who suffered. He did not so
make the Wisdom nor yet the Word who has
the might of dominion from the beginning, but
Him who was lifted up on high and stretched
out His hands upon the Cross."

Of the same from the same work : —


1 Prov. viii. 22. Ixx.

- i.e. literally, try not to lay hold of me.

3John XX. 17. * Acts ii, 36.


236


THEODORET.


" For if He is incorporeal and not subject
to manual contact, nor apprehended by eyes
of flesli, lie undergoes no wound, He is not
nailed l)y nails, He has no part in death, He
is not hidden in the ground. He is not shut
in a grave, He does not rise from a tomb."
Of the same from the same book : —
" ' No man taketh it from me. ... I
have power to lay it down and I have power
to take it again.' * If as God He hatl the
double power. He yet yielded to them who
were striving of evil counsel to destroy the
temple, but by His resurrection He restored it
in greater splendour. It is proved by incon-
trovertible evidence that He of Himself rose
and renewed His own house, and the great
work of the Son is to be ascribed to the
divine Father; for the Son does not work
without the Father, as is declared in the un-
impeachable utterances of the holy Scrip-
tures. Wherefore at one time the divine
Parent is described as having raised the
Christ from the dead, at another time the Son
promises to raise His own temple. If then
from what has previously been laid down the
divine spirit of the Christ is proved to be
impassible, in vain do the accursed assail the
apostolic definitions. If Paul says that the
Lord of Glory was crucified, clearly referring
to the manhood, we must not on this account
refer suffering to the divine. Why then do
they put these two things together, saying that
the Christ was crucified from infirmity?"
Of the same from the same work : —
'•' But had it been becoming to attribute to
Him any kind of infirmity, any one might
have said that it was natural to attach these
equalities to the manhood, though not to the
fulness of tlie Godhead, or to the dignity of
the highest wisdom, or to Him who accord-
ing to Paul is described as God over all." ^
Of the same from the same book : —
"This then is the manner of the infirmity
according to which He is described by Paul
as coming to death, for the man lives by God's
power when plainly associated with God's
spirit, since from the preceding statements
He who is believed to be in Him is proved to
be also the power of the Most High."
Of the same from the same : —
"As by entering the Virgin's womb He did
not lessen His power, so neither by the fast-
ening of His body to the wood of the cross is
His spirit defiled. For when the body was
crucified on liigh the divine Spirit of wisdom
dwelt even within the body, trod in
heavenly places, filled all the earth, reigned
over the depths, visited and judged the soul


'John X. iS.


' RotQ. ix. 5.


of every man, and continued to do all that
God continually does, for the wisdom that is
on high is not prisoned and contained within
bodily matter, just as moist and dry material
are contained within their vessels and are
contained by but do not contain them. But
this wisdom, being a divine and inefiable
power, embraces and confirms alike all that
is within and all that is without the temple,
and thence proceeding beyond comprehends
and sways at once all matter."

Of the same from the same work : —

" But if the sun being a visible body, appre-
hended by the senses, endures everywhere
such adverse influences without changing its
order, or feeling any blow, be it small or
great ; can we suppose the incorporeal Wis-
dom to be defiled and to change its nature
because its temple is nailed to the cross or
destroyed or wounded or corrupted ? The
temple suffers, but the substance abides
without spot, and preserves its entire dignity
without defilement."

Of the same from his work on the titles of
the Psalms of Degrees: —

" The Father who is perfect, infinite, in-
comprehensible, and is incapable alike of
adornment or disfigurement, receives no ac-
quired glory; nor yet does His Word, who
is God begotten of Him, through whom are
angels and heaven and earth's boundless
bulk and all the form and matter of created
things ; but the man Christ raised from the
dead is exalted and glorified to the open dis-
comfiture of His foes."

Of the same from the same work : —

" They however who have lifted up hatred
against Him, though they be fenced i"ound
with the forces of His foes, are scattered
abroad, while the God and Word gloriously
raised His own temple."

Of the same from his interpretation of the
93nd Psalm : —

"Moreover the prophet Isaiah following
the tracks of His sufferings, among other
utterances exclaims with a mighty voice 'And
we saw Him and He had no form nor beauty.
His form was dishonoured and rejected
among the sons of men,' ^ thus distinctly
showing that the marks of indignity and the
sufierings must be applied to the human but
not to the divine. And immediatelv after-
wards he adds ' Being a man under stroke,
and able to bear infirmity.'- He it is who
after suflering outrage was seen to have no
form or comeliness, then again was changed
and clothed with beauty, for the God dwell-
ing in Him was not led like a lamb to death


1 Isaiah liii. 2, 3. Sept.


* Isaiah liii. 3. Sept.


DIALOGUES.


237


and slaughtered like a sheep, for His nature
is invisible."

Testi7nony of the Holy Athanasius^ bishop
of Alexandria^ and confessor.
From his letter to Epictetus : —
" Whoever reached such a pitch of impiety
as to think and say that the Godhead itself
of one substance with the Father was cir-
cumcised, and from perfect became imper-
fect ; and to deny that what was crucified
on the tree was the body, asserting it on the
contrary to be the very creative substance of
wisdom ? "

Of the same from the same treatise : —
" The Word associated with Himself and
brought upon Himself what the humanity
of the Word suffered, that we might be able
to share in the Godhead of the Word. And
marvellous it was that the sufferer and He
who did not suffer were the same ; sufferer in
that His own body suffered and He was in it
while suffering, but not suffering because the
Word, being by nature God, was impassible.
And He Himself the incorporeal was in the
passible body, and the body contained in
itself the impassible Word, destroying the
infirmities of His body."

Of the same from the same letter : —
" For being God and Lord of Glory, He
was in the body ingloriously crucified ; but the
body suffered when smitten on the tree, and
water and blood flowed from its side ; but
being temple of the Word, it was full of the
Godhead. Wherefore when the sun saw its
Creator suffering in His outraged body, it
drew in its rays, and darkened the earth.
And that very body with a mortal nature
rose superior to its own nature, on account
of the Word within it, and is no longer
touched by its natural corruption, but clothed
with the superhuman Word, became incor-
ruptible."

Of the same from his greater discourse on
the Faith : —

"Was what rose from the dead, man or
God ? Peter, the Apostle, who knows better
than we, interprets and says, ' and when
they had fulfilled all that was written of Him
they took Him down from the tree and laid
Him in a sepulchre, but God raised Him
from the dead.' ^ Now the dead body of
Jesus which was taken down from the tree,
which had been laid in a sepulchre, and
entombed by Joseph of Arimathrea, is the
very body which the Word raised, saying,
' Destroy this temple, and in three days I
will raise it up.' ^ It is He who quickens

1 The quotation seems to be a confusion between Acts ii. 24,
and Acts xiii. 29. Sic in Athan, Ed. Migne. II. 1030.
*John iii. 19.


all the dead, and quickened the man Christ
Jesus, born of Mary, whom He assumed.
For if while on the cross ' He raised corpses
of the saints that had previously undergone
dissolution, much more can God the everliv-
ing Word raise the body, which He wore,
as says Paul, ' For the word of God is
quick and ^^owerful.' " ^

Of the same from the same work : —
" Life then does not die, but quickens the
dead; for as the light is not injured in a
dark place, so life cannot suffer when it has
visited a mortal nature, for the Godhead of
the Word is immutable and invariable as the
Lord says in the prophecy about Himself
' I am the Lord I change not.'"^

Of the same from the same work : —
" Living He cannot die but on the contrary
quickens the dead. He is therefore, by the
Godhead derived from the Father, a fount of
light ; but He that died, or rather rose from
the dead, our intercessor, who was born of
the Virgin Mary, whom the Godhead of the
Word assumed for our sake, is man."
Of the same from the same work : —
" It came to pass that Lazarus fell sick and
died ; but the divine Man did not fall sick
nor against His own will did He die, but of
His own accord came to the dispensation of
death, being strengthened by God the Word
who dwelt within Him, and who said ' No
man taketh it from me but I lay it down of
myself. I have power to lay it down and
I have power to take it again."* The God-
head then which lays down and takes the
life of man which He wore is of the Son, for
in its completeness He assumed the man-
hood, in order that in its completeness He
might quicken it, and, with it, the dead."

Of the same from his discourse against
the Arians : —

" When therefore the blessed Paul says the
Father ' raised ' the Son ' from the dead ' "
John tells us that Jesus said ' Destroy this
temple and in three days I will raise it up
but Lie spake ' of His own
'body.'" So it is clear to them that take
heed tliat at the raising of the body the Son
is said by Paul to have been raised from tlie
dead, for he refers what concerns the body
to the Son's person, and just so when he
says ' the Father gave life to the Son ' ' it
must be understood that the life was given to
the Flesh. For if He Himself is life how
can the life receive life.'' "


1 But " after his resurrection " appears to qualify the state,
mcnt '• arose " as well as " appeared " in Matt, xxviii. 53.

2 Hebrews iv. 12. 0 Acts xiii. 30.

3 Malachi iii. 6. * John ii. 19 and 21.
*John X. iS. 'John v. 26.


2 38


THEODORET.


Of the same from his work on the Incar-
nation : —

'•'■ For wlien the Word was conscious that in
no other way couhl tlie ruin of men be
undone save by death to the uttermost, and
it was impossible that the Word who is
ini'iiortal and Son of the Father shovdd
die, to etVect His end He assumes a body
capable of death, that tliis body, being
united to the Word, who is<n-er all, might, in
the stead of all, become subject to death, and
because of the indwelling Word might re-
main incorruptible, and so by the grace of
the resurrection corruption for the future
might lose its power over men. Thus offer-
ing to death, as a sacrifice and victim free
from every spot, the bodv which He had
assumed, by His corresponding otfcring He
straightway destroyed death's power over
all His kind ; for being the Word of God,
above and beyond all men. He rightly
offered and paid His own temple and bodily
instrument, as a ransom for all souls due to
death. And thus by means of the like
(boily) being associated with all men, the
incorruptible Son of God rightly clothed all
men with incorruption by the promise of the
resurrection, for the corruption inherent in
death no longer has any place with men, for
the sake of the Word who dwelt m them by
the means of the one body."

Of the same from the same work : —
" Wherefore, after His divine manifesta-
tions in His works, now also on behalf of all
He offered sacrifice, yielding to death His
own temple instead of all, tliat He might
make all men irresponsible and free from
the ancient transsfrcssion. and, exhibitinof His
own body as incorruptible flrstfruits of the
resurrection of mankind, might shew Him-
self stronger tlian death. For the body, as
havinsf a common su])stance — for it was a
human body, although by a new miracle its
constitution was of the Virgin alone — being
mortal, died after tlie example of its like ;
but by the descent of the Word into it no
longer sutVered corruption, according to its
own nature, but, on account of God the Word
who dwelt within it, was delivered from
corruption."

Of the same from the same work : —
" Whence, as I have said, since it was not
possible for the Word being immortal to die.
He took upon Himself a body capable of
death, in order that He might ofVer this same
body for all, and He Himself in His suffer-
ing on behalf of all through His descent into
this body might ' destroy Him that hath the
power of death.' " •

' Heb. ii. 14.


Of the same from the same work : ' —

" For the body in its passion, as is the
nature of bodies, died, but it had the prom-
ise of incorruption through the Word that
dwelt within it. For when the body died
the Word was not injured ; but He was
Himself impassible, incorruptible, and im-
mortal, as being God's Word, and being as-
sociated with the body He kept from it the
natin-al corruj^tion of bodies, as says the
Spirit to Him ' thou wilt not suffer thy Holy
One to see corruption.' " -

77/c testimony of the holy Da7nas7is^
bishop of Rome : "^ —

" If any one say that, in the passion of the
Cross, God the Son of God suflered pain, and
not the flesh with the soul, which the form
of the servant put on and assumed, as tlie
Scripture saith. Let him be anathema."

Testimony of the holy Ambrosius^ bishop
of Milan.

From his book on the Catholic faith : —

"• There are some men who have reached
such a })itch of impiety as to think that the
Godhead of the Lord was circumcised, and
from perfect was made imperfect ; and that
the divine substance. Creator of all things,
and not the flesh, was on the tree."

Of the same from the same work : —

"The flesh suflercd ; but the Godhead is
free from death. He yielded His body to
suffer according to the law of human nature.
For how can God die, when the soul cannot
die? ' Fear not,' He says, ' them which kill
the body but are not able to kill the soul.' ■"
If then the soul cannot be slahi how can the
Godhead be made subject to death .'' "

Testimony of the holy Basilius, bishop of
CcBsarca : —

" It is perfectly well known to every one
who has the least acquaintance with the mean-
ing of the words of the Apostle that he is not
delivering to us a mode of theology but is
explaining the reasons of the occonomy,'' for
he says ' God hath made that same Jesus
whom ye have crucified both Lord and
Christ.' " Thus he is plainly directing his
argument to His human and visible nature."

Testimony of the holy Gregorins., bishop
of Nazianz2is.

From his letter to the blessed Nectarius,
bishop of Constantinople : —

" The saddest thing in what lias befallen the
churches is the boldness of the utterances of
Apollinarius and his party. I cannot under-
stand how your Holiness has allowed them to

' This passasfP is not fnund in the discourse on the Incnr-
nalioii, lull a similar passage occurs in the third oration against
the Arians. Ed. Hen. p. 606. * Matt. x. 2^.

- Ps. xvi. 10. ^ of. note on p. 72.

3 ICpist. iii. Ad Paulinuni. " Acts ii. 36.


DIALOGUES.


239


arrogate to themselves the power of assem-
bling on the same terms with us."

And a little further on : —

" I will no longer call this serious ; it is in-
deed saddest of all that the only begotten
God Himself, Judge of all who exist, the
Prince of Life, the Destroyer of Death, is
made by him mortal and alleged to re-
ceive suffering in His own Godhead. He
represents the Godhead to have shared with
the body in the dissolution of that three days'
death of the body, and so after the death to
have been again raised by the Father."

Of the same from his former exposition to
Cledonius : —

" It is the contention of the Arians that the
manhood was without a soul, that they may
refer the passion to the Godhead and repre-
sent the same power as both moving the body
and suffering."

Of the same from his discourse about the
Son : —

" It remained for us to treat of what was
commanded Him and of His keeping the
commandments and doing all things pleasing
to Him ; and further of His perfection, ex-
altation, and learning obedience by all that
He suffered,! yL\^ priesthood, His offering.
His betrayal, His entreaty to Him that hath
power to save Him from death, His agony,
His bloody sweat, His prayer and similar
manifestations, were it not clear to all that
all these expressions in connexion with His
Passion in no way signify the nature which
was immutable and above suffering."

Of the same from his Easter Discourse
(Or. ii.) :-

" ' Who is this that cometh from Edom.^" ^
and from the earth, and how can the gar-
ments of the bloodless and bodiless be red
as of one that treadeth in the wine- fat?
Urge in reply the beauty of the garment of
the body which suffered and was made beau-
tiful in sutTering, and was made splendid by
the Godhead, than which nothing is lovelier
nor more fair."

Testimony of Gregory^ bishop of Nyssa.

From his catechetical oration : —

" And this is the mystery of the dispensa-
tion of God concernins: the manhood and of
the resurrection from the dead, not to prevent
the soul from being separated from the body
by death according to the necessary law of
human nature, and to bring them together
again through the resurrection."

Of the same from the same work : —
" The flesh which received the Godhead,
and which through the resurrection was ex-


» cf. Heb. V. S.


2 Isaiah Ixiii. i.


alted with the Godhead, is not formed of
another material, but of ours ; so, just as in
the case of our own body, the operation of
one of the senses moves to general sensa-
tion the whole man united to that part, in
like manner just as though all nature were
one single animal, the resurrection of the
part pervades the whole, being conveyed
from the part to the whole by what is con-
tinuous and united in nature. What then
do we find extraordinary in the mystery
that the upright stoops to the fallen to raise
up him that lies low.'' "

Of the same from the same work : —

"It would be natural also in this part not
to heed the one and neglect the other ; ])ut
in the immortal to behold the human, and
to be curiously exact about the diviner
quality in the manhood."

Of the same from his work against Eu-
nomius : —

" 'Tis not the human nature which raises
Lazarus to life. 'Tis not the impassible
power which sheds tears over the dead.
The tear belongs to the man ; the life comes
from the very life. The thousands are not
fed by human poverty ; omnipotence does
not hasten to the fig tree. Who was weary
in the way, and who by His word sustains
all the world without being weary .^ Wliat
is the brightness of His glory, what was
pierced by the nails .^ WHiat form, is smitten
in the passion, what is glorified for ever-
lasting.^ The answer is plain and needs no
interpretation."

Of the same from the same treatise : —

'"• He blames them that refer the passion to
the human nature. He wishes himself
wholly to subject the Godhead itself to the
passion, for the proposition being twofold
and doubtful, whether the divinity or (he
humanity was concerned in the passion, the
denial of tlie one becomes the positive con-
demnation of the other. While therefore
they blame them who see the passion in the
humanity, they will bestow unqualified
praise on them that maintain the Divinity of
the Son of God to be passible. But the
point established by these means becomes a
confirmation of their own absurdity of doc-
trine ; for if, as they allege, the Godlicad of
the Son suffers while that of the Father in
accordance with its substance is conserved
in complete impassibility, it follows that the
impassible nature is at variance with the
nature which sustains suffering."

The testiiuo7iy of the holy Amphilochi?is^
bishop of Iconinm.

From his discourse on the text " Verily,
verilv 1 say unto you, he that hcarcth my


240


TIIEODORET.


word and believeth on Him that sent me
hath everhisting Hfe " : ' —

"Whose then are the sufferings ? Of the
flesh. Therefore if you give to the flesh tlic
suflering, give it also the lowly words ; and
ascribe the exalted words to Him to Whom
you assign the miracles. For the God when
He is in the act of working wonders natu-
rally speaks in high and lofty language
worthy of His works and the man when He
is surtering litly utters lowly words corre-
sponding with His suflerings."

Of the same from his discourse on " My
Father is greater than I " : ~ —

" But when you give the suflerings to the
flesh and the miracles to God, you must of
necessity, though unwillingly, give the lowly
words to the man born of Mary, and the
high and lofty words becoming God, to the
Word who existed in the l)cginning. The
reason wliy I utter sometimes lofty words
and sometimes lowly is that by the lofty I
may show the nobility of the indwelling
Word, and by the lowly make known the
inhrmity of the lowly flesh. So at one time
I call myself equal to the Father and at
another I call the Father greater ; and in
this I am not inconsistent with myself, but I
shew that I am God and man ; God by the
lofty and man by the lowly. And if you
wish to know in what sense my Father is
greater than I, I spoke in the flesh and not
m the person of the Godhead."

Of the same from his discourse on " If it
be possible let this cup pass from me " : ^ —

"■Ascribe not then the suflerings of the flesh
to the impassible God, for I, O heretic, am
God, and man ; God, as the miracles prove ;
man as is shewn by the suflerings. Since then
I am God and man, tell me, who was it who
suffered.'* If God suflercd, you have spoken
blasphemy ; but if the flesh suflered, why do
you not attribute the passion to Him to whom
you ascribe the dread.'* For while one is suf-
fering another feels no dread ; while man is
being crucified God is not troubled."

Of the same from his discourse against the
Arians : —

"And not to prolong what I am saying, I
will shortly ask you, O heretic, did He who
was begotten of God before the ages sufler,
or Jesus who was born of David in the last
days.' If the Godhead suflered, thou hast
spoken blasphemy ; if, as the truth is, the
manhood suffered, for what reason do you
hesitate to attribute the passion to man .-* "

Of the same from his discourse concerning
the Son : —


* John V. 24
'John xiv.


28.


^ Matt. xxvi. 31;.


" Peter said, ' God hath made this Jesus
both Lord and Christ ' 1 and said too, 'this
Jesus whom ye crucified God liath raised up.' '-^
Now it was the manhood, not the God-
head, which became a corpse, and He who
raised it was the Word, the power of God,
who said in the Gospel, ' Destroy this tem-
ple and in three days I will raise it up.'^ So
when it is said that God hath made Him who
became a corpse and rose from the dead both
Lord and Christ, what is meant is the flesh,
and not the Godhead of the Son."

Of the same from his discourse on "The
Son can do nothing of Himself" : '' —

" For He had not such a nature as that His
life could be held by corruption, since His
Godhead was not forcibly reduced to suflering.
For how could it.'' But the manhood was re-
newed in incorruption. So he says ' For
this mortal must put on immortality and this
corruptible must put on incorruption.' " You
observe the accuracy ; he points distinctly to
' this mortal ' that you may not entertain
the idea of the resurrection of any other
flesh."

Testimony of the holy Flavianus^ bishop
of Aiitioch.

On Easter Day : —

" Wherefore also the cross isboldly preached
by us, and the Lord's death confessed among
us, though in nothing did the Godhead sufler,
for the divine is impassible, but the dispen-
sation was fulfilled by the body."

Of the same on Judas the traitor : —

" When therefore you hear of the Lord
being betrayed, do not degrade the divine
dignity to insignificance, nor attribute to
divine power the suflerings of the body.
For the divine is impassible and invariable.
For if through His love to mankind He took
on Him the form of a servant. He under-
went no change in nature. But being what
He ever was, he yielded the divine " body to
experience death."

Testimony of Theophihis^ bishop of Alex-
a?idria.

From his Heortastic Volume : —

"Of unreasoning beings tlic soids are not
taken and replaced ; they share in the cor-
ruption of the bodies, and ai^e dissolved into
dust. But after the Saviour at the time of
the cross had taken the soul from His own
body, He restored it to the body again when
He rose from the dead. To assure us of
this He uttered the w^ords of the psalmist,
the predictive exclamation, ' Thou wilt not

1 Acts ii. 36. ^ John ii. 19.

"- Acts ii. 24. The citation is loose. ■'John v. 19.
"I. for. XV. 53. Observe the in.iccuracy of the iiuotatinn.
"'rhc Latin translator, as thoiisjh observiiiLT the apparent ini-
propriety ol the epithet, here renders fleTo:' liy '• siinclissimum."


DIALOGUES.


241


leave my soul in Hell nor suffer thine Holy
One to see corruption.' " '

Testiinony of the blessed Gelasizis, bishop
of Ccesarea in Palestine : —

" He was bound, He was wounded, He was
crucified, He was handled. He was marked
with scars, He received a lance's wound, and
all these indignities were undergone by the
body born of Mary, while that which was
begotten from the Father before the ages
none was able to harm, for the Word had no
such nature. For how can any one con-
strain Godhead? How wound it? How
make red with blood the incorporeal nature?
How surround it with grave bands ? Grant
now what you cannot contravene and, con-
strained by invincible reason, honour God-
head."

Testimony of the holy John^ bishop of
Constatitijiople.

From his discourse on the words " My
Father worketh hitherto and I work ": 2 —

" ' What sign shewest Thou unto us see-
ing that Thou doest these things?' ^ What
then does He reply Himself? ' Destroy this
temple,' He says, ' and in three days I will
raise it up,' ^ speaking of His own body,
but they did not understand Him."

And a little further on : —

" Why does not the evangelist pass this by?
Why did he add the correction, ' But He
spake of the temple of his body ' ? * for He
did not say destroy this ' body,' but ' temple'
that He might shew the indwelling God.
Destroy this temple which is far more excel-
lent than that of the Jews. The Jewish
temple contained the Law ; this temple con-
tains the Lawgiver ; the former the letter that
killeth ; the latter the spirit that giveth life."*'

Of the same from the discourse " That
what was spoken and done in humility was
not so done and spoken on account of in-
firmity of power but difl:erent dispensa-
tions" : —

" How then does He say ' If it be possi-
ble'?' He is pointing out to us the in-
firmity of the human nature, which did not
choose to be torn away from this present
life, but stepped back and shrank on account
of the love implanted in it by God in the
beginning for the present life. If then
when the Lord Himself so often spoke in
such terms, some have dared to say that He
did not take flesh, what would they have
said if none of these words had been spoken
by Him?"

Of the same from the same work : —


^ Ps. xvi. 10.
' John V. 17.
*John ii. 18.

VOL. III.


* John ii. 19.
I* John ii. 21.


« cf. II. Cor. iii. 6.
' Matt. xxvi. 39.


"Observe how they spoke of His former
age. Ask the heretic the question Does God
dread ? Does He draw back ? Does He
shrink? Does He sorrow? and if he says
yes, stand oft' from him for the future, rank
him down below with the devil, aye lower
even than the devil, for even the devil will
not dare to say this. But, should he say
that each of these things is unworthy of God,
reply — neither does God pray ; for apart
from these it will be yet another absurdity
should the words be the words of God, for
the words indicate not only an agony, but
also two wills ; one of the Son and another
of the Father, opposed to one another. For
the words ' Not as I will, but as Thou
wilt,' are the words of one indicating this."
Of the same from the same work : —
"For if this be spoken of the Godhead
there arises a certain contradiction, and many
absurdities are thereby produced. If on the
contrary it be spoken of the flesh, the expres-
sions are reasonable, and no fault can be
found with them. For the unwillingness of
the flesh to die incurs no condemnation ; such
is the nature of the flesh and He exhibits all
the properties of the flesh except sin, and
indeed in full abundance, so as to stop the
mouths of the heretics. When therefore He
says ' If it be possible let this cup pass from
me ' and ' not as I will but as Thou wilt,'
He only shews that He is really clothed with
the flesh which fears death, for it is the
nature of the flesh to fear death, to draw
back and to suffer agony. Now He leaves it
abandoned and stripped of its own activity,
that by shewing its weakness He may con-
vince us also of its nature. Sometimes how-
ever He conceals it, because He was not
mere man."

Testimoity of Severianus, bishop of
Gabala.
From his discourse on the seals : —
" The Jews withstand the apparent, igno-
rant of the non-apparent ; they crucify the
flesh ; the}' do not destroy the Godhead. For if
my words are not destroyed together with the
letter which is the clothing of speech, how
could God the Word, the fount of life, die to-
gether with the flesh ? The passion belongs
to the body, but impassibility to the dignity."

See then how they whose husbandry is
in the East and in the West, as well as in
the South and in the North, have all been
shewn by us to condemn your vain heresy,
and all openly to proclaim the impassibility
of the divine Nature. See how both tongues, I
mean both Greek and Latin, make one har-
monious confession about the things of God.


)(


242


THEODORET.


Eran. — I am myself astonished at their
harmony, but I observe a considerable differ-
ence in the terms they use.

Orth. — Do not be angry. The very force
of their fight against their adversaries is the
cause of their seeming immoderate. The
same thing is to be observed in the case of
planters ; wlien they see a plant bent one
way or another, they are not satisfied with
bringing it to a straight line, but bend it still
further in the opposite direction, that by its
being bent still further from the straight it
may attain its upright stature. But that you
may know that the very promoters and sup-
porters of this manifold heresy strive to sur-
pass even the heretics of old by the greatness
of their blasphemies, listen once more to the
writings of ApoUinarius which proclaim the
impassibility of the divine nature, and confess
the passion to be of the body.

Testiinony of ApoUinarius.

From his summary : —

" John spoke of the temple which was
destroyed, namely the body of Him that
raised it, and the body is entirely united to
Him and He is not another among them.
And if the body of the Lord was one with
the Lord, the properties of the body were
constituted His properties on account of the
body."

And again : —

"And the truth is tliat His conjunction
with the body does not take place by circum-
scription of the Word, so that He has no-
thing beyond His incorporation. Wherefore
even in death immortality abides with Him ;
for if He transcends this composition, so
does He also the dissolution. Now death is
dissolution. But He was not comprehended
in the composition ; had He been so, the uni-
verse would have been made void ; nor in the
dissolutioix did He, like the soul, suffer the
deprivation which succeeds dissolution."

And again : —

" As the Saviour says that the dead bodies
go forth from their tombs, thougli their souls
do not go forth thence, just so He says that
He Himself will rise from the dead, although
it is only His body that rises."

In another similar work he writes : —

" Of man is the rising from the dead ; of
God is the raising. Now Christ both rose and
raised, for He was God and man. Had the
Christ been only man He would not have
quickened the dead, and if He had been only
God, He would not on His own account
apart from tiic Father have quickened any
of the dead. But Christ did both ; the
same being is both God and man. If the
Christ had been only man He would not


have saved the world ; if He had been only
God He would not have saved it throufjh
sufi'ering, but Christ did both, so He is God
and man. If the Clirist liad been only man
or if only God He could not have been a
Mediator between men and God."

And a little further on : —

"Now flesh is an instrument of life fitted
to the capacity for sufi'ering in accordance
with the divine will. Words are not proper
to the Flesh, nor are deeds. Being made
subject to the capacity for suffering, as is
natural to the flesh, it prevails over the suffer-
ing because it is the flesh of God."

And again a little further on : —

"The Son took flesh of the Virgin and
travelled to the world. This flesh He filled
with the Holy Gliost to the sanctification of
us all. So He delivered death to death and
destroyed death through the resurrection to
the raising of us all."

From his tract concerning the faith : —

" Since the passions are concerned with the
flesh His power possessed its own impas-
sibility, so to refer the passion to the power
is an impious error."

And in his tract about the incarnation he
further writes : —

" Here then He shews that it was the same
man who rose from the dead and God who
reigns overall creation."

You see now that one of the professors of
vain heresv plainly preaches the impassibility
of the Godhead, calls the body a temple, and
persists in maintaining that this body was
raised by God the Word.

Jiran. — I have heard and I am astonished ;
and I am really ashamed that our doctrines
should appear less tenable than the innovation
of ApoUinarius.

Orth. — But I will bring you a witness
from yet another heretical herd tlistinctly
preaching the impassibility of the Godhead
of the only begotten.

Eran. — Whom do 3'ou mean.''

Orih. — You have probably heard of
Eusebius the Phoenician, who was bishop of
Emesa by Lebanon.^

Eran. — I have met with some of his
writings, and found him to be a supporter
of tlie doctrines of Arius.

Orth. — Yes; he did belong to that sect,
but in his endeavour to prove that the Father
was greater than the only begotten he declares
the Godhead of the depreciated Son to be im-

1 Eusebius, bislitip of Kmesa (now Hems, where Helio<jaba-
lus received the i)ur])le, and Aurelian defeated Zcnohia) c.
.V1'~3S9 '=' called by Jerome " Sijfnifer Ariana factionis."
Chroii. sub ann. x Const iiuii. Theodoret also mentions writ,
ings of his against Apelles (1 Ixr. fab. i. 25.)


DIALOGUES.


243


passible and for this opinion he contended
with long and extraordinary perseverance.

Eran. — I should be very much obliged
if you would quote his words too.

Orth. — To comply with your wish I
will adduce somewhatlonger evidence. Now
listen to what he says, and fiincy that the
man himself is addressing us.

lesti?}io)iy of Eiisebius of Emesa : —

" Wherefore does he fear death? Lest he
suffer anything from death ? For what was
death to Him.? Was it not the severance of
the power from the flesh.'' Did the power
receive a nail that it should fear.? If our
soul suffers not the body's infirmities when
united with it, but the eye grows blind and yet
the mind retains its force ; and a foot is cut
oft' and yet the reasoning power does not
halt — and this nature evidences, and the Lord
sets His seal on, in the words ' Fear not
them which kill the body but are not able to
kill the soul ' (and if they cannot kill the soul,
it is not because they do not wish, but
because they are not able, though they would
like to make the soul share the suffering of
the body yoked with it) — shall He who
created the soul and formed the body suffer
as the body suffers, although He does take
upon Himself the body's sufferings.? But
Christ suffered for us, and we lie not.
' And the bread that I will give is my
flesh.' 1 This He gave for us.

" That which can be mastered was mas-
tered ; that which can be crucified was cru-
cified, but He that had power alike to dwell
in it and to leave it said ' Father into thy
hands I commend my Spirit,' ^ not into the
hands of them who were trying to hasten
His death. I am not fond of controversy ; I
rather avoid it ; with all gentleness I wish to
enquire into the points at issue between us
as between brothers. Do not I say truly
that the power could not be subject to the
sufferings of the flesh ? I say nothing ; let
him who will say what the power suffered.
Did it fail? See the danger. Was it ex-
tinct? See the blasphemy. Did it no longer
exist? This is the death of power. Tell
me what can so master it that it suffered and
I withdraw. But, if you cannot tell me,
why do you object to my not telling you ?
What you cannot tell me, that it did not
receive. Drive a nad into a soul and I will
admit that it can be driven into power. But
it was in sympathy. Tell me what you
mean by ' in sympathy.' As a nail went
into the flesh, so pain into the power. Let
us understand ' was in sympathy ' in this


> John vi. 51.


' lyuke xxiii. 46.


sense. Then pain was felt by the power
which was not smitten. For pain always
follows on suffering. But if a body often
despises pain while the mind is sound, on
account of the vigour of its thought, then in
this case let some one explain impartially
what suffered and what suffered with or was
in sympathy. What then? Did not Christ
die for us? How did He die? 'Father,
into thy hands I commend my Spirit.' * The
Spirit departed ; tiie body remained ; the
body remained without breath. Did He not
die then? He died for us. The Shepherd
offered the sheep, the Priest offered the sac-
rifice. He gave Himself for us. 'He that
spared not His own Son but delivered Him
up for us all.' ^ I do not reject the words,
but I want the meaning of the words. The
Lord says that the bread of God came down
from Heaven,-' and though I cannot ex-
press it more clearly on account of the
mysteries. He says in explanation ' It is my
flesh.' Did the flesh of the Son come
down from heaven ? No. How then does
He say, and that in explanation, the bread of
God lives and came down from Heaven?
He refers the properties of the jDower to the
flesh, because the power which assumed the
flesh came down from heaven. Change the
terms then ; He refers to the power what
the flesh suffers. How did Christ suffer
for us? He was spat upon. He was smitten
on the cheek, they put a crown about His
brow. His hands and feet were pierced.
All these sufferings were of the body, but
tliey are referred to Him that dwelt therein.
Throw a stone at the Emperor's statue.
What is the cry? 'You have insulted the
Emperor.' Tear the Emperor's robe. What
is the cry? ' You have rebelled against the
Emperor.' Crucify Christ's body. What
is the cry? ' Christ died for us.' But
what need of me and thee ? Let us go to
the Evangelists. How have you received
from the Lord how the Lord died ? They
read ' Father into thy hands I commend my
Spirit.'* The Spirit on high, the body on
the Cross for us. So far as His body is
attributed to Himself He offered the sheep."
Of the same from the same book : —
" He came to save our nature ; not to de-
stroy His own. If I consent to say that a
camel flies, you directly count it strange,
because it does not fit in with its nature ;
and you are quite right. And if I say that
men live in the sea you will not accept it;
you are quite right. It is contrary to nature.
As then if I say strange things about these


1 Luke xxiii. 46.

2 Romans viii. 33.


3 John vi. ji.
* Luke xxiii. 46.


R 2


244


THEODORET.


natures you count it strange ; if I say that
the Power which was before the ages, by
nature incorporeal, in dignity impassible,
which exists with the Father and by the
Father's side, on His right hand and in glory,
if I say that this incorporeal nature sullers,
will you not stop your ears? If you will not
stop your ears when you hear this, I shall
stop my heart. Can we do anything to an
angel? Smite him with a sword? Or cut
him in pieces? Why do I say to an angel?
Can we to a soul? Docs a soul receive
a nail? A soul is neither cut nor burnt.
Do you ask why? Because it was so cre-
ated. Are His works impassible and He
Himself passible? I do not reject the oecon-
omy ; on the contrary, I welcome the Ill-treat-
ment. Christ died for us and was crucified.
So it is written ; so the nature admitted. I
do not blot out the words nor do I blaspheme
the nature. But this is not true. Very
well, then let something truer be said. The
teacher is a benefactor, never harsh, never
an enemy, unless the pupil be headstrong.
Have you anything good to say? My ears
are gratefully open. Does any one want to
quarrel? Let him quarrel at his leisure.
Could the Jews crucify the Son of God and
make the power itself a dead body ? Can
the living die? The death of this power is
its failure. Even when we die, our body is
left. But if we make that power a dead
body we reduce it to non-existence. I am
afraid you cannot hear. If the body die,
the soul is separated from it and remains ;
but if the soul die, since it has no body, it
altogether ceases to exist. A soul by dying
altogether ceases to be. For the death of the
immortals is a contradiction of their existence.
Consider the alternative ; for I do not dare
even to mention it. We say these things as
vv^e understand them, but if any one is conten-
tious, we lay down no law. But I know one
thing, that every man must reap the fruit of
his opinions. Each man comes to God and
brings before Him what he has said and
thought about Him. Do not suppose that
God reads books, or is troubled by having to
recollect what you said or who heard you :
all is made manifest. The judge is on the


throne. Paulus ^ is brought before Him.
' Thou saidst I was a man ; thou hast no
life with IMe. Thou knewest not Me ; I
know not thee.' Up comes another. ' Thou
saidst I was one of the things that are cre-
ated.- Thou knewest not My dignity ; I
know not thee.' Up comes another. ' Thou
saidst that I did not assume a body. Thou
madest light of My grace. Thou shalt not
share My immortality.' Up comes another.
' Thou saidst that I was not born of a Vir-
gin to save the body of the Virgin ; thou
shalt not be saved.' Each one reaps the
fruit of his opinions about the faith."

You see the other sect of your teachers, in
which you supposed that you had learnt the
su fieri ng of the Godhead of the only Be-
gotten, abhors this blasphemy, preaches
the impassibility of the Godhead, and quits
the ranks of them who dare to attribute the
passion to it.

Eran. — Yes ; I am astonished at the con-
flict, and I admire the man's sense and
opinions.

Orth. — Then, my good Sir, imitate the
bees. As you flit in mental flight about the
meads of the divine Scripture, among the fair
flowers of these illustrious Fathers, build
us in your heart the honey-comb of the faith.
If haply you find anywhere herbage bitter
and not fit to eat, like these fellows Apolli-
narius and Eusebius, but still not quite with-
out something that may be meet for making
honey, it is reasonable that you should sip
the sweet and leave the poisonous behind,
like bees who lighting often on baneful
bushes leave all the deadly bane behind and
gather all the good. We give you this
advice, dear friend, in brotherly kindness.
Receive it and you will do well. And if you
hearken not we will say to you in the word
of the apostle "We are pure." -^ We have
spoken, as the prophet says, what we have
been commanded.

' i.e. Paul of Sainosata.

2 T<i>' hvTuiv in the oriirinul; lit: of the thiti<i:s lluit are,
which might have an orthodox interpretation, tho' .strictly
speakinij there is no such thing' as " to hv." there is only
"oa)r,"i.c. God. But Schulze is no doubt right in cxpUin-
ing Tiov oi'Tioi- here to refer to created things.

3 Acts XX. 26.


DEMONSTRATIONS BY SYLLOGISMS.

THAT GOD THE WORD IS IMMUTABLE.


1. We have confessed one substance of
the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, and have agreed that it is immutable.
If then there is one substance of the Trinity,
and it is immutable, then the only begotten
Son, w^ho is one person of the Trinity, is im-
mutable. And, if He is immutable. He w^as
not made flesh by mutation, but is said to
have been made flesh after taking flesh.

2. If God the Word was made flesh by
undergoing mutation into flesh, then He is
not immutable. For no one in his senses
would call that which undergoes alteration
immutable. And if He is mutable He is not
of one substance with Him that begat Him.
How indeed is it possible for one part of
an uncompounded substance to be mut-
able and the other immutable? If we grant
this we shall fall headlong into the blasphemy
of Arius and Eunomius, who assert that the
Son is of another substance.

3. If the Lord is consubstantial with the
Father, and the Son was made flesh by
undergoing change into flesh, then the sub-
stance is at once mutable and immutable,
which blasphemy if any one has the hardi-
hood to maintain, he will no doubt make it
worse by his blasphemy against the Father,
for inasmuch as the Father shares the same
substance, he will assuredly call Him mut-
able.

4. It is written in the divine Scriptures
that God the Word took flesh, and also a
soul. And the most divine Evangelist says
the Word was made flesh. 1 We must there-
fore perforce do one of two things : either we
must admit the mutation of the Word into
flesh, and reject all divine Scripture, both Old
and New, as teaching lies, or in obedience to
the divine Scriptiu'e, we must confess the
assumption of the flesh, banishing mutation
from our thoughts, and piously regarding the
word of the Evangelist. This latter we must
do inasmuch as we confess the nature of God
the Word to be immutable, and have count-
less testimonies to the assumption of the
flesh.

5. That which inhabits a tabernacle is
distinct from the tabernacle which is inhab-
ited.^ The Evangelist calls the flesh a taber-
nacle, and says that God the Word taber-


' John i. 14.


8 (TK^jvovv and (TKTjvovnevov.


nacled therein. "The Word," he says,
"was made flesh and dwelt amongus." ^ Now
if He was made flesh by mutation. He did
not dwell in flesh. But we have been
taught that He dwelt in flesh ; for the same
Evangelist in another place calls His body a
temple. 2 We must therefore believe the
Evangelist's explanation and interpretation
of what to some seemed ambiguous.

6. If when the Evangelist wrote " the
Word was made flesh " he had added no-
thing which could remove the ambiguity, per-
haps the controversy about the passage might
have had some reasonable excuse, from the
obscurity of the terms used. But since he
immediately went on to say "and dwelt in
us," the combatants contend to no purpose.
The former clause is explained by the latter.

7. The immutability of God the Word is
plainly proclaimed by the most wise Evan-
gelist, for after saying " the Word was made
flesh and dwelt among us," he immediately
adds, " And we beheld His glory, the glory
as of the only-begotten of the Father, full
of grace and truth." 3 But if, according to
the foolish, He had undergone mutation into
flesh. He would not have remained what
He was, but if even when enveloped in the
flesh He emitted the rays of His Father's
nobility, it follows that the nature which He
has is immutable, and it shines even in the
body and sends abroad the brightness of the
nature which is unseen. For that light noth-
ing can dim. " For the light shineth in the
darkness, and the darkness comprehendeth
it not," * as saith the very divine John.

8. The illustrious Evangelist was desirous
of explaining the glory of the only- begotten,
but was unable to carry out his purpose. He
therefore shews it by His fellowship with the
Father. For he says He is of that nature ;
just as though any one to persons beholding
Joseph sunk in a slavery inconsistent with
his rank, and unaware of the splendour of his
descent, were to point out that Jacob was his
father, and liis forefather Abraham. So in
this sense the Evangelist said that when He
dwelt among us He did not dim the glory of
His nature, "For we beheld His glory, the

1 John i. 14. The argument rather requires the rendering
" dwelt /« us," which is that of the Rheiins Version. "Ju
ncbis qui caro sumus." Ben^el. But see Alford in loc,

2 John ii. 19. sjohni. 14. *Johni. 5.


246


THEODORET.


glory as of the only-begotten of the Father."
So if even when He was made flesh it was
plain who He was, then He remained wlio
he was, and did not undergo the mutation
into flesh.

9. We have confessed that God the Word
took not a body only but also a soul. Why
then did the divine Evangelist omit in this
place mention of the soul and mention the
flesh alone? Is it not plain that he exhibited
the visible nature and by its means signified
tlie nature united to it? For the mention of
the soul is understood of course in that of the
flesh. For when wc hear the prophet saying
" Let all flesh bless His holy name," ' we
do not understand the prophet to be exhorting
bodies of flesh without souls, but believe the
whole to be summoned to give praise in the
summoning of a part.

10. The words " the Word was made
flesh" are plainly iiidicative not of mutation,
but of His unspeakable loving-kindness. For
afler the illustrious Evangelist had said " in
the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with God and the Word was God," and
had declared Him to be Creator of the visible
and invisible, and had called Him life and
true light, adding other similar expressions,
and had spoken concerning the Godhead in
such terms as human reason can take in and
the language at its command can express, he
went on " And the Word was made flesh,"
as though smitten with amazement and as-
tounded at the boundless loving-kindness.
His existence is eternal ; He is God ; He
made all things ; He is source of eternal life
and of true light ; and on account of the
salvation of men He put about Him the
tabernacle of flesh. And He was supposed
to be only that which He appeared. So for
this reavSon he did not even mention a soul
but only the perishable and mortal flesh. Ot
the soul as beinj; immortal he said nothincj
in order to exhibit the boundlessness of the
kindness.

11. The divine Apostle calls- the Lord
Christ seed of Abraham. But if this is true,
as true it is, then God the Word was not
changed into flesh, but took on Him the seed
of Abraham^ according to the teaching of the
Apostle himself.

12. God swore to David that of the fruit
of his loins, according to the flesh. He
would raise up the Christ, as the prophet ^
said and as the great Peter interpreted.* But
if God the Word was called Christ after
mutation into flesh, we shall nowhere find
the truth in the oaths. Yet we have been


1 Ps. CXlv. 21.

• Hebrews li. 16.


* Psalm cxxxii. 11.

* Acts ii. 30.


taught that God cannot lie ; nay ratlier is
Himself the truth. Therefore God the
Word did not undergo change into flesh,
but in accordance with the promise, took
firstfruits of David's seed.

PROOFS THAT THE UNION WAS
WITHOUT CONFUSION.

1. Those who believe that after tlie union
there was one nature both of Godhead and
of manhood, destroy by this reasoning the
peculiarities of the natures ; and their de-
struction involves denial of either nature.
For the confusion of the imited natures pre-
vents us from recognising- either that flesh is
flesh or that God is God. But if even after
tlie union the diflerence of the united natures
is clear, it follows that there is no confusion
and that the union is without confusion.
And if this is confessed then the Master
Christ is not one nature, but one Son shew-
ing either nature unimpaired.

2. We too assert the union, and ourselves
confess that it took place at the conception ; if
then by the union the natures were mixed
and confounded, how was the flesh after the
birth not seen to possess any new quality, but
exhibited the human character, preserved the
dimensions of the babe, was wrapped in
swaddling clothes, and sucked a mother's
breast? And if all this did not come to pass
in mere phantasy and seeming, then they
admit of neither phantasy nor seeming ;
then what was seen was truly a body. And
if this be granted then the natures were not
confounded by the union, but each remained
unimpaired.

3. The authors of this patchwork and
incongruous heresy at one time assert that
God the Word was made flesh, and at another
declare that the flesh underwent a change
into nature of Godhead. Either statement
is futile and vain and full of falsehood, for if
God the Word, as they argue, was made
flesh, why then do they call Him God, and
this alone, and refuse to name Him man as
well, and find great fault with us who in addi-
tion to confessing Him as God also call Him
man ? But if the flesh was changed into the
nature of Godhead, wherefore do thev substi-
tute the antitypes of the body ? For the type
is superfluous when the reality is destroyed.

4. An incorporeal nature is not corporeally
circumcised, but the word corporeally is added
on account of the spiritual circumcision of the
heart ; so then the circumcision is of a body ;
but the Master Christ is circumcised after the
union. And if this is granted then the
argument of the confusion is confuted.


DEMONSTRATIONS BY SYLLOGISMS.


247


5. We have learnt that the Saviour Christ
hungered and thirsted, and we have beheved
that this was so really and not in seeming, but
such conditions belong not to a bodiless
nature but to a body. The Master Christ
then had a body which before the resurrec-
tion was affected according to its nature.
And to this the divine Apostle bears testimony
when he says " For we have not an High
Priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities but was in all
points tempted like as we are yet without
sin." 1 For the sin is not of the nature but
of the evil will.^

6. Of the divine nature the prophet
David says, "Behold He that keepeth
Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep." ^ But
the narrative of the Evangelist describes the
Master Christ as sleeping in the boat. Now
not sleeping and being asleep are two con-
trary ideas, so the prophet contradicts the
Gospels if, as they argue, the Master Christ
was God alone. There is no contradiction,
for both prophecies and gospels flow from
one and the same spirit. The Master Christ
therefoi'e had a body, akin to all other bodies,
affected by the need of sleep. So the argu-
ment for the confusion is proved a fable.

7. Of the divine nature the prophet
Isaiah said, "He shall neither be hungry nor
weary"* and so on. But the Evangelist
says "Jesus being weary with his journey
sat thus on the well ; " " and " shall not be
weary" is contrary to "being weary."
Therefore the prophecy is contrary to the
narrative of the gospels. But they are not
contrary, for both are of one God. Not
being weary is of the uncircumscribed
nature which fills all things. But moving
from place to place is of the circumscribed
nature ; and when that which moves is con-
strained to travel it is subject to the weariness
of the wayfarer. Therefore what walked
and was weary was a body, for the union did
not confound the natures.

8. To the divine Paul when shut up in
prison the Master Christ said "Be not afraid
Paul " * and so on. But the same Christ,
who drove away Paul's fear, Himself so
feared, as testifies the blessed Luke that
He sweated from all His body drops of
blood, and with them sprinkled all the
ground about His body, and was strength-
ened by angelic succour,' and these state-
ments are opposed to one another, for

I Hebrews iv. 15. * cf. note on pag'e 164. 3 Psalm cxxi. 4.

* Isaiah xl. 2S. Ixx. ^ John iv. 6.

I"' When Paul was brought into the castle the Lord stood by
him and said, "Be of yood cheer Paul" (Acts xxiii. 11.)
"Fear not Paul " was said when he was being exceedingly
tossed in the tempest (Acts xxvii. 24),

^ Luke xxii. 44.


how can fearing be other than contrarv to
driving away fear.'' Yet they are not con-
trary. For the same Christ is by nature God
and man ; as God He strengthens them that
need consolation ; as man He receives consol-
ation through an angel. And although the
Godhead and the Spirit were present as an
anointing, the body and the soul were not
then supported either by the Godhead united
to them or by the Holy Ghost, but this ser-
vice was entrusted to an angel in order to ex-
hibit the infirmity both of the soul and of
the body and that through the infirmity might
be seen the natures of the infirm. Now these
things plainly happened by the permission of
the divine nature, that, among them that were
to live in future times, believers in the as-
sumption of the soul and of the body might be
vindicated by these demonstrations, and their
opponents by plain proof convicted. If then
the union was effected by the conception, and,
as they argue, made both natures one, how
could the properties of the natures continue
unimpaired, the soul agonize, and the body
sweat so as to sweat bloody drops from excess
of fear? But if the one is natural to the body
and the other to the soul, then the union did
not effect one nature of flesh and Godhead,
but one .Son appeared shewing forth in Him-
self both the human and the divine.

9. Should they say that after the re-
surrection the body underwent mutation
into Godhead they may properly be
answered thus. Even after the resurrec-
tion the body was seen circumscribed with
hands and feet and all the body's parts ;
it was tangible and visible ; it had wounds
and scars, as it had before the resurrec-
tion. One then of two alternatives must
be maintained. Either these parts must be
attributed to the divine nature, if the body
when changed into the divine nature had
these parts ; or on the other hand it must be
confessed that the body remained within the
bounds of its own nature. Now the divine
nature is simple and incomposite, but the body
is composite and divided into many parts ;
therefore it was not changed into the nature
of Godhead, but even after the resurrection
though immortal, incorruptible and full of
divine glory, it remains a body with its own
circumscription.

10. To the unbelieving apostles the Lord
after His resurrection shewed His hands,
His feet, and the prints of the nails; then
further to teach them that what they saw
was not a vision He added " a spirit hath
not flesh and bones as ye see me have." ^


1 Luke xxlv.


39-


248


THEODORET.


Therefore the body was not changed into
spirit it was flesh and bones and hands and
feet. Consequently even after the resur-
rection the body remained a body.

II. The divine nature is invisible, but
the thrice blessed Stephen said that he saw
the Lord,' so even after the resurrection the
Lord's body is a body, and it was seen by
tlie victorious Stephen, since the divine
nature cannot be seen.

13. If all mankind shall see the Son of
man coming on the clouds of heaven, ac-
cording to the Lord's own words,^ and He
said to Moses " No man shall see me and
live," 3 and both are true, then He will come
with the body with which He ascended into
heaven. For that body is visible, and of
this the angel spoke to the Apostles " This
same Jesus which is taken up from you into
Heaven shall so come in like manner as ye
have seen Him go into Heaven." "* If this
is true, as true it is, then there is not one
nature of flesh and Godhead, but the union
is without confusion.


PROOF THAT THE DIVINITY OF THE
SAVIOUR IS IMPASSIBLE.

1. Alike by the divine Scripture and by
the holy Fathers assembled at Nicaea we have
been taught to confess that the Son is of one
substance with God the Father. The im-
passibility of the Father is also taught by the
nature and proclaimed by the divine Script-
ure. We shall then further confess the Son
to be impassible, for this definition is en-
forced by the identity of substance. When-
ever then we hear the divine Scripture
proclaiming the cross and the death of the
Master Christ we attribute the passion to the
flesh, for in no wise is the Godhead, being by
nature impassible, capable of suffering.

2. " All things that the Father hath are
mine" ^ says the Master Christ, and one out
of all is impassibility. If therefore as God
He is impassible, He suffered as man.
For the divine nature docs not undergo
suffering.

3. The Lord said " the bread which I
will give is my flesh wliich I will give for
the life of the world," '^ and again " I am the
good shepherd and know my sheep and am
known of mine . . . and I lay down
my life for the sheep." ' So body and soul
are both given by the good shepherd for the
sheep who have soul and body.


1 Acts vii. sj.

* Matt. xxvi. 64.

* £xodus xxxiii. 30.


* Acts i. II.
'John xvi. 15.


6 John vi. 51.
' johnx. 14. 15.


4. The nature of men is compounded of
body and soul. But it sinned and stood in
need of a sacrifice free from every spot. So
the Creator took a body and a soul, and
keeping them clean from the stains of sin
for men's bodies gave His body and for their
souls His soul. If this is true, and true it is,
for these are words of truth itself, then wild
and blasphemous are they who ascribe pas-
sion to the divine natin-e.

5. The blessed Paul called the Christ
" the first born of the dead ;" ^ and I suppose
the first born has the same nature as they of
whom He is called first born. As man then
He is first born of the dead, for He first
destroyed the pangs of death and gave to all
the sweet hope of another life. As He rose
so He suffered. As man then He suffered
but as awful God He remained impassible.

6. The divine Apostle calls our Saviour
Christ "the firstfruits of them that slept," 2
but the firstfruits are related to the whole
whereof they are firstfruits. He is not there-
fore called firstfruits as God, for what
relationship is there between Godhead and
manhood.'' The former is an immortal
nature, the latter mortal. Such is the nature
of them that sleep, of whom Christ is called
firstfruits. To this nature belong death and
resurrection, and in its resurrection we have
a proof of the general resurrection.

7. When the Master Christ wished to per-
suade the doubting Apostles that He had
destroyed death and risen, He shewed them
parts of His body, His side. His hands. His
feet and the marks of the passion preserved
therein. This body then rose, and this, I
ween, was shown to the disbelievers. What
rose is what was buried, and what was buried
is what had died, and what had died is of
course what was nailed to the cross. So
the divine nature united to the body re-
mained impassible.

8. They who describe the flesh of the
Lord as giver of life make life itself mortal
by their words. They ought to have seen
that it was giver of life through the life
united to it. But if according to their
argument the life is mortal, how could the
flesh being itself by nature mortal, and made
life-giving through the life, remain life-
giving?

9. God the Word is by nature immortal,
and the flesh by nature mortal, but after the
passion by union with the Word the flesh it-
self became immortal. How then is it not
absurd to say that the giver of such im-
mortality shared death?


» Coloss. i. iS.


* I. Cor. XV. ao.


DEMONSTRATIONS BY SYLLOGISMS.


249


10. They who maaitain that God the
Word suffered in the flesh should be asked
the meaning of what they say, and should
they have the hardihood to reply that when
the body was pierced with nails the divine
nature was sensible of pain, let them learn
that the divine nature did not fill the part of
a soul. God the Word had assumed a soul
with the body. Should they reject this
argument as blasphemous, and should they
assert that the flesh suflered by nature, and
that God the Word made the passion His
own as of His own flesh, let them not pro-
pound puzzling and murky phrases, but let
them clearly propound the meaning of the ill
sounding phrase. They will have all those
who wish to follow the divine Scripture as
their supporters in this interpretation.

11. The divine Peter in his Catholic
Epistle says that Christ suffered in the flesh. 1
But he who hears that Christ suflered does
not understand God the Word incorporeal,
but incarnate. The name of Christ indi-
cates both natures; but the word "flesh"
connected with the passion signifies not that
both, but that one of the two, suflered. For
he that hears that Christ suflered in the
flesh thinks of Him as impassible in that
He was God, and attributes the passion
to the flesh alone. For just as when we
hear him saying that God had sworn to
David of the fruit of his loins according to
the flesh to raise up the Christ, we do not
say that God the Word derived His origin
from David, but that the flesh which God
the Word took was akin to David, so must
he who hears that Christ suffered in the
flesh, recognise that the passion belongs to
the flesh, and confess the impassibility of the
Godhead.

12. When on the cross the Lord Christ
said, " Father into Thy hands I commend
my spirit," ^ this spirit is said by the Arians
and the Eunomians to be the Godhead of the
only-begotten, for they hold that the body
which He took was without a soul, but the
heralds of the truth say that the soul was so
called and they base their opinion on the
following passages. The right wise Evan-
gelist immediately adds " And having said
thus He gave up the ghost." * So says Luke,
and the blessed Mark similarly adds " He
gave up the ghost." * The divine Matthew
writes, "yielded up the Ghost," ° and the di-

il.Pet. i. 1. 3 Luke xxiii. 46, « Matt, x.xvii. 50.

» Luke xxiii. 46. * Mark xv. 39.


vine John, " gave up the Ghost." ^ All speak
according to the usage of men, for we are
accustomed to use all these expressions about
those who die ; none of them conveys any
meaning of Godhead, but they all signify the
soul, and if any one were to receive the
Arian sense of the passage none the less even
thus will it shew the immortality of the
divine nature. For Christ commended it to
the Father. He did not yield it to death. If
then they that deny the assumption of the
soul, and maintain God the Word to be a
creature, and assert that He was in the body
in place of a soul, deny that He was delivered
to death, how can they obtain pardon who
while they confess one substance of the
Trinity, and leave the soul in its own immor-
tality, impudently dare to say that God the
Word of one substance with the Father
tasted death ?

13. If Christ is both God and man, as
the divine Scripture teaches, and the illus-
trious Fathers persistently preached, then
He suflered as man, but as God remained
impassible.

14. If they acknowledge the assumption
of the flesh, and declare it to be passible
before the resurrection, and preach that the
nature of the Godhead is impassible, why,
leaving the passible nature, do they attribute
the passion to the impassible ?

15. If our Lord and Saviour nailed the
handwriting to the cross, as says the divine
Apostle,^ He then nailed the body, for on his
body every man like letters marks the prints
of his sins, wherefore on behalf of sinners
He gave up the body that was free from all
sin.

16. When we say that the body or the
flesh or the manhood suflered, we do not se-
parate the divine nature, for as it was united
to one hungering, thirsting, aweary, even
asleep, and undergoing the passion, itself
aflected by none of these but permitting the
human nature to be affected in its own way,
so it was conjoined to it even when crucified,
and permitted the completion of the passion,
that by the passion it might destroy death ;
not indeed receiving pain from the passion,
but making the passion its own, as of its own
temple, and of the flesh united to it, on
account of which flesh also the faithful are
called members of Christ, and He Himself
is styled the head of them that believed.


1 John xix. 30.


2 Col. ii. 14.


LETTERS OF THE BLESSED THEODORET,

BISHOP OF CYRUS.


/. To an unknown correspondent.
In the words of the prophet we find the wise
hearer mentioned with the excellent coun-
cillor. ^ I, however, send the book I have
written on the divine Apostle, not as much to
a wise hearer as to a just and clever judge.
When goldsmiths wish to find out if their
gold is refined and unalloyed, they apply it
to the touchstone ; and just so I sent my
book to your reverence, for I wish to know
whether it is what it should be, or needs
some fining down. You have read it and
returned it, but have said nothing to me on
this point. Your silence leads me to con-
jecture that the judge has given sentence of
condemnation, but is unwilling to hurt my
feelings by telling me so. Pray dismiss any
such idea, and do not hesitate to tell me
your opinion about the book.

//. To the same.
When men love warmly, I doubt whether
in the case of the children of those whom
they love, they can be impartial judges.
Justice is carried away by affection. Fathers
fancy that their ugly boys are beautiful, and
sons do not see the uncomeliness of their
fathers. Brother looks at brother in the
light of affection rather than of nature. It
is thus that I am afraid your holiness has
judged what I have written, and that the
sentence has been delivered by warmth of
feeling. For truly the power of love is very
great, and not seldom it keeps out of sight
considerable errors in our friends. It is be-
cause you have so much of it, my dear
friend, that you have wreathed what I have
written with your kindly praises. All I can
do is to ask your piety to beseech the good
Lord to ratify your eulogy, and make the
man you have praised something like tlie
picture painted in the words of his admirers.

///. To Bishop IrencBus.^

Comparisons of this kind are forbidden
by tlic divine Apostle. In his Epistle to the
Romans he writes " Therefore judge no-

' Isaiah iii. 3. Sept.

- Ircnxus, Cnuiit nf tlic Empire and afterwards bishnp of
Tyre, was a friend and frc<ni(nt correspondent of Tlieodnret.
lie was deposed at the Latrociniuni in 440. cf. Epp. XII,
XVI, XXXV.


thing before the time until the Lord come who
both will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness and will make manifest the counsels
of the heart : and then shall every man have
praise of God." ^ And he is quite right; for
we can see only outward deeds, but the God
of all knows also the intention of the doers,
and when He delivers his sentence judges not
so much the work as the will. So He will
crown the divine Apostle who became to the
Jews as a Jew, to them that were under the
law as under the law, and to them that were
without law as without law,- for his object
in thus assuming an actor's mask was that
he might do good to mankind. His was no
time-server's career. The gain he got was
loss, but he secured the good of them whom
he taught. As I said, then, the divine Paul
bids us wait for the judgment of God.
But we are venturing on high themes; we
are handling a theology passing understand-
ing and words ; not, like the unholy heretics,
se&king blasphemous positions, but endeav-
ouring to confute their impiety, and as far as
in us lies to give praise to the Creator ; we
shall therefore do nothing unreasonable in
attempting to reply to your enquiry.

You have suggested the case of an im-
pious judge giving to two athletes of piety
the alternative of sacrificing to demons, or
flinging themselves into the sea. You de-
scribe the one as choosing (he latter and
plunging without hesitation into the deep,
while the other, refusing both, shews quite
as much abhorrence of the worship of idols
as his companion, but declines to commit
himself to the waves, and waits for this fate
to be violently forced upon him. You have
suggested these circumstances, and you ask
which of these two took the better course.
I think tliat you will agree with me that the
latter was the more praiseworthy. No one
ought to withdraw himself from life un-
bidden, but sliould await either a natural or
a violent death. Our Lord gave us this
lesson when He bade those that are perse-
cuted in one city flee to another and again
commanded them to quit even this and de-
part to another.^ In obedience to this teach-
ing the divine Apostle escaped the violence


1 1. Cor. iv. s.


> I. Cor. ix. 20, 31.


> Matt. X. 33.


LETTERS.


251


of the governor of the city, and had no hesi-
tation in speaking of the manner of his
flight, but spoke of the basket, the wall, and
the window, and boasted and glorified in the
act.^ For what looks discreditable is made
honourable by the divine command. In the
same manner the Apostle called himself at
one time a Pharisee^ and at another a Ro-
man,^ not because he was afraid of death,
but acting quite fairly in fight." In the
same way when he had learnt the Jews'
plot against him he appealed to Caesar " and
sent his sister's son to the chief captain to
report the designs hatched against him, not
because he clung to this present life, but in
obedience to the divine law. For assuredly
our Lord does not wish us to throw ourselves
into obvious peril ; and this is taught us by
deed as well as by word, for more than once
He avoided the murderous violence of the
Jews. And the great Peter, first of the
Apostles, when he was loosed from his
chains and had escaped from the hands of
Herod, came to the house of John, who
was surnamed Mark, and after removing
the anxiety of his friends by his visit and
bidding them maintain silence, betook
himself to another house in the endeavour
to conceal himself more effectually by the
removal.® And we shall find just the same
kind of wisdom in the old Testament, for
the famous Moses, after playing the man in
his struggle with the Egyptian and finding
out the next day that the homicide had
become known, ran away, travelled a long
journey, and arrived at the land of Midian.'
In like manner the great Elias when he had
learnt Jezebel's threats did not give himself
up to them which wished to kill him, but
left the world and hurried to the desert.**
And if it is right and agreeable to God to
escape the violence of our enemies, surely it
is much more right to refuse to obey them
v/hen they order a man to become his own
murderer. Our Lord did not give in to the
devil when he bade Him throw Himself
down,® and when he had armed against
Him the hands of the Jews by means of the
scourge and the thorns and the nails, and the
creature was urging Him to bring wholesale
destruction on His wicked foes, the Lord
Himself forbade, because He knew that His


iTbe word in the text for basket is crap^ai'j), a basket of
twisted work (J">jy) commonly rope — the word used by St.
Paul himself in II. Cor. xi. 33. In Acts ix. 25 St. I.uke writes
ev crnvpiSi., o-Trupis (? (nrdpnj) being' the lara:e rope basket of


Matt. XV. 37, and distinguished from the icoi/)ii'09 of Matt. xiv.
20 and of Juvenal III. 14, " yudais qit
fcentimque supellex" and VI. 542


yionim cophinus


2 Acts xxiii. 6. 3 Acts xxii. 25.

* "Dolus an virtus gut's in hoste requirat? " Virg Ain. ii. 390.
^ Acts XXV. II. '' Acts xii. 12, etc. ' Exod. ii. u etc.
' I. Kings xix. i etc. * Matt, iv, 6.


Passion was bringing salvation to the world,
and it was for this reason that just before His
Passion He said to His Apostles " Pray that
ye enter not into temptation," ^ and taught
us to pray " Lead us not into temptation." ^
Now let us shift our ground a little, and we
shall see our way more clearly. Let us elimi-
nate the sea from the argument, and suppose
the judge to have given each of the martyrs a
sword, and ordered the one who refused to
sacrifice to cut oft' his own head ; who in his
senses would have endured to redden his
hand with his own blood, become his own
headsman, lift his hand against himself, in
obedience to the judge's order .^

Clearly your second martyr deserves the
higher praise. The former indeed deserves
credit for his zeal, but the latter is adorned
by right judgment as well.

I have answered you according to the
measure of the wisdom given me ; He who
knows thoughts as well as acts, will shew
which of the two was right in the day of His
appearing.

IF. Festal.

The Creator of our souls and bodies has
given His bounty to both, and at one and the
same time has ovei-vvhelmed us with good
things that both heart and senses can feel.
At the time of the sacred feast He has given
us the rain we so much longed for, that our
celebration might be clear of sadness. We
have praised our bountiful Lord, and now as
we are wont write a festal letter and address
your piety with the request that you will aid
us with your prayers.

V. Festal.

The God who made us gives us care and
sorrow after our sin. But He has furnished
us with divine occasions of consolation by
appointing divine feasts. The thoughts
they suggest both remind us of God's gifts
to us, and promise complete freedom from
all our troubles. Enjoying these good things
and filled with cheerfulness, we address your
magnificence, and, according to the custom
of the festival, pay friendship's debt.

VI. Festal.

Our loving Lord has allowed us, with the
zeal of folks who love the Christ, to celebrate
the divine feast of salvation and enjoy the
fruit of the spiritual blessing that flows from
it. Since we know the disposition of your
Piety toward us, we write to tell you this.


' Matt. xxvi. ^i.


' Luke &x, 4.


252


THEODORET.


For they who have friendly thoughts to
others are always pleased to hear cheering
intelligence of them.

VII. To Thconilla.

Had I licard of the death of your dignity's
most honoura]:)le husband I should have
written long ago, and now my object in
writing is not to lull your great sorrow
to sleep by consolatory words. They are
lumecessary. They who have learnt the
wisdom of philosophers and consider what
tliis life is, find reason strong enougli to
meet and break griefs rising surge. And
even while \ou are remembering your long
companionship, reason recognises the divine
decrees, and to meet the forces of the tears
of sorrow marshals at once the course of
nature, the law of God, and the hope
of tlie resurrection. Knowing this as I do,
there is no necessity to use many words. I
only beseech you to avail yourself of good
sense in the hour of need. Think of the
death of him who is gone as no more than
a long journey, and wait for the promise
of our God and Saviour. For He who
promised the resurrection cannot lie, and is
the fount of truth.

VIII. To Eugraphia.

It is needless for me to bring once more to
bear upon your grief the spells of the spirit.
The mere mention of the sufferings that
wrought our salvation is enough to quench
distress, even at its worst. Those sufferings
were all undergone for humanity. Our Lord
did not destroy death to make one body vic-
torious over death, but through that one body
to effect our common resurrection, and make
our hope of it a sure and certain hope. And
if even while our holy celebrations are bring-
ing you manifold refreshment of soul, you
cannot overcome your sense of sorrow, let
me beg you, my honoured friend, to read the
very words of the marriage contract which
follow on the mention of the dowry, and to
see how the wedding is preceded by the re-
minder of death. Knowing as we do that
men are mortal, and bethinking us of the
peace of survivors, it is customary to lay
down what are called conditions, and for no
hesitation to be shewn at the mention of
death before the joining together in marriage.
These are the plain words " If the husband
should die first it is agreed that so and so be
done ; if this lot should first fall to the wife,
so and so." We knew all this before the wed-
ding ; we are waiting for it so to say every


day. Why then take it amiss? The union
must needs be broken either by the death of
the husband or the departure of the wife.
Such is the course of life. You know, my
excellent friend, alike God's will and human
nature ; dispel then your despondency and
wait for the fulfilment of the common hope
of the just.

IX. To an anonymous correspondent.

Your piety is annoyed and distressed at
the sentence passed on me unjustly and
without a trial. I am comforted that you
are so feeling. Had I been justly condemned
1 should have been sony at having given my
judges reasonable grounds for what they
have done, but, as it is, my conscience is
quite clear, and I feel joyful and exultant and
look forward to the remission of other sins
on account of this injustice. Naboth lives in
men's memories only because he suffered
that unjust death. Only pray that we be not
abandoned of God and let the enemy con-
tinue to do his worst. God's good will is
enough to make me very cheei'ful and if He
is on my side I despise all my troubles as
trifles. 1

X. To the learned Elias.

Legislators have made laws in aid of the
oppressed, and advocates have practised the
orator's arts to help them that stand in need
of fair defence. You, my friend, have stud-
ied eloquence and the law. Now put your
art in practice, and by it put down the op-
pressors, help them that are put down by
them, and defend tliem with the law as with
a shield. Let no guilty client enjoy the bene-
fit of your advocacy, even though he be your
friend.

Now one of these guilty men is that villain
Abraham. After being settled for a consid-
erable time on an estate belonging to the
church, he then took several partners in his
rascality, and lias had no hesitation in own-
ing his proceedings. I have sent him to you
with an account of his doings, the parties he
has wronged, and the reverend sub-deacon
Gerontius. I do not want you to deliver
the guilty man to the authorities, but in the
hope that when his victims have told you all
they have had to put up with, and have
made you, my learned friend, feel sympathy
for their case, you may be induced to com-
pel the wicked fellow to restore what he
has stolen.

1 Probably tbe condcnui;itlon referred to is the imperial
Edict of March 449 relegating Theodoret to the limits of his
own diocese, cf. Epp. 79. So.


LETTERS.


253


XL To Flavianus bishop of Constantinople.

The Creator and Guide of the Universe
has made you a luminary of the world, and
changed the deep moonless night into clear
noon. Just as by the haven's side, the beacon
light shews sailors in the night time the har-
bour mouth, so shines the bright ray of your
holiness to give great comfort to all that are
attacked for true religion's sake, and shews
them the safe port of the Apostles' faith. They
that know it already are filled with comfort,
and they that knew it not are saved from be-
ing dashed upon the rocks. I indeed am
especially bound to praise the giver of all
good, because I have found a noble champion
who drives away fear of men by the power
of the fear of God, fights heartily in the
front rank for the doctrines of the Gospel,
and gladly bears the brunt of the apostolic
war. So to-day every tongue is moved in
eulogy of your holiness, for it is not only
the nurslings of true religion who admire
the purity of your faith, but the praises of
your courage are sung even by the enemies
of the truth. Falsehood vanishes at truth's
lightning flash.

I write thus knowing that the very rever-
end and pious Hypatius the reader, both
readily obeys the bidding of your holiness,
and constantly, my Lord, mentions your
laudable deeds. I salute you as holy and
right dear to God. I exhort you to support
us with your prayers that we may lead the
rest of our lives according to God's laws.

XII. To the bishop Irenceus.^


Job, that famous tower of adamant and
noble champion of goodness, was not shaken
even by blows of continuous troubles of
every sort and kind, but stood impregnable
and firm. At the end however of all his trials
the righteous Law-giver explained the reason
of them in the words, " Dost thou think that
I answered thee for any other reason than that
thou mightest appear just?"^ I think that
these words are known to your piety which
is able to support the many and various at-
tacks of troubles and anxieties, and so far
from shrinking from them, exhibits the
strength and stability of your administration.
So the bountiful Lord, seeing the bravery
and holiness of your soul, has refused to keep
a worthy champion in concealment, and has
brought him forth to the contest to adorn
your venerable head with a crown of victory,
and give your struggles as a high example
of good service to the rest. So, my dear


friend, conquer in this battle too, and bear
bravely the death of your son-in-law, my
own dear friend. Conquer in your wisdom
the claims of kinsmanship and the memory
of a noble and generous character, a mem-
ory which must always recall something
beyond painter's art or rhetorician's skill.
Repel the assault of sorrow by the thought
of Him who wisely administers all the af-
fairs of men, with perfect knowledge of the
future and right guidance of it for our good.
Let us join in the joy of him who has
been delivered from this life's storms.
Let us rather give thanks because, wafted by
kindly winds, he has cast anchor in the wind-
less haven and has escapedthe grievous ship-
wrecks whereof this life is full. But need I
say all this to one who is a tried gladiator of
goodness? Need I, as it were, anoint for
endurance one who is a trainer of other ath-
letes? Still I write. It is a comfort to my-
self to write as I do. I am really and truly
grieved when I remember an intimacy that I
esteemed so highly. Once more I praise the
great Guide of all, Who both knowswhat
would be good for us and guides our life ac-
cordingly. I have dictated this after writing
my former communication, on one of my
friends in Antioch telling me that the end
had come.

XIII. To Cyrus.

I had heard of the island of Lesbos, and its
cities Mitylene, Methymna, and the rest;
but I was ignorant of the fruit of the vine
cultivated in it.i Now, thanks to _ your
diligence, I have become acquainted with it,
and I admire both its whiteness and the
delicacy of its flavour. Perhaps time may
even improve it, unless it turns it sour ; for
wine, like the body, and plants, and build-
ings, and other things made by hand, is
damaged by time. If, as you say, it makes
the drinker longlived, I am afraid it will be
of little use to me, for I have no desire to live
a long life, when life's storms are so many
and so hard.

I was however much pleased to hear of
the health of the monk. Really my anxiety
about him was quite distressing, and I
wrongly blamed the doctors, for his com-
plaint required the treatment they gave. I
have sent you a little pot of honey which the
Cilician bees make from storax flowers.


1 Vide note on Letter IH,


'Job xl. 3. Ixx.


1 On the wine of Lesbos cf. Hor. Car. i. 17, " innocentts
toctila Leshii; " Aulus Gellius tells the story how Aristotle,
when asked to nominate his successor, and wishing to point
out the superiority of Theophrastus to Menedemus, called
first for a cup of Rhodian, and then of Lesbian, and after sip,
ping both, exclaimed ijoiwc 6 Ac'a/Stos. Nact. Att. xixi. §.


254


THEODORET.


XIV, To Alexandra.


Had I only considered the character of the
OSS which you have sustained, I should
have wanted consolation myself, not only
because I count that what concerns you con-
cerns me, be it agreeable or otherwise, but be-
cause I did so dearly love that admirable and
truly excellent man. But the divine decree
lias removed him fi'om us and translated him
to the better life. I therefore scatter the cloud
of sorrow from my soul, and urge you, mv
worthy fnend, to vanquish the pain of your '
sorrow by the power of reason, and to brino-
your soul m this hour of need under the spell
of God s word. Why from our very cradles
do we suck the instruction of the divine
bcnptures, like milk from the breast, but
that, when trouble falls upon us, we may be
able to apply the teaching of the Spirit
as a salve for our pain? I know how sad,
iiow very grievous it is, when one has ex-
perienced the worth of some loved object
suddenly to be deprived of it, and to foil in a
moment from happiness to misery. But to
them that are gifted with good sense, and
use their powers of right reason, no human
contingency comes quite unforeseen ; nothino-
human is stable; nothing lasting; nor
beauty, nor wealth, nor health, nor dio-nity •
nor any of all those things that most" men
rank so high. Some men fall from a
summit of opulence to lowest poverty ; some
lose their health and struggle with various
torms of disease ; some who are proud of
the splendour of their lineage drag the crush-
ing yoke of slavery. Beauty is spoilt by
sickness and marred by old age, and very
wisely has the supreme Ruler sulibred none
ot these things to continue nor abide, with
the intent that their possessors, in fear of
change, may lower their proud looks, and
knowing how all such possessions ebb and
flow, may cease to put their confidence in
what IS short lived and fleeting, and may fix
their hopes upon the Giver of all o-ood I
am aware, my excellent friend, thatyou know
all this, and I beg you to reflect on human
nature ; you will find that it is mortal, and
received the doom of death from the be<rin-
ning. It was to Adam that God said " Dust
thou art and to dust thou shalt return." i
1 he giver of the law is He that never lies,
and experience witnesses to His truth
Divme Scripture tells us "all men have one
entrance mto life and the like goin<r out " ^
and every one that is born awaits the grave.
And all do not live a like length of time •
some men come to an end all too soon •


* Gen, iii. 19.


* "Wisdom vii. 6.


some in the vigour of manhood, and some
after they have experienced the trials of old
age. Thus, too, they who have taken on
them the marriage yoke are loosed from it
and it must needs be that either husband
first depart or wife reach this life's end
before him. Some have but just entered the
bridal chamber when their lot is weepincr
and lamentation ; some live together a little
while. Enough to remember that the grief
, IS common to give reason ground for over-
coming grief. Besides all this, even they
who are mastered by bitterest sorrow may
be comforted by the thought that the de-
parted was the father of sons ; that he left
them grown up ; that he had attained a very
high position, and in it, so far from giving any
cause for envy, made men love him the more,
and left behind him a reputation for liberality'
for hatred of all that is bad, for gentleness
and indeed for every kind of moral virtue. •

But what excuse for despondency will be
left us if we take to heart God's own
proinises and the hopes of Christians ; the
resurrection, I mean, eternal life, continuance
in the kingdom, and all that " eye hath not
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered
into the heart of man, the things which God
hath prepared for them that love Him ".? 2
Does not the Apostle say emphatically,
"I would not have you to be ignorant
brethren concerning them which are asleep,
that ye sorrow not even as others which have
no hope " .? ^ I have known many men who
even without hope have got the better of
their grief by the force of reason alone, and
it would indeed be extraordinary if they who
are supported by such a hope should prove
weaker than they who have no hope at all.
Let us then, I implore you, look at the end
as a long journey. When he went on a
journey we used indeed to be sorry, but we
waited his return. Now let the separation
sadden us indeed in some degree, for I am
not exhorting what is contrary to human
nature, but do not let us wail as over a
corpse; let us rather congratulate him on
his setting forth and his departure hence,
because he is now free from a world of un-
certainties, and fears no further change of
soul or body or of corporeal conditions.
1 he strife now ended, he waits for his reward.
Grieve not overmuch for orphanhood and
widowhood. We have a greater Guardian


anrl ^l"]? '''""'"^^ ''pecified are (i) ik^vB^pia; (ii) Mi<rorro.-wca;
ana (in; n-paorrj^. ^ ' <- ir >

The more classical Greek for eAe.;flep.a, the character of the
eAe.;«epo9, was eAe..flep,dT„9. - eAe^flep.a being used for freedom,
or license; Vide Arist. Eth. Nic iv I


The M«ro-r,.r^po? ,s a hater of knavery, as in Dem. .^84, 12.
c , nH A° '^ Character Of the npao, cff Aristotle. Eth. Nic. iv.
S. and Archbp. Trench, synonyms of the N. T. p. 14S.

'I. Cor. 11. 9. 3I.Thess.iv. 13.


LETTERS.


255


whose law it is that all should take good
care of orphans and widows and about
whom the divine David says " The Lord
relieveth the fatherless and widow, but the
way of the wicked He turneth upside down.^
Only let us put the rudders of our lives in
His hands, and we shall meet with an un-
failing Providence. His guardianship will
be surer than can be that of any man, for
His are the words " Can a woman for-
get her sucking child that she should not
have compassion on the son of her womb?
Yet will I not forget thee." - He is nearer
to us than father and mother for He is our
Maker and Creator. It is not marriage that
makes fathers, but fathers are made fathers
at His will.

I am now compelled thus to write because
my bonds ^ do not sufterme to hasten to you,
but your most God-loving and most holy
bishop is able unaided to give all consolation
to your very faithful soul by word and by deed,
by sight and by communication of thought
and by that spiritual and God-given wisdom
of his whereby I trust the tempest of your
grief will be lulled to sleep.

XV. To Silvaniis the Primate.*'

I know that in my words of consolation
I am somewhat late, but it is not without
reason that I have delayed to send them, for
I have thought it worth while to let the
violence of your grief take its course. The
cleverest physicians will never apply their
remedies when a fever is at its height, but
wait for a favourable opportunity for using
the appliances of their skill. So after reck-
oning how sharp your anguish must be, I
have let these few days go by, for if I my-
self was so distressed and filled with such
sorrow by the news, what must not have
been the sufferings of a husband and yoke-
fellow, made, as the Scripture says, one flesh, ^
at the violent sundering of the union ce-
mented both by time and love? Such pangs
are only natural ; but let reason devise con-
solation by reminding you that humanity is
frail and sorrow universal, and also of the
hope of the resurrection and the will of Him
who orders our lives wisely. We must
needs accept the decrees of inestimable
wisdom, and own them to be for our good ;
for they who reflect thus piously shall
reap piety's rewards, and so delivered
from immoderate lamentations shall pass
their lives in peace. On the other hand they

1 Ps. cxlvi. 9. 2 Isaiah xlix. 15.

3 i.e. confinement to the limits of his own diocese by the
decree of March, 449.

* cf. note on p. 261, Nothing is known of this Silvanus.

* Gen. ii. 24,


whom sorrow makes its slaves will gain
nothing by their wailing, but will at once
live weary lives and grieve the Guardian of
us all. Receive then, my most honoured
friend, a flxtherly exhortation " The Lord
gave and the Lord hath taken away. He
hath done whatsoever pleased Him. Blessed
be the name of the Lord." ^

XVI. To Bishop Irenceus?

There is nothing good, it seems, in pros-
pect for us, so, far from calming down, the
tempest troubling the Church seems to i-ise
higher every day. The conveners of the
Council have arrived and delivered the letters
of summons to several of the Metropolitans
including our own, and I have sent a copy of
the letter to your Holiness to acquaint you
how, as the poet has it, "Woe has been
welded by woe." "^ And we need only the
Lord's goodness to stay the storm. Easy it
is for Him to stay it, but we are unworthy of
the calm, yet the grace of His patience is
enough for us, so that haply by it we may
get the better of our foes. So the divine
apostle has taught us to pray "for He will
with the temptation also make a way to escape
that ye maybe able to bear it."* But I be-
seech your godliness to stop the mouths of
the objectors and make them understand that
it is not for them who stand, as the phrase
goes, out of range, to scoff" at men fighting in
the ranks and giving and receiving blows ;
for what matters it what weapon the soldier
uses to strike down his antagonists? Even
the great David did not use a panoply when
he slew the aliens' champion,* and Samson
slew thousands on one day with the jawbone
of an ass.*^ Nobody grumbles at the victory,
nor accuses the conqueror of cowardice,
because he wins it without brandishins: a
spear or covering himself with his shield or
throwing darts or shooting arrows. The
defenders of true religion must be criticized
in the same way, nor must we try to find
language which will stir strife, but rather
arguments which plainly proclaim the truth
and make those who venture to oppose it
ashamed of themselves.

What does it matter whether we style the
holy Virgin at the same time mother of Man
and mother of God, or call her mother and
servant of her offspring, with the addition
that she is mother of our Lord Jesus Christ
as man, but His servant as God, and so at
once avoid the term which is the pretext of

1 Job i. 21. 2 cf, Epp. iii, xii, and xxxv.

'Homer II. xvi. iii. ko.k'.v KaKw k<jTr\pi.Kro. For Theo-
doret's knowledge of Homer cf. pp. 104 and 258.

^I.Cor. X. 13. o I. Sam. xvii. 6 judges xv. 16.


256


THEODORET.


calumny, and express the same opinion by
another phrase? And besides this it must
also be borne in mind that the former of
these titles is of general use, and the latter
peculiar to the Virgin ; and that it is about
this that all the controversy has arisen,
which would God had never been. The
majority of the old Fathers have applied the
more honourable title to the Virgin, as your
Holiness yourself has done in two or three
discourses ; several of these, which your
godliness sent to me, I have in my own pos-
session, and in these you have not coupled
the title mother of Man with mother of God,
but have explained its meaning by the use of
other words. But since you find fault with
me for having left out the holy and blessed
Fathers Diodorus and Theodorus in my list
of authorities, I have thought it necessary to
add a few words on this point.

In the first place, my dear friend, I have
omitted many othei"s both famous and illus-
trious. Secondly this fact must be borne in
mind, that the accused party is bound to
produce unimpeachable witnesses, whose tes-
timony even his accusers cannot impugn.
But if the defendant were to call into court
authorities accused by the prosecutors, even
the judge himself would not consent to re-
ceive them. If t had omitted these holy
men in comjoiling an eulogy of the Fathers, I
should, I own, have been wrong, and should
have proved myself ungrateful to my teachers.
But if when under accusation I have brought
forward a defence, and have produced unim-
peachable witnesses, why do men who are
unwilling to see any of these testimonies lay
me under unreasonable blame? How I rev-
erence these writers is sufficiently shewn by
my own book in their behalf, in which I have
refuted the indictment laid against them, with-
out fear of the influence of their accusers or
even of the secret attack made upon myself.
These people who are so fond of foolish
talk had better get some other excuse for
their sleight of words. My object is not to
make my words and deeds fit the pleasure of
this man or that man, but to edify the church
of God, and please her bridegroom and Lord.
I call my conscience to witness that I am not
acting as I do through care of material things,
nor because I cling to the honour with all its
cares, which I shrink from calling an unhappy
one. I would long ago have withdrawn of
my own accord, did I not fear the judgment
of God. And now know well that I await my
fate. And I think that it is drawing near,
for so the plots against me indicate.^

iThis letter appears to be written shortly before the meeting
pf the Robber Synod in 449,


XVII. To the Deaco7iess Casiana.

Had I only considered the greatness of
your sorrow, I should have put oft' writing a
little while, that I might make time my ally
in my attempt to cure it, but I know the
good sense of your piety, and so I make bold
to offer you some words of consolation sug-
gested partly by human nature, and partly
by divine Scripture. For our natui^e is frail,
and all life is full of such calamities, and the
universal Governor and Ruler of the World,

— the Lord who wisely orders our concerns,

— gives us by means of His divine oracles
consolation of various kinds, of which the
writings of the holy Evangelists and the
divine utterances of the blessed prophets
are full. But I am sure it is needless to cull
these passages, and suggest them to your
piety, nurtured as you have been from
the beginning in the inspired word, ruling
your life in accordance with them, and
needing no other teaching. But I do im-
plore you to remember those words that
charge us to master our feelings, and promise
us eternal life, proclaim the destruction of
death, and announce the common resurrec-
tion of us all. Besides all this, nay, before
all this, I ask you to reflect that He who has
bidden these things so be is the Lord, that He
is a Lord all wise and all good, Who knows
exactly what is best for us, and to this end
o-uides all our life. Sometimes death is
better than life, and what seems distressing
is really pleasanter than fancied joys. I beg
your piety to accept the consolation oftered
by my humility, that you may serve the Lord
of all by nobly bearing your pain, and
aftbrding to men as well as women an ex-
ample of true wisdom. For all will admire
the strength of mind which has bravely
borne the attack of grief and broken the
force of its violent assault by the magnanim-
ity of its resolution. And we are not without
great comfort in the living likenesses of your
departed son ; for he has left behind him off-
spring worthy of deep affection, who may be
able to stay the excess of our sorrow.

Lastly I implore you to remember in your
grief what yoiu' bodily infirmity can endure,
and to avoid increasing your sufferings by
mourning overmuch ; and I implore our
Lord of His infinite resources to give you
ground of consolation.

XVIII. To Neoptolemus,

Whenever I cast my eyes on the divine
law which calls those who are joined to-
gether in marriage " one flesh," ^ I am at a

1 Gen. ii. 24,


LETTERS.


257


loss how to comfort the limb that has been
sundered, because I take account of the great-
ness of the pang. But when I consider the
course of nature, and the law which the
Creator has laid down in the words "Dust
thou art and to dust thou shalt return," ^ and
all that goes on daily in all the world on
land and sea — for either husbands first ap-
proach the end of life or this lot first
befalls the wives — I find from these reflec-
tions many grounds of consolation ; and
above all the hopes that have been given us
by our Lord and Saviour. For the reason
of the accomplishment of the mystery of the
incarnation was that we, being taught the
defeat of death, should no more grieve be-
yond measure at the loss by death of those
we love, but await the longed-for fulfilment
of the hope of the resurrection. I entreat
your Excellency to reflect on these things,
and to overcome the pain of your grief; and
all the more because the children of your
common love are with you, and give you
every ground of comfort. Let us then
praise Him who governs our lives wisely,
nor rouse His anger by immoderate lamen-
tation, for in His wisdom He knows what is
good for us, and in His mercy He gives it.

XIX. To the Presbyter Basilius.

I have found the right eloquent orator
Athanasius to be just what your letter de-
scribed him. His tongue is adorned by his
speech, and his speech by his character,
and all about him is brightened by his
abundant faith. Ever, most God-beloved
friend, send us such gifts. You have
given me, be assured, very great pleasure
through my intercourse with him.

XX. To the Presbyter Martyrius.

Natural disposition appears in us before
resolution of character, and, in this sense,
takes the lead ; but disposition is overcome
by resolution, as is plainly proved by the
right eloquent orator Athanasius. Though
an Egyptian by birth, he has none of the
Egyptian want of selfcontrol, but shews a
character tempered by gentleness. ^ He is
moreover a warm lover of divine things.
On this account he has spent many days
with me, expecting to reap some benefit from
his stay. But I, as you know, most God-
beloved friend, shrink from trying so to derive
good from others, and am far from being
able to impart it to those who seek it, and
this not because I grudge, but because I
have not the wherewithal, to give. Where-


1 Gen. iii. 19.
VOL. Ill,


' On TrpooTijs vide note on p. 254.


fore let your holiness pray that what is said of
me may be confirmed by fact, and that not
only may good things be reported of me by
word, but proved in deed.

XXI. To the learned Eusebius.

The disseminators of this great news,
with the idea that it would be very distasteful
to me, fancied that they might in this way
annoy me. But I by God's grace welcomed
the news, and await the event with pleasure.
Indeed very grateful to me is any kind of
trouble which is brought on me for the
sake of the divine doctrines. For, if we
really trust in the Lord's promises, " The
sufierings of this present time are not worthy
to be compared with the gloiy that shall be
revealed in us." ^

And why do I speak of the enjoyment of
the good things which are hoped for.? For
even if no prize had been ofiered to them
that struggle for the sake of true religion.
Truth alone by her own unaided force would
herself have been sufficient to persuade
them that love her to welcome gladly all
perils in her cause. And the divine Apostle
is witness of what I say, exclaiming as he
does, " Who shall separate us from the love
of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril or sword.? As it is written, 'For thy
sake we are killed all the day long ; we are
accounted as sheep for the slaughter.' " ^

And then to teach us that he looks for no
reward, but only loves his Saviour, he adds
straightway " Nay in all these things we are
more than conquerors through him that loved


us.


" 3


And he goes on further to exhibit his own
love more clearly. " For I am persuaded,
that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth,
nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord." *

Behold, my friend, the flame of apostolic
affection ; see the torch of love.*

I covet not, he says, what is His. I only
long for Him ; and this love of mine is an un-
quenchable love and I would gladly forego
all present and future felicity, aye, suffer and
endure again all kinds of pain so as to keep
with me this flame in all its force. This
was exemplified by the divine writer in deed


1 Rom. viii. iS. 3 Rom. viii. 37.

2 Rom. viii. 35. 36. * Rom. viii. 3S. 39.

8 epcoTOS. The USL' of this word in tliis connexion is in con-
trast with the spirit of tlie writers of tlie N. T., in wliicli tpouj
and its correlatives never appear.


258


THEODORET.


as well as in word and everywhere by land
and sea he has left belnnd him memorials of
his sufferings. So when I turn my eyes on
him and on the rest of the patriarchs,
prophets, apostles, martyrs, priests, what is
commonly reckoned miserable I cannot but
hold to be delightful. I confess to a feeling
of shame when I remember how even they
who never learnt the lessons we have learnt,
but followed no othicr guide but human
nature alone, have won conspicuous places
in the race of virtue. The famous Socrates,
son of Sophroniscus, when vmder the calum-
nious indictment, not only treated the lies of
his accusers with contempt, but expressed
his cheerfulness in the miclst of his troubles
in the words, " Anytus and Mclctus > can
kill me, but they cannot harm me." And
the orator of Pa^ania,- who was as wise as
he was eloquent, enriched both the men of
his own day and them that should come
after him with the saying: "to all the race
of men the end of life is death, even though
one shut himself up for safety in a cell ; so
good men are bound ever to put their hand
to every honourable work, ever defending
themselves with good hope as with a shield,
and bravely to bear whatever lot may be
given them by God." ^

Moreover a writer of earlier date than
Demosthenes, I mean the son of Olorus,
wrote many noble sentiments, and among
them this " We must bear what the gods
send us of necessity and the fortune of war
with courage." '' Why need I quote philos-
ophers, historians, and orators? For even
the men who gave higher honour to their
mythology than to the truth have inserted
many useful exhortations in their stories ; as
Ilomer in his poems introduces the wisest of
the Hellenes preparing himself for deeds of
valour, where he says

" He chid his angry spirit and beat his breast,
And said ' I'urliear my mind, and think on this:
There hath been time when bitterer agonies
Have tried thy patience.'" *

Similar passages might easily be collected


1 Apol. Soc. xviii. e/j-e /JLtu yap oii&iv av p\a^eiev oiiTt
M«Aj)T09 oi're 'Av-viTO?, ovSe yftp av Swatro.

* I.e. Demosthenes who belonefcd to Pseania .a deinus of
Attica on the eastern slope of llymettus, and so was called 6
llaiavevf,

3 Demosth. de Cor. 25S.

The snUimLiit linds various expression in ancient writers
e.g. Euripides, in a fragment of the lost " ^Egeus,"
KartiavdU S' oi/xiAeTai
KaX TO) KaT'o'lKOVi (KTOI Tj/ieVci) noiKDV.

and Propertius El. III. 10.

" ///e licet ferro caniiis se condat et a-re,
Mors taincn iitclusum frotrahit inde caput ,"

* Thucydidos II. Ixiv. 3. i\, .tiv re XP'I ''°- ''^ 6atfidvia
at^avKditu;, Ta re aTrb twi' TToXf/xt'oir ai'i'»peuo?.

The quotation is from the siiccch of IVriclcs to the Atlie-
nians in 15. C. 430 in which he Liicouragcs and sootlics them
under adversity.

e Homer Od. xx. 17. (Chapman's Translation.) cf. notes on
pp. lO-i, 2-S, 2S«!, 259, and 260.


from poets, orators, and philosophers, but
for us the divine writings are suflicient.

I have quoted what 1 have to prove how
disgraceful it were for the mere disciples of
nature to get the better of us who have had
the teaching of the prophets and the apos-
tles, trusting in the Saviour's sufferings and
looking for the resurrection of the body,
freedom from corruption, the gift of immor-
tality and the kingdom of heaven.

So, my dear friend, comfort those who
are discouraged at the stories bruited abroad,
and if anybody is pleased at them, tell them
that we are happy too, that we are exulting
and dancing with joy, and that what they
call punishment we are looking for as the
kingdom of heaven itself.

To inform those who do not know in what
mind we are, be assured, most excellent
friend, that we believe, as we have been
taught, in the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. There is no truth in the slander of
some that we have been taught to believe, or
have been baptized, or do believe, or teach
others to believe, in two Sons. As we know
one Father and one Holy Ghost so we know
one Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, the only
begotten Son of God, God the Word who
was made man. W^e do not however deny
the properties of the natures. We hold
them to be in error who divide the one Lord
Jesus Christ into two Sons, and we also call
them enemies of the truth who endeavour to
confound the natures. We believe an union
to have been made without confusion, and
we reckon some qualities to be proper to
the manhood and others to the Godhead ; for
just as the man — I mean man in general —
reasonable and mortal being, has a soul and
has a body, and is reckoned to be one being,
just so the distinction between the two nat-
ures does not divide the one man into two
persons, but we recognise in the one man
both the immortality of the soul and the
mortality of the body, and acknowledge the
invisible soul and the visible body, but, as I
said, one being at once reasonable and
mortal ; so do we recognise oiu" Lord and
God, I mean the Son of God our Lord
Christ, even after His incarnation, to be one
Son ; for the union is indivisible, as we know
it is without confusion. We acknowledge
too that the Godhead is without beginning,
and that tlie manhood is of recent origin ; for
the one nature is of the seed of Abraham and
David, from whom descended tlie holy Vir-
gin, but the divine nature was begotten of
the God and Father before the ages without
time, without passions, without severance.
But suppose the distinction between flesh


LETTERS.


259


and Godhead to be destroyed, what weapons
shall we use in our war with Arius and
Eunomius? How shall we undo their blas-
phemy against the only begotten? As it is,
we apply the words of humiliation as to
man, the words of exaltation and divinity as
to God, and the setting forth of the truth is
very easy to us.

But this disquisition on the faith is exceed-
ing the limits of a letter. Still even these
few words are enough to show the character
of the apostolic faith. ^

XXII. To Coimt Ulpianus.

It is said that what is faulty in men's ways
may be brought to order and improved by
words. But I think that characters made
beautiful by nature, themselves make words
fair, though they stand in need of none, just
as bodies naturally beautiful need no artificial
colouring. These qualities are conspicuous
in the right eloquent orator Athanasius, and I
have been the more pleased with him because
he is an ardent lover of your Excellency,
and is constantly sounding your praises.
Here, however, I have striven with him, and
in enumerating your high qualities, have
outdone him, for I know more about good
deeds of yours than he. I am however
vexed at not being able to praise them all,
and to see that my summary of your virtues
falls short of what might be said in your
praise, but if God grant it even to approach
the truth you will hold the pre-eminence in
every kind of virtue among all your contem-
poraries.^

XXIII. To the Patrician Areobindas?

In distributing wealth and poverty among
men the Creator and Governor of all gives
no unjust judgment, but gives the poverty of
the poor to the rich as a means of useful-
ness. So He brings chastisement upon men
not merely in the infliction of punishment
for their faults, but to provide the wealthy
with opportunities for shewing kindness to
mankind. This year the Lord has sent us
scourges, far less than our sins, but enough
to distress the husbandmen, of whose suffer-
ings I lately made your magnificence ac-
quainted through your own hinds. Pity, I
beseech you, the tillers of the ground, who
have spent their toil with but very little re-
sult. Be this bad year a suggestion of
spiritual abundance, and do ye through the
exercise of compassion gather in the harvest


1 Garnerius d.ntes this letter in Sept. or Oct., 44^9.

2 Nothing' more seems to be known either of Ulpianus or
of this Athanasius.

3 Areobindas was consul in 434, and died, according to
Marc^Uinus, in -^9.


of the compassion of God. On this account
the excellent Dionysius has hurried to your
greatness to tell you of the trouble, that he
may receive the remedy. He carries this
letter, like a suppliant's branch of olive, in
the hope that by its means he may receive
greater kindness.

XXIV. To Andreas Bishop of Samosata.

Your piety, nursling of God's love, longs,
I am sure, for my society. But I am all the
more eager for yours in proportion as I
know that from it more advantage will ac-
crue to me. Want somehow naturally
makes our wishes the stronger, but the Lord
of all is able to give us what we long for.
He rules all things Himself; knows what is
sure to do us good, and never ceases to give
every man this boon. I really cannot tell
you how much delighted I was with your
letter, and the very honourable and devout
deacon Thalassius increased my pleasure by
telling me what I was very anxious to know,
for what can be more welcome to me than
news that all goes well with you? And what
is it that so increases your welfare as the
moderation of the great men among us.'' You
have acted like a wise and active physician
who does not wait to be sent for, but comes
of his own accord to them that need his care.
This has given me great pleasure, and I have
learnt by my own experience what the poet
means when he says " laughing through her
tears." * May the bountiful Giver of all good
things grant your holiness to excel in them,
and to make us emulous of what is praise-
worthy in all good men. Help us then my
dear friend, and persuade him who can to
grant our petition. ^

XXV. Festal

When the only begotten God had been
made Man, and had wrought out our salva-
tion, they who in those days saw Him from
whom these bounties flowed kept no feast.
But in our time, land and sea, town and
hamlet, though they cannot see their bene-
factor with eyes of sense, keep a feast in
memory of all He has done for them ; and so
great is the joy flowing frotn these celebra-
tions that the streams of spiritual gladness
run in all directions. Wherefore we now
salute your piety, at once to signify the
cheerfulness which the feast has caused in
us, and to ask your prayers that we may
keep it to the end.

1 HoiP. II. VI. 4S4, cf. quotations from Homer pp. 104, 255,
25S, 259, 260.

2 It is to Andreas of Samosata that Theodoret addressed the
famous letter on the errors of Cyril numbered 162. He is
mentioned by Athanasius Sinaita,


52


26o


THEODORET.


XXVI. Festal.

The fountains of the Lord's kindness are
ever gushing forth with good things for them
that believe ; but some further good is con-
veyed by the celebrations which preserve
the memory of the greatest of benefits to
them that keep the feasts with more good
will. We have just now celebrated the rites
and enjoyed their blessing, and tluis salute
your piety, for so the custom of the feast and
law of love enjoins.

XXVII. To Aquilinus, deacon and Archi-
mandrite.

No one who has won the divine adoption
weeps for orphanhood, for what guardian
care can be more powerful than that of our
Father which is on high, because of Him
fathers of earth are fathers. By His will
some are made fatiiers by nature, some by
grace. To Him tlien let us hold fast and
keep alive the memory of them that are
dead. For we shall be the better for the
recollection of them that have lived well,
rousing us to imitation of them,

XXVIII. To Jacobus y presbyter and monk.

They who have made the vigour of their
manhood bright by virtuous industry hasten
happily towards old age, gladdened by the
recollection of their former victories, and for
old age's sake rid of further struggle. This
joy I think your own piety possesses, and that
you bear your old age the more easily for the
recollection of the labours of your youth.

XXIX. To Ape/lion.

The sufferings of the Carthaginians would
demand, and, in their greatness, perhaps
out-task, the power of the tragic language of
an ^schylus or a Sophocles. Carthage of
old was with difficulty taken by the Romans.
Again and again she contended with Rome
for the mastery of the world, and brought
Rome within danger of destruction. Now
the ruin has been the mere byplay of bar-
barians. Now dignified members of her far-
famed senate wander all over the world,
getting means of existence from the bounty
of kindly strangers, moving the tears of be-
holders, and teaching the uncertainty and
instability of the lot of man.

I have seen many who have come thence,
and I have felt afraid, for I know not, as the
Scripture says, " what the morrow will
bring forth." i Not least do I admire the

1 Prov. xxvii, i.


admirable and most honourable Celestinianus,.
so bravely does he bear his misfortune, and
makes the loss of his hap2:)iness an occasion
for philosophy, praising the governor of all,
and holding that to be good which God
either ordains or suflers to be. For the
wisdom of divine Providence is unspeakable.
He is travelling with his wife and children,
and I beg your excellency to treat him witli
an hospitality like that of Abraham. With
perfect confidence in your benevolence I
have undertaken to introduce him to you,
and I am telling him how generous is your
right hand.^

XXX. To Aerius the Sophist.^

Now is the time for your Academy to
prove the use of your discussions. I am
told that a brilliant assemblage collects at
your house, of which the members are both
illustrious by birth and polished of speech,
and that you debate about virtue and the
immortality of the soul, and other kindred
subjects. Show now opportunely your
nobility of soul and wealth of virtue, and
receive the most admirable and honourable
Celestinianus in the spirit of men who have
leai'nt the rapid changes of human prosperity.
He was formerly an ornament of the city of
Carthage, where he flung open the doors of
his house to many priests, and never thought
to need a stranger's kindness. Be his sjiokes-
man, my friend, and aid him in his need of
your voice, for he cannot sufler the advice of
the poet which bids him that needcth speak
though he be ashamed."^

Persuade I beg you any of your society
who are capable of so doing to emulate the
hospitality of Alcinous,'' to remove the pov-
erty which has unexpectedly befallen him,
and to change his evil fortune into good.
Let them praise our kindly Lord for making
us wise by other men's calamities, not
having sent us to strangers' houses and
having brought strangers to our doors. To
men that shew kindness He promises to give
what words cannot express and no intelli-
gence can understand.

XXXI. To Dommis bishop of Antioch!"

The most admirable and honourable Celes-
tinianus is a native of the famous Carthage,
and of an illustrious family in that city.

' The name Celestinianus varies in the MSS. with Celesti-
aciis. Thcodorct's letter in liis behalf may be placed shortly
after the sack of Carthage bv Genseric in 4^9.

2 A Christian Sophist of Cyrus, cf. Letter LXVI.

3 This passage is corrupt, and I cannot discover the quota-
tion. There may not Impossibly be a reference to Horn. Od-
xvii. .VIS-

* Horn. Od. vii. * cf. Epp. 8o-iio-ii?.


LETTERS.


261


Now he has been exiled from it. He is
wandering in foreign parts, and has to look
to the benevolence of them that love God.
He carries w^ith him a burden from which
he cannot escape and which increases his
care — I mean his wife, his children and his
servants, for whom he is at great expense.
I wonder at his spirit. For he praises the
great Pilot as though he were being borne
by favourable breezes, and cares nothing
for the terrible storm. From his calamity
he has reaped the fruit of piety, and this
thrice blessed gain has been brought him by
his misfortune ; for while he was in pros-
perity he never accepted this teaching, but
when the evil day left him bare, among the
rest of his losses he lost his impiety too, and
now possesses the wealth of the faith, and
for its sake thinks little of his ruin.

I therefore beseech your holiness to let him
find a fatherland in these foreign parts, and
to charge them that abound in riches to com-
fort one who once was endowed like them-
selves, and to scatter the dark cloud of his
calamity. It is only right and proper that
among men of like nature, where all have
erred, they that have escaped chastisement
should bring comfort to them that have
fallen on evil days, and by their sympathy
for these latter propitiate the mercy of God.

XXXII. To the Bishop Theoctistus>

If the God of all had forthwith inflicted
punishment on all that err he would utterly
have destroyed all men. But He spares ; He
is a merciful Judge; and thei'efore some He
chastises, and to others He gives the lesson
of the punishment of the chastised. An in-
stance of this merciful dealing has been
shewn in our times. Exiles from what was
once known as Libya, but is now called
Africa, have been brought by Him to our
doors, and by shewing us their sufferings He
moves us to fear, and by fear rouses us to
sympathy ; thus He accomplishes two ends at
once, for He both benefits us by their chas-
tisement, and to them by our means brings
comfort. This comfort I now beg you to
give to the very admirable and honourable
Celestinianus, a man who once was an orna-
ment of the Africans' chief city, but now has
neither city nor home, nor any of the neces-
saries of life. Now it is proper that those
who in the jurisdiction of your holiness have
been entrusted with the pastoral care of souls
should bring before their fellow citizens what
is for their good, for indeed they need such

1 Bp. of the Syrian Beroea. He succeeded Acacius in 437.
cf. Ep. 134.


teaching. For this reason, as we know, the
divine Apostle in his Epistle to Titus writes
" Let ours also learn to maintain good works
for necessary uses," ^ for if our city, solitary
as it is, and with only a small population,
and that a poor one, succours the strangers,
much rather may BercEa,^ which has been
nurtured in true religion, be expected to do
so, especially under the leadership of your
holiness.

XXXIII. To Staswius, Count and Primate.^

To narrate the sufferings of the most hon-
ourable and dignified Celestinianus would
require tragic eloquence. Tragic writers
set forth fully the ills of humanity, but I can
only in a word inform your excellency that
his country is Libya, so long on all men's
tongues, his city the far famed Carthage, his
hereditary rank a seat in her famous council,
his circumstances affluent. But all this is
now a tale, mere words stripped bare of
realities. The barbarian war has deprived
him of all this. But such is fortune ; she
refuses to remain always with the same men
and hastens to change her abode to dwell
with others.* I beg to introduce this guest
to your excellency, and beseech you that he
may enjoy your far famed beneficence. I
beg also that through your excellency he
may become known to all those who are in
office and opulence, in order that you may
both become a means of advantage to them
and win the higher reward from our merci-
ful God.

XXXIV. To the Count Pairicius.

All kinds of goodness are praiseworthy,
but all are made more beautiful by loving
kindness. For it we earnestly pray the God
of all ; through it alone we obtain forgive-
ness when we err ; it makes wealth stoop
to the poor, and because I know that your
Excellency is richly endowed with it 1 con-
fidently commend to you the admirable and
excellent Celestinianus, once lord of vast
wealth and possessions and suddenly stripped
of all, but bearing his poverty as easily as
few men bear their riches. The subject of
the tragedy involving the fall of his fortunes
is the barbarian invasion of Libya and Car-
thage. I have introduced him to your
greatness ; pray suggest his case to others,
and move them to pity. You will win


1 Titus 3. 14.

*i.e. The Syrian Beroea, Aleppo or Haleb.

SThe title Primas was applied in civil Law to (a) the Decu-
rioncs of a municipality, and (b) to the chiefs of provincial
frovernments. Cod. Theod. vii. iS. 13, ix. 40. 16 etc.

« cf. Horace I.xxxiv. 14 and III. xxix. 52 " nunc mihi nunc
alii benigna."


262


theodor£:t.


greater gain by giving many a lesson in
loving kindness.

XXXV. To the Bishop IrencBus}

You are conspicuous, my Lord, for many
forms of goodness, and your holiness is
beautified in an especial degree by loving-
kindness, by contempt of riches, and by a
generosity that gushes forth for the help of
them that need. I know too that you deem
worthy of more than ordinary attention those
who liave been brought up in prosperity and
have fallen from it into trouble. Knowing
this as well as I do I venture to make known
to you the very admiral^lc and excellent Celes-
tin'ianus. He was once well known in Car-
thage for wealth and position, now stripped
of these he is fovourably known by his piety
and philosophy, for he l:)ears what men call
misfortune with resignation because it has
brought him to the salvation of his soul.
lie came to me with a letter which described
his former prosperity, and after he had
passed several days with me I proved the
truth of what was said of him by experience.
1 have therefore no hesitation in commending
him to your Holiness, and begging you to
make him known to the well-to-do men of
tiie city. It is probable that when they have
learnt what has befallen him, in fear of a
like fiite befalling themselves, they will
endeavour to escape judgment by shewing
mercy. He has no resource but to go about
l)egging, as he is put to the greater expense
because he has with him his wife and chil-
dren, and the domestics who with him es-
caped the violence of the barbarians.

XXXVI. To Pompianus, Bishop of Emesa.

I know very well that your means are
small and your heart is great, and that in
your case generosity is not prevented by
limited resources. I therefore introduce to
your holiness the admirable and excellent
Cclestinianus, once enjoying much wealth
and prosperity, but now escaped from the
hands of the barbarians with nothing but
freedom, and having no means of liveHhood
except the mercy of men like your piety.
And cares crowd round him, for travelling
with him are his wife, children and servants,
whom he has brought with him from no
motives but those of humanity, for he can-
not think it right to dismiss them when they
refuse to abandon him. I beg you of your
goodness to make him known to our wealthy
citizens, for I think that, after being informed
by your holiness and seeing how soon pros-


1 i.e. of Tyre.


perity may fall away, they will bethink them
of our common humanity, and, in imitation
of your magnanimity, will give him such
help as they can.

XXXV 11. To Salustius the Governor ^

When rulers keep the scales of justice
true, and let them hang in even balance,
they confer all kinds of benefits upon their
subjects ; if they are also gifted with pru-
dence and further show loving-kindness to
him that needs it, manifold advantages accrue
from their rule to them that live under it.
Having enjoyed these good things through
your excellency, and having experienced
them in your former administration, they
have now been moved with joy at the infor-
mation that to your mimificence the helm
of government has been entrusted. I pray
that they may gain yet greater good, that
your excellency may win still higher praise,
and that the encomiums of your eulogists may
be vindicated by the addition to all your other
honourable titles to fame of that colophon ^
of good things — true religion. As I was
compelled to pass several days in Hierapolis
I hoped to have the pleasure of meeting your
excellency, and persistently enquired of new
comers if the insignia of office had been
conveyed to you. But I was compelled by
the divine feast of salvation to return in
haste to the city entrusted to me. Now
however that I have received your excel-
lency's letter, with very great pleasure I re-
turn your salutation, and without delay have
sent, as you requested, the honourable and
pious deacon who is by God's grace a
water-finder. May the Lord in His loving
kindness grant him both to do good service to
the city and increase your excellency's glory.

XXXVIII. Festal.

The divine feast of salvation has brought
us the founts of God's good gifts, the bless-
ing of the Cross, and the immortality which
sprang from our Lord's death, the resurrec-
tion of our Lord Jesus Christ which gives
promise of the resurrection of us all. These
l)eing the gifts of the feast, such its exhibition
of the bounty of divine grace, it has filled
us with spiritual gladness. But encom-
passed as we are on every side by many and

1 i.e. of the Eupliratensis.

s Colophon was one of the twelve Ionian cities founded by
Mopsus on the coast of Asia Minor and was one of the claim,
ants for beinu; the birthplace of Homer. To put a colophon to
anything:: became a proverbial expression for to put the crown-
insj touch, to complete — from the fact according to Strabo
(C. 64^) tliat the Colophonian cavalry was so excellent as at
once to decide and finish a battle in which it appeared. So the
place and date of the edition of a book, with the device of the
printer, appended to old editions is called a colophon.


LETTERS.


263


great calamities, the brightness of the feast
is dimmed, and lamentation and wailing are
mingled with our psalmody. Such sorrows
does sin bring forth. It is sin which has
filled our life with pangs ; it is on account of
sin that death is lovelier to us than life ; it is
on account of sin that when we think in
imagination of that incorruptible tribunal
we shudder even at the life to come. So
may your piety pray that God's loving-kind-
ness may light on us, and that this gloomy
and terrible cloud may be dispersed and sun-
shine again quickly give us joy.

XXXIX. Festal.

My wish was to write in cheerful terms
and sound the note of the spiritual joy of the
feast, but I am prevented by the multitude
of our sins, which are bringing on us the
judgment of God. For who indeed can be
so insensible as not to perceive the divine
wrath? May your piety then pray that
affairs may undergo a change for the better ;
that so we too may change the style of our
letter, and write words of cheerfulness in-
stead of those of wailing.

XL. To Theodorus the Vicar}

The custom of the feast bids me write a
festal letter, but the cloud of our calamities
sutlers me not to gather the usual happy
fruit from it. Who is so stony-hearted as
not to be shocked and affrighted at the
anger and grief of the Lord .'' Who is not
stirred to the memory of faults .'' Who does
not look for the righteous sentence? All this
dims the brightness of the feast, but the
Lord is full of loving-kindness, and we trust
He will not actually fulfil His threats, but
will look mercifully on us, scatter our sad-
ness, open the springs of mercy, and shew His
wonted long suffering. I salute your great-
ness, and beseech you to send me news of the
health I sincerely trust you are enjoying.

XLI. To Claudianus^

The divine Celebration has as usual con-
ferred on us its spiritual boons ; but the sour
fruits of sin have not suffered us" to enjoy
them with gladness. They have had their
usual results ; in the beginning they caused
thorns, caltrops, sweats, toil and pain to
sprout ; at the present moment sin sets the
earth quaking against us, and makes nations
rise against us on every side. And we lament

1 TOTTOTTjpijTr;?, vicarius, or lieutenant, is used of " Vicars " both
civil and ecclesiastical.

2 In Vatican MS. to Salustianus. The mention of the earth-
quake fixes the date of this letter in 447, a year when the Huns
were ravaging the eastern empire.


because we force the good Lord, who is wish-
ful to do us good, to do us ill, and compel
Him to inflict punishment.

Yet when we bethink us of the unfathomable
depths of His pity we are comforted, and trust
thattheLord will notcastoff'Hispeople, neither
will He forsake His inheritance.' While salut-
ing your magnificence I beseech you to give
me news of your much-wished for health.

XLII. To Constantius the prefect.^

Did no necessity compel me to address a
letter to your greatness, I might haply be
found guilty of presumption, for neither
taking due measure of myself nor recognis-
ing the greatness of your power. But now
that all that is left of the city and district
which God has committed to my charge is
in peril of utterly perishing, and certain men
have dared to bring calumnious charges
against the recent visitation, I am sure your
magnificence will pardon the boldness of my
letter when you enquire into the necessity of
the case, and my own object in writing. I
groan and lament at being compelled to
write against a man over whose errors one
ought to throw a veil, because he is of the
clerical order. Nevertheless I write to de-
fend the cause of the poor whom he is
wronging. After being charged with many
crimes and excluded from the Communion,
pending the assembly of the sacred Synod, in
alarm at the decision of the episcopal coun-
cil he has made his escape from this place,
thereby trampling, as he supposed, on the
laws of the Church, and, by his contempt
of the sentence of excommunication has laid
bare his motive. He has undertaken an accu-
sation not even fit for men of mean crafts,
and in consequence of his ill-feeling towards
the illustrious Philip has proceeded against
the wretched tax-payers. I feel that it is
quite needless for me to mention his charac-
ter, his course of life from the beginning and
the greatness of his wrong-doings, but this
one thing I do beseech your Excellency, not
to believe his lies, but to ratify the visitation,
and spare the wretched tax-payers. Aye,
spare the thrice wretched decurions who
cannot exact the moneys demanded of them.
Who indeed is ignorant of the severity of the
taxation of the acres among us? On this
account most of our landowners have fled,
our hinds have run away, and the greater
part of our lands are deserted. In discuss-
ing the land there will be no impropriety in
our using geometrical terms. Of our coun-

1 Psalm xciv. 14.

2 This and the five following letters may be placed in 446,
after the promulgation of the law of Theodosius " de reievatis,
adceratis, vel donalis possessionibiis" late in 445.


264


THEODORET.


try the length is forty milestones, and the
breadth the same. It includes many high
mountains, some wholly bare, and some
covered with unproductive vegetation.
Within this district there are fifty thousand
free jugers,* and besides that ten thousand
which belong to the imperial treasury. Now
only let your wisdom consider how great is
the wrong. For if none of the country had
been uncultivated, and it had all furnished
easy husbandry for the hinds, they would
nevertheless have sunk under the tribute,
unable to endure the severity of the tax-
ation. And here is a proof of what I say.
In the time of Isidorus ^ of glorious memory,
fifteen thousand acres were taxed in gold,
but the exactors of the Comitian assessment,
unable to bear the loss, frequently complained,
and by offerings besought your high dignity
to let them oft' two thousand five hundred for
the unproductive acres, and your excellency's
predecessors in this office ordered the unpro-
ductive acreage to be taken oft' the unfortunate
decurions, and an equivalent number to be
substituted for the Comitian ; and not even
thus are they able to complete the tale.

So with many words I ask your favour,
and beseech your magnificence to put aside
the false accusations that are made against
the wretched tax-payers, to stem the tide of
distress in this unhappy district, and let it
once more lift its head. Thus you will
leave an imperishable memory of honour to
future generations. I am joined in my sup-
plication to you by all the saints of our dis-
trict, and especially by that right holy and
pious man of God, the Lord Jacobus,^ who
holds silence in such great esteem that he
cannot be induced to write, but he prays
that our city, which is made illustrious by
having him as neighbour and is protected by
his prayers, may receive the boon which I
ask.

XLIII. To the Augusta Fulcheria.*'

Since you adorn the empire by your piety
and render the purple brighter by your faith,
we make bold to write to you, no longer
conscious of our insignificance in that you
always pay all due honour to the clergy.
With these sentiments I beseech your ma-
jesty to deign to show clemency to our un-
happy country, to order the ratification of
the visitation which has been several times
made, and not to accept the false accusations
which some men have brought against it.


^ i.e., 28,800 sq. ft. " JHffum vacant quod juncti hovts uno
die exarare possint ." varro R. R. i. 10.

' For many years Prefect of the East.

8 Presumably the Jacobus of Relig. Hist. XXI, an ascetic
disciple of Maro.

* Vide p. 15s n.


I beseech you to give no credit to him who
bears indeed the name of bishop, but whose
mode of action is unworthy even of respect-
able slaves.' He has been himself under
serious charges and subject to the bann of
excommunication under the most holy and
God-beloved archbishop of Antioch, the
Lord Domnus, pending the summoning of
the episcopal council for the investigation
of the charges against him. He has now
made his escape, and betaken himself to the
imperial city, where he plies the trade of an
informer, attacking the country which is his
mother country with its thousands of poor,
and, for the sake of his hatred to one, wags
his tongue against all. Out of regard to
what is becoming to me I will say nothing
as to his character and education, and indeed
he shows only too plainly what he has at
present in hand. But of the district I will
say this, that when the whole province had
its burdens lightened, this portion, although
it bore a very heavy share of the burden,
never enjoyed the benefit of relaxation.
The result is that many estates are deprived
of husbandmen ; nay, many are altogether
abandoned by their owners, while the
wretched decurions have demands made on
them for these very properties, and, being
quite unable to bear the exaction, betake
themselves some to begging, and some to
flight. The city seems to be reduced to one
man, and he will not be able to hold out
unless your piety supplies a remedy. But I
am in hopes that your serenity will heal the
wounds in the city and add yet this one
more to your many good deeds.

XLIV. To the patrician ^ Senator.

Thanks be to the Saviour of the world
because to your greatness He is ever adding
dignity and honour. The reason of my not
writing up to this time to exhibit the delight
which I have felt at the colophon^ of your
honour, has been my wish not to trouble
your magnificence. At the moment of my
now thus writing, the district which Provi-
dence has committed to my care stands as
the provoib has it on a razor's edge." You
will I'emember the visitation which was
made at the time when we first were bene-
fited by your presence among us ; how it was

1 The delator referred to in these letters is presumably
Athanaslus of Perrha, who was deposed by Domnus II bishop
of Antioch, in the middle of the fifth century. As Tillemont
points out (Vol. XV. pp. 261-3 ed. 17^0) we cannot make the
identification with certainty, but the circumstances correspond
witli what is known of this Athanasius. There was a Perrha,
now Pcrrin, about twenty miles north of Samosata (Saniisat).

' From tne time of the Emperor Constantine the title pa-
trician designated a high court functionary.

» Cf. note on page 262. * Cf. note page 107.


LETTERS.


265


with difficulty established in the time of the
most excellent prefect the Lord Florentius; '
and how it was confirmed by the present
holder of the office. An individual who
bears the name of bishop, but of ways un-
worthy even of stage players, has fled from
the episcopal synod at a time when he was
lying under sentence of excommunication
and is endeavouring to calumniate and dis-
credit the visitation, while through his
hatred to the illustrious Philip he assails
the truth. I therefore beseech your excel-
lency to make his lies of none effect, and that
the visitation lawfully confirmed may remain
undisturbed. It is indeed becoming to your
greatness to reap the fruit of this good deed
among the rest, to receive the acclamations
of those whom you are benefiting, and so to
do honour at once to the God of all and to
his true servant the very man of God the
Lord Jacob,* who joins with me in sending
you this supplication. Had it been his
wont to write he would have written him-
self.

XLV, To the Patrician Anatolius.^

Your greatness knows full well how all
the inhabitants of the East feel towards your
magnificence, as sons feel towards an affec-
tionate father. Why then have you shewn
hate to them that love you, deprived them of
your kindly care, and driven them all to
weeping and lamentation by putting your
own advantage before the service of others ?
In truth I think there is not one of them that
fear the Lord who is not much grieved at
losing your official sway, and I think that
even all the rest, although they have not right
knowledge about divine things, when they
reflect on the kindnesses you have conferred,
share in these sentiments of distress. I for
my part am specially sorry when I bethink
me of your dignity and your unaffected char-
acter, and I pray the God of all ever to be-
stow on you the bulwark of His invincible
right hand, and supply you with abundance
of all kinds of blessings. We beseech your
excellency no less when absent than when
present to extend to us your accustomed pro-
tection, and to undo the rage of that unworthy
bishop of ours whose purposes are perfectly
well known to your greatness. He is en-
deavouring, as I am informed, to work the
entire ruin of our district, and has accepted

' To the same FJorentius is addressed the important letter
LXXXIX wherein Theodoret defends himself from charges of
heterodoxy. Before 449 he had six times attained the high
position of Prefect of the Kast.

' i.e. the ascetic mentioned in letter XLI.

* Anatolius, consul in 440, was Magister militum in the East.
He was a true friend to Theodoret. This letter may be placed
in 444.


the part of an informer to culumniate the re-
cent visitation, and this when all in a word
know that the taxation of our district is very
heavy, and that in consequence many estates
have been abandoned by the husbandmen.
But this man, in contempt of his excommu-
nication, and in flight from the holy synod,
has thrust out his tongue against the unhappy
poor. May your magnificence then consent
to look to it that the truth be not vanquished
by a lie. And I bring the same supplication
about the Cilicians. For we cease not to
wail till the iniquity be undone. The Lord,
who promises to reward even a drop of water,
will requite you for this trouble.

XL VI. To the learned Petrus.

Nothing is able to stay the praiseworthy
purpose of them that highly esteem what is
right. That this is the case is confirmed by
the grief shown by your magnificence at the
news you have lately received, and your re-
refusal to overlook the attack that right has
suffered. You have opportunely put away
your distress, and righteously stopped the
mouth of the enemy of the truth. No
sooner did we hear of this, and found true
philosophy so coupled with rhetorical skill,
than we felt the more warmly disposed
towards your excellence. Now we beseech
you the more earnestly to counteract this fine
fellow's lies and confirm the comfort given to
the unhappy poor.

XLVII. To Proclus^ Bishop of Constanti-
nople.

A year ago, thanks to your holiness, the
illustrious Philip governor of our city was
delivered from serious danger. After enter-
ing into the enjoyment of the security which
he owed to your kindness, he filled our ears
with your praises. But all your labour a
certain most pious personage was endeavour-
ing to make null and void. The visitation
made several times twelve years ago he
calumniates, and has adopted a style of slan-
der which would be unbecoming even in a
respectable slave. Now I beseech your sanc-
tity to put a stop to his lies, and to induce
the illustrious praefects to ratify the decision
which they duly and mercifully gave. As a
matter of fact our city was taxed more se-
verely than all the cities of the provinces, and
after every city had been relieved ours con-
tinued to this day assessed at over sixty-two
thousand acres. At last the occupants of
that seat of honour were with difficulty in-


J Proclus was enthroned at Constantinople in 434, on th^
death of Maxiinianus.


266


THEODORET.


duced to send inspectors of the district ; their
report was first received by Isidorus of
famous memory and confirmed by the glori-
ous and Christ-loving lord Florentius, and
the whole matter was very carefully enquired
into by our present ruler, whose equity
adorns the throne, and he confirmed the as-
sessment by an imperial decree. But this
truth- loving person, all for his hatred of one
single individual, the excellent Philip, has
declared war against the poor. Under these
circumstances I implore your holiness to ar-
ray the forces of your righteous eloquence
against his eloquence of wrong, to throw
your shield over the truth which is attacked
and at once prove her strength and the futility
of lies.

XLVIII. To Eustathius, bishop of Beryttis.'

I have gladly received the accusation,
although I have' no difficulty in disproving
the indictment. I have written not three
letters only but four ; and I suspect one of
two things ; either those who promised to
convey the letters did me wrong in the
matter of their delivery, or else your piety,
though in receipt of them, is yet anxious for
more, and so gets up a charge of idleness
against me. I, as I said before, am not dis-
tressed at the accusation, for it is plain
proof to me of the warmth of your aftection.
Continue then to ply your craft, cease not
to prefer your complaint and so to cause
pleasure to myself.

XLIX. To DamianuSy^ bishop of Sidon.

It is the nature of mirrors to reflect the
faces of them that gaze into them, and so
whoever looks at them sees his own form.
This is the same too with the pupils of the
eyes, for they shew in them the likeness of
other people's features. Of this your holi-
ness furnishes an instance, for you have not
seen my ugliness, but have beheld with ad-
miration your own beauty. I really have
none of the qualities which you have men-
tioned. It is nevertheless my prayer that
your words may be vindicated by actual fact,
and I beseech your piety by your prayers to
cause it to come to pass that your praises
may not fall to the ground through
no reality to correspond with them.


Z. To the Archimandrite Gerontius}

The characters of sou is are often depicted
in words and their unseen forms revealed ;
so now your reverence's letter exhibits the
piety of your holy soul. Your waiting for
that sentence, your anxiety, your search for
advocates and preparation for a defence,
clearly indicate your soul's zeal about divine
things. We on the contrary are in a man-
ner inactive and sleepy ; we are nurtured in
idleness, and stand in need of much assist-
ance from prayers. Give them to us, O
man beloved of God, that now at all events
we may wake up and give some care to the
soul.

LI. To the presbyter Agapius.^

The works of virtue are admirable in
themselves, but yet more admirable do they
appear if they find an eloquence able to re-
port them well. Neither of these advantages
has been lacking in the case of the bishop
beloved of God, the lord Thomas, for he
himself has contributed his own labours on
behalf of piety, and has found in your holi-
ness a tongue to bestow meet praise on
those labours. Coming as he did with such
testimony in his favour we have been all the
more delighted to see him, and, after enjoy-
ing his society for a short space, have dis-
missed him to his charge.


LII.


having


» Kustathius of Bcrytus (Bevrout) was a bad specimen of
the tiinc-servins ecclesiastic. Vicrce in his attacks on lltas,
and a prominenttncinber of the Latrociiiiuin in 449, he narrowly
csciipcd deposition himself at Chalcedon in 451 .

' At Chalcedon Damianus of Sidon voted for the deposition
of Dioscorus. (I.abbcConc. IV. 443.) In this and in the preced-
letter we find Theodoret in friendly communication with


mj;


representatives of the two antagonistic parties,
the correspondence can only be conjectured.


The date of


To Ibas, bishop of Edessa?

It is, I think, of His providential care for
our common salvation that the God of all
brings on some men certain calamities, that
chastisement may prove to be to them that
have erred a healing remedy ; to virtue's
athletes an encouragement to constancy ;
and to all who look on a beneficial exemplar.
For it is natural that when we see others
punished we should be filled with fear our-
selves. In view of these considerations I
look on the trouble of Africa as a general
advantage. In the first place when I bear
in mind their former prosperity and now
look on their sudden overthrow, I see how
variable are all human afiairs, and learn a
twofold lesson ; — not to rejoice in felicity as
though it would never come to an end, nor
be distressed at calamities as hard to bear.
Then I recall the memory of past errors, and
tremble lest I fall into like sufferings. My
main motive in now writing to you is to
introduce to your holiness the very God-


1 All that is known of Gerontius is his being the recipient
of the !ett(.T. " Arcliimandrite " = a.p\iav tt)? yoiai'<5pas, i.e. ruler
of the f lid or byre.

> Neitlicr Agaplus nor the bishop mentioned in this letter
can be identified.

' C. 43S-4S7-


LETTERS.


267


beloved bishop Cyprianus,' who starting
from the famous Africa is now compelled,
by the savagery of the barbarians, to travel
in foreign lands.

He has brought a letter to us from the
very holy bishop the lord Eusebius,^ who
wisely rules the Galatians. When your
piety has received him with your wonted
kindness I beg you to send him with a letter
to whatever pious bishops you may think fit
so that while he enjoys their kindly consola-
tion he may be the means of their receiving
heavenly and lasting benefits.

LIII. To Sophronius, bishop of Co7istantina?

Since I know, O God-beloved, how gener-
ous and bountiful is your right hand, I put
a coveted boon within your reach ; for just
as men hungry for this woi"ld's gain are
annoyed at the sight of them that stand in
need of pecuniary aid, so the liberal are
delighted, because the riches they reach after
are heavenly. A man who furnishes this
excellent opportunity is the God-beloved
bishop Cyprianus, formerly known among
them that minister to others, but now, while
he gives a deplorable account of the African
calamities, he has to look to the benevolence
of others, and depends on the bounty of
pious souls. I hope that he too will enjoy
your brotherly kindness, and will be for-
warded with letters to other havens of
refuge.

LIV. Festal,

By our divine and saving celebrations both
the down-hearted are cheered, and the joyous
made yet more joyful. This I have learnt
by experience, for, when whelmed in the
waves of despair, I have risen superior to the
surge at sight of the haven of the feast.
May your piety pray that I may be wholly
rescued from this storm, and that our loving
Lord may grant me forgetfulness of my sor-
row.

L V. Festal.

We are much distressed, for we are gifted
with the nature not of rocks but of men,
but the recollection of the Lord's Epiphany
has been to me a very potent medicine ; so
at once I write, according to the custom of
the feast, and salute your magnificence with
a prayer that you may live in prosperity and
repute.

1 Nothing seems known of this Cyprian beyond this men-
tion of his expulsion by the Vandals. The letter is thus dated
after 439.

2 Eusebius of Ancyra. The name also appears as Eulalius.
Baron. Ann. 440.

3 Telia or Constantina in Osrhoene. Sophronius was cousin
of Ibas of Edessa.


L VI . Festal.

My grief is now at its height and my
mind is seriously affected by it, but I have
thought it right to fulfil the custom of the
feast, so now I take my pen to salute your
reverence and pay the debt of affection.

L VII. To the pra/ect Eutrechius}

Besides other boons the Ruler of the uni-
verse has granted to us that of hearing of
\our excellency's honour, and of congratu-
lating at once yourself on your elevation
and your subjects on so gentle a rule. I
have thought it wrong to give no expression
to my satisfaction and to refrain from mani-
festing it by letter. Your magnificence
knows quite well how warm is our affection
towards you — an affection most warmly re-
ciprocated. And being so filled with love
we beseech the Giver of all good things ever
to pour on you His manifold gifts.

L VIII. To the consul Nomus^

I am divided in mind at the idea of send-
ing a letter to your greatness. On the one
hand I know how everything depends on
your judgment ; I sec you under the weight
of public anxieties, and so think it better to
be silent. On the other hand, being well
aware of the breadth and capacity of your
intelligence, I cannot bear to say nothing,
and am afraid of being charged with
negligence. I am moreover stimulated by
the longing regret left with me by the short
taste I had of your society. My full enjoy-
ment of it was prevented by the disease and
death of that most blessed man, so now I
think writing will be a comfort. I pray the
Master of all to guide your life that it be
ever borne on favourable breezes and so we
may reap the benefit of your kindly oare.

LIX. To Claudianus .^

Sincere friendships are neither dissolved
by distance of place nor weakened by time.
Time indeed inflicts indignities on our
bodies, spoils them of the bloom of their
beauty, and brings on old age ; but of friend-
ship he makes the beauty yet more bloom-
ing, ever kindling its fire to greater warmth
and brightness. So separated as I am from
your magnificence by many a day's march,
pricked by the goad of friendship I indite
you this letter of salutation. It is conveyed
by the standard-bearer Patroinus, a man


1 Prefect of the East in 447. Theodoret writes to him ao;ain
when in 448 or 440 Theodosius II had been induced to relegate
him to his own diocese. Vide Letters LXXX and LXXXI.

* Nomus was consul in 445.

» cf. Epp. XLI and XCIX, but there are no notes of identity.


268


THEODORET.


who on account of his high character is worthy
of all respect, for he endeavours with much
zeal to observe the laws of God. Deign,
most excellent sir, to give us by him infor-
mation of your excellency's precious health,
and of the desired fulfilment of your promise.

LX. To DioscoruSy bishop of Alexandria}
Among many forms of virtue by which
we hear that your holiness is adorned (for
all men's ears are filled by the flying fame
of your glory, which speeds in all directions)
special praise is unanimously given to your
modesty, a characteristic of wdiich our Lord
in His law has given Himself as an ensample,
saying, " Learn of me ; for I am meek and
lowly in heart ; " ^ for though God is high, or
rather most high He honoured at His incar-
nation the meek and lowly spirit. Looking
then to Him, sir, you do not behold the
multitude of your subjects nor the exaltation
of your throne, but you see rather human
nature, and life's rapid changes, and follow
the divine laws whose observance gives us
the kingdom of heaven. Hearing of this
modesty on the part of your holiness, I take
courage in a letter to salute a person sacred
and dear to God, and I offer prayers whereof
the fruit is salvation. Occasion is given me
to write by the very pious presbyter Euse-
bius, for when I heard of his journey thither
I immediately indited this letter to call upon
your holiness to support us by your prayers,
and by your reply to give us a spiritual feast,
sending to us who are hungry the blessed
banquet of your words.

LXI. To the presbyter Archibius.
I did not let the two letters which I had
just received from you go unheeded, but
wrote without delay, and gave my letter to the
very devout presbyter Euscbius.^ In conse-
quence of some delay, it was for the time post-
poned, for the weather kept the vessels within
the harboiu", inasmuch as it indicated a com-
ing storm at sea and bade sailors and pilots
wait awhile. So I discharged this debt for
the time, not that I may cease to be a debtor
but that I may increase the debt. For this
obligation becomes many times greater by
being discharged, inasmuch as they who try
to observe the laws of friendship increase
the potency of its love, and, blowing sparks
into a flame, kindle a greater warmth of
affection, while all who are fired tliereby
strive to surpass one another in love. Receive

1 Dioscorus succeeded Cyril in 444, and this letter is proba-
bly dated soon after.

' Matt. xi. 29. ...

3 This name suggests correspondence of date with the pre-
ceding. "


then my defence, my venerable friend ; for-
give me ; and send me a letter to tell me how
you are.

LXII. To the presbyter John.

A saying of one of the men who used to
be called wise was, " Live unseen." I ap-
plaud the sentiment, and have determined
to confirm the word by deed, for I see no
impropriety in gathering what is good from
others, just as bees, it is said, gather their
honey and draw forth the sweet dew from
bitter herbs as well as from them that are
good to eat, and I myself have seen them
settling on a barren rock and sucking up its
scanty moisture. Far more reasonable is it
for them that are credited with reason to
harvest what is good from every source ; so,
as I said, I try to live unseen, and above all
men am I a lover of peace and quiet. On
his recent return froin your pai't of the
world the very pious presbyter Eusebius
announced that you had held a certain
meeting, and that in the course of conver-
sation mention had been made of me, and
that your piety spoke with praise of my
insignificant self. I have therefore deemed
it ungrateful, and indeed unfair, that he who
spoke thus well and kindly of me should
fail to be paid in like coin ; for although we
have done nothing worthy of praise still we
admire the intention of them that thus praise
us, for such praise is the oft-spring of affec-
tion. Wherefore I salute your reverence,
using as a means of conveyance of my
letter him who has brought to me the un-
written words which you have spoken about
me. When, most pious sir, you have re-
ceived my letter, write in reply. You were
first in speech ; I in writing ; and I answer
speech by letter. It remains now to you to
answer letter for letter.

LXIII. Festal>

We have enjoyed the wonted blessings of
the Feast. We have kept the meiuorial
Feast of the Passion of Salvation ; by means
of the resurrection of the Lord we have
received the glad tidings of the resurrection
of all, and have hymned the ineftable loving
kindness of our God and Saviour. But the
storm tossing the churches has not suffered
us to take our share of unalloyed gladness.
If, when one member is in pain the whole
body is partaker of the pang,^ how can we
forbear from lamentation when all the body
is distressed.^ And it intensifies our dis-

1 Gamerius gives the conjectural date 447.
'Cf. I.Cor. xii. a6.


LETTERS.


269


couragement to think that these things are
the prelude of the general apostasy. May your
piety pray that since we are in this plight
we may get the divine succour, that, as the
divine Apostle phrases it, we may " be able
to withstand the evil day.'" But if any time
remain for this life's business, pray that the
tempest may pass away, and the churches re-
cover their former calm, that the enemies of
the truth may no more exult at our misfort-
unes.

LXIV. Festal.

When the Master underwent the Passion
of salvation for the sake of mankind, the
company of the sacred Apostles was much
disheartened, for they knew not clearly
what was to be the Passion's fruit. But
when they knew the salvation that grew
therefrom, they called the proclamation of the
Passion glad tidings, and eagerly oftered it
to all mankind. And they that believed, as
being enlightened in mind, cheerfully re-
ceived it, and keep the Feast in memory of
the Passion, and make the moment of death
an opportunity for entertainment and fes-
tivity. For the close connexion with it of
the resurrection does away with the sadness
of death, and becomes a pledge for the
resurrection of all. After just now taking
part in this celebration, we send you these
tidings of the feast as though they were some
fragrant perfume, and salute your piety.

LXV. To the general Zeno^

To be smitten by human ills is the common
lot of all men ; to endure them bravely and
rise superior to their attack is no longer
common. The former is of human nature ;
the latter depends upon resolution. It is on
this account that we wonder how the philo-
sophers resolved on the noblest course of life
and conquered their calamities by wisdom.
And philosophy is produced by our reason's
power, which rules our passions and is not
led to and fro by them. Now one of human
ills is grief, and it is this which we exhort
your excellency to overcome, and it will not be
difficult for you to rise victorious over this feel-
ing, if you consider human nature, and take to
heart the uselessness of sorrow. For what
gain will it be to the departed that we should
wail and lament? When, however, we re-
flect upon the common birth, the long years
of intercourse, the splendid service in the
field, and the far-famed achievements, let us
reflect that he who was adorned by them
was a man subject to the law of death ; that

1 Eph. vi. 13.

' cf. Ep. LXXI. Zeno was consul in 44S. Nothing- is
known of his brother..


moreover all things are ordained by God,
who guides the affairs of men in accordance
with His sacred knowledge of what will be
for their good. Thus have I written so far
as the limits of a letter would allow me, be-
seeching your eminence for all our sakes to
preserve your health, which is wont to be
maintained by cheerfulness and ruined by
despondency. Wherefore in my care for the
advantage of us all I have penned this letter.

LXVL To Aerius the Sophist}

She that gave you birth and nurtured you
invites you to the longed-for feast. The holy
shrine is crowned by a roof; it is fitly
adorned ; it is eager for the inhabitants for
whom it was erected. These are Apostles
and Prophets, loud-voiced heralds of the old
and new covenant. Adorn, therefore, the
feast with your presence ; receive the bless-
ing which swells forth from it, and make the
feast more joyous to us.

LXVIL To Maranas.

It was thy work, my good Sn-, to call tlie
rest also to the feast of the dedication.
Through thy zeal and energy the holy temple
has been built, and the loud-voiced heralds of
the truth have come to dwell therein, and
guard them that approach thither in faith.
Nevertheless I write and signify the season
of the feast.

LXVIII. To Epiphanms.

It was my wish to summon you to the
feast of holy Apostles and Prophets, not
only as a citizen, but as one who shares both
my faith and my home. But I am prevented
by the state of your opinions. Therefore I
put forward no other claims than those of
our country, and I invite you to participate
in the precious blessing of the holy Apostles
and Prophets. This participation no differ-
ence of sentiment hinders.

LXIX. To Eugraphia^

Had I not been unavoidably prevented, I
should no sooner have heard that your great
and glorious husband had fallen asleep than
I should straightway have hurried to your
side. I have enjoyed at your hands many
and various kinds of honour, and I owe you
full many thanks. When hindered, much
against my will, from paying my debt, I
deemed it ill-advised to send you a letter at


1 cf. Ep. XXX. This letter, conveying an invitation to a
church which Aerius had built at Cyrus, his native city, was
probably written early in the episcopate of Theodoret.

2cf. Ep.vm.


270


THEODORET.


the very moment, when your grief was at its
height ; when it was impossible for my mes-
senger to approach your excellency, and when
grief prevented you from reading what I
wrote. But now that your reason has had
time to wake from the intoxication of grief,
to repress your emotion, and to discipline
the license of sorrow, I have made bold
to write and to beseech your excellency to
bethink you of human nature, to reflect how
common is the loss you deplore, and, above
all, to accept the divine teaching, and not let
your distress go beyond the bounds of your
faith. For your most excellent husband, as
the Lord Himself said, '' is not dead but
sleepeth " ' — a sleep a little longer than he
was wont. This hope has been given us by
the Lord ; this promise we have received
from the divine oracles. I know indeed how
distressing is the separation, how most dis-
tressing ; and especially so when aflbction is
made stronger by sympathy of character and
length of time. But let your grief be for a
journey into a far country, not for a life ended.
This kind of philosophy is particularly be-
coming to them that be brought up in piety,
and it is of this philosophy that I beseech
you, my respected friend, to seek the adorn-
ment. And I do not offer you this advice as
a man labouring himself under insensibility ;
in truth my heart was grieved when I learnt
of the departure of one I loved so well. But
I call to mind the Ruler of the world and His
unspeakable wisdom, which ordains every-
thing for our good. I implore your holiness
to take these reflections to heart, to rise su-
perior to your sorrow, and praise God who is
the Master of us all. It is with ineffable
providence that He guides the lives of men.

LXX. To EustathiuSy bishop of ^gcel^

The story of the noble Mary is one fit for
a tragic play. As she says herself, and as is
attested by several others, she is a daughter of
the right honourable Eudajmon. In the catas-
trophe which has overtaken Libya she has
fallen from her father's free estate, and has
become a slave. Some merchants bought
her from the barbarians, and have sold her to
some of our countrymen. With her was sold
a maiden who was once one of her own do-
mestic servants ; so at one and the same time
the galling yoke of slavery fell on the servant
and the mistress. But the servant refused to
ignore the difference between them, nor could
she forget the old superiority : in their calam-
ity she preserved her kindly feeling, and, after


' I^uke viii. ez.

' On the seaboard of Cilicia| now Ayas, The date may be
443 or 444.


waiting upon their common masters, waited
upon her who was reckoned her fellow slave,
washed her feet, made her bed, and was
mindful of other like offices. This became
known to the purchasers. Then through all
the town was noised abroad the free estate of
the mistress and the servant's goodness. On
these circumstances becoming known to the
faithful soldiers who are quartered in our
city (I was absent at the time) they paid the
purchasers their price, and rescued the woman
from slavery. After my return, on being
informed of the deplorable circumstances,
and the admirable intention of the soldiers, I
invoked blessings on their heads, committed
the noble damsel to the care of one of the
respectable deacons, and ordered a sufficient
provision to be made for her. Ten months
had gone by when she heard that her father
was still alive, and holding high office in
the West, and she very naturally expressed a
desire to return to him. It was reported that
many messengers from the West are on the way
to the fair which is now being held in your
parts. She requested to be allowed to set out
with a letter from me. Under these circum-
stances I have written this letter, begging your
piety to take care of a noble girl, and charge
some respectable person to communicate with
mariners, pilots, and merchants, and commit
her to the care of trusty men who may be able
to restore her to her father. There is no
doubt that those who, when all hope of recov-
ery has been lost, bring the daughter to the
father, will be abundantly rewarded.

LXXI. To Zeno^ General and Cofisul.

Your fortitude rouses universal admiration,
tempered as it is by gentleness and meekness,
and exhibited to your household in kindliness,
to your foes in boldness. These qualities
indicate an admirable general. In a soldier's
character the main ornament is bravery, but
in a commander prudence takes precedence
of bravery ; after these come self-control
and fairness, whereby a wealth of virtue is
gathered. Such wealth is the reward of the
soul which reaches after good, and with its
eyes fixed on the sweetness of the fruit, deems
the toil right pleasant. For to virtue's athletes
the God of all, like some great giver of
games, has offered prizes, some in this life,
and some in that life beyond which has no
end. Those in this present life your excel-
lency has already enjoyed, and you have
achieved the highest honour. Be it also the
lot of your greatness to obtain too those
abiding and perpetual blessings, and to re-

1 Zeno w^s Consul in 44S. cf. £p. LXV,


LETTERS.


271


ceive not only the consul's robe, but also the
garment that is indescribable and divine.
Of all them that understand the greatness of
that gift this is the common petition.

LXXII. To Hennesigeiies the Assessor}
At the time when men were whelmed
in the darkness of ignorance, all did not
keep the same feasts, but celebrated distinct
ceremonies in difterent cities. In ^lis were
the Olympian games, at Delphi the Pythian,
at Sparta the Hyacinthian, at Athens the
Panathenaic, the Thesmophoria, and the Dio-
nysian. These were the most remarkable,
and further some men celebrated the revel
feast of some dcemons and some of others. But
now that those mists have been scattered by
intellectual light, in every land ami sea main-
landers and islanders together keep the feast
of our God and Saviour, and whithersoever any
one may wish to travel abroad, journey he
either towards rising or towards setting sun,
everywhere he will find the same celebration
observed at the same time. There is no longer
necessity, in obedience to the law of Moses
which was adapted to the infirmity of the Jews,
to come together into one city and keep the
feast in memory of our blessings, but every
town, every village, the country and the far-
.thest frontiers, are filled with the grace of
God, and in every spot divine shrines and pre-
cincts are consecrated to the God of all. So
through every town we observe our several
festivals and communicate with one another
in the feast. It is the same God and Lord
who is honoured in our hymns and to whom
our mystic sacrifices are offered. On this
account, as is well known, we neighbours
address one another by letter and signify the
joy that comes to us in the feast. So now
do I to you and offer the festal salutation to
your excellency. You will without doubt
reply and honour the custom of the feast.

LXXIII. To Apollo7iius.^
Themistocles the son of Neocles, the far-
famed and admirable general, is described
by the admiring historian as endowed with
natural virtue alone. Of Pericles, however,
the son of Xanthippus, it is said that he also
derived ability from his education to charm
his hearers by his persuasive eloquence, and
was gifted with the power alike of knowing
what measures should be taken and of en-
forcing them by word of mouth. In writ-
ing about him there is no impropriety in my
using his own words. These things illus-
trate your magnificence, for God, our Crea-


1 "N'nllus est sivetemporis sive personcE index." Garnerius.
' cf. Ep. cm. ApoIlonJus was Comes Sucrarum Largitio.
num in 436.


tor, hath given you natural capacity, and your
education makes its brilliance the more con-
spicuous. Nothing then is wanting to the
full complement of your high qualities save
only knowledge of their Author ; be but this
added, and the tale of virtues which we shall
have will be complete. Thus I write to
you on receiving news of your arrival, be-
seeching the Giver of all good to grant a
beam of light to your soul's eye, to show
you the greatness of His boon, to kindle
your love of that possession, and to grant the
longed for favour to him that longs for it.'

LXXIV. To Urbanus.

It has been granted to us by our generous
Lord once again to enjoy the feast and to
send to your excellency the festal salutation.
We pray that you may be well and pros-
perous, and share the inefliable and divine
boon which to them that approach supplies
the seeds of the blessings hoped for, and
gives the symbols of the life and kingdom
that have no end. These things we beseech
the loving Lord to impart to you, for it is
natural for friends to ask that their friends
may be blessed.

LXXV. To the Clergy of Bercea.

I perceive that it is with reason that I am
well disposed to your reverences, for I have
been assured by your kindly letter that my
affection was returned. For this affection of
mine towards you I have many reasons.
First of all there is the fact that your father,
that great and apostolic man, was my father
too. Secondly I look upon that truly relig-
ious bishop,^ who now rules your church, as
I might on a brother both in blood and in
sympathy. Thirdly there is the near neigh-
bourhood of our cities, and fourthly our fre-
quent intercourse with one another, which
naturally begets friendship and increases it
when it is begotten. If you like, I will
name yet a fifth, and that is that we have the
same close connexion with you as the tongue
has with the ears, the former uttering speech,
and the latter receiving it ; for you most
gladly listen to my words, and I am de-
lighted to let fall my little drop upon you.


iThucydinc^, (I. 13S,) writes of Themistocles that "to a
greater deVree th;in any other man he was to be admired for the
natural ability which he displayed; for by his inborn capacity,
he was an unrivalled iudgeofwhat the emerg;ency of the moment
required, and unsurpassed in his forecast of the future, and this
without the aid of previous or additional instruction."

The same historian (II. 60) records the speech of Pericles
in his own vindication in which he says " I think myself in-
ferior to none in knowing what measures should be taken and
in enforcing: them by word of mouth."

2 Theoctistus ; who, we learn from Letter CXXXIV, did not
prove himself a friend in need, succeeded Acacius in 43S.
Garnerius, apparently on insufficient grounds, would therefore
date the letter before this year.


272


THEODORET.


But the colophon ' of our union is our har-
mony in faith ; our refusal to accept any
spurious doctrines ; our preservation of the
ancient and apostolic teaching, which has
been brought to you by hoary wisdom and
nurtured by virtue's hardy toil. I beseech
you therefore to take greater care of the flock,
to preserve it unharmed for the Shepherd, and
boldly to utter the famous words of the patri-
arch " that which was born of beasts I offered
not unto Thee." *

LXXVI. To Uranius, Governor of Cyprus.

True friendship is strengthened by inter-
course, but separation cannot sunder it, for
its bonds are strong. This truth might easily
be shewn by many other examples, but it is
enough for us to verify what I say by our
own case. Between me and you are indeed
many things, mountains, cities, and the sea,
yet nothing has destroyed my recollection of
your excellency. No sooner do we behold any
one arriving from those towns which lie on
the coast, than the conversation is turned on
Cyprus and on its right worthy governor,
and we are delighted to have tidings of your
high repute. And lately we have been grati-
fied to an unusual degree at learning the most
delightful news of all : for what, most excel-
lent sir, can be more pleasing to us than to see
your noble soul illuminated by the light of
knowledge? For we think it right that he
who is adorned with many kinds of virtue
should add to them also its colophon, and we
believe that we shall behold what we desire.
For your nobility will doubtless eagerl}' seize
the God-given boon, moved thereto by true
friends who clearly understand its value, and
guided to the bountiful God " Who wills all
men to be saved and to come to the knowledge
of the truth," ' netting men by men's means
to salvation, and bringing them that He cap-
tures to the ageless life. The fisherman in-
deed deprives his prey of life, but our Fisher
frees all that He takes alive from death's pain-
ful bonds, and therefore " did he shew him-
self upon earth, and conversed with men," ■*
bringing men His life, conveying teaching by
means of the visible manhood, and giving to
reasonable beings the law of a suitable life and
conversation. This law He has confirmed
by miracles, and by the death of the flesh has
destroyed death. By raising the flesh He
has given the promise of resurrection to us
all, after giving the resurrection of His own
precious body as a worthy pledge of ours.
So loved He men even when they hated Him
that the mystery of the occonomy fails to

»cf. p.a6an. » Gen. xxxi. 39. »I.Tim. ii. 4. «Baruch iii.38.


obtain credence with some on account of the
very bitterness of His sufterings, and it is
enough to show the depths of His loving
kindness that He is even yet day by day call-
ing to men who do not believe. And He does
so not as though He were in need of the ser-
vice of men, — for of what is the Creator of
the universe in want? — but because He thirsts
for the salvation of every man. Grasp then,
my excellent friend. His gift ; sing praises to
the Giver, and procure for us a very great and
right goodly feast.

LXXVII. To Eulalius, bishop of Persian
Armenia.^

I know that Satan has sought to sift you as
wheat, ^ and that the Lord has allowed him so
to do that He may shew the wheat, and prove
the gold, crown the athletes, and proclaim
the victors' names. Nevertheless I fear and
tremble, not indeed distressed for the sake of
you who are noble champions of the truth, but
because I know that it comes to pass that some
men are of feebler heart. If among: twelve
apostles one was found a traitor, there is no
doubt that among a number many times as
great any one might easily discover many fall-
ing short of perfection. Thus reflecting I
have been confounded and filled with much
discouragement, for, as says the divine Apos-
tle, "whether one member suffer all the
members suffer with it."* "We are mem-
bers one of another," * and form one body,
having the Lord Christ for head.* Yet one
consolation I have in my anxiety, when I
bethink me of your holiness. For brought
up as you have been in the divine oracles,
and taught by the arch-shepherd what are
the good shepherd's marks, there is no
doubt that you will lay down your life for the
sheep. For, as the Lord says, " he that is
an hireling" when he sees " the wolf com-
ing," " fleeth because he is an hireling, and
careth not for the sheep," but " the good
shepherd giveth his life for the sheep." ®
Just so it is not in peace that the best gen-
eral shews his inborn valour, but in time of
war, by at once stimulating others and him-
self exposing himself to peril for his men.
For it would be preposterous that he should
enjoy the dignity of his command, and, in
the hour of need, run out of danger's way.
Thus the thrice blessed prophets ever acted,
making light of the safety of their bodies,
and, for the sake of the Jews who hated
and rejected them, underwent all kinds of
peril and toil. Of them the divine apostle

1 On the persecution in Persia see page 157.

»Luke xxii. 31. « Eph. iv. 25. « John X, 13, I3, H,

M.Cor. xii.26. 6C0I. i. 18.


LETTERS.


273


says " they were stoned, they were sawn
asunder, were tempted, were slain by the
sword ; they wandered about in sheepskins
and goatskins, being destitute, afflicted, tor-
mented, of whom the world was not worthy ;
they wandered in deserts and mountains,
and in dens and caves of the earth." ' Thus
the divine apostles travelled preaching over
all the world, without home, bed, bedding,
board, or any of the necessaries of life, but
scourged, racked, imprisoned, and undergo-
ing countless kinds of death. And all this
they underwent, not for the sake of their
friends, but voluntarily facing these pei'ils
for the sake of the men who were persecuting
them. A far stronger claim is made on you
now to accept the peril at present assailing
you, for the sake of fellow-believers and
brothers and children. This affection is
shown even by unreasoning animals, for
sparrows may be seen fighting with all their
force in behalf of their brood, and putting
out in their defence all the strength they
have ; other kinds of birds moreover undergo
danger for their young. But why do I
speak of birds? Bears too, and leopards,
wolves, and lions, voluntarily suffer any
pain for the safety of their offspring, for
instead of fleeing from the hunter they will
await his attack and do battle for their young.
I have adduced these instances not as
though anointing your piety for endurance
and courage by the example of brute beasts,
but to console myself in my despondency,
and to be assured that you will not leave
Christ's flock without a shepherd when
wolves make their attack, but will invoke the
Lord of the flock to help you and will heart-
ily do battle in its behalf. A crisis like this
proves who is a shepherd and who a hire-
ling ; who diligently feeds the flock and
who on the other hand feeds on the milk and
thinks little of the safety of the sheep. " But
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to
be tempted above that ye are able ; but will
with the temptation also make a way to es-
cape that ye may be able to bear it." ^ But
one thing I do beseech your reverence, and
that is to have greater heed of the unsound ;
and not only to strengthen the unstable but
also to raise the fallen, for shepherds by no
means neglect those of their flock who have
fallen sick, but keep them apart from the
rest, and try in every possible way to restore
them, and so must we do. We must make
them that are slipping stand up, and give
them a helping hand and a word of encour-
agement. When they are bitten we must
heal them ; we must


not give up the attempt


1 Heb. xi. 37, 3S.
VOL. III.


> I. Cor. X. 13,


to save them nor leave them in the devil's
maw. Thus ever acted the divine Apostle
Paul ; and when the Galatians, after receiv-
ing the baptism of salvation, and the gift of
the divine Spirit, fell away into the sickness
of Judaism, and received circumcision, he
wailed and lamented more exceedingly than
the most affectionate mother, and tended
them and freed them from that infirmity.
We can hear him exclaiming, "My little
children, of whom I travail in birth again
until Christ be formed in you." " So too the
teacher of the Corinthians, who had com-
mitted that abominable fornication, he both
chastised as might a father, and very skilfully
treated, and after cutting him off' in the first
Epistle, readmitted him in the second and
says, " So that contrariwise ye ought lather
to forgive him and comfort him lest perhaps
such a one should be swallowed up with
overmuch sorrow." ^ And again, "Lest
Satan should get an advantage of us for we
are not ignorant of his devices." ^ In
the same manner too those who partook of
things offered to idols he properly rebuked,
suitably exhorted, and freed from their griev-
ous error.

Wherefore our Lord Jesus Christ permitted
the first of the apostles, whose confession He
had fixed as a kind of groundwork and
foundation of the Church, to waver to and
fro, and to deny Him, and then raised Him
up again. And thus He gave us two les-
sons : not to be confident in ourown strength,
and to strengthen the unstable. Reach out,
therefore, I beseech you, a hand to them
that are fallen, " draw them out of the hor-
rible pit, out of the miry clay, and set their
feet upon a rock," and " put a new song into
their mouth, even praise unto our God," "
that their example of life may become an
example of salvation, that "many shall see
it and fear and shall trust in the Lord." *
Let them be prevented from participating in
the holy mysteries, but let them not be kept
from the prayer of the catechumens, nor
from hearing the divine Scriptures and the
exhortation of teachers,® and let them be
prohibited from partaking of the sacred
mysteries, not till death, but during a given


1 Gal. iv. 19. 3 II. Cor. ii. u. ^ps. xl. 3.

2 II. Cor. ii. 7. * Psalm xl. 2 and 3.

0 "It is noticeable that with systematic discipline as to the
persons taught, there was no order of teachers. It was part
of the pastoral office to watch over the souls of those who
were seeking admission to the Church, as well as those who
were in it, and thus bishops, priests, deacons, or readers
might all of them be found, when occasion required, doing the
work of a Catechist. The Doctor Audientium of whom
Cyprian speaks, was a Lector in the Church of Carthage.
Auifustine's Treatise de Catechizandis Ricdibus, was ad-
dressed to Deogratias as a deacon; the Catecheses of Cyril of
Jerusalem were delivered by him partly as a deacon, partly as
a presbyter. The word catechist implies accordingly a func-
tion, not a class." Dean Plumptre in Diet. Christ. Ant. i. 319.


274


THEODORET.


time, till they recognise their ailment, covet
health, and are properly contrite for having
abandoned their true Prince and deserted to
a tyrant, and for having left their benefactor
and gone over to their foe.

The same lessons are given us by tlic
precepts of the holy and blessed Fathers. I
write as I do, not to teach you piety, but to
remind you as a brother might, knowing
well that even the best of pilots in the mo-
ment of the storm needs monition even from
his men. So the great and fiimous Moses,
renowned throughout the world, who did
those mighty works of wonder, did not re-
fuse the counsel of Jethro, a man still sunk
in idolatrous error ; for he did not regard
his impiety, but acknowledged the soundness
of his advice. Moreover I implore your
piety to offer earnest prayer to God in my
behalf that for the remaining days of my
life I may live in accordance with His laws.

Thus have I written by the most honour-
able and religious presbyter Stephanus, whom
on account of the goodness of his character
I have seen with great pleasure.

LXXVIII. To Euscbius, bishop of Persian
Arfnenia.

Whenever anything happens to the helms-
man, either the officer in command at the
bows, or the seaman of highest rank, takes
his place, not because he becomes a self-
appointed helmsman, but because he looks
out for the safety of the ship. So again
in war, when the commander falls, the chief
tri])une assumes the command, not in the
attempt to lay violent hands on the place of
power, but because he cares for his men.
So too the thrice blessed Timothy when
sent by the divine Paul took his place.' It
is therefore becoming to your piety to ac-
cept the responsibilities of helmsman, of
captain, of shepherd, gladly to run all risk
for the sake of the sheep of Christ, and not
to leave His creatures abandoned and alone.
It is rather yours to bind up the broken, to
raise up the fallen, to turn the wanderer
from his error, and keep the whole in
health, and to follow the good shepherds
who stand before the folds and wage war
against the wolves. Let us remember too
the words of the patriarch Jacob; " In the
day the drought consumed me and the frost
by night and my sleep departed from my
eyes. The rams of thy flock I have not
eaten. That which was born of beasts I
brought not unto thee. I bare the loss of

> Cf. I. Cor. iv. 17 and I. Thess. iii. 2.


it. Of my hand didst thou require it,
whether stolen by day or stolen by night." '
These are the marks of the shepherd ; these
are the laws of the tending of the sheep.
And if of brute cattle the illustrious patri-
arch had such care, and offered this defence
to him who trusted them to his charge, what
ought not we to do who are entrusted with
the charge of reasonable sheep, and who
have received this trust from the God of all,
when we remember that the Lord for them
gave up His life? Who does not fear and
tremble when he hears the word of God
spoken through Ezekiel.'' "I judge be-
tween shepherd and sheep because ye eat
the fat and clothe yourselves with the wool
and ye feed not the flocks."^ And again,
" I have made thee a watchman unto the
house of Israel ; when thou speakest not to
warn the wicked from his wicked way,
the same wicked man shall die in his in-
iquity but his blood shall I require at thine
hand." ^ With this agree the words spoken
in 2^^1'^bles by the Lord. "Thou wicked
and slothful servant . . . Thou oughtest
to have put my money to the exchangers, and
then at my coming I should have received
the same with usury." '' Up then, I beseech
you, let us fight for the Lord's sheep. Their
Lord is near. He will certainly appear and
scatter the wolves and glorify the shepherds.
" The Lord is good unto them that wait for
Him, to the soul that seeketh Him." ^ Let
us not murmur at the storm that has arisen
for the Lord of all knoweth what is good for
us. Wherefore also when the Apostle asked
for release from his trials He would not
grant his supplication but said, " My grace
is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made
perfect in weakness."' Let us then bravely
bear the evils that befall us ; it is in war
that heroes are discerned ; in conflicts that
athletes are crowned ; in the surge of the
sea that the art of the helmsman is shewn ;
in the fire that the gold is tried. And let
us not, I beseech you, heed only ourselves,
let us rather have forethought for the rest,
and that much more for the sick than for the
whole, for it is an apostolic precept which
exclaims " Comfort the feeble minded, sup-
port the weak." ' Let us then stretch out
our hands to them that lie low, let us tend
their wounds and set them at their post to
fight the devil. Nothing will so vex him as
to see them fighting and smiting again.
Our Lord is full of loving-kindness. He re-


1 Gen. xxxi. 40. 38. 39. ^.,v,.x.

s Cf. Ezekiel iii. 17, iS. Quotatio
memory.

■» Matt. XXV. 26, a^.
^ Lamentations iii. 25,


Ezekiel xxxiv. 2, and cf. 17
40tations are apparently ft


:rom


* II. Cor. xii. 9,
7 I. Thess. V. 14.


LETTERS.


275


ceives the repentance of sinners. Let us
hear His own words: "As I live saith the
Lord I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his
way and live." ' So He prefaced His words
with an oath, and He who forbids oaths to
others swore Himself to convince us how
He desires our repentance and salvation.
Of this teaching the divine books, both the
old and the new, are full, and the precepts
of the holy Fathers teach the same.

But not as though you were ignorant have
I written to you ; rather have I reminded
you of what you know, like those who stand-
ing safe upon the shore succour them that are
tossed by the storm, and shew them a rock,
or give warning of a hidden shallow, or catch
and haul in a rope that has been thrown.
*' And the God of peace shall bring Satan
under your feet shortly " ^ and shall gladden
our ears with news that you have passed from
storm to calm, at His word to the waves
"Peace be still."'

And do you too offer prayers for us, for
you who have undergone peril for His sake
can speak with greater boldness.''

LXXIX. To Anatolius the Patrician^

The Lord God has given your excellency
to us to be at the present time a source of
very great comfort, and has afforded us a
meet haven for the storm. We have there-
fore confidence in informing your lordship
of our distress. Not long ago we acquainted
your excellency that the right honourable
Count Rufus had shewn us an order written
in the imperial handwriting commanding the
gallant general to provide with prudence and
diligence for our residence at Cyrus, and not
to suffer us to depart to another city, on the
ground that we are endeavouring to summon
synods to Antioch, and are disturbing the
orthodox.* Now I make known to you
that in obedience to the imperial letter I
have come to Cyrus. After an interval of
six or seven days they sent the devoted
Euphronius, the commander, with a letter
begging me to acknowledge in writing that
the imperial order had been shown me. I
therefore promised to remain in Cyrus and
its adjacent district, and to tend the sheep
entrusted to my care. I therefore beseech
your excellency to make exact enquiry, both

1 Ezekiel 33. i. ^ Rom. xvi. 20. * Mark iv. 39.

* These letters on the Persian persecution might be placed
anywhere while it lasted c. 420-450. Garnerius suggests 443.
Eulalius and Eusebius are unknown.

6 cf. Epp. XLV. XCII. CXI. CXIX. CXXI. CXXXVIII.

8 This edict of Theodosius is dated by Tillemont March
30, 449. Theodoret received the order for his relegation to
Cyrus while he was at Antioch, and at once submitted.


whether these orders had really been issued,
and for what reason. I am indeed conscious
of many other sins, but I do not know that
I have erred either against the Church of
God, or against public order. And I write
as I do, not because I take it ill to have to
live at Cyrus, for in truth she is dearer to me
than any of the inost famous cities, because
my office in her has been given me by God-
But the fact of my being bound to her not
by preference but by compulsion does seem
somewhat grievous, and besides it does give
a handle to the wicked to grow bold and to
refuse to obey our exhortations.

Under these circumstances I beseech your
lordship, if no order of the kind has really
been issued, to let me know ; but if the letter
really comes from the victorious emperor,
tell his pious majesty not readily to believe
calumnies, nor give ear to accusers alone, but
to demand an account from the accused.
Though really the evidence of the facts alone
was quite enough to persuade his piety that
the charges against me were false. For when
did I ever make myself offensive about
anything to his serene majesty or his chief
officers.? Or when was I ever obnoxious
to the many and illustrious owners here.'*
It is on the contrary well known to your
excellency that I have spent a considerable
portion of my ecc lesiastical revenues in erect-
ing porticoes and baths, building bridges, and
making further provision for public objects.
But if any persons take it ill that I mourn
over the ruin of the churches of Phcenicia,
be it known to your lordship that it is im-
possible for me not to grieve when I see the
horn of the Jews exalted on high and the
Christians in tears and sorrow, though they
send them to the very ends of the earth.'
We cannot fight against the apostolic decrees,
for we remember the word of the Apostle
which says, "We ought to obey God rather
than men," ^ and more terrible to us than any
of the pains of this life is the "judgment
seat of Christ " ^ the Lord, before whom we
shall all stand to render an account of our
words and of our deeds. On account of
that judgment seat the hardships of this
present life must be endured. For them
that suffer wrong the hope of what is to
come is consolation enough, but to us the
loving Lord has given further comfort in
you, most excellent sir, whose life is bright
with piety and faith.

1 The allusion appears to be to the edict of Feb. 44S, order-
ing the deposition of Theodoret's friend Irenaeus bishop of
Tyre, on the ground of his being a digamus and a heretic.
Iren^us was degraded from the priesthood and forbidden to
appear in Tyre. cf. Epp. III. XII. XVI. XXXV.

3 Acts V. 29. ^ Romans xiv, 10.


T 2


2^6


THEODORET.


LXXX. To the prefect Eutrechius}

I have been much astonished that no in-
formation has been sent me by your lordship
of the plots against me. To counteract
them would vcr^^ likely have been a dilhcult
matter to any one not having the means of
convicting their promoters of lies ; but to
give information of what was going on
needed not so much power as friendliness,
and we had hoped that when your excellency
had been summoned to the imperial city, and
had been chosen to adorn the prefect's exalted
seat, every tempest of the Church would be
calmed down. But we suil'er from such
disturbances as we did not see even in the
beginning of the dispute. The churches of
Phoinicia are in trouble ; in trouble are those
of Palestine, as all luianimously report; and
the distress is proved by the letters of the
most pious bishops. All the saints among
us groan and every pious congregation is
lamenting. While looking for a cessation
of our former troubles we have been afflicted
with new ones. I myself have been for-
bidden to quit the coasts of Cyrus, if the
dispatch is true which has been shewn me,
and which is said to be an autograph of our
victorious emperor. It runs as follows
" Since so and so the bishop of this city is
continually assembling synods and this is a
cause of trouble to the orthodox, take heed
with proper diligence and wisdom that he
resides at Cyrus, and does not depart from
it to another city." I have accepted the
sentence, and remain still. Your lordship
can bear witness to my sentiments, for you
know how on my arrival at Antioch I de-
parted in a hurry, on account of those who
wished to detain me there. And those were
unquestionably wrong who gave both their
ears to my calumniators and would not keep
one for me. Even to murderers, and to
them that despoil other men's beds, an op-
portunity is given of defending themselves,
and they do not receive sentence till they
have been convicted in their own presence,
or have made confession of the truth of the
charges on which they are indicted. But a high
priest who has held the office of bishop for five
and twenty years * after passing his previous
life in a monastery, who has never troubled
a tribunal, nor yet on any single occasion
been prosecuted by any man, is treated as a
mere plaything of calumny, without being
allowed even the common privilege of gravc-

I Vide Letter LVII.

2 This brings us to about the year 423, when Theodoret was
consecrated bishop at the approximate age of 30, after passing
seven years in the monastery of Nicerte, three miles from
Apamca, and one hundred and twenty from Cyrus. Cf. lip.
CXIX,


robbers of being questioned as to the truth
of the accusations brought against them.
Yet they have done wrong ; I have done no
wrong. But I am ready for even more
serious troubles. Though they be ever so
much annoyed at my bewailing the calam-
ities of PhcEuicia I shall not cease so to do
so long as I behold them. The only judgment
that is awful to me is the judgment of God.
For them, nevertheless, I pray that from the
God of all they may obtain forgiveness; for
your excellency, that you may ever live in
honour, excel in all good things, speak
boldly against lies, and fight on the side of
the truth. And let the contrivers of this plot
know that, though I depart to the uttermost
ends of the earth, God will not sufler the
confirmation of impious doctrines, but will
nod His head and destroy them that bow
down to doctrines of abomination.

LXXXI. To the Consul Nonms}

For but a brief portion of a day I enjoyed
the society of your lox'dship, for I was
deprived by unavoidable circumstances of
what I so earnestly desired. I had hoped
that our short interview would have kindled
good will and friendly intercourse, but I was
disappointed. I have now written you two
letters, without receiving any reply ; and by
the imperial decree I am forbidden to travel
beyond the boundaries of Cyrus. For this
apparent punishment cause there is none,
except the fact of my convening an episcopal
synod. No indictment was published ; no
prosecutor appeared ; the defendant was not
convicted ; but the sentence was given. We
submit, for we know the reward of the
wronged. I am aware however that Festus
the Procurator who was entrusted with the
government of the Jews when they de-
manded the death of the divine Paul, publicly
replied, "It is not lawful to us Romans to
deliver any man before that he which is ac-
cused have the accusers face to face, and have
license to answer for himself concerning the
crime laid against him." ^ Now these words
were spoken by one who was no believer in
our Master, Christ, but was a slave to the
errors of polytheism. I was never asked
whether I was assembling synods or not, or
for what reason I was assembling them,
or what umbrage this could give, either
to the Church or to the government;
yet just as though I had been a very guilty


• Cf. Letter LVIII. Nomus was an influential officer of
Theodosius IL, being " Maffisler Offiiciortim" \n a^, consul
in 445 and patrician in 449. A friend^ofDioscorus, he opposed
Tluodoret and was instrumental in procuring the decree which
confined the bishop to his diocese in 449.

' Acts XXV. 16. Observe the variations in the citation.


LETTERS.


^77


criminal I am prohibited from visiting other
cities ; while to every one else every city lies
open, and that not only to Arians and Euno-
mians, but to Manichees and Marcionists, to
them that are sick with the unsoundness of
Valentinus and Montanus, aye to pagans
and Jew^s, while I, a foremost champion of
the teaching of the Gospels, am from every
city excluded. Some however maintain that
I do not adhere to it. Then let there be a
council : let there be assembled there the
godly bishops who are capable of judging :
then let there be assembled those in office
and in rank who have been instructed in
divine lore. Let me state what I hold, and
let the judges declare what opinion is agree-
able to the teaching of the Apostles. I have
not thus written from any desire to see the
great city, nor from trying to travel to any
other. \n fact I rather love the quiet of them
whose wish is to administer the churches in
a monastic state. I should like your excel-
lency to know that neither in the time of
the blessed and sainted Theodotus, nor in
that of John of blessed memory, nor in that
of the very holy lord bishop Domnus, did I
of my own accord enter Antioch ; five or six
times I was invited but I with difficulty as-
sented, and when I did assent it was in
obedience to the canon of the Church which
orders him who is summoned to a synod
and refuses to be present to be held guilty.
And when I appeared, what thing unpleas-
ing to God did I do.? Was it that I re-
moved from the sacred lists the names of such
and such a man guilty of unspeakable wicked-
ness.'' Was it that I ordained to the priest-
hood men of character and of honourable
life .? Was it that I preached the gospel to
the people.? If these things are worthy of
indictment and punishment, I gladly welcome
yet severer punishments for their sake.
My accusers compel me to speak. Even
before my conception my parents promised
to devote me to God ; from my swaddling-
bands they devoted me according to their
promise and educated me accordingly ; the
time before my episcopate I spent in a
monastery and then was unwillingly conse-
crated ' bishop. Five and twenty years I so
lived that I was never summoned to trial by
any one nor ever brought accusation against
any. Not one of the pious clergy who were
under me ever frequented a court. In so
many years I never took an obol nor a gar-
ment from any one. Not one of my domes-
tics ever received a loaf or an egg. I could
not endure the thought of possessing any-
thing save the rags I wore. From the

1 Cf. note on page 376.


revenues of my see I erected public porti-
coes ; I built two large bridges ; I looked
after the public baths. On finding that
the city was not watered by the river run-
ning by it, I built the conduit, and supplied
the ch-y town with water. But not to men-
tion these matters I led eight villages of
Marcionists with their neighbourhood into
the way of truth ; another full of Eunomians
and another of Arians I brought to the light
of divine knowledge, and, by God's grace,
not a tare of heresy was left among us.
All this I did not effect with impunity ;
many a time I shed my blood ; many a time
was I stoned by them and brought to the
very gates of death. But I am a fool in my
boasting, yet my words are spoken of neces-
sity, not of consent. Once the thrice blessed
Paul was compelled to act in the same way
to stop the mouths of his accusers. Yet I
put up with seeming ignominy and count it
high honour, for I hear the voice of the
Apostle crying, " All that will live godly in
Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution."'

But I beseech your excellency to give
heed to the affiiirs of the Church, and calm
the storm that has arisen, for in fact not even
at the beginning of the dispute was the
Church beset by such confusion. No one
informs you of the greatness of the peril,
of the lamentations of the Christians in Phoe-
nicia and of the wails of our holiest monks.
Wherefore I have written to you at some
length, that on learning the agitation of the
Church your excellency might stay it, and
reap the fruits of the benefit which such
action will produce.

LXXXII. To EusebiuSy bishop of Ancyra.^

I had hoped at this time to hear frequently
from your holiness. Suffering as I do under
charges which are plain calumny I stand in
need of brotherly consolation. For they
who are now renewing the heresy of Mar-
cion, Valentinus, Manes, and of the other
Docetae, annoyed at my publicly pillorying
their heresy, have endeavoured to deceive the
imperial ears, by calling me a heretic and
falsely accusing me of dividing into two sons
our one Lord Jesus Christ, the divine Word
made man. Their utterances did not meet
with the success that they expected. A
despatch was therefore written to the right
honourable and glorious commander and
consul, containing indeed no accusation of
heresy, but certain other charges no less

1 II. Tim. iii. 12.

2Eusebius was present at the Council of Chalcedon in 451
Mansi vi. 565 c. See also Letter CIX. A Latin translation of
this letter is in Baronius ann. 443.


278


THEODORET.


unfounded. They alleged that I was en-
deavouring to assemble frequent synods at
Antioch ; that certain persons thereupon
took umbrage ; that for this reason I ought
to desist from these proceedings and manage
the cliurches entrusted to my charge. When
this communication was shewn me I caught
at the sentence as an opportunity of good.
For in the first place I gained the rest I so
much longed for ; furthermore I trust in the
wiping out of the stains of the many errors
I have committed, on account of the wrong
devised against me by the enemies of truth.
Even in this present life our supreme Ruler
very plainly shews us what care He takes of
them that suffer wrong. While I have been
remaining at rest, prisoned within the
boundaries of my own country ; while
throughout the East all men have been
distressed and have been bitterly lamenting
though compelled to silence by the terror
that has fallen on them (for what has
befallen me has stricken terror into the
hearts of all) the Lord has stooped from
heaven, has convicted my calumniators of
their falsehood, and laid bare their impious
intent. They armed even Alexandria
against me and by means of their worthy
instruments are dinning into all men's ears
that I am j^reaching two sons instead of one.

I, on the contrary, am so far from holding
this abominable opinion, that, on finding
some of the holy fathers of the Nicene
Council opposing in their treatises the mad-
ness of Arius and forced in their strug-
gle against their opponents to make too
marked a distinction, I have objected, and
refused to admit such distinction, for I know
how the exigencies of the distinction result
in exaggeration.

And lest any one should suppose that I
am speaking as I do tlirough fear, let any
one who likes get hold of my ancient writ-
ings written before the Council of Ephesus,
and those written after it twelve years ago.
For by God's grace I interpreted all the
Prophets and the Psalms and the Apostles :
I wrote long ago against the Arians, the
Macedonians, the sophistry of Apollinarius
and the madness of Marcion : and in every
one of my books by God's grace the mind
of the Church shines clear. Moreover I
have written a book on the Mysteries,
another on Providence, another on the Qiies-
tions of the Magi, a life of the Saints, and
besides these, not to name every one in
detail, many more.'


iThe works mentioned are (a) those on the Octatcucli, the
BooUs of Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles, the Psalms, Can-
ticles, and the Prophets; (/3) on the xiv Epp. of St. Paul,
including the Hebrews; the Dialogues, and the Ilicreiicarum


I have enumerated them not for ambition's
sake, but to challenge my accusers and my
judges to put any of my writings they may
choose to the test. They will find that by
God's grace I hold no other opinion than
just that which I have received from holy
Scripture.

When, then, your holiness has heard this
from me, I beg you to inform the ignorant
and to persuade the unbridled tongues that
revile me and all who are deceived b}' them,
not to believe what they have heard of me
from my calumniators. Beg them to believe
rather the Lavs^giver when he exclaims
' ' Men shall not receive a false report." '
Ask them to wait till the facts are proved.

My piayer is that the churches may enjoy
a calm and that this long and painful storm
may vanish away. But if the multitude of
our sins suffer not this to come to pass ; if
for their sakes we are delivered to the sifter ;
we pray that we may share the perils under-
gone for the faith, in order that since we
have not the confidence that comes from this
life, at least for guarding the faith in its integ-
rity we may meet with pity and pardon in
the day of the appearance of the Lord. And
for this we beseech your holiness to join us
in our prayers.

LXXXIII. Of Theodoretus, bishop of Cyrus,
to JDioscorus, Archbishop of Alexandria.

To them that suffer under false accusation
the greatest comfort is given by the words of
Scripture. When such a sufferer is wounded
by the lying words of an unbridled tongue,
and feels the sharp stings of distress, he
remembers the story of the admirable Joseph,
and as he beholds that model of chastity, an
exemplar of every kind of virtue, suffering,
under a calumnious charge, imprisoned and
fettered for invading another man's bed, and
spending a long time in a dungeon, his pain
is lightened by the remedy that the story fur-
nishes. So again when he finds the gentle
David, hunted as a tyrant by Saul, and then
catching his enemy and letting him go un-
harmed, an anodyne is given him in his dis-
tress. But when he sees the Lord Christ
Himself, Maker of tlie ages, Creator of all
things, very God, and Son of the very God,
called a gluttonous man and a wine bibber
by the wicked Jews, it is not only consolation
but rather great joy that is given him in that
he is deemed worthy of sharing the suffer-
ings of the Lord.

Fahulnrum Coinf>i'iidiuvi ; (y) XII Hooks on the mysteries of
the Kaitli ; (<:) the " lie Proxu dentin; " (Q on the Questions of
the Moi,''i,:\nA (>)) \.\\c Religious History . Of these (y) and
(0 arc lost.
I K.\. xxiii. I. Ixx. and niarg.


LETTERS.


279


Thus I was compelled to write when I
read the letters of your holiness to the most
pious and sacred archbishop Domnus, for
there was contained in them the statement
that certain men have come to the illustrious
city administered by your holiness, and have
accused me of dividing the one Lord Jesus
Christ into two sons, and this when preach-
ing at Antioch, where innumerable hearers
swell the congregation. I wept for the men
who had the hardihood to contrive the vain
calumny against me. But I grieved, and, my
Lord, forgive me, forced as I am by pain to
speak, that your pious excellency did not re-
serve one ear unbiassed for me instead of be-
lieving the lies of my accusers. Yet they
were but three or four or about a dozen,
while I have countless hearers to testify to
the orthodoxy of my teaching. Six years I
continued teaching in the time of Theodotus,
bishop of Antioch, of blessed and sacred
memory, who was famous alike for his dis-
tinguished career and for his knowledge of
the divine doctrines. Thirteen years I taught
in the time of bishop John of sacred and
blessed memory, who was so delighted at my
discourses as to raise both his hands and
again and again to start up : your holiness in
your own letters has borne witness how,
brought up as he was from boyhood with the
divine oracles, the knowledge which he had
of the divine doctrines was most exact. Be-
sides these this is the seventh year of the
most pious lord archbishop Domnus.* Up
to this present day, after the lapse of so long
a time, not one of the pious bishops, not one
of the devout clergy has ever at any time
found any fault with my utterances. And
with how much gratification Christian people
hear our discourses your godly excellency
can easily learn, alike from those who have
travelled thence hither, and from those who
reached your city from us.

All this I say not for the sake of boasting,
but because I am forced to defend myself.
It is not the fame of my sermons to which I
am calling attention ; it is their orthodoxy
alone. Even the great teacher of the world
who is wont to style himself last of saints and
first of sinners, that he might stop the mouths
of liars was compelled to set forth a list of
his own labours ; and in shewing that this ac-
count of his sufferings was of necessity, not
of free will, he addied "I am become a fool
in glorying; ye have compelled me."^ I
own myself wretched — aye thrice wretched.
I am guilty of many errors. Througli faith
alone I look for finding some mercy in the

1 Domnus succeeded his Uncle John at Antioch in 441.
»II. Cor. xii. II.


day of the Lord's appearing. I wish and I
pray that I may follow the footprints of the
holy Fathers, and I earnestly desire to keep
undefiled the evangelic teaching which was
in sum delivered to us by the holy Fathers
assembled in council at the Bithynian Nicaea.
I believe that there is one God the Father
and one Holy Ghost proceeding from the
Father : ' so also that there is one Lord
Jesus Christ, only begotten Son of God, be-
gotten of the Father before all ages, bright-
ness of His glory and express image of the
Father's person,* ori account of man's salva-
tion, incarnate and made man and born of
Mary the Virgin in the flesh. For so are we
taught by the wise Paul "Whose are the
Fathers and of whom as concerning the
flesh Christ came, who is over all, God
blessed for ever. Amen," ^ and again " Con-
cerning His Son Jesus Christ our Lord which
was made of the seed of David according to
the flesh and declared to be the Son of God
with power according to the spirit of holi-
ness."* On this account we also call the
holy Virgin " Theotokos," * and deem those
who object to this appellation to be alienated
from true religion.

In the same manner we call those men
corrupt and exclude them from the assembly
of the Christians, who divide our one Lord
Jesus Christ into two persons or two sons or
two Lords, for we have heard the very divine
Paul saying " One Lord, one faith, one bap-
tism " •* and again " One Lord Jesus Christ
by Whom are all things " ' and again " Jesus
Christ the same yesterday and to-day and for
ever" ^ and in another place — " He that de-
scended is the same also that ascended up
far above all heavens." ^ And countless
other passages of this kind may be found in
the Apostle's writings, proclaiming the one
Lord.

So too the divine Evangelist exclaims,
" And the Word was made flesh and dwelt
among us and we beheld His glory, the glory
as of the only begotten of the Father, full of
grace and truth." '"

And his namesake exclaimed, " After me
Cometh one who is preferred before me for He
was before me." " And when he had shewn
one person, he expressed both the divine and
the human, for the words "man" and
" comes" are human, but the phrase "He
was before me" expresses the divine. But

iThe first formal insertion of the addition Jiliogue is said to
be in a Creed put forth at a council of Toledo about A.D. 400.
At the third council of Toledo A.D. 589, the Nica;no.Constan-
tinopolitan Creed w.as promulgated with the addition — " ex
Patrc et Filio procedentein."

2Heb. i. 3. cEph. iv. s. " John i. 14.

3 Rom. ix. 5. 7 I. Cor. viii. 6. "John i. 15.

* Rom. i. 3, 4. 8 Heb. xiii. 8.

6 cf. note on page 213. » Ephes. iv. 10.


28o


THEODORET.


nevertheless he did not recognise a distinc-
tion between Him who came after and Him
who was before, but owned the same being
to be eternal as God, but born man, after
himself, of the Virgin.

Thus too, the thrice blessed Thomas, when
he had put his hand on the flesh of the Lord,
called Him Lord and God, saying "My Lord
and my God." ' For through the visible
nature he discerned the invisible.

So do we know no difference between the
same flesh and the Godhead but we own
God the Word made man to be one Son.

These lessons we have learnt alike from
the holy Scripture and from the holy Fathers
who have expounded it, Alexander and
Athanasius, loud voiced heralds of the truth,
who have been ornaments of your apostolic
see ; from Basil and from Gregory and the
rest of the lights of the world ; and that, in our
endeavour to shut the mouths of them that
dare to oppose the blessed Theophilus and
Cyril, we use their works, our own writings
testify. For we are most anxious by the
medicines supplied by very holy men to heal
them that deny the distinction between the
Lord's flesh and the Godhead, and who main-
tain at one moment that the divine nature was
changed into flesh, and at another that the
flesh was transmuted into nature of Godhead.

For they clearly instruct us in the dis-
tinction between the two natures, and pro-
claim the immutability of the divine nature,
calling the flesh of the Lord divine as being
made flesh of God the Word ; but the doc-
trine that it was transmuted into nature of
Godhead they repudiate as impious.

I think that your excellency is well aware
that Cyril of blessed memory often wrote to
me, and when he sent his books against Julian
to Antioch, and in like manner his book on the
scapegoat, he asked the blessed John, bishop
of Antioch, to shew them to the great
teachers of the East; and in compliance with
this request the blessed John sent us the books.
I read them with admiration, and I wrote to
Cyril of blessed memory ; and he wrote back
to me praising my exactitude and kindness.
This letter I have preserved.

That I twice subscribed the writings of
John of blessed memory concerning Nes-
torius my own hand bears witness, but this
is the kind of thing whispered about me by
men who try to conceal their own unsound-
ness by calumniating me.

Therefore I implore your holiness to turn
your back on the liars ; to give heed to the
Church's quiet and either to heal by salutary

1 John XX. 2S.


medicines them that are trying to destroy the
doctrines of the truth, or, if they refuse to
accept your treatment, to expel them from the
fold, to the end that the sheep may be spared
from contagion. I beg you to give me your
customary salutation. That I have written
you my true sentiments is proved by my
works on the holy Scriptures and against
the Arians and Eunomians.

I will in addition write yet a brief word.
If any one refuses to confess the holy Virgin
to be " Theotokos," or calls our Lord Jesus
Christ bare man, or divides into two sons Him
who is one only begotten and first born of
every creature, I pray that he may fall from
hope in Christ, and let all the people say
amen, amen.

Now that I have thus spoken, deign, my
lord, to give me your sacred prayers, and to
cheer me by a letter in reply telling me that
your holiness has turned your back on my
accusers.

I and my household salute all thy brother-
hood in piety hi Christ.

LXXXIV. To the bishops of Cilicia}

Your piety has heard of the calumnies
directed against me. The opponents of the
truth allege that I divide our one Lord Jesus
Christ, the only begotten Son of God, into
two sons, and it is said by some that a ground
for their calumny is derived from a handful
of men among you who hold these opinions,
and who divide God the Word made man
into two sons. They ought to listen to those
words of the Apostle which openly declare
" one Lord Jesus Christ by whom are all
things,"" and again "one Lord, one faith,
one baptism." ^ They ought to have followed
the Master's teaching, for the Lord Himself
says "And no man hath ascended up to
heaven, but he that came down from heaven,
even the Son of man which is in Heaven."*
And again "If ye shall see the Son of Man
ascend up where He was before." * And
the tradition of holy baptism teaches ns that
there is one Son, just as there is one Father
and one Holy Ghost. I hope then that your
piety will deign, if there really are any,
though I cannot believe it, who disobey the
apostolic doctrines to close their mouths, to
rebuke them as the laws of the Church re-
quire, and teach them to follow the footsteps
of the holy Fathers and preserve undefiled
the faith laid down at Nicaaa in Bithynia by
the holy and blessed Fathers, as summing

1 This encyclical is probably of the same date as the pre-
ceding.

' I. Cor. viii. 6. *Johniii. 13.

' Ephcs. iv. 5. *Johnvi.63.


LETTERS.


2S1


up the teaching of Evangelists and Apostles.
For it becomes you who love God to give
heed both to God's glory and our common
credit, and not to overlook the attacks
which are made upon us all through the
ignorance or contentiousness of these few
men — if they really are guilty, and if they
are not, like ourselves, suftering from the
whetted tongues of false accusers.

Deign to remember us m your prayers to
God, for so the law of love ordains.

LXXXV. To the bishop Basil.''
The chief good is said by the divine Paul
to be love,^ and by love he ordered the
nurslings of the faith to be fed. Of this love
your piety possesses great wealth, and so has
told me what was befitting and given me
pleasant news. For to them that fear the
Lord what can be pleasanter than the health
and harmony of the doctrines of the truth }
Be well assured, most godly sir, that we
were much delighted to hear the intelligence
of our common friend; and in proportion to
our previous distress at hearing that he de-
scribed the nature of flesh and of Godhead as
one, and openly attributed the passion of
salvation to the impassible Godhead, so
Avere all rejoiced to read the letters of your
holiness, and to learn that he maintains in
their integrity the properties of the natures,
and denies both the change of God the Word
into flesh, and the mutation of the flesh into
the nature of Godhead, maintaining on the
contrary that in the one Son, our Lord Jesus
Christ, God the Word made man, the prop-
erties of either nature abide unconfounded.
We praise the God of all for the harmony of
divine faith. We have however written to
either Cilicia,^ although our intelligence is
imperfect, as to whether there are really
any opponents of the truth, and have charged
the godly bishops to search and examine if
there are any who divide the one Lord Jesus
Christ into two sons, and either to bring
them to their senses by admonition, or cut
them off" from the roll of the brethren. For
in fact we equally repudiate both those who
dare to assert one nature of flesh and God-
head, and those who divide the one Lord
Jesus Christ into two sons and strive to go
beyond the definitions of the Apostles.

But let your holiness be well assured that
we are disposed to peace. For if the prophet
says, " With them that hate peace I was

1 There appears to be nothing in this letter or in Letter CII.
also addressed to bishop Basil to identify the recipient. Basil
bishop of Seleucia in Isauria w.is at the Latrocinium and at
Chalcedon. Basil, bishop of Trajanopolis was also present
at the same councils. Garnerius is in favour of the former, and
notes the date as 448.

a I. Cor. xiii. 13. » Vide note on p. 44-


peaceful," ' much more readily do we wel-
come the peace of God.

Some of those men who have been fed on
lies have hurried to Alexandria and patched
up calumnies against me, with the result
that the godly bishop of that city, led away
by their statements, although he had been
fully informed by my letters, has sent a pious
bishop to the imperial city. I beg you there-
fore to shew your accustomed kindness to
him, and to confront falsehood with the truth.

LXXXVi:^ To Flavianus, bishop of Con-
stantinople.

At the present time, most God-beloved
lord, I have received many buftetings of bil-
lows, but I called upon the great Pilot, and
have been able to stand firm against the
storm ; the attacks, however, now made
upon me transcend every story in tragedy.
In relation to the attacks which are being
plotted against the apostolic faith, I thought
that I should find an ally and fellow-worker
in the most godly bishop of Alexandria, the
lord Dioscorus,^ and so sent him one ot our
pious presbyters, a man of remarkable pru-
dence, with a synodical letter informing his
piety that we abide in the agreement made
in the time of Cyril of blessed memory, and
accept the letter written by him as well as
that written by the very blessed and sainted
Athanasius to the blessed Epictetus, and,
before these, the exposition of the faith laid
down at Nicaea in Bithynia by the holy and
blessed Fathers. We exhorted him to in-
duce those who are unwilling to abide by
these documents at once to abide by them.
But one of the opposite party, who keep up
these disturbances, by tricking some of
those who are on the spot and contriving
countless calumnies against myself has
stirred an iniquitous agitation against me.

But the very godly bishop Dioscorus has
written us a letter such as never ought to
have been written by one who has learnt
from the God of all not to listen to vain
words. He has believed the charges brought
against me as though he had made personal
enquiry into every one of them, and had ar-
rived at the truth after questioning, and has
thus condemned me. I however have bravely
borne the calumnious charge, and have
written him back a courteous letter, repre-
senting to his piety that the whole charge is

1 Ps. cxx. 6 and 7. Ixx.

2 This important letter may be placed between the sentence
of deposition issued by Dioscorus in Feb. 44S and the im-
perial edict of March 449; probably before November 44S,when
Eutyches was arraigned before the Synod of Constantinople
presided over by Flavian.

3 cf. Letter LX, written probably not long after the conse.
cration of Dioscorus in 444.


2S2


TIIEODORET.


false, and that not one of the godly bishops
of the East holds opinions contrary to the
apostolic decrees. Moreover the pious clergy
whom he sent as messengers have been con-
vinced by the actual evidence of the facts.
These however he has dismissed unheeded,
and, lending his ears to my calumniators,
has acted in a manner quite incredible, were
it not that the whole church bears witness to
it. He put up with them tliat were crying
Anathema against me ; nay he stood up in
his place and confirmed their words by add-
ing his voice to theirs. Besides all this he
sent certain godly bishops to the imperial
city, as we learnt, in the liope of increasing
the agitation against me. 1 in the first place
have for champion Ilim who seeth all things,
for it is on behalf of the divine decrees that
I am wrestling — next after Ilim I invoke
your holiness to fight in defence of the faith
that is attacked, and do battle on behalf of
the canons that are being trodden under foot.
When the blessed Fathers were assembled in
that imperial city' in harmony with them
that had sat in council at Nicaea, they distin-
guished the dioceses, and assigned to each
diocese the management of its own aflairs,
expressly enjoining that none should intrude
from one diocese into another. They or-
dered that the bishop of Alexandria should
administer the government of Egypt alone,
and every diocese its own afiairs.*

Dioscorus, however, refuses to abide by
these decisions ; he is turning the see of the
blessed Mark upside down ; and these things
he does though he perfectly well knows that
the Antiochene metropolis possesses the
throne of the great Peter, who was teacher
of the blessed Mark, and first and coryphaeus
of the chorus of the apostles.^

But I know the majesty of the see, and I
know and take measure of myself. I have
learnt from the first the humility of the
Apostles. I beseech your holiness not to
overlook the trampling underfoot of the holy
canons, and to stand forward zealously as
champion of the divine faith, for in that faith
we have hope of our salvation and on its ac-


1 i.e. in Constantinople in 3S1. The second Canon of the
Council is referred to, — conhning each bishop ti> his own
" diocese," i.e. :i tract comprising more than one province. So
the bishop of Alexandria was restricted to Ei^ypt.

~ The immediate cause of this enactment by tlie Constnnti-
nopolitan Fathers was the interference of I'etcr of Alexandria
in the appointment to the see of Constantinople, when the or-
thodox party nominated Gregory of Nazianzus. cf. p. 1^6.

3 The third Canon of Constantinople had enacted that hence-
forth the see of the new capital should rank next after Koine.
In the text the precedence of Antioch before Alexandria is
based on association with St. Peter. "The so-called Cathedra
Petri, which is kept in a repository of the wall of the apse of
the Vatican Basilica," and was " exhibited in 1S66" " is proba-
bly a throne made for or presented to Charles the Bold in S75."
Diet. Christ. Ant. ii. 1060. For the connexiun of St. Peter with
Antioch sec Routh Kell. Sac. i. 179.


count are confident that we shall meet with
mercy.

But that your holiness may not be ignorant
of this, know, my lord, that he shewed his
ill-will towards me from the time of my
assenting, in obedience to the canons of the
holy Fathers, to the synodical letters issued
in your see in the time of Proclus of blessed
memory ; on this point he has chidden me
once and again on the ground of my violating
the rights of the church of Antioch and, as he
says, of that of Alexandria. Remembering
this, and finding, as he thinks, an oppor-
tunity, he has exhibited liis hostility. But
nothing is stronger than the truth. Truth is
wont to conquer even with few words. I be-
seech your holiness to remember me in your
prayers to the Lord that I may have power
to prevail against the waves that are beating
me hither and thither.

LXXXVII, To DomnuSy bishop of Apamea.^

The law of brotherly love demanded that
I should I'eceive many letters from your god-
liness at this time. For the divine Apostle
charges us to weep with them that weep
and rejoice with them that do rejoice.^ I
have not received a single one, although
just lately 1 was visited by some of the pious
monks of your monastery with the pious
presbyter Elias. Nevertheless I have written,
and 1 salute your holiness ; and I make you
acquainted with the fact that the consolation
of the Master has stood me in stead of all
other, for in truth not even had I as many
mouths as I have hairs on my head, could
I worthily praise Him for my being deemed
worthy of suffering on account of my con-
fession of Him, and for the apparent disgrace
which I hold more august than any honour.
And if I be banished to the uttermost parts
of the earth all the more will I praise Him
as being counted worthy of greater blessings.
Nevertheless I hope your holiness will put
up prayers for the quiet of the holy
churches. It is because of the storm that
is assailing them that I wail and groan and
lament. That quiet, as I know, was driven
away by the Osrhoene clergy,* who poured
out countless words against me, although I
had no share in their condemnation, nor in
the sentence passed upon them ; on the con-
trary, as your holiness knows, I besought

' Domnus of Apamea is to be distinguished from Dornnus
II, bishop of Antioch the recipient of Letters XXXI, CX, CXII
and CLXXX. He was present at Chalcedon in 451. This let-
ter may be placed in 448-g.

* Romans xii. 15. Observe the inversion.

3 The action of the Osrhoene clergy here referred to is their
accusation of Theodoret's friend Ibas of Edessa. The "sen-
tence " was that of excommunication delivered by Ibas. The
leaders of the cabal against liim were instigated by Uranius,
bishop of liimeria, one of Ibas's suffragans, cf. note on p. 291.


LETTERS.


283


that the communion might be given to them
at Easter. But slanderers find no difficulty
in saying what they like. My consolation
lies in the blessing of the Master who said,
" Blessed are ye when men shall revile you
and persecute you and shall say all manner
of evil against you falsely for my sake ;
I'ejoice and be exceeding glad : for great is
your reward in heaven : for so persecuted
they the prophets which were before you."^

LXXXVIII. To Taurus the Patrician?

Slanderers have forced me to go beyond
the bounds of moderation, and compel me
to write to you who have adorned the highest
offices, and obtained the most distinguished
honours. I therefore implore you to pardon
me, for I do not write in self sufficiency,
but because I am thrust forwai'd by necessity.
It is not because I expect to fall unjustly into
trouble and distress, for this is the common
fate of all who have sincerely served God, but
because I desire to persuade your excellency
that those who accuse my opinions are pro-
ducing false charges against me. From my
mother's breast I have been nurtui^ed on apos-
tolic teaching, and the creed laid down at
Nicaea by the holy and blessed Fathers I have
both learnt and teach. All who hold any other
opinion I charge with impiety, and if any
one persists in asserting that I teach the con-
trary, let him not bring a chai-ge which I
cannot defend, but convict me to my face.
For this is agreeable to the laws alike of God
and of man, but to whom is it so becoming
to champion the wronged as to you, O friend
of Christ, to whom boldness of utterance is
given by the splendour of your lineage, the
greatness of your rank and your foremost
place in the law.''

LXXXIX. To Florentius the patrician!^

In sending a letter to your greatness I am
daring what is beyond me, but the cause of
my daring is not self-confidence, but the
slanders of my calumniators. I have thought
it well worth while to instruct your righteous
ears how openly the impugners of my
opinions are calumniating me. I have been
guilty, I own, of many errors, but up to
now I have ever kept the faith of the apos-
tles undefiled, and on this account alone I
have cherished the hope that I shall meet
with mercy on the day of the Lord's appear-
ing. On behalf of this faith I continue to

1 Matt. V. II, 12.

» Garnerius dates Letters LXXXVIII-CIX in 447. They
belong rather to 448-449.

3 Florentius, Praefect of the Imperial Guard, and already six
times Prsefect of the East, was present as a lay commissioner
atthe trial of Eutyches in 449 and at Chalcedon in 451.


contend against every kind of heresy ; this
faith I am ever giving to the nurslings of
piety ; by means of this faith I have meta-
morphosed countless wolves into sheep, and
have brought them to the Saviour who is
the Arch-shepherd of us all. So have I
learnt not only from the apostles and
prophets but also from the interpreters of
their writings, Ignatius, Eustathius, Athan-
asius, Basil, Gregory, John, and the rest of
the lights of the world ; and before these
from the holy Fathers in council at Niccea,
whose confession of the faith I presei^ve in
its integrity, like an ancestral inheritance,
styling corrupt and enemies of the truth all
who dare to ti-ansgi'ess its decrees. I invoke
your greatness, now that you have heard
from me in these terms, to shut the mouths
of my calumniators. It is in my opinion
wholly unreasonable to accept as true what
is charged against men in their absence ;
rather is it lawful and right that those who
wish to appear as prosecutors should accuse
the defendants in their presence, and endeav-
our to convict them face to face. Under
these conditions the judges will without diffi-
culty be able to arrive at the truth.

XC. To Lupicinus the Master}

I have passed through the contests of my
prime. I see before me the confines of old
age, and have expected as an old man to
have more honour given me. But I am a
mark for the shafts of slander, and am
driven to meet by defence accusations lev-
elled against me. Under these circum-
stances, I beseech your excellency not to
believe the lies of my accusers. Had I been
living a life of silence, there might have
been room for the suspicion of unorthodoxy.
But I am continually discoursing in the
churches, and therefore have, by God's
grace, innumerable witnesses to the sound-
ness of what I teach. I follow the laws and
rules of the apostles. I test my teaching by
applying to it, like a rule and measure, the
faith laid down by the holy and blessed
Fathers at Nicaea. If any one maintain that
I hold any contrary opinion, let him accuse
me face to face ; let him not slander me in
my absence. It is fair that even the defend-
ant should have an opportunity of speech,
and meet with his defence the charges
brought against him, and that then and not
till then should the judges lawfully pro-
nounce their sentence. This favour I beg


1 i.e., magister officiorum, one of the great state officers
under the Constantininn constitution. He had control over
posts, police, arsenals, and the imperial correspondence, and,
from his authority in the palace, was a kind of " comptroller,"
or" master of the household." cf. Rufinus, p. 133.


2^4


THEODORET.


through your excellency's assistance. If any
men wish to condemn me unheard, I accept
with willingness even their unjust sentence.
For I wait for the judgment of the Master,
where we need neither witnesses nor accus-
ers. Before Him, as says the divine Apostle,
" all things are naked and opened." '

XCI. To the prefect Eutrechius?

I well know, and \\qq.A no words to tell
me, how your excellency regards me. Ac-
tions speak more clearly than words, but
I have been anxious for you to know the
cause of the accusation that is brought
against me. For I am suffering under a
most extraordinary charge, being at one and
the same time attacked as unmarried, and as
having been married twice. ^ If my present
calumniators assert that I am falsifying the
apostolic doctrine, why in the world, in-
stead of accusing me in my absence, do
they not attempt to convict me face to face "i
This fact alone is enough to give utter refu-
tation to their lies, for it is because they know
that I have innumerable witnesses 4:o the
apostolic character of my doctrines that they
have urged an undefended indictment against
me. Lawful judges must on the contrary
keep one ear unbiassed for the accused. If
they give both to the pleadings of the op-
ponents, and deliver a sentence acceptable
to them, I shall put up with the injustice as
bringing me nearer to the kingdom of
heaven, and shall await that impartial tri-
bunal, where there is neither prosecutor, nor
counsel, nor witness, nor distinction in rank,
but judgment of deeds and words and
righteous retribution. " For," it is said,
" we must all appear before the judgment
seat of Christ that every one may receive
the things done in his body according to that
he hath done whether it be good or bad." *

XCII. To Anatolius the Patrician!'

The very holy lord archbishop Domnus
has arranged for the most pious bishops to
repair to the imperial city, with a view to
the complete refutation of the false accu-
sation made against us all. At this time
we stand in especial need of the aid of your
magnificence, since the Lord of all has
endowed you with the gifts of pure faith, of
warm zeal in its behalf, of intelligence and
capacity, and power withal to carry out

' Heb. iv. 13.

' vide p. 267.

' This appears to be merely a figurative description of the
inconsistency of the charges, for there was no question of
Thcodoret's being a " digamos."

* II. Cor. V. 10.

"Seven Letters are addressed to Anatolius; viz., XLV,
LXXIX, XCII, CXI, CXIX, CXXI, and CXXXVIII.


your prudent counsels. I beg you therefore
to defend the cause of the wronged, to
contend against lies, and champion the
apostolic teaching now assailed. Without
doubt the master and guide of the churches
will bless your endeavour, will scatter the
lowering cloud, and bless the nurslings of
the faith with clear sky. Even should He
permit the tempest to prevail, your greatness
will reap your perfect reward, and we shall
bow our heads before the storm, ready to
live with cheerfulness wheresoever it may
drive us, and waiting the judgment of God
and his true and righteous sentence.

XCIII. To Senator the Patrician.

I cherish an indelible memory of your
magnificence, and now by very religious and
holy bishops I salute you. The very holy
lord bishop Domnus has arranged for them
to journey to the imperial city in order to
put an end to the false charges raised
against me. For certain men have contrived
manifest calumnies against me, and have
grievously disturbed the churches for whose
sake the Lord Christ " endured the Cross
despising the shame " ; ^ in whose behalf
the band of the divine apostles and com-
panies of victorious martyrs were delivered
to many kinds of death. On behalf of their
peace I call on your magnificence to con-
tend. It had been easy for the God of all
to have nodded His head and scattered the
lowering clouds ; but He bides His time,
and thereby at once shews the endurance of
them that are assailed, and gives us oppor-
tunities of doing good.

XCIV. To Protogenes ' the Prcefect.

The loving-kindness of the Lord has
already given you an opportunity of carrying
out your good intentions. He has given
you a greater opportunity now, that your
excellency may the more easily champion
the cause of the truth that is assailed, bring
lies to nought, and give the churches the
calm for which they so intensely long.
Your excellency has already learned from
many other sources how great is the surge
by which the churches in the East are
overwhelmed, but you will acquire more
accurate information concerning it from the
very religious bishops who, on account of
it, have undertaken their long journey in


' Senator was consul in 436, three years after the probable
date of Thcodoret's earlier letter to him (cf. Letter XLIV.
p. 264.) He was present at Chalcedon.

5 Heb. xii. 2.

' Protogenes was Prxfect of the East and Consul in 449 and
was present at the Council of Chalcedon.


LETTERS.


285


the winter, relying, next after the Grace of
God, on the providence of your authority.
Disperse for us, then, O Christian man, the
storm, change the moonless night into
clear sunshine, and bridle the tongues set
wagging against us. We by God's grace are
ever fighting for the apostolic decrees, and
we preserve undefiled the faith laid down at
Nica^a, and style impious all who dare to
violate its dogmas. In evidence of the truth
of what I say may be cited my catechumens,
those who are from time to time baptized by
me, and the hearers of my discourses in the
churches. If they mean to accuse me in
accordance with the law, they must convict
me in my presence, not slander me in my
absence. In this manner your excellency,
when giving judgment in other cases, is
wont to deliver your sentences, perceiving on
which side lies the right from the pleadings
both of the prosecution and of the defence.

XCV. To the prcefect Antiochus}

You have laid aside the cares of your very
important government, but your fame flour-
ishes among all ; for they that have I'eaped
the fruit of your benevolence, and they are
many and everywhere, persistently extol it,
proclaiming your good report in all direc-
tions, and stirring their hearers' tongues to
join in the chorus of acclamation. When I
behold the worthy fruit which adorns with
its beauty its far-famed stem, I am delighted.
For this I'eason I call your excellency to
greater and higher deeds, and beseech you
to give heed to the tranquillity of the churches.
They have been overwhelmed with a great
storm by the contrivers of calumnies against
me, and under these circumstances the very
religious bishops, making light of a long
journey, of infirmity, and of old age, have
left their own flocks unshepherded, and un-
dertaken to travel this great distance, in their
eagerness to confute the lies told against us
all. I beseech your gi-eatness to give them
your protection, to shew care for the calum-
niated East, and your forethought for the wel-
fare of the apostolic faith. It is only fitting
that you should add this further glory to the
rest of your good deeds.

XCVI. To Nonius the Patrician?

I have written to you two letters, indeed I
think three, but without getting any answer.

1 Antiochus was Consul in 431.

Scf. Letters LVIII and LXXXI. Nomus the consul and
Nomus the patrician are distinguished in Schulze's Index to
the Letters, but there seems no reason to doubt their identity.
Nomus the powerful minister of Theodosius II. was consul
in 445 and patrician in 449, to which year this third letter may
be ref-.-rred,


I had wished to say no more, but to know
my own place and the greatness of dignities,
and to beg you to inform me of the cause of
your silence. Really I do not know what
offence I can have given to your excellency.
We err unwillingly as well as willingly, and
sometimes are quite ignorant in what way
we are transgressing. I therefore beg your
greatness, remembering the divine laws
which plainly charge us "If thy brother
shall trespass against thee go and tell him
his fault betvv'een him and thee alone " ^ to
deign to make plain to me the origin of
the annoyance, that I may either prove my-
self innocent, or, made aware of where I was
wrong, may beg your pardon. In my con-
fidence in the evidence of my conscience I
hope for the former. All men are adorned
by magnanimity, and not least those who,
following the example of your excellency,
trained in outside education as well as in-
structed in divine principles, both hear the
apostolic laws loudly exclaiming " Let not
the sun go down upon your wrath " ^ and re-
member the words of Homer "*

" In fit bounds contain thy mighty mind;
Benignity is best."

I have thus written not as though giving
you information, but to remind one who is
much occupied, and I do so in remembrance
of the law of the Lord, who says " Therefore
if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there
rememberest that thy bi'other hath ought
against thee ; leave there thy gift before the
altar, and go thy way ; first be reconciled to
thy brother and then come and offer thy
gift." ■* In obedience to these words I have
thought it right to salute your excellency by
the most pious bishops, and to exhort you to
give heed to the tranquillity of the churches.
They are indeed overwhelmed by a great
storm.

XCVII. To the Count Sporacius.^

I am delighted with your excellency's
letter. My pleasure has been increased by
the very religious presbyter and monk lam-
blichus, who has told me of your warm zeal,
your earnestness in religion, and your real
goodwill to me. On hearing of this as well
as of the efforts of the glorious and pious lord

1 Matt, xviii. 15. 3 II. ix. 256. cf. pp. 104 and 255.

2 Ephes. Iv. 26. * Matt. v. 23, 24.

6 Sporacius or Asporacius was present at Chalcedon in 451,
as comes domesticorum, or one of the two commanders of the
body g-uard. It was at his request that Theodoret wrote his
Hcereticarum fabularuiii compendium which he dedicates "To
the most maarnificent and o^lnrious lord Sporacius my Christ-
loving son." To Sporacius was also addressed tlie short
treatise " aJversu- Nestorium " of which some editors have
doubted the genuineness. The present letter may be dated in
449.


286


THEODORET.


Patricius ' on my behalf I give you the apos-
tolic blessing which the l)lessccl Onesiphorus
obtained from that holy tongue; " The Lord
give mercy to your house, for he oft refreshed
me and was not ashamed of my chain ; "
" The Lord grant unto him that he may find
mercy of the Lord in that day." ^ This I pray
for you, even though the enemies of the truth
Inflict on me yet greater miseries as they
suppose ; for we have been taught to regard
men's purpose ; but be sure of this, that with
true religion death to me is very pleasant,
and exile to the ends of the earth. Still we
are distressed at the storm of the churches,
which the Lord of all is mighty to disperse.

XCVIII. To Pancharizis.

We are distressed to see the tempest of
the churches, but their Master and Ruler
ever through mighty billows shows to men
His own wisdom and power. He rebukes
the winds and brings about a calm as He
did when He was in the apostles' boat.^ So,
though I am distressed, nevertheless because
I know this power of our Saviour and am
aware of what He arranges for us, even
though adversity befall me, I give thanks,
and accept it as a gift of God. I have learned
the lesson to care little for the present, and
to wait for the expected blessings. But it
behoves your excellency zealously to de-
fend the apostolic faith, that you may receive
from the God of all the recompense of such
conduct.

XCIX. To Claudianns the Ajitigrapharius.*

Although you have not yet met me, I think
that your excellency is aware of the open
calumnies that have been published against
me, for you have often heard me preaching
in church, when I have proclaimed the Lord
Jesus, and have pointed out the properties
alike of the Godhead and of the manhood ;
for we do not divide one Son into two, but,
worshipping the Only -begotten, point out
the distinction between flesh and Godhead.
This, indeed, is I think confessed even by
the Arians, who do not call the flesh God-
head, nor address the Godhead as flesh.
Holy Scripture clearly teaches us both
natures. Nevertheless, though I have ever
thus spoken, certain men are uttering lying
words against me. But I rely on my con-
science and have as witness to my teaching
Him who looks into the hearts. So, as the
prophet says, I regard the contrivances of

«Cf.I.etler XXXIV. « II.Tim. i. i6and iS. » Matt. viii. 26.

* " Fuit vero ai'Tiypai/>f m? npud Ora'cos queni Galli vocant

Controleur giniral desjinances." Garncriua. '


calumny as " a spider's web." ' I await the
great judgment which needs no words, but
makes manifest what in the meanwhile is
unknown.

I send this by the very religious bishops,
thinking it worth while to salute your ex-
cellency by them and to remind you of your
promise. For attacked as I am I do not
cease to go a-hunting, for I know that even
the sacred apostles in the midst of the as-
saults made upon them did not cease to ply
the net of the spirit.

C. To Alexandra?

I have recently received your excellency's
letter. For the zeal you have shewn on my
behalf I thank you, and pray the God of all
to guard the goods you have, to increase
them with further boons, and to grant 3'ou
the enjoyment of future and everlasting
blessings. I think that He hears the prayer
even of them that are sentenced to relegation,
and all the more when it is for the sake of
His divine doctrine that they are undergoing
apparent disgrace. I am writing by the very
religious bishops, and I beg that they may
meet with your kindly care. It is for the
sake of the faith of the gospel and the peace
of the churches that they have undertaken
this long journey.

CI. To the Deaconess Celarina.

The flames of the war against us have
been lit up again. After yielding awhile, the
enemy of men has once more armed against
us men nurtured in lies, who utter open
slander against me, and say that I divide our
one Lord Jesus Christ into two sons. I
however know the distinction between God-
head and manhood, and confess one Son,
God the Word made man. I assert that He
is God eternal, wiio was made man at the
end of days, not by the change of the God-
head, but by the assumption of the man-
hood. It is however needless for me to
inform your piety of my sentiments, for you
have exact knowledge of what I preach, and
how I instruct the ignorant. I beseech you
therefore since the workers of lies have
poured their insults upon all the godly
bisho])s of the East at once, and overwhelmed
the cluuches with a storm, that your piety
will show all possible zeal on behalf of the
doctrines of the gospel and the peace of the
churches. On this account the very godly
bishops have left the churches shepherded
by them, have disregarded the inclemency


1 Isaiah lix. 5.


2 cf. Letter XIV.


LETTERS.


287


of winter, and endured the labours of their
long journey, that they may calm the tempest
which has arisen. 1 am sure that your godly
excellency will regard them as champions of
piety and governors of the churches.

CIL To Bishop Basilius}

There is nothing remarkable in the re-
proaches that are directed against me being
heard in silence by men who do not know
me ; but that your holiness should not refute
the lies of my revilers, or at least should do
so only to a certain extent, and with no great
heartiness, passes the belief of any one who
knows your character and conduct. And I
say this not because friendship ought to be
preferred to truth, but because the witness
of truth is on the side of friendship. Your
reverence has very often heard me preaching
in church, and, in other assemblies where I
have spoken on doctrinal questions ; you
have listened to what I have said, and I do
not know of any occasion on which you have
found fault with me for expressing unortho-
dox opinions. But what is the case at the
present moment? Why in the world, my
dear friend, do you not utter a word against
falsehood, while you allow a friend to be
calumniated and the truth to be assailed.?
If this is because you disregard the helpless
and insignificant, remember the plain pro-
clamation of the commandment of the Lord
" Take heed that ye despise not one of these
litde ones which believe in me, for I say unto
you that in heaven their angels do always
behold the face of my Father which is in
heaven." ^ If however it is the influence of
my calumniators which imposes silence upon
you, you must listen to the other law which
says " Thou shalt not honour the person of
the mighty " ^ and " Judge righteous judg-
ment" " and " Thou shalt not follow a mul-
titude to do evil"* and "He that shutteth
his eyes from seeing evil and stoppeth his
ears from hearing of blood."® You may
find innumerable similar passages in holy
Scripture, which I have thought it needless
to collect when writing to a man brought up
in the divine oracles, and watering Christian
people with his teaching. Rut this I will
say, that we shall all stand before the judg-
ment seat of Christ, and shall give account
of our words and deeds. I, who for every
other reason dread this tribunal, now that I

1 Cf. Letter LXXXV. There seems nothing to indicate
whether this Basil is Basil of Seleuciaor Basil of Trajanopolis,
both of whom were present at the Latrocinium and took part
against Theodoret. Garnerius refers it to the former, a time-
server of the court.

' Matt, xviii. lo and 6. * John vii. 24.

» Leviticus xix. 15. ^ Ex. xxiii. 3.

« Isaiah xxxiii. 15. Observe the inversion.


am encompassed with calumny, find my
chief consolation in the thought of it.

cm. To the Count Apollonius}

The very godly bishops have been led to
travel to the imperial city by the calumnies
uttered against me, and I by their holinesses
send your excellency my salutation, and pay
the debt of friendship, not indeed to wipe
out the cherished obligation, but to make it
greater. For in truth the obligations of
friendship are increased by their discharge.
That I should now be reaping the fruits of
calumny is not extraordinary, for, in that
I am human, there is nothing that I must
not expect. All troubles of this kind must
be borne by them that have learned wisdom ;
one thing only is distressing — that harm
should accrue to the soul.

CIV. To Flaviamis,^ Bishop of Constanti-
nople.

I have already in another letter Informed
your holiness how openly the calumniators
of our teaching are slandering us.^ Now in
like manner by means of the very godly
bishops I do the sa^me, having not only these
as witnesses of the orthodoxy of my teaching
but also countless other men who are my
hearers in the churches of the East. Above
and beyond all these I have my conscience,
and Him who sees my conscience. And I
know too how the divine Apostle often ap-
pealed to the testimony of his conscience, for
" our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience " " and again " I say the truth in
Christ I lie not, my conscience also bearmg
me witness in the Holy Ghost." " Know
then, O holy and godly sir, that no one has
ever at any time heard us preaching two
sons; in fact this doctrine seems to me
abominable and impious, for there is one Lord
Jesus Christ through whom are all things.
Him I acknowledge both as everlastmg
God and as man in the end of days, and I
o-ive Him one worship as only begotten. I
have learned however the distinction be-
tween flesh and Godhead, for the union is
unconfounded. Thus drawn up as it were in
battle array to oppose the madness of Anus
and Eunomius, we very easily refute the
blasphemy hazarded by them against the
only begotten, by applying what was spoken
in humility about the Lord, and suitalUy to

1 Cf. Letter LXXIIL Apollonius was ''comes sacrarum

^''•fcf'Lette'rsXL'and LXXXVL This letter may probably
be placed between the sentence of internement and the assem-
blinsi of the Latrocinium.

3"Compare Letter LXXXVL

MLCor. i. 12. 1 Rom. IX. I.


288


THEODORET.


His assumed nature, to man, and, on the
other hand, what becomes the divine and
signifies the divine nature, to God ; not
dividing Him into two persons, but teaching
that both the former and latter attributes be-
long to the only begotten, the latter to Him
as God the Creator and Lord of all, and the
former as made man on our account. For
divine Scripture says that He was made man,
not by mutation of the Godhead, but by as-
sumption of human nature, of the seed of
Abraham. This the divine Apostle openly
says in the words " For verily He took not
on Him the nature of angels, but He took on
Him the seed of Abraham, wherefore in all
things it behoved Him to be made like unto
His brethren." ^ And again " Now to Abra-
ham and his seed were the promises made :
he saith not and to seeds, as of many ; but as
of one, and to thy seed, which is Christ." ^

These and similar passages have been cut
out of divine Scripture by Simon, Basilides,
Valentinus, Bardesanes, Marcion, and the
man who is named after his maniacal heresy.^
So they style the Master Christ God only,
and describe Him as having nothing human
about Him, but appearing in imagination
and appearance as man to men. On the
other hand the Arians and Eunomians say
that God the Word assumed only a body,
and that He Himself supplied the place of a
soul in the body. And Apollinarius de-
scribes the Master's body as endued with a
soul ; * but, deriving, I know not whence,
the idea of a distinction between soul and
intelligence,^ deprives intelligence of its
share in the achieved salvation.^ The
teaching of the divine Apostles lays down on
the contrary that a soul both reasonable and
intelligent was assumed together with flesh,
and the salvation of which the hope is held
out to them that believe is complete.

There is yet another gang of heretics who
hold differently. Fhotinus,^ Marcellus,*
and Paul of Samosata,^ assert that our Lord
and God was only man. When arguing
with these we are under the necessity of ad-
vancing proofs of the Godhead, and of shew-
ing that the Master Christ is everlasting
God. When, on the other hand, we are
contending with the former faction, which
calls our Lord Jesus Christ God only, we
are obliged to marshal against them the


1 Heb, li. i6. 17. * i.e. Manes. '' i^ux") ^"^ vou^.

2 Gal. iii. 16. ♦ 'e/u.i/d/voi'. ''■ tf. pp. 132 and 140-

' Disciple of Marccllus. of. Soc. ii. 30. Thcodorel, in his
interpretation of the Ep. to the Hebrews, links liini with
Sabcllius. (Ed. Migne. iii. 547.)

" cf. p. 139.

" Patriarch of Antioch 260-270. Bp. Wordsworth calls him
" the Socinus of the 3rd c." Saniosata (Sanisat) was capi-
tal of the CoiTiinagene in Syria.


forces of the divine Scripture, and collect
from it evidence of the assumption of the
manhood. For a physician must use reme-
dies appropriate to the disease, and suit the
medicine to the case.

Now, therefore, I beseech your holiness
to scatter the slander raised against me, and
bridle the tongues now vainly reviling me.
For, after the incarnation, I worship one
Son of God, one Lord Jesus Christ, and de-
nounce as impious all who hold otherwise.
Deign, sir, to give me too your holy
prayers, that, by God's grace, I may reach
the other side of the ocean of danger, and
drop my anchor in the windless haven of
the Lord.

CF. To Etdogius the CEconomus}

We have heard from man}'^ sources of
your piety's efforts on behalf of true reli-
gion. It is therefore right that you should
readily succour one who is calumniated
for the same cause, and should refute the
revilers' lies. You, O godly Sir, know what
I hold, and what I teach, and that no one
has ever heard of my preaching two sons.
Exert, I implore you, in this case too your
divine energy, and stop the mouths of the
evil speakers. In conflicts of this kind one
must help not only one's friends but even
those who have caused us pain.

CVI. To Abraham the CEco7ioi)ius.

By the godly bishops I salute you. I be-
seech you to give heed to the churches'
calm, and to disperse the waves of calumny.
" Whatsoever a man soweth that shall he
also reap," ^ as says the divine Apostle.
Without doubt then he who fights for the
apostolic doctrines shall reap the fruit of
the apostolic blessing and enjoy the Apos-
tles' devotion.

CVII. To the presbyter Theodotus.

The struggles which your piety has under-
gone on behalf of the apostolic doctrines
are not unknown, but are frequently men-
tioned alike by those who have knowMi them
by experience, and by others who have
heard of them from these. Continue, my
dear sir, your efforts, and fight for the doc-
trines of the Fathers. For these I too am


' In an ecclesiastical sense the title osconomus was used of

(i) the treasurer of a particular church: e.g. Cyriacusof
Constantinople (Cliron. Pasch. p. 378).

(ii) a diocesan ollicial. Tlie Council ofChalcedon ordered
that every diocese should have its otconomus.

(iii) the custos nionasten'i, who had charge of the secular
affairs of the monastery, as the diocesan oeconomus of those of
tlio tliocese.

' Gal. vi. 7,


LETTERS.


289


buffeted in all directions and, while I re-
ceive the shock of the great waves, I beseech
our Governor either to nod his head and
scatter the tempest, or enable the victims of
the storm by His grace to play the man.

CVIII. To Acacius the Presbyter.

True indeed is the promise of David's
Psalm, for through him the Spirit of truth
gave this promise to them that believe,
" Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also
to him ; and he shall bring it to pass ; and
he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the
light and thy judgment as the noonday." ^
This we find too has come to pass in the
case of your piety. For the great care you
bestow upon them that are weeping for their
orphanhood, and your struggles on behalf
of the apostolic doctrines, are in every one's
mouth, and so, as the prophets say, " Hidden
things are made manifest." Since I too have
heard of your piety's admirable exertions I
write to salute you, most godly sir, and be-
seech you to increase your glory by adding
to your labours, and to fight on behalf of the
doctrine of the Gospels, that we may both
keep the inheritance of our fathers unim-
paired, and bring our Master His talent with
good usury.^

CIX. To Eusebms^ Bishop of Ancyra?

Many are the devices secretly plotted
against me, and through me patched up
against the faith of apostles. I am
however comforted by the sufferings of
the Saints, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
and men famous in the churches in the
word of Grace ; and besides these by the
promises of our God and Saviour, for in
this present life He has promised us nothing
pleasant or delightful, but rather trouble,
toil, and peril, and attacks of enemies. " In
the world," He says, " ye shall have tribula-
tion," "and " if they have persecuted me they
will also persecute you," * and " If they
have called the master of the house Beelze-
bub how much more shall they call them
of his household,"® and " The time cometh
when whosoever killeth you will think he
doeth God service," ^ and "Straight is the
gate and narrow the way which leadeth unto
life," * and " When they persecute you in
this city flee you into another," " and I might
quote all similar passages. The divine

1 Psalm xxxvii. j. 6.

- On the care of orphans in the early church vide Ig-. Ep.
Smyrn. VI. and Bp. Lightfoot's note. At Constantinople the
Orphanotrophus was a priest of high rank.

3 Cf. Letter LXXXII. 6 John xv. 20. 'John xvi. 2.

* John XV. 33. « Matt. 25. • Math. vii. 14.

" Math. X. 23.


Apostle too speaks in the same strain.
" Yea and all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus shall suffer persecution, but evil men
and seducers shall wax worse and worse,
deceiving and being deceived." ' These
words give me the greatest comfort in this
distress. As the calumnies uttei'ed against
me have probably reached your holiness's
ears, I beseech your holiness to give no
credence to the lies of my slanderers. I am
not aware of ever having taught anyone up
to the present time to believe in two sons.
I have been taught to believe in one only
begotten, our Lord Jesus Christ, God the
Word made man. But I know the distinc-
tion between flesh and Godhead, and regard
as impious all who divide our one Lord Jesus
Christ into two sons, as well as those who,
travelling in an opposite direction, call the
Godhead and manhood of the master Christ
one nature. For these exaggerations stand
opposed to one another, while between them
lies the way of the doctrines of the Gospel,
beautified by the footprints of prophets and
apostles, and of all who after them have
been conspicuous for the gift of teaching.
I was anxious to adduce their opinions, and to
point out how they bear witness in favour of
my own, but I want more words than a letter
allows room for, wherefore I have written
summarily what I have been taught about
the incarnation of the only begotten ; I send
my statement to your godly excellency.^ I
have written not with the object of teaching
others, but of making my defence against
the accusations brought against me, and of
explaining my sentiments to those who are
ignorant of them. After your holiness has
read what I have written, if you find it in
conformity with the apostolic doctrines, I
hope you will confirm my opinion by what
you reply — if, on the contrary, anything
that I have said jars with the divine teaching,
I request to be told of it by your holiness.
For, though I have spent much time in


teaching, I still need one to teach me.


We


know," says the divine Apostle " in part,"^
and again he says, " If any man think that he
knoweth anything he knoweth nothing yet
as he ought to know."* So I hope that I
may hear the truth from your holiness, and
that you may also give heed to the calm of
the Church, and fight for the divine doc-
trines. It is for their sakes that the very
godly bishops, making light of the diffi-
culties of the journey, and of the winter,
have set out for the imperial city, in the


1 II. Tim. iii. 12. 13.

2 Garnerius supposes this to refer to Dial. 11.
8 I. Cor. xiii. 9. * I. Cor. viii. a.


VOL. III.


U


290


THEODORET.


endeavour to bring about some end to the
storm. Send them I pray you, on their way
with your prayers and with your prayers too
strengthen me.'

ex. To Domnus, bishop of Antioch}

When I read your letter I remembered the
very blessed Susannah, who when she saw
the famous villains, and i:)elicved that the
God of all was present, uttered that remark-
able cry, " I am straitened on every side ; " ^
but nevertheless preferred to fiill into the
snares of slander rather than to despise the
just God. And I, sir, have two alternatives,
as I have often said, to offend God and
wound my conscience, or to fall by man's
unjust sentence. The most pious emperor,
I think, knows nothing of this. For what
hindered him from writing, and ordering the
ordination to take place, if in truth it so
pleased him? Why in the world do they
utter threats without and cause alarm, and
yet do not send letters openly ordering it?
One of two things must be true ; either the
very pious emperor is not induced to write,
or they are trying to make us break the law
and afterwards be indicted by them for ille-
gality. I have before me the example of the
blessed Principius,'' for in that case, when
they had given orders by writing, they pun-
ished him for obedience. Moreover the let-
ters wliich I read on the very day of the letter-
bearer's arrival are of a contrary tenour.
For one of the holy monks has written to
some one that he has received letters both
from the very illustrious guardsman and tlie
very glorious ex-magister stating that the
case of the very godly lord bishop Irenaeus
will stand more favourably, and in return for
this good will they ask prayers on their be-
half. I think therefore that a reply ought to
be written to the clergy who have written
from the imperial city to the effect that" " in

1 Tlie route of the bishops would bo by land, in consequence
of the dangers of the sea voyajie in winter time. From Ancyra
(Angora) they would follow the course of the Sangarius into
Bithynia, and would cross thence via Chalcedon to Constanti-
nople.

'•i This letter is placed by Garnerius in the end of 447 on ac-
count of its allusion to Proclus, who died in October 447, and to
the deposition of Irenxus of Tyre, for which t)ie formal edict
was issued in Feb. 4-}S, but which was perhaps rumoured earlier.
But by some the death of Proclus is placed a year earlier.

3 Ilist. of Susannah 22.

< Of the blessed Principius nothing is known, cf. Tille-
mont, XV. 267.

t- " The phraseology of this letter has given rise to much
misapprehension. The use of the first person has led some to
suppose that Theodoret, who belonged to another province, was
the consecrator of Irenxus, or that he took part in his conse-
cration, or even with the Abbe M.artin (le Pseudo-Synodc
d'fephise, pp. 84, Ss) that it is erroneously ascribed to 'rheod-
orct, and was really written by Domnus. It is clear from ihe
tenor of the epistle that it was written by Theodoret, and that
the first person is employed by him as writing in Domnus'
name. (Tillemont xv. pp. 871, 872.) " Diet. Christ. Biog.
iii. 3S1 n.

It is in consonance with this theory that Alexander of An-


obedience to the sentence of the very godly
bishops of Phoenicia, and knowing both the
zeal and the magnanimity and love for the
poor and all the other virtues of the very
godly bishop Irenceus, and in addition to
this the orthodo.xy of his opinions, I have
ordained him. I am not aware that he has
ever objected to apply to the holy Virgin the
title ' Theotokos,' or has ever held any
other opinions contrary to the doctrines of
the Gospel. As to the question of digamy, I
have followed my predecessors ; for Alex-
ander of blessed and sacred memory, the or-
nament of this apostolic sec, as well as the
very blessed Acacius, bishop of Beroea, or-
dained Diogenes of blessed memory who
was a ' digamus ; ' ' and similarly the blessed
Praylius ordained Domnhius of Ca^sarea
who was a ' digamus.'^ We have therefore
followed precedent, and the example of
men well known and illustrious both for
learning and chai'acter. Proclus, bishop
of Constantinople, of blessed memory well
aware of this and many other instances, both
himself accepted the ordination, and wrote
in praise and admiration of it. So too did
the leading godly bishops of the Pontic Dio-
cese,^ and all the Palestinians.

" No doubt has been raised about the mat-
ter, and we hold it wrong to condemn a man
illustrious for many and various noble ac-
tions." In my opinion it is becoming to write
in these terms. If your holiness holds any
other view, let what seems good to you be
done. I, as they suppose, have undergone
one punishment, and am ready by God's
help to undergo yet another. Even a third
and fourth, if they like, by the stay of God's
grace I will endure, praising the Lord. If
your holiness thinks right, let us see what
answer comes from Palestine, and, after con-
sidering more exactly what course is to be
taken, let us so write to Constantinople.

CXI. To Afiatolius the patrician.*

Your excellency will be recompensed for
the kindness you have shewn me by the God

tioch is described as bishop of this apostolic see, a phrase
natural for Domnus to use, but not for Theodoret.

1 It is uncertain who this Diogenes was; he cannot have
been Diogenes of Cyzicus, for he was alive and present at
Chalcedon in 451.

2 No more is known of Domninus or Praylius. cf. p. 157.


"It is clear from the Philosopliumena of Hippolytus (ix, 12.)
that by the beginning of the third century the rule of mono-
gamy for the clergy was well established, since he complains
that in the days of Callistus ' digamist and trigamist bishops,
priests, and deacons began to be admitted.' " Diet. Christ.
Ant. i. 552.

^ The I'ontic Diocese is one of the twelve civil divisions of
the Constantinian empire.

* This letter is in reply to that written by Anatolius on the
receipt of Letter XCII. Garnerius, who places the decree iA
relegation earlier than Tillemont, dates it about the end of April
44S.


LETTERS.


291


of all, for all that is done for His sake has its
reward. I laugh at all my slanderers. The
bodies of them who are most severely
scourged do not feel the pain, because the
scourged flesh is deadened. Still I lament
over them whose unrestrained mouths utter
such lies. In what way have the accusers
of the godly bishop Ibas ' been wronged by
me that they should utter such calumnies
against me? To begin with, I was not even
one of the judges, for in obedience to the
imperial decree I was living at Cyrus.
Moreover, as I have heard from many, they
all along treated my absence as a grievance,
for I had arranged for their partaking of the
Holy Communion at the Easter feast of
salvation,^ and as they often expressed a wish
to meet me, I received them with kindness
and advised them as to the proper course to
take. But that I may also speak in the de-
fence of the very godly bishop the lord
Domnus, what was the proper course for
him to take.? He was openly attacked ; he
saw men deposed by a synodical sentence
sent into another diocese, and i-esuming
their priestly functions in violation of the
laws of the Church ; he saw things holy and
divine laughed at and turned into ridicule by
the enemies of the Church ; what was he to
do ? When he knew this he handed over the
case to others, and not only to the very godly
lord Ibas, but also to the holy lord bishop
Symeon of Amida, that the metropolitans of
the two provinces might hear the charges.
What fairness is there in charging the same
persons with cruelty and kindness ? If we ex-
communicate, we run into danger ; if we do
not excommunicate, we do not escape it. We
alone of all the world are objects of attack.
Other dioceses are at peace. We alone are
exposed to calumniators, — specially I my-
self, though I took no part in the trial, and
am absolutely without responsibility in the
matter.

Thus have I been forced to write on reading
your lordship's letter, and on learning from
it how for these reasons a great commotion
has been made against me, a man confined to
my diocese ; a man of peace ; one not even
deliberating with the godly bishops of the
province. As a matter of fact, although
there have been already two episcopal ordi-
nations in our province, I took part in neither.

1 The leaders of the attack on Ibas, (bishop of Edessa and
metropolitan, in 436) were four presbyters, Samuel, Cyrus,
Eulogius, and Maras. The cabal chose the moment for action
when Domnus_ visited Hierapolis for the enthronization of
Stephen, and in 445 Ibas was summoned by Domnus to
Antioch, but did not come. In 448 the eighteen cliarges — some
frivolous, some of gross heresy — were formally heard, and
Domnus decided in favor of Ibas. cf. p. 283, note.

" i.e. recommended Ibas not to excommunicate his ac.
cusers.


Were I not restrained by the imperial decree
I would have gone away, and spent the
remainder of my days in some remote spot.
I am faint for the plots hatched against me.
I am sure those Edessenes never put together
their slander against me of their own accord.
They were prompted to these attacks on me
by their truly truthful neighbours. I thank
our Saviour that he has deemed me worthy
of the beatitudes of the Gospel, all unworthy
though I be. For this reason I have gladly
accepted the sentence of relegation. I am
ready for exile, and, for the sake of the
" hope laid up for me," ' welcome whatever
fate they may inflict. I pray without ceasing
for your excellency, and beseech all the
saints to share in my petitions.

CXII. To Domnus, bishop of Antioch^

When news was brought to me that the
pettiness of the victorious emperor had been
put an end to, a reconciliation eflected between
him and the very godly bishop,^ the summons
to the council cancelled, and the peace of the
churches restored, I hoped that our troubles
were a thing of the past. But I am deeply
distressed at what I hear from your holiness.
It is impossible to hope for any good from
this notorious council, unless the merciful
Master with His wonted providence shall
undo the riotous demons' devices. Even in
the great synod, I mean that of Nicaea, the
Arian party voted with the orthodox and set
their hands to the apostolic exposition. But
they did not cease to war against the truth
till they had torn asunder the body of the
Church. For thirty years the supporters of
the apostolic doctrines and they who were
infected with the Arian blasphemy continued
in communion with one another. But at An-
tioch," when the latest council was finished,
when they had seated the man of God, the great
Meletius, on the apostolic throne, and then
after a few days ejected him by the imperial
authority, Euzoius who was afiected with the
undoubted plague of Arius was put forward,
and straightway the champions of apostolic
doctrines seceded and thereafter the division
continued.

As I look back on what happened then,

»Col.i. 5.

2 Garnerius points out that the indications of the date of this
letter are clear. It mentions the imperial summons to the
L.atrocinium, and contains Theodoret's advice to Domnus as to
what companions he should take with him. It must therefore
be placed between the arrival of the summons at Antioch and
the departure of Domnus for Ephesus. The summons is dated
the 30th of March, and appointed the 1st of August for the
meeting. Antioch is aclearthirty days' journey from Ephesus
and Domnus had not yet chosen his companions. We may
therefore date the letter in the May of 449.

3 Presumably Irenaius of Tyre.

* i.e., in 361. For Theodoret's account of the circumstances
vide pp. 92, 93.


U 2


292


TIIEODORET.


and look fonvard to similar events in the
future, my wretched spirit sighs and wails,
for I see no prospect of good. The men of
the other dioceses do not know the poison
which lies in the Twelve Chapters ; ' having
regard to the celebrity of the writer of them,
they suspect no mischief, and his successor in
the see" is I think adopting every means to con-
firm them in a second synod. For supposing
he who lately wrote them at command, and
anathematized all who did not wisli to abide
by them, were presiding over an oecumenical
council, what could he not effect? And be
well assured, my lord, that no one wlio knows
the heresy they contain will brook to accept
them, though twice as many men of this sort
decree them. Before now, though a larger
number have rashly confirmed them, I resisted
at Ephesus,and refused to communicate with
the writer of them till he had agreed to the
points laid down by me, and had harmonized
his teaching with them, without making any
mention of the Chapters. This your holiness
can ascertain without any difficulty if you
order the acts of the synod to be investigated ;
for they are preserved as is customary with
the synodical signatures, and there are extant
more than fifty synodic acts shewing the ac-
cusation of the Twelve Chapters. For be-
fore the journey to Ephesus the blessed John ^
had written to the very godly bishops Euthe-
rius of Tyana, Firmus of Cajsarea, and
Theodotus of Ancyra, denouncing these
Chapters as Apollinarian.* And at Ephesus
the exposition and confirmation of these
Chapters was the cause of our deposition of
the Alexandrian and of the Ephesian.*
Moreover at Ephesus many synodic letters
were written both to the victorious emperor,
and to the great officers, about these Chapters ;
and in like manner to the laity at Constanti-

1 Cyril wrote his Ilird letter to Nestorius probably on Nov.
3, 430. " To the end of the letter were appended twelve ' arti-
cles ' or ' chapters,' couched in the form of aiiathcinatisins
against the various points of the Nestorian theory." " 'rhese
propositions were not well calculated to reclaim Nestorius;
nor were they indeed so worded throughout as to approve
themselves to all who essentially agreed with Cyril as to the
personal Deity of Christ. On the contrary the abruptness
of their tone, and a certain one-sidedness . . . made some
of them open, prima facie, to serious criticism from per-
sons who, without being Nestorians, felt that in the attack on
Nestorianism tlie truth of Christ's real and permanent man-
hood might be in danger of losing its due prominence" Canon
Bright, Diet. Christ. Siog. i. 766.

2 Dioscorus succeeded Cyril at Midsummer, 444.

s i.e. John of Antioch. "He reached Ephesus June27, 431.

* Eutnerius of Tyana (Kiliss Ilissar in Karamania) was a
strong Nestorian, and signed the appeal of Nestorius after his
deposition in 431. On July 17th John and his adherents were
deposed. Firmus of tiie Cappadocian Cajsarea (still " Ka-
saria") himself a graceful letter writer, was an anti-Nestorian.
Theodotus of Ancyra also sided with Cyril.

''i.e. Cyril and Memnon. "No sooner had John reached
Ephesus, than before he had washed and dressed after his
journey, in the inn itself, late at night, in secret session, by the
connivance of the Count Candidianus, a sentence was passed
on Cyril .and Memnon — on Cyril, on the accusation of Tneodo-
ret." Cf. Garaerius Hist, Thcod., and Cyril. Ep. ad Cixlest.
I^abbe iii. 663.


nople and to the reverend clergy. Moreover
when we were summoned to Constantinople
we had five discussions in the imperial pres-
ence, and afterwards sent the emperor three
protestations. And to the very godly bishops
of the West, of Milan I mean, of Aquileia,
and of Ravenna, we wrote on the same sub-
ject, protesting that the Chapters were full of
the Apollinarian novelty. Furthermore their
writer received a letter from the blessed John
by the hands of the blessed Paul,' openly
blaming them ; and in like manner from Aca-
cius of blessed memory. And to give your
holiness concise information on the subject I
liave sent you both the letter of tlie blessed
Acacius, as well as that of the blessed John
to the blessed Cyril, in order that you may
perceive that though they were writing to
him on the subject of agreement they blamed
these Chapters. And the blessed Cyril him-
self, in his letter to the blessed Acacius
plainly indicated the drift of these Chapters in
the words " I have written this against his
innovations and when peace is made they
will be made manifest." The very defence
proves the accusation. I have sent you the
copy of what he wrote at the time of the
agreement, that you may see, my lord, that
he made no mention of them, and that
those who attend the Council are under an
obligation to bring forward what was written
at the time of the agreement, and to state
plainly what had caused the difierence and
on what terms the sundered parts were
atoned. For they who are summoned to
fight for the truth must flinch from no toil,
and must invoke the divine aid, that we may
preserve unimpaired the heritage bequeathed
us by our forefathers.

Your holiness must look out for men of
like mind among the godly bishops and
make them companions of your journey ;
and likewise of the reverend clergy those
who are zealous for the truth, lest betrayed
even by them of our own side we are either
driven to do something displeasing to the
God of all, or, in our abandonment, fall an
easy prey to our foes.

It is faith in which we have our hopes of
salvation, and we must leave no means un-
tried to prevent aught spurious being
brought into it, and the apostolic teaching
from being corrupted.

I write yon these words from far away,
with sighs and with groans, and T beseech
our common Master to scatter this dark
cloud and bestow on us once more the boon
of the bright sunshine.

• John of Antioch sent Paul of Eniesa to confer with Cyril
on terms of peace in 432.


LETTERS.


293


CXIII. To Leo, bishop of Rome.

If Paul, the herald of the truth, the
trumpet of the Holy Ghost, hastened to
the great Peter ^ in order that he might
carry from him the desired solution of diffi-
culties to those at Antioch who were in
doubt about living in conformity with the
law, much more do we, men insignificant
and small, hasten to your apostolic see'
in order to receive from you a cure tor the
wounds of the churches. For every reason
it is fitting for you to hold the first place,
inasmuch as your see is adorned with many
privileges. Other cities are indeed adorned by
their size, their beauty, and their population ;
and some which in these respects are lacking
are made bright by certain spiritual boons.
But on your city the great Provider has
bestowed an abundance of good gifts. She
is the largest, the most splendid, the most
illustrious of the world, and overflows with
the multitude of her inhabitants. Besides
all this, she has achieved her present sover-
eignty, and has given her name to her
subjects. She is moreover specially adorned
by her faith, in due testimony whereof the
divine Apostle exclaims " your faith is
spoken of throughout the whole world."*
And if even after receiving the seeds of the
message of salvation her boughs were
straightway heavy with these admirable
fruits, what words can fitly praise the piety
now practised in her.? In her keeping too
are the tombs that give light to the souls of
the faithful, those of our common fathers and
teachers of the truth, Peter and Paul.* This


1 This celebrated letter may be dated towards the end of
440 allowing time for news to reach Theodoret of his deposi-
tion at the Latrocinium on August 11. In 44S Leo had pro-
cured the well known decree from Valentinian lit, addressed
to tlie famous Aetius in connexion with the dispute with Hilary
of Aries, constituting the bishop of Rome the chief authority
in the Western Church, basing his demands not so much on the
recognised precedence of the imperial see as on the supposed
primacy of St. Peter. But in 451 , only two years after the date of
Theodoret's letter the council of Chalcedon (Can. xxviii) .after
recording the canon (iii) of Constantinople that " the bishop
of Constantinople shall have the primacy of honour after the
bishop of Rome, because that Constantinople is new Rome,"
addecl " we decree the same things concerning the privileges
of Constantinople, which is new Rome. The Fathers formerly
gave the primacy to the see of old Rome, because she was the
imperial city, and gave like privileges to new Rome, rightly
judging that the city which enjoyed like imperial privileges
should also be honoured in matters ecclesiastical, being next
in rank." We are yet very far from later claims. Indeed even
Gregory the Great when he protested against the title of cecu-
menical bishop, assumed by John the Faster, did not claim it
for himself.

»Paul and Barnabas went up to Jerusalem, not to Peter, but
" unto the Apostles and elders." Acts xv. 2. Peter took a
leading part in the discussion, but the " sentence " was pro-
nounced not by Peter, but by James, and the decree was that
of " the Apostles and elders with the whole Church." The
slight " wresting " of the scriptures of which Theodoret is
guilty is due rather to a desire to compliment an important
personage than in anticipation of later controversies.
3 Rome was the only apostolic see in the West.

*Rom.i.S. ^c c 1. r

»The traditional places of sepulture are, of half 01 each ot

the holy bodies, the shrine of SS. Peter and Paul in the crypt

of St. Peter's; of the remaining moiety of St. Peter the

Lateran ; of St. Paul, St. Paolo fuori le Mura,


thrice blessed and divine pair arose in the
region of sunrise, and spread their rays in
all directions. Now from the region of sun-
set, where they willingly welcomed the
setting of this life, they illuminate the world.
They have rendered your see most glorious ;
this is the crown and completion ' of your
crood things ; but in these days their God has
adorned their throne * by setting on it your
holiness, emitting, as you do, the rays of
orthodoxy. Of this I might give many
proofs, but it is enough to mention the zeal
which your holiness lately shewed against
the ill-famed Manichees, proving thereby
your piety's earnest regard for divine things.
Your recent writings, too, are enough to
indicate your apostolic character. For we
have met with what your holiness has
written concerning the incarnation^ of our
God and Saviour, and we have marvelled at
the exactness of your expressions.

For both writings agreed in setting forth
both the everlasting Godhead of the Only-
begotten derived from the everlasting Father,
and the manhood derived from the seed of
Abraham and David ; and that the nature
assumed was in all things like unto us, being
unlike to us in this respect alone, that it
remained free from all sin ; since it springs
not of nature but of free will.

The letters moreover contain this, that the
Only-begotten Son of God is one, andhis God-
head impassible, immutable, and invariable,
like the Father who begat Him and the Holy
Spirit ; and that on this account He took the
passible nature, divine nature being incapable
of suftering, that by the suffering of His^ own
flesh He might bestow freedom from suftering
on them that have believed in Him. These
statements and others of like nature were con-
tained in your letters. We, in admiration of
your spiritual wisdom, have lauded the grace
of the Holy Ghost uttered through you, and
we invoke and beseech and beg and implore
your highness to protect the churches of God
that are now assailed by the storm.

We had expected that through the
instrumentality of the representatives ' sent
by your holiness to Ephesus, the tempest


1 KoAo(;)uii'. cf. note on page 262. ^^ a

2 St. Paul is treated as in a sense bishop of Rome, ine idea
miy have some bearing on the hypothesis sometimes adopted,
to avoid the difficulties in the early Roman succession, that
there was a Gentile line derived from St. Paul, who ordained
Linus, and after him Cletus; and that for the Jewish brethren
St. Peter ordained Clement.

3 His dogmatic epistles and his sermons. He is not known
to have written any large treatise. r-r. ,. i- u

4 Dioscorus presided, and next him sat Julius of Puteoli, who
in company with the presbvtcr Ren.atus, and the deacon Hilarius
(■successor to Leo in the papacy) had carried to Flavian the
famous " tome " of Leo in June 449. Leo (Epp. XXXII. and
XXXI V.l describes his legates assent " de latere meo. Ac-
cording to one version of the story Renatus died at Delos on
the way out. Labbe IV, 1079.


294


THEODORET.


would have been done away, but we have
fallen under severer attacks of the storm.
For the very righteous bishop of Alexan-
dria was not content with the illegal and
very unrighteous deposition of the most
holy and godly bishop of Constantinople,
the lord Flavianus, nor was his soul satisfied
with a similar slaughter of the rest of the
bishops, but me too in my absence he
stabbed with a pen, without summoning me
to the bar, without trying me in my presence,
without questioning me as to my opinions
about the incarnation of our God and
Saviour. Even murderers, tomb-breakers,
and adulterers, are not condemned by their
judges until they have themselves confirmed
by confession the charges brought against
them, or have been clearly convicted by the
testimony of others. Yet I, nurtured as I
have been in the divine laws, have been con-
demned by him at his pleasure, when all the
while I was five and thirty days * march away.

Nor is this all that he has done. Only last
year when two fellows tainted with the un-
soundness of Apollinarius had gone thither
and patched up slanders against me, he stood
up in church and anathematized me, and
that after I had written to him and explained
my opinions to him.

I lament the disturbance of the church, and
long for peace. Six and twenty years have I
ruled the church entrusted to me by the God
of all, aided by your prayers. Never in the
time of the blessed Theodotus,' the chief
bishop of the East ; never in the time of his
successors in the see of Antioch, did I incur
the slightest blame. By the help of God's
grace working with me more than a thousand
souls did I rescue from the plague of Mar-
cion ; many others from the Arian and Eunom-
ian factions did I bring over to our Master
Christ. I have done pastoral duty in eight
hundred churches, for so many parishes does
Cyrus contain ; and in them, through your
prayers, not even one tare is left, and our
flock is delivered from all heresy and error.
He who sees all things knows how many
stones have been cast at me by evil heretics,
how many conflicts in most of the cities of
the East I have waged against pagans, against
Jews, against every heresy. After all this
trial and all this danger I have been con-
demned without a trial.

But I await the sentence of your apostolic
see. I beseech and implore your holiness
to succour me in my appeal to your fair and
righteous tribunal. Bid me hasten to you,
and prove to you that my teaching follows
the footprints of the apostles. I have in my

* Patriarch at Antioch 430-429.


possession what I wrote twenty years ago ;
what I wrote eighteen, fifteen, twelve, years
ago ; against Arians and Eunomians, against
Jews and pagans ; against the magi in
Persia ; on divine Providence ; on theol-
ogy ; and on the divine incarnation. By
God's grace I have interpreted the writings
of the apostles and the oracles of the
prophets. From these it is not difficidt to
ascertain whether I have adhered to the right
rule of faith, or have swerved from its straight
course. Do not, I implore you, spurn my
prayer ; regard, I implore you, the insults
piled after all my labours on my poor grey
head.

Above all, I implore you to tell me whether
I ought to put up with this unrighteous de-
position or not ; for I await your decision.
If you bid me abide by the sentence of con-
demnation, I abide ; and henceforth I will
trouble no man, and will wait for the right-
eous tribunal of our God and Saviour. God
is my witness, my lord, that I care not for
honour and glory. I care only for the scan-
dal that has been caused, in that many of the
simpler folk, and especially those whom I
have rescued from various heresies, cleaving
to the authority of my judges and quite unable
to understand the exact truth of the doctrine,
will perhaps suppose me guilty of heresy.

All the people of the East know that dur-
ing all the time of my episcopate I have not
acquired a house, not a piece of ground, not
an obol, not a tomb, but of my own accord
have embraced poverty, after distributing, at
the death of my parents, the whole of the
property which I inherited from them.

Above all I implore you, O holy sir, be-
loved of God, to grant me the help of your
prayers. I have told you this by the reverend
and godly presbyters Hypatius and Abraniius
chorepiscopi ' and by Alypius exarch '^ of
our monks. I would hasten to you myself
were I not kept back by the chains of the
imperial order, which imprison me as they
do others. Treat my messengers, I beseech
you, as a father might his sons; give them
kindly and unbiassed audience; deign to
grant your protection to my old age,^ slan-
dered as it is and attacked in vain. Above
all, regard, to the utmost of your power, the
faith conspired against; preserve for the
churches the inheritance of their fathers un-


1 Xo w(M(l exactly renders the title of these ministers, dis-
charfrinsr functions of an episcopal kind, thousrh without .h'ffh
rcMionsihility. Tlicy are lirst nicntionL-d in the Councils of
Ancyra and of Neo-Csesarea and fifteen of them subscribed the
decrees of Nicsa. . ,

= Kxarch,in its most ordinp.ry ecclesiastical sense nearly
equivalent to patriarch, came also to bo used ot officers charged
with the visitation of monasteries.

3 If born in 3S() (Garnerius), Theodoret wjuld now be 63.
Tilleiisonl says 3yj.


LETTERS.


295


impaired. So will your holiness receive the
recompense due for such deeds from the
great Giver of all good gifts.'

CXIII. (^a).' From Pope Leo to Theodorct.

To our much beloved brother Theodore-
tus, bishop, Leo, bishop.

CXIV.'' To Andiberis.

The reverend presbyter Peter is distin-
guished not only by his priestly rank, but
also by his wise practice in medicine. Dur-
ing his long residence with us he has won
all hearts by his conciliatory manners. On
learning of my departure he has now de-
termined to leave Cyrus ; 1 therefore com-
mend him to your excellency, and hope
that, fully capable as he is of doing good
service to the city, — for when he lived at
Alexandria he practised the same profession,
— he will meet with kindness at your hands.

CXV. To Apella.

When I undertook the direction of the
see of Cyrus, I procured for it from all direc-
tions men who practised necessary arts, and
besides this induced skilful physicians to
live there. Of these one is the reverend
presbyter Peter, who practises his profes-
sion with wisdom, and adorns it by his
character. On my departure, several have
left the city and Peter also has determined to
leave. Under these circumstances I beseech
your excellency to give him your kind care.
He is well able to attend the sick and to
wage war against their ailments.

CXVI.* To the presbyter Renatus.
We have heard of the warm and right-


i The tone of this letter, it need hardly be said, is quite in-
consistent with the later idea of an " appeal to Rome." It is
" an appeal," but the appeal of a wronged man for the sup-
port, succour, and advice, of a brother bishop of the highest
position and character. It does not on the face of it suggest
that Leo has any authority to review or alter the sentence of
the council. Tillemont (Mdm. Ecc. xv. 294) observes that
though addressed to Leo in person the appeal is really made
to the bishops of the West in council. Leo remonstrated, but
Theodosius and his court maintained that the decrees of the
Latrocinium must stand.

2 In Migne's edition here follows the reply of Leo to The-
odoret, which appears as Letter CXX. in the works of Leo.

3 Written after the deposition at Ephesus, and when Theod-
oret is either on the point of departing, or has departed, from
Cyrus to the Apamean monastery. The simultaneous exercise
of the clerical and medical professions points perliaps to the
continuance of the class of " Silverless martyrs," i.e. physi-
cians who took no fee but healed on condition that their pa-
tients should turn to Christ. The legendary Saints of the un-
feed faculty are Cosmo and Damian, the brothers whose
church occupies the site of the Temple of Remus, or of the
Penates, in the Roman Forum.

< This letter will be of the same date as CXIII. Theodoret
was aware that Leo was to be represented at the Latrocinium
by Renatus as well as by Julius of Puteoli and the archdeacon
Hilarius, but had not heard that he had never reached Ephesus.
We are told on the authority of Felix, the author of the
" Breviarium H<zre%is Eutychianm " that Renatus died at
Delos on the way out. This death is however discredited by
Qitesnel and some other authorities.


eous zeal of your holiness, and the just and
lawful boldness of speech which you em-
ployed in condemning the audacious proceed-
ings at Ephesus. Nor is this known to us
alone, but the fame of your orthodoxy has
gone out into all lands, and all men are cele-
brating your righteousness, your zeal, your
boldness, and your denunciation of my un-
fair treatment. And your holiness took
this course after seeing one massacre. If
you had seen the others which took place
after your departure you would perhaps have
emulated the fervour of the famous Phine-
has.' I am one of those who was subse-
quently condemned, being forbidden by the
imperial order to attend the council, and
sentenced in my absence.^

Six and twenty years have I been a bishop ;
innumerable labours have I undergone ; I
have struggled hard for the truth ; I have
freed tens of thousands of heretics from their
errors and brought them to the Saviour ;
and now they have stripped me of my priest-
hood ; they are exiling me from the city.
For my old age, for my hairs grown gray in
the truth, they have no respect. Wherefore,
I beseech your sanctity, persuade the very
sacred and holy archbishop ^ to bid me
hasten to your council. For that holy see
has precedence over all churches in the
world, for many reasons ; and above all
for this, that it is free from all taint of heresy,
and that no bishop of heterodox opinion has
ever sat upon its throne, but it has kept the
grace of the apostles undefiled.'* Confi-
dent in your justice I shall accept your de-
cisions, whatever they may be, and shall
claim to be judged by my writings. More
than thirty books have I written against
Arius and Eunomius, against Marcion,
against Macedonius, against the heathen
and against Jews ; I have interpreted the
holy Scriptures, and any one who likes may
easily learn that I have followed in the
steps of the apostles, proclaiming the one
Son, one Father, and one Holy Ghost ; one
Godhead of the Trinity, one sovereignty,
one power, eternity, immutability, impassi-
bility, one will ; * that the Godhead of the
Lord Jesus Christ was perfect, perfect the


1 Numbers xxv. 7.

2 Hilarius did leave Ephesus before the second session of
the council (Cf. Leo Ep. XLVI) and before the deposition of
Theodoret. The "massacre" may refer to the brutal treat-
ment of Flavian by the adherents and bullies of Dioscorus.

3 i.e. Leo.

*This is more or less true up to the time of Leo the great,
but Leo the great was the first pope who was an eminent
theologian. Liberius is a doubtful case. Cf. page 76.

5 The Monothelite Controversy dates from two centuries
afler Theodoret, when Heraclius was trying to bring about
religious union in his empire. Pope Honorius asserted two
energies, but one will. Monothelitism was definitely condemned
at Constantinople in 6S1, and Honorius anathematized.


296


THEODORET.


manhood taken for our salvation and for our
sak.es delivered unto death. I do not know
one Son of man and another Son of God,
but one and the same, Son of God and God
begotten of God, and Son of man, through
the form of the sei-vant, of the seed of Abra-
ham and David. These and like doctrines
I continue to teach ; these also I have found
in the writings of the most holy and sacred
lord archbishop Leo, and I praise the Lord
of all that I agree with his apostolic doctrines.
Receive, I beseech you, my supplication, and
do not overlook the wrongs under which I
suffer. On this account I have sent to your
holiness the godly presbyters Hypatius and
Abramius, chorepiscopi, and Alypius exarch
of our monks, adorned as they are by good
lives, and able by word of mouth to give
you exact information as to the affairs of my
insignificant self.

CXVII. To the bishop Florentiiis}

Truly the grace of our God and Saviour
has not yet abandoned the human race, but
has left us a seed in your holiness " lest we
should become as Sodom, and be made like
unto Gomorrah." " This seed sutlers us not
altogether to faint, but charges us to wait
for the passing away of the dire storm ; this
renders us hopeful.

We have therefore sent to your holiness
the very godly presbyters Hypatius and
Abramius, chorepiscopi, and Alypius,
exarch of our monks, that you may put an
end to the disaster which has befallen the
churches of the East ; that in the first place
you may confirm the faith handed down to
us from the first by the holy Apostles, may
proscribe the heresy that has started up, and
openly convict the men who have the hardi-
liood to debase the preaching of the CEco-
nomy ; ' and secondly may fight as champion
of thein who are being attacked for the
truth's sake. For it is in the cause of the
apostolic Faith, most holy, that we have un-
dergone that unrighteous massacre, because
we refused to abandon the truth of the Gos-
pel doctrines. Now it behoves your holi-
ness not to overlook the unjust persecution
of men of like mind with yourself, but hy
your just help to put a stop to injustice, and

'There were at this time two well known personages of
the name of Florentiiis to whom this letter may possibly hiivc
been addressed. Florentiiis the patrician, recipient of Letter
LXXXIX., and Florentiiis bisliop of Sardis. Ajijainst the
former hypothesis are tlic terms of the letter; asfainst the hit-
tor tlic character and sympathies of tlie metr()i)o!itan of Lydia,
il, as Garnerius thinks, he was an Eutychian. Canon Venablcs
(Diet. Christ Biog. 11. 540) supposes' a Florcntius bishop ofa
nameless western see. Garnerius and others think the letter
was probably really addressed lo tlic clergy or bishops assem-
lilcd in synod at Rome.

2 Komaus i.\. 25. ' ^'idc page 72.


teach the assailants of the truth that men
who strive to act unscrupulously at their
own good pleasure cannot be allowed to
work out their ends.

CXVJII. To the Archdeacon of Rome}

A terrible storm has attacked our
churches, but the adherents of the apostolic
faith have in your holiness a safe and quiet
haven. Not only do you champion the cause of
the doctrines of the Gospel, but you utterly
detest the wrong done to me. 1 was living
far away at a distance of thirty-five days'
journey, when I was condemned at their
good pleasure by those most righteous
judges. Teaching which has obtained in
the churches from the coming of God our
Saviour till this day they have abandoned.
They have introduced a novel and bastard
doctrine, diametrically contrary to the tra-
dition of the apostles, and are openly at
war with them that hold to the ancient in-
struction. Deign, then, most godly sir, to
kindle the zeal of the very sacred and holy
archbishop, that the churches of the East
too may enjoy your kindly care. Above all
fight in behalf of the faith delivered from
the beginning by the holy apostles; preserve
the heritage of our fathers unimpaired, and
scatter the mist that oppresses us. Give us
instead of moonless night clear sunshine,
and condemn the wickedness of the massa-
cre unrighteously wrought against us. It is
becoming to your holiness to add yet this
act of zeal to your other good deeds.

CXIX. To Anatolms the patrician}

Your excellency has been fully informed
as to the acts of the most righteous judges
at Ephesus, for their sound has gone out
into all lands and their most just judgment
to the ends of the world, ^ What church
has not felt the storm that has been raised
by it.-* The one side wronged, the other
were wronged, but they who neither suflered
nor did the wrong share the distress of the
wronged, and lament over them that so
savagely and against all laws human and
divine massacred their own members. Even
house breakers caught in the very act are
first tried and then punished by their judges ;
even murderers, violators of sepulchres, and
adulterers, are first haled before the bench,
and their accusers ordered to make their


1 Cf. note on page 393. Garnerius however is doubtful
whether the archdeacon is Hilarius or another. The evidence
seems in favour of the identitv.

2 This letter is of the same diite as the rest of the present
series. Thcodoret has heard il' liis deposition and is expect-
ing the sentence of banishmcn'. .

^ Cf. I'rahii xix. .|,


LETTERS.


597


indictment, and the motive of the witnesses
is tested to see that they are not giving evi-
dence to curry favour with the prosecutoi's,
or are prejudiced against the defendants ;
and after this they are bidden to make their
defence to the charges brought against them.
This is done twice, thrice ; sometimes even
four times ; and then, and not till then, after
the truth has been sought in the words of
both accuser and accused, the sentence is
given. As to how these men judged in the
case of the rest I will say nothing, lest I
may seem a meddler in what does not con-
cern me. I am forced to speak on behalf
of myself alone, for the unrighteous deed of
violence compels me. The imperial order
kept me at home, and prevented me from
travelling beyond the bounds of the city
placed under my pastoral care. The decis-
ion of the synod went against me, and a man
was condemned who was five and thirty
days' journey away.

Now the God of all said to the patriarch
Abraham about Sodom and Gomorrah :
" Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah
is very great and because their sin is very
grievous ; I will go down now and see
whether they have done altogether accord-
ing to the cry of it which is come unto me ;
and if not, I will know." * He knew quite
well the wickedness of those men, and
nevertheless He said, " I will go down and
see," so teaching us to wait for the proof of
facts. But these men never summoned me
to trial, they never heard the sound of my
voice, they refused to hear from me a state-
ment of my opinions, and handed me over, as
a victim to be slaughtered, to the rage of the
enemies of the truth.

I, however, welcome my rest, and espe-
cially so at the present time, when the apos-
tolic decrees have been by many destroyed,
and the new heresy strengthened. But lest any
one who does not know me should believe
that the slanders uttered against me are true,
and should be scandalized at the idea of my
holding opinions other than those of the
gospel, I implore your excellency to ask as
a favour from the victorious sovereign that
I may go to the West, and there plead my
cause before the very godly and holy bishops ;
and if I be found transgressing in the least
degree the rule of the faith, that I may be
plunged into the midst of the deep sea. If
he will not grant you this request, let him
at least command me to inhabit my monas-
tery,* which is a hundred and twenty miles
away from Cyrus, seventy-five from Anti-
och, and lies three miles away from Apamea.


I Gen. xviii, 30, ai.


I.e. Nicerte,


Of these petitions, if possible, I ask the
former ; if not at least I implore that, through
your excellency's interposition, the second
may be granted me. I shall ever carry
the memory of your kindness in my heart
and on my lips, supplicating the Lord of
hosts to requite your excellency as well with
present as with future blessings. I am com-
pelled to write to you in these terms be-
cause I have heard that certain persons are
endeavouring to compass my removal from
this place.

CXX. To Lupiciiis}

Even the enemies of the truth must, I
think, be indignant at the injustice and
illegality of the violence done us. It is
only reasonable that the nurslings of the
truth, at whose head stands your excellency,
should be still more distressed at this new
and surprising tragedy. It is only right that
those who are the more grieved should show
the more earnestness and zeal to counteract
the deeds impiously and illegally done ; and
restore to its previous concord the Church's
body now in peril of being torn asunder.
Wherefore I beseech your excellency to
reckon the present crisis an opportunity for
spiritual reciprocity ; to give on your side
earnestness on behalf of the truth, and to
receive from our generous Master alike His
kindly care in this present life and in the
life to come the kingdom of heaven.

CXXI. To AnatoUus the patrician.^

The Lord who overlooks and governs all
things has shewn both the apostolic truth
of my doctrines, and the falsehood of the
slander laid at my door. For the writings
sent from the right godly and holy lord
Leo, archbishop of Great Rome, to Fla-
vianus of holy memory and to the rest
assembled at Ephesus, are entirely in har-
mony with what I myself have written
and have always preached in church. So
soon therefore as I had read them, I praised
the loving-kindness of the Lord, in that He
had not wholly forsaken the churches, but
had protected the spark of orthodoxy ; or —
shall I not rather say.-* — not a spark, but a
very great torch, such as might enkindle and
enlighten the world ; for he has truly, in
his writings, observed the apostolic stamp,
and in them we have found at once what has

' Garnerius reads Lupicinus and identifies him with the
recipient of Letter XC. Letter CXX is of the same date as
the precedino^.

2 This letter may be dated shortly after Letter CXIX.
Garnerius points out thut it contains a short summary of the
orthodox tradition, but makes no mention of the council of
Ephesus in 431.


29^


THEODORET.


been delivered by the holy and blessed
prophets und apostles, and their successors
in the preaching of the Gospel, and more-
over the holy Fathers assembled at Nicaea.
By these I confess that I abide, and indict
all who hold other doctrines as guilty of
impiety. Side by side with these writings of
mine I have set one of the letters sent by
him to Ephesus, to the end that when your
excellency reads them you may remember
the words which I have often spoken in
church, may recognise the harmony of the
doctrines, and may hate the utterers of the lie,
as well as those who have set up their new
heresy in opposition to the doctrines of the
Apostle.

CXXII} To Uranius' bishop of Emesa.

I have been greatly delighted that we who
correspond in character should have corre-
sponded by letter. But I do not quite see
what you mean by saying " Are not these
my words?" If it were said only for the
sake of salutation, I am not annoyed at it ; but
if it is intended to remind me of the advice
which recommended silence, and of the so-
called ccconomy,^ I am very much obliged,
but I do not accept the suggestion. For the
divine Apostle charges us to take quite the
opposite course. " Be instant in season and
out of season." * And the Lord says to this
very spokesman, " Be not afraid, but
speak" * and to Isaiah, "Cry aloud, spare
not"® and to Moses " Go down, charge the
people" ^ and to Ezekicl " I have made thee
a watchman unto the house of Israel," and
it shall be " if thou warn not the wicked," ^
and the like : for I think it needless to write
at length to one who knows. Not only
therefore are we not distressed at having
spoken freely, but we even rejoice and are
glad, and laud Him who has thought us
worthy of these sullerings ; aye and call on
my friends to encounter the same perils.

If they know that we do not keep the
apostolic rule of the faith, but swerve to the
right hand or the left, let them hate us ; let
them join the opposite side ; let them be

1 The two following letters arc written from the i7ionastcryat
Niccrte where Theodoret found a retreat after his banislunent
from Cyrus. Garnerius would place the former late in 449, and
the latter early in 450.

* ITranius, nishop of Enicsa in Phrenicia, was present at the
two trials of Ibas, at Tyre in February and at lierytus in Sep-
tember 44S. At the Latrocinium he was accused of immorality
and of episcojjal usurpation. It was during his episcopate
that the head of the IJaptist was supposed to be found at Emesa.
Cf. notes on pp. 96 and 242.

3 Cf. note on p. 72. Here oiKOfo/iia is used {ox discreet silence
like the German " Ziiruckhaliuiig," and the French " tiu'ii-
a^ement." Cf. the Socratic epuiveia and the Latin dissimu-
latio.

* II. Tim. iv. 3. 6 Isaiah Iviii. i.

' Acts xviii. 9. ' Exodus xix. 21.

'Ezekieliii. 17.19. inexact quotation.


ranked with them that are at war with us.
But if they bear witness to our holding the
right teaching of the gospel message, we
hail them with the cry, " Do you too ' stand
having your loins girt about with truth, .. , .
andyour feet shod with the preparation of the
gospel of peace,' " ' and so on, for it is said
that virtue comprises not only temperance,
righteousness, and prudence, but also cour-
age, and that by means of courage the rest
of its component parts are preserved. For
righteousness needs the alliance of cour-
age in its war against wrong; temperance
vanquishes intemperance by the aid of cour-
age. And for this reason the God of all said
to the prophet " The just shall live by his
faith, and if any man draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him." ^ Shrinking
he calls cowardice. Hold fast then, my
dear friend, to the apostolic doctrines, for
" He that shall come will come, and will
not tarry," ^ and " He shall render to every
man according to his deeds,"* for "the
fashion of this world passeth away," * and
the truth shall be made manifest.

CXXIII. To the same.

Your letter was a long one, and a pleasant
one, and it shews how warm and genuine is
your aflection. So delighted am I with it
that I am not at all sorry for having errone-
ously conjectured the meaning of the
beginning of your former one. For my mis-
apprehension of the intention of your letter
has disclosed your brotherly love, made plain
the sincerity of your faith, and shewn your
zeal for the true religion. We have indeed
shared between us the words and the trials
of the prophet ; your holiness has used the
words ; I am bufleted by the hurricane and
billows, and against the rowers of the ship I
exclaim in his words " They that observe
lying vanities forsake their own mercy."*
Perhaps He who is Jonah's Lord and mine
will grant that I too may rise and be released
from the monster. But if the surge con-
tinue to boil I trust that even thus I shall
enjoy the divine protection, and learn by my
own experience how His strength is " made
perfect in weakness," ' for He has measured
the peril by my infirmity. The divine
prophet whom I have mentioned was flung
into the sea by his shipmates one and all,
but I am granted the consolation of your
holiness, and of other godly men. For them

' Kphcs. vi. 14.

2 Ilcb. X. 3$. Cf. Hab. ii. 4. Sept. Note inverted quotation
of Ilabakkuk.

sileb. X.37. 8 1. Cor. vii. 31. ' II. Cor. xii. 9,

* Rom. ii. 6. * Jonah ii. S.


LETTERS.


299


and for your godliness I pray that the bless-
ing bestowed upon the excellent Onesiphorus
may be yours, for you have not blushed at
my gibes ; nay rather you have shared in my
afflictions for the faith's sake.

And one thing which I wish you to know
is that, though other godly bishops have sent
me their bounty, I have declined to receive
it; — not from any want of respect to the
senders, God forbid ; — but because hitherto
food convenient for me has been provided by
Him Who gives it even to the ravens w^ith-
out stint. In the case of your reverence I
have acted differently, for ideally the warmth
of your affection has overcome what has
hitherto been my fixed principle. For be
well assured, my godly friend, that ever since
friendship grew up between us the fire of our
love has been kindled to greater heat.

CXXIV. To the learned Maranas?

I too am distressed at the calamities of the
Church, and wail over the storm that is rag-
ing ; for myself I am glad to be quit of agita-
tion, and to be enjoying a calm which is de-
lightful to me. As to the men whom your
learning states to be still carrying on their
iniquities, the day is not far distant when
they will pay the penalty of their present
rash lawlessness. All things are governed
by the Lord of all with weight and rule, and
whenever any fall away into unbounded
iniquity His long suffering comes to an end,
and He then acts as Judge and appoints pun-
ishment. Foreseeing this I pray that they
may cease from their license that I may not
be compelled to weep once more for them as
I behold them undergoing chastisement.

Your excellency I can never forget, and I
beg our common Master to fill your house
with blessing.

CXXV. To Aphthonius, Theodoritus^ Nojinus,
ScylaciuSy Aphthonius, Joannes, Magistrates
of the Zeugmatensis.

I know the strength and stability of your
faith, and have been filled with the greatest
possible delight, for, since we worshippers of
the eternal Trinity constitute one body, it is
only natural that together with the members
that are sound the rest of the members
should rejoice. So says the divine Apostle ;
" Whether one member be honoured all the
members rejoice with it." ^ I therefore re-
joice with you in your struggles on behalf of
the apostolic doctrines and your following


» Cf. Letter LXVII. This letter may be dated during Theo-
doret's banishment to Nicerte in 449, and is evidently in reply
to a letter of condolence from the advocate.

* I. Cor. xii. 36.


of the famous Naboth in more excellent
things. Naboth for his vineyard's sake suf-
fered most unrighteous slaughter, because he
would not give up the heritage of his fathers.
You are fighting not for vineyards, but for
divine doctrines, and I'eject this new-fangled
and spurious heresy as blackening the bright-
ness of the teaching of the gospel ; you do
not suffer the number of the blessed Trinity
to be diminished or increased. For it is
diminished by those who ascribe the passion
of the only begotten to the Godhead ; It Is
Increased b}'^ those who have the audacity
to introduce a second son. You believe in
one only begotten, as you do in one Father
and in one Holy Ghost. In the only be-
gotten made flesh you behold the assumed
nature which He took from us and offered on
our behalf. The denial of this nature puts
our salvation far from us ; for if the Godhead
of the only begotten Is impassible, as the
nature of the Trinity Is Impassible, and we
refuse to acknowledge that which is by nat-
ure adapted to suffer, then the preaching of
a passion wliich never happened is idle and
vain. For if that which suffers has no exist-
ence how could there be a passion.'' We
declare that the divine nature is impassible ;
— a doctrine confessed by our opponents as
well as by ourselves. How then could there
be a passion when there is no subject capa-
ble of suffering.-* The great mystery of the
osconomy will appear an appearance, a mere
seeming instead of the reality. This is the
fable started by Valentlnus, Bardesanes, Mar-
clon and Manes. But the teaching handed
down to the churches from the beginning re-
cognises, even after the incarnation, one Son,
our Lord Jesus Christ, and confesses the
same to be everlasting God, and man made
at the end of days ; made man not by the
mutation of the Godhead but by the assump-
tion of the manhood. For suppose the di-
vine nature to have undergone mutation into
the human nature, then it did not remain
what It was ; and if it is not what it was,
they who have these objects of worship are
false in calling Him God. We, on the con-
trary, recognise the only begotten Son of
God to be Immutable as God, and Son of
the very God. For we have learnt from the
divine Scripture that being In the form of
God He took the form of the servant ; ' and
took on Him the seed of Abraham, not was
changed Into Abraham's seed ; and shared
just as we do both in ffesh and blood and in
a soul immortal and immaculate. Preserv-
ing these for our sinful bodies He offered His


1 Phil. ii. 6 and 7.


300


THEODORET.


sinless body and for our souls His soul
free from all stain. It is for this reason that
vvc have the hope of the comnion resurrection,
for the race will assuredly share with its first
fruits, and as we have shared with Adam in
his death, so too with Christ our Saviour
shall we be sharers in His life. This the
divine Apostle has plainly taught us, for
'' now " he says '• is Christ risen from the
dead and become the first fruits of them that
slept. For since by man came death, by
man came also the resurrection of the dead,
for as in Adam all die, even so in Christ
shall all be matle alive." '

I write thus not to inform you but to re-
mind you, I have tried to be brief, but I
fear I have transgressed the limits of a letter.
I was however urged to write by the very
reverend and godly presbyter and archi-
mandrite Mecimas, who, in obedience to the
law of love, has undertaken so long a jour-
ney, told us of your excellency's zeal, and
begged us to inflame it by a letter. I have
therefore granted his supplication, and writ-
ten my letter, and I implore the Lord of all
to keep you safe in the faith and make
stronger than him who sifts us.'*

CXXVI. To the Bishop Sabinianus.^

I praised your holiness on your quitting
the envied see. Once it was venerable ;
now it is ridiculous, for we have made it a
thing to be bought and sold. I was as-
tounded to hear of your having appealed to
the men who ejected you. You ought to
have done just the contrary, and, on being in-
vited to grasp the tiller, to have declined to
do so, on the ground that your shipmates had
become your foes. Are you not aware, most
godly sir, what our Saviour, through His
sacred apostles, taught us to preach } Do
you not know what the heirs of the apostolic
doctrines have just now laid down as objects
of worship.^ For who of the old teachers
from the time when the message was first
preached down to the j^eriod of the darkness
that now obtains, ever listened to any one
preaching one nature of flesh and Godhead
or dared at any time to call the nature of the
only begotten passible.'' These doctrines in
our day are by some men openly and boldly
uttered, while among others their utterance
is overlooked, and by silence men become
participators in the blasphemy. What then,

' I. Cor. XV. 20. 21. 22. ^cf. Luke xxii. 31.

^ Sabinianus succeeded Atlianasius bishop of Pcrrha on the
deposition of the latter at Antiocli in 445. lie was deposed at
ihe Latrociniuin and Atlianasius restored. Roth liishops
signed at Chalcedon as bisliops of Perrha (Labbe iv, 602, Jijo.
Ilict : Christ: Biog: iv, 574. The letter iiiav be dated 450.
Theodoret chides Sabini'anus for appealing- to the dominant
wrong doers against his expulsion.


may well be asked, is the proper course to
be taken by those who abominate such doc-
trines.'' They have, I should reply, two
alternatives before them ; they may either
come to close quarters, and prove the spuri-
ousness of the doctrines, or they may decline
communion with their opponents as openly
impious.

I, indeed, liave received the wrong done
me as a divine blessing. I do not mean
that I have thanked them that have wronged
mc ; how could I thank fratricides, and men
who have become followers of Cain?

But I praise mv Master for thinking me
worthy of the lot of them that suffer wrong,
for separating me from wrong-doers and
blasphemers, and for giving me my most
delightful rest.

CXXVII, To Jobius, presbyter and archi-
mandrite.^

The patriarch Abraham won a victory in
his old age.* The great Moses was now an
old man when, so long as he stretched out
his hands in prayer, he vanquished Amalek.^
The divine Samuel ^ was an o'ld man when
he put the aliens to flight. These are em-
ulated by your venerable old age. In our
wars for true religion's sake you are play-
ing the man, and championing the cause of
the gospel doctrines, and putting young men
in the shade by the vigour of your spirit.

I rejoice to hear it, and am glad, and long
to embrace your right venerable gray hairs.
This I cannot do, for your reverence is kept
at home by your years, and I am kept in
durance here by the imperial decree. But I
cheat my love by this letter, and give your
piety this most loving embrace. I call upon
you in your prayers to help the churches
now whelmed in the storm, and to win for
me the divine support, assailed as I am for
the sake of the doctrines of the gospel, and
standing sorely in need of help from above.

CXXVJJI. To Candidus, presbyter and archi-
viandrite."

1 am afraid that the vigour of your godly
soul has been overcome by old age, and that
you do not keep your hands stretched out as
usual. So Amalek is trying to win. May
there be some to succour your weakness, as
once of old Ur and Aaron supported the

'Joliius was an orthodox archiin;indrite of Constantinople,
and subscribed the deposition of Eulychca by the hand of his
deacon Andreas .at Constantinople in 4^8. (Lal>bc iv, 2.^2) _ In
450 Leo addresses him with other archimandrites (Ep. LXXI
pasjfe ini2). This letter seems to have been written about the
time of the Latrocinium.

2 Gen. xiii. 15. ' Ex. xvii. 13. * I. Sam. vii. 12.

■'■ Garnerius would date this letter at the time of the council
,of Chakedoa.


LETTERS.


301


hands of the law-giver, that you may over-
throw Amalek and save Israel. These are
days when we specially need more earnest
prayers, when Gentiles and Jews and every
heresy are at peace, and the Church alone is
beaten by the storm and surrounded by the
boisterous billows.

We indeed specially need the aid of your
pi"ayers, for those whom we reckoned to be
fighting on our side are fighting on that of our
foes.

CXXIX. To Magti us Anto nin us the presbyter. '

Sailors at night are cheered by the sight
of the harbour lights, and so are they who are
in peril for the sake of the apostolic faith by
the zeal of them that share the faith. We
have great comfort in what we hear of your
godliness's eftbrts on behalf of the divine
doctrines, for this mind has been given you
by the Giver of all good gifts and for the
safe keeping of these doctrines you undergo
every toil. Now I, comforted by your zeal,
make an insignificant return, calling on j'ou
to persevere in your divine labours, to de-
spise your adversaries as an easy prey, (for
what is weaker than they who are destitute
of the truth .'') and to trust in Him who said
" I will not fail thee nor forsake thee," ^ and
" Lo I am with you alway even unto the
end of the world." ^ Help me too with your
prayers that I may confidently say " The
Lord is on my side ; I will not fear : what can
man do unto me ? " *

CXXX. To Bishop Timotheus.^

Not without purpose does the supreme
Ruler allow the spirits that are against us to
agitate the waves of impiety. He does so
that He may try the courage of the sailors,
and, while He exhibits some men's manliness,
convicts others of cowardice, stripping the
mask from the faces of some who put on an
appearance of piety, and proclaiming others
as foremost fighters in the ranks of the truth.
We have seen an instance of this in the
present time. The storm rose high ; some
shewed their secret impiety ; some aban-
doned the truth which they were holding,
went over to the phalanx of our foes, and
now, with them, are smiting the very men

1 Garnerius supposes that this Antoninus is the same as the
Antoninus mentioned as living in Theodoret's Religious
History and thinks that the Solitary may have become an
Archimandrite after 445 when the Religious History- was
written, but the mss. vary as to the superscription of the letter,
which may be addressed to Magnus, Antonius and others.

* Joshua i. J. 3 Matthew xxviii. 20. •• Psalm cxviii. 6.

I" Timotheus was Bishop of Doliche, a town of the Euphra-
tensis. He was present at Antioch when Athanasius of
Perrha was deposed, and also at Chalcedon. The letter may be
dated from Nicerte in 450.


whom they used to call their chiefs. The
witnesses of these things detest the enemy
and pity the deserters, but are afraid to give
aid to the victims of the attack upon the
apostolic doctrines. Nay, suppose the
traitors to urge them with greater insistency,
they will perhaps themselves pass over to
the side of the assailants, will give no
quarter to their fellow-believers, but will
drive against them their barbs side by side
with the very men whom they accuse.
They will act thus though they have been
taught by the divine Scripture that a wrong
done to one's neighbour incurs punishment,
while the sufiering of injustice entails great
and lasting rewards.

Your own piety, your zeal for the faith,
and your good will to myself, have been
proved by this agitation. Twice you have
written me a letter in contempt of all that
might deter you, and have thus shewn your
brotherly aft'ection. You have also indicated
the conflict you are sustaining on behalf
of the apostolic doctrines. You ask me to
tell you by letter what we ought to think
and preach concerning the passion of
salvation. I have received your request
with delight, and, not indeed to give you
information but only to remind one who is
beloved of God, will proceed to tell you
what I have learnt from the divine Scripture
and from the Fathers who have inter-
preted it.

Know then, most godly sir, that before
all things it is necessary to observe the dis-
tinction of terms, and, in addition to this,
the cause of the divine incarnation. Once
let these be made clear, and there will be no
ambiguity left about the passion. We will
therefore first, to those who endeavour to
contradict us, put this enquiry. Which of
the names given to the only begotten Son of
God are anterior to the incarnation, and
which posterior, or rather, connected with
the operation of the occonomy.? They will
reply that the terms anterior are, " God the
Word," " only begotten Son," " Almighty,"
and "Lord of all creation"; and that the
names "Jesus Christ " belong to the incar-
nation. For, after the incarnation, God the
Word, the only begotten Son of God is called
Jesus Christ; for " Behold" He says " unto
you is born this day Christ the Lord " ' and
because others had been called christs,
priests, kings, and prophets, lest any one
shoidd suppose Him to be like unto them,
the angels conjoined the title Lord with that
of Christ, in order to prove the supreme

1 Luke ii. 11.


302


THEODORET.


di^^nity of Him that was born. And, again,
Gal)riel says to the blessed Virgin, " Behold
thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring
forth a son and shalt call His name Jesus " '
" for He shall save His people from their
sins." ' Before the incarnation, however,
He was never called either Christ or Jesus.
For truly the divine Prophets, in their pre-
dictions of things to come, used the words,
just as they prophesied about the birth, the
cross, and the passion, when the events had
not yet come to pass. Nevertheless, even
after the incarnation He is called God the
Word, Lord, Almighty, only begotten Son,
Maker, and Creator. Ff)r He was not made
man by mutation, but, remaining just what
He was, assumed what we are, for "• Being
in the form of Gotl," to use the words of the
divine Apostle " He took the form of a ser-
vant."^ On this account, therefore, even
after the incarnation, He is called also by
the titles which are anterior to the incar-
nation, since His nature is invariable and
immutable. But when relating the passion
the divine Scripture nowhere uses the term
God, since that is the name of the absolute
nature. No one on hearing the words " In
the beginning was the Word and the Word
was with God, and the Word was God " ■*
and similar expressions, would suppose that
the flesh existed before the ages, or is of one
substance with the God of the universe, or
was Creator of the world. Every one
knows that these terms are proper to the
Godhead. Nor would any one on reading
the genealogy of St. Matthew suppose that
David and Abraham according to nature
were forefathers of God, for it is the assumed
nature which is derived from them.

Since then these points are plain and indu-
bitable even among extreme heretics, and
we acknowledge both the nature which is
before the ages, and that which is of recent
time, so are we bound to recognise at once
the passibility of the flesh, and the impassi-
Inlity of the Godhead, not dividing the union
nor separating the only begotten into two
persons, but contemplating the properties
of the natures in the one Son. In the case
of soul and body, which are of natures con-
temporary and natiually united, we are ac-
customed to make this distinction, describ-
ing the soul as simple, reasonable, and im-
mortal, but the body as complex, passible,
and mortal. We do not divide the union,
nor cut one man in two. Far rather, then,
in the case of the Godhead, begotten of the


' I. like i, 31.

' Matt. i. 21, Observe the confusioti of quotation.

» Phil. ji. 6. «John i. i.


Father before the ages, and of the manhood
assumed of David's seed, is it becoming to
adojDt a similar course, and distinctly to re-
cognise the everlasting, eternal, simple, uncir-
cumscribed, immortal, and invariable charac-
ter ofthe one nature, and the recent, complex,
circumscribed, and fluctuating nature of the
other. We acknowledge the flesh to be now
immortal and incorruptible, although before
the resurrection it was susceptible of death
and of passion ; for how otherwise was it
nailed to the tree, and committed to the
tomb.' And though we recognise the dis-
tinction ofthe natures, we are bound to wor-
ship one Son, and to acknowledge the same
as Son of God and Son of man, form of
God, and form of a servant. Son of David,
and Lord of David, seed of Abraham, and
creator of Abraham. The union causes the
names to be common, but the community of
names does not confound the natures. With
them that arc right-minded some names are
plainly appropriate as to God, and others as
to man ; and in this way both the passible and
the impassible are properly used of the Lord
Christ, for in His humanity He suflered,
while as God He remained impassible. If,
according to the argument of the impious, it
was in the Godhead that He suffered, then,
I apprehend, the assumption of the flesh,
was supererogatory ; for suppose the divine
nature to have been capable of undergoing pas-
sion, then He did not need the passible man-
hood. But grant that, as even their own argu-
ment contends, the Godhead was impassible,
and the passion was real, let them beware of
denying that which suflered, lest they deny
with it the reality of the passion ; for if that
which suffers does not exist, then the pas-
sion is uiu'eal. Now for any one who likes
to open the quaternion ' of the sacred
evangelists, it is easy to perceive that the
divine vScripture distinctly proclaims the pas-
sion of the body, and to learn from them
how Joseph of Arimathasa came to Pilate,
and begged the body of Jesus ; how Pilate
ordered the body of Jesus to be delivered,
how Joseph took down the body of Jesus from
the tree and wrapped the body of Jesus in
the linen cloth, and laid it in the new tomb.
All this is described by the four evangelists
with frequent mention of the body. But if
our opponents adduce the words of the
angel to Mary and her companions, " Come

'The word TerpaicTus commonly cxprcs<;es the sum ofthe
first four numbers in the Pythagorean system, i.e. 10, the
root of creation; (i-|-2+3-l-4=)o.) Cf. the Pythagorean 0.1th
" .\ai /ulA Toil li/utTtpa \fiv\a -napaSoi'Ta TeTpaKTVf." Its use for
TeTpaSiToi' orT€Tpa6io>' (cf. Acts xii. 4) may indicate acceptance
of the llieory of the mystic and necessai-y number of the gos-
pels of wliicn early and remarkable expression is found in Iren-
teus (cont. Hxr. iii. 11.)


LETTERS.


303


where the Lord lay," ' let them be referred
to the passage in the Acts which states that
devout men " carried Stephen to his burial
and observe that it was not the soul, but
the body, of the victorious Stephen, to which
the customary rites were paid. And to this
very day, when we approach the shrines of
the victorious martyrs, we commonly enquire
what is the name of him who is buried in
the grave, and those who are acquainted
with the facts reply peradventure "Julian
the martyr," or " Romanus," or, " Timo-
theus." '

Very often it is not entire bodies that are
buried, but only very small remains, yet
nevertheless we speak of the body by the
name that belongs to the whole man. It
was in this sense that the angel called the
body of the Lord, " Lord," because it was
the body of the Lord of the universe. More-
over the Lord Himself promised to give on
behalf of the life of the world, not His invisi-
ble nature, but His body. " For," He says,
" the bread that I will give is my flesh which
I will give for the life of the world," " and
when He took the symbol of divine myste-
ries, He said, " This is my body which is
given for you." * Or according to the ver-
sion of the Apostle, "broken."® In no
place where He spoke of the passion did He
mention the impassible Godhead.

It is therefore before all things necessary
that the question should be put to those who
are endeavouring to contradict us whether
they confess that the perfect manhood was
assumed by God the Word, and assert the
vmion to have been made without confusion.
Once let these points be admitted, and the
rest will follow in due course, and the pas-
sion will be attributed to the passible nature.
I have now summed up these heads and
have exceeded the limits of my letter. I have
sent also what I lately wrote at the sugges-
tion of a very godly and holy man of God,
the lord ' in the form of a concise in-
struction designed to teach the truth of the
apostolic doctrines. Should I find a good
copyist, I will also send your holiness
what I have written in the form of a dia-
logue,® extending the argument, and strength-


» Matt, xxviii. 6. ' Acts viii. 2.

3 There were many martyrs of the name of Julianus. Theo-
doret might have visited a shrine of Julianus martyred at Emesa
in the reign of Numerian. A Romanus was one of the seven
martyrs at Samosata in the persecution of Diocletian. Among
martyred Timothei was one who suffered at Gaza in 304.

*Johnvi.5i. 0 I. Cor. xi. 24.

* Luke xxii. 19. ' The name is omitted.

» Garnerius identifies the " short instruction " with the com-
position mentioned in letter CIX. and sent to Euschins of
Ancyra; and the bishop whose name is omitted with the
same Eusebius. But in his note on CIX, he thinks this
composition is a part of Dial. II. It would seem from this
letter that the composition in question was distinct from the
Dialogues.


ening my positions, by the teaching of the
Fathers. I have moreover now sent a few
statements of the ancient teachers, sufficient
to shew the drift of their instruction. Give
me in return, most godly sir, the succour of
your prayers, that I may pass through the
terrible tempest and reach the quiet haven
of the Saviour.

CXXXI. To Longirws, Archimandrite of
Doliche^

You have shewn alike your zeal for the
true religion, and your love for your neigh-
bour, both of which are at the present time
clearlv connected, for it is for the sake of
the apostolic decrees that I am being at-
tacked, because I refuse to give up the heri-
tage of my fathers, and prefer to undergo any
suffering to looking lightly on the robbery of
one tittle from the faith of the Gospel. You
have accepted fellowship in my sufferings,
not only by comforting me by means of your
letter, but further by sending to me the
very honourable and pious Matthew and
Isaac. You shall hear, I am well assured,
from the lips of the righteous Lord, "I was
in prison, and ye visited me." * We are
small and of no account, and burdened by a
great load of sins, but the Lord is bountiful
and generous. He remembers the small
rather than the great, and says, " Inasmuch
as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these "^ "■ which believe in me "* " ye have
done it unto me." * I pray you in that you
are conspicuous for right doctrine, and
shine by worthiness of life, and there-
fore have great boldness before God, help
me in your prayers, that I may be able
" to stand," to use the words of the Apostle,®
" against the wiles of error," escape the sins
of the destroyer, and stand, though with little
boldness, in the day of the appearing before
the righteous Judge.

CXXXII. To Ibas, bishop of Edessa?

The Lord has taught them that suffer
wrong not to be cast down, but to rejoice,

1 Sent presumably at the same time as the preceding.
Nothin<^ is recorded of Longinus. It will be remembered
that the^name, recorded also in the Acts of Linus as that ol
an officer commanding the executioners of St. Paul, is
assigned by tradition to' the soldier who wounded the Saviour's

side. . -, „ ... ,

2Mattxxv.36. 4 Matt, xviii. 6.

sMatt. XXV. 40. sMatt. xxv.^o.

cEph iv. 14, and vi. 11. As in the case of the former
citation Theodoret seems to be quoting from memory, and
coupliiiu' the two passages in which the word /j6Ho6fta occurs.
" Wiles^" fiti in better with the evident allusion to Eph. vi. 11,
than the periphrasis by which A. V. renders iv. 14, and for
which the revisers substitute " the wiles of error.' 'Vf^o5«'«
may be exactly described as '' i\ uttoo-toAiki) (Jxoi-))," for it oc-
curs nowhere but in these two passages.

' To console him under the unjust sentence of the Latro
cinium.


304


THEODORET.


and to derive consolation tVom the examples
of old. For from the period of the first
men down to our own days we find instances
of men who have been zealous in the wor-
ship of tlic God of all, and yet have been
wronged by those with whom tlieir lot was
cast, and have fallen into many and grievous
troubles. Of these I would have gone
through the entire list, had I not been writ-
ing to one of accurate knowledge of the
divine vScriptures. But since you, O beloved
of God, have been nurtured from your boy-
hood in the divine oracles, I have thought
it needless so to do. I only ask you to cast
your eyes on them, and to look on all the
kind-hearted clergy that have done wrong,
with sorrow ; on all tliat look lightly on
wrong doing, with pity ; and to be sorrow-
ful for the disquiet of the Church. I ask
you to rejoice and be glad that I am a sharer
in sufiering for the sake of true religion, and
to praise without ceasing Him who has
imposed this lot on me. As for honour and
comfort and the dignity of sees and wretched
reputation, let us yield them to the murder-


ers.


Let us cleave only to the doctrines of the
gospel, and with them, if need be, endure any
extremity of pain, and choose honourable
penury rather than wealth with its many
cares.

I am not writing in these terms in order
to give you exhortation, for I know the
courage of your holiness in trouble. My
object is to make my own mind known to
your piety, and to inform you that you have
on your side comrades who are gladly incur-
ring peril for the truth's sake. I have been
anxious for some time to write thus to you,
but I have been unable to find anyone to
convey my letter. Now I have met with the
very honourable and pious presbyter Ozeas,
a man who is at once engaged in the battle
for truth and attached to your piety. So I
write and salute your holiness, and beg you
to give me both the prop of your prayers and
the comfort of a letter from you.

CXXXIII. To John, bishop of Gcrmanicia.^

1 have always known, sir, that you are not
unmindful of our friendship. And it has ever

• It will be remembered that Flaviaiius had actually died
from tlie brutal treatment he had received at the hands — and the
feet — of Dioscorus with his partisans and bullies, and " inii^ra-
vil ad Dominum dolore pluffarum,^' Aui^. ii, .(49, three days
after he was carried from St. Mary's at Kphesus to his dun-
geon. (Liberatus Hrev. xix. Diet". Clirist. Bio^. i.S58.)

2 John of Gerinanicia (vide p. .S6 n.) was on the Nestorian
side at Ephesus in 4,y, and so naturally associated with
Theodoret. At Chalcedon he was compelled to pronounce a
special anathema a^'ainst Neslorius. (Mansi vil. ly^, Diet.
Christ. HioK. iii. 374.) The letter is written at"lerthe deposition
and before the banishment to Niccrte. C(. Ep. 147.


been my wish and prayer that your piety
should give heed to exact truth, and shun
the communion of traitors to true religion,
ascribing to the Supreme Ruler His care on
our behalf. For indeed, while I have been
silent and inactive. He has put an end to
our very keen and terrible sufferings, and has
replaced the dire tempest by this bright
calm. And now that the lovins^-kindness of
the Lord has granted us this blessing, I find
the quiet of my retreat indeed delightful, for
I feel the necessity of persuading those who
have been led away by the slanders launched
against me, and of both convincing them of
the truth of the teaching of the gospels, and
refuting the attack of falsehood. When once
this refutation is finished, and the victory of
the truth is secured, it is my purpose to quit
public life, and withdraw to the rest that I
so greatly long for. As to the foes of the
truth I cry with the prophet, " Their memo-
rial is perished with a noise, but the Lord
shall endure for ever." ' As to ourselves, I
sing with the Psalmist, " He sent from
above. He took me. He drew me out of
many waters, He delivered me from my
strong enemy," ^

This letter is in reply to two received
from your holiness, one conveyed by Anas-
tasius, the presbyter of Beroea, and one by
the standard-bearer Theodotus. In your
last letter you mention another, but this has
not been delivered. As to my journey
thither I can say nothing till I know what
orders are given concerning me by the most
pious emperor. His letter has not yet
arrived.

CXXXIV. To Theoctistus, Bishop of Bercca.^

Our Saviour, Lawgiver, and Lord, was
once asked, " What is the first command-
ment?" His reply was "Thou shalt love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind."
And He added " This is the first command-
ment : and the second is like unto it. Thou
shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." Then
He said further " On these two command-
ments hang all the law and the prophets." *

He then who keeps these, according to the
definition of the I-ord, plainly fulfils the Law ;
and he who transgresses them is guilty of

' Ps. ix.ft, 7, Ixx. 2 Ps. xviii. 16, 17.

"This letter marks the chana^e in the condition of affairs
which followed on the death of Theodosius on July 20, 45".
and the accession of Pulcheria and Marcian. Eutyches
was exiled, the eunuch Chrysaphius banished and executed,
and Theodoret recalled. It may be placed in the autumn of
4:;o or earlv in .151. The earlier letter (xxxii) to Theoctistus
claims on behalf of Celestinianus a kindness which Theodoret
in his then hour of need had failed to receive.

• Matt. xxii. 36-40.


LETTERS.


305


transgressing the whole Law. Let us then
examine, before the exact and righteous tri-
bunal of our conscience, whether we have
fulfilled the divine commandments. Now
the first is kept by him who guards the faith
given by God in its integrity, who abomi-
nates its assailants as enemies of the truth
and hates heartily all those who hate the
beloved ; and the second by him who most
highly esteems the care of his neighbour and
who, not only in prosperity but also in ap-
parent misfortunes, observes the laws of
friendship. They, on the other hand, who
look after their own safety, as they suppose,
who on its account make little of the laws of
friendship and take no heed of their friends
when assaulted and attacked, are reckoned to
belong to the number of the wicked and of
them that are without. The Lord of all re-
quires better things at the hands of His
disciples. "Love" He says " your enemies,


for if


ye


love them which love


you.


what


reward have ye ? for the sinners and the publi-
cans do this."' I, however, have not re-
ceived even such kindness as publicans
receive. Publicans, do I say? I have not
even received the consolation given to mur-
derers and wizards in their dungeons. If
every one had imitated this cruelty, nothing
else would have been left then for me in my
life time but to be wasted by want, and, at my
death, instead of being committed to a tomb,
to be made meat ' for dogs and wild beasts.
But I have found support in those who care
nought for this present life, but await the
enjoyment of everlasting blessings, and these
furnish me with manifold consolation. But
the loving Lord " caused judgment to be
heard from heaven ; the earth feared and
was still, when God arose to judgment." ^
But the wicked shall perish." The falsehood
of the new heresy has been proscribed, and
the truth of the divine Gospels is publicly
proclaimed. I for my part exclaim with
the blessed David, " Blessed be the Lord
God who only doeth wondrous things, and
blessed be His glorious name : and let the
whole earth be filled with His glory ; amen
and amen." ^

CXXXV. To Bishop Romulus."
You have reminded me of the ancient

1 cf. Matt. V. 44. 46 instead of rriva fjnadov exere; the text has
Ti' TrAe'oc iroictTf .

2 The use of the somewhat rare and poetical word Bopa
sug-g-ests a possible allusion to several well known passages
in the dramatists; e.g. ^sch. Pr. 5S3, Soph. Ant. 30 and Eur.
PhcEn. 1603.

3 Psalm Ixxv. S and 9. * Psalm xxxvii. 20.
^ Psalm Ixxii. iS, 19.

'^ Romulus, bishop of Chalcis in Coele Syria, sided with
the dominant haeretical party through pusillanimity. He was

VOL. III. 3


story, and remarked how the King of the
Syrians, bethinking him of the loving
kindness of the kings of Israel, assumed the
form of a suppliant and failed not to obtain
his petition. Remember therefore, sir,
the divine wrath. God delivered Ahab to
utter destruction for using mercy, and de-
livered his sentence through the mouth of
the prophet, saying " Thy life shall go for
his life and thy people for his people." ' We
are thus commanded to temper mercy with
justice, since not every kind of mercy is
pleasing to the God of all. The present
state of affairs specially requires prudent
council ; for we are contending on behalf of
the divine doctrines, wherein we have the
hope of our salvation. But herein, too, may
be seen the great difference between man
and man. Some men are verily infected
with the common impiety; while others,
without distinction, advance at one time one
doctrine, and at another its opposite. Some
who know the truth conceal it in the secret
chambers of their soul, while they preach
impiety with the rest ; others again who are
filled with envy have made their private
ill-will an occasion of waging war against
the truth, and wreak all kinds of mischief
against the prophets of the truth. Again,
there are who embrace the truth of the
apostolic doctrines, and yet because they are
afraid of the power of the dominant party
are too cowed to proclaim it, and though
they lament at the abundance of our mis-
fortunes, nevertheless side with them that
set the mighty surge a-rolling. It is in
this last category that we place your rev-
erence. We have believed you to be sound
in the divine doctrines, and think that ycu
keep your affection for me, and are borne
along with the time for no other reason thim
your cowardice. Under these circumstances
though I am not writing to any of the rest,
I write to your holiness, and receive your
reply. I see your drift and to some extent
I pardon your pusillanimity. But the loving
Lord has now removed all occasions of
cowardice, by exhibiting the new-fangled
impiety, and shewing the plain truth of the
gospels. I, even though my mouths were as
many as my hairs, cannot praise as I ought
the loving-kindness of the Lord for com-
pelling my strongest opponents openly to
preach what has been preached by me. For
I have heard that he who shares your holi-
ness's roof, when he heard that anathemas


at Chalcedon in 451. Who may have been his crab-gaited friend
can only be conjectured.

It would appear that edicts anathematizing Eutyches were
published soon after the accession of Marcian.

' I. Kings XX. 43.


3o6


THEODORET.


had been published In the great cities,
ceased to imitate the crooked gait of crabs,
and, after disputing in a certain assembly
about doctrines, walked in the straight road.
Never must we suit our words to the season,
but ever preserve the unbending rule of
truth.

CXXXVI. To Cyrus Magistrianus}

I was very much distressed to hear of the
trouble which had befallen you. I low in-
deed could I fail to suHer, making as I do
your interest mine, and remembering the
apostolic law which bids us not only " re-
joice with them that do rejoice, but also
weep with them that weep " } " Suffering it-
self is able to draw even those that are at
enmity with one another into sympathy.

What is so grievous as to lose a wife ; one
who bore blamelessly the yoke of wedlock,
one who made her husband's life pleasant,
one who shared the care of the family; one
who managed the household and shared in
the direction of everything ; one who was
ready to suggest whatever might be likely to
be of service, and to comply with the wishes
of her husband? But what sorrow could
surpass tlie committal to the tomb of the
mother at the same moment as the son
whom she bore ; a son who had been care-
fully trained and had received a learned
education ; one who, you hoped, would
be the stay of your old age ; buried in the
very spring of his manhood, when the down
was just beginning to grow upon his cheeks?
Did we only look at the character of the
calamity, it admits of no consolation. But
when we bethink us how our race is doomed
to die ; that against that race the divine fiat
has gone forth ; that sullering is common,
for life is full of such woes ; we shall bravely
bear what has happened, shall repel the
assaults of despair, and shall raise that won-
derful song of praise " The Lord gave and the
Lord hath taken away ; the Lord hath done
what seemed to him good ; blessed be the
name of the Lord." ^ But wc have many
more reasons for consolation. We have
been distinctly taught the hopes of the resur-
rection, and we look for the time when the
dead shall live again. We know how the
Lord many times called death sleep. If we
trust, as in truth we do, the Saviour's words,
we are bound not to mourn those that have
fallen asleep, even though their sleep lasts

' There is here neither note of time, nor certainty whether
this Cyrus is the Cyrus who is thanked in Ep. XIII. for tlic
Lesbiun wine. The superscriptions of both letters arc unl^;i-
vourable to theories identifying him with any possible bishop
of the name.


' Romans xii. 15.


'Job i. 21. Ixx.


somewhat longer than it is wont. We must
await the resurrection. We must remem-
ber that the Ruler of the world in His
wisdom, and clearly knowing as He does
not the present only but the future also,
guides events for our good. A wise man
who knew all this full well reasons about
deaths of this kind and says, " Yea ; speedily
was he taken away, lest that wickedness
should alter his understanding." '

Let us submit I beg you to the wise Ruler
of all ; let us submit to His decrees. Whether
they be pleasant or whether they be grievous,
they are good and profitable, they make men
wise ; for them that endure they ordain
crowns.

CXXXVJI. To the Archimandrite John.^

The blessed David fell into several errors,
which God, who wisely orders all things,
has caused to be recorded for the good of
them that were to come after. But it was
not on their account that Absalom, joarri-
cide, murderer, impious, and altogether vile,
started his wild war against his father. The
reason of his beginning that most unright-
eous struggle was because he coveted the
sovereignty. The divine David, however,
when these events were coming to pass, began
to remember the wrong that he had done.
I too am conscious within myself of the
guilt of many errors, but I have kept un-
defiled the dogmatic teaching of the Apos-
tles. And they who have trampled upon
all laws human and divine, and condemned
me in my absence, have not sentenced me for
what I have done wrong, for my secret deeds
are not made manifest to them ; but they have
contrived false witness and calumny against
me, or rather in their open attack upon the
doctrines of the Apostles have proscribed me
for my obedience to them. " So the Lord
awaked as one out of sleep ; He smote His
enemies in the hinderparts and put them to a
perpetual shame." ^ Counterfeit and spurious
doctrines He has scattered to the winds, and
has provided for the free preaching of those
which He has handed down to us in the holy
Gospels. To me this suffices for complete de-
light. I do not even long for a city in which I
have passed all my time in hard work ; all I
long for is to see the establishment of the truth
of the Gospels. And now the Lord has satis-
fied this longing. I am therefore very glad


• Wisdom iv. ii.

^ A Johannes was an Archimandrite of Constantinople and
was present at Clialccdon in 451, (I^abbe iv. Si2d) but there is
no evidence to identify the recipient of the present letter,
which may be dated from Nicerte not long after the death of
Thcodosius.

3 I'salni Ixxviii. 65 and 66.


LETTERS.


307


and happy, and I sing praises to our gener-
ous Lord, and I invite your reverence to re-
joice with me, and, with our praises, to put
up the earnest prayer that the men who say
now one thing and now another and change
about to suit the hour, like the chameleons
who assume the colour of the leaves, may be
strengthened by the loving-kindness of the
Lord, established upon the rock, and, of His
mercy, made to pay the highest honour to
the truth.

CXXXVIII. To Anatolius the paMcian}

I have cordially welcomed the rest which
has fallen to my lot, and am harvesting its
beneficial and pleasant results. Our Christ-
loving Emperor,^ after reaping the empire as
fruit of his true piety, has offered as first-
fruits of his sovereignty to Him that bestowed
it, the calm of the storm-tossed churches,
the triumph of the invaded flxith, the victory
of the doctrines of the Gospel. To these he
has added the righting of the wrong done to
me. Of a wrong so great and of such a kind
who ever heard? What murderer was ever
doomed in his absence ? What violator of
wedlock was ever condemned without a
hearing? What burglar, grave-breaker,
wizard, church-robber, or doer of any other
unlawful deed, was ever prevented, when
eager to appeal to the law, and slain when
far away by the sentence of his judge? In
their cases nothing of the kind was ever
known. For, by our law, plaintiff and de-
fendant are bidden to stand face to face be-
fore the judge, while the judge has to wait
for the production of plain truth, and then,
and not till then, either dismiss the accused
as innocent, or punish him as being reached
by the indictment. In my case the course
pursued has been just the opposite. The
emperor's letter forbade me to approach the
far-fjimed synod, and the most righteous
judges condemned me in my absence, not
after fair trial, but after extravagant lauda-
tion of the -documents which were produced
to incriminate me. Neither the law of God
nor shame of man stayed the deed of blood.
Orders were given by the president,^ fling-

1 This is the last of the series of Theodoret's letters to his
illustrious friend. It expresses his gratitude for his restitution
by Marcian and begs Anatolius to use his best endeavours to
get a council called to settle the difficulties of the Church. The
letter thus dates itself in the year 451 and indicates that the
calling of the council of Chalcedon was to some extent due to
Theodoret's initiative. At the earlier sessions at Chalcedon
Marcian was represented by Anatolius, and it was partly the
authority of Anatolius which overbore the protests of Diosco-
rus and his party against the admission of Theodoret.

2 Marcian was crowned Kmperor on August the 24th 450.
Thendosius II. had died on the preceding aSth of July.

3 " Dioscorus presided, and next to him Julian, or Julius, the
representative of the ' most holy bishop of the Roman Cliurch'
then Juvenal of Jerusalem, Domnus of Antioch, and, his
lowered position indicating what was to come, Flavian of


I ing the truth to the winds, and courting the
power of the hour. He was obeyed by
men who think as I do, whose doctrines
are my doctrines, and who had expressed
admiration of me and mine. None the less
did that day convict some men of treachery ;
some of cowardice ; while to me a ground
of confidence was given by my sufferings
for the truth's sake. And to me our master
Christ hath granted the boon " not only of
believing on Him but also of suffering for
His sake." ' For the greatest of all gifts of
grace are sufferings for the Master's sake,
and the divine Apostle puts them even be-
fore great mai*vels.

In these boons I too glory, humble and
insignificant as I am, and having no other
ground of boasting. And I beseech your
excellency to offer on behalf of my poor self
expressions of thanksgiving to the emperor,
lover of Christ, and to the most pious Au-
gusta,^ dear to God, instructress of the good,
for that she has requited our generous
Lord with such gifts, and has made her zeal
for true religion the foundation and ground-
work of her sway. Besides this, beg their
godly majesties to complete the work that
has been so well marked out, and to summon
a council, not, like the last, composed of a
turbulent rabble, but — kept quite clear of
all of these — of men who decide on and
highly value divine things, and esteem all
human affairs as of less account than the
truth. If their majesties wish to bring about
the ancient peace for the churches, and I am
sure that they do, beg their pious graces to
take part in the proceedings, that their pres-
ence may overawe those of a contrary
mind and the truth may have none to gainsay
her, but may herself by her own unaided
powers examine into the position of affairs,
and the character of the apostolic doctrines.

I make this request to your excellency,
not because I long to see Cyrus again, for
your lordship knows what a solitary town
it is, and how I have somehow or other
managed to conceal its ugliness by my great
expenditure on all kinds of buildings, but to
the end that what I preach may be shewn
to be in agreement with apostolic doctrines

Constantinople." Canon Bright in Diet. Christ. Biog. i. 856;
Mansi. vi. 607.

iPhil. i. 29.

2cf. p. iS5n. " A sudden and total revolution at once took
place. The change was wrought, — not by the commanding
voice of ecclesiastical authority, — not by the argumentative
eloquence of any great writer, who by his surpassing abilities
awed the world into peace, — not by the reaction of pure Chris-
tian charity, drawing the conflicting parties together by evan-
gelic love. It was a new dynasty on the throne of Constanti-
nople. The feeble Theodosius dies; the masculine Pulcheria,
tlie champion and the pride of orthodoxy, the friend of Flavi-
anus and Leo ascends the throne, and gives her hand, with a
share of tlie empire, to a brave soldier Marcianus." Milman,
Lat. Christ, i. 264.


X 2


3o8


THEODORET.


while the Inventions of my opponents are
counterfeit and base. Once let this come to
pass, by God's help be it spoken, and I shall
pass the remainder of my days in cheerful
contentment, wherever the Master may bid
me dwell. To you who have been brought
lip in the true religion, and are dowered with
the wealth of goodness it is becoming to make
this effort, and by your urgent counsel to ren-
der yet more zealous our most pious emperor
and the Christ-loving Augusta, zealous al-
ready as they are to strengthen their glorious
empire by laudable and rightful energy.

CXXXIX. To Aspar^ Consular and Patri-
cian.^

To the other good deeds of your excel-
lency must be added your having acquainted
our pious and most cliristian emperor, whom
God's grace has appointed for the bless-
ing of his subjects, of the enormous wrong
done against me, and your having by a
righteous edict annulled an edict which
was nothing of the kind. Supported by
divine Providence I have made what they
reckoned a punishment a means of good,
and I have welcomed my rest with delight ;
but none the less I have been wrongly and
illegally treated, though in no single point
guilty of the errors which the enemies of the
truth slanderously laid at my door, but yet
made to suffer the penalty of the greatest
criminals. Nay, my fate has been yet
harder than theirs. I was judged without
a trial ; I was doomed in my absence ; when
forbidden by the emperor's orders to go to
Ephesus I received the most righteous sen-
tence of my holy judges. All this has now
been undone by his most serene majesty,
through the active interposition of your ex-
cellency. I, for my part, feeling that I
should be wrong to keep silent and not offer
you my thanks, have availed myself of this
letter, whereby I beseech your excellency to
speak in warm terms in my behalf both to
the victorious and Christian emperor and
to the very godly and pious Augusta. On
their behalf I imjolore our good Lord as
earnestly as lies in my power to guard their
empire in security, and to grant that it may be
at once a source of loving protection for their
subjects, and of terror to their foes, and
establish honourable peace for all. May
your excellency be induced to petition them
completely to put an end to the agitation of
the Church, and order the assembling of the

• Cjariierius has substituted for Aspar the name Abienus who
was Consul in 450. Schulzc would retain the ordinary reading
of Aspar. The recipient of the letter, whoever he be, is
thanked for his part in the rescinding of the acts of the late
Latrocininm.


council ; not, like the last, of men who from
their habits of unrulincss throw the synod
into confusion, but, in peace and quiet, of
members instructed in divine things, and in
the habit of confirming the apostolic decrees
and rejecting what is spurious and at variance
with the truth. And I express this hope to
the end that your excellency may reap the
good which such a course of conduct is
likely to produce.

CXL. To the Master Vincomaliis}

I have been much astonished to learn that
your magnificence, though quite unacquainted
with me and mine, and knowing only the
wrong that had been done me, stood up as
my advocate, and left no means untried to
undo the results of the conspiracy against
me. But your excellency will assuredly re-
ceive recompense from our bountiful Lord,
for He who promised to give a reward for a
little water will doubtless give greater
recompense to the givers of greater gifts.

I have indeed endured such sufferings as
none, or at least very few, of the ancients
have undergone, and this not only from my
open foes, but, as I apprehend, from my real
friends. The former attacked me, the latter
betrayed me.

Who in the world ever heard of such a
trial? Who ever commanded a criminal to
be tried in his absence after chaining him
up at a distance of more than five and thirty
stages } What judge has ever been so savage
and inhuman as not only to try men, aye but
to condemn men the sound of whose voice
he has never heard, and this in most savage
and inhuman fashion? The Lord has ordered
the erring brother, who spurns advice, after
a first, second and third admonition, to be
treated as " an heathen man and a publican." *
Now these most equitable and righteous
judges have not even given to them of the
same faith with themselves the treatment
which they give to heathen men and pub-
licans. These indeed they do see and oc-
casionally converse with, and that with all
honour and deference where they appear to
be of rank and dignity. But they have
ordered me to be cut oft' from home, from
water, from everything. This is the way in
which they have wished to become imitators
of our Father in heaven "Who maketh
His sun to rise on the evil and on the good

^The internal evidence of the letter makes it synchronize
with the preceding. The advocacy of the cause of Tneodoretus
by Vincoinalus is the more striking in tliat it does not appear
to have been suggested by personal friendship. Vinconialus
was Consul Designate in 452. (Diet. Christ. Biog. iv. 1159.
I.abhe iv. S43.) Magister =." Magister Officiorum," cf. note
on p. 2S.{.

2 Malt, xviii. 17.


LETTERS.


309


and sendeth rain on the just and on the
unjust." ' But of these men I will say no
more. The tribunal o£ the Lord is at hand
where is required not stage pretence but the
reality of life. Now I beseech your excel-
lency to express my thanks to the emperor,
the lover of Christ and victorious, and to the
very pious and godly Augusta, for having
made true religion the firm root of their
pious empire, and to implore their majesties
to make the peace of the churches firm by
commanding the assembling of a council, not
of men of violence who throw the discussion
into confusion, but of the lovers of the truth
who confirm the apostolic teaching, and
repudiate this new fangled and spurious
heresy. And I pray that of these honourable
endeavours you may reap the fruit at the
hands of our loving Lord.

CXLI. To Marcellus, Archimandrite of the
Acoemetce^

Bright is made your holiness by your
goodly life, exhibiting on earth the image of
the conversation of the angels, but it is made
still brighter by your zeal for the apostolic
faith. As keel to boat, as corner-stone to
house, so to them that choose to live in piety
is the truth of the doctrines of the Gospel.
For this truth when assailed you have
bravely fought, not striving to protect it as
though it were weak, but shewing your
godly disposition ; for the teaching of our
Master Christ is gifted with stability and
strength, in accordance with the promise of
the same Saviour, " that the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it." ^ It is the lov-
ing and bountiful Lord who has thought
right that I too should be dishonoured and
slain on behalf of this doctrine. For truly
we have reckoned dishonour honour, and
death life. We have heard the words of
the apostle " For unto us it is given by
God not only to believe on Him, but also
to suffer for His sake." ^ But the Lord arose
like the sleeper, and stopped the mouths of
them that uttered blasphemy against God

» Matt. V. 45.

2The Acoemetae, "sleepless," or "unresting," were an
order of monks established in the 5th century by Alexander, an
officer of the imperial household. Marcellus, the third Abbot,
was a second founder, and was warmly supported by the
patriarch Gennadius of Constantinople. (45S-71.) Before
Chalcedon he joined with other orthodox abbots to petition
Marcian against Eutyches. (Labbe iv. 531 Diet. Christ. Biog.
iii. S13). Alexander's foundation was of 300 monks of various
nations, divided into six choirs, and so arranged that the work
of praise and prayer should " never rest." This has been
copied elsewhere and since,

" where tapers day and night
On the dim altar burned continually.
In token that the house was evermore
Watching to God."

Wordsworth, Exc. viii.
»Matt. xvi. 18. * Phil. i. 29.


and injustice against me. But He has made
the tongues of the pious pour forth their
fountains in their wonted message. I, how-
ever, am gathering the delightful fruits
of rest ; as I look at the agitation of the
churches I am grieved, but I rejoice and
am gflad at beingr freed from cares. I have
ever been gratified at your admirable piety,
but heretofore I have not written, not from
any lack of regard for the dictates of charity,
but because I have waited for some suita-
ble occasion. Just now, having fallen in
with the most pious and prudent monks who
have been sent by your holiness on other
business, I have lost no time in carrying out
my wish. I salute your godliness. I beg
you in the first place to support me with
your prayers, and further to cheer me by a
letter, for by God's grace I have been at-
tacked for the Gospel's sake.

CXLII. To the same.

T have already addressed your reverence
in another letter, and have delivered it to
your much respected brethren. Now again
I address your holiness. I am induced to do
so both by your admirable life, and by the
praiseworthy zeal which you have shewn
on behalf of the apostolic faith, fearless alike
of imperial power and of episcopal com-
bination. For granted that the majority of
the covincil consented under coercion, still
they did confirm the new fangled heresy by
their signatures. Your holiness, however,
was shaken by none of these things, but
abided by the ancient doctrines which the
Lord, by means of both the prophets and the
apostles, has taught the churches to hold.
These decrees I pray that I may preserve,
and keep to the end my faith and confession
in one Father, one Son and one Holy Ghost.
For the incarnation of the only begotten
made no addition to the number of the
Trinity. Even after the incarnation the
Trinity is still a Trinity. This is the teach-
ing I have received from the beginning ;
this has been my faith ; in this was I bap-
tized ; this have I preached ; in this have I
baptized, this I continue to hold. Of them
that utter a lie about the Father the Lord
has said " When he speaketh a lie he speak-
eth of his own," ' for what is said of the
teacher is appropriate to the disciples. So
these men who employ lies against me speak
of their own, and do not describe what is
mine. I am comforted by my Master's words
" Blessed are ye when men shall revile you
and persecute you and shall say all manner

1 John viii, 44.


310


THEODORET.


of evil against you falsely for my sake. Re-
joice and be exceeding glad for great is your
reward in heaven." '

I entreat your piety to pray that I may not
have my part among the wrong doers, but
among them that sutler wrong on account of
the truth of the Gospels.

CXLIIL To Andrew, Monk of Constanti-
nople^

I have never seen your piety nor have we
ever communicated by letter, but I have l)c-
come warmly attached to you. What has
wrought the charm and continues to inflame
it is the report unanimously brought by the
tasters of your honey. All express admira-
tion of the orthodoxy of your faith, the
brightness of your life, the constancy of your
soul, the harmoniousness of your character,
the attractiveness and sweetness of your so-
ciety and all the other characteristics of the
true foster child of philosophy. For all these
reasons I am attached to your godliness, and
my longing has made me even begin a corre-
spondence ; but, my dear sir, grant me as soon
as possible what I desire and let me have
written communication from you. For when
friends are at a distance considerable comfort
is given them by epistolary communication.
You will write to no man of heterodox opin-
ions, but to one nurtured in the teaching of
the apostles and preacher not of a quater-
nity but of a Trinity, for in reality I see little
difterence in the impiety of those who have
the hardihood to endeavour to contract into
one the two natures of the Only-begotten
and those who endeavour to divide our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, God
the Word made man, into two sons ; if such
indeed there be ; I cannot think so ; but
Arians, Eunomians, and Apollinarians too
have ever shamelessly fabricated this slander
against the Church, and indeed laborious stu-
dents may easily perceive that our far famed
Fathers,' lights of the churches, laboured
at the hands of the foes of the truth under
this accusation which is now levelled against
mc by the most excellent champions of the
new fangled heresy. Our wise Lord has
laid bare their impiety, for lie could not en-
dure to confirm the unholy heresy by His long
sulTering.

Be sure then, sir, that you will be writing


'Matt. V. II, 12.

'Giirncrius identifies this Andrew with an archimandrite
who was in favour of the deposition of Eutychcs at Flavian's
Constantinopolitan Council in 44S.

•■' " No one," says Garncrius " will have any doubt as to the
reference being to Diodorus of Tarsus and Th'coilorus of Mop-
sucstia who compares the words used with Letter XVI, witli the
end of Dialofjue 1, and with exnressions in botli the ecclesias.
Ucal and religious history." Cf. pp, 25O, 175, 133, and 136.


to one of like sentiments with your own ; and
of this you can easily assure yourself from
my copious writings.

Write then to me in i-eturn, and again your
letter, by God's leave, shall serve to kindle
aflection. And before you write, give me
the help of your prayers, and beseech our
good Lord to guide my feet into the right
road, that I may travel the rest of my jour-
ney in accordance with His laws. You who
have won right of access from your unstained
life will easily persuade Him Who is eager to
give us His good gifts.

CXLIV. To the soldiers.^

Human nature is everywhere the same, but
pursuits in life are many and various. Some
men prefer a sailor's career, some a soldier's ;
some men become athletes, some husband-
men ; some ply one craft and some another.
To pass by all other differences, some men
are zealous and diligent about divine things,
and get themselves instructed in the exact
teaching of the apostolic doctrines ; while
others, on the contrary, become slaves of the
belly, and suppose that the enjoyment of base
pleasures is happiness. Others again are
there, lying in a mean between these two ex-
tremes, who do not exhibit this praiseworthy
enthusiasm, nor embrace a life of inconti-
nence, but still honour the simplicity of the
faith. Men who attack the statement that
some things are altogether impossible with
God must not, I apprehend, be classed with
the zealous and the well instructed in divine
things, but rather either with those who have
no exact knowledge of the apostolic doctrint^s,
or those who have been enslaved by pleas-
ures and shift hither and thither at the caprice
of a moment, setting forth now one thing and
now another.

You have asked me to write on these
points. I should prefer at the present time
to keep silence. But in obedience to the
commandment of the Lord, " Give to every
man that asketh of thee," ^ I am constrained
briefly to reply.

I say then that the God of the universe can
do all things, but that in the word " all" is
comprehended only what is right and good,
for He who is naturally both wise and good
admits of nothing that is of a contrary nature,
but only what becomes his nature. If any
objectors gainsay this statement, ask them if
the God of the universe, the lawgiver of


> From the mention at the end of the letter of the epistle of
Leo lo Flavianus, Garncrius argues that it must be dated at the
end of 449 or somewhat later. The epistle of Leo is dated on
the 13th of June and could not have reached Theodoret in his
detention at Cyrus till the autuma.

'LukeviijOt


LETTERS.


311


truth, can lie. If they say that lying is pos-
sible to God, expel them from your company
as impious and blasphemous. Should they
agree that lying is not possible to the God of
the universe, ask them in the second place,
if He who is the fount of justice can become
unjust. Should they allow that this too is
impossible to the God of all, you must yet
again enquire if the unfathomable depth of
wisdom can become unwise, God cease to be
God, the Lord cease to be the Lord, the
Creator be no Creator, the Good not good but
evil and the true Light not light but its oppo-
site. If they admit that all these things and
the like are impossible to God, you must say
to them therefore many things are impossible
with God ; and that their being impossible so
far from being a proof of want of power, in-
dicates on the contrary the greatest power.

Even in the case of our own soul, when we
say that it cannot die, we do not predicate
weakness of it, but we proclaim its cajoacity of
immortality. And similarly when we confess
the immutability, impassibility, and immortal-
ity of God, we cannot attribute to the divine
nature change, passion, or death. Suppose
them to urge that God can do whatever He
will, you must reply to them that He wishes
to do nothing which it is not His nature to do ;
He is by nature good, therefore He does not
wish anything evil ; He is by nature just,
therefore He does not wish anything unjust ;
He is by nature true, therefore He abominates
falsehood ; He is by nature immutable, there-
fore He does not admit of change ; and if He
does not admit of change He is always in the
same state and condition. This He Himself
asserts through the prophet. " I am the
Lord I change not." ' And the blessed
David says " Thou art the same and Thy years
shall have no end." * If He is the same He
undergoes no change. If He is naturally
superior to change and mutation He has not
become from immortal, mortal nor from im-
passible, passible, for had this been possible
He would not have taken on Him our nature.
But since He has an immortal nature. He
took a body capable of suffering, and with
the body a human soul. Both of these He
kept unstained from the defilements of sin,
and gave His soul for the sake of the souls
that had sinned, and His body for the sake
of the bodies that had died. And since the
body that was assumed is described as body
of the very only begotten Son of God, He
refers the passion of the body to Himself.
But the four evangelists testify that it was
not the divine nature but the body which was


* Malachi iii, 6.


' Ps. cii. 47.


nailed to the cross, all teaching with one
voice that Joseph of Arimathea came to
Pilate and begged the body of Jesus ; that he
took down the body of Jesus from the tree
and wrapped in fine linen, and laid in his
own new tomb the body of Jesus ; that Mary
the Magdalene came to the tomb seeking the
body of Jesus and ran to His disciples, and
reported these things when she could not
find the body of Jesus.

This is the unanimous teaching of the
evangelists. But if your opponents urge that
the angels said " Come see the place where
the Lord lay" ' let the foolish folk learn that the
divine Scripture says also about the victorious
Stephen "And devout men carried Stephen
to his burial." ^ And yet it was the body only
which was deemed proper for burial, while
the soul was not buried together with the
body ; nevertheless the body alone was spoken
of by the common name. Similarly the
blessed Jacob said to his sons " Bury me
with my fathers." ^ He did not say " Bury
my body." Then he went on " There they
buried Abraham and Sarah his wife ; there
they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife ;
and there I buried Leah."^ He did not
say " their bodies." The names are com-
mon to bodies or souls, but nevertheless it
is only the bodies which he called by the
common names. In this manner too we
constantly describe the shrines of the holy
apostles, prophets and martyrs, one it may
be of Dionysius, another of Julianus another
of Cosmas." And yet we know that only
fragmentary remains of bodies lie there,
while the souls in diviner regions are at
rest. Precisely the same custom is to be
found in common use, for such an one, we
say, died ; and such an one lies in this place ;
although we know that the soul is immortal
and does not share the tomb with the body.
In this sense the angel said " Come see the
place where the Lord lay " ^ not because
he shut the Godhead in the tomb, but be-
cause he spoke of the Lord's body by the
Lord's name.

In proof of this being the view of the
holy Fathers let them mark the words of Atha-
nasius, illustrious archbishop of Alexandria,
who adorned his episcopate with confession.
He exclaims " Life cannot die, but rather
quickens the dead."

Let them hear too the words of the far-


' Matt, xxviii.6. 3 Gen. xlix. 29.

2 Acts viii. 2. < Gen. xlix. 31.

0 Cf. note onp. 30 3. Among martyred Dionysii were (i)
one of the Seven Sleepers of Bphesus, (ii) one at Tripoli (iii)
another at Corinth, (iv and v) and two at Caesarea, in the per.
secution of Diocletian. Cosmas and Damianus are the famous
semi-mythical physicians, the Silverless Martyrs. Vide p. 295.

6 Matthew xxviii, 6.


312


THEODORET.


famed Damasus bishop of Rome, " If any-
one allege that on the cross pain was under-
gone by the Godhead and not by the body
with the soul, the form of the servant which
He had taken in its completeness, let him be
anathema." '

Let them hear too the very sacred and
holy bishop of the Church of the Romans,
the lord Leo, who has now written " The
Son of God suffered as He was capable of
suffering, not according to the nature which
assumed but that which was assumed. For
the impassible nature assumed the passible
body, and gave it for us, to the end that He
might work out our salvation and at the same
time preserve His own nature impassible."

And again "For He did not come to de-
stroy His own nature but to save ours." ^

If therefore they accuse us for saying that
God can do what He wishes, but that He
wishes what is becoming to His own nature,
and what is unbecoming He neither wishes
nor is capable of; let them accuse too these
saints and all the rest who maintain this
position. Let them accuse even the Apostle
who says ' That by two immutable things
in which it was impossible for God to lie." ^
And again " If we believe not, yet He
abideth faithful : He cannot deny Himself." ■*

Repeat these passages to your opponents,
and if they are convinced, praise the good
Lord for that, by means of your zeal, He
has benefited them. If they remain uncon-
vinced, enter into no discussion with them
about doctrines, for it is forbidden by the
divine apostle to " strive about words to no
profit but to the subverting of the hearers." ^
But do you keep inviolate the teaching of
the Gospels, that in the day of His appear-
ing you may bring to the righteous Judge
what has been entrusted to you with its due
intciest, and may hear the longed for words
" Well done good and faithful servant; thou
hast been faithful over a few things I will
make thee ruler over many things. Enter
thou into the joy of thy Lord." ®

CXLV. To the Monks of Constantinople.'

There is nothing new or surprising in the
fact that the men who have made their
tongues weapons against our God and Sa-

> Damas. Epist. :id Paulinum. •• II. Tim. ii. 13.

» Leo Epist. ad Flavianuni. f'' II. 'rim. ii. 14.

3 Hebrews vi. 18, ^ Matt. xxv. 23.

'This, remarks Garncrius, is less a letter than a prolix
exposition of Thcodorct's view of the Incarnation. Theodoret
mentions his condemnation at the I.,atrocinium and the exile
of Eutyches, but s.-iys nothing of the favour.ablc action towards
himself of Marcianns. Theodosius died-on the 29th of July,
and Marcian began his reign on the 25th of August, ^<,o.
Theodoret could not possibly hear of the exile of Eutycries
before tin- end of September. The docnmrnt may therefore be
dated in the late autumn of 450 before 'rheodoret had received
the imperial permission to return to Cyrus.


viour should also aim their shafts of false-
hood against His right minded servants. It
must needs be that the servants who grieve
sorely at the outrage inflicted on their Master
should share it. That so it should be they
have been forvvarned by their Lord Himself,
Who consoles His holy disciples with the
words " If they have persecuted me they
will also persecute you." ' " If they have
called the Master of the house Beelzebub,
how much more shall they call them of His
household." ^ Then He cheered them by
pointing out tliat calumny is easily detected,
for He went on " There is nothing covered
that shall not be revealed and hid that shall
not be known." ^ I have often seen the truth
of the divine prediction, but I see it with
special clearness now. The authors of the
calumny against me, who have bought my
destruction for large sums of money, have
been distinctly seen to be involved in the
unsoundness of Valentinus and Bardesanes.
They had hoped to cloke their own iniquity
if only they could whet their tongues on the
hone of falsehood in order to wound me.
For ever since I saw that the heresy long ago
extinguished had been renewed by these men
I never ceased to cry aloud, bearing my
testimony in private and in public, as well in
social gatherings as in the temples of God,
and strive to confute their conspiracy against
the faith. They have consequently poured
out their insults on ray head, and allege that
I preach two sons. But they ought to have
convicted me to my face, not slandered me
behind my back. They have done just the
contrary. They tied me hand and foot at
Cyrus by the imperial decree ; they com-
pelled the very righteous judges to condemn
me without a trial, and delivered their most
equitable sentence against a man who was
five and thirty stages away. Such treatment
was never suffered by any criminal charged
with witchcraft or robbery of the dead, by
murderer or by adulterer. But for the present
I will leave the judges alone, for the Lord is
at hand " Who judges the world with righte-
ousness and the people with his truth ; " *
Who exacts an account not only of words
and deeds, but even of evil thoughts. But I
think it right to refute the false charge which
has been made. What proof have they of
my asserting two sons.-* Had I been one of
the silent kind there might have been some
ground for the suspicion, but my task has
been to contend on behalf of the apostolic
decrees, to bring the pasture of instruction to
the Lord's flocks, and to this end I have


>Tohn XV. 20.
>Mattz.ais.


3 Matt. X. 36.
* Ps. xcvi. 13.


LETTERS.


313


written five and thirty books interpreting the
divine Scripture, and proving the falselwod
of the heresies. The falsehoods these men have
concocted are therefore easy of refutation.
Tens on tens of thousands of hearers testify
that I have taught the truth of the doctrines
of the Gospel, and for any one who likes to
bring them to the test my writings lie before
the world. Not on behalf of a duality of
sons, but of the only begotten Son of God,
against the heathen, against Jews, against
the recipients of the plague of Arius and
Eunomius, against the supporters of the mad-
ness of ApoUinarius, against the victims of
the corruption of Marcion, I have never
ceased to struggle ; trying to convince the
heathen that the Eternal Son of the ever
living God is Himself Creator of the Uni-
verse ; the Jews that about Him the prophets
uttered their predictions, the Arians and
Eunomians that He is of one substance, of
one dignity and of equal power with the
Father ; Marcion's mad adherents that He is
not only good but just ; and Saviour not, as
they fable, of another's works, but of His
own. Once for all, fighting against each
heresy, I charge men to fall down and wor-
ship the one Son.

And what need is there of many words,
when it is possible to refute falsehood in few ?
We provide that those who year by year
come up for holy baptism should carefully
learn the faith set forth at Nictea by the holy
and blessed Fathers ; and initiating them as
we have been bidden,' we baptize them in
the name of the Father and of the Son and of
the Holy Ghost, pronouncing each name sin-
gly. Furthermore when performing divine ser-
vice in the churches, both at the beginning
and the decline of day and when dividing
the day itself into three parts, we glorify the
Father the Son and the Holy Ghost. ^ If, as
our slanderers allege, we preach two sons,
which do we glorify and which do we leave
unworshipped ? It were the wildest folly to
believe that there are two sons, and to give
the doxology to one alone. And who is so
distraught as, while hearing the words of
the divine Paul " one Lord, one faith, one
baptism,"* and again "there is one Lord
Jesus Christ by Whom are all things," * to
lay down the law at variance with the teach-
ing of the Spirit, and cut the one in two.
But I am prating unnecessarily, for these

1 fiViTTaytoyovvTe';, ixvcrayuiyeuj came ultimately to equal
" baptize." The word and its correlatives had long passed out
of special mystic use. In Cicero a /xvo'TaY'^'y''^ is a
"Cicerone" (Verr. iv. 59) and Strabo uses ju-uo-Taywyeii' for to
be a guide. (S12.)

* Reference appears to be made here to offices at the 3d, 6th,
and 9th hours, and to morning and evening services, without
specification of their number.

^Ephes. iv. 5. *I.Cor. viii. 6.


men, nurtured in falsehood as they are, do
not even dare to assert that they have ever
heard me say anything of the kind ; but
they aflirm that I preach two sons because I
confess the two natures of our Master Christ.
And they refuse to perceive that every human
being has both an immortal soul and a
mortal body ; yet no one has hitherto been
found to call Paul two Pauls because he
has both soul and body, any more than Peter
two Peters or Abraham or Adam. Every-
one recognises the distinction of the natures,
and does not call one man two Pauls. Pre-
cisely in the same way, when styling our
Lord Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of
God, God the Word incarnate, both Son of
God and Son of Man, as we have been
taught by the divine Scripture, we do not
assert two sons, but we do confess the
peculiar properties of the Godhead and of
the manhood. The party however who deny
the nature assumed of us men cannot hear
these arguments without irritation.

It is only right that I should point out
from what sources they have derived this
impiety. Simon, Menander, Cerdo, and
Marcion absolutely deny the incarnation, and
call the birth from a Virgin fable. Valen-
tinus, however, Basilides, Bardesanes, and
Harmonius and their following, accept the
conception of the Virgin and the birth ; but
they deny that God the Word took anything
from the Virgin, but made as it were a
transit through her as through a conduit, and
appeared to mankind in semblance only, and
seeming to be a man, in like manner as He
was seen by Abraham and certain others of
the ancients. Arius and Eunomius on the
contrary held that He assumed a body, but
that the Godhead played the part of the soul,
in order that they may attribute to it what
was lowly in His words and deeds. Apol-
linarius did indeed assert that He assumed a
soul with the body,'not the reasonable soul, but
the soul which is called animal or phytic'
Their contention is that the Godhead took the
part of the mind. He had learnt the distinction
of soul and of mind fi'om the philosophers
that are without while divine Scripture says
that man consists of soul and body. For we
read " And the Lord God formed man of the
dust of the si^ound and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life and man became
a living soul." ^ And the Lord in the
sacred Gospels said to His apostles " Fear
not them which kill the body but are not
able to kill the soul."^


1 i.e. the life common to man with animals and plants, cf.
p. 194 n.

s Gen. ii. 3. s Matt. x. 28.


3M


THEODORET.


So great is the divergence between the
doctrines. These men have now done their
best to outdo ApoUinarius, Arius and Euno-
niius, in their impiety and have now endeav-
oured to plant anew the lieresy sown of old
by Valcntinus and Bardesanes, and afterwards
uprooted by most excellent husbandmen.
Like Valentinus and Bardesanes they have
denied that the body of our Lord was as-
sumed of our nature. But the Church, fol-
1 Aving the footprints of the Apostles, con-
templates in the Lord Christ both perfect
(jodhead and perfect manhood. For just as
lie took a body, not that He needed a body,
but by its means to give immortality to all
bodies ; so too He took a soul, the guide of
the body, that every soul by its means might
share His immutability. For even if souls
are immortal, they are not however immuta-
ble ; for they undergo many and frequent
changes, as they experience pleasure, now
from one object, and now from another.
Whence it cometh about that we err when
we are changed and are inclined to what is
worse. But after the resurrection our bodies
enjoy immortality and incorruptibility, and
our souls impassibility and immutability.
For this reason the only begotten Son of
God took both a body and a soul, preserved
them free from all blame, and offered the
sacrifice for tlie race. And this is why He is
called our high priest; and He is named high
priest not as God but as man. He makes the
offering as man, and accepts tiie sacrifice
with the Father and the Holy Spirit as God.
If only Adam's body had sinned, it alone
should have benefited by the cure. But
since the soul not only shared in the sin but
was first in the sin, for first the thouglit
forms an image of the sin and then carries it
out by means of the body, it was just, I
ween, that the soul too should be healed.
But it is perhaps superfluous to demonstrate
these points by reasoning, when the divine
Scripture clearly proclaims them. This doc-
trine is distinctly taught by the holy David
and the very divine Peter, the one foretelling
from distant ages, and the other interpreting
his prediction. The words of the first of the
apostles are " David therefore being a
prophet, and knowing that God had sworn
with an oath to him, that of tlie fruit of his
loins, according to the flesh, He would raise
up Christ to sit on his throne ; he seeing this
before spake of the resurrection of Christ
that His soul was not left in hell neither His
flesh did see corruption."'

Now he has given us much instruction on


■ Acts ii. 30 and 31. Pa. xvi. 10,


the same point in these few words. First he
states that the assumed nature derives its
descent from the loins of David; secondly
that He took not a body only, but also an
immortal soul, and thirdly that He delivered
body and soul to death, and, after taking
them again, raised them as lie would. His
own words are '- Destroy this temple and in
three days I will raise it up." ' But we have
learnt that the divine nature is immortal.
What sufiered was the passible, and the im-
passible remained impassible. For God the
Word was made man, not to render the
impassible nature passible, but on the pas-
sible nature, by means of the Passion, to
bestow the boon of impassibility. And the
Lord Himself in the holy Gospels at one time
says " I have power to lay down my life and
I have power to take it again, no man taketh
it from me but I lay it down of myself ; "
"That I may take it again." ^ And again
" Therefore doth my Father love me because
I lay down my life for the sheep," ^ and
again "Now is my soul troubled"* "my
soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death" "
and of His body He says "The bread that
I will give is my flesh which I will give for
the life of the world," "^ and when He de-
livered the divine mysteries and broke the
symbol and distributed it, He added " This
is my body which is being broken for you
for the remission of sins," ' and again " This
is my blood which is shed for many for the
remission of sins,"** and again "Except ye
eat the flesh of the Son of JMau and drink
His blood ye have no life in you " " and
" Whosoever eateth my flesh and drinketh
my blood hath eternal life" " in himself" he
adds.'" Innumerable passages of the same
character may be quoted, both in the old
Testament and the new, pointing out the
assumption both of the body and of the soul,
and that they are descended from Abraham
and David. Joseph of Arimathea when he
came to Pilate begged the body of Jesus,
and the fourfold authority" of the holy
Gospels tells us how he received the body,
wrapped it in the linen cloth, and committed
it to the tomb. I do, indeed, sorrow and
lament that I am compelled by the attacks
of error to adduce against men supposed to
be of one and the same faith with myself the


ijohn ii. 10.

2|olin X. iS. 17. Observe the inversion and inexactitude.

3 John X. 17 and 15. •'' Matt. xxvi. 3S.

*john xii. 27. cjohnvi.^i.

'I. Cor. xi. 24. Matt. xxvi. 28. But it is tn be noticed tliat
for St. Paul's word itAco^ti'or, i.e. " beinjj broken," Theodoret
substitutes ■^pvmo\jLivov, i.e. ''beini; crushed," or "broken
small," a verb not used by the evangelists. And the clause
" for the remission of sins" is misplaced.

8 Matt. xxvi. 2$. 10 John vi. 54.

8Johnvi.53. >• Cf. note on page 302.


LETTERS.


315


arguments which I have already urged
against the victims of the plague of Marcion,
— of w^hom, by God's grace, I have con-
verted more than ten thousand, and brought
them to Holy Baptism. What child of
the church ever had any doubts on these
points ? Who has not cited this teaching of
the holy Fathers? The works of the great
Basil are full of it ; as well as those of his
fellow soldiers Gregory and Amphilochius,
and of those who in the West have been
illustrious teachers of grace, Damasus, bishop
of great Rome, and Ambrose of Milan; and
Cyprian of Carthage who for the sake of
these doctrines won the martyr's crown.
Five times was the famous Athanasius driven
from his flock and compelled to dwell in
exile ; and in the cause of these doctrines
strove too his master Alexander. Eustathius,
Meletius, and Flavianus, luminaries of the
East, and Ephraim, harp of the Spirit, who
daily waters the people of Syria with the
streams of grace; John and Atticus, loud
heralds of the truth ; and men of an earlier age
than they, Ignatius, Folycarp, Irengeus, Justin,
and Hippolytus, of whom the more part not
only shine at the head of the company of
bishops, but also adorn the martyr's band.

He, too, who now rules great Rome and
diffuses in all directions from the West the
rays of right teaching, the most holy Leo,
has expressed to me this distinctive mark of
the faith in his own letters. All these have
clearly taught that the only begotten Son of
God and everlasting God, ineffably begotten
of the Father, is one vSon ; and that after the
incarnation He was called both Son of man
and man, not because He was changed into
manhood, for His nature is immutable, but
because He took what was ours. They teach
too that He was both impassible and im-
mortal as God, and mortal and passible as
man ; but after the resurrection even in rela-
tion to His humanity He received impassi-
bility and immortality, for, though the body
remained a body, still it is impassible and
immortal, verily a divine body and glorified
with divine glory. This is distinctly told us
by the blessed Paul in the words ''For our
conversation is in heaven from whence also
we look for the Saviour, our Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall change our vile body that
it may be fashioned like unto the body of
His glory." ' He does not say to " His
glory " but to " the body of His glory," and
the Lord Himself, when He had said to His
apostles " There be some standing here which
shall not taste of death till they see the Son

iPhil. iii. 30 and 21.


of man coming in His Father's glory," ' took
them after six days into an exceeding high
mountain, and was transfigured before them,
and His face became as the sun, and His
raiment was bright like the light."' By these
means He shewed the manner of the second
advent. He taught that the assumed nature
is not uncircumscribed (for this is character-
istic of the Godhead alone) but that it shall
send forth flashes of the divine glory, and
emit rays of light transcending the powers of
the sense of sight. With this glory He was
taken up ; with this the angels said that He
should come ; for their words were " He
who was taken from you into heaven shall so
come in like manner as ye have seen him go
into heaven." ^ When moreover He was
seen by the divine apostles after the resurrec-
tion. He shewed them both hands and feet ;
and to Thomas He shewed also His side and
the wounds of the nails and of the spear.
For on account of those men who positively
deny the assumption of the flesh, and further
of those others who assert that after the re-
surrection the nature of the body was changed
into the nature of Godiiead, He preserved
unaltered the prints of the nails and of the
spear. And while raising all other bodies
free from every disfigurement,'' in His own
body He left the marks of His suflerings,
to the end that deniers of the assumption of
the body may be convicted of their error by
means of His sufierings ; and holders of the
notion that His body was changed into an-
other nature may be taught by the print of
the nails that it abides in its own proper
qualities. Suppose any one to imagine that
he has a pi'oof that the body of the Lord did
not remain a body after the resurrection in
the fact that He came in to the disciples when
the doors were shut, let such an one re-
member how He walked upon the sea while
His body was still mortal, how He was born
after keeping the seals of virginity intact,
and how again when encircled by them that
were plotting against Him He frequently es-
caped from their hands. But why need I
mention the Lord, who was not only man,
but God before the ages, and to whom it
was easy to do whatsoever He would ? Let
them tell how Habakkuk was translated
from Judsea into Babylon in a moment of
time and passed through the covering of the
den, and brought the food to Daniel, and re-
turned again, without destroying the seals of
the den.* It is sheer foolishness to enquire
into the manner of the miracles of the Lord,


1 Matt. xvi. 28. Observe variation. The MSS. agree.

* Cf. Matt, xxxvii. i. a. * Cf. p. 109. n.

» Acts i. 1 1. ^ Bel and the Dragon. 36.


3i6


THEODORET.


but in addition to what has been said it
ouofht also to be known that after the resur-
rection our bodies also will be incorruptible
and immortal, and being released from what
is earthly will become light and aethereal.
This moreover is distinctly taught us by the
divine Paul in the words "It is sown in cor-
ruption, it is raised in incorruption, it is
sown in weakness it is raised in power; it
is sown in dishonour it is raised in glory ; it
is sown a natural body it is raised a spiritual
body " ' and in another place " We shall be
caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord in
the air."'* If then the bodies of the saints
become light and ajthercal and easily travel
through the air, we cannot wonder that the
Lord's body united to tlie Godhead of the
only begotten, when, after the resurrection,
it had become immortal, entered in when the
doors were shut.

Countless other proofs might be quoted
without difficulty from apostles and prophets.
But what has been already said is enough
to show the drift of my teaching. I believe
in one Father, one Son and one Holy Ghost;
and I confess one Godhead, one Lordship,
one substance and three hypostases. For
the incarnation of the only begotten did not
adtl to the number of the Trinity, and make the
Trinity a quaternity, but, even after the
incarnation the Trinity was still a Trinity.
And while confessing that the only begotten
Son of God was made man I do not deny
the nature which He took, but confess, as I
have said, both the nature which took and
the nature which was taken. The union did
not confound the properties of the natures.
For if the air by receiving the light through
all its parts does not cease to be air, nor yet
at the same time destroy the nature of the
light, for with our eyes we behold the light
and by our feeling we recognise the air, as it
meets us cold or hot, or moist or dry, so it
were sheer folly to call the union of the
Godhead and the manhood confusion. If
created natures which share at once subordi-
nate and temporal existence, when united
and in some sense mingled, yet remain un-
iinpaired, and, when the light withdraws,
the natui"e of the air is left alone, much more
proper is it, I apprehend, for the nature
wliich fashioned all things, when conjoined
with and united to the nature wliich it as-
sumed from us, to be acknowledged to con-
tinue itself in its purity, and in like manner
to preserve unimpaired that which it liad
assumed. Gold, too, when brought in con-
tact with the fire, participates both in the


' 1. Cor. XV. 43. 43.


» I. Thess. iv. 17.


colour and power of fire, but it does not lose
its own nature, but at the same time remains
gold and has the active qualities of fire. In
this manner also the Lord's body is a body,
but impassible, incorruptible, immortal, of
the Lord, divine and glorified with the di-
vine glory. It is not separated from the
Godhead, nor yet is of any one else, save
of the only begotten Son of God Himself.
For it does not show to us another person,
but the only-begotten Himself clad in our
nature.

This is the doctrine which I am continu-
ally preaching. They on the other hand
who deny the incarnation wrought on our
behalf have called me a heretic, adopting a
course something like that of unchaste
females, who, while they sell their own
charms, assail honest women with the in-
sults of their profession, and apply language
proper to their own wantonness to women
who hold such wantonness in abhorrence.
This is how Egypt has acted. She has her-
self fallen willingly into the thraldom of
base desire. She has lavished her sei'vile
adulation on a man of chaste character.
Then, failing to entice him by her wiles, or to
trap him in the snares of her voluptuous
passion, she describes one who is faithful to
purity as an adulterer.

But these men will be called to account
by God, as well for their devices against the
faith as for the snares they have laid against
me. I only charge those who have been
infiuenced by the false accusations uttered
against me to keep one ear for the accused,
and not to give both to the accusers. In this
manner they will fulfil the divine law which
lays down " Thou shalt not raise a false
report,"' and "Judge righteously between
every man and his brother."'' In these
words the divine law charges us not to
believe the calumnies uttered against ihe
absent but to judge the accused face to face.

CXLVI, To John the CEconomus?

Rest and a life free from care are very
grateful to me. I have therefore blocked
the door of the monastery, and decline inter-
course with my friends.

But I have received information that fresh
attacks are being made against the Faith of
the Gospels, and therefore conclude that there
may be danger in my silence. When wrong
has been done some mortal prince, not only

» Ex. xxiii. I. 2 Deut. i. 16.

^ Cf. nnte on pag'e 288. This letter, or rather doctrinal state-
ment is incomplete. Garnerius supposes it to have heen
written durin<j Theodoret's retirement after the Council of
Chalcedon. There he cut himself off from society and wished
to devote himself to study and contemplation.


LETTERS.


317


the guilty authors of the outrage but they
also who have been standing by and made
no effort to drive off the assailants, are in
peril of punishment : What penalty then
ought not to be undergone by men who can
venture to look lightly on the utterance of
blasphemy against our God and Saviour?
This is the fear which has impelled me now
to write and expose the innovations of which
I have been informed.

It is said that a common report in the
city represents that after certain presbyters
had offered prayer, and concluded it in the
wonted manner, while some said " For to
Thee belongs glory and to thy Christ and to
the Holy Ghost ;" and others " Through
grace and loving kindness of thy Christ,
with whom belongs glory to Thee with thy
holy Spirit," the very wise archdeacon pro-
hibited the use of the expression, " the
Christ" and said that the " only begotten"
ought to be glorified. If this is true it were
impossible to exceed the impiety. For he
either divides the one Lord Jesus Christ into
two sons and regards the only begotten Son
as lawful and natural, but the Christ as
adopted and spurious, and consequently
unmeet for being honoured in doxology ; or
else he is endeavouring to support the heresy
which has now burst in on us with the riot
of wild revelry. Had a grievous tempest
been now oppressing us, any one might have
supposed that the blasphemer suited his
blasphemy to the necessity of the moment,
through fear of the power of the originators
of the heresy. But now that He who is
blasphemed has rebuked the winds and the
sea, and blessed the storm-tossed churches
with a calm, while everywhere by land and
sea the proclamation of the apostles is
preached, what room is there for the blas-
phemy.? While not even they who have
lately basely inserted among the doctrines of
the Church that flesh and godhead are of one
and the same nature have ever forbidden the
offering of praise to the Lord Christ. This
fact may be easily ascertained from those
who have returned thence. A man holding
the foremost place in the ecclesiastical rank
ought to have known the divine Scripture,
and to have learnt from it that just as the
heralds of the truth rank the only begotten
Son with the Father, so accordingly using
the title of " the Christ " instead of that of
"Son" they number Him sometimes with
the Father and sometimes with the Holy
Ghost ; for the Christ is none other than the
only begotten Son of God. So we may
quote the divine Paul writing to the Corin-
thians, but teaching the world, that " There is


one God the Father of whom are all things
. . and one Lord Jesus Christ by whom
are all things." ' Thus he calls the same
person, Christ, Jesus, Lord, and Creator
of all things. And writing to the Thessalo-
nians he says " Now God Himself and our
Father and our Lord Jesus Christ direct
our way unto you."^ And in his second
epistle to the same he puts the Christ before
the Father, not to invert the order, but to
teach that the order of the names docs not
indicate a distinction of dignity and nature.
His words are " Now our Lord Jesus Christ
Himself, and God, even our Father, which
hath loved us, and hath given us everlasting
consolation and good hope through grace,
comfort your hearts, and stablish you in
every good word and work." ^ And at the
end of his Epistle to the Romans after cer-
tain exhortations he adds " I beseech you
brethren for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake
and for the love of the spirit." * Now if he
had known the Christ as being any other than
the Son he would not have put Him before
the Holy Ghost. Writing to the Corinthians,
at the very beginning of his letter, he men-
tions the name of Christ as alone sufficient
to inffuence the faithful. "Now I beseech
you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ that ye all speak the same thing " *
and when writing to them a second time he
thus concludes " The peace of our Lord Jesus
Christ and the love of God the Father and
the communion of the Holy Ghost be with
you all." ^ Here he puts the name of Christ
not only before the Spirit, but also before the
Father and this in all the churches is the
beginning of the Liturgy of the Mystery.

According, then, to this extraordinary reg-
ulation the august name of our God and
Saviour, Jesus Christ, ought to be omitted
from the mystic writings. But it is unneces-
sary to say more on this point. The opening
of every one of his letters is distinguished by
the divine Apostle with this address. At one
time it is " Paul a servant of Jesus Christ
called to be an apostle." ' At another
" Paul called to be an apostle of Jesus
Christ."'* At another "Paul a servant of
God and an apostle of Jesus Christ."^ And
suiting his benediction to his exordium he
deduces it from the same source and links
the title of the Son with God the Father,
saying " Grace to you and peace from God
our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ." '"
And he graces the conclusion of his letters


' I. Cor. viii. 6.

2 I. Thess. iii. n.

3 II. Thess. ii. 16,17.
* Romans xv. 30.


« I. Cor. i. 10.
eil. Cor. 13. 14.
7 Romans i. i.


« I. Cor. i. I.
9 Titus i. I.
w Romans i. 7,


3iS


THEODORET.


with the blessing "The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be witli you all, amen." '

Copious additional evidence may be found
whereby it may be learnt without difficulty
that our Lord Jesus Christ is no other person
than the Son which completes the Trinity.
For the same before the ag^es was onlv be-
gotten Son and God the Word, and after the
resurrection He was called Jesus and Christ,
receiving the names from the facts. Jesus
means Saviour; " Thou shalt call His name
Jesus for He shall save His people from their
sms.

He is named Christ from being as man
anointed with the Holy Ghost, and called our
High Priest, Apostle, Prophet and King.
Long- agfo the divine Moses exclaimed " The
Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a
prophet, from the midst of thee, of thy
l)rcthren, like unto ine."^ And the divine
Da\id cries '■'• The Lord hath sworn and will
not repent, Thou art a priest forever after the
order of Melchiscdek." ^ This prophecy is
confirmed by the divine Apostle." And
again " seeing then that we have a great
High Priest that has passed into the heavens,
Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our
profession." '^

That as God, He is king before the ages
that prophetic minstrelsy teaches us in the
words "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and
ever ; the sceptre of Thy kingdom is a right
sceptre." '

His majesty as man is also shown us. For
having the sovereignty of all things as God
and Creator, He assumes this majesty as
man, wherefore it is added " Thou lovest
righteousness and hatest wickedness, there-
fore God thy God hath anointed thee with
the oil of gladness above thy fellows."" And
in the second psalm the anointed one him-
self says " Yet was I set as king by Him
upon the holy hill of Sion, I will declare the
decree of the Lord. The Lord hath said
unto me ' Thou art my Son this day Iiave T
begotten Thee ; ask of me and I shall give
Thee the heathen for thine inheritance and
the uttermost parts of the earth for thy pos-
session.' "" This He said as man, forasman
He receives what as God He possesses. And
at the very beginning of the psalm the gift
of prophecy ranks Him with God the Father
in the words " Why do the hcatlien rage and
the people imagine a vain thing. The kings
of the earth set themselves and the rulers
take counsel together against the Lord and
against His anointed.""*

1 Romans xvi. 4. ^ Hebrews vii. 21. • Psalm xlv. 7.

2 Matt. i. 21. « Hebrews iv. 14. 0 I'salm ii. 6, 7, 8. Ixx.
» l^i-ut. viii. 15. M'salm xlv.6. i» Psalm ii. i, 2.

* Psalm cxii. 4.


Let no one then foolishly suppose that the
Clirist is any other than the only begotten
S(jn. Let us not imagine ourselves wiser
than the gift of the Spirit. Let us hear the
words of the great Peter, " Thou art the
Christ, the Son of the living God." ' Let
us hear the Lord Christ confirming this
confession, for " On this rock," He says, " I
will build my church and the gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it." ^ Wherefore
too the wise Paul, most excellent master
builder of the churches, fixed no other
foundation than this. " I," he says, " as a
wise master builder have laid the foundation,
and another buildcth thereon. But let every
man take heed how he buildcth tliereon.
For other foundation can no man lay than
that is laid, which is Jesus Christ." ^ How
then can they think of any other foundation,
wlien they are bidden not to fix a founda-
tion, but to build on that which is laid.'' The
divine writer recognises Christ as the founda-
tion, and glories in this title, as when he
says, "I am crucified with Christ: never-
theless I live ; yet not I but Christ liveth in
me.'"* And again " To me to live is Christ
and to die is gain," * and again " For I
determined not to know anything among you
save Jesus Christ and Him crucified." *
And a little before he says, " But wc preach
Christ crucified to the Jews a stumbling-
block and to the Greeks foolishness, but unto
them which are called both Jews and
Greeks, Christ the power of God and the
wisdom of God." ' And in his Epistle to
the Galatians he writes, " But when it
pleased God who separated me from my
mother's womb and called me by His grace
to reveal His Son in me that I might preach
Him among: the heathen." " But when writ-
ing to the Corinthians he does not say we
preach "the Son" but "Christ crucified,"
herein doing no violence to his commission,
but recognising the same to be Jesus, Christ,
Lord, only begotten, and God the Word,
For the same reason too at the beginning of
his letter to the Romans he calls himself
"servant of Jesus Christ" and describes
himself as " separated unto the gospel of
God, which He had promised afore by His
prophets in the Holy Scriptures, concerning
His vSon Jesus Christ our Lord, which was
made of the seed of David according to the
flesh ; and declared to be the Son of God


1 Matt. xvi. 16.

2 It will he observed that our author omits the verse con-,
tainini;;- the famous paronomasia, and tliat what he resjards the
Saviour as contirminij is not any supposed authority on the
part of the speaker but the identification of Himself with tlie
Christ and of tlic Christ with the Son of the livintj (Jod.


^ \. Cor, iii. 10, 11.
* Gal. ii. 19.


« Phil. i. 21.
« I. Cor. ii. 3.


' 1. Cor. i. 2^, 24.
•Gal.i. IS, 16.


LETTERS.


319


with power," ' and so on. He calls the
same both Jesus Christ, and Son of David,
and Son of God, as God and Lord of all, and
yet in the middle of his epistle, after making
mention of the Jews, he adds, "■ whose ai'e
the fathers, and of whom as concerning the
flesh Christ came, who is over all God
blessed for ever, amen."^ Here he says
that He who according to the flesh derived
His descent from the Jews is eternal God
and is praised by the right minded as Lord
of all created things. The same teaching is
given us in the Apostle's words to the ex-
cellent Titus " Looking for that blessed
hope, and the glorious appearing of the
great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ." ^
Here he calls the same both Saviour, and
great God, and Jesus Christ. And in
another place he writes, " In the kingdom
of Christ and of God."* Moreover the
chorus of the angels announced to the shep-
herds " Unto you is born this day in the city
of David . . . Christ the Lord." '

But to men who meditate on God's law
day and night, it is indeed needless to write
all the proofs of this kind ; the above are
sufficient to persuade even the most obsti-
nate opponents not to divide the divine titles.
One point, however, I cannot endure to
omit. He is alleged to have said that
there are many Christs but one Son. Into
this error I suppose he fell through ignorance.
For if he had read the divine Scripture, he
would have known that the title of the Son
has also been bestowed by our bountiful
Lord on many. The lawgiver Moses, the
writer of the ancient history, says "And the
sons of God saw the daughters of men that
they were fair and they took them wives of
them," '^ and the God of all Himself said to this
Prophet " Thou shalt say unto Pharaoh, Israel
is my son even my first-born." ' In the great
song he says " Rejoice O ye nations with His
people and let all the sons of God be strong
in Him ; " ^ and by the mouth of the prophet
Isaiah He says " I have nourished and
brought up sons (children) and they have re-
belled against me ; " ^ and through the thrice
blessed David " I have said ye are gods and
all of you are children of the Most High,"^"
and to the Romans the wise Paul wrote in


1 Romans i. 1-4. * Romans ix. 5. 3 Titus ii. 13.

^ Ephes. V. 5. Here the A. V. rather obbcures the force of
the original. The R. V. alters to " in the kingdom of Christ
and God," but even this hardly brings out Theodoret's views ot
if T;~i /3a<riAeia tou XpKTTOu Kal ©eoO, '' in the kingdom of the
Christ and God.'' The MSS. do not vary. At the same time it
will be borne in mind that the anarthrous use of' ®to?" is not
infrequent, and that some commentators (cf. Alford ad loc.)
would hesitate to ground on this passage the argument of the
text. The reading of X and B in John i. 18 "6 ^oi'oyei'r;? 0e6s "
is significant.

* Luke ii. n. ^ Exodus iv. 22. » Is. i, 2.

« Gen. vi. 2. * Deut. xxxii. 43. Ixx. i" Psalm Ixxxii. 6.


this manner, " For as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.
For ye have not received the spirit of bond-
age again to fear ; but ye have received the
spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father. For the Spirit itself beareth witness
with our spirit, that we are the children of
God. And if children, then heirs ; heirs of
God and joint-heirs with Christ : if so be that
we suffer with Him that we may be also
cflorified together ; " ' and to the Gaiatians he
writes " And because ye are sons God hath
sent forth the spirit of His Son into your
hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Wherefore thou
art no more a servant but a son ; and if a son
then an heir of God through Jesus Christ." ^
The lesson he gives to the Ephesians is " in
love having predestinated us into the adoption
of children by Jesus Christ to Himself." ''

If then, because the name of the Christ is
common, we ought not to glorify the Christ
as God, we shall equally shrink from wor-
shipping Him as Son, since this also is a name
which has been bestowed upon many. And
why do I say the Son .? The very name of
God itself has been given by God to many.
" The Lord the God of gods hath spoken and
called the earth." " And ' ' I have said Ye are
gods," ^ and " Thou shalt not revile the
gods." " Many too have appropriated this
name to themselves. The daemons who have
deceived mankind have given this title to idols ;
whence Jeremiah exclaims, "The gods that
have not made the heavens and the earth
even they shall perish from the earth and
from under these heavens ; " ' and again
" They made to themselves gods of silver and
gods of gold;"** and the prophet Isaiah
when he had mocked the making of the idols,
and said " He burneth part thereof in the fire
with part thereof he eateth flesh he warmeth
himself and saith Aha I am warm I have
seen the fire,"® went on "and the residue
thereof he maketh a god and falleth down
unto it and saith ' Deliver me for thou art my
god ' " '° and so the prophet laments over them
and says " Know that their heart is ashes." "
And the Psalmist David has taught us to sing
"For all the gods of the nations are idols,
but the Lord made the heavens." ^^

But this common use of titles gives no
offence to men who are instructed in true
relicrion. We are aware that the daemons
have falsely bestowed upon themselves and


I Rnmans viii. 14-17. ^ Gal. iv. 6. 7.

3 Ephes. i. 4. S- Observe the position of "in love" which
agrees with the margin of R. V.

« Psalm 1. I . Ixx. ^ Exodus ii. 28.

6 Psalm Ixxxii. 6. ' Jeremiah x. 11.

8 This seems to be an inaccurate quotation of Baruch vi. 11.
cf. p. 165 n. " Isaiah xliv. 16. w Isaiah xliv. 17.

II Isaiah xliv. 20. Ixx. " Psalm xcvi. \.


320


THEODORET.


on idols the divine name, while the saints
have leceived tiiis honour of free grace.

In reality and by nature it is the God of all,
and His only-begotten Son and the Holy
Spirit which are God. This is distinctly
taught us by the athnirable Paul in the words
*' For though there be that are called gods
wliether in heaven or in earth, as there are
gods many and lords many, but to us there is
but one God, the Father, of whom are all
things, and we in Him ; and one Lord by
whom are all things and we by Him." ' And
the Holy Spirit is called the Spirit of God
and so also is the soul of man, for, it is
written, '^ His breath goeth forth," ^ and " O
ye spirits and souls of the righteous bless ye
the Lord," ^ and the Psalmist David called
the angels spirits. '* Who makcth His angels
spirits and His ministers a flame of Are." ■*
Why indeed do 1 mention the angels and
the souls of men .? Even the daemons are so
called by the Lord " He shall take imto him
seven other spirits more wicked than himself
and they shall enter in, and the last state of
that man shall be worse than the first." ^ But
even this application of the name does not
otlend the pious reader, for the Father and
His only begotten Son and His Holy Spirit
are one God by nature ; and the divine Word
made man, our Lord Jesus Christ, is by
nature one Son, only begotten of the Father;
and the Comforter who completes the number
of the Trinity is one Holy Ghost. Thus
though many are named fathers, we worship
one Father, the Father before the ages, who
Himself gave this title to men, as the Apostle
says, " For this cause I bow my knees unto
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom
every fatherhood in heaven and earth is
named." ^ Let us not then, because others
are called christs, rob ourselves of the worship
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Forjustas though
many are called gods and fathers, there is one
God and Father over all and before the ages ;
and though many are called sons, there is
one real and natural Son ; and though many
are styled spirits there is one Hoi}' Ghost ;
just so though many are called christs there
is one Lord Jesus Christ by Whom are all
things. And very properly docs the Church
cling to this name ; for she has heard Paul,
escorter of the Bride, exclaiming " I have
espoused you to one husband that I may
present you as a chaste virgin to Christ," ' and

1 I. Cor. viii.j. 6. 3 Song- of the three holy children 63.

2 I'saliii cxlvi.4. < Psalm civ. 4.

f' Matt. xii. 43. Luke xi. 26. Observe difl'erence of tense and
variiition.

•> ICphcs. iii. 14. R. V. inari;. It will he seen that the arjjjuincnt
ofriieoUoret does not admit of the translation " whole family"
as in A. y.

' II. Cor. xi. a.


again "Husbands love your wives as Christ
also loved the Church,'" ' and again "For
this cause shall a man leave his father and
mother, and shall be joined unto his wife,
and they two shall be one flesh. This is a
great mystery ; but I speak concerning Christ
and the Church." ^ Listen to him as he
says " Christ hath redeemed us from the
curse of the law, being made a curse for us," ^
and elsewhere " Know ye not that so many
of us as were baptized unto Jesus Christ were
baptized into His death,"* and in another
place, " For as many of you as have been bap-
tized into Christ have put on Christ,"'^ and
again " Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and
make not provision for the flesh, to fullil the
lust thereof." "

They who are blessed by the boons of God
and have learnt to know these passages and
others like them, kindled with warm love
for their bountiful Master, constantly carry on
their lips this His dearest name and cry in the
words of the Song of Songs " My beloved is
mine and I am his ; " " I sat down under his
shadow with great delight, and his fruit was
sweet to my taste." ^ And besides all this that
name of ours which we love so well we
have derived from the name of Christ. We
are called Christians.**

Of this name the Lord of all says, " The
Lord God shall call His servants by another
name which shall be blessed on the earth " '
and the following is thereason why the Church
specially clings to this name. When the
only-begotten Son of God was made man,


s Rom. xiii. 14.
' Canticles ii. 16.


1 Ephes. V. 25. ■• Rom. vi. 3.

2 Ephes. V. 31. 32. ^ Gal. iii. 27.

3 Gal. iii. 13.
8 Acts xi. 26. •' The word seems to have been in the first

instance a nickname fastened by the heathen populace of An-
tioch on the followers of Christ, who still continued to style
themselves the ' disciples ' or the ' saints ' or the ' brethren ' or
the ' believers,' and the like. The biting gibes of the An-
tiochene populace which stung to the quick successive emper-
ors — Hadrian, M. Aurclius.Severus, Julian — would be little
disposed to spare the helpless adherents of this new 'super-
stition.' Objection indeed has been taken to the Antiocheiie
origin of the name on the ground that the termination is
Roman, like Pompeianus, Caesarianus, and the like. Hut this
termination, if it was Latin, was certainly Asiatic likewise, as
appears from such words as 'Aaiaros, ^a/crpiai'ds, ^apSiard?,
TpaAAiai'd?, 'Apeiard?, Merai'Sptai'ri?, Sa/ScAAtai'd?. The next oc-
currence of the word in a Christian document is on the
occasion of St. Paul's apearance before Festus (A. D.
60). It is not however put in the mouth of a. be-
liever, but occurs in the scornful jest of Agrippa, ' With
but little persuasion thou wouldest fain make me a
Christian' (Acts xxvi. 2S). The third and last example
occurs a few years later. In the first Epistle of St.
Peter, presumably about A. D. 66or 67, the Apostle writes ' Let
not .any of you suffer as a murderer or a thief . . . but if (he
suffers) as a Christian, let him not be ashamed but glorify God *
(iv. 15). Here again the term is not the Apostles own, but
represents the charge brought against the believers by their
heathen accusers. In tiie New Testament tlierc is no indication
that the name was yet adopted by the disciples of Christ as
their own. Thus Christian documents again confirm the
statement of Tacitus that as early as the Neronian persecution
this name prevailed, and the same origin also is indirectly sug-
gested by those notices, which he directly states — not ' i/iii sfse
af'j^i-lltibtitit C/in'sli<t>ios' but' gitos villous appellabat Chris-
liaiiiis.' It was a gibe of the common people against ' the
brethren.' " I5p. Lightfoot Ap. Fathers, II. i. 417.
» Isaiah Ixv. 15. 16. Ixx.


LETTERS.


321


then He was named Christ, then human
nature received the beams of intellectual
light ; then the heralds of the truth shed
their beams upon the world. Teachers of
the Church, however, constantly used the
names of the only begotten without dis-
tinction ; at one time they glorify the Father,
the Son and the Holy Ghost ; at another the
Father with Christ and the Holy Ghost ; yet
as far as the sense is concerned there is here
no difference. Wherefore after the Lord had
commanded to baptize in the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost
the blessed Peter said to them who received
his preaching and asked what they must do,
" Believe and be baptized every one of you
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ," ^ as
though this name contained in itself all
the potency of the divine command. The
same teaching is clearly given us by the great
Basil, luminary of the Cappadocians,^ or
rather of the world. His words are " the
name of Christ is the confession of the whole."
It indicates at once the Father, who anointed,
the Son, who was anointed, and the Holy
Ghost whereby He was anointed. Further-
more the thrice blessed Fathers assembled in
council at Nictea, after saying that we must
believe in one God, the Father, added " and
in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten
Son of God." Thereby they teach that the
Lord Jesus Christ is Himself the only begot-
ten Son of God.

To what has been said it must also be
added that we must not affirm that after the
ascension the Lord Christ is not Christ but
only begotten Son. The divine Gospels and
the history of the Acts and the Epistles of
the Apostle himself were, as we know, writ-
ten after the ascension. It is after the ascen-
sion that the divine Paul exclaims " Seeing
then that we have a great High Priest that is
passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of
God, let us hold fast our profession." ^ And
again, "For Christ is not entered into the
holy places made with hands, which are the
figures of the true ; but into Heaven itself,
now to appear in the presence of God for us."*
And again after speaking of our hope in God
he adds " which hope we have as an anchor
both sure and stedfast, and which entereth
into that within the veil ; whither the fore-
runner is for us entered, even Jesus made an
High Priest for ever after the order of Mel-

1 Acts ii. 3S. " Believe " substituted for " repent."
* i.e. of Caesarea. The Cappadocian Cassarea originally
called Mazaca is still Kasaria.

3 Heb. iv. 14. On the opinion of the Pauline authorship of
the Epistle to the Hebrews cf. note on page 37. The Alexan-
drian view is shewn to have affected the Eastern Church. For
the reading " Jesus Christ " instead of Jesus the Son of God
on which Theodoret's argument depends there is no manu-
script authority, * Heb, ix, 24.

VOL. HI. 1


chisedec." ' And when writing to the blessed
Titus about the second advent he says," Look-
ing for that blessed hope, and the glorious
appearing of the great God and our Saviour
Jesus Christ." ^ And to the Thessalonians
he wrote in similar terms " For they them-
selves show of us what manner of entering in
we had unto you, and how we turned to God
from idols to serve the living and true God ;
and to wait for His Son from heaven, whom
He raised from the dead, even Jesus, which
delivered us from the wrath to come." ^ And
again "And the Lord make you to increase
and abound in love one toward another, and
toward all men, even as we do toward you :
to the end he may stablish your hearts un-
blamable in holiness before God, even our
Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ with all his saints."* And again when
writing to the same a second time he says,
" Now we beseech you, brethren, by the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by
our gathering together unto him."^ And a
little further on when predicting the destruc-
tion of antichrist he adds, " Whom the Lord
shall consume with the spirit of his mouth,
and shall destroy with the brightness of his
coming."^ And when exhorting the Romany
to concord he says, " But why dost thou
j'udge thy brother } or why dost thou set at
naught thy brother.'' for we shall all stand
before the judgment seat of Chi-ist. For it is
written, as I live, saith the Lord, every knee
shall bow to me, and every tongue shall con-
fess to God." ^ And the Lord Himself when
announcing His second advent besides other
things says too this " Then if any man shall
say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there ;
believe it not. For as the lightning cometh
out of the east, and shineth even unto the
west, so shall also the coming of the Son of
Man be."**

And after the immortality and incorrupti-
bility of His body He called Himself Son of
Man, naming Himself from the nature which
was seen, inasmuch as the divine nature is in-
deed invisible to angels, as the Lord Himself
had said " No one hath seen God at any
time." * And to the great Moses He said
" There shall no man see me and live." '°

> Heb. vi, 19, 30.

2 Titus ii, 13. Cf. note on page 319 on the passage Ephes. v,
5. Here, however, the position of the article is in favour of
the interpretation " Jesus Christ, the great God and our Sav-
iour " which was generally adopted by the Greek, orthodox
Fathers in their controversy with the Arians and by the majority
of ancient and modern commentators. But see Alford ad loc.
for such arguments as may be adduced in favour of taking
(TioTTJp as anarthrous like ®ed?.

3 I Thess. 1.9, 10. 6 II Thess.ii. 8.

■1 I Thess. iii. 12, 13. ' Romans xiv. 10. 16.

" II Thess. ii. I. ' Matt. xxiv. 23 and 27.

0 John i. iS. The " no man " of A. V. does not admit of
Theodoret's argument.

1" Ex. xxxiii 20. Ixx. ovSeij o\f«rai.


322


THEODORET.


The words "Henceforth know we no]
man after the flesh ; yea, though we have
known Christ after the flesh ; yet now hence-
forth know we Him no more," ' were not
written l^y the divine Apostle in order to
annul the assumed nature, but for the con-
firmation of our own future incorruption,
immortality, and spiritual life.

The Apostle therefore continues " There-
fore if any man be in Christ he is a new
creature ; old things arc passed away ; be-
hold all things are become new."^ He
speaks of what is to be in the future as
though it had already come to pass. We
have not yet been gifted with immor-
tality, but we shall be ; and when so gifted
we shall not become bodiless, but we shall
put on immortality. " For " says the divine
Apostle, " we would not be unclothed, but
clothed upon, that mortality might be swal-
lowed up of life."' And again "For this
corruptible must put on incorruption, and
this mortal must put on immortality." "
Thus he did not speak of the Lord as bodi-
less, but taught us to believe that even the
visible nature is incorruptible, and glorified
with the divine glory. This instruction he
has given us yet more clearly in the Epistle
to the Philippians ; " For our conversation "
he writes " is in heaven ; from whence also
we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus
Christ; who shall change our vile body, that
it may be fashioned like unto his glorious
body." * By these words he teaches us dis-
tinctly that the body of the Lord is a body,
but a divine body, and glorified with the
divine glory.

Let us, then, not shun the name whereby
we enjoy salvation, and whereby all things
are made new, as says our teacher himself
in his Epistle to the Ephesians, — " Accord-
ing to His good pleasure which He hath
purposed in Himself; that in the dispensa-
tion of the fulness of time He might gather
together in one all things in Christ, both
which are in heaven, and which are on
earth, even in Him." ® Let us rather learn
from this blessed language how we are bound
to glorify our benefactor, by connecting the
name of Christ with our God and Father.
In his Epistle to the Romans the Apostle
says " my gospel, and the preaching of
Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of
the mystery, which was kept secret since the
world began, but now is made manifest, and
by the scriptures of the prophets, according
to the commandment of the everlasting God,


» II. Cor. V. 16
«II.Cor. V. 17.

» II. Cor. V. 4.


* I. Cor. XV. S3-
« Phil iii. 20, 21.
0 Eph. 1.9, 10.


made known to all nations for the obedience
of faith ; to God only will be glory through
Jesus Christ forever. Amen."' Writing to
the Ephesians he thus gives praise — " Now
unto Him that is able to do exceeding abun-
dantly above all that we ask or think, ac-
cording to the power that worketh in us,
unto Him be glory in the Church by Christ
Jesus throughout all ages, world without
end. Amen." ^ And a little before he says,
" For this cause I bow my knee unto the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ of whom
the whole family in heaven and earth is
named." ^ And considerably farther on he
says " Giving thanks always for all things unto
God and the Father in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ." * And when he requites with
benediction the liberality of the Philip-
pians he says " But my God shall supply
all your need according to His riches in
glory by Christ Jesus." * And for the He-
brews he prayed, " Now the God of peace,
that brought again from the dead our Lord
Jesus Christ, that great shepherd of the sheep,
through the blood of the everlasting cove-
nant, make you perfect in every good work,
to do His will, working in you that which
is well pleasing in His sight, through Jesus
Christ ; to whom be glory for ever and ever.
Amen."® And not only when glorifying,
but also when exhorting and protesting, the
Apostle conjoins the Christ with God the
Father. To the blessed Timothy he ex-
claims " I charge thee therefore before God
and the Lord Jesus Christ."' And again
" I give thee charge in the sight of God who
quickeneth all things, and before Jesus
Christ, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed
a good confession ; that thou keep this com-
mandment without spot, unrebukable, until
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ ;
which in His times He shall shew, who is
the blessed and only Potentate, the King
of kings and Lord of lords ; who only hath
immortality, dwelling in the light which no
man can approach unto ; whom no man hath
seen, nor can see ; to whom be honour and
power everlasting. Amen."^

These are the lessons we have learnt from
the divine Apostles ; this is the teaching
given us by John and Matthew, those mighty
rivers of the gospel message. The latter
says " The book of the generation of Jesus
Christthesonof David, the son of Abraham ;"'
and the former when he shewed the things
which were before the ages wrote, " In the


1 Rom. xvi. 25, 26, 27.

* Eph. iii, 20, 21.

s Eph. iii. 14. A. V.

* Eph. V. 20.

* Phil. iv. 19.


'' Heb. xiii. 20, 21.

' II. Tim. iv. I.

» I. Tim. vi. 13. 14. 15. 16.

»Matt.i. I.


LETTERS.


323


beginning was the Word and the Word was
with God and the Word was God. The
same was in the beginning with God. All
things were made by Him."

CXLVII^ To John ^ Bishop of Germanicia.

Immediately on receipt of your holiness's
former letter I replied. About the present
state of aftairs, it is impossible to entertain
any good hope. I apprehend that this is the
beginning of the general apostasy. For when
we see that those who lament what was
done as they say, by violence, at Ephesus,
show no signs of repentance, but abide by
their unlawful deeds and are building up a
superstructure at once of injustice and of
impiety ; when we see that the rest take no
concerted action to deny their deeds and
do not refuse to hold communion with men
who abide by their unlawful action, what
hope of good is it possible for us to entei*-
tain ? Had they been expressing their ad-
miration of what has happened as though
all had been well and rightly done, it would
only have been proper for them to abide by
what they themselves commend. But if,
as they say, they are lamenting what has
been done and stating it to have been done
by force and violence, why in the world do
they not repudiate what has been unlaw-
fully done? Why is the present, which lasts
for such a little time, preferred before what
is sure to come to pass ? Why in the world
do they openly lie and deny that any innova-
tion has been introduced into doctrine? On
account of what murders and witchcrafts have
I been expelled? What adulteries did the
man commit? What tombs did the man
violate? It is perfectly clear even to out-
siders that it was for doctrine that I and the
rest were expelled. Why the Lord Dom-
nus too, because he would not accept "the
Chapters " ^ was deposed by these excellent
persons who called them admirable and con-
fessed that they abided by them. I had read
their propositions, and they rejected me as
the head and front of the heresy and ex-
pelled others for the same reason."

*Johni. 1.2. 3. Here this document abruptly terminates.

2 The following letters omitted in the volume of Sirmondus
have been published in the Auctarium of Garnerius and else-
where. The following; letter number CXLVII is the CXXVth
in all the manuscripts. Schuize remarks that he would have
replaced it in its own rank but for the confusion which would
thus have been introduced in quotation. John, bishop of Ger-
manicia is also the recipient of Letter CXXXIII. This is written
a few days after the former, late in 449 or at the beginning of

450-

s i.e. the twelve articles or chapters couched in the form of
anathema against the heads of Nestorian doctrine, appended
to Cyril's third letter to Nestorius.

* It has been pointed out before (Page 293) that at the Latro-
cinium Domnus was compelled to yield his presidential
seat as Patriarch of Antioch, Dioscorus presiding, the Ro


man legate sitting second, and Juvenal of Jerusalem third.
"Cowed by the dictatorial spirit ot Dioscorus and unnerved by


What has happened proves plainly enough
that they supposed the Saviour to have laid
down the law of practical virtue rather for
Hamaxobians' than for them. When some
men had given in charges against Candidi-
anus, the Pisidian,^ accusing him of several
acts of adultery and other iniquities, it is said
that the president of the council remarked, " If
you are bringing accusation on points of doc-
trine, we receive your charges ; we have not
come here to decide about adulteries." Ac-
cordingly Athenius and Athanasius^ who had
been expelled by the Eastern Synod were
bidden to return to their own churches ; just
as though our Saviour had laid down no
laws about conduct, and had only ordered us
to observe doctrines — which those most
sapient persons have been foremost in cor-
rupting. Let them then cease to mock ; let
them no longer attempt to conceal the im-
piety which they have confirmed by blows
as well as by words. If this is not the case,
let them tell us the reasons of the massacres ;
let them own in writing the distinction be-
tween the natures of our Saviour, and that
the union is without confusion ; let them de-
clare that after the union both Godhead and
manhood remained unimpaired. " God is
not mocked." * Let the chapters be denied
which they have often repudiated, and now at
Ephesus have sanctioned. Do not let them
trick your holiness by their lies. They used to
praise my utterances at Antioch, being breth-
ren, and when made readers, and ordained
deacons, presbyters and bishops ; and at the
end of my discourse they used to embrace me
and kiss me, on head, on breast, on hands ; and
some of them would cling to my knees, calling
my doctrine apostolic, — the very doctrine
that they have now condemned, and anath-

the outrageous violence of Barsumas and his band of brutal
monks he consented to revoke his former condemnation of
Eutyches." "This cowardly act of submission was followed by
a still baser proof of weakness, the condemnation of the ven-
erable Flavian. Dioscorus having thus by sheer intimidation
obtained his ends revenged himself for their former opposition
to his wislies upon those whose cowardice had made them
the instruments of his nefarious designs, and proceeded to
mete out to them the same measure they had dealt to Flavian.
Domnus was the last to be deposed. The charges alleged
against him were his reported approval of a Nestorian sermon
preached before him at Antioch by Theodoret, on the death of
Cyril, and some expressions in letters written by him to Dios-
corus condemning the obscure character of Cyril's anathema-
tisms."
Canon Venables in Die. Chris, biog. vol i. p. 879.

1 i.e. wild nomad tribes who live in waggons (a/ua^d/3ioi).
These Horace (Car. iii. 24, :o) takes as a better type of charac
ter than wealthy villa-builders; —

" Campestres melius ScythcE

f'uorum plaustra vagas rite trahunt domos
ivunt."

2 Bishop of Antioch in Pisidia. He was of the orthodox
party and stated himself to have been bred from childhood in
the Catholic faith. (Cone. iv. 304.) His name is also written
Calendio (Tillem. xv. 579, Die. Chris. Biog. i, 395).

2 Athanasius of Perrha, the delator of earlier letters (vide
note on page 264) had been deposed from his bishopric at .1
synod of uncertain date held between 444 and 449 at Antioch
under Domnus, and replaced by Sabinianus.

^ Gal. vi. 7.


Y 2


324


THEODORET.


ematized. They used to call me luminary,
not only of the East, but of the whole woild,
and now I forsooth have been proscribed and,
so far as lies in their power, I have not even
bread to eat. They have anathematized even
all who converse with me. But the man whom
but a little while ago they deposed and called
Valentinian and Apollinarian they have hon-
oured as a martyr of the faith, rolling at his
feet, asking his pardon and calling him spirit-
ual father. Do even woodlice change their
colour to match the stones or chameleons their
skin to suit the leaves, as these men do their
mind to match the times? I give up to them
see, dignity, rank, and all the luxury of this
life. On the side of the apostolic doctrines I
await the evils which they deem terrible, find-
ing sufficient consolation in the thought of the
judgment of the Lord. Fori hope that for
the sake of this injustice the Lord will remit
me many of my sins.

Now I implore your holiness to beware of
the fellowship of iniquity and to insist on
their repudiation of what has been done. If
they refuse shun thein as traitors to the faith.
That your reverence should wait awhile to
see if the tempest will pass, we have not
thought subject for blame. But after the or-
dination of the primate of the East ' every
man's mind will be made manifest. Deign,
Sir, to pray for me. At this time I am sorely
in want of that help that I may hold out
against all that is being devised against me.

CXLVIII in the Edition of Garnerius

is " the minute of the most holy bishop Cyril,
delivered to Posidonius, when sent by him
to Rome, in the matter of Nestorius."
(Cyrill. Ep. XL tom. Ixxvii. 85.)

CXLIX is " Copy of the Letter written by
John, bishop of Antioch, to Nestoiius.^^

This letter has sometimes been supposed
to have been really composed by Theodoret.^

CL. Letter of Theodoretus, bishop of Cyrus,
to Joannes, bishop of Antioch^

I have been much distressed at reading the

' i.e. Maximus, who was appointed by the Latrocinium to
succeed Domnus in the see of Antioch, and consecrated by
Anatolius in defiance of right and usajje. Or possibly the
irregularity of the nomination ofMaxi^nus may lead Theodoret
to regard the see as vacant. Garnerius understands the refer-
ence to be to an interval between the appointment and conse-
cration of Maximus.

* Vide Migne Pat. Ixxvii. 1449.

" A letter so admirable in tone and feeling, so happy in its
expression, that it has been attributed to the practised pen of
Theodoret." (Canon Venables, Diet. Christ. I?iog. iii. 350.)
Tillemont describes it .as " trls belle, ires bien Jaite et trts
digne de la reputation qu' avail ce prelat."

":' This letter may be dated in February 4;ji. Celestine and
Cyril had written to John of Antioch in relation to the condem-
nation of Nestorius by the western bishops at Rome in August
430. Theodoret was at Antioch on the arrival of these letters


anathematisms which you have sent to re-
quest me to refute in writing, and to make
plain to all their heretical sense. I have
been distressed at the thought that one ap-
pointed to the shepherd's office, entrusted
with the charge of so great a flock and ap-
pointed to heal the sick among his sheep, is
both himself unsound, and that to a terrible
degree, and is endeavouring to infect his lambs
with his disease and treats the sheep of his folds
w^ith greater cruelty than that of wild beasts.
They, indeed, tear and rend the sheep that are
dispersed and separated from the flock ; but
he in its very midst, and while thought to be
its saviour and its guardian introduces secret
error among the victims of their confidence
in him. Against an open assault it is pos-
sible to take precautions, but when an attack
is made in the guise of friendship, its victim
is found off^ his guard and hurt is easily done
him. Hence foes who make war from
within are far more dangerous than those
who attack from without.

I am yet more grieved that it should be
in the name of true religion and with the
dignity of a shepherd that he should give
utterance to his heretical and blasphemous
words, and renew that vain and impious
teaching of Apollinarius which was long
ago stamped out. Besides all this there is
the fact that he not only supports these
views but even dares to anathematize those
who decline to participate in his blasphe-
mies ; — if he is really the author of these
productions and they have not proceeded
from some enemy of the truth who has
composed them in his name and, as the old
story has it, flung the apple of discord ' in
the midst, and so fanned the flame on high.

But whether this composition comes from
himself or from some other in his name, I,
for my part, by the aid of the light of the
Holy Ghost, in the investigation of this
heretical and corrupt opinion, according to
the measure of the power given me, have
refuted them as best I could. I have con-
fronted them with the teaching of evange-
lists and apostles. I have exposed the
monstrosity of the doctrine, and proved how
vast is its divergence from divine truth.
This I have done by comparing it with the
words of the Holy Spirit, and pointing out
what strange and jarring discord there is
between it and the divine.

Against the hardihood of this anathema-

and hence additional probability is given to the theory that he
wrote the reply referred to in the preceding note. Then came
the publication of Cyril's chapter or anathemas which Theod-
oret undertook to refute. Letter CL. is prefixed to his re-
marks on them.

1 The " old story " is a comparatively late addition to the
myth of the marriage of Peleus.


LETTERS.


325


tizing, thus much I will say, that Paul, the
clear-voiced herald of truth, anathematized
those who had corrupted the evangelic and
apostolic teaching and boldly did so against
the angels, not against those who abided by
the laws laid down by theologians ; these he
strengthened with blessings, saying, "And
as many as walk according to this rule,
peace be on them and mercy and on the
Israel of God." ' Let then the author of
these writings reap from the Apostle's curse
the due rewards of his labours and the har-
vest of his seeds of heresy. We will abide
in the teaching of the holy Fathers.

To this letter I have appended my counter
arguments, that on reading them you may
judge whether I have effectively destroyed
the heretical propositions. Setting down
each of the anathematisms by itself, I have
annexed the counter statement that readers
may easily understand, and that the refuta-
tion of the dogmas may be clear.*

CLl. Letter or address of Theodore t to
the monks of the Etiphratensiaji^ the Os-
rhoene, Syria^ Phoenicia^ and Cilicia.^

When I contemplate the condition of the
Church at the present crisis of affairs, — the
tempest which has recently beset the holy
ship, the furious blasts, the beating of the
waves, the deep darkness of the night, and,
besides all this, the strife of the mariners, the
struggle going on between oarsmen, the
drunkenness of the pilots, and, lastly, the un-
timely action of the bad, — I bethink me of
the laments of Jeremiah and cry with him,
" my bowels, my bowels ! I am pained at
my very heart, my heart maketh a noise in
me," * and to put away despondency's great
cloud by the drops from my eyes, I have
recourse to founts of tears. Amid a storm
so wild it is fitting that the pilots be awake,
to battle with the tempest, and take heed for
the safety of the ship : the sailors ought to
cease from their strife, and strive to undo the
danger alike by prayer and skill : the mari-
ners ought to keep the peace, and quarrel
neither with one another nor with the pilots,
but implore the Lord of the sea to banish the
darkness by His rod. No one now is will-
ing to do anything of the kind ; and, just as

1 Gal. vi. 16.

* The Refutation of the anathematisms of Cyril is to be
found in Migne Pat. Ixxvi.Col 393. Vide also the prolegomena.

3 This document did not appear in the original edition of the
Letters. A fragment in Latin was published in the Aucta-
rium of Garnerius. The complete composition is given by
Schulze from a MS. in the Imperial Library at Vienna. The
date may be assigned as early in 431. As Cyril had weaned
the monks of Eg^pt and even of Constantinople from the
cause of Nestorius, so Theodoret attempts to win over the
solitaries of the East from Cyril.

* Jer. iv. 19.


happens in a night-engagement, we cannot
recognise one another, we leave our enemies
alone, and waste our weapons against our
own side ; we wound our comrades for foes,
while all the while the bystanders laugh at
our drunken folly, enjoy our disasters, and
are delighted to see us engaged in mutual de-
struction. The responsibility for all this lies
with those who have striven to corrupt the
apostolic faith, and have dared to add a mon-
strous doctrine to the teaching of the Gospels ;
with them that have accepted the impious
" Chapters" which they have sent forth with
anathematisms to the imperial city, and have
confirmed them, as they have imagined, by
their own signatures. But these " Chapters "
have sprouted without doubt from the sour
root of Apollinarius ; they are tainted with
Arian and Eunomian error ; look into them
carefully, and you will find that they are not
clear of the impiety of Manes and Valentinus.'

In his very first chapter he rejects the
dispensation " which has been made on our
behalf, teaching that God the Word did not
assume human nature, but was Himself
changed into flesh, thus laying down that
the incarnation took place not in reality but in
semblance and seeming. This is the out-
come of the impiety of Marcion, Manes, and
Valentinus.

In his second and third chapters, as
though quite oblivious of what he had stated
in his preface, he brings in the hypostatic
union, and a meeting by natural union, and
by these terms he represents that a kind of
mixture and confusion was effected of the
divine nature and of the form of the servant.
This comes of the innovation of the Apol-
linarian heresy.

In his fourth chapter he denies the dis-
tinction of the terms of evangelists and
apostles, and refuses to allow, as the teach-
ing of the orthodox Fathers has allowed,
the terms of divine dignity to be understood
of the divine nature, while the terms of
humility, spoken in human sense, are
applied to the nature assumed ; whence the
rightminded can easily detect the kinship
with impiety. For Arius and Eunomius,
asserting the only begotten Son of God to be
a creature, and made out of the non-existent,
and a servant, have ventured to apply to
His godhead what is said in lowly and
human sense ; establishing by such means
the difference of substance and the unlike-


1 " Nihil contumeliosius" remarks Garnerius, " in Cyrilli
personam et doctrinam did potest.'" Some have even thought
the expressions too bitter for Theodoret. But the mild man
could hit hard sometimes. He felt warmly for Nestorius and
against Cyril, and (accepting Tillemont's date) he was now
about 38.

2 o\.KQV0\i,La., Vide p. 72.


326


THEODORET.


ness. Besides this, to be brief, he argues
that the very impassible and immutable
Godhead of the Christ suflcred, and was
crucified, dead, and buried. This goes
beyond even the madness of Arius and
Eunomius, for this pitch of impiety has
not been reached even by them that dare
to call the maker and creator of the universe
a creature. Furthermore he blasphemes
against the Holy Ghost, denying that It
proceeds from the Father, in accordance
with the word of the Lord, but maintaining
that It has Its origin of the Son. Here
we have the fruit of the Apollinarian seed ;
here we come near the evil husbandry of
Macedonius. Such are the offspring of the
Egyptian, viler children of a vile father.
This growth, which men, entrusted with
the healing of souls, ought to make abortive
while yet in the womb, or destroy as soon as
it is born, as dangerous and deadly to man-
kind, is cherished by these excellent persons,
and promoted with great energy, alike to
their own ruin and to that of all who will
listen to them. We, on the contrary,
earnestly desire to keep our heritage un-
touched ; and the faith which we have re-
ceived, and in which we have been ourselves
baptized, and baptize others, we strive to pre-
serve uninjured and undefiled. We confess
that our Lord Jesus Christ, perfect God and
perfect man, of a reasonable soul and body,
was begotten of the Father before the ages,
as touching the Godhead ; and in the last
days for us men and our salvation (was born)
of the Virgin Mary ; that the same Lord is
of one substance with the Father as touching
the Godhead, and of one substance with us as
touchinsf the manhood. For there was an
union of two natures. Wherefore we acknowl-
edge one Christ, one Son, one Lord ; but we
do not destroy the union ; we believe it to have
been made without confusion, in obedience
to the word of the Lord to the Jews,
" Destroy this temple and in three days I
will raise it up." ' If on the contrary there
had been mixture and confusion, and one
nature was made out of both, He ought to
have said " Destroy me and in three days
I shall be raised." But now, to show that
there is a distinction between God according
to His nature, and the temple, and that both
are one Christ, His words are " Destroy this
temple and in three days I will raise it up,"
clearly teaching that it was not God who
was undergoing destruction, but the temple.
The nature of this latter was susceptible of
destruction, while the power of the former

1 John ii. 19.


raised what was being destroyed. Further-
more it is in obedience to the divine Scrip-
tures that we acknowledge the Christ to be
God and man. That our Lord Jesus Christ
is God is asserted by the blessed evangelist
John " In the beginning was the Word and
the Word was with God and the Word was
God. He was in the beginning with God.
All things were made by Him and without
Him was not anything made that was
made." ' And again, " That was the true
light which lighteth every man that cometh
into the world." '" And the Lord Himself
distinctly teaches us, " He that hath seen
me hath seen the Father."^ And "I and
my Father are one"'* and '•'I am in the
Father and the Father in me," " and the
blessed Paul in his epistle to the Hebrews
says " Who being the brightness of His glory
and the express image of His person, and
upholding all things by the word of His
power " ^ and in the epistle to the Philippians
" Let this mind be in you, which was also in
Christ Jesus ; who being in the form of God
thought it not robbery to be equal with God
but made Himself of no reputation and took
upon Him the form of a servant."^ And in
the Epistle to the Romans, " Whose are the
fathers and of whom as concerning the
flesh Christ came who is over all God
blessed for ever. Amen." ** And in the
epistle to Titus " Looking for that blessed
hope and the glorious appearing of the great
God and our Saviour Jesus Christ." " And
Isaiah exclaims "Unto us a child is born,
unto us a son is given : and the government
shall be upon His shoulder ; and His name
shall be called, Angel of great counsel.
Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God,
powerful, the Prince of Peace, the Father of
the Age to come."'° And again " In chains
they shall come over and they shall
fall unto thee. They shall make sup-
plication unto thee saying, surely God
is in thee and there is none else, there
is no God. Verily thou art a God that
hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the
Saviour." " The name Emmanuel, however,
indicates both God and man, for it is inter-
preted in the Gospel to mean " God with
us,"'" that is to say "God in man," God
in our nature. And the divine Jeremiah too
utters the prediction " This is our God and
tliere shall none other be accounted of in
comparison with him. He hath found out all


' John i. !.

- John i. 9.

■' JoliM xiv. o.

■• lohii X. 30.

f' John X. 3'' transposed.

<= "Hebrews i. 3.


- Phil.ii. S. 6, 7.

» Romans ix. 5.

i'Tit. ii. 13.

1" Is. ix.6. (LXX. Alex.)
^1 Isaiah xlv. 14, 15.
" Matl. i. 23.


LETTERS.


327


the way of knowledge and hath given it
unto Jacob His servant and to Israel His
beloved and afterward did He show Him-
self upon earth and conversed with men." '
And countless other passages might be
found as well in the holy gospels and in
the writings of the apostles as in the predic-
tions of the prophets, setting forth that our
Lord Jesus Christ is very God.

That after the Incarnation He is spoken of
as Man our Lord Himself teaches in His
words to the Jews " Why go ye about to
kill me? " " A man that hath told you the
truth." ^ And in the first Epistle to the Co-
rinthians the blessed Paul writes " For since
by man came death, by man came also the
resurrection of the dead," ' and to show of
whom he is speaking he explains his words
and says, " For as in Adam all die even so
in Christ shall all be made alive," " And
writing to Timothy he says, " For there is
one God and one mediator between God and
men, the man Christ Jesus." * In the Acts
in his speech at Athens " The times of this
igfnorance God winked at ; but now com-
mandeth all men everywhere to repent ; be-
cause He hath appointed a day in the which
He will judge the world in righteousness by
that man whom He hath ordained, whereof
He hath given assurance vmto all men, in
that He hath raised him from the dead." ^
And the blessed Peter preaching to the Jews
says, "Ye men of Israel, hear these words;
Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God
among you by miracles and wonders and
signs which God did by Him in the midst
of you," ' and the prophet Isaiah when pre-
dicting the sufferings of the Lord Christ,
whom but just before he had called God, calls
man in the passage " A man of sorrows and
acquainted with grief." " Surely he hath
borne our griefs and carried our sorrows." **
I might have collected other consentient
passages of holy Scripture and inserted them
in my letter had I not known you to be prac-
tised in the divine oracles as befits the man
called blessed in the Psalms.^ I now leave
the collection of evidence to your own dili-
gence and proceed with my subject.

We confess then that our Lord Jesus Christ
is very God and very man. We do not divide
the one Christ into two persons, but we be-
lieve two natures to be united without con-
fusion. We shall thus be able without diffi-


1 Baruch iii. 35, 36, 37. From the time of Irennsus the
book of Baruch, friend and companion of Jeremiah, was
commonly quoted as the work of the great prophet, e.g. Iren.
adv. Haer. v. 35, i. cf. note on p. 165.

1 John vii. 19 and viii. 40. ^ Acts xvii. 30, 31.

s I. Cor. XV. 21. ' Acts ii. 22.

♦ I. Cor. XV. 32. • Isaiah liii. 3 and 4.

» I. Tim. ii. v. •' Psalra i. 2.


culty to refute even the manifold blasphemy
of the heretics : for many and various are the
errors of those who have rebelled against the
truth, as we shall proceed to point out.
Marcion and Manes deny that God the Word
assumed human nature and do not believe
that our Lord Jesus Christ was born of a
Virgin. They say that God the Word Him-
self was fashioned in human form and ap-
peared as man rather in semblance than in
reality.

Valentinus and Bardesanes admit the birth,
but they deny the assumption of our nature
and affirm that the Son of God employed the
Virgin as it were as a mere conduit.

Sabellius the Libyan, Photinus, Marcel-
lus the Galatian, and Paul of Samosata say
that a mere man was born of the Virgin, but
openly deny that the eternal Christ was
God.

Arius and Eunomius maintain that God
the Word assumed only a body of the
Virgin.

Apollinarius adds to the body an unrea-
sonable soul, as though the incarnation of
God the Word had taken place not for the
sake of reasonable beings but of unreasona-
ble, while the teaching of the Apostles is
that perfect man was assumed by perfect
God, as is proved by the words " Who be-
ing in the form of God took the form of
a servant ;" ' for "form" is put instead of
"nature" and "substance" and indicates
that having the nature of God He took the
nature of a servant.

When therefore we are disputing with
Marcion, Manes and Valentinus, the earliest
inventors of impiety, we endeavour to prove
from the divine Scriptures that the Lord
Christ is not only God but also man.

When, however, we are proving to the
ignorant that the doctrine of Arius, Euno-
mius and Apollinarius about the oeconomy
is incomplete, we show from the divine
oracles of the Spirit that the assumed nature
was perfect.

The impiety of Sabellius, Photinus, Mar-
cellus, and Paulus, we refute by proving by
the evidence of divine Scripture that the
Lord Christ was not only man but also
eternal God, of one substance with the
Father. That He assumed a reasonable soul
is stated by our Lord Himself in the words
"Now is my soul troubled; and what shall
I say ? Father save me from this hour ; but
for this cause came I unto this hour." " And
again " My soul is exceeding sorrowful even
unto death." ^ And in another place " I


1 Phil. ii. 6 and 7.
'John xii. 27.


8 Matt. xxvi. 38.


328


THEODORET.


have power to lay down my soul (life A. V.)
and I have power to take it again. No man
taketh it from me." ' And the angel said to
Joseph, " Take the young child and His
mother and go into the land of Israel ; for
they arc dead which souglit the young child's
soul (life A. V.)"* And the Evangelist says
"Jesus increased in wisdom and stature and
in favour with God and man." Now wliat
increases in stature and wisdom is not the
Godhead which is ever perfect, but the
human nature v^diich comes into being in
time, grows, and is made perfect.

Wherefore all tlie human qualities of the
Lord Christ, hunger, I mean, and thirst and
weariness, sleep, fear, sweat, prayer, and
ignorance, and the like, we affirm to belong
to our nature which God the Word assumed
and united to Himself in eflbcting our
salvation. But the restitution of motion to the
maimed, the resurrection of the dead, the
supply of loaves, and all the other miracles
we believe to be works of the divine power.
In this sense I say that the same Lord Christ
both surtcrs and destroys suffering ; suffers,
that is, as touching the visible, and desti'oys
suffering as touching the ineffably indwelling
Godhead. This is proved beyond question
by the narrative of the holy evangelists,
from whom we learn that when lying in a
manger and wrapped in swaddling clothes,
He was announced by a star, worshipped by
magi and hymned by angels. Thus we rev-
erently discern that the swaddling bands
and the want of a bed and all the poverty
belonged to the manhood ; while the journey
of the magi and the guiding of the star and
the company of the angels proclaim the God-
head of the unseen. In like manner He
makes His escape into Egypt and avoids the
fury of Herod by flight, ' for He was man ;
but as the Prophet says " He shakes the idols
of Egypt," * for He was by nature God.
He is circumcised ; He keeps the law ; and
offers offerings of purification, because He
sprang from the root of Jesse. And, as man,
He was under the law ; and afterwards did
away with the law and gave the new covenant,
because He was a lawgiver and had promised
by the prophets that He Himself would give
it. He was baptized by John ; and this
shews His sharing what is ours. He is
testified to by the Father from on high and is
pointed out by the Spirit ; this proclaims
Him eternal. He hungered ; but He fed
many thousands with five loaves ; the latter
is divine, the former human. He thirsted
and He asked for water ; but He was the


1 John X. 1 8 varied.
'Matt. ii. 30.


' Vide note on Page 203.
* Isaiah xix. 1.


well of life ; the former of His human weak-
ness, the latter of His divine power. He fell
asleep in the boat, but he put the tempest of
the sea to sleep ; the former of His human
nature, the latter of His efficient and creative
power which has gifted all things with their
being. He was weary as he walked ; but He
healed the halt and raised dead men from
their tombs ; the former of human weakness,
the latter of a power passing that of this
world. He feared death and He destroyed
death ; the former shows that He was mortal,
the latter that He was immortal or rather
giver of life. " He was crucified," as the
blessed Paul says "through weakness."'
But as the same Paul says " Yet He liveth
by the power of God." ^ Let that word
" weakness" teach us that He was not nailed
to the tree as the Almighty, the Uncircum-
scribed, the Immutable and Invariable, but
that the nature quickened by the power of
God, was according to the Apostle's teaching
dead and buried, both death and burial being
proper to the form of the servant. " He
broke the gates of brass and cut the bars of
iron in sunder " ^ and destroyed the power of
death and in three days raised His own temple.
These are proofs of the form of God in
accordance with the Lord's words "Destroy
this temple and in three days I will raise it
up." " Thus in the one Christ through the
sufferings we contemplate the manhood and
through the miracles we apprehend the
Godhead. We do not divide the two natures
into two Christs, and we know that of the
Father God the Word was begotten and that
of the seed of Abraham and David our nature
was assumed. Wherefore also the blessed
Paul says when discoursing of Abraham "He
saith not and to seeds as of many ; but as
of one, and to thy seed which is Christ," *
and writing to Timothy he says "Remember
that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was
raised from the dead according to my
gospel." ® And to the Romans he writes
" Concerning His son Jesus Christ .
which was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh." ' And again
" Whose are the fathers and of whom as
concerning the flesh Christ came." * And
the Evangelist writes "The book of the
generation of Jesus Christ, the Son of David,
the Son of Abraham," ' and the blessed Peter
in the Acts says David " being a prophet
and knowing that God had sworn with an
oath to him that of the fruit of his loins, He
would raise up Christ to sit on his throne, he


' Tl.Cor. xiii. 4.

2 1 1. Ctir. xiii. 4.

3 i'salni cvii. 16.


* Jolin ii. 19.
"> G;U. iii. 16.

• XI . Tim. ii. 8.


' Romans i. 3.
' llomans ix. J.
» Matt. i. I.


LETTERS.


329


seeing this before spake of his resurrection," '
and God says to Abraham "In thy seed
shall all tlie nations of the earth be blessed,""
and Isaiah " There shall come forth a rod out
of the stem of Jesse and a branch shall grow
out of His roots ; and there shall rest upon
Him ^ the spirit of wisdom and understanding
the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of
knowledge and of piety and the spirit of the
fear of the Lord shall fill Him." " And a
little further on " And in that day thei-e shall
be a root of Jesse which shall stand for an
ensign of the people ; to it shall the Gen-
tiles seek; and His rest shall be glorious."*
From these quotations it is made plain that
according to the flesh, the Christ was de-
scended from Abraham and David and was
of the same nature as theirs ; while accord-
ing to the Godhead He is Everlasting Son and
Word of God, ineffably and in superhuman
manner begotten of the Father, and co-eter-
nal with Him as brightness and express
image and Word. For as the word in re-
lation to intelligence and brightness in re-
lation to light are inseparably connected, so
is the only begotten Son in relation to His
own Father. We assert therefore that our
Lord Jesus Christ is only begotten, and first
born Son of God ; only begotten both before
the incarnation and after the incarnation,
but first-born after being born of the Virgin.
For the name first-boi"n seems to be in a
sense contrary to that of only begotten, be-
cause the only Son begotten of any one is
called only begotten, while the eldest of sev-
eral brothers is called first-born. The divine
Scriptures state God the Word alone to have
been begotten of the Father ; but the only
begotten becomes also first-born, by taking
our nature of the Virgin, and deigning to
call brothers those who have trusted in Him ;
so that the same is only begotten in that He
is God, first born in that He is Man. Thus
acknowledging the two natures we adore
the one Christ and offer Him one adoration,
for we believe that the luiion took place from
the moment of the conception in the Virgin's
holy womb. Wherefore also we call the holy
Virgin both Mother of God * and Mother of
man, since the Lord Christ Himself is called
God and man in the divine Scriptui-e. The

> Acts. ii. 30. 2 Gen. xxii. iS.

3 Here in the LXX comes in "The spirit of God." It is
unlikely that Theodoret should have intended to omit this, and
the omission is probably due as in similar cases to the care-
lessness of a copyist in the case of a repetition of a word.

* Isaiah xi. I. 3. 3. 7. 6 Isaiah xi. :o.

6 On the word ©eotokos cf. note on Page 213.
Jeremy Taylor (ix. 637 ed. :S6i) defends it on the bare
ground of logic which no doubt originally recommended it.
"Though the blessed virgin Mary be not in Scripture called
©eoToKO? ' the mother of God.' yet that she was the mother of
Jesus and that Jesus Christ is God, that we can prove from
Scripture, and that is sufficient for the appellation."


name Emmanuel proclaims the union of the
two natures. If we acknowledge the Christ
to be both God and Man and so call Him,
who is so insensate as to shrink from using
the term " Mother of man " with that of
" Mother of God".? For we use both terms
of the Lord Christ. For this reason the Vir-
gin is honoured and called "full of grace."'
What sensible man then would object to
name the Virgin in accordance with the
titles of the Saviour, when on His account
she is honoured by the faithful.? For He
who was born of her is not worshipped on
her account, but she is honoured with the
highest titles on account of Him Who was
boi'n from her.

Suppose the Christ to be God only, and to
have taken the origin of His existence from
the Vii-gin, then let the Virgin be styled and
named only " Mother of God" as having
given birth to a being divine by nature.
But if the Christ is both God and man and
was God from everlasting (inasmuch as He
did not begin to exist, being co-eternal with
the Father that begat Him) and in these
last days was born man of His human nature,
then let him who wishes to define doctrine
in both directions devise appellations for the
Virgin with the explanation which of them
befits the nature and which the union. But
if any one should wish to deliver a panegyric
and to compose hymns, and to repeat praises,
and is naturally anxious to use the most
august names; then, not laying down doc-
trine as in the former case, but with rhetori-
cal laudation, and expressing all possible ad-
miration at the mightiness of the mystery, let
him gratify his heart's desire, let him em-
ploy high names, let him praise and let him
wonder. Many instances of this kind are
found in the writings of orthodox teachers.
But on all occasions let moderation be re-
spected. All praise to him who said that
" moderation is best," although he is not of
our herd. ^

This is the confession of the faith of the
Church ; this is the doctrine taught by
evangelists and apostles. For this faith, by
God's grace I will not refuse to undergo
many deaths. This faith we have striven to
convey to them that now err and stray, again
and again challenging them to discussion,
and eager to show them the truth, but with-


1 Luke i. 28.

2 Cleobulus of Lindos is credited with the maxim apiarrov
ueVpoi'. Theognis, (335) transmits the famous nr;6«i' ayai- attrib-
uted by Aristotle (Rhet. ii. 12, 14) to Chilon of Sparta. Ovid
makes Phoebus say to Phaethon " Medio tutissitnus ibis "
(Met. ii. 137) ; and quotations from many other writers may be

found all .,,.,..

" Turning to scorn with lips divine
The ftlsehood of extremes I "


330


THEODORET.


out success. With a suspicion of their prob-
ably phiin confutation, they have shirked
the encounter ; for verily falsehood is rotten
and yokefellow of obscurity. " Every one,"
it is written " that doeth evil cometh not to
the light lest his deeds should be reproved" '
by the light.

Since, therefore, after many efforts, I have
failed in persuading them to recognise the
truth, I have returned to my own churches,
filled at once with sorrow and with joy ; with
joy on account of my own freedom from
error ; and with sorrow at the unsoundness of
my members. I therefore implore you to
pray with all your might to our loving Lord,
and to cry unto Him, " 'Spare Thy people,
O Lord and give not Thy heritage to re-
proach.'* Feed us O Lord that we be-
come not as we were in the beginning when
Thou didst not rule over us nor was Thy
name invoked to help us. ' We are become a
reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and deris-
ion to them that are round about us,' ^ be-
cause wicked doctrines have come into Thy
inheritance. They have polluted Thy holy
temj^le in that the daughters of strangers
have rejoiced over our troubles. A little
while ago we were of one mind and one
tongue and now are divided into many
tongues. But, O Lord our God, give us
Thy peace which we have lost by setting
Thy commandments at naught. O Lord we
know none other than Thee. We call Thee
by Thy name. ' Make both one and break
down the middle wall of the partition,' ■"
namely the iniquity that has sprung up.
Gatlicr us one by one, Thy new Israel,
building up Jerusalem and gathering together
the outcasts of Israel. * Let us be made
once more one flock ® and all be fed by
Thee ; for Thou art the good Shepherd ' Who
giveth His life for the sheep.' ' ' Awake,
why sleepest Thou O Lord, arise cast us not
off forever.' ^ Rebuke the winds and the
sea ; give Thy Church calm and safety from
the waves."

These words and words like these I im-
])lore you to utter to the God of all ; for He
is good and full of loving-kindness and ever
fulfils the will of them that fear Him. He
will therefore listen to your prayer, and will
scatter this darkness deeper than the plague
of Egypt. He will give you His own calm
of love, and will gather them that are scat-
tered abroad and welcome them that have
been cast out. Then shall be heard " the


1 John iii. 20.
* j"e' ''• 17-
' Psalm Ixxix. 4.
« Cf. Ephes. ii. 14.


0 Psalm cxlvii. a
•John X. ID.
'John X. 11.
' Psiilm xliv. 13.


voice of rejoicing and salvation in the taber-
nacles of the righteous." ' Then shall we
cry unto Him we have been " glad accord-
ing to the days wherein Thou hast afflicted
us and the years wherein we have seen
evil," * and you when you have been granted
your prayer shall praise Him in the words
" Blessed be God which hath not turned
away my prayer nor His mercy from me."^

Proof that after the Incarnation our Lord
Jesus Christ, was one Son.

The authors of slanders against me allege
that I divide the one Lord Jesus Christ into
two sons. But so far am I from holding
this opinion that I charge with impiety all
who dare to say so. For I have been taught
by the divine Scripture to worship one Son,
our Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son
of God, God the Word incarnate. For we
confess the same to be both God eternal, and
made man in the last days for the sake of
man's salvation ; but made man not by the
change of the Godhead but by the assump.
tion of the manhood. For the nature of this
godhead is immutable and invariable, as is
that of the Father who begat Him before the
ages. And whatever would be understood
of the substance of the Father will also
be wholly found in the substance of the
only begotten ; for of that substance He
is begotten. This our Lord taught when
He said to Philip " He that hath seen
me hath seen the Father " * and again
in another place " All things that the
Father hath are mine," * and elsewhere " I
and the Father are one," ® and very many
other passages may be quoted setting forth
the identity of substance.

It follows that He did not become God :
He was God. " In the beginning was the
Word, and the Word was with God ; and
the Word was God."' He was not man:
He became man, and He so became by tak-
ing on Him our nature : So says the blessed
Paul; — "Who being in the form of God
thought it not robbery to be equal with
God, but made Himself of no reputation,
and took upon Him the form of a ser-
vant." "^ And again ; " For verily He took
not on Him the nature of angels ; but He
took on Him the seed of Abraham."® And
again ; Forasmuch then as the children are
partai<ers of flesh and blood. He also Him-
self likewise took part of the same." '° Thus


' Psalm cxviii. 15.
' Psalm xc. 15.
' Psalm lxvi.20.
* John xiv. g.
■John xvi. 15.


« John x. 30.
'John i. 1.

• Phil. ii. 6. 7.

• Heb. ii. 16.
i» lieb. ii. 14.


LETTERS.


331


He was both passible and impassible ; mortal
and immortal ; passible, on the one hand,
and mortal, as man ; impassible, on the
other, and immortal, as God. As God He
raised His own flesh, which was dead ; —
as His own words declare: " Destroy this
temple, and in three days I will raise it
up." ' And as man, He was passible and
mortal up to the time of the passion. For,
after the resurrection, even as man He is
impassible, immortal, and incorruptible ;
and He discharges divine lightnings ; not that
according to the flesh He has been changed
into the nature of Godhead, but still preserv-
ing the distinctive marks of humanity. Nor
yet is His body uncircumscribed, for this is
peculiar to the divine nature alone, but it
abides in its former circumscription. This
He teaches in the words He spake to the
disciples even after His resurrection " Be-
hold my hands and feet that it is I myself;
handle me and see ; for a spirit hath not
flesh and bones as ye see me have." ^ While
He was thus beheld He went up into heaven ;
thus has He promised to come again, thus
shall He be seen both by them that have
believed and them that have crucified, for it
is written " They shall look on Him whom
they pierced."^ We therefore worship the
Son, but we contemplate in Him either
nature in its perfection, both that which
took, and that which was taken ; the one of
God and the other of David. For this reason
also He is styled both Son of the living God
and Son of David ; either nature receiving
its proper title. Accordingly the divine
scripture calls him both God and man, and
the blessed Paul exclaims " There is one
God, and one mediator between God and
men, the man Christ Jesus ; who gave Him-
self a ransom for all." * But Him whom here
he calls man in another place he describes as
God for he says " Looking for that blessed
hope and the glorious appearing of the great
God and our Saviour Jesus Christ." * And
yet in another place he uses both names at
once saying " Of whom as concerning the
flesh Christ came who is over all God
blessed for ever. Amen." *

Thus he has stated the same Christ to
be of the Jews according to the flesh, and
God over all as God. Similarly the prophet
Isaiah writes " A man of sorrows and ac-


« I.Tim, ii. 5.6.
B Tit. ii. 13.


1 John ii. 29.

* Luke xxiv. 39.

3 John xix. 37. Cf. Zee. xii. 10.

*Rom.ix. 5. The first implicit denial of the sense here
given by Theodoret to this remarkable passage is said to be
found in an assertion of the Emperor Julian that neither Paul
nor Matthew nor Mark ever ventured to call Jesus God. In
the early church it was commonly rendered in its plain and
grammatical sense, as by Irenaeus, Tertullian, Athanasius,
and Chrysostom. Cf. Alford in loc.


quainted with grief. . . . Surely He hath
borne our griefs and carried our sorrows," '
and shortly afterwards he says " Who shall
declare His generation .'' " * This is spoken
not of man but of God. Thus through
Micah God says " Thou Bethlehem in the
land of Judah art not the least among the
princes of Judah, for out of thee shall come
a governor that shall rule my people Israel,
whose goings forth have been as of old from
everlasting."^ Now by saying "From thee
shall come forth a ruler " he exhibits the
(Economy of the incarnation ; and by adding
" whose goings forth have been as of old
from everlasting " he declares the Godhead
begotten of the Father before the ages.

Since we have been thus taught by the
divine scripture, and have further found that
the teachers who have been at different periods
illustrious in the Church, are of the same
opinion, we do our best to keep our heritage
inviolate; worshipping one Son of God, one
God the Father, and one Holy Ghost ; but
at the same time recognising the distinction
between flesh and Godhead. And as we
assert them that divide our one Lord Jesus
Christ into two sons to trangress from the
road trodden by the holy apostles, so do we
declare the maintainers of the doctrine that
the Godhead of the only begotten and the
manhood have been made one nature to fall
headlong into the opposite ravine. These
doctrines we hold ; these we preach ; for
these we do battle.

The slander of the libellers that represent
me as worshipping two sons is refuted by
the plain facts of the case. I teach all per-
sons who come to holy Baptism the faith
put forth at Nicsea ; and, when I celebrate
the sacrament of regeneration I baptize them
that make profession of their faith in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, pronouncing each name by
itself. And when I am performing divine
service in the churches it is my wont to give
glory to the Father and to the Son and to the
Holy Ghost ; not sons, but Son. If then I
uphold two sons, whether of the two is
glorified by me, and whether remains un-
honoured } For I have not quite come to
such a pitch of stupidity as to acknowledge
two sons and leave one of them without any
tribute of respect. It follows then even from
this fact that the slander is proved slander, —
for I worship one only begotten Son, God the
Word incarnate. And I call the holy Virgin
"Mother of God " "^ because she has given
birth to the Emmanuel, which means " God


1 Is. liii. 3. 4.
' Isaiah liii. S.


3 Matt. ii. 6 and Mic. v. a.
* ©(OToKOf . cf. p. ajj.


332


THEODORET.


with us." ' But the prophet who predicted
the Emmanuel a little further on has written
of him that "Unto us a child is born, unto
us a son is given ; and the government shall
be upon his shoulders ; and his name is
called Angel of great counsel, wonderful,
counsellor, mighty God, powerful, Prince of
peace, Father of the age to come." * Now
if the babe born of the Virgin is styled
" Mighty God," then it is only with reason
that the mother is called " Mother of God."
For the mother shares the honour of her
offspring, and the Virgin is both mother of
the Lord Christ as man, and again is His
servant as Lord and Creator and God.

On account of this difference of term He
is said by the divine Paul to be " without
father, without mother, without descent,
having neither beginning of days nor end of
life." ^ He is without father as touching His
humanity; for as man He was born of a
mother alone. And He is without mother as
God, for He was begotten from everlasting
of the Father alone. And again He is with-
out descent as God while as man He has
descent. For it is written " The book of
the generation of Jesus Christ the son of
David, the son of Abraham." * His descent
is also given by the divine Luke.^ So again,
as God, He has no beginning of days for He
was begotten before the ages ; neither has
He an end of life, fo " His nature is immor-
tal and impassible. But as man He had both
a beginning of days, for He was born in the
reign of Augustus Caesar, and an end of life,
for He was crucified in the reign of Tiberius
Ctesar. But now, as I have already said,
even His human nature is immortal ; and, as
He ascended, so again shall He come accord-
ing to the words of the Angel — " This same
Jesus which is taken up from you into
Heaven shall so come in like manner as ye
have seen Him go into Heaven." "

This is the doctrine delivered to us by the
divine prophets ; this is the doctrine of the
company of the holy apostles ; this is the
doctrine of the great saints of the East and
of the West ; of the far-famed Ignatius, who
received his archpriesthood by the right hand
of the great Peter, and for the sake of his
confession of Christ was devoured by savage
beasts ; ' and of the great Eustathius, who
presided over the assembled council, and on
account of his fiery zeal for true religion was


I Matt. i. 3.V * Matt. i. i.

' Is. ix. 6. LXX. Alex. ■' I.uke iii. 23.

' Heb. vii. 3. " Acts i. it.

' The martyrdom of Ignatius may he placed within a few
years of no, — before or after. In the 4th c. Oct. 17 was
named as the day both of his birth and death. Bp. Lightfoot.
Ap. Fathers II. i. 30 and 46.


driven into exile.' This doctrine was
preached by the illustrious Meletius, at the
cost of no less pains, for thrice was he driven
from his flock in the cause of the apostles'
doctrines ; ^ by Flavianus,^ g\oYy of the im-
perial see ; and by the admirable Ephraim,
instrument of divine grace, who has left us in
the Syriac tongue a written heritage of good
things ; * by Cyprian, the illustrious ruler of
Carthage and of all Libya, who for Christ's
sake found a death in the fire ; " by Damasus,
bishop of great Rome,* and by Ambrose,
glory of Milan, who preached and wrote it
in the language of Rome.'

The same was taught by the great lumina-
ries of Alexandria, Alexander and Athana-
sius, men of one mind, who underwent
sufferings celebrated throughout the world.
This was the pasture given to their flocks by
the great teachers of the imperial city, by
Gregory, shining friend and supporter of the
truth ; b}' John, teacher of the world, by
Atticus, their successor alike in see and in
sentiment.** By these doctrines Basil, great
light of the truth, and Gregory sprung from
the same parents,® and Amphilochius,"' who
from him received the gift of the high-priest-
hood, taught their contemporaries, and have
left the same to us in their writings for a
goodly heritage. Time would fail me to
tell of Polycarp," and Irenjeus,'^ of Metho-
dius'^ and Hippolytus,'^ and the rest of the
teachers of the Church. In a word I assert
that I follow the divine oracles and at the
same time all these saints. By the grace of
the spirit they dived into the depths of God-
inspired scripture and both themselves per-
ceived its mind, and made it plain to all thut
are willing to learn. Diflerence in tongue
has wrought no difference in doctrine, for
they were channels of the grace of the divine
spirit, using the stream from one and the
same fount.

' i.e. Eustathius of Beroea and Antiocli, who, according to
Tlicodorct (II. E. i.6, p. 43.), sat at Nicxa on Constantine's
right hand. (Contra. I. Soz. i. 19.) He was exiled on account
of the accusation got up against him by Euscbius of Nico-
media.

2 Meletius of Antioch. cf. pp. g2, 93. lie presided at Con-
stantinople in 3S1, and died while the Council was sitting.

•■' Of Constantinople, murdered at the Latrocinium.

* Vide p. 129.

f^ cf. Ep. Ll'l. St. Cyprian was beheaded at Carthage, Aug.
13, 25S, his last recorded utterance being his reply to the reading
of the sentence "That Thascius Cyprianus be bclicaded with
the sword," " Thanks be to God."" Theodorct's " lire " is
either an error, or means the fiery trial of martyrdom.

" Vide p. $2. 7 cf. pp. 110, 174.

*' i.e. Gregory of Nazianzus, put in possession of St. Sophia
by Thcodosius 1. Nov. 24, 3S0, Chrysostom, consecrated by The.
ophilus of Alexandria, Feb. 26,398; and Atticus, who succeeded
Arsacius tlie usurper in 406.

" Gregory ol Nyssa. cf. p. 129. *' f 155.

1" Of Iconiuin. cf. p. 114. 12 t c. 202.

" Commonly known as bishop of Patara, thougli Jerome
speaks of him as of Tyre. The place and time of his death are
doubtful. Eusebius calls him a contemporarj'. (cf. Jcr. Cat..
S3i and .Socr. vi. 13.)

1* According to Dijllinger the first anti-pope. cf. reff. p. 177.


LETTERS.


333


CLII. Report of the (bishops^ of the East to
the Efnperor, giving information of their pj-o-
ceedings, and exphnning the cause of the
delay in the arrival of the bishop of Antiocli}

In obedience to the order of your pious
letter we have journeyed to the Ephesian me-
tropolis. There we have found the affairs of
the Church in confusion, and disturbed by
internecine war. The cause of this is that
Cyril of Alexandria and Memnon of Ephe-
sus have banded together and mustered a
great mob of rustics, and have forbidden
both the celebration of the great feast of Pen-
tecost, and the evening and morning offices.^

They have shut the sacred churches and
martyrs' shrines ; they have assembled
apart with the victims of their deceit ; they
have wrought innumerable iniquities, tramp-
ling under foot alike the canons of the holy
Fathers, and your own decrees. And the
action has been taken in face of the order
given both in writing and by word of mouth
by the most excellent count Candidianus,^
envoy of your Christ-loving majesty, that
the council must await the arrival of the
very holy bishops, coming from all quarters
of the Empire, and then and not till then
formally assemble in obedience to your
piety's commands. Moreover Cyril of Alex-
andria had written to me, the bishop of An-
tioch, two days before the meeting of their
synod, that the whole council was awaiting
my arrival. We have therefore deposed
both the aforenamed, Cyril and Memnon,
and have excluded them from all the services
of the church. The rest, who have partici-
pated in their iniquity, we have excommuni-
cated, until they shall reject and anathema-
tize the Chapters ■* issued by Cyril, which
are full of the Eunomian and Arian heresies,
and shall, in obedience to your piety's com-
mand, assemble together with us, and shall
in an orderly manner and with all exactitude,
together with ourselves, examine into the
questions at issue, and confirm the pious
doctrine of the holy Fathers.

As to the delay in my own arrival be it
known to your piety that, in consideration of
the distance of the way by land, — and this


' Cyril's party met on June 22, 431 , — numbering- 19S, in the
Church of the Virgin. John of Antioch with liis fourteen sup-
porters did not arrive till the 27th. Unable to start from their
diocese before April 26, the octave of Easter, they did not as-
semble at Antioch till May 10, and -then were delayed by a
famine. Immediately on tlieir arrival the " Conciliabuluni "
of the 43 anti-Cyrillians met with indecent precipitancy.

- Both parties, regarding their opponents as excommuni-
cate, forbade them to perform their sacred functions.

2 " Comes domesticorum " commander of the guards, -^vas
representative of Theodosius II. and Valentinian III. at
I-^phesus. Candidianus was at first disposed to demur to the
condemnation of Nestorius as disorderly and irregular, and to
si le with the Oiientals.

^ cf. p. 292.


was our route, — I have come very quickly,
I have travelled forty stages without pausing
to rest on the way ; so your Christian majesty
may learn from the inhabitants of the towns
on the route. Besides this I was detained
many days in Antioch by the famine there ;
by the daily tumults of the people ; and by
the unusual severity of the rainy season,
which caused the torrents to swell, and
threatened danger to the town.

CLIII. Report of the same to the empresses
Pulcheria and Eudoxia.

We had expected to be able to report to
your pious majesties in different terms, but
we are now compelled to make known to
you the following facts, forced as we
are by the irregular exercise of despotic
power by Cyril of Alexandria and Memnon
of Ephesus. The proper course to have
been pursued, in accordance with the laws
of the Church, and the command of your
pious majesties, would have been to wait
for the arrival of the godly bishops on the
road, and in common with them to examine
into the questions at issue concerning the
true faith, and investigate the point offered
for discussion, and, after exact enquiry, to
confirm the doctrines of the apostles. They
had written to me that they would wait for
our arrival. They heard that we were only
three stages off". Then they assembled an un-
constitutional council by themselves, and
have ventured on proceedings iniquitous, ir-
regular, and bristling with absurdities. And
this they have done though the most honour-
able count Candidianus, sent by your pious
and Christian majesties for good order's
sake, expressly charged them, alike in writ-
ing and by word of mouth, to wait for the
arrival of the godly bishops who had been
convened, and to attempt no innovation on
the true faith, but to take their stand on the
directions of our godly-minded sovereigns.
Now in spite of their having heard the im-
perial letter and the advice of the most hon-
ourable count Candidianus, they have
nevertheless made naught of due order.
As the pi'ophet says " They hatch cockatrice'
eggs, and weave the spider's web ; and he
that would eat of their eggs when he breaks
them findeth rottenness, and therein is a vi-
per," ' Wherefore we confidently cry "Their
webs shall not become garments, neither shall
they cover themselves with their works. " "

They have shut the churches and the mar-
tyi"s' shrines ; they have forbidden the celebra-
tion of the holy feast of Pentecost ; besides this


1 Is. lix. 5. Ixx.


» Is. lix. 6.


334


THEODORET.


they have sent the minions of their disorderly
despotism into bishops' private houses, utter-
ing shoclving threats, and forcing them to
affix tlieir signatures to illegal acts. We
therefore considering all their preposterous
conduct, have deposed the aforenamed Cyril
and Memnon, and deprived them of their
episcopate. Their associates in irregularity,
wliether influenced by sycophancy or by
fear, we have excommunicated, until, coming
to a knowledge of their own wounds, they
shall heartily repent, shall anathematize the
heretical Chapters of Cyril, which are
tainted witli the heresy of Apollinarius,
Arius, and Eunomius, shall recover the faith
of the Fathers in Council at Nic^a, and, in
obedience to the pious commands of our
Christian sovereigns, shall, peacefully and
without any tumult, assemble in synod,
be willing to examine with care the ques-
tions submitted to them, and honestly protect
the purity of the faith of the Gospel.

CLIV. Report of the same to the Se?iate of
Constantinople. '

CLV. Letter of John, bishop of Antioch and
his supporters, to the clergy of Constan-
tinople^

CLVI. Letter of the same to the people of
Constantinople?

CL VIL Report of the Coimcil of (the bishops
of) the East to the victoriotis Emperor,
announcing a second time the deposition of
Cyril and of Memnon*

Your piety, which shines forth for the
good of the empire and of the churches of
God, has commanded us to assemble at
Ephesus, in order to bring about peace and
Grain for the Church, rather than to confuse
and disturb it. And the commands of your
majesty plainly and distinctly indicate your
pious and peaceful intentions for the churches
of Christ. But Cyril of Alexandria, a man,
it would seem, born and bred for the bane
of the churches, after taking into partner-
ship the audacity of Memnon of Ephesus,
has first of all transgressed against your
quieting and pious decree, and has so shewed
his general depravity. Your majesty had


* This Report, couched in almost identical terms with the
preceding, I omit, although commonly accepted as the compo-
sition of Theodorct.

2 This is also merely a short summary of CLII. and CLIII.

3 Omitted as being a repetition of the preceding.

■i Tlic Latin version of tlie title begins " Rf/atio orientalis
ronriliabu/i." So the rival and hurried gathering of the East-
erns was styled. The following letter is a further justi-
ficaticm of their action, and illustrates the readiness and ability, \
if not the temper and prudence, of the bishop of Cyrus, its j
jirobable author. ' ,


ordered an investigation and careful testing
to be made concerning the faith, and that
witli the consent and concord of all. Cyril,
challenged, or rather himself convicting
himself, on the count of the Apollinarian
doctrines, by means of the letter which he
lately sent to the imperial city, with anathe-
matisms, wherebv he is convicted of sharinw;
the views of the impious and heretic
Apollinarius, pays no heed to this condition
of things, and, as though we were living
with no emperor to go\ern us, is proceeding
to every kind of lawlessness. He ouglit
himself to be called to account for liis un-
sound opinion about our Lord Jesus Christ ;
but, usurping an authority given him neither
by the canons, nor bj- your edicts, he is
hurrying headlong into every kind of dis-
order and illegality.

Moved by these things the holy Synod,
which has refused to accept his devices for
the damage of the faith, for the aforesaid
reasons deposes him. It deposes Memnon
also, who has been his counsellor and abettor
through all, who has kept up constant agita-
tion against the very holy bishops for refus-
ing to assent to his pernicious heterodoxy ;
who has shut the churches and every place
of prayer, as if we were living among the
heathen and the enemies of God ; who has
brought in the Ephesian mob, so that every
day we are in supreme danger, while we
look not to defence, but heed the right doc-
trines of true religion. For the destruction
of these men is identical with the establish-
ment of orthodoxy.

From his own Chapters your majesty can
have no difficulty in perceiving his impious
mind. He is convicted of trying, so to say,
to raise from Hades the impious Apollina-
rius, who died in his heresy, and of attack-
ing the churches and the orthodox faith. He
is shewn in his publications to anathematize
at once evangelists and apostles and them
that succeeded them as forefathers of the
Church, who, moved not by their own im-
aginations, but by the holy Spirit, have
preached the true faith, and proclaimed the
gospel ; a faith and gospel indeed opposed to
what this man holds and teaches and by in-
culcating which he wishes to give his own
private iniquity the mastery of the world.
Since this is intolerable to us we have fol-
lowed the proper course, relying at once on the
divine grace and on your majesty's good will.

We know that vou give to nothing higher
honour than to the sacred faith in which both
vou and your thrice blessed forefathers have
been brought up. From them you have i e-
ceived the perpetual sceptre of empire, ever


LETTERS.


33S


putting down the opponents of the apostolic
doctrines. Such an opponent is the aforesaid
Cyril, who, with the aid of Memnon, has
captured Ephesus as he might some fortress,
and justly shares with his ally the sentence
of deposition. Justly : for, besides all that
has been said, they have boldly tried every
means of assault and every violence against
us, who, to come together in council in rati-
fication of your edict, have disregarded
every claim of home and country and self.

We are now the prey of tyranny, unless
your piety intervene and order us to assemble
in some other place, near at hand, where we
shall be able, from the scriptures, and from
the writings of the Fathers, to refute beyond
contradiction both Cyril and the victims of
his ingenuity. We have mercifully expelled
these men from communion with the sugf-
gested hope of salvation in case they should
repent ; although, as if on some campaign of
uncivilized soldiery, they have up to this
moment furnished him with the means of
his illegality. Some were deposed long
ago, and h:ive been restored by Cyril. Some
have been excommunicated by their own
metropolitans, and admitted by him again
into communion. Others have been im-
paled on various accusations, and have been
promoted by him to honour. All through,
the main motive of his action has been the
endeavour to achieve his heretical purpose
by the force of numbers, for he does not
reckon as he ought that in what relates to
true religion, it is not numbers that are
required, but rather correctness of doctrine,
and the truth of the doctrine of the apostles.
Men are needed who are competent to
establish these points not by audacity and
masterful self-assertion but by pious use of
apostolic testimony and example.

For all these reasons we beseech and im-
plore your majesty to bear prompt aid to
assaulted truth, and to remedy without
delay these men's masterful madness ; for,
like a hurricane, it is sweeping the less
moderate among us into pernicious heresy.
Your piety has had care for the churches in
Persia and among the barbarians ; it is onl}'
right that you should not neglect those which
are tossed by the storm within the boundaries
of the Roman empire.

CL VIII. Report of (the bishops of) the East
to the very pio2is emperor, which they
delivered with the preceding Report to the
right honourable count Irenceus.

On receiving the letter of your piety we
entertained hopes that the Egyptian storm
which has lately struck the churches of


God would be driven away. But we have
been disappointed. Those men have been
made even yet more daring by their mad-
ness ; they have given no heed to the
sentence of deposition justly and in due
form passed upon them, nor have become
an}' more moderate in consequence of the
rebuke of your majesty. They have trampled
down alike the laws of your piety, and the
canons of the holy Fathers, and, some of them
being deposed and some excommunicated,
keep festivals, and celebrate communion, in
Houses of Prayer. And we, as we have
already informed your Christ-loving majesty,
on the receipt of your clemency's kindly letter,
though our only desire was to pray in the
church of the Apostles, have not only been
prevented, but actually stoned, and chased
for a considerable distance, so that we were
compelled to eflect our safety by flight at
full speed. Our opponents on the contrary
think that they may act just as they please.
They have declined to make investigation of
the questions at issue, and to undertake the
defence of Cyril's heretical Chapters, rejecting
the plain j^roofs of the impiety which they
contain. They are impudent from mere
impudence, while the examination of the
questions before us requires not impudence,
but calmness, knowledge, and skill in mat-
ters of doctrine.

Under these circumstances we have been
under the necessity of sending forward the
most honourable Count Ireuceus, to approach
your piety, and to explain the position of
affairs. . He has accurate information con-
cerning all that has occurred, and has
learned from us many modes of cure, whereby
it may be possible to bring about the
I'estoration of tranquillity to the holy churches
of God. We beseech your clemency to
grant him patient audience, and to give
orders for the prompt carrying out of what-
ever measures may seem good to your piety,
that we be not here crushed beyond all
endui'ance.

CLIX. Letter of the same to the Prccfect and
to the Master}

CLX. Letter of the same to the Gover7ior
atid Scholasticus."

CLXI. Report presejited to the Emperor by
John, archbishop of Antioch and his sup-
porteis through Palladius Magistrianus.^

• Written at the same time and under the same circum-
stances as the former, of which it is an abbreviation^ and is
consequently omitted.

- Omitted as merely repeating the representation of CT.VII.

''This document defends tlie action of the couciliabulum,
speaking of Cyril, in consequence of their deposition, as


336


THEODORET.


CLXII. Letter of Theodoretus to Andreas,
bishop of Sainosata, written from Ephesus.^

Writing from Ephesus I salute your holi-
ness, I congratulate you on your infirmity,
and deem you dear to God, in that you have
known what evil deeds have been afoinsT on
here by report, and not by personal expe-
rience. Evil indeed ! They transcend all
imagination and all incidents of history ;
they compel a continual downpour of tears.
The body of the Church is in peril of dis-
memberment; — nay, rather I may say it
has received the first incision; — unless the
wise Healer restore and re-connect the un-
sound and severed limbs. Once again the
Egyptian is raging against God, and warring
with Moses and Aaron I lis servants, and the
more part of Israel are on the side of the
foe ; for all too few are the sound who will-
ingly suffer for true religion's sake. Ancient
principles are trodden under foot. Deposed
men perform priestly functions, and they
who have deposed them sit sighing at home.
Men excommunicated by the same sentence
as the deposed have relieved the deposed of
their deposition of their own free will. Such
is the mockery of a synod held by Egyptians,
by Palestinians, by men from the Pontic
and Asian dioceses, and by the West in their
company. '^

What players in a pantomime, in the days
of paganism, even in any farce so held up
religion to ridicule? Indeed what farce-
writer ever performed such a play? What
dramatist ever wrote so sad a tragedy ? Such
and so great are the troubles that have beset
God's Church, whereof I have narrated but
a very small part.

CLXIII. First Letter of the Co7nmissioners of
the East, sent to Chalcedon, among whom
was Theodoretus.^

On our arrival at Chalcedon, for neither
we ourselves nor our opponents were per-

" lately " bishop of Alexandria, and demanding the exile of
Mcmnon.

' 'rhis letter may be dated " towards the end of July or in
the bcf^innins of August 431, after the restitution of Cyril and
Mc-ninon on July 16, and before the departure of Thcodoret
from Hphcsus on August 20." Gariierius. Andrew ofSamo-
sata wrote objections to Cyril's Chapters in the name of the
bishops of the East. He was prevented by illness from being
present at Ephesus in 431, as he was also from the synod as-
sembled at Antioch in 444 to hear the cause of Athaiiasius of
Perrha. He was a warm supporter of Nestorius.

This letter exists only in the Latin Version, and is to be
found also in Mansi Collect. Cone. ix. 293.

2 III Ep. CI^XI. the numbers are specified; — " Of Egyp-
tians fifty; of Asiani under Memnon, leader of the tyranny,
fort^; of the heretics in Pamphylia called Messalianitx, twelve;
besides those attached to the same metropolitan " (i.e. Amphi-
lochius of Side) " and others deposed and excommunicated in
divers places by synods or bishops, who constitute nothing but
a mere turbulent and disorderly mob, entirely ignorant of the
divine decrees."

■' Another version of the title runs "To the very holy and
wise synod assembled at Ephesus, Joannes, Faulus, Aprin.


mitted to enter Constantinople, on account
of the seditions of the excellent monks, we
heard that eight days before we had ap-
peared (behold the glory of the most pious
prince) the lord Nestorius was dismissed
from Ephesus, free to go where he would ;
whereat we are much distressed, since verily
deeds done illegally and informally now
seem to have some force. Let your holiness
however be assured that we shall eagerly join
the battle for the Faith, and are willing to
fight even unto death. To-day, the nth of the
month Gorpiieum,' we are expecting our
very pious Emperor to cross over to
the Rufinianum,^ and there to hear the
trial.

We therefore beg your holiness to pray
the Lord Christ to help us to be able to con-
firm the faith of the holy Fathers, and to
pluck up by the roots these Chapters which
have sprouted to the damage of the Church.
We implore your holiness to think and act
with us, and to abide in your ready devotion
to the orthodox faith. When this letter was
written the lord Himerius ^ had not yet met
us, being peradventure hindered on the road.
But do not let this trouble you. Only let
your piety strenuously support us, and we
trust that gloom will disappear, and the
truth shine forth.

CLXLV. Second Epistle of the same to the
same, expressing pretnature triumph in victory.^

Through the prayers of your holiness our
most pious prince has granted us an audience,
and by God's grace we have got the better
of our opponents, as all our views have been
accepted by the most Christ-loving emperor.
The reports of others were read, and what
seemed unfit to be received, and had no
further importance, he rejected. They were
full of Cyril, and petitioned that he might
be summoned to give an account of himself.
So far they have not prevailed, but have
heard discourses on true religion, that is on
the system of the Faith, and that the faith of
the blessed Fathers was confirmed. We fur-
ther refuted Acacius * who had laid down in
his Coinmentaiies that the Godhead is
passible. At this our pious emperor was
so shocked at the enormity of the blasphemy
that he flung oft' his mantle, and stepped

gius, Theodoretus, greeting." The letter may be dated in
Sept. 431. Paul, bishop of Emesa, was ultimately an active
peacemaker in the dispute. Apringius was bishop of Chalcis.

It only exists in the Eatin.

' The Macedonian name for September.

-A villa in the vicinity of Chalcedon.

2 Metropolitan of Nicomedia ; one of the " Conciliabulum."

* Also only in I^atin.

■'■' Bishop of Melitene in Armenia Secunda, an ardent anti-
Ncstorian, who remonstrated with Cyril for consenting to
make peace with the Orientals.


LETTERS.


337


back. We know that the whole assembly
welcomed us as champions of true religion.
It has seemed good to our most pious
emperor that anyone should explain his own
views, and report them to his piety. We
have replied that it is impossible for us
to make any other exposition than that made
by the blessed Fathers at Nicaea, and so it
has pleased his majesty. We therefore
offered the form subscribed by your holiness.
Moreover, the whole population of Con-
stantinople is continually coming out to us
to implore us to fight manfully for the Faith.
We do our best to restrain them, to avoid
giving offence to our opponents. We have
sent a copy of the expositing, that two copies
may be made, and you may subscribe them
both.

CLXV. Letter of the same to the same}

To the very pious bishops now in Ephesus :
Johannes, Himerius, Faulus, Apringius,
Theodoretus, greeting. For the fifth time
an audience has been granted us. We
entered largely into the question of the
heretical Chapters, and swore again and
again to the very pious emperor that it was
impossible for us to hold communion with
our opponents unless they rejected the
Chapters. We pointed out moreover that
even if Cyril did abjure his Chapters he
could not be received by us, because he had
become the heresiarch of so impious a
heresy. Nevertheless we gained no ground,
because our adversaries were urgent, and
their hearers could neither restrain them in
their insolent endeavour, nor compel them to
come to enquiiy and argument. They thus
evade the investigation of the Chapters, and
allow no discussion concerning them. We,
however, as you entreat, are ready to insist
to the death. We refuse to receive Cyril
and his Chapters ; we will not admit these
men to Communion till the improper ad-
ditions to the Faith be rejected. We
therefore implore your holiness to continue
to show at once our mind and our efforts.
The battle is for true religion ; for the only
hope we have, — on account of which we
look forward to enjoying, in the world to
come, the loving-kindness of our Saviour.
As to the very pious and holy bishop
Nestorius, be it known to your piety that we
have tried to introduce a word about him, but
have hitherto failed, because all are ill-
affected toward him. We will notwith-
standing do our best, though this is so, to
take advantage of any opportunity that


1 Only in Latin.


may offer, and of the goodwill of the
audience, to carry out this purpose, God
helping us. But that your holiness may not
be ignorant of this too, know that we, seeing
that the partisans of Cyril have deceived
everyone by domineering, cheating, flatter-
ing, and bribing, have more than once
besought the very pious emperor and most
noble princes both to send us back to the
East, and let your holiness go home. For
we are beginning to learn that we are
wasting time in vain, without nearing our
end, because Cyril everywhere shirks dis-
cussion, in his conviction that the blas-
phemies published in his Twelve Chapters
can be openly refuted. The very pious
emperor has determined, after many exhort-
ations, that we all go every one to his own
home, and that, further, both the Egyptian
and Memnon of Ephesus are to remain in
their own places. So the Egyptian will be
able to go on blindfolding by bribery. The
one, after crimes too many to tell, is to
return to his diocese. The other, an inno-
cent man, is barely permitted to go home.
We and all here salute you and all the
brotherhood with you.

CLXVI. First petition of the commissioners,
addressed from Chalcedon, to the JSm-
peror.

It had been much to be desired that the
word of true religion should not be adulter-
ated by ridiculous explanations, and least of
all by men who have obtained the priesthood
and high office in the churches, and who
have been induced, we know not how, by
ambition, by lust of authority, and by certain
poor promises, to despise all the command-
ments of Christ. Their only motive has
been the desire to pay court to a man who
has the presumption to hope that he and his
abettors will be able to manage the whole
business with success ; I mean Cyril of Alex-
andria. Of his own frivolity he has intruded
into the holy churches of God heretical doc-
trines which he believes himself able to sup-
port by argument. He expects to escape
the chastisement of sinners by the sole help
of Memnon and the bishops of the aforesaid
conspiracy.

We are lovers of silence ; in general we
advise a philosophic course of action. Now,
however, sensible that to be silent and to
cultivate philosophy would be to throw away
the Faith, we turn in supplication to you
who, next to the Goodness on high, are the
sole preserver of the world. We know that
it specially belongs to you to be anxious for


VOL. in.


338


THEODORKT.


true religion, as having, up to this present
day, continually protected it, and being in
turn protected by it.

We beg you therefore to receive this trea-
tise, as though our defence were to be
pleaded in the presence of the most holy
God ; not because we are less active in the
sacred cause, but because we are devoted to
true religion, and are speaking in its behalf.
For in Christian times the clergy have no
more boundea duty than to bear testimony
before so faithful a prince, however ready we
might have been to yield our bodies and to
lay down our lives a thousand times in the
battle for the faith. We therefore beseech
you by God who secth all things, by our Lord
Jesus Christ who will judge all men in
righteousness, by the Holy Ghost by whose
grace you hold your empire, and by the
elect angels who are your guardians and
whom one day you shall see standing by the
awful throne, and ceaselessly offering unto
God that dread doxology which it is now
sought to corrupt ; we beseech your piety,
besieged as you now are by the craftiness of
certain men who are forbidding access to
you, and are supporting the introduction into
the faith of heretical Chapters, utterly at
variance with sound doctrme, and tainted
with heresy, to order all who subscribe
them, or assent to them, and wish, after your
promised pardon, to dispute further, to come
forth and submit to the discipline of the
Church. Nothing, sir, is more worthy of
an emperor than to fight for the truth, for
which you hurried to join battle with Per-
sians and other barbarians, when Christ
granted you to win f;dr victories in acknowl-
edgment of your zeal towards Him. We
beseech you that the questions at issue may
be put before your piety in writing, for thus
their purport will be more easily perceived,
and the transgressors will be convicted for
all future time. If however anyone, heedless
of the utterances for which he shall be at
fault, shall wish by his teaching to prevail
over the right faith, it will be the part of
your justice and judgment to consider whether
the very name of teachers has not been
thrown away by men who are reluctant to
run any risks concerning the doctrines which
they introduce, refusing to be obedient to
your orders, that they may escape conviction
for having done wrong ; nor reckoning them
worth refutation, that their mutual conspiracy
be not proved fruitless. For now it is clear,
from those that have been ordained by them
that some of them, in return for this impiety,
have bethought them of obliging certain
persons by the concession of dignities and


have devised certain other ineans. This will
become still more clear ; and your piety will
soon see that they will distribute the rewards
of their treachery, as though they were the
spoils of the faith of Christ.

But we, of whom some were long ago or-
dained by the very pious Juvenal, bishop of
Jerusalem, have kept silence, although it was
our duty to contend for the canon, that we
might not seem to be troubled for our own
reputation's sake. We are now perfectly
well aware of his active trickery through
Phoenicia Secunda and Arabia. We really
have not time to attend to such things. We
are men who have preferred rather to be de-
prived of the very places of which the min-
istry has been entrusted to us, and so of our
life, than of our ready zeal for the faith.
To the attempts of those men we will oppose
the sentence of God and of your piety.

Now also we beg that true religion may
be your one and primary care, and that the
brightness of orthodoxy, which at length
with difficulty blazed forth in the days of
Constantine of holy name, was maintained
by your blessed grandfather and father, and
was extended by your majesty among the
Persians and other barbarians, be not allowed
to grow dim in the very innermost courts of
your imperial palace, or, in your serenity's
days, to be dispersed.

You will not send, sir, a divided Chris-
tianity into Persia ; nor here at home will
there be anything great, while we are dis-
tressed by disputes, and while there is no
one existing on their side to settle them ; no
one will take part in a divided Word and
Sacraments ; no one without loss of faith
will cut himself off from such famous fathers
and saints who have never been condemned.
No imperial successes will be permitted to a
people at variance among themselves ; a
burst of derision will be roused from the
enemies of true religion ; and all the other
noxious consequences of their malignant con-
troversy are too numerous to reckon.

If there is anyone who thinks little of the
science of theology, let that one be any one
in the world rather than he to whom the Lord
has given the supreme government of the
world. Our petition is that your piety will
give judgment, for God will guide your in-
telligence into exact comprehension. Finally,
should this be impracticable (and all the
engagements of your piety we cannot know)
we beseech your serenity to give us leave to
travel safely home. We are aware that to
the dioceses entrusted to us cause of offence
is given by so protracted a delay, on account
of those men who even in sacred matters


LETTERS.


339


look out for opportunities of dissension
whence no advantage can be derived.

CLXVII. Second petition of the same, sent
from Chalcedon to Thcodosins Artgustus.

Your piety has been informed on several
occasions, both by ourselves in person and
by our emissaries, that the doctrine of the
true faith seems to stand in dans:er of beinsr
corrupted, and that the body of the Church is
apparently being rent asunder by men who
are turning everything upside down, tramp-
ling upon all church order, and all imperial
law, and throwing everything into confusion,
that they may confirm the heresy propounded
by Cyril of Alexandria. For when we were
first summoned by your piety to Ephesus, to
enquire into the question which had arisen,
and to confirm the evangelic and apostolic
faith laid down by the holy Fathers, before
the arrival of all the bishops who had been
convened, the holders of their own private
Council confirmed in writing the heretical
Chapters, which are at one with the impiety
of Arius, Eunomius and Apollinarius.
Some they deceived ; some they terrified ;
others already charged with heresy, they re-
ceived into communion ; and others who had
not communicated with them were bribed
into so doing ; others again were fired with
the hope of dignities for which they were


gathered


round


them
they
shewn not


though


unfit ; so these men
a great crowd of adherents, as
had no idea that true religion is
by numbers, but by truth.

The dispatch of your piety was read a
second time by the niost honourable Count
Candidianus, ordering that the questions re-
cently raised be examined in a quiet and
brotherly manner. When however all the
pious bishops were assembling, the reading
had no effect.

Then came the noble Palladius Magistri-
anus, bringing another dispatch from your
majesty, to the effect that all enactments
passed privately and apart must be rescinded ;
that the Council must be assembled afresh,
and the true doctrine ratified ; but, as usual,
this your pious mandate was treated with
contempt by these unscrupulous persons.

Then again arrived the right honourable
Master John, at that time " Comes Largi-
tionum," bringing another pious letter to the
effect that the depositions of the three had
been decreed, that the oflences which had
sprung up were to be removed, and the faith
laid down at Nictea by the holy and blessed
Fathers was to be ratified by all. As usual
these universal mockers transgressed this
law too.


For after hearing the letter they did not
change their mode of action ; they held com-
munion with the deposed ; spoke of them as
bishojos, and refused to allow the Chapters,
which had been propounded to the loss and
corruption of the pious faith to be rejected ;
notwithstanding their having been frequently
summoned by us to discussion. For we had
ready to hand a plain refutation of the heret-
ical Chapters.

In evidence of these statements we have
the right honourable Master, who when both
sides had been summoned a third and a
fourth time, not venturing to make this con-
duct an excuse on account of their disobedi-


ence,


thought it worth while


to summon us


hither.

We came at once ; on our arrival we al-
lowed ourselves no rest making our petition,
both before your piety and before the illus-
trious assembly, that they would take up the
quarrel for the Chapters and enter into dis-
cussion concerning them, or on the other
hand reject them as contrary to the right
faith, abiding by the faith as laid down by
the blessed fathers in council at Nictea.

They refused to do anything of the kind ;
they pei-sisted in their heretical procedure ;
yet they were allowed to attend the churclies,
and to perform their priestly functions. We,
however, alike at Ephesus and here, have
been for a long time deprived of communion ;
alike there and here we have undergone in-
numerable perils ; and while we were being
stoned and all but slain by slaves dressed up
as monks, we took it all for the best, as will-
ingly enduring such treatment in the cause
of the truth.

Afterwards it seemed good to your majesty
that we and the opposite party should assem-


ble once


agam


that the recalcitrant miaht be


compelled to examine the doctrines. While
we were waiting for this to come to pass your
piety set out for the city, and ordered the
very men who were being accused of heresv
and had been therefore some of them de-
posed by us, and others excommunicated and
thereafter to be subjected to the discipline of
the Church, to come to the city and perform
priestly functions, and ordain.' We however
who in the cause of true religion have un-
dertaken a struggle so tremendous ; we who
have shrunk from no peril in our battle for
right doctrine, have neither been bidden to
enter the city to serve the cause of the im-
perilled Faith and strive for orthodoxy ; nor
have we been permitted to return home ; *

1 i.e. Maximianus, in succession to Nestorius, Oct. 25,

431-

- Nestorius was permitted to return to his old monastery at
Antioch.


340


THEODORET.


but here we are in Chalcedon distressed
and groaning for the Cliurch oppressed by
schism.

Wherefore since we are in receipt of no
reply we have thought it necessary to inform
your piety by this present letter, before God
and Christ and the Holy Ghost, that if any
one shall have been ordained (before the
settlement of right doctrines) by these men
of heretical opinions, he must necessarily be
cut off from the whole church, as well from
the clergy as the dissentient laity. For none
of the pious will endure that communion be
granted to heretics, and their own salvation
be nullified.

And when this shall have come to pass,
then your piety shall be comjDclled to act
against your will. For the schism will grow
beyond all expectation, and thereby the
champions of true religion will be saddened,
unable to endure the loss of their own souls,
and the establishment of those impious doc-
trines of Cyril which the contentious are de-
sirous of defending.

Many indeed of the supporters of true
religion will never allow the acceptance of
Cyril's doctrines; we shall never allow it,
who all are of the diocese of the East of your
province, of the diocese of Pontus, of Asia,
of Thrace, of Illyricum and of the Italics,
and who also sent to your piety the treatise
of the most blessed Ambrose, written against
this nascent superstition.

To avoid all this, and the further troubling
of yom- piety, we beg, beseech, and implore
you to issue an edict that no ordination take
place before the settlement of the orthodox
faith, on account of which we have been
convened by your Christ-loving highness.

CLXVIII. Third demand of the same, ad-
dressed from Chalcedon to the sovereigns.

We never expected the summons of your
piety to meet with this result. We were
honourably convoked, as priests by prince ;
we were convoked to ratify the faith of the
holy Fathers ; and therefore, in due obedi-
ence to a pious prince, we came. On our
arrival we were no less faithful to the Church,
nor less respectful to your edict. From the
day of our arrival at Ephesus till the present
moment we have without intermission fol-
lowed your behests.

As it seems, however, our moderation, in
these times, has not been of the slightest use
to us ; nay, rather, so far as we can see, it
has stood very much in our way. We in-
deed who have thus behaved have been up
to the present time detained in Chalcedon ;


and nowr we are told that we may go home.
They however who have thrown everything
into confusion, who have filled the world
with tumult, who are striving to rend
churches in twain, and who are the open
assailants of true religion, perform priestly
functions, crowd the churches, and as they
imagine have authority to ordain, though in
truth it is illegally claimed by them, stir up
seditions in the church, and what ought to
be spent upon the poor they throw away
upon their bullies.

But you are not only their emperor ; you
arc ours too. For no small portion of your
empire is the East, wherein the right faith
has ever shone, and, besides, the other prov-
inces and dioceses from which we have been
convened.

Let not your majesty despise the faith
which is being corrupted, in which you and
your forefathers have been baptized ; on
which the Church's foundations are laid ; for
which most holy martyrs have rejoiced to
sufter countless kinds of death ; by aid of
which you have vanquished barbarians and
destroyed tyrants ; which you are needing
now in your war for the subjugation of
Africa. For on your side will fight the God
of all if you struggle on behalf of His holy
doctrines and forbid the dismemberment of
the body of the church : for dismembered it
will be if the opinion prevail which Cyril
has introduced into the Church and other
heretics have confirmed.

To these truths we have often already
borne testimony before God both in Ephesus
and in this place. I have furnished infor-
mation to your holiness, giving an account
as before the God of all. For this is required
of us, as is taught in the divine Scripture
both by prophets and apostles ; as says
the blessed Paul " I give thee charge in the
sight of God, who quickeneth the dead, and
of Lord Jesus Chx-ist, who before Pontius
Pilate witnessed a good confession ; " ' and
as God charged Ezekiel to announce to the
people, adding threats and saying, " when
thou givest him not warning, . . . his
blood will I require at thine hand." ^

In awe of this sentence, once again we in-
form your majesty that they who have been
permitted to hold churches, and who teach
the doctrines of Apollinarius, Arius, and Eu-
nomius, perform all sacred functions irregu-
larly and in violation of the canons, and
destroy the souls of all who approach them ;
if, indeed, any shall be found willing to
listen to them. For by the grace of God


' I. Tim. vi.


'3-


* Ez. iii. i8.


LETTERS.


341


whose Providence is over all, and w^ho
wishes all men to be saved, the more part of
the people is sound, and warmly attached to
pious doctrines. It is on their account that
we grieve.

And in our anguish and alarm lest the
plague creeping on by little and little should
attack more, and the evil become general,
we thus instruct your serenity, and continue
to give you exhortation ; we implore your
majesty to yield to our prayers and to pro-
hibit any addition to be made to the Faith
of the holy Fathers assembled in council at
Nicaea.

And if after this our entreaty your piety
reject this doctrine, which was given in the
presence of God, we will shake off the dust
of our feet against you, and cry with the
blessed Paul, "We are pure from your
blood." ' For we cease not night and day
from the moment of our arrival at this dis-
tinguished council to bear witness to prince,
nobles, soldiers, priests and people, that we
hold fast the Faith delivered to us by the
Fathers.

CLXIX. Letter written by Theodoretus, bishop
of CyrtiSy from Chalcedon to Alexander of
Hierapolis^

We have left no means untried, of courtesy,
of sternness, of entreaty, of eloquence be-
fore the most pious emperor, and the illus-
trious assembly, testifying before God who
sees all things and our Lord Jesus Christ
who shall judge the world in justice,^ and the
Holy Spirit and his elect angels, lest the
Faith be despised which is now being coi"-
rupted by the maintainers and bold sub-
scribers of heretical doctrines ; and that
chai'ge be given for it to be laid down in the
same terms as at Nicaea and for the rejec-
tion of the heresy introduced to the loss and
ruin of true religion. Up to this time
however we have produced not the slightest
effect, our hearers being carried now in one
direction and now in another.

Nevertheless all these difficulties have not
been able to deter me from urging my point,
but by God's grace I have pressed on. I
have even stated to our pious emperor with
an oath that it is perfectly impossible for
Cyril and Memnon to be reconciled with
me, and that we can never communicate with
any one who has not previously repudiated the
heretical Chapters. This then is our mind.


1 Acts. XX. 26.

' Dated by Garnerius at the end of September or begin-
ning ol October 431, before the order had been given for the
withdrawal of the Easterns and the entry of the other party to
consecrate a bishop.

»cf, II. Tiro. iv. 1.


The object of men who " seek their own not
the things which are Jesus Christ's " ' is to
be reconciled with them against our will.
But this is no business of mine, for God
weighs our motives and tries our character,
nor does He inflict chastisement for what is
done against our will. Be it known to your
holiness that if ever I said a word about our
friend^ either before the very pious emperor
or the illustrious assembly, I was at once
branded as a rebel. So intensely is l)e hated
by the court party. This is most annoy-
ing. The most pious emperor, especially,
cannot bear to hear his name mentioned and
says publicly " Let no one speak to me of
this man." On one occasion he gave an in-
stance of this to me. Nevertheless as long
as I am here I shall not cease to serve the
interests of this our father, knowing that the
impious have done him wrong.

My desire is that both your piety and I
myself get quit of this. No good is to be
hoped from it, in as much as all the judges
trust in gold, and contend that the nature of
the Godhead and manhood is one.

All the people however by God's grace
are in good case, and constantly come out
to us. I have begun to discourse to them
and have celebrated very large commun-
ions.

On the fourth occasion I spoke at length
about the faith and they listened with such
delight that they did not go away till the
seventh hour but held out even till the mid-
day heat. An enormous crowd was gathered
in a great court, with four verandahs, and I
preached from above from a platform near
the roof.

All the clergy with the excellent monks
are on the contrary utterly opposed to me, so
that when we came back from the Rufini-
anum, after the visit of the very pious em-
peror, stone throwing began and many of
my companions were wounded, by the people
and false monks.

The very pious emperor knew that the
mob was gathered against me and coming up
to me alone he said, *' I know that you are
assembling improperly." Then, said I,
" As you have allowed me to speak hear me
with favour. Is it fair for excommunicated
heretics to be doing duty in churches, while
I, who am fighting for the Faith and am
therefore excluded by others from commun-
ion, am not allowed to enter a church.-*"
He replied "What am I to do.?" I said,
" What your comes laroitionum did at
Ephesus. When he found that some were


1 Phil, ii. zi.


» i.e. Nestorius.


342


THEODORET.


assembling, but that we were not asscin-
bling, lie stopped them saying, ' If you are
not peaceful 1 will allow neither party to
assemble.' It would have become your
piety also to have given directions to the
bishop here to forbid both the opposite party
and ourselves to assemble before our meeting
together to make known your righteous sen-
tence to all." To this he replied '* It is not
for me to order the bishop ; " and I answered
" Neither shall you command us, and we
will take a church, and asseml)le. Your
piety will find that there are many more on
our side than on theirs." In addition to this
I pointed out that we had neither reading of
the holy Scripture, nor oblation ; but only
" prayer for the Faith and for your majesty,
and pious conversation." So he approved,
and made no further prohibition. The re-
sult is that increased crowds ilock to us, and
gladly listen to our teaching. I therefore
beg your piety to pray that our case may
have an issue pleasing to God. I am in
daily danger, suspecting the wiles of both
monks and clergy, as I witness alike their
influence and their negligence.

CLXX. Letter of certain. Easterns, 7vho had
been sent to Constantinople^ to Bishop
Riifiis.

To our most godly and holy fellow-
minister Rufus, Joannes, Himcrius, Theo-
doretus, and the rest, send greeting in the
Lord.'

True religion and the peace of the Church
sufler, we think, in no small degree, from
the absence of your holiness. Had you been
on the spot you might have put a stop to the
disturbances which have arisen, and the
violence that has been ventured on, and
mi<rht have fought on our side for the sub-
jection of the heresies introducctl into the
orthodox Faith, and that doctrine of apostles
and evangelists which, handed down from
time to time from father to son, has at length
been transmitted to ourselves.

And we do not assert this without ground,
for we have learnt the mind of your holiness
from the letter written to the very godly
and holy Julianus, bishop of Sardica,


'After pointing out tliat snpcrsciiplion, style, expression,
sentiments, and circuinstanccs all indicate Thcodoret as the
writer of this letter, Garncriiis proceeds "The objection of
Baronius that mention is made of Martinus, bishop of Milan,
when there never was a Martinus bishop of Milan, is not of
great importance. Thcodoret at a distance niifjht easily write
Martinus for Martinianus, or a copyist might abbreviate the
name to this form." The date of the letter is marked as after
the order to the bishops to remain at Constantinople, and be-
fore permission was given them to return home. The Letters
were also written to Martinianus of Milan, to T"hn of
Ravenna, and to John of Aquileia, but only that to Rufus is
extant. Rufus is probably <hc bishop of Tliessalonica.


for that letter as is right charged the aliove
named very godly bishop to fight for the
Faith laid down by the blessed fathers as-
sembled in council at Niccea, and not to
allow any corruption to be introduced into
those invincible definitions which are suffi-
cient at once to exhibit the truth and to
refute falsehood. So your holiness rightly,
justly, and piously advised, and the recipient
of the letter followed your counsel. But
many of the members of the council, to use
the word of the prophet, " have gone aside,"
and have "altogether become filthy,"' for
they have abandoned the Faith which they
received from the holy Fathers, and have
subscril)ed the twelve Chapters of Cyril of
Alexandria, which teem with Apollinarian
error, are in agreement with the impiety of
Arius and Eunomius, and anathematize all
who do not accept their unconcealed unor-
thodoxy. To this plague smiting the Church
vigorous resistance has been offered by us
who have assembled from the East, and
others from difierent dioceses, with the
object of securing the ratification of the Faith
delivered by the blessed Fathers at Niciea.
For in it, as your holiness knows, there is
nothing lacking whether for the teaching of
evangelic doctrines, or for the refutation of
every heresy.

For the sake of this Faith we continue to
struggle, despising alike all the joys and
sorrows of mortal life, if only we may
preserve untouched this heritage of oin-
fathers. For this reason we have dejDosed
Cyril and Memnon ; the former as prime
mover in the heresy, and the latter as his
aider and abettor in all that has been done
to ratify and uphold the Chapters published
to the destruction of the Church. We have
also excommunicated all that have dared to
subscribe and support these impious doc-
trines till they shall have anathematized them,
and returned to the Faith of the Fathers at
Nicrca.

But our long-sulTering has done them no
good. To this day they continue to do
battle for those pernicious doctrines and
have impaled themselves on the law of the
canon which distinctly enacts " If any
bishop deposed by a synod, or presbyter or
deacon deposed by his own bishop, shall
perform his sacred office, without waiting
for the judgment of a synod, he is to have no
opportunity for defending himself, not even
in anotlier synod : but also all who communi-
cate with him are to be expelled from the
church." Now this law has been broken


1 PLJ.xiv.j.


LETTERS.


343


both by the deposed and the excommunicate.
For immediately after the deposition and
the excommunication becoming known to
tliem, they performed sacred functions, and
they continue to do so, in plain disbelief of
Him who said " Whatsoever ye shall bind on
earth shall be bound in heaven." '

With this we have thought well to acquaint
your holiness at once, but in expectation of
some favourable change, we have waited up
to the present time. But we have been dis-
appointed. They have continued to fight for
this impious heresy, and pay no attention to
the counsels of the very pious emperor. On
five separate occasions he has met us, and
ordered them either to reject the Chapters of
Cyril as contrary to the Faith, or to be will-
ing to do battle in their behalf, and to shew
in what way they are in agreement with the
confession of the Fathers, We have our
proofs at hand, whereby we should have
shewn that they are totally opposed to the
teaching of orthodoxy, and for the most part
in agreement with heresy.

For in these very Chapters the author of the
noxious productions teaches that the God-
head of the only begotten Son suffered, instead
of the manhood which He assumed for the
sake of our salvation, the indwelling God-
head manifestly appropriating the sufferings
as of Its own body, though suffering nothing
in Its own nature ; and further that there is
made one nature of both Godhead and man-
hood,— for so he explains " The Word was
made flesh," " as though the Godhead had
undergone some change, and been turned
into flesh.

And, further, he anathematizes those who
make a distinction between the terms used
by apostles and evangelists about the Lord
Christ, referring those of humiliation to the
manhood, and those of divine glory to the
Godhead, of the Lord Christ. It is with
these views that Arians and Eunomians, at-
tributing the terms of humiliation to the
Godhead, have not shrunk from declaring
God the Word to be made and created, of
another substance, and unlike the Father.

What blasphemy follows on these state-
ments it is not difficult to perceive. There
is introduced a confusion of the natures, and
to God the Word are applied the words
"My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
me ;" ^ and " Father, if it be possible let this
cup pass from me," * the hunger, the thirst,
and the strengthening by an angel ; His
saying "Now is my soul troubled,"* and
" my soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto


J Matt, xviii. i8.
2 John i. 14.


3 Ps. xxii. 1.
* Matt. xxvi. 39.


6 John xii. 27.


death," and all similar passages belonging
to the manhood of the Christ. Any one
may perceive how these statements corre-
spond with the impiety of Alius and Euno-
mius ; for they, finding themselves unable to
establish the diilerence of substance, connect,
as has been said, the suHei iiigs, and the terms
of humiliation, with tlie Godhead of the
Christ.

And be your reverence well assured that
now in their churches the Arian teachers
preach no other doctrine than that the sup-
porters of the " homousion " at present hold
the same views as Arius, and that, after long
time, the truth has now at last been brought
to light.

We on the contrary abide in the teaching,
and follow in the pious footprints, of the
blessed Fathers assembled at Nicaea, and of
their illustrious successors, Eustathius of
Antioch, Basil of Ctesarea, Gregory, John,
Athanasius, Theophilus, Damasus of Rome,
and Ambrose of Milan. For all these, fol-
lowing the words of the apostles, have left
us an exact rule of orthodoxy, which all we
of the East earnestly desire to preserve im-
moved. The same is the wish of the Bithyn-
ians, the Paphlagonians, of Cappadocia
Secunda, Pisidia, Mysia, Thessaly, and
Rhodope, and very many moi'e of the dif-
ferent provinces. The Italians too, it is
evident, will not endure this new-fangled
doctrine ; for the very godly and holy Marti-
nus," bishop of Milan, has written a letter to
us, and has sent to the very pious emperor a
work by the blessed Ambrose on the incarna-
tion of the Lord, of which the teaching is
opposed to these heretical Chapters.

And be it known to your holiness that
Cyril and Memnon have not been satisfied
with corrupting the orthodox Faith, but have
trampled all the canons under foot. For they
have received into communion men excom-
municated in various provinces and dioceses.
Others lying under charges of heresy, and of
the same mind as Celestius and Pelagius,
(for they are Euchitse, or Enthusiasts"^) and
therefore excommunicated by their diocesans
and metropolitans, they have, in defiance of
all ecclesiastical discipline received into com-
munion, so swelling their following from all
possible quarters, and shewing their eager-
ness to enforce their teaching less by piety
than by violence. For when they had been
stripped bare of piety they devised, in their

1 Matt. xxvi. 3S. 2 Vide note on superscription.

3cf. note on p. 114. Celestius, an Irishman of good fam-
ily, was associated with Pelagius at Rome. Both were con-
demned at Ephesus in 431. The connexion of Pelagius with
the Euchitse may be suggested by the denial of the former of
original sin and the depreciation by the latter of baptism as
producing no results.


344


THEODORET.


extremity, another sort of force, — walls of
flesh, with the idea that by their showers of
bribery tliey might vanquisli the faitli of the
Fathers. But so long as yoin- lioliness puts
forth yom* strength, and you continue to light,
as you arc wont, in defence of true religion,
none of these devices will be of the least
avail. We exhort you therefore, most holy
sir, to l)e\vare of the communion of the un-
scrupulous introducers of this heresy; and to
make kntnvn to all, both far and near,
that these are the points for which the thrice
blessed Damasus deposed the heretics Apol-
linarius, Vitalius, and Timothcus ; and that
the Epistle in which the writer has con-
cealed his heresy and coloured it with a
coating of truth, must not in simplicity be
received. For in the Chapters he has boldly
laid bare his impiety, and dared to anathema-
tize all who disagree with him, while in the
letter he has vilely endeavoured to harm the
simpler readers.

Your holiness must therefore beware of
neglecting this matter, lest when, too late,
you see this heresy confirmed, you grieve in
vain, and sutler affliction at being no longer
able to defend the cause of truth.

We have also sent you a copy of the me-
morial which we have given to the most
pious and Christ-loving emperor, containing
the faith of the holy Fathers at Nictca,
wherein we have rejected the newly-invented
heresies of Cyril, and adjudged them to be
opposed to the orthodox faith.

vSince in accordance witli the orders of the
very pious emperor only eight of us travelled
to Constantinople, we have subjoined the
copy of the order given us by the holy synod,
that you may be acquainted with the prov-
inces contained in it. Your holiness will
learn them from the signatures of the metro-
politans. We salute the brotherhood which
is with you.

CLXXI. T,cttcr of Thcoiiorct to John, bishop
of Aiifioch, after the reconciliation}

God, who goverHS all things in wisdom,
who provides for our unanimity, and cares
for the salvation of Ilis people, has caused us
to be assembled together, and has shewn us
that the views of all of us are in agreement
with one another. We have assembled to-
gether, and read the Egyptian Letter ; " we

1 Tliis Letter nppcars to be that of the Euphratcnsian synod.
(" prohat primiim lure vox o' kou(u, in conventu : deindc
plnralis numcriis itb/i/ttf posit/is." Garneriu'^.)

Cjainciiiis wcnikl (late it (liirin<; the negotiations for reconcil-
iation, wlicii John of Antioc)i visitcil Acacius at Bercra, after
the Orientals had accepted Cyril's formula of faith. Schiil/,e
would rather place it after the negotiations were over.

» Presumably the letter written by Cyril to Acacius, seltini;
forth his own view, and representing that peace niijiht be


have carefully examined its purport, and we
have discovered that its contents arc quite in
accordance witii oiu" own statements, and en-
tirely opposed to the Twelve Chapters,
against which up to the joresent time we have
continued to wage war, as being contrary to
true religion. Their teaching was that God
the Word was carnally made flesh ; that
there was an union of hypostasis, and that
the combination in union was of nature, and
that God the Word was the first-born from
the dead. They forbade all distinction in
the terms used of our I.,ord, and further con-
tained other doctrines at variance with the
seeds sown liy the apostles, and outcome of
heretical tares. 'J'he present script, however,
is beautified by apostolic nobility of origin.
For in it our Lord Jesus Christ is exhibited as
pei'fect God and perfect man ; it shews tv\'o
natures, and the distinction between them ;
an unconfounded union, made not by mixture
and compounding, but in a manner ineflable
and divine, and distinctly preserving the
properties of the natures; the impassibility
and immortality of God the Word ; the pas-
sibility and temporary surrender to death of
the temple, and its resurrection by the power
of the united God ; that the holy Spirit is not
of the Son, nor derives existence from the
Son, but proceeds from the Father, and is
properly stated to be of the Son, as being of
one substance.' Beholding this orthodoxy in
the letter, we have hymned Him who heals
our stammering tongues, and changes our
discordant noises into the harmony of sweet
music. ^

CLXXII. Letter of Theodorctus to Ncstorius?

To the very reverend and religious lord
and very holy Fatlier, Nestorius, the bishop
Theodorctus sends greeting in the Lord,
Your holiness is, I think, well aware that I
take no pleasure in cultivated society, nor in
the interests of this life, nor in reputation,
nor am I attracted by other sees. Had I
learnt this lesson from no other source, the
very .solitude of the city'' over which I am
called to preside would sufhce to teach me
this philosophy. It is not indeed dis-

attaiiied if the Orientals would give up Nestorius. It exists in
Latin. Synod. Mansi, V. S31.

' Vide p. 279. Note.

- The following paragraph, found only in the Vatican MS.,
and described by Schulze as " inept," is omitted. It has no
significance.

•' Of this letter the Greek copies have perished. Three Latin
versions e\-i.st.

(i) In Synod c. 120. Mans. v. S9S.

(ii) In sytiodi qHiiil(e collafione. Man«:. IX. 204.

(iii) A version of Marius Mercator from the Recension of
Garneriiis. 'riic two latter arc both i,'iveii in .Mignc, Theod.
I\'. 48(^1. The translation given follows the former of these
two. 'rho date appears to be iioi long after the receipt by
'I'hiodoret of the Chapters of Cyril.

4 cl. p. J07.


LETTERS.


345


tinguished only tor solitude, but also by very
many disturbances which may check the ac-
tivity even of those who most delight in
them.

Let no one therefore persuade your holi-
ness that I have accepted the Egyptian writ-
ings as orthodox, with my eyes shut, because
I covet any see. For really, to speak the
truth, after" frequently reading and carefully
examining them, I have discovered that they
are free from all heretical taint, and I have
hesitated to put any stress upon them, though
I certainly have no love for their author,
who was the originator of the disturbances
which have agitated the world. For this I
hope to escape punishment in the day of
Judgment, since the just Judge examines
niotives. But to what has been done un-
justly and illegally against your holiness, not
even if one were to cut off both my hands
would I ever assent, God's grace helping me
and supporting my infirmity. This I have
stated in writing to those who require it. I
have sent to your holiness my reply to what
you wrote to me, that you may know that,
by God's grace, no time has changed me like
the centipedes and chameleons who imitate
by their colour the stones and leaves among
which they live. I and all with me salute all
the Brotherhood who are with you in the
Lord.

CLXXIII. Letter to Andreas, Monk of Con-
stantinople}

*' God is faithful who will not suffer you to
be tempted above that ye are able ; but
will with the temptation also make a way
to escape that ye may be able to bear it," *
and convicts falsehood, — although now re-
futed assertion of the falsehood is approved,
— and the power of truth has been shewn.
For, lo, they, who by their impious reason-
ing had confused the natures of our Saviour
Christ, and dared to preach one nature, and
therefore insulted the most holy and venera-
ble Nestorius, high priest of God, their
mouths held, as the prophet says, with bit
and bridle ^ and turned from wrong to right,
have once again learnt the truth, adopting
the statement of him who in the cause of
truth has borne the brunt of the battle. For
instead of one nature they now confess two,
anathematizing all who preach mixture and
confusion. They adore the impassible God-
head of Christ ; they attribute passion to the
flesh ; they distinguish between the terms of
the Gospels, ascribing the lofty and divine


> cF. Epp. CXLIII and CLXXVII. ' Ps. x^::i. 9.

» I Cor. X. 13.


to the Godhead, and the lowly to the man-
hood. Such are the writings now brought
from Egypt.

CLXXIV. To Bimerius, bishop of Nico media}

We wish to acquaint your holiness that on
reading and frequently discussing the letter
brought from Egypt we find it in harmony
with the doctrine of the Church. Of the
twelve Chapters we have proved the con-
trary, and up to the present time we con-
tinue to oppose them. We have therefore
determined, if your holiness has recovered
the churches divinely entrusted to you, that
you ought to communicate with the Egyp-
tians and Constantinopolitans and others who
have fought with them against us, because
they have professed to hold our faith, or I
should rather say the faith of the apostles ;
but not to give your consent to the alleged
condemnation of the very holy and venerable
Nestorius. For we hold it impious and un-
just in the case of charges in which both
appeared as defendants to lavish favour on
the one and shut the door of repentance on
the other. Far more unjust and impious is
it to condemn an innocent man to death.
Your holiness should be assured that you
ought not to communicate with them before
you have recovered your churches. For this
not only I but all the holy bishops of our dis-
trict decreed in the recent Council.

CLXXV. To Alexander of HierapoUs}

1 have already informed your holiness that
if the doctrine of the very holy and venerable
bishop, my lord Nestorius, is condemned, I
will not communicate with those who do so.
If it shall please your holiness to insert this
in the letter which is being sent to Antioch
so be it. Let there then, I beseech you, be
no delay !

CLXXVL Letter to the same Alexander after
he had learnt that John, bishop of Antioch,
had anathematized the doctrine of Nes-
torius^

Be it known to your holiness that when I
read the letter addressed to the emperor I
was much distressed, because I know per-
fectly well that the writer of the letter, being
of the same opinions, has unwisely and

J Himerius was of the "Conciliabulum." and a staunch
Nestorian. LeQuien points out tliat he, as well as Theodoret,
became ultimately reconciled to the victorious party.

2 This according to Marius Mercator is the conclusion of
a letter to Alexander of Ilierapolis. Garnerius hadedited it as
the conclusion of the preceding letter to Himerius. Vide
Mans.V.SSo.

3 This loiter was also edited by Garnerius as addressed to
Himerius but is inscilbtil by Scliul/.i: to Alexander of Hierajj-
olis. It is lo be found coiDplete in Mans. 927.


346


THRODORET.


impiously condemned one who has never
held or tauj^ht anything contrary to sound
doctrine, liut the form of anathema, though
it be more likely than his assent to the con-
demnation, to grieve a reader, nevertheless
has given me some ground of comfort, in
that it is laid down not in wide general
terms, but with some qualification. For
he has not saitl " We anathematize his doc-
trine " but ''whatever he has either said
or held other than is warranted by the doc-
trine of the apostles."

CLXXVII. Letter to Andreas^ bishop of Sa-
mosata}

The illustrious Aristolaus has sent Magis-
terianus from Egypt with a letter of Cyril in
which he anathematizes Arius, Eunomius,
ApoUinarius and all who assert Christ's God-
head to be passible and maintain the confus-
ion and commixture of the two natures.
Hereat we rejoice, altiiough he did withhold
his consent from our statement. He requires
further subscription to the condemnation
which has been passed, and that the doctrine
of the holy l)ishop Nestorius be anathema-
tized. Your holiness well knows that if any
one anathematizes, without distinction, the
doctrine of that most holy and venerable
bishop, it is just the same as though he
seemed to anathematize true religion.

We must then if we are compelled anath-
ematize those who call Christ mere man, or
who divide our one Lord Jesus Christ into
two sons and deny His divinity, etc.

CLXXVIII. Letter to Alexander of Hiera-
polis^

I think that more than all the very holy
and venerable bishop, my lord John, must
have been gratified at my refusing either
to give my consent to the condemnation of
the very holy and venerable bishop Nestorius
or to violate the pledges made at Tarsus,
Chalcedon and Ephesus.'

He remembers also what was frequently
received from us at Antioch after our de-
parture.

Let no one therefore deceive your holiness
into the belief that I should ever do this,

' This letter is to be found complete in Lntin in Mans.
Synod. S40, Siliulze's Index in.scriiiiii}^- it to Andreas tlic
Const;intinopolil;in monk. cf. Kp. CLXII. and note.

^Thecomplete letter is }>;iven in another I^atin version Balu7,.
Synod. LXVl. (jarnerius makes it the conclusion of the letter
to Andrew of oaniosata.

' The order of events is reversed. John and his friends went
from Ephesus to Chalcedon, from Chalcedon via Ancyra to
Tarsus, where he was in his own patriarchate, and held a
council, confirming: Cyril's deposition, and pledjiing its mem-
bers never to abandon Nestorius. Again at Antioch the same
course was repeated.


for God is without doubt on my side and
strengthening me.

CLXXLX. Letter of Cyril to John, bishop of
Antioch, against Theodoret?

CLXXX. Letter of Theodoretus, as some
suppose, to Domnus, bishop of Antioch,
written on the death of Cyril, bishop of
Alexandrian^

At last and with difficulty the villain has
gone. The good and the gentle pass away
all too soon ; the bad prolong their life for
years.

The Giver of all good, methinks, removes
the former l)efore their time from the troubles
of humanity; He frees them like victors
from their contests and transports them to the
better life, that life which, free from death,
sorrow and care, is the prize of them that con-
tend for virtue. They, on the other hand,
who love and practise wickedness are allowed

'Vide Migne LXXVII. 327. Cyril. Ep. Ixiii.

2This letter is inserted in the Act. Synod, (vide Mans. ix.
295) as addressed to John, but Garncrius, with general accept-
ance, has substituted Domnus. Its genuineness was contested
by Baronius (an. vi. 23) not only on the ground of its ascrip-
lion to lohn who predeceased Cyril four years ; but also
because its expressions are at once too Nestorian in doctrine
and too extreme in bitterness to have been penned by Thcod-
oret. Garneriusis of opinion that the extrenie Nestorianisin
and bitterness of feeling arc no arguments against the author,
ship of Theodoret; and, as we have already had occasion
to notice, our author can on occasion use very strong language,
as for instance in Letter CE. p. 324, where he alludes to Cyril
as a shepherd not only plague smitten himself but doing his
best to inflict more damage on his Hock than that caused by
beast of prey, by infecting his charge with his disease.

" It must lie needless to add that Cyril's character is not to
be estimated aright by ascribing any serious -ralue to a coarse
and ferocious invective against his memory, which was (pioted
as Theodoret's in the fifth General Council (Theodor. Ep. iSo;
see Tillemont, xiv. 784). If it were indeed the production of
the pen of Theodoret, the reputation which would sutler from
it would assuredly be his own." Canon Bright. Diet. Christ.
Biog. I.

" The long and bitter controversy in which both parties did
and said many things they must "liave had cause deeply to
regret, was closed by the death of Cyril, Jmie 9, or 27, 444.
With Baronius, ' the cautious' Tillemont, Cardinal Newman
and Dr. IJriglit, we should be glad to ' utterly scout' the idea,
that the ' atrocious letter' on Cyril's death ascribed to Tluod.
oret by the Fifth Qicumenical Council (Theod. ed. Schulze,
Ep. iSo; Labbc, V. 507) which he was said to have delivered
by way of p;tan (Bright u. s. 176) and 'the scarcely less
scandalous ' sermon (ib.) can have been written by him. 'To
treat it as genuine would be to vilify Theodoret.' 'The
Fathers of the Council' writes Dr. Newman ' are no authority
on such a matter' (Hist. Sketches p. 35^). A painful sus-
picion of their genuineness, however, still lingers and troubles
our conception of Theodoret. The documents may have been
garbled, but the general tone too much rescndiles that of im-
disinitcd polemical writings of Theodoret's to allow us entirely
to repudiate them. We wish we could. Neander (vol. iv.
p. 13, note, Clark's tr.) is inclined to accept the genuineness
of the letter, the arguments against which he does not regard
as carrving conviction, and to a large extent deriving their
weight 'from Tilleinont's ' Catholic standpoint.' That Theod-
oret should speak in this manner of Cyril's character and
death cannot, he thinks, appear surprising to those who,
without prejudice, contemplate Cyril and his relations to
Theodoret. The playful description, after the manner of
I>ucian, of a voyage to the Shades below, is not to be
reckoned a very sharp thing even in Theodoret. The advice
to nut a heavy stone over his grave to keep Cyril down is
sufiicient proof^that the whole is a bitter jest. The world felt
freer now Cyril was gone; and he does not shrink from telling
a friend that he could well spare him. 'The exaggeration of
rhetorical polemics requires many grains of allowance.
Canon N'euablcs. Diet. Christ. Uiog. iv.


LETTERS.


347


a little longer to enjoy this present life, either
that sated with evil they may afterwards learn
virtue's lessons, or else even in this life may
pay the penalty for the wickedness of their
own ways by being tossed to and fro through
many years of this life's sad and wicked
waves.

This wretch, however, has not been dis-
missed l)y the ruler of our souls like other
men, that he may possess for longer time the
things which seem to be full of joy. Know^-
ing that the fellow's malice has been daily
growing and doing harm to the body of the
Church, the Lord has lopped him off like a
plague and " taken away the reproach from
Israel." ' His survivors are indeed delighted
at his departure. The dead, maybe, are
sorry. There is some ground of alarm lest
they should be so much annoyed at his com-
pany as to send him back to us, or that he
should run away from his conductors like the
tyrant of Cyniscus in Lucian."

Great care must then be taken, and it is es-
pecially your holiness's business to undertake
this duty, to tell the guild of undertakers to
lay a very big and heavy stone upon his
grave, for fear he should come back again,
and show his changeable mind once more.
Let him take his new doctrines to the shades
below, and preach to them all day and all
night. We are not at all afraid of his divid-
ing them by making public addresses against
true religion and by investing an immortal
nature with death. He will be stoned not
only by ghosts learned in divine law, but also
by Nimrod, Pharaoh and Sennacherib, or any
other of God's enemies.

But I am wasting words. The poor fellow
is silent whether he will or no, " his breath
goeth forth, he returneth to his earth, in that
very day his thoughts perish." ^ He is
doomed too to silence of another kind. His
deeds, detected, tie his tongue, gag his
mouth, curb his passion, strike him dumb
and make him bow down to the ground.

1 really am sorry for the poor fellow.
Truly the news of his death has not caused
me unmixed delight, but it is tempered by
sadness. On seeing the Church freed from
a plague of this kind I am glad and rejoice ;
but I am sorry and do mourn when I think
that the wretch knew no rest from his
crimes, but went on attempting greater and

1 1. Sam. xvii. 26.

2 Lucian. " Cataplus sive Tyrannus."

Cyniscus ami Megapenthes come to the shore of Styx in the
same batch of ghosts.

Megapenthes be^s hard of Clotho to let him go back again,
but Cyniscus the philosopher, who professes great delight at
having died at last, refuses to get into the boat. "No; by
Zeus, not till we have bound this fellow here, and set him on
board, for I am afraid tie will get over you by his entreaties."

» Ps, cxlvi, 4.


more grievous ones till he died. His idea
was, so it is said, to throw the imperial city
into confusion by attacking true doctrines a
second time, and to charge your holiness
with supporting them. But God saw and did
not overlook it. " He put his hook into his
nose and his bridle into his lij^s," ' and turned
him to the earth whence he was taken. Be it
then granted to your holiness's prayers that
he may obtain mercy and pity and that
God's boundless clemency may surpass his
wickedness. I beg your holiness to drive
away the agitations of my soul. Many dif-
ferent reports are being bruited abroad to
my alarm announcing general misfortunes.
It is even said by some that your reverence
is setting out against your will for the court,
but so far I have despised these reports
as untrue. But finding every one repeating
one and the same story I have thought it
right to try and learn the truth from your
holiness that I may laugh at these tales if
false, or sorrow not without reason if they
are true.

CLXXXI. Letter to Abundlus, bishop of

To my dear lord and very holy brother
Abundius Theodoretus sends greeting in the
Lord. I have discovered that your pietv
religiously preserves the true and a]:)ostolic
faith ; and I have thanked Almighty God
that the truth which was in peril has been re-
newed and brought to light by your holiness.

Of old, after the flood, it came to pass
that Noah and his sons were left for seed of
the human race. Just so in our own day are
reserved the ftithers of the West, that by
them the holy churches of the East may be
able to preserve that true religion which has
been threatened with devastation and destruc-
tion by a new and impious heresy. Well
may we quote those words of the prophet
" Except the Lord of hosts had left unto us
a very small remnant we should have been
as Sodom and we should have been like
unto Gomorrah. "^ So upon us from
this impious heresy the wrath of God has
fallen like a flood and invasion.

Now we acknowledge the presence of our

1 Isaiah xxxvii. 29.

2 This letter may be dated from Niccrtc in the autumn of
4C0 when Abundius was at Constantinople on a mission from
Leo, after the failure to get Thoodosius to agree to the sum-
mary of the Council in the AVest. Theodosius died a few
days after the arrival of the envoys at Constantinople.
Theodoret is anxious to encourage the Ronuin Legates to
support the orthodox cause in the Imperial city, to repair the
mischief caused bv the Latrocinium, and to show the court
that he and his friends [has and Aquilinus had the support of
Leo. Abundius, fourth bishop of Como (450-469) represented
Leo at Chalcedon. Manzoni, in the Promessi Sposi, reminds
us of llie local survival of the name.

8 Isaiah i. 9.


348


THEODORET.


Saviour in a human body, and one Son of
God, His perfect Godlicad and His perfect
manhood. We do not divide our one Lord
Jesus Christ into two sons for He is one ;
but we recognise the distinction between
God and man ; we know that one is of the
Father, the other of tlie seed of David and
Abraham, according to the divine Scriptures,
and that the divine nature is free from pas-
sion, the body which was before subject to
passion being now itself too free from pas-
sion ; for after the resurrection it is plainly
delivered from all passion.

This we have learnt from the letter of the
very holy and religious Archbishop our lord
Leo. For we have read what he wrote to
Flavianus, of holy and blessed memory, and
have thanked the loving-kindness of the
Lord because we have found an advocate and
defender of the truth. To this letter I have
given my adhesion, and have subjoined a
copy of it to my present epistle, which I
have also subscribed and have thereby proved
that I obey the apostolic rules, that is true
doctrines ; that I abide in them to this day,
and am suffering in their cause.


Assent has also been given by my lord Ibas
and my lord Aquilinus against wliom the
inventors of the new heresy have armed the
imperial power.

It remains for you with your very holy
colleagues to bring aid to the sacred Church,
and to drive away the war that threatens it.
Banish the impious party which has l^een
roused against the truth ; give back the
churches their ancient peace ; so will you
receive fi'om the Lord, Who has promised to
grant this boon, the fruits of your apostolic
labours.

All the very religious and godly presbyters
and reverend deacons and brethren by your
holiness I greet ; and I and all who are with
me salute your reverence.'

1 After all the storms of controversy and quarrel which we
have followed in the course of the dialogues and letters of the
Blessed Bishop of Cyrus; after the lurid leap of qriiii pleiisnn-
try which, if not actually penned by Theodorct, indicates a tem-
per that must have often shewn itself in these troubled times;
there is something pathetic and encouraging in the concilatory
conclusion of this last letter. Cyril has been dead for years,
and his weaknesses are forgotten in a confession which his
more moderate opponents could accept. The subscription of
Theodoret to the tome of Leo is an earnest of harmony and
concord. The calmer wisdom of the West asserts the truth
which underlay the furious disputes of the subtler East. The
last word of the drama is Peace.


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.

LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN.

Translated, with Introduction and Notes, by
ERNEST GUSHING RICHARDSON, Ph.D.,

LIBRARIAN OF PRINCETON COLLEGE.


CONTENTS.


PAGE

I. Introduction 353

1. Time and place of composition and character of the work 353

( 1 ) The work of Jerome .... 3 153

(2) The work of Gennadius 353

2. Literature , 354

(i) Literature on Jerome and Gennadius 3154

(2) Literature on the authors mentioned by Jerome and Gennadius. 354

3. Manuscripts 354

4. Editions 354

5. Translations 355

6. The Present Translation 356

(i) Text 356

(2) The translation itself 357

II, Jerome. Lives of Illustrious Men * 359

III. Gennadius. Lives of Illustrious Men 385

IV. Index 5S2


JEROME AND GENNADIUS,

LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN.


I. INTRODUCTION.

This combined work of Jerome and Gennadius is unique and indispensable in the his-
tory of early Christian literature, giving as it does a chronological history in biographies of
ecclesiastical literatui'e to about the end of the fifth century.

For the period after the end of Eusebius' Church History it is of prime value,

I. Time and Place of Composition, and Character.

1. The work of Jerome was written at Bethlehem in 492. It contains 135 writers from
Peter up to that date. In his preface Jerome limits the scope of his work to those who
have written on Holy Scriptures, but in carrying out his plans he includes all who have
written on theological topics ; whether Orthodox or Heretic, Greek, Latin, Syriac, and
even Jews and Heathen (Josephus, Philo, Seneca). The Syriac writers mentioned are
however few. Gennadius apologizes for the scanty representation which they have in
Jerome on the ground that the latter did not understand Syriac, and only knew of such as
had been translated.

The motive of the work was, as the preface declares, to show the heretics how many
and how excellent writers there were among the Christians. The direct occasion of the
undertaking was the urgency of his friend Dexter, and his models were, first of all Sueto-
nius, and then various Greek and Latin biographical works including the Brutus of
Cicero.

Jerome expressly states in his preface that he had no predecessor in his work, but very
properly acknowledges his indebtedness to the Church History of Eusebius, from whom
he takes much verbatim. The first part of the work is taken almost entirely from
Eusebius.

The whole work gives evidence of hasty construction (e.g., in failure to enumerate the
works of well-known writers or in giving only selections from the list of their writings)
but too much has been made of this, for in such work absolute exhaustiveness is all but
impossible, and in the circumstances of those days, such a list of writers and their works
is really remarkable. He apologizes in the preface for omitting such as are not known to
him in his " out of the way corner of the earth." He has been accused of too great cre-
dulity, in accepting e.g., the letters of Paul to Seneca as genuine, but on the other hand
he often shows himself both cautious (Hilary, Song of S.) and critical (Minutius Felix
£>e Fato^.

The work was composed with a practical purpose rather than a scientific one and kept
in general well within that purpose — giving brief information about writers not generally
known. This is perhaps why in writing of the better known writers like Cyprian he does
not enumerate their works.

2. The work of Geiinadius was written about 4S0 according to some, or 493 to 495
according to others. Ebert with the Benedictins and others before him, makes an almost
conclusive argument in favor of the earlier date on the ground that Gennadius speaks of

VOL. III. A a


354 JEROME AND GENNADIUS.

Timotheus Aelurus who died in 477 as still living. This compels the rejection of the par-
agraph on Gennadius himself as by a later hand, but this should probably be done at any
rate, on other grounds. The mss. suggest that Gennadius ended with John of Antioch,
although an hypothesis of three editions before the year 500, of which perhaps two were
by Gennadius, has grounds. The bulk of the work at least was composed about 480
(probably cliaptcrs 1-90) and the remainder added perhaps within a few years by Genna-
dius or more probably two other hands.

Gennadius' style is as bare and more irregular than Jerome's but he more frequently
expresses a critical judgment and gives more interesting glimpses of his own — the semi-
Pelagian — point of view. The work appears more original tlian Jerome's and as a
whole hardly less valuable, though the period he covers is so much shorter.

2. Literature.

1. The llfej-afHi-e on ye^-ome is immense. The oftenest quoted general works are
Zockler, Hierony7mis. Gotha, 1S65 and Thierry, St. ycj-ome Par. 1867. On Jerome in
general the article by Freemantle in Smith and Wace Did. of Christian Biography is
the first for the English reader to turn to. Ceillier and other patrologies, while sufficiently
full for their purpose, give very little special treatment to this work, Ebert ( Gesch. chr.-
Lat.-Lit. Lpz. 1874) being a partial exception to this statement. The best literary
sources arc the prolegomena and notes to the various editions of the woi'k itself. Much
tlie same may be said of Gennadius though the relative importance of his catalogue among
his writings gives that a larger proportionate attention. In English the article by Cazenove
in Smith and Wace and in French the account in the Histoire litteraire de la France are
the best generally accessible references.

2. Literature on the -writers mentioned by Jerome a7id Gennadius. Any one who
cares to follow up in English the study of any of the writers mentioned in the Liv^es of
illustrious men will find tools therefor: i. For the earlier writers to the time of Eusebius,
Eusebius Church History tr. M'Giflert (N. Y. Chr. Lit. Co.) notes. 2. For the whole
period : Smith and Wace Diet, of Christian Biography, 4 vols, and more accessible to
most (though a cheap reprint of Smith and Wace is now threatened) SchaiT. Church Ilist.
(N. Y. Scribners) where at the end of each volume an account is given of the chief writers
of the period including admirable bibliographical reference.

Of course the best source is the works themselves : The Ante-Nicene Fathers^ ed. Coxe,
The Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers ed. Schaft' and Wace. (N. Y. Christian Literature
Co.) For further research the student is referred to the list of Patrologies and Bibliog-
raphies in the supplementary volume of the Ante-Niccne Fathers, to the liibliography of
Ante-Nicene FathcMs in the same volume, to Clicvalier. Diet, des sources hist, and the
memoranda by Sittl, in the Jahresbcrichte \\. d. fortschr. d. class. Alterthwiss. 1887 sq.

3. Manuscripts.

The manuscripts of Jerome and Gennadius are numerous. The translator has seen
84 mss. of Jerome and 57 of Gennadius and has certain memoranda of at least 35 more
and hints of still another score. It is certainly within bounds to say that there are more
than 150 mss. of Jerome extant and not less than 100 of Gennadius.

The oldest of those examined (and all the oldest of which he could learn were seen)
are at Rome, Verona, Vercelli, Montpellier, Paris, Munich and Vienna.

4. Editions.

The editions of Jerome are relatively as numerous as the mss. The Illustrious ?nen
is included in almost all the editions of his collected works, in his collected " minor writ-


INTRODUCTION. 355


ings" and in many of the editions of his epistles (most of the editions in fact from 146S to
about 1530.)

It is several times printed separately or with Gennadius or other catalogues. The
editions of Gennadius are less numerous but he is often united with Jerome in the
editions of Jerome's collected works, and generally in the separate editions.

The following list of editions is printed as illustrative. It does not pretend to be com-
plete, but is simply a list of such as have been personally examined by the translator up to
date ; s. 1. et a (6) -}- 390 ff, 62, 11. ; s. 1. et a (1468?) 323ff, 2 col. 50 11. ; Rome 1468.
P. de Max; (Compluti?) 1470; Rome 1470; Mogunt 1470; s. 1. et a. (Augsb. Zainer
1470); s. Let a. 1470,4° 23 11: s. a. "JA. RV" 1471 ? ; Rome 1479; Parma 1480;
Ven. 1488; Basil 1489; Ven. 1490; Basil 1492 Norimb. 1495; s. 1. 1496?; Basil 1497;
Lyons, 1508; Paris 1512; Lyons 1513; Lyons 1518 Basil 1525 Lyons 1526 (Erasmus) ;
Basil 1526 (Erasm) Basil 1529 Lyons 1530 Paris 1534; Frankfort 1549; Bas. 1553; Bas.
1565; Rome 1565- ; Rome 1576 Colon 1580; Paris 1609; Helmst 1611-12 Cologne
1616; Frf. [1622]; Antw. 1639 Frf. 1684; Paris 1706 (Martianay tSi Pouget) ; Helmst.
1700; Hamb. 1718; Veron. 1734-42 (Vallarsi) ; repr. 1766-72; Florence 1791 ; Paris
1S65 (Migne) ; Lpz. 1879 (Herding) Turin 1875, 1877, 1S85 (Jerome only) .

Andreas, Erasmus, Victorinus, Graevius, Martianay, Miraeus, Fabricius, Cyprian are
among the earlier editors but Erasmus is facile frinceps in popularity of reprint. The
edition of Vallarsi in 1734-42 was a decided advance toward a critical text. Various
editors before him had made use of various mss. especially the " Corbeiensis " or " San-
germanensis " but secondarily mss. at Wulfenbiittel, Munich, the Bodleian, Niirnberg,
" Sigbergensis," " Gemblacensis," " Marcianus" and others. Vallarsi founded his edition
largely on a Verona ms. (still there) on the " Corbeiensis" so much used and praised before
(now Paris Lat. 12161) " St Crucis" one at Lucca of the 9th century and more or less
on mss. employed by previous editors. This edition has remained the standard and is
the one adopted for the Migne edition.

The most recent edition which pretends to a critical character is that of Herding (Lpz.
1879). The editions by Tamietti are simply school editions of Jerome only, and make no
pretensions to a critical text. The edition of Herding is founded on a transcript of Vat.
Reg. 2077,7th century; Bamberg 677, nth century; Bern, 11 cent, and a much
mutilated Niirnberg ms. of the 14th century. But it appears that the transcript of Vaticanus
only covered the Jerome and a few scanty readings from Gennadius and the same is true
of the collation made for this editor later from the Paris ms. (Corbeiensis).

Sittl, (Jahresber; u. class. Alterthumsw. 1888. 2 p. 243) says that the edition "with-
out the preface which contains a collation of Codex Corbeiensis would be woilhless."
This is a little strong, for the readings he gives from Vaticanus have a decided value in
default of other sources for its readings and his strict following of this often produces a
correct reading against Vallarsi who was naturally inclined to follow Veronensis and
Corbeiensis both of which were probably a good deal manipulated after they left the hand
of Gennadius. The collation of Corbeiensis besides excluding Gennadius is not over exact
and some of the most effaced pages seem to have been given up entirely by the collator.

5. Translations.

An early translation of Jerome's work into Greek was made by Sophronius and used
by Photius. A translation purporting to be his is given by Erasmus. There has been a
o-ood deal of conti'oversy over this, some even accusing Erasmus of having forged it entire.
It is an open question with a general tendency to give Erasmus the benefit of the doubt.
The present translator while holding his judgment ready to be corrected by the finding of
a ms, or other evidence, inclines to reject in toto, regarding it as for the most part trans-

A a 2


356 JEROME AND GENNADIUS.

lated by Erasmus from some South German or Swiss ms., or, if that be not certain, at least
that the translation is too little established to be of any use for textual purposes. There is a
modern translation of select works of Jerome in French by Matougucs. The chief sources
for comparison used by the translator liiivc been Sophronius (or Erasmus) Matougucs,
M'Giflert's Eusebius for the first part of Jerome where he takes so liberally from Eusebius,
and scattered selections here and there in Ceillier, Smith and Wace, Diet, and other liter-
ary-historical works.

6. The Present Translation.

1. Text. It was proposed at first to make the translation from the text of Herding.
This, and all editions, gave so little basis for scientific certainty in regard to various
readings that a cursory examination of mss. was made. At the suggestion of Professor
O. von Gebhardt of Berlin the examination was made as thorough and systematic as possible
with definite reference to a new edition. The translator hoped to finish and publish the
new text before the translation was needed for this series, but classification of the mss.
proved unexpectedly intricate and the question of the Greek translation so difficult that
publication has been delayed. The material has however been gathered, analyzed, sifted
and arranged sufiiciently to give reasonable certainty as to the body of the work and a toler-
ably reliable judgment on most of the important variations.

While anxious not to claim too much for his material and unwilling to give a final
expression of judgment on disputed readings, until his table of mss. is perfected, he vent-
ures to think that for substantial purposes of translation, if not for the nicer ones of a new
text, the material and method which he has made use of will be substantially con-
clusive.

The following translation has been made first from the text of Herding and then
corrected from the manuscripts in all places where the evidence was clearly against the
edition. In places where the evidence is fairly conclusive the change has been made and
a brief statement of evidence given in the notes. When the evidence is really doubtful
the reading has been allowed to stand with evidence generally given.

The materials of evidence used are i. eight mss. collated entire by the translator A.
Parisinus (Corbeiensis or Sangermanensis, 7 cent.) T. Vaticanus Reg., 7 cent. ; 25 Vero-
nensis, 8 cent. ; 30 Vercellcnsis 8 cent. ; 31 Monspessalanensis, 8 or 9 cent. ; a Monacen-
sis 8 cent. ; e Vindobonensis 8 or 9 ; H. Parisinus 10 or 9.

2. Occasional support from readings gathered by him from other mss., chiefly 10
Cassenatensis 9 cent. ; 21 Florentinus, 11 cent.; 32 Toletanus 13 cent. ; 40 Guelferbyrti-
nus, 10? cent.

3. Readings from mss. mentioned by other editors.

4. The various editions, but mainly confined to Vallarsi and Herding in Jerome,
Fabrlcius and Herding in Gennadius.

The translator has examined nearly 90 mss. and secured more or less readings from
nearly all with reference to an exact table. The readings of several are extensive enough to
have pretty nearly the value of full collations. Quotations are occasionally made from these
(e.g. from 10, 21, 29, 32, 40, etc.) but practically quotations from the eight mentioned
mss. cover the evidence and without a table more would rather obscure than otherwise.

There is no opportunity here to discuss the relative value of these used. It maybe said
however that they are the oldest mss., and include pretty much all the oldest. Though age
itself is by no means conclusive, the fact that they certainly represent several independent
groups makes it safe to say that a consensus of seven against one or even six against any
two (with certain reservations) or in the case of Gennadius of ^ against 2 is conclusive for
a reading. As a matter of fact against many readings of Herding and even oi Vallarsi,


INTRODUCTION.


o:)/


are arranged all these mss., and against some nearly all or even every ms. seen, e.g. Her.
p. 73 d. 13 reads morti dari with Migne-Fabricius but all these mss. have mutandam and so
91. 22 "seven" for "eight." On p. 161. 7. Her. omits. Asyncritus against mss. and all
modern eds., so 44. 3. " Ponti," 51. 7 " ut quidem putant;" 77. 25. " firmare " and a
score of other places.

Of course this is not enough evidence or discussion for a critical scholastic text but for
the practical illustrative purpose in hand will sei-ve. Any evidence which does not give a
well digested genealogy of mss. and the evidence for their classification must be reckoned as
incomplete, — all that the above evidence can claim to do, is to give the translator's judgment
respecting the readings and illustrative evidence, but it is not probable that the com-
pleted table will alter many (if any) of these readings which are given in view of a tenta-
tive table which will likely prove final.

2. TJie Tra7islation itself. The plan of this work includes (a) a translation, in which
the translator has tried to give a fair representation of the text in a not too ragged form but
has failed to improve on the original. The works were written as science rather than litera-
ture and have many facts but no style. The translator has therefore aimed rather at repre-
senting these facts than at producing a piece of polite literature. (b) Notes are subjoined
including, first the brief biographical data which every one wants first to orient himself
by, secondly textual notes, and thirdly, occasional explanatory notes.


11. JEROME.

LIVES OF ILLUSTRIOUS MEN.


PREFACE.


You have urged me, Dexter,' to follow the example of Tranquillus " in giving a syste-
matic account of ecclesiastical writers, and to do for our writers what he did for the illus-
trious men of letters among the Gentiles, namely, to briefly set before you all those who
have published^ any memorable writing on the Holy Scriptures, from the time of our
Lord's passion until the fourteenth year of the Emperor Theodosius/ A similar work has
been done by Hermippus* the peripatetic, Antigonus Carystius," the learned Satyrus,' and
most learned of all, Aristoxenus the Musician,** among the Greeks, and among the Latins
by Varro,^ Santra,'" Nepos," Hyginus,'" and by him through whose example you seek to
stimulate '^ us, — Tranquillus.

But their situation and mine is not the same, for they, opening the old histories and
chronicles could as if gathering from some great meadow, weave some '■* small crown at
least for their work. As for me, what shall I do, who, having no predecessor, have, as
the saying is, the worst possible master, namely myself, and yet I must acknowledge that
Eusebius Pamphilus in the ten books of his Church History has been of the utmost assist-
ance, and the works of various among those of whom we are to write, often testify to the
dates of their authors. >^ And so I pray the Lord Jesus, '^ that what your Cicero, who stood
at the summit of Roman eloquence, did not scorn to do, compiling in his Brutus^ a cata-
logue of Latin orators, this I too may accomplish in the enumeration of ecclesiastical
writers, and accomplish in a fashion worthy of the exhortation which you made. But if,
perchance any of those who are yet writing have been overlooked by me in this volume,
they ought to ascribe it to themselves, rather than to me, for among those whom I have not
read, I could not, in the first place, know those who concealed their own writings, and, in
the second place, what is perhaps well known to others, would be quite unknown to me in
this out of the way corner of the earth. '^ But surely when they are distinguished by their
writings, they will not very greatly grieve over any loss in our non-mention of them. Let
Celsus, Porphyry, and Julian learn, rabid as they are against Christ, let their followers,
they who think the church has had no philosophers or orators or men of learning, learn
how many and what sort of men founded, built and adorned it, and cease to accuse our
faith of such rustic simplicity, and recognize rather their own ignorance.

In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, farewell."

1 Dexter. Compare chapters 133 and 106.

- Tranquillus. C. Suetonius Tranquillus (about A. D. 100). De illustribus grammatlcls ; De darts rheloribus.
^ Picblished or lianded down " Prodidertint." Some mss. read " tradiderunt" and Jerome usually employs ^' Edo"
for publish.

^ Fourteenth year of the Emperor Tlieodosius. A. 0.492.

6 Hermippiis of Smyrna. (3rd century B. C.) Lives of distinguished men.

'•Antigonus. Antigonus of Carystus (Reign of Ptolemy Philadelphus?).

' Satyrus. A Peripatetic (Reign of Ptolemy Philopator) "wrote a collection of biographies."

8 Aristoxenus the musician. A Peripatetic, pupil of Aristotle, wrote lives of various Philosophers.

9 Varro. M. Terentius Varro the " most learned of the Romans " (died B. C. 28) published among other things a series of
"portraits of seven hundred remarkable personages" (Ramsay in Smith's Dictionary).

"^^ Santra. Santra the Grammarian?

n Nepos. Cornelius Nepos friend of Cicero wrote Lives of Illtistrious men.

^- Hygitius. Caius Julius Hyginus, freedman of Augustus and friend of Ovid.

13 Seek to stimulate 30 31 a [H e 21 ] and the mass of mss. also Fabricius ; stimulate. A. T. Migne. Her.

1* Some A H 25 31 e 21. Fabricius; No T a? Migne Her.

15 The Lord yes us A H T 25 31 e; The Lord yesus Christ a; Our Lord Jesus Christ Bamb. Bern; My Lord "jfesus
Christ Norimb.

16 Out of the way corner of the earth i.e., Bethlehem.

^"f Zn the name of the Lord yesus Christ farewell T 2^ ^1 aai; do. omitting Christ A.; omitallHe.


x6o


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


I.

2.

3-

4-

5-
6.

7-
8.

9-

lO.

1 1.

13.

14.

15-
16.

17-
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23-
34.

25-
26.

27.

38.

39.
30.
31-


34-
35-
36.
37-
3S.

39-
40.

41.

43.

43-
44.

45-
46.

47-
48.

49.

50-
51-
52.
53-
54-
55-
56.

57-
58.


LIST OF WRITERS.

Simon Peter.

James, the brother of our Lord.
Matthew, surnamed Levi.
Jiulc, the brother of James.
Paul, formerly called Saul.
Barnabas, surnamed Joseph.
Luke, the evangelist.
Mark, the evangelist.
John, the apostle and evangelist.
Ilermas.
Philo Judaius.
Lucius Annieus Seneca.
Josephus, son of Matthias.
Justus of Tiberias.
Clemens the bishop.
Ignatius the bishop.
Polycarp the bishoi^.
Papias the bishop.
Qiiadratus the bishop.
Aristides the philosopher,
Agrippa Castor.
Hegesippus the historian.
Justin the philosopher.
Melito the bishop.
Theophilus the bishop.
Apollinaris the bishop.
Dionysius the bishop.
Pinytus the bishop.
Tatian the heresiarch.
Phillip the bishop.
Musanus.
Modestus.

Bardesancs the heresiarch.
Victor the bishop.
Iranicus the bishop.
Pantrcnus the philosopher.
Rhodo, the disciple of Tatian.
Clemens the presbyter.
Miltiadcs.
Apollonius.
Serapion the bishop.
Apollonius the senator.
Tlieophilus another bishop.
Baccylus the bishop.
Polycrates the bishop.
Ileraclitus.
Maxim us.
Candidus.
Appion.
Sextus.
Arab i anus.
Judas.

TertuUian the presbyter.
Origcn, surnamed Adamantius.
Ammonius.
Ambrose the deacon.
Trypho the pupil of Origen.
Minucius Felix.


59-
60.

61.

62.

63-

64.

65.

66.
67.
68.
69.
70.

71-

73.

73.

74-

75-
76.

77-
78.

79-
80.

Si.
82.

83.
84.

85.
86.

S7-
88.

89.

90.

91.

93.

93-

94.

95-
96.

97-
98.

99.

100.

lOI.

102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
loS.
109.
110.
III.

113.

113-
114.

115.

116.


Gains.

Berillus the bishop.

Hippolytus the bishop.

Alexander the bishop.

Julius the African.

Gemimus the presbyter.

Theodorus, surnamed Gregory the

bishop.
Cornelius the bishop.
Cyprian the bishop.
Pontius the deacon.
Dionysius the bishop.
Novatianus the heresiarch.
Malchion the presbyter.
Archelaus the bishop.
Anatolius the bishop.
Victorinus the bishop.
Pamphilus the presbyter.
Pierius the presbyter.
Lucianus the presbyter.
Phileas the bishop.
Arnobius the rhetorician.
Firmianus the rhetorician, surnamed

Lactantius.
Eusebius the bishop.
Reticius the bishop.
Methodius the bishop.
Juvencus the presbyter.
Eustathius the bishop.
Marcellus the bishop.
Athanasius the bishop.
Antonius the monk.
Basilius the bishop.
Theodorus the bishop.
Eusebius another bishop.
Triphylius the bishop.
Donatus the heresiarch.
Asterius the philosopher.
Lucifer the bishop.
Eusebius another bishop.
Fortunatianus the bishop.
Acacius the bishop.
Serapion the bishop.
Hilary the bishop.
Victorinus the rhetorician.
Titus the bishop.
Damasus the bishop.
Apollinarius the liishop.
Gregory the bishop.
Pacianus the bishop.
Photinus the heresiarch.
Phocbadius the bishop.
Didymus the Blind.
Optatus the bishop.
Acilius Sevcrus the senator.
Cyril the bishop.
Euzoius the bishop.
Epiphanius the bishop.
Ephreni the deacon.
Basil another bisliop.


JEROME.


361


117. Gregory another bishop.

118. Lucius the bishop.

119. Diodorus the bishop.

130. Eunomius the heresiarch.

131. Priscillianus the bishop.

133. Latronianus.
123. Tiberianus.

134. Ambrose the bishop.
125. Evagrius the bishop.

136. Ambrose the disciple of Didymus.

137. Maximus, first philosopher, then

bishop.

135. Another Gregory, also a bishop.
139. John the presbyter.

130. Gelasius the bishop.

131. Theotimus the bishop.

133. Dexter, son of Pacianus, now prae-
toi-ian pi-efect.

133. Amphilochius the bishop.

134. Sophronius.

135. Jerome the presbyter.

CHAPTER I.

Simon Peter ' the son of John, from the
village of Bethsaida in the province of Gali-
lee, brother of Andrew the apostle, and him-
self chief of the apostles, after having been
bishop of the church of Antioch and having
preached to the Dispersion^ — the believers in
circumcision,^ in Pontus, Galatia, Cappa-
docia, Asia and Bithynia — pushed on to
Rome in the second year of Claudius to over-
throw Simon Magus,* and held the sacerdo-
tal 'chair there for twQnty-five years until the
last, that is the fourteenth, year of Nero.
At his hands he received the crown of mar-
tyrdom being nailed to the cross with his
head towards the ground and his feet raised
on high, asserting that he was unworthy to
be crucified in the same manner as his Lord.
He wrote two epistles which are called
Catholic, the second of which, on account of
its difference from the first in style, is con-
sidered by many not to be by him. Then
too the Gospel accoi'ding to Mark, who was
his disciple and interpreter, is ascribed to
him. On the other hand, the books, of
which one is entitled his Acts, another his
Gospel, a third his Preaching, a fourth his
Revelation, a fifth his " Judgment" are re-
jected as apocryphal.*


1 Died 65-6 or 67.

- Dispersion. The technical " Dispersion " — the Jews out
ofjudea. Cf. Peter I. I. See Westcott in Smith's Diet, of
Bible.

3 Circumcision a paraphrase for " Hebrews " in Eueebius
and Rufinus.

< Simon Magus. That Peter met Simon Ma^us in Rome is
a post-apostolic legend. Compare the Clementine literature.

•'' Apocryphal . For literature on apocryphal works see
Ante-Nic. Fath. ed. Coxe (N. Y. Chr. Lit. Co.,) vol. 9 pp. 95 |
sq. The Acts, Gospel, Preaching and Revelation are men-
tioned by Eusebius. The jfudgment was added by Jerome.


Buried at Rome in the Vatican near the
triumphal way he is venerated by the whole
world.'

CHAPTER 11.

James,' who is called the brother of tlie
Lord,^ surnamed the Just, the son of Joseph
by another wife, as some think, but, as ap-
pears to me, the son of Mary sister of the
mother of our Lord of whom John makes
mention in his book,* after our Lord's pas-
sion at once ordained by the apostles bishop
of Jerusalem, wrote a single epistle, which
is reckoned among the seven Catholic
Epistles and even this is claimed by some to
have been published by some one else under
his name, and gradually, as time went on,
to have gained authority-. Hegesippus who
lived near the apostolic age, in the fifth book
of his Commentaries, writing of James, says
" After the apostles, James the brother of
the Lord surnamed the Just was made head
of the Church at Jerusalem. Many indeed
are called James. This one was holy from
his mother's womb. He drank neither wine
nor strong drink, ate no flesh, never shaved
or anointed himself with ointment or
bathed. He alone had the privilege of enter-
ing the Holy of Holies, since indeed he did
not use woolen vestments but linen and went
alone into the temple and prayed in behalf of
the people, insomuch that his knees were
reputed to have acquired the hardness of
camels' knees." He says also many other
things, too numerous to mention. Josephus
also in the 20th book of his Antiquities, and
Clement in the 7th of his Outlines mention
that on the death of Festus who reigned over
Judea, Albinus was sent by Nero as his suc-
cessor. Before he had reached his province,
Ananias the high priest, the youthful son of
Ananus of the priestly class taking advan-
tage of the state of anarchv, assembled a
council and publicly tried to force James to
deny that Christ is the son of God. When
he refused Ananius ordered him to be
stoned. Cast down from a pinnacle of the
temple, his legs broken, but still half alive,

This last has been much discussed of late in connection with
the recently discovered Teaching of the Tvjclve. The identifi-
cation of the Teaching with the Judgment is credited to Dr.
von Gebhardt (Salmon in Smith and Wace Diet. v. 4 (18S7)
pp. 810-11). The recent literature of it is immense. Compare
Schaff, Oldest Church Manual, and literature in Ante-Nic.
Fath. vol. 9 pp. S3-S6.

1 The textual variations on the chapter are numerous
enough but none of them are sustained by the better mss. e.g.
" First Simon Peter" " Simon Peter the Apostle " " Peter
the Apostle " . . . " Called canonical " . . . " are
considered apocryphal " . . . " the whole city."

2 Died 62 or 63 (according to Josephus and Jerome) or 6q
(Hegesippus).

3 Brother of the Lord. Gal. I. 19.
* in his book Joh. 19, 25.


362


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


raising his hands to heaven he said, " Lord
forgive them for they know not what they
do." Then struck on tiie head by the club
of a fuller such a club as fullers are accus-
tomed to wring out garments ' with — he
died. This same Josephus records the tra-
dition that this James was of so great sanc-
tity and reputation among the people that the
downfall of Jerusalem was believed to be on
account of his death. He it is of whom the
apostle Paul writes to the Galatians that " No
one else of the apostles did I see except
James the brother of the Lord," and shortly
after the event the Acts of the apostles bear
witness to the matter. The Gospel also
which is called the Gospel according to the
Hebrews,'* and which I have recently trans-
lated into Greek and Latin and which also
Origen ^ often makes use of, after the ac-
count of the resurrection of the Saviour
says, "but the Lord, after he had given his
grave clothes to the servant of the priest, ap-
peared to James (for James had sworn that
he would not eat bread from that hour in
which he drank the cup of the Lord until he
should see him rising again from among
those that sleep) " and again, a little later, it
says " ' Bring a table and bread,' said the
Lord." And immediately it is added, " He
brou<jht bread and blessed and brake and
gave to James the Just and said to him, ' my
brother eat thy bread, for the son of man is
risen from among those that sleejD.'" And
so he ruled the church of Jerusalem thirty
years, that is until the seventh year of Nero,
and was buried near the temple from which
he had been cast down. His tombstone with
its inscri])tion was well known until the
siege of Titus and the end of Hadrian's reign.
Some of our writers think he was buried in
Mount Olivet, but they are mistaken.

CHAPTER HL

Matthew,'' also called Levi, apostle and
aforetimes publican, composed a gospel of
Christ atlirst published in Judea in Hebrew ''
for the sake of tliose of the circumcision
who believed, but this was afterwards trans-
lated into Greek though by what author is
uncertain. The Hebrew itself has been
preserved imtil the present day in the library
at Caesarea which Pamphilus so diligently
gathered. I have also had the opportunity


' fftiriiienls A 11 25 30 c 21 ; vjet garments T c 29.

2 Gospel according to the Hebrews. Compare Lipsius Gos-
pels apocr, in Smith and AVacc, Diet. v. z i)p. 709-12.

' Origen. II 31 a c 1021 ; Adamantius A T 25.

* Died after 62.

'■' Gospel . . . in Hehrevj, Jerome seems to regard the
Gospel accordinij to the Hebrews mentioned by him above as


of having the volume described to me by
the Nazarenes ' of Beroea," a city of Syria,
who use it. In this it is to be noted that
wherever the Evangelist, whether on his
own account or in the person of our Lord
the Saviour quotes the testimony of the Old
Testament he does not follow the authority
of the translators of the Septuagint but the
Hebrew. Wherefore these two forms exist
" Out of Egypt have I called my son," and
" for he shall be called a Nazarene."

CHAPTER IV.

JuDE ^ the brother of James, left a short
epistle which is reckoned among the seven
catholic epistles, and because in it ■* he
quotes from the apocryphal book of Enoch
it is rejected by many. Nevertheless by age
and use it has gained authority and is reck-
oned among the Holy Scriptures.

CHAPTER V.

Paul,* formerly called Saul, an apostle
outside the number of the twelve apostles,
was of the tribe of Benjamin and the town
of Giscalis^ in Judea. When this was taken
by the Romans he removed with his parents
to Tarsus in Cilicia. Sent by them to Jeru-
salem to study law he was educated by
Gamaliel a most learned man whom Luke
mentions. But after he had been present at
the death of the martyr Stephen and had re-
ceived letters from the high priest of the
temple for the persecution of those who be-
lieved in Christ, he proceeded to Damascus,
where constrained to faith by a revelation, as
it is written in the Acts of the apostles, he
was transformed from a persecutor into an
elect vessel. As Ser<>ius Paulus Proconsul
of Cyprus was the first to believe on his
preaching, he took his name from him because
he had subdued him to faith in Christ, and
having been joined by Barnabas, after trav-
ersing many cities, he returned to Jerusalem
and was ordained apostle to the Gentiles by
Peter, James and John. And because a full
account of his life is given in the Acts of the
Apostles, I only say this, that the twenty-fifth
year after our Lord's passion, that is the sec-
ond of Nero, at the time when Festus Procu-
rator of Judea succeeded Felix, he was sent
bound to Rome, and remaining for two years
in free custody, disputed daily with the Jews

' A'Wz«rc««=Nasaraei. See Smith and Wacc s.v .
- Beroea some mss. read Veria and so Herding. The
modern Aleppo.
3 Died after 62.

^ in it H 31 a e 10 21 ; omit A T 25 30.
f' Died 67 ^, prolialily after 64 at least.
'> Gisralis, supposed thus to have orisjinated at Giscalis and


the original Hebrew Text of Matthew, cf. Lightfool, /^'^a^/wi to have gone from there to Tarsus, but this is not generally
V. 2. p. 295. 1 accepted.


JEROME.


363


concerning the advent of Christ. It ought to
be said that at the first defence, the power of
Nero having not yet been confirmed, nor his
wickedness broken forth to such a degree as
the histories relate concerning him, Paul was
dismissed by Nero, that the gospel of Christ
might be preached also in the West. As he
himself writes in the second epistle to
Timothy, at the time when he was about to
be put to death dictating his epistle as he did
while in chains; "At my first defence no
one took my part, but all forsook me : may
it not be laid to their account. But the
Lord stood by * me and strengthened me ;
that through me the message might be fully
proclaimed and that all the Gentiles might
hear, and I was delivered out of the mouth
of the lion " * — clearly indicating Nero as
lion on account of his cruelty. And di-
rectly following he says " The Lord de-
livered me from the mouth of the lion" and
again shortly " The Lord delivered me ^ from
every evil work and saved me unto his
heavenly kingdom," ■* for indeed he felt
within himself that his 'martyrdom was near
at hand, for in the same epistle he announced
" for I am already being offered and the time
of my departure is at hand." ^ He then, in
the fourteenth year of Nero on the same day
with Peter, was beheaded at Rome for
Christ's sake and was buried in the Ostian
way, the twenty-seventh year after our Lord's
passion. He wrote nine epistles to seven
churches : To the Romans one. To the Corin-
thians two, To the Galatians one. To the
Ephesians one. To the Philippians one, To
the Colossians one, To the Thessalonians
two ; and besides these to his disciples. To
Timothy two. To Titus one, To Philemon
one. The epistle which is called the Epistle
to the Hebrews is not considered his, on
account of its difference from the others in
style and language, but it is reckoned, either
according to Tertullian to be the work of
Barnabas, or according to others, to be by
Luke the Evangelist or Clement afterwards
bishop of the church at Rome, who, they
say, arranged and adorned the ideas of Paul
in his own language, though to be sure, since
Paul was writing to Hebrews and was in
disrepute among them he may have omitted
his name from the salutation on this account.
He being a Hebrew wrote Hebrew, that is
his own tongue and most fluently while the

1 77/e Zo/'rf J/oot/ Jj/ all mss. and eds; God. Her.

^lion. 2 Tim. 4. 16-17.

^ from the mouth of the lion, and again shortly " The Lord
delivered me" (substantially) A H 25 30 31 a e etc.; omit
T. Her. There are slig;ht variations; God H 21 Bamb Bern.
Norimb. ; / was delivered Val. Cypr. Tam. Par 1512 etc.

* The Lord . . . kingdom 2 Tim. 4. iS.

''for I ... at hand 2 Tim. 4. 6.


things which were eloquently written in
Hebrew were more eloquently turned into
Greek ' and this is the reason why it seems to
differ from other epistles of Paul. Some
I'ead one also to ^ the Laodiceans but it is re-
jected by everyone.

CHAPTER VL

Barnabas^ the Cyprian, also called Jo-
seph the Levite, ordained apostle to the
Gentiles with Paul, wrote one Epistle., valu-
able for the edification of the church, which
is reckoned among the apocryphal writings.
He afterwards separated from Paul on ac-
count of John, a disciple also called Mark,*
none the less exercised the work laid upon
him of preaching the Gospel.

CHAPTER Vn.

Luke * a physician of Antioch, as his
writings indicate, was not unskilled in the
Greek language. An adherent of the apos-
tle Paul, and companion of all his journey-,
ing, he wrote a Gospel., concerning which
the same Paul says, "We send with him a
brother whose praise in the gospel is among
all the churches " ® and to the Colossians
" Luke the beloved physician salutes you," '
and to Timothy *' Luke only is with me." **
He also wrote another excellent volume to
which he prefixed the title Acts of the
Apostles., a history which extends to the
second year of Paul's sojourn at Rome, that
is to die fourth ® year of Nei-o, from which
we learn that the book was composed in
that same city. Therefore the Acts of Paul
and Thecla '" and all the fable about the lion
baptized by him we reckon among the
apocryphal writings," for how is it possible
that the inseparable companion of the apos-
tle in his other affairs, alone should have
been ignorant of this thing. Moreover Ter-
tullian who lived near those times, mentions
a certain presbyter in Asia, an adherent of
the apostle Paul,'^ who was convicted by
John of having been the author of the book,


J into H 31 a e. and many others; iji A T 25 30.

- also to A H T 25 30 a e Norimb, Bamb.; also 31 ; omit,
Her. who seems to have omitted on some evidence possibly
Bern.

3 Died in Salamis 53 (Ceillier Papebroch), 56 (Braunsber-
ger),6i (Breviarum romanum),76 (Nirschl). The discussion
of the date of his death is a good deal mixed up with the
question of the authenticity of the wori<.

^Mark Acts IS, 37. •' Died S3-4?.

^ we send . . . churches 2 Cor. 8. iS.

''Luke . . . salutes you Co\. i^. n.

^ Luke . . . TviVA »«« 2 Tim. 4. 11.

'I fourth A T H 25 3031 Val. etc.; fourteenth. Her. Sifebert.
S. Crucis.

1" Acts of Paul and Thecla (Acts = Journeyings) Cf. Acts
of Paul and Thecla, tr. in Ante Nic. Fath. v. 8 pp. 487-92.

11 apocryphal ivritings A H 31 e a Bamb Norimb. Val. etc. ;
apocrypha Her. T 25 30.

12 apostle Paul A H e a etc. Val ; omit Paul T 25 30 31 Her.


364


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


and who, confessing that he did this for
love of Paul, resignetl his office of presbyter.
Some suppose that whenever Paul in his
epistle says "according to my gospel" he
means the book of Luke and that Luke not
only was taught the gospel history by the
apostle Paul who was not with the Lord in
the flesh, but also by other apostles. This
he too at the beginning of his work de-
clares, saying " Even as they delivered unto
us, which from the beginning were eyewit-
nesses and ministers of the word." So he
wrote the gospel as he had heard it, but com-
posed the Acts of the apostles as he himself
had seen. He was buried at Constantinople
to which city, in the twentieth year of Con-
stantius, his bones together with the remains
of Andrew the apostle were transferred.


CHAPTER Vni.

Mark ' the disciple and interpreter of
Peter wrote a short gospel at the request of
the brethren at Rome embodying what he
had heard Peter tell. When Peter had heard
this, he approved it and published it to the
churches to be read by his authority as
Clemens in the sixth book of his Hypotyposes
and Papias, bishop of Hierapolis, record.
Peter also mentions this Mark in his first
epistle, figuratively indicating Rome under
tlie name of Babylon " She w^ho ^ is in Baby-
lon elect together with you saluteth you ^
and so doth Mark my son." So, taking the
gospel which he himself composed, he went
to Egypt and first preaching Christ at Alex-
andria he formed a church so admirable in
doctrine and continence of living that he
constrained all followers of Christ to his
example. Philo most learned of the Jews
seeing the first church at Alexandria still
Jewish in a degree, wrote a book * on their
manner of life as something creditable to his
nation telling how, as Luke says, the be-
lievers had all things in common * at Jerusa-
lem, so he recorded that he saw ® was done
at Alexandria, under the learned Mark. He
died in the eighth year of Nero and was
buried at Alexandria, Annianus succeeding
him.'


' Flourished 45 to 55?.

- She who A 11 T 25 30 31 a e Val etc; the church zuhich.
Iler. and one mentioned by Vallarsi, also in Munich niss.

M370-

^ She who . . . saluieth you I. Pet. 5. I i.

* a boot A 11 31 a c etc ; and Her.; omit T 25 30. This work
entitled On a contemplative life is still extant but is gencrallv
regarded as not by Philo.

^had all things in common Acts 2. 44.

".«o . . . saw Pi.'i\^cx\'iVa.\.\ so he saw and recorded.
T 25 30 Her.

' Annianus succeeding him A H T 25 30 a e Val etc.; omit
Her. ji.


CHAPTER IX.

John,' the apostle whom Jesus most
loved, the son of Zebedee and brother of
James, the apostle whom Herod, after our
Lord's passion, beheaded, most recently of
all the evangelists wrote a Gospel., at the re-
quest of the bishops of Asia, against Cerin-
thus and other heretics and especially
against the then growing dogma of the
Ebionites, who assert that Christ did not
exist before Mary. On this account he
was compelled to maintain His divine na-
tivitv. But there is said to be yet another
reason for this work, in that when he had
read Matthew, Mark, and Luke, he ap-
proved indeed the substance of the history
and declared that the things they said were
true, but that they had given the history of
only one year, the one, that is, which
follows the imprisonment of John and in
which he was put to death. So passing by
this year the events of which had been set
forth by these, he related the events of the
earlier period before John was shut up in
prison, so that it might be manifest to those
who should diligently read the volumes of
the four Evangelists. This also takes away
the discrepancy which there seems to be be-
tween John and the others. He wrote also
one Epistle which begins as follows " That
which was from the beginning, that which
we have heard, that which we have seen
with our eyes and our hands handled con-
cerning the word of life" which is esteemed of
by all men who are interested in the church
or in learning. The other two of which
the first is " The elder to the elect lady and
her children " and the other " The elder un-
to Gaius^ the beloved whom I love in truth,"
are said to be the work of John the presby-
ter to the memory of whom another sepul-
chre is shown at Ephesus to the present day,
though some think that there are two me-
morials of this same John the evangelist.
We shall treat of this matter in its turn^
when we come to Papias his disciple. In
the fourteenth year then after Nero,* Do-
mitian having raised a second persecution he
was banished to the island of Patmos, and
wrote the Apocalypse., on which Justin
Martyr and Irena3us afterwards wrote com-
mentaries. But Domitian having been
put to death and his acts, on account of his
excessive cruelty, having been annulled by
the senate, he returned to Ephesus under

1 Exiled to Patmos 94-95.
- Gains A H 25 30 31 a e; Caius Her. T.
3/« its turn A 11 T 31 a e Val. etc; omit T. 2530.
* after Nero A. H 30 31 a e. Bamb. Norimb. Cypr. Val. J
omit T 25.


JEROME.


365


Pertinax ' and continuing there until the
time of the emperor Trajan, founded and
built churches throughout all Asia, and,
worn out by old age, died in the sixty-
eighth year after our Lord's passion and
was buried near the same city.


CHAPTER X.

Hermas ' ^ whom the apostle Paul men-
tions in writing to the Romans "Salute^
Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas" and
the brethren that are with them " ^ is re-
puted to be the author of the book which is
called Pastor and which is also read pub-
licly in some churches of Greece. It is in
fact a useful book and many of the ancient
writers quote from it as authority, but
among: the Latins it is almost unknown.


CHAPTER XI.

Philo ' the Jew, an Alexandrian of the
priestly class, is placed by us among the
ecclesiastical writers on the ground that,
writing a book concerning the first church of
Mark the evangelist at Alexandria, he writes
to our praise, declaring not only that they
were there, but also that they were in many
provinces and calling their habitations mon-
asteries. From this** it appears that the
church of those that believed in Christ at
first, was such as now the monks desire to
imitate,^ that is, such that nothing is the pe-
culiar property of any one of them, none o%\
them rich, none poor, that patrimonies are
divided among the needy, that they have
leisure for prayer and psalms, for doctrine
also and ascetic practice, that they were in
fact as Luke declares believers were at first at
Jerusalem. They say that under Caius "*
Caligula he ventured to Rome, whither he
had been sent as legate of his nation, and
that when a second time he had come to


'^ Pertinax K H T 25 3031 a e Noiimb. Cypr. etc; Nerva
Pertinax Bamb. Anibros. Iler. ; Nerva principe. Val.

2 The date of Hermas depends on what Hennas is supposed
to be the author. He is supposed to be i the Hermas of the
New Testament, or 2 the brother of Pius I (139-54) or 3 a
still later Hermas. All these views have distingfuished advo-
cates, but this view of Jerome taken from Origen through Euse-
bins is not much accepted.

i Hermas A T 25 30 e; Herman Her. Val. a 31; Hermam
H Cypr.

< Salute (omitting Asyncritus) A H T 25 30 31 a e etc.
Cypr.; add Asyncritus Val. Her. Greek from the New Testa-
ment.

= Hermes Patrobas Hermas A H T 25 30 a e Val. Gr. etc. ;
omit Hermes. A Her.

" Salute . . . them Rom. 15, 14.

~' Visited Rome A. D. 40, and must have lived (Edersheim)
ten or fifteen years after his return.

8 From this etc. Acts 2, 4; 4, 32.

^ desire to imitate t\u: mss.; strive to be Cypr. Fabr. Ya\.,
on account of the difficult construction with imitate.

i" Caius Cypr, Fabr, Val.; Gaius all the mss.; omit Her.


Claudius, he spoke in the same city with the
apostle Peter and enjoyed his friendship, and
for this reason also adorned the adherents of
Mark, Peter's disciple at Alexandria, with
his praises. There are distinguishetl and
innumerable works by this man : On tJie Jive
books of Afoses, one book Concerning the
confusion of tongues^ one book On 7iatiire
and invention^ one book On the thi^igs
which our senses desire a7id we detest^ one
book On learnings one book On the heir of
divine things, one book On the division of
equals and contraries^ one book O71 the
three virtues^ one book On why in Scripture
the names of 7nany persons arc changed^ tv/o
books On covenants., one. book On the life of
a wise 77ian^ one book Concerning giants^
five books That drea7ns are se7it by God, five
books of Questions and answers on Exodus,
four books On the tabe7-nacle a7id the Deca-
logue, as well as books O71 victims a7id
pro7>iises or curses. On P/'ovidence, On the
fexvs, On the i7ia7zner of one's life. On
Alexander, and That du7nb beasts have right
7'eason, and That eve7y fool shotild be a slave,
and On the lives of the Christia7is, of which
we spoke above, that is, lives of apostolic
men, which also he entitled, On those who
practice the div i7ie life, because in truth
they contemplate divine things and ever pray
to God, also under other categories, two O71
agricultui'e, two On drunke7i7iess. There
are other monuments of his genius which
have not come to our hands. Concerning
him there is a proverb among the Greeks
' Either Plato philonized, or Philo platon-
ized," that is, either Plato followed Philo, or
Philo, Plato, so great is the similarity of ideas )(


and language.


CHAPTER XII.

Lucius Ann^us Seneca' of Cordova, dis-
ciple of the Stoic Sotion^ and uncle of Lucan
the Poet, was a man of most continent life,
whom I should not place in the category of
saints were it not that those Epistles of Paul
to Seneca and Seneca ^ to Pa?il, which are
read by many, provoke me. In these, written
when he was tutor of Nero and the most
powerful man of that time, he sa}'s that he
wouUl like to hold such a place among his
countrymen as Paul held among Christians.
He was put to death by Nero two years be-
fore Peter and Paul were crowned with
martyrdom.

1 Died 65.

2 .So//o« Cypr. Val. Her.; Phothion fotion,fotinus Socion

or Soxonis, the mss.

3 and Seneca A H e a 2i lo Fabr. Val. etc. ; or Seneca T 25
30 31 Her.


366


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


CHAPTER XIII.

JosEPHUS,' the son of Matthias, priest of
Jerusalem, taken prisoner by Vespasian and
his son Titus, was banished. Coming to
Rome he presented to the emperors, father
and son, seven books On the captivity of the
yeivs, which were deposited in the public
hbrary and, on account of his genius, was
found worthy of a statue at Rome. He
wrote also twenty books oi A)itiq?iities. from
the beginning of the world until the four-
teenth year of Domitian Caesar, and two of
Antiquities against Appion^ the gram-
marian of Alexandria who, imder Caligula,
sent as legate on the part of the Gentiles
against Philo, wrote also a book containing
a vituperation of the Jewish nation. An-
other book of his entitled. On allrnli)ig
wisdom^ in which the martyr deaths of the
Maccabeans are related is highly esteemed.
In the eighth book of his Antiquities he
most openly acknowledges that Christ was
slain by the Pharisees on account of the
greatness of his miracles, that John the
Baptist was truly a prophet, and that Jerusa-
lem was destroyed because of the murder of
James the apostle. He wrote also concern-
ing the Lord after this fashion : " In this
same time was Jesus, a wise man, if indeed
it be lawful to call him man. For he was a
worker of wonderful miracles, and a teacher
of those who freely receive the truth. He
had very many adherents also, both of the
Jews and of the Gentiles, and was believed
to be Christ, and when through the envy of
our chief men Pilate had crucified him,
nevertheless those who had loved him at first
continued to the end, for he appeared to them
the third day alive. Many things, both these
and other wonderful things are in the songs
of the prophets who prophesied concerning
him and the sect of Christians, so named
from Him, exists to the present day."

CHAPTER XIV.

Justus, ^ '' of Tiberias of the province of
Galilee, also attempted to write a History of
Jewish affairs and certain brief Co7nmcn-
taries on the Scriptures but Josephus con-
victs him of falsehood. It is known that lie
wrote at the same time as Josephus himself.

CHAPTER XV.

Clement, " of whom the apostle Paul
writing to the Philippians says " With Clem-

' Knrn A. D. 37, died after c,;. 2 Flourished ino.

•'' ViixtHS a 21 10 Fabr. Val. ; ytistim/s otliers.

•• Bishop 91 or 2-101. Died no (Huscb. C'h. Hist.) It is
by no means certain that Cleiiieiis I!oiii:unis is the I'lemens
mentioned in the New Testament. Compare discussions bl-


ent and others of my fellow-workers whose
names are written in the book of life," ' the
fomth bishop of Rome after Peter, if indeed
the second was Linus and the third Anacle-
tus,' although most of the Latins think that
Clement was second after the apostle.'^ He
wrote, on the part of the church of Rome,
an especially valuable Letter to the church of
the Corinthians^ which in some places is
publicly read, and which seems to me to
agree in style with the epistle to the Hebrews
which passes under the name of Paul but it
differs from this same epistle, not only in
many of its ideas, but also in respect of the
order of words, and its likeness in either re-
spect is not very great. There is also a
second Epistle under his name which is re-
jected by earlier writers, and a Disputation
betzveen Peter and Appion written out at
length, which Eusebius in the third book of
his Church history rejects. He died in the
third year of Trajan and a church built at
Rome preserves the memory of his name unto
this day.

CHAPTER XVI.

Ignatius," thii-d bishop of the church of
Antioch after Peter the apostle, condemned
to the wild beasts during the persecution of
Trajan, was sent bound to Rome, and when
he had come on his voyage as far as
Smyrna, where Polycarp the pupil of John
was bishop, he wrote one epistle To the
Ephesians^ another To the Magnesiajis a
third To the Trallians a fourth To the
Ro7nans^ and going thence, he wrote To the
Philadelphians and To the Sjnyrneans and
especially To Polycarp^ commending to him
the church at Antioch. In this last^ he bore
witness to the Gospel which I have recentlv
translated, in respect of the person of Christ
saying, " I indeed saw him in the flesh after
the resurrection and I believe that he is," and
when he came to Peter and those who were
with Peter, he said to them " Behold ! touch
me and see me how that I am not an incor-
poreal spirit " and straightway they touched
him and believed. Moreover it seems worth
while inasmuch as we have made mention of
such a man and of the Epistle which he
wrote to the Romans.^ to give a few "quota-
tions "* : "From Syria even unto Rome I

Salmon in Smith and Wace, and M'Giffert in his translation
of Eusebius.

I With Clement . . . life Phil. 4, 3.

^ Anacletus Val. Fabr. Her.; Anencletus, Anincletus,
Attend itns, H 2:531 c; Cletits (or Elitus). T3031; Anicletiis,
10; Aufcletus, A; Aneclltiis,a..

3 npostle A H 25 30 31 a e; apostle Peter T Fabr. Val. ller.

^ Itishop about 70, died about 107.

•' In this last etc. Eusebius from whom he quotes says
Stiiyinians. I,i<jhtfoot maintains that Jerome had never seen
the Iqiistlis of Ignatius.

<■■ ijiiotatintis etc. This is taken bodily from Eusebius.
The translation is M'GilVert's adapted to the I-:itin of Jerome.


JEROME.


Z^7


fight with wild beasts, by land and by sea, by
night and by day, being bound amidst ten
leopards, that is to say soldiers who guard me
and who only become worse when they are
well treated. Their wrong doing, however,
is my schoolmaster, but I am not thereby
justified. May I have joy of the beasts that
are prepared for me ; and I pray that I may
find them ready ; I will even coax them to
devour me quickly that they may not treat me
as they have some whom they have refused to
touch through fear. And if they are unwill-
ing, I will compel them to devour me. For-
give me my children, I know what is expedi-
ent for me. Now do I begin to be a disciple,
and desire none of the things visible that I
may attain unto Jesus Christ. Let fire and
cross and attacks of v/ild beasts, let wrenching
of bones, cutting apart of limbs, crushing of
tlie whole body, tortures ' of the devil, — let
all these come upon me if only I may attain
unto the joy which is in Christ."

When he had been condemned to the wild
beasts and with zeal for martyrdom heard the
lions roaring, he said " I am the grain of
Christ. I am ground by the teeth of the wild
beasts that I may be found the bread of the
world." He was put to death the eleventh
year of Trajan and the remains of his body
lie in Antioch outside the Daphnitic gate in
the cemetery.

CHAPTER XVIL

PoLYCARP^ disciple of the apostle John
and by him ordained bishop of Smyrna was
chief of all Asia, where he saw and had as
teachers some of the apostles and of those
who had seen the Lord. He, on account of
certain questions concerning the day of the
Passover, went to Rome in the time of the
emperor Antoninus Pius while Anicetus
ruled the church in that city. There he
led back to the faith many of the believers
who had been deceived through the per-
suasion of Marcion and Valentinus, and
when Marcion met him by chance and
said "Do you know us" he replied, "I
know the firstborn of the devil." After-
wards during the reign of Mai'cus Antoninus
and Lucius Aurelius Commodus in the fourth
persecution after Nero, in the presence of
the pi'oconsul holding court at Smyrna and
all the people crying out against him in the
Amphitheater, he was burned. He wrote a
very valuable Epistle to the PJilUppians

1 tortures A H T 25 30 31 e; all the tortures a. Fabr. Val.
Her.

^Bishop 106 or7 — 157-168 (?); iS4sq (Lipsius) Authorities
differ as to dates of his death from 147-175. Bishop certainly
(Salmon) no.


which is read to the present day in the
meetings in Asia.

CHAPTER XVHL

Papias," the pupil of John, bishop of Hie-
rapolis in Asia, wrote only five volumes,
which he entitled Exposition of the words
of 07ir Lord, in which, when he had as-
serted in his preface that he did not follow
various opinions but had the apostles for
authority, he said " I considered what An-
drew and Peter said, what Philip, what
Thomas, what James, what John,''^ what
Matthew or any one else among the disci-
ples of our Lord, what also Aristion and the
elder John, disciples of the Lord had said,
not so much that I have their books to read,
as that their living voice is heard until the pre-
sent day in the authors themselves." It ap-
pears through this catalogue of names that the
John who is placed among the disciples is
not the same as the elder John whom he
places after Aristion in his enumeration.
This we say moreover because of the opin-
ion mentioned above, where we record that
it is declared by many that the last two
epistles of John are the work not of the
apostle but of the presbyter.

He is said to have published a Second
coming of Our Lord or Millcnniii7ti. Ire-
naeus and Apollinaris and others who say
that after the resurrection the Lord will reign
in the flesh with the saints, follow him.
Tertullian also in his work On the hope of
the faithful, Victorinus of Petau and Lac-
tantius follow this view.

CHAPTER XIX.

QuADRATUS^ disciple of the apostles,
after Publius bishop of Athens had been
crowned with martyrdom on account of his
faith in Christ, was substituted in his place,
and by his faith and industry gathered the
church scattered by reason of its great fear.
And when Hadrian passed the winter at
Athens to witness the Eleusinian myste-
ries and was initiated into almost all the
sacred mysteries of Greece, those who hated
the Christians took opportunity without in-
structions from the Emperor to harass the
believers. At this time he presented to Ha-
drian a work composed in behalf of our
religion, indispensable, full of sound argu-
ment and faith and worthy of the apostolic
teaching. In which, illustrating the antiq-
uity of his period, he says that he has seen

1 130 (Salmon).

2 vjhatjolin A II 25 30 31 a e ; omit T Her.

3 Flourished 126 (125) ? Not the Athenian bishop (Salmon).
Work not extant.


368


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


many who, oppressed by various ills, were
licaled by the Lord in Judea as well as some
who had been raised from the dead.

CHAPTER XX.

7 Aristides ' a most eloquent Athenian

philosopher, and a disciple of Christ while
yet retaining his philosopher's garb, pre-
sented a work to Hadrian at the same time
that Qiiadratus presented his. The work
contained a systematic statement of our doc-
trine, that is, an Apology for the Christians,
which is still extant and is regarded by phil-
ologians as a monument to his genius.

CHAPTER XXI.

AoRippA ^ surnamed Castor, a man of
great learning, wrote a strong refutation
of the twenty-four volumes which Basilides
the heretic had written against the Gospel,
disclosing all his mysteries and enumerating
the propliets Barcabbas and Barchob ^ and
all the other barbarous names which terrify
the hearers, and his most high God Abraxas,
whose name was supposed to contain the
year according to the reckoning " of the
Greeks. Basilides died at Alexandria in the
reign of Hadrian, and from him the Gnostic
sects arose. In this tempestuous time also,
Cochebas leader of the Jewish faction put
Christians to death with various tortures.

CHAPTER XXII.

Hegesippus * who lived at a period not
far from the Apostolic age, writing a History
of all ecclesiastical events from the passion
of our Lord, down to his own period,
and gathering many things useful to the
reader, composed five volumes in simple
style, trying to represent the style of speak-
ing of those whose lives he treated. He
says that he went to Rome in the time of
Anicetus, the tenth bishop after Peter, and
continued there till the time of Eleutherius,
bishop of the same city, who had been
formerly deacon under Anicetus. Moreover,
arguing against idols, he wrote a history,
showing from what error they had first
arisen, and this work indicates in what age
he flourished.* He says, " They built monu-
ments and temples to their dead as we see

'Flourished 125, apolog7 presented about 133.

' Flourished about J30 or 135.

•'' Various readings arc Sarcobiis, Barcobeth, Barclio el,
Bascobiis el.

* reckoning all but T and Her. which have nomeiiclature.

'• Died iSo. Wrote his history in jiart before 11)7, and pub-
lished after irj.

« I/efounslted T H a e 25 ^o \'al. Fabr.; Tluy fourished
Her.


up to the present day,' such as the one to
Antinous, servant to the Emperor Hadrian,
in whose honour also games v»ere celebrated,
and a city founded bearing his name, and
a temple with priests established." The
Emperor Hadrian is said to have been
enamoured of Antinous.

CHAPTER XXIII.

Justin," a philosopher, and wearing the
garb of philosopher, a citizen of Ncapolis, a
city of Palestine, and the son of Priscus
Bacchius, laboured strenuously in behalf of
the religion of Christ, insomuch that he de-
livered to Antoninus Pius and his sons and
the senate, a work written Against tJic na-
tions^ and did not shun the ignominy of the
cross. He addressed another book also to
the successors of this Antoninus, Marcus
Antoninus Verus and Lucius Aurelius Com-
modus. Another volume of his Against tJic
nations^ is also extant, where he discusses
tlie natuie of demons, and a fourth against
the nations which he entitled, Rcftitation
and yet another On tJte sovereignty of God^
and another book which he entitled, Psaltcs,
and another On the Sozil^ the Dialogue
against the Jeivs^ which he held against
Trypho, the leader of the Jews, and also
notable volumes Against Marcion^ which
Irenaeus also mentions in the fourth book^
Against heresies^ also another book Against
all heresies which he mentions in the
Apology which is addressed to Antoninus
Pius. He, when he had held diarpipaQ in the
city of Rome, and had convicted Crcscens
the cynic, who said many blasphemous
things against the Christians, of gluttony
and fear of death, and had proved him de-
voted to luxury and lusts, at last, accused
of being a Christian, through the eflbrts and
wiles of Crescens, he shed his blood for
Christ.

CHAPTER XXIV.

Melito^ of Asia, bishop of Sardis, ad-
dressed a book to the emperor Marcus An-
toninus Verus, a disciple of Fronto the orator,
in behalf of the Christian doctrine. lie
wrote other things also, among which are
the following : On the passover^ two books,
one book On the lives of the prophets^ one
book On the chjirch^" one book On the

' up to the present rfrtv A II 31 e a ; to day T 25 30.

2 Horn about 104 (100?), Christi;m 133 (before 132 Holland)
wrote apology about 150, died 167.

'^fourth hook A T 25 30 Val. Her.; fifth H 31 a e Fabr.
and early editions; The right reference is probably Bk. 4 cli.
10 but he himself is mentioned in book 5 and it is likely Jeiome
wrote V

* Bishop about 150, died between 171 and iSo.

'• On the church A 25 30 e a; omit T 31 e a [H],


JEROME.


569


Lord's day^ one book On faith ^ one book
On the psalms ( ?) one On the senses, one
On the sojtl and body, one On baptism,
one On truths one On the genei-ation of
Christ, On His prophecy ' one On hospi-
tality and another which is called the Key
one On the devil, one On the Apocalypse of
John, one On the corporeality of God, and
six books oi Eclogues. Of his fine oratorical
genius, Tertullian, in the seven books which
he wrote against the church on behalf of
Montanus, satirically says that he was con-
sidered a prophet by many of us.

CHAPTER XXV.

Theophilus,^ sixth bishop of the church of
Antioch, in the reign of the emperor Marcus
Antoninus Verus composed a book Against
Marcio7i, which is still extant, also three
volumes To Autolycus and one Against the
heresy of Hertnogenes and other short and
elegant treatises, well fitted for the edification
of the church. I have read, under his name,
commentaries On the Gospel and On the
proverbs of Solomon which do not appear to
me to correspond in style and language with
the elegance and expressiveness of the above
works.

CHAPTER XXVI.

Apollinaris,^ bishop of Hierapolis in
Asia, flourished in the reign of Marcus An-
toninus Verus, to whom he addressed a
notable volume in behalf of the faith of the
Christians. There are extant also five other
books of his Against the Nations, two On
truth and Against the Cataphtygians writ-
ten at the time when Montanus was making
a beginning with Prisca and Maximilla.

CHAPTER XXVII.

DiONYSius," bishop of the church of Cor-
inth, was of so great eloquence and industry
that he taught not only the people of his own
city and province but also those of other prov-
inces and cities by his letters. Of these one is
7t> the Laced(Bmo7iians , another To the Athe-
nians, a third To the Nicomedians, a fourth
To the Cretans, a fifth To the church at
Atnastrina and to the other churches of
Pontus, a sixth To the Gnosians and to
Pijiytus bishop of the same city, a seventh
To the Roma7is, addressed to Soter their
bishop, an eighth To Chrysophora a holy


woman. He flourished in the reign of Mar-
cus Antoninus Verus and Lucius Aurelius
Com modus.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

PiNYTUS ' of Crete, bishop of the city of
Gnosus, wrote to Dionysius bishop of the
Corinthians, an exceedingly elegant letter in
which he teaches that the people are not to
be forever fed on milk, lest by chance they
be overtaken by the last day while yet in-
fants, but that they ought to be fed also on
solid food, that they may go on to a spiritual
old age. He flourished under Marcus An-
toninus Verus and Lucius Aurelius Corn-
modus.^

CHAPTER XXIX.

Tatian ^ who, while teaching oratory,
won not a little glory in the rhetorical art,
was a follower of Justin Martyr and was
distinguished so long as he did not leave his
master's side. But afterwards, inflated " by
a swelling of eloquence, he founded a new
heresy which is called that of the Encratites,
the heresy which Severus afterwards aug-
mented in such wise that heretics of this
party are called Severians to the present
day. Tatian wrote besides innumerable
volumes, one of which, a most successful
book Against the nations, is extant, and this
is considered the most significant of all his


prophecy A H 25 30 31 e a Val. etc:


» On truth .
omitT Her.

2 Bishop in 16S, died after iSi (some :76-S6).
8 Claudius ApoUinaris died before iSo.
* Bishop about 170, died about iSo.

VOL. III.


works. He flourished in the reign of
Marcus Antoninus Verus and Lucius Aure^. //
lius Commodus.


CHAPTER XXX.

Philip* bishop of Crete, that is of the
city of Gortina, whom Dionysius mentions
in the epistle which he wrote to the church
of the same city, published a remarkable
book Against Marcion and flourished in the
time of Marcus Antoninus Verus and Lucius
Aurelius Commodus.


CHAPTER XXXI.

MusANUS,® not inconsiderable among
those who have written on ecclesiastical
doctrine, in the reign of Marcus Antoninus
Verus wrote a book to certain brethren who
had turned aside from the church to the heresy
of the Encratites.


Commodus A 25 30 31 e a


'Died about iSo.
'^ That they may go on . . .
Fabr. Val; omitT II ? Her.
^ Born about 1^0, died after 172.
'^inflated A H "30 31 a e Val etc.; elated T 25 Her.
5 Bishop about 100, died about jSo.
" Flourished 2Q.\ ?.


Bb


370


JEROME AND GENNADTUS.


CHAPTER XXXII.

MoDKSTUS ' also in the reign of Marcus
Antoninus and Lucius Aurclius Cominudus
wrote a book Agaiiist Mai-cion which is
still extant. Some other compositions pass
under his name but are regarded by scholars
as spurious.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Bardesanes ^ of Mesopotamia is reckcned
among the distinguished men. He was
at first a follower of Valentinus and
afterwards his opponent and himself founded
a new heresy. He has the reputation
among the Syrians of having been a brilliant
genius and vehement in argument. He
wrote a multitude of works against almost
all heresies which liad come into existence
in his time. Among these a most remark-
able and strong work is the one which he
addressed to Marcus Antoninus On fate^
and many other volumes On persecution
which his followers translated from the
Syriac language into Greek. If indeed so
much force and brilliancy appears in the
translation, how great it must have been in
the original.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

Victor,^ thirteenth bishop of Rome,
wrote, On the Paschal Controversy and
some other small works. lie ruled the
church for ten years in the reign of the
Emperor Sevci'us.

CHAPTER XXXV.

Irenaeus,'' a presbyter under Pothinus
the bishop who ruled the church of Lyons
in Gaul, being sent to Rome as legate by the
martyrs of this place, on account of certain
ecclesiastical questions, presented to Bishop
Eleutherins certain letters under his own
name which are worthy of honour. After-
wards when Pothinus, nearly ninety years
of age, received the crown of martyrdom
for Christ, he was put in his place. It is
certain too that he was a disciple of Poly-
carp, the priest and martyr, whom we men-
tioned above. He wrote five books Against
heresies and a short vokune, Against the na-
tions and another On discipiinc^ a letter to
Marcianus his brother On a postolical preach-
ing, a l)Ook of Various treatises ; also to Blas-
tus, Ofz schism^' to Florinus On 7nonarchy or

> Flourished iSo-igo. 2 Flourished about 172.

3 Bishop about 190 (or 1S5 according to others) dii'<l 202 or


197.


* Born between 140 and 145, died 202 or hiter.

'' sclihm 1 1 A 31 a e \'al. Eusebius etc : chrism A T 25 30.


That God is not the author of evil^ also an
excellent Co?7i7ncntaiy on the Ogdoad at the
end of which indicating that he was near the
apostolic period he wrote " I adjure thee who-
soever shall transcribe this book, by our Lord
Jesus Christ and by his glorious advent at
which He shall judge the quick and the dead,
that you diligently compare, after you have
transcribed, and amend it accordmg to the
copy from which you have transcribed it and
also that you shall similarly transcribe this
adjuration as you find it in your pattern."
Other works of his are in circulation to wit :
to Victor the Roman bishop On the Paschal
co)drovcrsy'\\\ which he warns him not lightly
to break the unity of the fraternity, if indeed
Victor believed that the many bishops of
Asia and the East, who with the Jews cele-
brated the passover, on the fourteenth day of
the new moon, were to be condemned.
But even those who diflered from them did
not support Victor in his opinion. Pie
flourished chiefly in the reign of the Empe-
ror Commodus, who succeeded Marcus An-
toninus Verus in power.

CHAPTER XXXVI.

Pantaenus,* a philosopher of the stoic
school, according to some old Alexandrian
custom, where, from the time of ■* Mark the
evangelist the ecclesiastics were always doc-
tors, was of so great prudence and erudition
both in scripture and secular literature that,
on the request of the legates of that nation,
he was sent to India by Demetrius bishop
of Alexandria, whei'e he found that Barthol-
omew, one of the twelve apostles, had
preached the advent of the Lord Jesus ac-
cording to the gospel of Matthew, and on
his return to Alexandria he brought this
with him written in Hebrew characters.
Many of his commentaries on Holy Script-
ure are indeed extant, but his living voice
was of still greater benefit to the churches.
He taught in the reigns of the emperor Sev-
erus and Antoninus surnamed Caracalla.

CHAPTER XXXVII.

Rhodo,* a native of Asia, instructed in
the Scriptures at Rome by Tatian whom we
mentioned above, published many things
especially a work Against Marcion in which
he tells how the Marcionites difier from one
another as well as from the church and says

> Ogdoad "Octava" is translation for " Ogdoad " used by
Eusebius and explained to refer to the Valentinian Ogdoads.
(M'Gitrert.)

* At Alexandria about 179, died about 216.

•■' T reads foUov.'ing the example of and makes a more man-
ageable text.

* Flourished 1S6.


JEROME.


0/


that the aged Apelles, another heretic, was
once engaged in a discussion with him, and
that he, Rhodo, held Apelles up to ridi-
cule because he declared that he did not
know the God whom he worshipped. He
mentioned in the same book, which he wrote
to Callistion, that he had been a pupil of
Tatian at Rome. He also composed ele-
gant treatises On the six days of creation
and a notable work against the Phrygians.^
He flourished in the reigns of Commodus
and Severus.

CHAPTER XXXVHI.

Clemens," presbyter of the Alexandrian
church, and a pupil of the Pantaenus men-
tioned above, led the theological school at
Alexandria after the death of his master
and was teacher of the Catechetes. He
is the author of notable volumes, full of
eloquence and learning, both in sacred
Scripture and in secular literature ;
among these are the Stromata^ eight books,
Hypotyposes eight books, Against the
nations one book, On pedagogy,^ three
books. On the Passover^ Disquisition on
fasting and another book entitled, What
rich man is saved? one book On CalunDiy,
On ecclesiastical canons a)id against those
ivho follow the error of the feivs one book
which he addressed to Alexander bishop of
Jerusalem. He also mentions in his volumes
of Stromata the work of Tatian Against the
nations which we mentioned above and a
Chronography of one Cassianus, a work
which I have not been able to find. He also
mentioned certain Jewish writers against the
nations, one Aristobulus and Demetrius and
Eupolemus who after the example of Jose-
phus asserted the primacy of Moses and the
Jewish people. There is a letter of Alex-
ander the bishop of Jerusalem who after-
wards ruled the church with Narcissus, on
the ordination of Asclepiades the confessor,
addressed to the Antiochians congratulating
them, at the end of which he says " these
writings honoured* brethren I have sent to
you by the blessed presbyter Clement, a
man illustrious and approved, whom you
also know and with whom now you will
become better acquainted a man who, when
he had come hither by the special provi-
dence of God, strengthened and enlarged
the church of God." Origen is known to
have been his disciple. He flourished more-


25


"^ Phrygiens A 31 a e with Eusebius; Cataphrvgians '
Tfl " according to the usage of the Latins " (cf. M'fjifTeit).


_^,« — — j^ - . — ^_

- Born about 160, died about 217,
"' On pedagogy = " The Instructor."

* honoured literally " lordly " perhaps like the conventional
formula " Lords and brethren."


over during the reisrns of Severus and his
son Antoninus.


CHAPTER XXXIX.

MiLTiADES ' of whom Rhodo gives an
account in the work which he wrote against
Montanus, Prisca and Maximilla, wrote a
considerable volume against these same
persons, and other books Against the nations
and the fexvs and addressed an Apology to
the then ruling emperors. He floiuished in
the reign of Marcus Antoninus and Commo-
dus.

CHAPTER XL.

Apollonius," an exceedingly talented
man, wrote against Montanus, Prisca and
Maximilla a notable and lengthy volume, in
which he asserts that Montanus and his mad
prophetesses died by hanging, and many other
things, among which are the following con-
cerning Prisca and Maximilla, " if they
denied that they have accepted gifts, let
them confess that those who do accept are
not prophets and I will prove by a thousand
witnesses that they have received gifts, for
it is by other fruits that prophets are shown
to be prophets indeed. Tell me, does a
prophet dye his hair? Does a prophet
stain her eyelids with antimony? Is a
prophet adorned with fine garments and
precious stones? Does a prophet play with
dice and tables? Does he accept usury?
Let them respond whether this ought to be
permitted or not, it will be my task to prove
that they do these things." He says in the
same book, that the time when he wrote the
work was the fortieth year after the begin-
ning of the heresy of the Cataphrygians.
Tertullian added to the six volumes which
he wrote On ecstasy against the church a
seventh, directed especially against Apol-
lonius, in which he attempts to defend all
which Apollonius refuted. Apollonius flour-
ished in the reigns of Commodus and Sev-
erus.

CHAPTER XLI.

Serapion,^ ordained bishop of Antioch
in the eleventh year of the emperor Commo-
dus, wrote a letter to Caricus and Pontius *
on the heresy of Montanus, in which he
said " that you may know moreover that
the madness of this false doctrine, that is the

1 Flourished 1S0-190.

2 Bishop about iq6, flourighed 210.

3 Risliop icx), died 211.

* Caricus and Pontius. SoValesius and others with Eu-
sebius but mss. except " a " have Carinus and it is interesting-
to note that the same ins. reads Ponticus with most mss. of
Eusebius.


B b 2


17^


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


doctrine of a new prophecy, is reprobated by
all the world, I have sent to you the letters
of the most holy Apollinaris bishop of Hie-
rapolis in Asia." He wrote a volume also
to Domnus, who in time of persecution went
over to the Jews, and another work on the
gospel which passes under the name of
Peter, a work to the church of the Rhosen-
ses in Cilicia wlio by the reading of this book
had turned aside to heresy. There are here
and there short letters of his, harmonious in
character with the ascetic life of their author.

CHAPTER XLII.

Apollonius,' a Roman senator under the
emperor Commodus, having been denounced
by a slave as a Christian, gained permission
to give a reason for his faith and wrote a re-
markable volinne which he read in the sen-
ate, yet none the less, by the will of the
senate, he was beheaded for Christ by virtue
of an ancient law among them, that Chris-
tians who had once been brought before their
judgment seat should not be dismissed unless
they recanted.

CHAPTER XLHI.

Theopiiilus,* bishop of Caesarea in Pales-
tine, the city formerly called Turris Stra-
tonis, in the reign of the emperor Severus
wrote, in conjunction with other bishops, a
synodical letter of great utility against those
who celebrated the passover with the Jews
on the fourteenth diay of the month.

CHAPTER XLIV.

Bacchylus,^ bishop of Corinth, was held
in renown under the same emperor Severus,
and wrote, as representative of all the bishops
who were in Achaia, an elegant work On
the passover.

CHAPTER XLV.

PoT.vcRATEs ^ bishop of thc Ephesians
with other bishops of Asia who in accord-
ance with some ancient custom celebrated
the passover with the Jews on thc fourteenth
of the month, wrote a synodical letter against
Victor bishop of Rome in whicli he says that
he follows the authority of the apostle John
and of the ancients. From this we make
the following brief quotations, " We there-
fore celebrate the day according to usage, in-
violably, neither adding anything to nor
taking anything from it, for in Asia lie the
remains of the greatest saints of those who
shall rise again on the day of the Lord, when


1 Died about iSj.
- Died about 190.


s Bishop about 190-200.
• Bishop about 190.


he shall come in majesty from heaven and
shall quicken all the saints, I mean Philip
one of the twelve apostles who sleeps at
Hierapolis and his two daughters who were
virgins until their death and another dausfhter
of his who died at Ephesus full of the Holy
Spirit. And John too, who lay on Our
Lord's breast and was his high priest carry-
ing the golden frontlet on his forehead, both
martyr and doctor, fell asleep at Ephesus
and Polycarp bishop and martyr died at
Smyrna. Thraseas of Eumenia also, bishop
and martyr, rests in the same Smyrna.
What need is there of mentioning Sagaris,
bishop and martyr, who sleeps in Laodicea
and the blessed Papyrus and Melito, eunuch
in the Holy Spirit, who, ever serving the
Lord, was laid to rest in Sardis and there
awaits his resurrection at Christ's advent.
These all observed the day of the passover on
the fourteenth of the month, in nowise depart-
ing from the evangelical tradition and follow-
ing the ecclesiastical canon. I also. Poly-
crates, the least of all your servants, according
to the doctrine of my relatives which I also
have followed (for there were seven of my
relatives bishops indeed and I the eighth)
have always celebrated the passover when the
Jewish people celebrated the putting away
of the leaven. And so brethren being sixty-
five years old in the Lord and instructed by
many brethren from all parts of the world,
and having searched all the Scriptures, I
will not fear those who threaten us, for my
predecessors said " It is fitting to obey God
rather than men." I quote this to show
through a small example the genius and au-
thority of the man. He flourished in the
reign of the emperor Severus in the same
period as Narcissus of Jerusalem.

CHAPTER XLVL

Heraclitus' in the reign of Commodus
and Severus wrote commentaries on the Acts
and Epistles.

CHAPTER XLVIL

Maximus,'' under the same emperors pro-
pounded in a remarkable volume the famous
questions, What is thc origin of evil? and
Whether matter is tfiade by God.

CHAPTER XLVHL

Candidus ^ under the above mentioned
emperors published most admirable treatises
On the six days of creation.


1 Flourished about 193.

' Bisliop of Jerusalem 185.


9 Flourished about 196.


JEROME.


j/0


CHAPTER XLIX.

Appion ' under the emperor Severus
likewise wrote treatises On the six days of
creation.

CHAPTER L.

Sextus " in the reign of the emperor
Severus wrote a book On the resurrection.


CHAPTER LI.

Arabianus ^ under the same emperor
pubHshed certain small works relating to
christian doctrine.

CHAPTER LH.

Judas,* discussed at length the seventy
weeks mentioned in Daniel and wrote a
Chronography of former times which he
brought up to the tenth year of Severus.
He is convicted of error in respect of this
work in that he prophesied that the advent
of Anti-Christ would be about his period,
but this was because the greatness of the
persecutions seemed to forebode the end of
the world.

CHAPTER Un.

Tertullian " the presbyter, now re-
garded as chief of the Latin writers after
Victor and Apollonius, was from the city of
Carthage in the province of Africa, and was
the son of a proconsul or Centurion, a man
of keen and vigorous character, he flour-
ished chiefly in the reign of the emperor
Severus and Antoninus Caracalla and wrote
many volumes which we pass by because
they are well known to most. I myself
have seen a certain Paul an old man of
Concordia, a town of Italy, who, while he
himself was a very young man had been
secretary to the blessed Cyprian who was
already advanced in age. He said that he
himself had seen how Cyprian was accus-
tomed never to pass a day without reading
Tertullian, and that he frequently said to
him, " Give me the master," meaning by
this, Tertullian. He was presbyter of the
church until middle life, afterwards driven
by the envy and abuse of the clergy of the
Roman church, he lapsed to the doctrine of
Montanus, and mentions the new prophecy
in many of his books.

He composed, moreover, directly against
the church, volumes : On modesty., On
■persecution., On fasts., On monogamy., six
books On ecstasy., and a seventh which he

1 Flourished about 196. ' Flourished about 196.

' Flourished about ig6. * 202.

6 Born 4bout 160, christian 195, apology 198, died about 345.


wrote Against Apollonius. He is said to
have lived to a decrepit old age, and to have
composed many small works, which are not
extant.

CHAPTER LIV.

Origen," surnamed Adamantius, a per-
secution having been raised against the
Christians in the tenth year of Severus
Pertinax, and his father Leonidas having
received the crown of martyrdom for Christ,
was left at the age of about seventeen, with
his six brothers and widowed mother, in
poverty, for their property had been con-
fiscated because of confessing Christ. When
only eighteen years old, he undertook the
work of instructing the Catechetes in the
scattered churches of Alexandria. After-
wards appointed by Demetrius, bishop of
this city, successor to the presbyter Clement,
he flourished many years. When he had
already reached middle life, on account of
the churches of Achaia, which were torn
with many heresies, he was journeying to
Athens, by way of Palestine, under the
authority of an ecclesiastical letter, and
having been ordained presbyter by Theoc-
tistus and Alexander, bishops of Caesarea
and Jerusalem, he oflended Demetrius, who
was so wildly enraged at him that he wrote
everywhere to injure his reputation. It is
known that before he went to Caesarea, he
had been at Rome, under bishop Zephyrinus.
Immediately on his return to Alexandria he
made Heraclas the presbyter, who continued
to wear his philosopher's garb, his assistant
in the school for catechetes. Heraclas be-
came bishop of the church of Alexandria,
after Demetrius. How great the glory of
Origen was, appears from the fact that
Firmilianus, bishop of Caesarea, with all the
Cappadocian bishops, sought a visit from
him, and entertained him for a long while.
Sometime afterwards, going to Palestine to
visit the holy places, he came to Caesarea ^
and was instructed at length by Origen in
the Holy Scriptures. It appears also from
the fact that he went to Antioch, on the
request of Mammaea, mother of the Em-
peror Alexander, and a woman religiously
disposed, and was there held in great
honour, and sent letters to the Emperor
Philip, who was the first among the Roman
rulers, to become a christian, and to his
mother, letters which are still extant. Who
is there, who does not also know that he was
so assiduous in the study of Holy Scriptures,
that contrary to the spirit of his time, and


1 Born at Alexandria 185, died at Tyre 253.
- Caesarea. Caesarea in Palestine.


;74


JEROMK AND GENNADIUS.


of his people, he learned the Hebrew lan-
guage, and taking the Septuagint translation,
he gathered the other translations also in a
single work, namely, that of Aquila, of
Ponticus the Proselyte, and Theodotian the
Ebonite, and Symmachus an adherent of
the same sect who wrote commentaries also
on the gospel accoiding to Matthew, from
which he tried to establish his doctrine. And
besides these, a fifth, sixtli, and seventh trans-
lation, which we also have from his library,
he sought out with great diligence, and
compared with other editions. And since I
have given a list of his works, in tlie volumes
of letters which I have written to Paula,
in a letter which I wrote asrainst the works
of Varro, I pass this by now, not failing
however, to make mention of his immortal
genius, how that he understood dialectics, as
well as geometry, arithmetic, music, gram-
mar, and rhetoric, and taught all the schools
of philosophers, in such wise that he had
also diligent students in secular literature,
and lectured to them daily, and the crowds
which flocked to him were marvellous.
These, he received in the hope that through
the instrumentality of this secular literature,
he might establish them in the faith of
Christ.

It is unnecessary to speak of the cruelty of
that persecution which was raised against
the Christians and under Decius, who was
mad against the religion of Phili^^, whom
he had slain, — the persecution in which
Fabianus, bishop of the Roman church,
perished at Rome, and Alexander and
Babylas, Pontifs of the churches of Jerusa-
lem and Antioch, were imprisoned for their
confession of Christ. If any one wdshes to
know what was done in regard to the position
of Origcn, he can clearly learn, first indeed
from his own epistles, which after the perse-
cution, were sent to diflerent ones, and
secondly, from the sixth book of the church
history of Eusebius of Caesarea, and from
his six volumes in behalf of the same Origen.

He lived until the time of Gallus and
Volusianus, that is, until his sixty-ninth year,
and died at Tyre, in which city he also
was buried.

CHAPTER LV.

Ammonius," a talented man of great phil-
osophical learning, was distinguished at
Alexandria, at tlie same time. Among many
and distinguished monunicnts of his genius,
is the elaborate work which he composed On
the harmony of Moses and Jcstis^ and the


> Flourished 220.


Gospel canons^ whicli he worked out, and
which Eusebius of Caesarea, afterwards fol-
lowed. Porphyry falsely accused him of hav-
ing become a heathen again, after being a
Christian, but it is certain that he continued
a Christian until the very end of his life.

CHAPTER LVI.

AMnuosius,' at first aMarcionitebut after-
wards set right by Origen, was deacon in the
church, and gloriously distinguished as con-
fessor of the Lord. To him, together with
Protoctetus the presbyter, the book of Origen,
On Diartyrdom was written. Aided" by his
industry, funds, and perseverance, Origen
dictated a great number of volumes. He
himself, as befits a man of noble nature, was
of no mean literary talent, as his letters to
Origen indicate. He died moreover, before
the death of Origen, and is condemned by
many, in that being a man of wealth, he did
not at death, remember in his will, his old
and needy friend.

CHAPTER LVII.

Trypho,^ pupil of Origen, to whom some
of his extant letters are addressed, was very
learned in the Scriptures, and this many of
his works show here and there, but especially
the book which he composed On the red
heifer *^ in Deuteronomy, and On the halves^
which with the pigeon and the turtledoves
were oflbred by Abraham as recorded in
Genesis.*

CHAPTER LVIII.

MiNUCius ® Felix, a distinguished advo-
cate of Rome, wrote a dialogue representing
a discussion between a Christian and a Gen-
tile, which is entitled Octavius^ and still an-
other work passes current in his name, On
fite^ or Arrainst the matheniaticiaus^ but
this although it is the work of a talented
man, does not seem to me to correspond in
style with the above mentioned work. Lac-
tantius also mentions this Minucius in his
works.

CHAPTER LIX.

Gaius,' bishop of Rome, in the time of
Zephyrinus, that is, in the reign of Anto-
ninus, the son of Severus, delivered a very
notable disputation Against rroculus^ the
follower of ISIontanus, convicting him of

1 Died about 2:50.

^rtnfo/.iTc Val. Her.; "audio him "A II 25 30; "and
to tin's lime " n 31.

■' I'Mouiishcd nbtnit 240.

* red hfifcr Numb. 19, 2. (?) or Dcut. Ch. 21.

f' Genesis 15, y-in.

e FlourislK-a 19O.' ' Died about 217.


JEROME.


67b


temerity in his defence of the new prophecy,
and in the same volume also enumerating
only thirteen epistles of Paul, says that the
fourteenth, which is now called. To the
Hebrews^ is not by him, and is not consid-
ered among the Romans to the present day
as being by the apostle Paul.

CHAPTER LX.

Beryllus,' bishop of Bostra in Arabia,
after he had ruled the church gloriously * for
a little while, finally lapsed into the heresy
which denies that Christ existed before the
incarnation. Set right by Origen, he wrote
various short w^orks, especially letters, in
which he thanks Origen. The letters of
Origen to him, are also extant, and a
dialogue between Origen and Beryllus as
well, in which heresies are discussed. He
was distinguished during the reign of Alex-
ander, son of Mammaea, and Maximinus
and Gordianus, who succeeded him in
power.

CHAPTER LXI.

HiPPOLYTus, ^ bishop of some church
(the name of the city I have not been able
to learn) wrote A reckoning of the Paschal
feast and chronological tables which he
worked out up to the first year of the Em-
peror Alexander. He also discussed the
cycle of sixteen years, which the Greeks
called kKKai6£KaEri]pi6a and gave the cue to
Eusebius, who composed on the same
Paschal feast a cycle of nineteen years, that
is hvcaKaidEKaeTyplda. Hc wrote some Com-
mentaries on the Scriptures, among which
are the following : On the six days of
creation^ On Bxodtis, On the Song of
Songs, On Genesis^ On Zechariah, On
the Psalms, On Isaiah, On Daniel, On the
Apocalypse, On the Proverbs, On Ecclesi-
astcs, On Saul, On the Pythonissa, On the
Antichrist, On the resurrection, Against
Marcion, On the Passover, Against all
heresies, and an exhortation On the praise
of otir Lord a7zd Saviour, in which he
indicates that he is speaking in the church in
the presence of Origen. Ambrosius, who
we have said was converted by Origen from
the heresy of Marcion, to the true faith,
urged Origen to write, in emulation of
Hyppolytus, commentaries on the Script-
ures, offering him seven, and even more
secretaries, and their expenses, and an equal
number of copyists, and what is still more,
with inci'edible zeal, daily exacting work

' Flourished about 230.

"^gloriously A 31 e a 10 21 Bamb. Norimb. Val.: omit T zk
30 H Her. ^

5 Bishop 217-S, died 229-3S.


fi"om him, on which account Origen, in one
of his epistles, calls him his " Task-
master."

CHAPTER LXn.

Alexander," bishop of Cappadocia, de-
siring to visit the Holy Land, came to
Jerusalem, at the time when Narcissus,
bishop of this city, already an old man,
ruled the church. It was revealed to Nar-
cissus and many of his clergy, that on the
morning of the next day, a bishop would
enter the city, who should be assistant on
the sacerdotal throne. And so it came to
pass, as it was predicted, and all the bishops
of Palestine being gathered together. Nar-
cissus himself being especially urgent, Alex-
ander took with him the helm of the church
of Jerusalem. At the end of one of his
epistles, written to the Antinoites On the
peace of the church. He says "Narcissus,
who held the bishopric here before me, and
now with me exercises his office by his
prayers, being about a hundred and sixteen
yeai-s old, salutes you, and with me begs
you to become of one mind." He wrote
another also Po the Antiocheans, by the
hand of Clement, the presbyter of
Alexandria, of whom we spoke above,
another also To Origen, and In behalf of
Origen against Demetrius, called forth by
the fact that, according to the testimony of
Demetrius, he had made Origen presbyter.
There are other epistles of his to difierent
persons. In the seventh persecution under
Decius, at the time when Babylas of Antioch
was put to death, brought to Caesarea and
shut up in prison, he received the crown of
martyrdom for confessing Christ.

CHAPTER LXIII.

Julius Africanus," whose five volumes
On Chronology, are yet extant, in the reign
of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, who suc-
ceeded Macrinus, received a commission to
restore the city of Emmaus, which after-
wards was called Nicopolis. There is an
epistle of his to Origen, On the question of
Susanna^ where it is contended that this
story is not contained in the Hebrew, and is
not consistent with the Hebrew etymology in
respect of the play on " prinos and prisai,"
" schinos and schisai." In reply to this, Ori-
gen wrote a learned epistle. There is extant
another letter of his. To Aristides, in which
he discusses at length the discrepancies, which
appear in the genealogy of our Saviour, as
recorded by Matthew and Luke.


1 Bishop at Jerusalem 212, died 250.
* . . . 221.


376


JEROMI-: AXD GEXXADIUS.


CHAPTER LXIV.

Gemimus,' prcslnter of the church at
Atitioch, composed a few monuments of his
genius, flourisliing in the time of the Em-
peror Alexander and Zebennus, bishop of
his city, especially at the time at which
llcraclas was ordained Pontiifof the church
at Alexandria.

CHAPTER LXV.

-^ TiiEODORus,^ afterwards called Gregory,
"^ bishop of Neocaesarea in Pontus, while yet
a very young man, in company with his
brother Athenodorus, went from Cajipadocia
to Berytus, and thence to Caesarea in Pales-
tine, to study Greek and Latin literature.
When Origen had seen the remarkable nat-
ural ability of these men, he urged them to
study philosophy, in the teaching of which
he gradually introduced the matter of faith
in Christ, and made them also his followers.
So, instructed by him for five years, they
were sent back by him to their mother;'
Theodorus, on his departure, wrote a pane-
gyric of thanks to Origen, and delivered it
before a large assembly, Origen himself
being present. This panegyric is extant at
the present day.

He wrote also a short, but very valuable,
paraphrase On Ecclcsiasfes^ and current
report speaks of other epistles of his, but
more especially of the signs and wonders,
wliich as bishop, he performed to the great
glory of the churches.

CHAPTER LXVI.

Cornelius,' bishop of Rome, to whom
eight letters of Cyprian are extant, wrote a
letter to Fabius,'* bishop of tlic church at
Antioch, On the Roman, Italian, and Af-
rican councils, and anotiier On JVovatian,
and those who had fallen from the faith, a
third On the acts of the co?incil, and a fourth
very prolix one to the same Fabius, contain-
ing the causes of the Novatian lieresy and
an anathema of it. He ruled the church for
two years under Gallus and Volusianus.
He received the crown of martyrdom for
Christ, and was succeeded by Lucius.


/


CHAPTER LXVH.

Cyprian ' of Africa, at first was fiimous
as a teacher of rhetoric, and afterwards on
the persuasion of the presbyter Caecilius,

1 Presbyter at Antioch about 232.

2 Gregory of Neoccsarca, born 21015, bishop 340, died
about 270.

3 Risliop 251, died 252.

* Fahitta. Some inss. Fabianus.

* Born about 200, bishop 24S, died at Cartilage 25S.


from whom he received his surname, he be-
came a Christian, and gave all his substance
to the poor.,'^ Not long after he was inducted
into tlie presbytery, and was also made
bishop of Carthage. It is unnecessary
to make a catalogue of the works of his
genius, since they are more conspicuous than
the sun.

He was put to death under the Emperors
Valerian and Gallienus, in the eighth perse-
cution, on the same day that Cornelius was
put to death at Rome, but not in the same
year.

CHAPTER LXVI II.

Pontius,' deacon of Cyprian, sharing his
exile until the day of his death, left a notable
volume On the life and death of Cypriatz.

CHAPTER LXIX.

DiONYSius," bishop of Alexandria, as
presbyter had charge of the catechetical
school under Heraclas, and was the most
distinguished joupil of Origen. Consent-
ing to the doctrine of Cyprian and the
African synod, on the rebaptizing '"' of here-
tics, he sent many letters to diflerent peo-
ple, which are yet extant; He wrote one
to Fabius, bishop of the church at Antioch,
On penitence, another To the l^ovians, by
the hand of Hippolytus, two letters To Xys-
tus^ who had succeeded Stephen, two also
To Philemon and Dionysiiis, presbyters of
the church at Rome, and another To the
same Dionysius, afterwards bishop of Rome,
and To Novatian, treating of their claim
that Novatian had been ordained bishop of
Rome, against his will. The beginning of
this epistle is as follows: "Dionysius to
Novatian, his brother greeting. If you
have been ordained unwillingly, as you say,
you will prove it, when you shall willingly
retire."

There is another epistle of his also To
Dionysitts and Didymns, and many Festal
epistles on the passover, written in a de-
clamatory style, also one to the church of
Alexandria On exile, one To Hierax,* bishop
in Egypt, and yet others On viortality. On
the Sabbath, and On the gymnasium, also
one To Hermamnion and others 0)1 the per-
secution of Decius, and two books Against
Nepos the bishop, who asserted in his writ-
ings a thousand years reign in the body.
Among other things he diligently discussed
the Apocalypse of John, and wrote Against
Sabellius and To Ammon, bishop of Ber-

' Died about 260.

- Presliylcr 232, oxilt'd ^51) aiul jj;, died 265.

■' r.lui/'iiiiiii,' -.1 c ^^ll. ilei. ; /<ii/>/izi»n^ A'f II T 25 30 31.

■• Uieru.x (J jiuscb. Vul. Her. Ilcraolas A II T 25 30 31.


JEROME.


-1 >7 >T


nice, and To Telesphorus^ also To Euphra-
iior, also four books To Dionysiiis^ bishop;
of Rome, to the Laodiceans On penitence^
to Origen On martyrdo7n^ to the Armenians
On peniience^^ a\^o On the order of trans-
gressio7z^ to Timotiiy On nature, to EujDhra-
nor On temptation^ many letters also To
Basilides, in one of which he asserts that
he also began to write commentaries on
Ecclesiastes. The notable epistle which he
wrote against Paul of Samosta, a few days
before his death is also current. He died in
the twelfth year of Gallienus.


CHAPTER LXX.

NoVATiANUS,^ presbyter of Rome, at-
tempted to usurp the sacerdotal chair occu-
pied by Cornelius, and established the
dogma of the Novatians, or as they are
called in Greek, the Cathari, by refusing to
receive penitent apostates. Novatus, author
of this doctrine, was a presbyter of Cyprian.
He wrote, On the passover. On the Sabbath,
On circumcision, On the priesthood. On
prayer^ On the food of the fews. On zeal.
On Attains, and many others, especially, a
great volume On the Trinity <, a sort of epit-
ome of the work of Tertullian, which many
mistakenly ascribe to Cyprian.

CHAPTER LXXI.

Malchion,* the highly gifted presbyter of
the church at Antioch, who had most suc-
cessfully taught rhetoric in the same city,
lield a discussion with Paul of Samosata,
who as bishop of the church at Antioch, had
introduced the doctrine of Artemon, and
this was taken down by short hand writers.
This dialogue is still extant, and yet another
extended epistle written by him, in behalf of
the council, is addressed to Dionysius and
Maximus, bishops of Rome and Alexandria.

He flourished under Claudius and Aureli-
anus.

CHAPTER LXXII.

Archelaus,* bishop of Mesopotamia,
composed in the Syriac language, a book of
the discussion which he held with Mani-
chaeus, when he came from Persia. This
book, which is translated into Greek, is
possessed by many.

He flourished under the Emperor Probus,
who succeeded Aurelianus and Tacitus.


"^penitence A T 25 30 a Her.; penitence likewise Canon on
penitence H 31 e 10 21 Val.

2 Flourished about 250 sq.

3 Prayer A H 25 30 31 21; Ordination e 'r Her.

♦ Flourished 37a. •" Flourished about 27S.


CHAPTER LXXni.

r;

Anatolius ' of Alexandria, bishop of
Laodicea in Syria, who flourished under the
emperors Probus and Cams, was a man of
wonderful learning in arithmetic, geometry,
astronomy, grammar, rhetoric, and dialectic.
We can get an idea of the greatness of his
genius from the volume which he wrote
On the passover and his ten books On the
institutes of arithmetic. -jp.

CHAPTER LXXIV.

ViCTORiNUS,^ bishop of Pettau, was not
equally familiar with Latin and Greek. On
this account his works though noble in


thought, are inferior in style.


They are the
Genesis, On
Isaiah, On
Ecclesiastes,


following : Commentaries On

Exodus, Oft Leviticus, On

Ezekiel, On Habakkuk, On

On the Song of Songs, On the Apocalypse

of John, Against all heresies and many

others. At the last he received the crown of

martyrdom.

CHAPTER LXXV.

Pamphilus ^ the presbyter, patron of Eu-
sebius bishop of Caesarea, was so inflamed
with love of sacred literature, that he tran-
scribed the greater part of the works of Ori-
gen with his own hand and these are still
preserved in the library at Caesarea. I
have twenty-five volumes * of Commentaries
of Origen, written in his hand, On the
twelve prophets which I hug and guard with
such joy, that I deem myself to have the
wealth of Croesus. And if it is such joy to
have one epistle of a martyr how much more
to have so many thousand lines which seem
to me to be traced in his blood. He wrote
an Apology for Origen before Eusebius had
written his and was put to death at Caes-
area in Palestine in the persecution of
Maximtnus.

CHAPTER LXXVI.

7 PiERius," presbyter of the church at Alex-
andria in the reign of Cams and Diocletian,
at the time when Theonas ruled as bishop in
the same church, taught the people with
great success and attained such elegance of
language and published so many treatises on
all sorts of subjects (which are still extant)
that he was called Origen Junior. He was
remarkable for his self-discipline, devoted

ac-
the


to voluntary poverty, and thoroughly
quainted with the dialectic art. After


1 Born about 230, bishop 270, died about 2S3.

2 Bishop of Pettau 303, died 304. ' Died 309.

4 volumes A H 31 a e 10 21 Val. ; omit T 25 30 Her.

3 flourished before 299.


378


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


persecution, lie passed the rest of liis life at
Rome. There is extant a long treatise of his
On the prophet Ilosca which from internal
evidence appears to have been delivered on
the vigil of Passover.

CHAPTER LXXVII.

LuciANUS,' a man of great talent, presby-
ter of the church at Antioch, was so diligent
in the study of the Scriptures, that even now
certain copies of the Scriptures bear tlie name
of Lucian. Works of his. On faiths and
short Epistles to various people are extant.
He was put to death at Nicomedia for his
confession of Christ in the persecution of
Alaxiininus, and was buried at Helenopolis
in Bithynia.

CHAPTER LXXVHI.

PniLEAS ' a resident of that Egyptian city
which is called Thmuis, of noble family, and
no small wealth, having become bishop,
composed a finely written work in praise of
martyrs and arguing against the judge who
tried to compel him to offer sacrifices, was
beheaded for Christ during the same perse-
cution in which Lucianus was put to death
at Nicomedia.

CHAPTER LXXIX.

V Arnobius ^ was a most successful teacher
of rhetoric at Sicca in Africa during the reign
of Diocletian, and wrote volumes Against the
nations which may be found ever3'where.^

CHAPTER LXXX.

-4 FiRMiANUS,* known also as Lactantius, a
disciple of Arnobius, during the reign of
Diocletian smnmoned to Nicomedia with
Flavius the Grammarian whose poem On
medicine is still extant, taught rhetoric there
and on account of his lack of pupils (since it
was a Greek city) he betook himself to writ-
ing. We have a Banquet of his which he
wrote as a young man in Africa and an
Itinerary of a journey from Africa to Ni-
comedia written in hexameters, and another
l)ook which is called The Grammarian and
a most beautiful one On the wrath of God^
and Divine institutes against the nations^
seven books, and an Epitorne of the same
work in one volume, without a title,'' also two
books To Asclepiades ^ ow<t\^ov)\K On persecu-
tion^ four books of Epistles to Probiis^ two

'Died .^12. •■' Flourished 295.

» Died after 306. < Died .^25.

^without a title "that is a compendium of the l.-tRt three
books only" as Cave explains it. Ffoulkes in Smith and W.
But no.


books of Epistles to Severus^ two books of
Epistles to his pupil Demetrius ' and one
book to the same On the work of God or the
creation of man. In his extreme old age
he was tutor to Crispus Caesar a son of Con-
stantine in Gaul, the same one who was
afterwards put to death by his father.

CHAPTER LXXXI.

EusEBius " bishop of Caesarea in Pales-
tine was diligent in the study of Divine
vScriptures and with Pamphilus the martyr
a most diligent investigator of the Holy
Bible. He published a great number of
volumes among which are the following:
Demonstrations of the Gospel twenty books
Preparations for the Gospel fifteen books,
Theophany'^ five books. Church history
ten books. Chronicle of Universal history
and an Epitome of this last. Also On dis-
crepancies between the Gospels^ On Isaiah^
ten books, also Against Porphyry., who
was writing at that same time in Sicily as
some think, twenty-five books, aLso one
book of Topics., six books of Apology for
Origen., three books On the life of Pam-
philus., other brief works On the martyrs.,
exceedingly learned Cojnmentaries oti one
hundred and fifty Psalms., and many
others. He flourished chiefly in the reigns
of Constantine the Great and Constantius.
His surname Pami)hilus arose from his
friendship for Pamphilus the martyr.

CHAPTER LXXXH.

Reticius* bishop of Autun, among the
Aedui, had a great reputation in Gaul in
the reign of Constantine. I have read his
commentaries On the Sotig of Songs and
another great volume Against Novatian but
besides these, I have found no works of his.

CHAPTER LXXXIH.

Methodius,* bishop of Olympus in
Lycia and afterwards of Tyre, composed
hook?, Against Porphyry written in polished
and logical style also a Banquet of the ten
virgins., an excellent work On the resurrec-
tion., against Origen and On the Pythonissa
and On free will., also against Origen. He
also wrote commentaries On Genesis and On
the Song of Songs and many others which
are widely read. At the end of the recent

' tvjo books . . . Sevents . . • Demetrius e a H 10 3i Val.;
omit T2S 30 31 Ilcr.

' Born 267, bishop about 315, died about 33S.

3 Theophany T 31 Val. Her. ; omit A H 25 30 a? e.

* Bishop 313, died 334. '" Died 311 or 313.


JEROME.


3^9


persecution or, as others affirm, in the reign
of Decius and Valerianus, he was crowned
with martyrdom at Chalcis in Greece.

CHAPTER LXXXIV.

JuvENCUS,' a Spaniard of noble family
and presbyter, translating the four gospels
almost verbally in hexameter verses, com-
posed four books. He wrote some other
things in the same metre relating to the
order of the sacraments. He flourished in
the reign of Constantinus.

CHAPTER LXXXV.

EusTATHius,^ a Pamphilian from Side,
bishop ■* first of Beroea in vSyria and then of
Antioch, ruled the chui'ch and, composing
many things against the doctrine of the
Arians, was driven into exile under the em-
peror Constantius ■* into Trajanopolis in
Thrace where he is until this day. Works of
his are extant On the soul. On ventriloquism
Against Orlgen and Letters too numerous
to mention.

CHAPTER LXXXVI.

Marcellus,* bishop of Ancyra, flourisned
in the reign of Constantinus and Constantius
and wrote many volumes of various Proposi-
tions and especially against the Arians. Works
of Asterius and Apollinarius against him are
current, which accuse him of Sabellianism.
Hilary too, in the seventh book of his work
Against the Arians, mentions him as a here-
tic, but he defends himself against the charge
through the fact that Julius and Athanasius
bishops of Rome and Alexandria communed
with him.

CHAPTER LXXXVII.

Athanasius ® bishop of Alexandria, hard
pressed by the wiles of the Arians, fled
to Constans emperor of Gaul. Returning
thence with letters and, after the death of
the emperor, again taking refuge in flight,
he kept in hiding until the accession of
Jovian, when he returned to the church and
died in the reign of Valens. Various works
by him are in circulation ; two books
Against the nations one Against Valens

1 Flourished 330.

2 Died 337, (or according' to others 370-82.) Jerome in this
chapter seems, unless the usual modern view is confused, to
have mixed up Eustathius of Antioch with Eusebius of Se-
baste.

3 Bishop AH T 25 30 Her; omit 31 32 a e Val.

* Constantius this is supposed to be an evident slip for
Constantinus (Compare Venables in Smith and Wace Diet.
v. 2, p. 383) but if there is confusion with Eustathius of Sebaste
as suggested above possibly the latter's deposition bv Constan-
tius is referred to. But the difficulty remains almost as great.

5 Died 372, or 374 (Ffoulkes.)

* Born about 296, died 373.


and Ursacius, On virginity, very many
On the persecutions of the Arians, also On
the titles of the Psahns and Life of An-
thony the monk, also Festal epistles and
other works too numerous to mention.

CHAPTER LXXXVHI.

Anthony ' the monk, whose life Athana-
sius bishop of Alexandria wrote a long work
upon, sent seven letters in Coptic to various
monasteries, letters truly apostolic in idea
and language, and which have been trans-
lated into Greek. The chief of these is To
the Arsenoites. He flourished during the
reign of Constantinus and his sons.

CHAPTER LXXXIX.

Basil* bishop ot Ancyra, [a doctor of]'
medicine, wrote a book Against Marcellus
and on virginity and some other things —
and in the reign of Constantius was, with
Eustathius of Sebaste, primate of Mace-
donia.

CHAPTER XC.

Theodorus," bishop of Heraclea in
Thrace, published in the reign of the
emperor Constantius commentaries On
Matthew and fohn. On the Epistles and
On the Psalter. These are written in a
polished and clear style and show an excel-
lent historical sense.

CHAPTER XCI.

Eusebius ^ of Emesa, who had fine rhe-
torical talent, composed innumerable works
suited to win popular applause and writing
historically he is most diligently read by
those who practise public speaking. Among
these the chief are, Against J^ews, Gentiles
and Novatians and Homilies on the Gos-
pels, brief but numerous. He flourished in
the reign of the emperor Constantius in
whose reign he died, and was buried at
Antioch.

CHAPTER XCII.

Triphylius, bishop of Ledra or Leu-
cotheon,^ in Cyprus, was the most eloquent
man of his age, and was distinguished dur-
ing the reign of Constantius. I have read
his Commentary on the Song of Songs.
He is said to have written many other works,
none of which have come to our hand.


1 Born 251, died 356.

- Bishop of Ancyra 336-344, 3S3-60, 361-3.
^ A doctor of So T?and some editions. Most mss. omit
(gnarus) but it needs to be supplied in translation.

< Bishop 335, died 355? '' Bishop 344, died about 370.

6 Died before 359. ^ Leucot/teo/i :^ he\xiQQn.


38o


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


CHAPTER XCIII.

DoNATus,' from whom the Donatians
arose in ^Africa in the reigns of the emperors
Constantinus and Constantius, asserted that
the scriptures were given up to the heathen
by the orthodox during the persecution, and
deceived ahnost all Africa, and especially
Numidia by his persuasiveness. Many of
his works, which relate to his heresy, are ex-
tant, including On the Holy Spirit^ a work
which is Arian in doctrine.

CHAPTER XCIV.

AsTERius,^ a philosopher of the Arian
party, wrote, during the reign of Constan-
tius, commentaries On the Kpistle to the
Rofuans^ On the Gospels and On the Psalms^
also many other works which are diligently
read by those of his party.

CHAPTER XCV.

Lucifer,^ bishop of Cagliari, was sent by
Liberius the bishop, with Pancratius and
Hilary, clergy of the Roman church, to the
emperor Constantius, as legates for the faith.
When he would not condemn the Nicene
faith as represented by Athanasius, sent
again to Palestine, with wonderful constancy
and willingness to meet martyrdom, he wrote
a book against the emperor Constantius and
sent it to be read by him, and not long after
he returned to Cagliari in the reign of the
emperor Julian and died in the reign of Val-
entinian.

CHAPTER XCVI.

EusEBius,'* a native of Sardinia, at first a
lector at Rome and afterwards bishop of
Vercelli, sent by the emperor Constantius to
Scythopolis, and afterwards to Cappadocia,
on account of his confession of the faith, re-
turned to the church under the emperor
Julian and published the Commefitaries of
Eiiscbhis of Caesar ea on the Psalms^ which
he had translated from Greek into Latin, and
died during the reign of Valentian and
Valens.

CHAPTER XCVn.

FoRTUNATiANUS,* an African by birth,
bishop of Aquilia during the reign of Con-
stantius, composed brief Commentaries on
the gospels arranged by chapters, written in
a rustic style, and is held in detestation be-
cause, when Liberius bishop of Rome was


» Bishop 31.^, —355.

* AsteiiuK of Cappadocia, died about 330.
' Bishop 353, died 370.

* Bf)rn about 315, Bisliop about 340, exiled 355-62, died 371-5.
« Flourished 313-355.


driven into exile for the faith, lie was in-
duced by the urgency of Fortunatianus to
subscribe to heresy.

CHAPTER XCVni.

AcACius,' who, because he was blind in
one eye, they nicknamed "• the one-eyed,"
bishop of the church of Caesarea in Pales-
tine, wrote seventeen volumes On Eccleslas-
tes and six of Miscellaneous questions^ and
many ti^eatises besides on various subjects.
He was so influential in the reign of the em-
peror Constantius that he made Felix bishop
of Rome in the place of Liberius.

CHAPTER XCIX.

Serapion,^ bishop of Thmuis, who on ac-
count of his cultivated genius was found
worthy of the surname of Scholasticus, was
the intimate friend of Anthony the monk, and
published an excellent book Against the
Manichaeans^ also another On the titles of
the Psalms., and valuable Epistles to different
people. In the reign of the emperor Con-
stantius he was renowned as a confessor.

CHAPTER C.

Hilary,^ bishop of Poitiers in Aquit-
ania, was a member of the party of Saliuni-
nus bishop of Aries. Banished into Phrygia
by the Synod of Beziers he composed twelve
books Against the Arians and another book
On Councils written to the Galilean bish-
ops, and Commentaries on the Psalms that
is on the first and second, from the fifty-
first to the sixty-second, and from the one
hundred and eighteenth to the end of the
book. In this work he imitated Origen,
but added also some original matter. There
is a little book of his To Constantijis which
he presented to the emperor while he was
living in Constantinople, and another On
Constantius which he wrote after his death
and a book Against Valens and Ursacius^
containing a history of the Ariminian and
Selucian Councils and To Sallust the pre-
fect or Against Dioscurus^ also a book of
Hymns and 7nystcrics^ a commentary On
Matthew and treatises On Job., which he
translated freely from the Greek of Origen,
and another elegant little work Against
Auxentius and Epistles to different i:)ersons.
They say he has written On the Song of
Songs but this work is not known to us.
He died at Poictiers during the reign of
Valentinianus and Valens.

' Bishop about 33S, died 365-6.

' Scrapion the scholastic, died about 35S.

3 Bishop 350-5, exiled 356-00, died at Poitiers 367-8.


JEROME.


381


:^


CHAPTER CI.


ViCTORiNUS,' an African by birth, taught
rhetoric at Rome under the emperor Con-
stantius and in extreme old age, yielding
himself to faith in Christ wrote books
against Arius, written in dialectic style and
very obscure language, books which can
only be understood by the learned. He also
wrote Commentaries on the EpistlesiJ

CHAPTER CH.

Titus ^ bishop of Bostra, in the reign of
the emperors Julian and Jovinian wrote
vigorous works against the Manichaeans,
and some other things. He died under
Valens.

CHAPTER CHI.

Damasus,^ bishop of Rome, had a fine
talent for making verses and published many
brief works in heroic metre. He died in
the reign of the Emperor Theodosius at the
age of almost eighty.

CHAPTER CIV.

' Apollinarius,'' bishop of Laodlcea, in
Syria, the son of a presbyter, applied him-
self in his youth to the diligent study of
grammar, and afterwards, writing innumer-
able volumes on the Holy Scriptures, died
in the reign of the Emperor Theodosius.
There are extant thirty books by him Against
Porphyry^ which are generally considered
as among the best of his works.* _

CHAPTER CV.

Gregory, * bishop of Elvira,' in Baetlca,
writing even to extreme old age, composed
various treatises in mediocre language, and
an elegant work On Faith. He is said to
be still living.

CHAPTER CVI.

Pacianus,® bishop of Barcelona, in the
Pyrenees Mountains, a man of chaste elo-
quence, and as distinguished by his life as
by his speech, wrote various short works,
among which are The Deer^ and Against

1 Caius or Fabius Marius Victorinus, died about 370.

2 Ordained 361, died 371.

2 Pope Damasus, died 3S0.

* ApoUinaris the younger, Bishop 362, died about 390.

'• Works " generally recognized as authentic " Matougues.

* Gregory Baeticus Bishop of Elvira 359-392.
' Elvira, Eliberi or Grenada.

8 Bishop about 360, died about 390.

9 ^^^^, This title has given rise to a good deal of conject
ure. Fabricius's conjecture that it referred to certain games
held on the Kalends of January is doubted by Vallarsi, but
appears to have been really acute, from the fact that two mss.
read " The deer [CervulusJ on the Kalends of Janu;uy and
against other pagan games."


the JVovatians, and died in the reign of
Emperor Theodosian, in extreme old age.

CHAPTER CVII.

Photinus,' of Gallograecia, a disciple of
Marcellus, and ordained bishop of Sirmium,
attempted to introduce the Ebionite heresy,
and afterwards having been expelled from
the church by the Empei'or Valentinianus,
wrote many volumes, among which the most
distinguished are Against the nations^ and
To Valentinianus.


CHAPTER CVIII.

Phoebadius,^ bishop of Agen, in Gaul,
published a book Against the Arians.
There are said to be other works by him,
which I have not yet read. He is still living,
infirm with age.


CHAPTER CIX.


,/


DiDYMUs,^ of Alexandria, becoming blind
while very young, and therefore ignorant of
the rudiments of learning, displayed such a
miiacle of intelligence as to learn perfectly
dialectics and even geometry, sciences which
especially require sight. He wrote many
admirable works : Commentaries on all the
Psalms., Commentaries on the Gospels of
Matthew and John., On the doctrines., also
two books Against the Arians., and one
book On the Holy Spirit., which I translated
in Latin, eighteen volumes On Isaiah., three
books of commentaries On Uosea., addressed
to me, and five books On Zechariah., written
at my request, also commentaries On Job.,
and many other things, to give an account of
which would be a work of itself.'' He is
still living, and has already passed his eighty-
third year.

CHAPTER ex.

Optatus * the African, bishop of Milevis,*
during the reign of the Emperors Valentini-
anus and Valens, wrote in behalf of the
Catholic party six books against the calumny
of the Donatian party, in which he asserts
that the crime of the Donatists is falsely
charged upon the catholic party.


1 Bishop about 347, deposed 351, died about 376.

2 Bishop 3SS, died about 392.

3 Born about 311, flourished about 315, died 396.

* itself " The titles of which are well Icnown." Matougues.
■■' Flourished about 370.

" Milevis or Mileum ^ Milah " a town of Numidia 25 miles
north-west of Cirta." Phillott.


38:


JEROME AND GENNADTUS.


CHAPTER CXI.

AciLius Severus ' of Spain, of the family
of tliat Severus to whom Lactantius' two
books of Epistles are addressed, composed a
volume of mingled poetry and pi'ose which
is a sort of guide book to his whole life.
This he called Calamity or Trial.' lie
died in the reign of Valentinianus.

CHAPTER CXI I.

Cyril,'' bishop of Jerusalem often expelled
by the church, and at last received, held the
episcopate for eight consecutive years, in the
reign of Theodosius. Certain Catechetical
lectures of his, composed while he was a
young man, are extant.

y CHAPTER CXIII.

Euzoius," as a young man, together with
Gregory, bishop of Nazianzan, was edu-
cated by Thespesius the rhetorician at
Caesarea, and afterwards when bishop of
the same city, with great pains attempted
to restore the library, collected by Origen
and Pamphilus, which had already suffered
injury. At last, in the reign of the Emperor
Theodosian, he was expelled from the
church. Many and various treatises of his
are in circulation, and one may easily be-
come acquainted with them.

CHAPTER CXIV.

Epiphanius," bishop of Salamina in
Cyprus, wrote books Against all heresies.^
and many others which are eagerly read by
the learned, on account of their subject mat-
ter, and also by the plain people, on account
of their language. He is still living, and in
his extreme old age composes various brief
works.

CHAPTER CXV.

Epiiraim,® deacon of the church at Edessai
composed many works in the Syriac lan-
guage, and became so distinguished that his
writings are repeated 2:)uhlicly in some
churches, after the reading of the Scriptures.

I once read in Greek a volume by him
On the Holy Spirit^ which some one had
translated from the Syriac, and recognized
even in translation, the incisive power of
lofty genius.

He died in the reign of Valens.

1 Died before 376 Fabricius and Miijnc read A(|uilus,
Hoiiorius has Achiliiis but the inss. read as above. Tliis is
the only source of information and the work is lost.

- Trial " Vicissitudes or proofs." Matouf^ues.

3 Cyril of Jcrusaleni, born about 315, Hishop 350-7, iSiH'O,
362-7, 37S to his death in 3S0.

•• Deposed about 379.

" Horn about 310, bishop about 3rtS-o, died i\,o},.

<= Ephrem of Nisibis =:Ephrein"Syrus died 37S.


CHAPTER CXVI.

Basil,' bishop of Caesarea in Cappado-
cia, the city formerly called Mazaca, com-
posed admirable carefully written books
Against Eunojnius., a vokmie On the Holy
Spirit^ and nine homilies On the six days
oj" creation, also a work On asceticism and
short treatises on various subjects. He died
in the reign of Gratianus.

CHAFFER CXVII.

Gregory," bishop of Nazianzen, a most
eloquent man, and my insti'uctor in the
Scriptures, composed works, amounting in
all to thirty thousand lines, among which
are On the death of his brother Cacsarins,
On charity, In praise of the JMaccabecs,
In praise of Cyprian, In praise of Atha-
7/asi?(s, In praise of Maximns the philoso-
pher after he had returned from exile. This
latter however, some superscribe with the
pseudonym of Herona, since there is another
work by Gregory, upbraiding this same
Maximus, as if one might not praise and
upbraid the same person at one time or
another as the occasion may demand. Other
works of his are a book in hexameter, con-
taining, A discussion bctiveen virginity and
marriage, two books Agai?zst Eunomins,
one book On the Holy Spirit, and one
Against the Emperor Julian. He was a
follower of Polemon in his style of speaking.
Having ordained his successor in the bishop-
ric, during his own life time, he retired to
the country where he lived the life of a
monk and died, three years or more ago, in
the reign of Theodosius.

CHAPTER CXVIII.

Lucius,^ bishop of the Arian party after
Athanasius, held the bishopric of the church
at Alexandria, until the time of the Emperor
Theodosius, by whom he was deposed.

Certain festal epistles of his, On the pass-
over are extant, and a few short works of
Miscellaneous propositions.

CHAPTER CXIX.

DiODORUS," bishop of Tarsus enjoyed a
great reputation while he was still presbyter
of Antioch. Commentaries of his On the
epistles are extant, as well as many other
works in the manner of Eusebius the great
of Emesa, whose meaning he has followed,

' Basil the Great, born 329, bisliop 370 died 379.

2 (iregory Na/.ianzaii born ahuut 3.>:;, Bislioi) 373, died3S9.

3 Lucius bishop of Suniosata, at Alexanihia 373, deposed
378. ■• Died before 394.


JEROME.


.vS3


but whose eloquence he could not imitate on
account of his ignorance of secular literature.

CHAPTER CXX.

EuNOMius,' bishop of Cyzicus and mem-
ber of the Arian party, fell into such open
blasphemy in his heresy, as to proclaim
publicly what the others concealed. He is
said to be still living in Cappadocia, and to
write much against the church. Replies to
him have been made by Apollinarius, Did-
ymus, Basil of Caesai-ea, Gregory Nazianzen,
and Gregory of Nyssa.

CHAPTER CXXI.

Priscillianus,^ bishop of Abila, belonged
to the party of Hydatius and Ithacius, and
was put to death at Treves by the tyrant
Maximus. He published many short writ-
ings, some of which have reached us. He
is still accused by some, of being tainted
with Gnosticism, that is, with the heresy of
Basilides or Mark, of whom Irenaeus writes,
while his defenders maintain that he was not
at all of this way of thinking.

CHAPTER CXXH.

Latronianus ^ of Spain, a man of great
learning, and in the matter of versification
worthy to be compared with the poets of an-
cient time, was also put to death at Treves
withPriscillianus, Felicissimus, Julianus, and
Euchrotia, cooriginators with him of schism.
Various fruits of his genius written in differ-
ent metres are extant.

CHAPTER CXXni.

TiBERiANUS,* the Baetican, in answer to
an insinuation that he shared the heresy
of Priscillian, wrote an apology in pompous
and mongrel language. But after the death
of liis friends, overcome by the tediousness
of exile, he changed his mind, as it is written
in Holy Scripture " the dog returned to his
vomit," and married a nun, a virgin dedi-
cated to Christ.

CHAPTER CXXIV.

Ambrose * bishop of Milan, at the present
time is still writing. I withhold my judg-
ment of him, because he is still alive, fearing
either to praise or blame lest in the one
event, I should be blamed for adulation, and
in the other for speaking the truth.


1 Bishop 360, died before 396.

2 Flourished 379, condemned 3S0, died 3S5.

3 Died 385.

* End of 4th Century.

I' Born about 340, baptized 374, died 397,


CHAPTER CXXV.

EvAGRius,' bishop of Antioch, a man of
remarkably keen mind, while he was yet
presbyter read me various treatises on vari-
ous topics, which he had not yet published.
Pie translated also the Life of the blessed
Anthony from the Greek of Athanasius into
our language.

CHAPTER CXXVI.

Ambrose^ of Alexandria, pupil of Didy-
mus, wrote a long work On doctrines
against Apollinaris, and as some one has
lately informed me. Commentaries on Job.
He is still living.

CHAPTER CXXVn.

Maximus ^ the philosopher, born at Alex-
andria, ordained bishop at Constantinople
and deposed, wrote a remarkable work On
faith against the Arians and gave it to the
Emperor Gratianus, at Milan.

CHAPTER CXXVni.

Gregory " bishop of Nyssa, the brother
of Basil of Caesarea, a few years since read
to Gregory Nazianzan and myself a work
against Eunomius. He is said to have also
written many other works, and to be still
writing.

CHAPTER CXXIX.

JoHN,^ presbyter of the church at Antioch,
a follower of Eusebius of Emesa and Diod-
orus, is said to have composed many books,
but of these I have only read his On the
priesthood.

CHAPTER CXXX.

Gelasius,^ bishop of Caesarea in Palestine
after Euzoius, is said to write more or less in
carefully polished style, but not to publish
his works.

CHAPTER CXXXI.

Theotimus,' bishop of Tomi, in Scythia,
has published brief and epigrammatical
treatises, in the form of dialogues, and in
olden style. I hear that he is now writing
other works.


1 Bishop of Antioch, 3SS, died 393.
" Died after 392.

3 A Cynic. Bishop 379. , 0 j- 1 .-.

4 Born 339-2, bishop 372, deposed 376, restored 37S, died utter

c John Chrysostom born at Antioch about 347, at Constanti-
nople 30S, deposed 403, died 407.
1; Bishop 37g, died 39t-5-
" Bishop of Tomes? 392-403.


384


JEROME AND GENNADTUS.


CHAPTER CXXXII.

Dexter,' son of Pacianus whom I men-
tioned above, distingnislied in his generation
and devoted to the Christian faith, has, I am
told, written a Universal History^ which I
have not yet read.

CHAPIT.R CXXXIII.

Amphilochius,^ bishop of Iconium, re-
cently read to mc a book On the Holy
Spirit^ arguing that He is God, that He is
to be worshii^ped, and that He is omnip-
otent.

CHAPTER CXXXIV.

SopiiRONius,' a man of superlative learn-
ing, wrote while yet a lad, hi praise of
Bethlehem^ and recently a notable volume,
On the overthro-iV of Serapis^ and also to
Eustachius, On virginity^ and a Life of
Hilarion the monk. He rendered short
works of mine into Greek in a very finished
style, the Psalter also, and the Prophets^
which I translated from Hebrew into Latin.

CHAPTER CXXXV.

I, Jerome,* son of Eusebius, of the city of
Strido, which is on the border of Dalmatia
and Pannonia and was overthrown by the
Goths, up to the present year, that is, the
fourteenth of the Emperor Theodosius, have
written the following: Life of Paul the
7nonk.i one book of Letters to different per-
sons., an Exhortation to Heliodorus^ Con-
troversy of Lucifer ianus and Orthodoxus.
Chronicle of tiniversal history., 28 homilies

'Flavins Lucius Dexter flourislied 395.

* Ainphilocliius of C;ii)]);uioci:i, bishop 375, died about 400.

3 Klourished 392. Author also of Greeli translation of
Jerome's Illustrious Men?

* Horn 3JI, died 420.


of Origen on feremiah and Ezckiel,
which 1 translated from Greek into Latin,
On the Seraphim., On Osanjza, On the
prudent afid the prodigal sons, On three
questions of the ancient laiu. Homilies on the
Song of Songs two. Against Ilclvidins, On
the perpet2ial virginity of Mary., To Eus-
tochius, On maintaining virginity, one book
of Epistles to Marcclla, a consolatory letter
to Paula On the death of a daughter^ three
books oiCommcntaries on the epistle of Paul
to the Galatians, likewise three books of
Comme?itaries oti the epistle to the Ephe-
sians. On tJie epistle to Titus one book. Oil
the epistle to IViilcmon one, Commentaries
on Ecclesiastes, one book of Hebrew ques-
tions on Genesis, one book On places in
fudea, one book of Hebrew names, Didy-
inus 071 the Holy Spirit, which I translated
into Latin one book, jg homilies on Lukc,^
On Psalms lO to i6, seven books. On the
captive JMonk, The Life of the blessed
Hilario7i. I translated the New 1 estamcnt
from the Greek, and the Old l^estafnent
from the Hebrew,^ and how many Letters
I have written To Paula and Eustochius I
do not know, for I write daily. I wrote
moreover, two books of Explanations on
Micah, one book Oti Nahuni, two books
On Habakkuk, one On Zephaniah, one On
Haggai, and many others On the prophets,
which are not yet finished, and which I am
still at work upon.^


1 59 homilies, T 25 30 Her. ; 59 homilies of Origen A H 31
e a etc.

2 The Old Testament from the Hebrew A H 30 31 a e; omit
T 25 Her.

■■* There are many brief additions to the chapter on Jerome
himself, the most common one (B C D I S V W X Y Z i 2 4 5
6 7 9 II 12 14 15 17 19 20 21 26 27 28 i}, 42 in o p r t u V y z) be-
ing " Two hoo]<.9. Ag a i)ist Joviiiian and an Apology addressed
to Pammachus." Some add also " and an Kpita'phium." A
and k give a long additional account of Jeioiiie.


III. GENNADIUS.


LIST OF THE AUTHORS WHOM GENNADIUS ADDED, AFTER THE

DEATH OF THE BLESSED JEROiME.'


I.

2.

3-

4-

5-
6.

7-
8.

9-

lO.

II.

12.

13-

14.

16.

17-
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23-
24.

25-
26.

27.

28.

29.

30-
31-
32.
33-
34-
35-
36-

37-

38.

39-
40.

41.

43.

43-
44.

45-
46.

47-

48.

49.


James, surnamed the Wise.
Julius, bishop of Rome.
Faulonas the presbyter.
Vitellius the African.
Macrobius the presbyter.
Heliodorus the presbyter.
Pachomius the presbyter-monk.
Theodorus, his successor.
Oresiesis the monk.
Macarius the monk.
Evagrius the monk.
Theodorus the presbyter.
Prudentius.
Audeutius the bishop.
Commodiauus.
Faustinus the presbyter.
Rufinus the presbyter.
Tichonius the African.
Severus the presbyter.
Antiochus the bishop.
Severianus the bishop.
Nicaeas the bishop.
Olympius the bishop.
Bacliiarius.
Sabbatius the bishop.
Isaac.
Ursinus.

Another Macarius.
Heliodorus tiie presbyter.
John, bisliop of Constantinople.
John, another bishop.
Paulus the bishop.
Helvidius.

Theophilus the bishop.
Eusebius the bishop.
Vigilantius the presbyter.
SimpHcianus the bishop.
Vigilius the bishop.
Augustine the bishop.
Orosius the presbyter.
Maximus the bishop.
Petronius the bishop.
Pelagius the heresiarch.
Innocentius the bishop.
Caelestius, follower of Pelagius.
Julianus the bishop.
Lucianus the presbyter.
Avitus the presbyter.
Paulinus the bishop.


VOL. III.


Jerome. This is in a few mss. only.


53-

54-

55-

56.

57-
58.

59-
60.

61.

62.

63.
64.

65.
66.
6^.
68.
69.
70.

P-

72.

73-
74-

76.

78.

79-
80.

81.

82.

83.
84.

85.
86.

87.
88.
89.
90.
91.
93.

93-
94.

95-
96.

97-
98.

99.


Eutropius the presbyter.
Another Evagrius.
Vigilius the deacon.
Atticus the holy bishop.
Nestorius the heresiarch.
Caelestinus the bishop.
Theodorus the bishop.
Fastidius the bishop.
Cyrillus the bishop.
Timotheus the bishop.
Leporius the presbyter.
Victorinus the rhetorician.
Cassianus the deacon.
Philippus the presbyter.
Eucherius the bishop.
Vincentius the Gaul.
Syagrius.

Isaac the presbyter.
Salvianus the presbyter.
Paulinus the bishop.
Hilarius the bishop.
Leo the bishop.
Mochimus the presbyter.
Timotheus the bishop.
Asclepius the bishop.
Peter the presbyter.
Paul the presbyter.
Pastor the bishop.
Victor the bishop.
Voconius the bishop.
Musaeus the presbyter.
Vincentius the presbyter.
Cyrus the monk.
Samuel the presbyter.
Claudianus the presbyter.
Prosper.

Faustus the bishop.
Servus Dei the bishop.
Victorius.

Theodoritus the bishop.
Gennadius the bishop.
Theodulus the presbyter.
John the presbyter.
Sidonius the bishop.
Gelasius the bishop.
Honoratus the bishop.
Cerealis the bishop.
Eugenius the bishop.
Pomcrius the bishop.
Gennadius,


c c


386


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


CHAPTER I.

James,' surnamed the Wise, was bishop
of Nisibis the famous city of the Persians
and one of the confessors under Maximinus
the persecutor. He was also one of those
who, in the Niccan council, by their opposi-
tion overthrew the Arian perversity of the
Homoousia. That the blessed Jerome men-
tions this man in his Chronicle as a man
of great virtues and yet does not place him
in his catalogue of writers, will be easily ex-
plained if we note that of the three or four
Syrians whom he mentions he says that he
read them translated into the Greek. From
this it is evident that, at that period, he did
not know the Syriac language or literature,
and therefore he did not know a writer who
had not yet been translated into another
language. All his writings are contained in
twenty-six books namely On falth^ Against
all heresies^ On charity towards all, On
fastings On prayer , On particular affec-
tioti towards onr neighbor^ On the resurrec-
tion. On the life after death. On humility.
On penite7ice^^ On satisfaction. On virgin-
ity, On the worth ^ of the soul. On circjun-
cision. On the blessed grapes^ On the say-
ing in Isaiah, "the grape cluster shall not
be destroyed," That Christ is the son of
God and con substantial ivith the Father,
On chastity. Against the Nations^ On the
construction of the tabei-nacle. On the
co7iversation of the nations^ On the Per-
sian kingdom. On the persecution of the
Christians. He composed also a CJiro)iicle
of little interest indeed to the Greeks, but of
great relial)ility in that it is constructed only
on the authority of the Divine Scriptures.
It shuts the mouths of those who, on some
daring guess, idly philosophize concerning
the advent of Antichrist, or of our Lord.
This man died in the time of Constantius
and according to the direction of his father
Constantiue was buried within the walls of
Nisibis, for the protection cvidendy of the
city, and it turned out as Constantiue had
expected. For many years after, Julian hav-
ing entered Nisibis and grudging either the
glory of him who was buried there or the
faith of Constantiue, whose family he perse-
cuted on account of this envy, ordered the
remains of the saint to be carried out of the
city, and a few months later, as a matter
of public policy, the Emperor Jovian who


succeeded Julian, gave over to the barbarians
the city which, with the adjoining territory,
is subject unto the Persian rule until this
day.

CHAPTER II.

Julius,' bishop of Rome, wrote to one
Dionysius a single epistle On the incar-
nation of Our Lord, which at that time was
regarded as useful against those who asserted
that, as by incarnation there were two persons
in Christ, so also there were two natures, but
now this too is regarded as injurious for it
nourishes the Eutychian and Timothean
heresies.

CHAPTER HI.

Paulonas,- the Presbyter, disciple of the
blessed deacon Ephraim a man of very en-
ergetic character and learned in the holy
scriptures was distinguished among the
doctors of the church while his master was
still living and especially as an extempora-
neous orator. After the death of his master,
overcome by love of reputation, separating
himself from the church, he wrote many
things opposed to the faith. The blessed
Ephraim when on the point of death is re-
ported to have said to him as he stood by his
side — See to it, Paulonas that you do not
yield yourself to your own ideas, but when
you shall think that you understand God
wholly, believe that you have not known, —
for he felt beforehand from the studies or the
words of Paulonus, that he was investigating
new things, and was stretching out his mind
to the illimitable, whence also he frequently
called him the new Bardesanes.


' worth, mss. generally; /tv//;/^, editions generally.


CHAPTER IV.

ViTEi.Lius ^ the African, defending the
Donatist schism wrote Why the servants
of God are hated by the world, in which,
except in speaking of us as persecutors, he
published excellent doctrine. He wrote also
Against the nations and against us as tradi-
tors of the Holy Scriptures in times of perse-
cution, and wrote much Oji ecclesiastical pro-
cedure. He was distinguished during the
reign of Constans son of the emperor Con-
stantinus.

CHAPTER V.

Macrobius" the Presbyter was likewise
as I learned from the writings of Optatus,
afterwards secretly bishop of the Donatians
in Rome. He wrote, having been up to this


1 Bishop (Pope) ,v^7, died 352.
' Kiouiishcd 370.


•" Fourth century.
♦ Bishop about 370.


GENNADIUS.


3S7


time a presbyter In the church of God, a work
To cofifessors and virgins., a work of ethics
indeed, but of very necessary doctrine as
well and fortified with sentiments well fitted
for the preservation of chastity. He was dis-
tinguished first in our party in Africa and
afterwards in his own, that is among the
Donatians or Montanists at Rome.

CHAPTER VL

Heliodorus * the Presbyter wrote a book
entitled A^i introductory treatise on the
nature of things., in which he showed that
the beginning of things was one, that nothing
was coaeval with God, that God was not
the creator of evil, but in such wise the
creator of all good, that matter, which is used
for'" evil, was created by God after evil was
discovered, and that nothing material what-
ever can be regarded as established in any
other way than by God, and that there was
no other creator than God, who, when by
His foreknowledge He knew that nature was
to be changed," warned of punishment.

CHAPTER VII.

Pachomius * the monk, a man endowed
with apostolic grace both in teaching and in
performing miracles, and founder of the
Egyptian monasteries, wrote an Order of
discipline suited to both classes of monks,
which he received by angelic dictation. He
wrote letters also to the associated bishops
of his district, in an alphabet concealed by
mystic sacraments so as to surpass custom-
ary human knowledge and only manifest to
those of special grace or desert, that is To the
Abbot Cornelius one. To the Abbot Syrus
one, and one To the heads of all monasteries
exliorting that, gathered together to one
very ancient monaster}' which is called in
the Egyptian language Bau, they should
celebrate the day of the Passover together as
by everlasting law. He urged likewise in
another letter that on the day of remission,
which is celebrated in the month of August,
the chief bishops should be gathered together
to one place, and wrote one other letter to
the brethren who had been sent to work out-
side tlie monasteries.

CHAPTER Vin.

TiiEODORUS," successor to the grace and
the headship of the alcove mentioned Abbot
Pachomius, addressed to other monasteries

1 About 360.

2 Used for T 35 31 a e 21 ; inclhied to 30? ? Fabr. Her.

s changed K T 25 30 31 a e 21 10 Bamb. Boni. Gcm-
blac. Sigberg. G\\e\^en\>.\ given over to death Fabr. Ilir. utc.
* Born about 2u-!, died 34S. ■■ ]!orii about 314, died 31)7.


letters written in tlie language of tloly Script-
ure, in which nevertheless he frequently men-
tions his master and teacher Pachomius and
sets forth his doctrine and life as examples.
This he had been taught he said by an Angel
that he himself miglit teach again. He
likewise exhorts them to remain by the pur-
pose of their heart and desire, and to restore
to harmony and unity those who, a dissen-
sion having arisen after the death of the Abbot,
had broken the unity by separating them-
selves from the community. Three horta-
tory epistles of his are extant.

CHAPTER IX.

Oresiesis ' the monk, the colleague of
both Pachomius and Theodorus, a man
learned to perfection in Scripture,"' composed
a book seasoned with divine salt and formed
of the essentials of all monastic discipline
and to speak moderately, in which almost
the whole Old and New Testament is found
set forth in compact dissertations — all, at
least, which relates to the special needs of
monks. This he gave to his brethren almost on
the very day of his death leaving, as it were,
a legacy.

CHAPTER X.

Macarius,^ the Egyptian monk, distin-
guished for his miracles and virtues, wrote
one letter which was addressed to the
younger men of his profession. In this he
taught them that he could serve God per-
fectly who, knowing the condition of his
creation, should devote himself to all labours,
and by wrestling against every thing which
is agreeable in this life, and at the same time
imploring the aid of God would attain also
to natural purity and obtain coiitinence, as
a well merited gift of nature.

CHAPTER XL

Evagrius * the monk, the intimate dis-
ciple of the above mentioned Macarius, edu-
cated in ■' sacred and profane literature and
distinguished, whom the book which is
c-aW-qA \hQ. Lives of the fathers mentions as
a most continent and erudite man, wrote
many things of use to monks among which
are these : Suggestions against the eight
principal sins. ITe was first to mention or
among the first at least to teach these setting
acfainst them eight books taken from the
testimony of the Holy Scriptiu-es only, after
the example of our Lord, who alwa3's met

1 Died about 3S0.

" Scn'JHure 25 30 a e 10 : Holy Scriptures A T 31 21.

•* Born about 300, died 390 (391).

■» Born 345, died 399.

^ educated in T 31 e Her. ; omit A 25 30 a.


C C 2


3S8


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


his tempter with quotations from Scripture,
so that every suggestion, whether of the
devil or of depraved nature had a testimony
against it. This work I have, under in-
structions, translated into Latin translating
with the same simplicity which I found in
the Greek. He composed also a book of
One hundred se7iti7ncnts for those living
simply as anchorites, arranged by chapters,
and one of Fifty sentijuents for the erudite
and studious, which I first translated into
Latin. The former one, translated before, I
restored, partly by retranslating and partly
by emendation, so as to represent the true
meaning of the author, because I saw that
the translation was vitiated and confused by
time. He composed also a doctrine of the
common-life suited to Cenobites and Syno-
dites,' and to the virgin consecrated to God,
a little book suitable to her religion and sex.
He published also a few collections of opin-
ions very obscure and, as he himself says of
them, only to be understood by the hearts of
monks, and these likewise I published in
Latin. He lived to old age, mighty in signs
and miracles.

CHAPTER Xn.

TiiEODORUS,^ presbyter of the church at
Antioch, a cautious investigator and clever
of tongue, wrote against the ApoUinarians
and Anomians On the incar7iation of the
Lord^ fifteen books containing as many as
fifteen thousand verses, in which he showed
by the clearest reasoning and by the testi-
mony of Scripture that just as the Lord
Jesus had a plenitude of deity, so he had a
plenitude of humanity. He taught also that
inan consists only of two substances, soul
and body and that sense and spirit are not
ditVerent substances, but inherent inborn
faculties of the soul through whicli it is in-
spired and has rationality and through which
it makes the body capable of feeling. Moi-e-
over the fourteenth book of this work treats
wholly of the uncreated and alone incor-
poreal and ruling nature of the holy Trinity
and of the rationality of animals which lie
explains in a devotional spirit, on the au-
thority of Holy Scriptures. In the fifteenth
volume he confirms and fortifies the whole
body of his work by citing the traditions of
the fathers.

CHAPTER XHL

Prudentius,' a man well versed in secu-


1 Synodites a kind of monks.

* Theodore of Mopsuesta (?), born at Antioch (?) about ^jo,
died 42S.

' Born at Saragossa 34S, was at Rome in 405, died in Spain
40S?


lar literature, composed a Trocheum ' of
selected persons from the whole Old and
New Testament. He wrote a commentary
also, after the fashion of the Greeks, On the
six days of creation from creation of the
world until the creation of the first man and
his fall. He wrote also short books which
are entitled in the Greek, Apotheosis^ Psy-
chofnachia and Hamartigenia^ that is On
divinity^ On spiritical co7ifiict^ On the
origin of sin. He wrote also In praise of
martyrs^ an invitation to martyrdom in one
book citing several as examples and another
o{ Hymns ^t but specially directed Against
Syjnmachus ' who defended idolatry, from
which we learn that Palatinus was a soldier.

CHAPTER XIV.

AuDENTius,^ bishop of Spain, wrote a
book against the Manicheans, Sabellians and
Arians and very particularly against the
Photinians who are now called Bonosiacians.
This book he entitled On faith against
heretics.^ and in it he showed the Son to
have been coeternal with the Father and
that He did not receive the beginning of
his deity from God the Father, at the time
when conceived by the act of God, he was
born of the Virgin Mary his mother in true
humanity.

CHAPTER XV.

CoMMODiANUS," while he was engaged in
secular literature read also our writings
and, finding opportunity, accepted the f^ith.
Having become a Christian thus and wish-
ing to offer the fruit of his studies to Christ
the author of his salvation, he wrote, in
barely tolerable semi-versified language.
Against the pagatzs^ and because he was
very little acquainted with our literature he
was better able to overthrow their [doctrine]
than to establish ours. Whence also, con-
tending against them concerning the divine
counterpromises, he discoursed in a sufli-
ciently wretched and so to speak, gross
fashion, to their stupefaction and our de-
spair. Following Tertullian, Lactantius and
Papias as authorities he adopted and incul-

' Tyocheitm. There is much controversy over the word,
some maintaining^ that it should be Ditt()cliaeon= " the double
food or double testament " (Lock in Smith and Wace) or Dipty-
chon. It is a description of a series of pictures from the Uible.
The mss. read Trocheum a. e.; Troceum T 25; Trocetum 30;
Trocleum A ; Trnpcum 31. A recent monograph on the subject
has not yet come to han^.

■ Syniinachiis. Two works are here confused, the work
against Symmachus, and the Cathemerinon hymns, in the
preface to which the quotation occurs.

■' Hishop of Toledo about 390. (Chevalier) or in the reign
of Constantius (Ceillier), 370(Hoefer).

* Flourished about 270. There is wide variety of opinion
respecting this date, some placing a-> e:irly as 250 and some
nearly one hundred years later.


GENNADIUS.


389


cated in his students good ethical principles
and especially a voluntary love of povei'ty.

CHAPTER XVI.

Faustinus' the presbyter wrote to Qiieen
Flaccilla seven books Against the Arians
and Macedonians,, arguing and convicting
them by the testimonies of the very Scriptures
which they used, in perverted meaning, for
blasphemy. He wrote also a book which, to-
gether with a certain presbyter named Mar-
cellinus, he addressed to the emperors Valen-
tinianus, Theodosius and Arcadius, in defence
of their fellow Christians. From this it ap-
pears that he acquiesced in the Luciferian
schism, in that in this same book he blames
Hilary of Poitiers and Damasus, bishop of
Rome, for giving ill-advised counsel to the
church, advising that the apostate " bishops
should be received into communion for the
sake of restoring the peace. For it was as
displeasing to the Luciferians to receive the
bishops who in the Ariminian council had
communed with Arius, as it was to the Nova-
tians to receive the penitent apostates.

CHAPTER XVn.

RuFiNUS,'* presbyter of the church at
Aquileia, was not the least among the doc-
tors of the church and had a fine talent for
elegant translation from Greek into Latin.
In this way he opened to the Latin speaking
church the greater part of the Greek liter-
ature; translating the works of Basil of
Caesarea in Cappadocia, Gregory Nazian-
zan, that most eloquent man, the Recog-
nitions of Clement of Rome, the Church
history of Eusebius of Caesarea in Palestine,
the Sentences of Xystus,'' the Sentences of
Evagrius and the work of Pamphilus Martyr
Agaiftst the j?tathematicians. Whatever
among all these which are read by the-
Latins have prefatory matter, have been
translated by Rufinus, but those which are
without Prologue have been translated by
some one else who did not choose to write
a prologue. Not all of Origen, however,
is his work, for Jerome translated some
which are identified by his prologue. On
his own account, the same Rufinus, ever
through the grace of God published an Ex-
position of the Apostles' creed so excellent
that other expositions are regarded as of no
account in comparison. He also wrote in a
threefold sense, that is, the historical, moral
and mystical sense, on Jacob's blessing on

' Flourished about 3S4.

2 Apostate =z prevaric.itorcs.

3 Born 345, at Jerusalem about 390, died 410.

*Xys(us T 25 30 e; Sextus A 31 ;i Xystus of Rome T Her. 1


the patriarchs. He wrote also many epistles
exhorting to fear oPGod, among wiiich those
which he addressed to Proba are preeminent.
He added also a tenth and eleventii l)ook to
the ecclesiastical history which we have said
was written by Eusebius and translated by
him. Moreover he responded to a detractor
of his works, in two volumes, arguing and
proving that he exercised his talent with the
aid of the Lord and in tlie sight of God, for
the good of the church, while he, on the
other hand, incited by jealousy had taken to
polemics.

CHAPTER XVIII.

TiCHONius,' an African by nationality was,
it is said, sufliciently learned in sacred litera-
ture, not wholly unacquainted with secular
literature and zealous in ecclesiastical affairs.
He wrote books On internal ivar and Ex-
positions of various causes in which for the
defence of his friends, he cites the ancient
councils and from all of which" he is recog-
nized to have been a Donatist. He com-
posed also eight Rttlesfor investigating and
ascertaining the meaning of the Script-
ures^ compressing them into one volume.
He also expounded the Apocalypse of John
entire, regarding nothing in it in a carnal
sense, but all in a spiritual sense. In this
exposition he maintained the angelical nature ^
to be corporeal, moreover he doubts that
there will be a reign of the righteous on
earth for a thousand years after the resur-
rection, or that there will be two resurrec-
tions of the dead in the flesh, one of the
righteous and the other of the unrighteous,
but maintains that there will be one simul-
taneous resurrection of all, at which shall
arise even the aborted and the deformed
lest any living human being, however de-
formed, should be lost. He makes such dis-
tinction to be sure, between the two resur-
rections as to make the first, which he calls
the apocalypse of the righteous, only to take
place in the growth of the church where,
justified by faith, they are raised from the
dead bodies of their sins through baptism to
the service of eternal life, but the second, the
general resurrection of all men in the flesh.
This man flourished at the same period with
the above mentioned Rufinus during the reign
of Theodosius and his sons.

CHAPTER XIX.

Severus ■* the presbyter, surnamed Sul-

1 399.

2 from all of which A 25 30 31 u ; from vjJiich c T Her.
'^angelical ?/a/Kr^ etc., " that the human body is an abode

of an2:els" (angelicam &tati<mem corpus esse) Phillott, in
Smith and Wace.

* Sulpicius Severus born after 353, died about 410.


390


JEROMR AND GEXNADIUS.


pitiiis, of the province of Aquitania, a man
distinguished by his birth, by his excellent
literary work, by his devotion to poverty
and by his humility, l^eloved also of the
sainted men Martin bishop of Tours and
Paulinas Nolanus, wrote small books which
are far from despicable. He wrote to his
sister many Letters exhorting to love of God
and contempt of the world. These are well
known. He wrote two to the alcove men-
tioned Paulinus Nolanus and others to
others, but because, in some, family matters
are included, they have not been collected
for publication. He composed also a Chron-
icle^ and wrote also to the profit of many,
a Life of the holy Martin^ monk and bishop,
a man famous for signs and wonders and
virtues.' He also wrote a Conference between
Postuinianns and Gallus^ in which he him-
self acted as mediator and judge of the
debate. The subject matter was the manner
of life of the oriental monks and of St.
Martin — a sort of dialogue in two divisions.
In the first of these he mentions a decree of
the bishops at the synod of Alexandria in
his own time to the cftcct that Origen is to
be read, though cautiously, by those who are
wise, for the good that is in him, and is to be
rejected by the less able on account of the
evil. In his old age, lie was led astray by the
Pelagians, and recognizing the guilt of much
speaking, kept silent until his death, in order
that by penitent silence he might atone for
the sin which he had contracted by speaking.

CHAPTER XX.

Antiociius * tlie bishop, wrote one long ^
volume Against avarice and he composed a
homily, full of godly penitence and humil-
ity On the healing of the blind ma^i whose
sight was restored by the Saviour. He died
during the reign of the emperor Arcadius.

CHAPTER XXI.

Severianus,* bishop of the church of Gab-
ala, was learned in tlie Holy Scriptures and
a wonderful preacher of homilies. On this
account he was frequently sunnnoned by the
bishop John and the emperor Arciidius to
preach a sermon at Constantinople. I have
read his Exposition of the epistle to the
Galatians and a most attractive little work
On baptism and the feast of Epiphany.
He died in the reign of Theodosius, his son
by baptism.


1 Virtues or miracles.

2 liishop of Ptolemais (Acre) about 400, died alioul 40S.
' lon^. a 25 30 31 ; ffreat A T c.

* full of A 25 30 31 a e; o« T 21 Ilcr.

' ScvcriaiiusVr Kincsa. Bisliop 400-3, died after 40S.


CHAPTER XXII.

NicEAS,'" bishop of the city of Romatia,
composed, in simple and clear language, six
books of Instrnction for neophitcs. The
first of these contains. How candidates who
seek to obtain grace of baptism ought to act,
the second, On the errors of relationship, in
which he relates that not far from his own
time a certain Melodius, father of a family,
on account of his liberality and Garadius' a
peasant, on account of his bravery, were
placed, by the heathen, among the gods. A
third book On faith in one sovereign^ a
fourth Against genealogy ^^ a fifth On the
creed., a sixth On the sacrifce of the pas-
chal lamb. He addressed a work also To
the fallen virgitt., an incentive to amend-
ment for all who have fallen.

CHAPTER XXIII.

Olympius * the bishop, a .Spaniard by
nationality, wrote a book of faith against
those who blame nature and not the will,
showinsf that evil was introduceil into nature
not by creation but by disobedience.

CHAPTER XXIV.

Baciiiarius," a Christian plnlosopher,
prompt and ready and minded to devote his
time to God, chose travel as a means of pre-
serving the integrity of his purpose. He
is said to have published acceptable small
works but I have only read one of them, a
work On faith., in which he justified him-
self to the chief priest of the city, defending
himself against those who complained and
misrepresented his travel, and asserting that
he undertook his travel not through fear of
men l)ut for the sake of God, that going
forth from his land and kindred he might
become a co-heir with Abraham the patri-
arch.

CHAPTER XXV.

vSahratius,^ bishop of the Galilean
[province, at tiie request of a certain virgin,
chaste and devoted to Christ, Secumla by
name, composed a book On faith against
Marcion and Valentinus his teacher, also


1 Nicctns Bishop of " Rcinessiaiicii " or Romaciana or
Reineliana in Dacia before 31)2, died after 414.

^Taiid 31 read jV;Vf/« or JVi'cf/as, but other uiss. Niceas
and so Faliricius and Her.

3 Cidiadiiis A 'V 31 a e; GtiJciriiis 25 30 Her.

■• (Ictiitilos'v T 25 30 21 ; getiitliloi^^iam 31 a e.

T' liishd]) of liarcelona about 310.

'■'A Spanisli bisho]). Moiirislied about 400.

'St. Servais, liisbop of 'rons'res 33S, died at Macstriclit 3S4.
The jialron saiiil of Macslriclit. Supposed by soii'e to be
the same as I'liel)adius (l<'acy:adius, I'liaeliadnis, Sepjatius,
Sabadius Pliitadius (called in Gascony Fiari) .' bisliop of
Ay:eu. Flourished 440 (Cuve^.


Gennadius.


391


against Eunomius and his Master Aetius,
showing, both by reason and by testimony
of the Scriptures, that the origin of the deity
is one, that the Author of his eternity and
the Creator of the earth out of nothing,
are one and the same, and hkevvise concern-
ing Christ, that he did not appear as man
in a phantasm but had real flesh through
which eating, drinking, weary and weeping,
suffering, dying, rising again he was demon-
strated to be man indeed. For Marcion and
Valentinus had been opposed to these
opinions asserting that the origin of Deity
is twofold and that Christ came in a phan-
tasm. To Aetius indeed and Eunomius his
disciple, he showed that the Father and Son
are not of two natures and equal in divinity
but of one essence and the one from the other,
that is the Son from the Father, the one
ccieternal with the other, which belief Aetius
and Eunomius opposed.

CHAPTER XXVI.

Isaac ' wrote On the Holy Trinity and a
book On the incarnation of the Lord^ writ-
ing in a very obscure style of argument and
involved language, maintaining that three
persons exist in one Deity, in such wise that
any thing may be peculiar to each which
another does not have, that is to say, that
the Father has this peculiarity that He,
himself without source, is the source of
others, that the Son has this peculiarity,
that, begotten. He is not posterior to the
begetter, that the Holy Spirit has this pe-
culiarity, that He is neither made nor be-
gotten iDut nevertheless is from another. Of
the incarnation of the Lord indeed, he
writes that the person of the Son of God is
believed to be one, while yet there are two
natures existing in him.

CHAPTER XXVII.

Ursinus ^ the monk wrote against those
who say that heretics should be rebaptized,
teaching" that it is not legitimate nor hon-
ouring God, that those should be rebaptized
who have been baptized either in the name
of Christ alone or in the name of the Father
and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, though
the formula has been used in a vitiated sense.
He considers that after the simple confes-
sion of the Holy Trinity and of Christ,
the imposition of the hands of the catholic
priest is sufficient for salvation.

1 Converted Jew, flourished about 385.
* Flourished above 440.
sOmit ''teaching" e T 31.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

Macarius ' another monk, wrote at Rome
books Against the viatJicniaticians^ in
which labour he sought tlie comfort of
oriental writings.

CHAPTER XXIX.

Heliodorus," presbyter of Antioch, pub-
lished an excellent volume gathered from
Holy Scriptures Oji Virginity.

CHAPl^ER XXX.

[John '' ■* bishop of Constantinople, a man
of marvelous knowledge and in sanctity of
life, in every respect worthy of imitation,
wrote many and very useful works for all
who are hastening to divine things. Among
them are the following On cotnpunction of
soul one book, That no one is ifzjzircd
except by himself., an excellent volume Iti
praise of the blessed Paul the apostle., On
the excesses and ill reputation of Eutropius
a praetorian j^refect and many others, as I
have said, which may be found by the
industrious.]

CHAPTER XXXI.

Another John,* ^ bishop of Jerusalem,
wrote a book against those who disparaged
his studies, in which he shows that he follows
the genius of Origen not his creed.

CHAPTER XXXII.

Paul the bishop wrote a short work On
pcnite7zce in which he lays down this law
for penitents ; that they ought to repent for
their sins in such manner that they be not
beyond measure overwhelmed with despair-
ing sadness.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Helvidius,' a disciple of Auxentius and
imitator of Symmachus, wrote, indeed, with
zeal for religion but not according to knowl-
edge, a book, polished neither in language
nor in I'easoning, a work in which he so
attempted to twist the meaning of the Holy
Scriptures to his own perversity, as to vent-
ure to assert on their testimony that Joseph
and Mary, after the nativity of our Lord,
had children who were called brothers of the

' Flourished fifth century. 2 Flourished about 440.

"John Chrysostom born at Antioch about 347, bishop of
Constantinople 39S, deposed 403, died 407.

■» This whole paragraph is omitted by most mss., though T
and 21 have it.

" Bishop 3S6, died 417.

c yohn A 25 30 31 a e; another John [T ?] 21.

' Fourth century.


392


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


Lord. In reply to his perverseness Jerome,
published a book against hini, well lilled
with scripture proofs.'

CHAPTER XXXIV.

TuEOPHiLUS," bishop of the church ' of
Alcxanchia, wrote one <rreat voliune Ai^a/nsf
Origc7i in which he condemns pretty nearly
all his sayings and himself likewise, at the
same time saying that he was not original
in liis views but derived them from the
ancient fathers especially from Heraclas, that
he was deposed from ■* the ofHce of presbyter
driven from tiie church and compelled to
fly from the citv. He also wrote Against
the Anthropomorphites^ heretics who say
that God has the human form and members,
confuting: in a lon^^ discussion and arguing
by testimonies of Divine Scripture and con-
vincing. He shows that, according to the
belief of the Fathers, God is to be thought
of as incorporal, not formed with any sug-
gestion of members at all, and therefore
tiiere is nothing like Him among created
things in substance, nor has the incorrupti-
Inlity nor unchangeableness nor incorporeal-
ity of his nature been given to any one but
that all intellectual natures are corporeal, all
corruptible, all mutable, that He alone
should not l)e subject to corruptibility or
changeableness, who alone has hiimortality
and life. Likewise the return of the paschal
feast which the great council at Nicea had
found would take place after ninety years at
the same time, the same month and day
adding some observations on the festival and
explanations he gave to the emperor Theo-
dosius. I have read also thice books On
faith, which bear his name but, as their
language is not like his, I do not very much
think they are by him.

CHAPTER XXXV.

EusEBius ^ wrote On the mystery of our
Lord's cross and the faitlifulness of the
apostles, and especially of Peter, gained by
virtue of the cross.

CHAFIER XXXVI.

ViGiLANTius,^ a citizen of Gaul, had the
church of Barcelona. He wrote also with
some zeal for religion but, overcome by the
desire for human praise and presuming
al)ove his strength, being a man of polished
language but not practised in the meaning of

' In reply . . . proofs A T 2^ 30 2J ; omit e 31 a.

2 IJisliop 3S5, died <ii2. •■' Church T 21 ; city A 25 30 31 a.

^deposed 2j 31 a e r; elect A 30; stripped o) T.

'■ r?ishop of Milan 451, died 462.

* At Jerusalem 394, heretic about 404.


Scriptures, he expounded the vision of
Daniel in a perverted sense and said other
frivolous things which are necessarily men-
tioned in a catalogue of heretics. [To him
also the ])lessed Jerome the presbyter re-
sponded.] '

CHAPTER XXXVII.

.SiMPLiciANUS," the bishop, exhorted Au-
gustine then presbyter, in many letters, that
he shoidd exercise his genius and take time
for exposition of the Scriptmes that, as it
were, a new Ambrosius, the task master of
Origen might apj)ear. Wherefore also he
sent to him many examinations of scriptures.
There is also an epistle of his of ^ticstiofis
in which he teaches by asking questions as
if wishing to learn.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

ViGiLius^ the bishojo wrote to one Simpli-
cianus a small book In praise of martyrs
and an epistle containing the acts of the
martyrs in his time among the barbarians.

CHAPTER XXXIX.

Augustine," of Africa, bishop of Hippore-
gensis, a man renowned throughout the world
for learning both sacred and secular, un-
blemishetl in the faith, pure in life, wrote
works so many that they cannot all be
gathered. For who is there that can boast
himself of having all his works, or who
reads with such diligence as to read all
he has written .'' * As an old man even, he
published fifteen books On the Trinity
which he had begun as a young man. In
which, as scripture says, brought into the
chamber of the king and adorned with the
manifold garment of the wisdom of God, he
exhibited a church not having spot or
wrinkle or any such thing. In his work
0>i the incarnation of the Lord also he
manifested a peculiar piety. On the resur-
rection of the dead he wrote with equal sin-
cerity, and left it to the less able to raise
doubts respecting abortions.^ ^

' to him . . . responded A Her. ; omit T 25 30 31 a e.

- Bishop of Mihin 397, died 400.

3 Hisho]) of Trent 3SS, died 405.

^ Horn at Tagaste 354, baptized at] Milan 3S7, bishop of
IIil)l)o 305, died 430.

" all fie has ivritten c T A 30 31 a Ilcr. ; 25 I-abr. add
"wherefore on account of his much speakino^ Solomon's say-
in<^ came true that ' /« the iiniltiliide of v.'ords there VHinteth
not sin.' " This expression in the editifins has been the gfround
of nmcli comment on Gennadius' Sumi-pelagian bias, but it
almost certainly does not represent the original form of the
text.

''•Abortions "That abortions . . . shall rise again I
make bold neither to affirm nor to deny " Augustine De civ.
Dei. 22, 13. ^

" T 31 end fhu.s; A omits and left . . . ahortwns but
adds a few lines of otlier matter; e ;iilds differing matter; a
adds remained a catholic; 30 adds remained a catholic and died
ill the same city — the city rchich is still called Hypporegensis;
while 25 adds a vast amount.


GENNADIUS.


393


CHAPTER XL.

Orosius,' a Spanish presbyter, a man
most eloquent and learned in history, wrote
eight books against those enemies of the
Christians who say that the decay of the
Roman State was caused by the Chris-
tian religion. In these rehearsing the ca-
lamities and miseries and disturbances of
wars, of pretty much the whole world from
the creation ^ he shows that the Roman Em
pire owed to the Christian religion its un-
deserved continuance and the state of peace
which it enjoyed for the worship of God.

In the first book he described the world
situated within the ever flowing stream of
Oceanus and intersected by the Tanais, giv-
ing the situations of places, the names,
number and customs of nations, the charac-
teristics of various regions, the wars begun
and the formation of empires sealed with the
blood of kinsmen.

This is the Orosius who, sent by Augus-
tine to Hieronymus to teach the nature of
the soul, returning, was the first to bring to
the West relics of the blessed Stephen the
first martyr then recently found. He flour-
ished almost ^ at the end of the I'eign of the
emperor Honorius.

CHAPTER XLI.

Maximus,* bishop of the church at Turin,
a man fairly industrious in the study of the
Holy Scripture, and good at teaching the
people extemporaneously, composed treatises
In praise of the apostles and John the
Baptist^ and a Homily on all the martyrs.
Moreover he wrote many acute comments on
passages from the Gospels and the Acts of
the Apostles. He wrote also two treatises,
On the life ' of Saint Eusebius^ bishop of
Vercelli, and confessor, and On Saint Cyp-
rian., and published a monograph Oji the
grace of baptism. I have read his On
avarice^ On hospitality., On the eclipse of
the moon. On almsgiving, On the saying
in Isaiah, Your ivinedealers mix wine ivith
water, On Our Lord's Passion, A general
treatise On fasti?zg by the servants f God,
On the quadragesimal fast in particular,
and That there should be no jesting on
fast day. On Judas, the betrayer, On Our
Lords cross. On His sepulchre. On His
resurrection. On the accusation and trial

1 Paulus Orosius of Tarragon, the historian, flourished
about 413 or4i7. His history was begun after 416 and fin-
ished in 417.

'^from the creation (" from the whole period of the earth ")
A 25 30 31 a e ; omit T 21 Her.

■^ almost 25 30 31 ae; omit T A Her.

♦ Maximus of Vercelli, bishop of Turin about 415, died 466-
470.

'• omit life A 30 a.


of Our Lord bforc Pojztius Pilate, On the
Kalends of Jatiuary, a homily On the day
of Our Lords Nativity, also homilies On
Epiphany, On the Passover., On Pentecost ,
many also. On having no fear of carnal
foes. On giving thanks after meat. On
the repentance of the Ninivites, and other
homilies of his, published ' on various occa-
sions, whose names I do not remember.
He died in the reign of Honorius and
Theodosius the younger.

CHAPTER XLIL

Petronius," bishop of Bologna in Italy'
a man of holy life and from his youth prac-
tised in monastic studies, is reputed to have
written the Lives of the Fathers, to wit of
the Egyptian monks, a work which the
monks accept as the mirror and pattern of
their profession. I have read a treatise
which bears his name On the ordination of
bishops, a work full of good reasoning and
notable for its humility, but whose pol-
ished style shows it not to have been his, but
perhaps, as some say, the work of his
father Petronius,'' a man of great eloquence
and learned in secular literature. This I
think is to be accepted, for the author of the
work describes himself as a praetorian pre-
fect. He died in the reign of Theodosius
and Valentinianus.

CHAPTER XLIII.

Pelagius* the heresiarch, before he was
proclaimed a heretic wrote works of practi-
cal value for students : three books On
belief in the Trinity, and one book of
Selections from Holy Scriptures bearing
on the Christian life. This latter was
preceded by tables of contents, after the
model of Saint Cyprian the martyr. After
he was proclaimed heretic, however, he
wrote works bearing on his heresy.

CHAPTER XLIV.

Innocent I us,® bishop of Rome, wrote
the decree which the Western churches
passed against the Pelagians and which his
successor. Pope Zosimus, afterwards widely
promulgated.

CHAPTER XLV.

Caelestius,^ before he joined Pelagius,
while yet a very young man, wrote to his


1 piihlished T 30 21 Her. ; delivered A 25 31 a e.

2 Bishop of Bologna 430, died before 350.

3 ill Italy A 30 31 ;ie; omit T 25 21 Her.
^ Petronius A 25 30 31 ; omit T a?.

I"' At Rome about 400, at Carthage 411, heretic 417.
'■ Bishop or " Pope" 402, died 417.
' Heretic 412-417.


^04


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


parents three epistles 0)i monastic lifc^ writ-
ten as short books, and containing moral max-
ims suited to every one who is seeking God,
containing no trace of the fault which after-
wards appeared but wholly devoted to the
encouragement of virtue.

CHAPTER XLVI.

JuLiANUS ' the bishop, a man of vigorous
character, learned in the Divine Scriptures,
and prollcicnt both in Greek and Latin, was,
before he disclosed his participation in the
ungodliness of Pelagius, distinguished among
the doctors of the church. But afterwards,
trying to defend the Pelagian heresy, he
wrote four books. Against Augustine^ the
opponent of Pelagius, and tlien again, eight
books more. There is also a book contain-
ing a discussion, where each defends his
side.

This Julianus, in time of famine and
want, attracting many through the alms
which he gave, and the glamour of virtue,
which they cast around him, associated them
with him in his heresy. He died during the
reign of Valentinianus, the son of Con-
stantius.

CHAPTER XLVn.

LuciANUS ' the presbyter, a holy man to
whom, at the time when Honorius and
Theodosius were Emperors, God revealed
the place of the sepulchre and the remains
of Saint Stephen the Protomartyr, wrote out
that revelation in Greek, addressing it to
all the churches.

CHAPTER XLVin.

AviTUs ' the presbyter, a Spaniard by
race, translated the above mentioned work
of the presbyter Lucianus into Latin, and
sent it with his letter annexed, by the hand
of Orosius the presbyter, to the Western
churches.

CHAPTER XLIX.

Paulinus," bishop of Nola in Campania,
composed many brief works in verse, also a
consolatory work to Celsus On the death of a
christian and baptized chlld^ a sort of epi-
taph, well fortified with christian hope, also
many Letters to Scvcrus^ and A panegyric
in prose written before he became bishop, 0«
victory over tyrants which was addressed to
Theodosius and maintained that victory lay

' T?ishop of Eclanum about 416.

2 I>uci;uuis of CapharijanKila, flourished 415.

3 Avitus of Rrapfa, died 440.

* Pontius Meropius (Anicius?) Paulinus, T?orn at Bordeaux
3SS (3S4?). pupil of Ausonius, baptized before 3S9, bishop
before 410, died 431.


rather in faith and prayer, than inarms. He
I wrote also a Sacranioitary and Hyjnnal,
I He also addressed many letters to his
sister. On cojitcmpt of the worlds and
published treatises of different sorts, on
various occasions.'

The most notable of all his minor works,
are the works Ott repenta/ice^ and A general
panegyric of all the martyrs. He lived in
the reign of Honorius and Valentinianus,
and was distinguished, not only for erudi-
tion - and holiness of life, but also for his
ability to cast out demons.

CHAPTER L.

EuTROPius,^ the presbyter, wrote to two
sisters, handmaids of Christ, who had been
disinherited by their parents on account of
their devotion to chastity and their love for
religion, two Consolatory letters in the form
of small books, written in polished and
clear language and fortified not only by
argument, but also by testimonies from the
vScriptures.

CHAPTER LL

Another Evagrius '' wrote a Discussion
between Simon the Jeiv and Theophilus
the Christian^ a work which is very well
known.

CHAPTER LH.

ViGiLius '^ the deacon, composed out of
the traditions of the fathers a Rule for
monks^ which is accustomed to be read in
the monastery for the profit of the assembled
monks. It is written in condensed and clear
language and covers the whole range of
monastic duties.

CHAPTER LHL

Atticus ® bishop of Constantinople, wrote
to the princess daughters ^ of the Emperor
Arcadius, 07i faith ajid virginity^ a most
excellent work, in which he attacks by antic-
ipation the Nestorian doctrine.

CHAPTER LIV.

Nestorius** ^ the heresiarch, was regarded,
while presbyter of the church at Antioch, as
a remarkable extemporaneous teacher,'" and

1 on various occasions is omitted by T 31 c.

- erudition A T 31 a c 21 ; observation 25 30 Her.

3 Pupil of Aui^ustinc about 430.

■» Pupil of St. Martin of Tours 405.

'■' l'"li)urislied about nip.

" Bisliop of Constantinople 406, died 425.

' Daughters Pulcheria and her sisters.

8 Uishnp of Constantinople 42S, deposed 431, died in the
Thebaid about 439.

9 Nestorius 25 30 Her; Nestor A T 31 a e 3i.
1" teacher A T 30 31 a e; omit 25 Her.


GENNADIUS.


395


composed a great many treatises on various
^iicstions^ into which aheady at that time
he infused that subtle evil, which afterwards
became the poison of acknowledged impiety,
veiled meanwhile by moral exhortation. But
afterwards, when commended by his elo-
quence and abstemiousness he had been
made pontitF of the church at Constantino-
ple, showing openly what he had for a long
while concealed, he became a declared enemy
of the church, and wrote a bookO;^ the Incar-
natioit of the Lord^ formed of sixty-two
passages from Divine Scripture, used in a
perverted meaning. What he maintained in
this book may be found in the catalogue of
heretics,

CHAPTER LV.

Caelestinus,^ bishop of Rome, addressed
a volume to the churches of the East and
West, giving an account of the decree of the
synod against the above mentioned Nestorius
and maintaining that while there are two
complete natures in Christ, the person of the
Son of God is to be regarded as single.
The above mentioned Nestorius was shown
to be opposed to this view. Xystus likewise,
the successor of Caelestinus, wrote on the
same subject and to the same Nestorius and
the Eastern bishops, giving the views of
the Western bishops against his error.

CHAPTER LVI.

Theodotus,' ■* bishop of Ancyra in Gala-
tia, while at * Ephesus, wrote against Nes-
torius a work of defence and refutation,"
written, to be sure, in dialectic style, but in-
terwoven with passages from the Holy Script-
ures. His method was to make statements
and then quote proof texts from the Script-
ures.

CHAPTER LVII.

Fastidius,^ bishop in Britain, wrote to
one Fatalis, a book On the Christian lifc^
and another On preserving" the estate of
virginity^^ a work full of sound doctrine,
and doing honour to God.

CHAPTER LVHI.

Cyril,® bishop of the church at Alexan-
dria, published various treatises on various
^uestions^ and also composed many homilies,

' at that time A T a e ; omit 25 30 31.

'Bishop (Pope) of Rome 423, died 432.

3 Theodotus Bishop of Ancyra 431-8.

* Theodotus T ? a e; Theodorus a 25 30 31 Fabr. Her.

" vjhile ai T 31 e 21 ; vjhile formerly at 25 30 a A?.

B and refutation A 25 30 a ; omit T 31 e 21.

' Flourished 420.

^virginity T 31 e 21 ', -vidovjhood A 21; 30 a Fabr. Her.

•Born about 376, bishop of Alexandria 412, died 444.


which are recommended for preaching by
the Greek bishops. Other books of his are ;
On the downfall of the syn-agogiie^ On
faith against the heretics^ and a work
directed especially against Nestorius and
entitled, A Refutation^ in which all the
secrets of Nestorius are exposed and his
published opinions are refuted.

CHAPTER LIX.

TiMOTHEUS,' the bishop composed a book
On the nativity of Our Lord according to
the fleshy which is supposed to have been
written at Epiphany.

CHAPTER LX.

Leporius,^ formerly monk afterwards
presbyter, relying on purity,^ through his
own free will and unaided effort, instead of
depending on the help of God, began to follow
the Pelagian doctrine. But having been ad-
monished by the Gallican doctors, and cor-
rected by Augustine in Africa, he wrote a
book containing his retraction, in which he
both acknowledges his error and returns
thanks for his correction. At the same time
in correction of his false view of the incar-
nation of Christ, he presented the Catholic
view, acknowledging the single person of
the Son of God, and the two natures existing
in Christ in his substance.*

CHAPTER LXI.

Victorinus,* a rhetorician of Marseilles,
wrote to his son Etherius, a commentary On
Genesis, commenting, that is, from the
beginning of the book to the death of the pa-
triarch Abraham, and published four® books
in verse, words which have a savour of piety
indeed, but, in that he was a man busied
with secular literature and quite untrained
in the Divine Scriptures, they are of slight
weight, so far as ideas are concerned.

He died in the reign of Theodosius and
Valentinianus.

CHAPTER LXH.

Cassianus,^ a Scythian by race, ordained
deacon by bishop John the Great, at Con-
stantinople, and a presbyter at Marseilles,
founded two monasteries, that is to say one
for men and one for women, which are still

1 Prom position evidently flourished before 450.
- Flourished 41S-430.

^purity T 31 a e 21 ; purity of life A 2^ 30.
^ in his substance A T 30 31 a e 21 ; omit 25 Her.
^Claudius Murius Victor (Victorius or Victorinus) of Mar-
seilles died 445.

'''four A T 31 a e; three zi 30.
' Joh;innes Cassianus diedi 450.


596


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


standing. He wrote from experience, and
in forcible language, or to speak more clearly,
with meaning back of his words, and action
back of his talk. He covered the whole
field of practical directions, for monks of all
sorts, in the following works: On dress^
also On the cation of prayers^ and the
Usage in the saying of Psalms^ (for these
in the Egyptian monasteries, are said day
and night), three books. One of Institutes^
eight books On the origin^ nature and
remedies for the eight principal sins, a
book on each sin. He also compiled Con-
ferences with the Egyptian fathers, as fol-
lows : On the aim of a jnonk and his creed.
On discretion, Ofz three vocations to the
service of God, On the ivarfare of the fesh
against the spirit and the spirit against the
fleshy On the nat?(re of all sins. On the
slaughter of the saints. On fckleness of
inuid. On principalities. On the nature oj
prayer, On the duration of prayer. On per-
fection^ On chastity. On the protection of
God, On the knowledge of spiritual things.
On the Divine graces. On friendship. On
whether to define or not to define. On
three ancient kinds of monks ajid a fourth
recently arisen. On the object of ceiiobltes
and hermits. Oft true satisfaction In
repentance. On the remission of the ^uht-
quageslmal fast. On nocturnal Illusions, On
the saymg of the apostles, " For the good
which I would do^ I do not, but the evil
which I zvould ttot, that I do," On mortifica-
tion, and finally at the request of Leo the
archdeacon, afterwards bishop of Rome,
he wrote seven books against Nestorius, On
the lncarnatlo7i of the Lord, and writing
this, made an end, both of writing and living,
at Marseilles, in the reign of Theodosius and
Valentinianus.

CHAPTER LXni.

Philip,' the presbyter Jerome's best pupil,
published a Commentary on fob, written in
an unaffected style. I have read his Pamlllar
letters, exceedingly witty, exhorting the en-
durance of poverty and sufferings. He died
in the reign of Martianus and Avitus.

CHAPTER LXIV.

EucHERius,^ bishop of the church at
Lyons, wrote to his relative V^alerianus, On
contempt for the world arid, worldly philos-
ophy, a single letter, written in a style which
shows sound learning and reasoning. He
wrote also to his sons, Salonius and Veran-
ius, afterward bishops, a discussion Oti cer-


1 Dic-d about 455.


' Bishop about 435, died 450.


tain obscure passages of Holy Scriptures,
and besides, revising and condensing certain
works of .Saint Cassianus, he compressed
them into one volume, and wrote other
works suited to ecclesiastical or monastic
pursuits. He died in the reign of Valen-
tinianus and Martianus.

CHAPTER LXV.

ViNCENTius,' the Gaul, presbyter in the
Monastery on the Island of Lerins, a man
learned in the Holy Scriptures and very well
informed in matters of ecclesiastical doctrine,
composed a powerful disputation, written in
tolerably finished and clear language, which,
suppressing his name, he entitled Peregrlnus
against heretics. The greater part of the
second book of this work having been stolen,
he composed a brief reproduction of the sub-
stance of the original work, and published in
one [book]. He died in the reign of Theo-
dosius and Valentinianus.

CHAPTER LXVI.

Syagrius* wrote On faith, against the
presumptuous words, which heretics assume
for the purpose of destroying or superseding
the names of the Holy Trinity, for they say
that the Father ought not to be called Father,
lest the name. Son should harmonize with
that of Father, but that he should be called
the Unbegotten or the Lnperishable and the
Absolute, in order that whatever may be
distinct from Him in person, may also be
separate in nature, showing that the Father,
who is unchangeable in nature may be called
the Unbegotten, though the Scripture may not
call Him so, that the person of the Son is
begotten from Him, not made, and that the
person of the Holy Spirit proceeds from Him
not begotten, and not made. Under the
name of this Syagrius I found seven books,
entitled On Faith and the rules of Falth^
but as they did not agree in style, I did not
believe they were written by him.

CHAPTER LXVn.

Isaac, ^ presbyter of the church at Antioch,
whose many works cover a long period, wrote
in Syriac especially against the Nestorians and
Eutychians. He lamented the downfall of
Antioch in an elegiac poem, taking up the
same strain that Ephraim, the deacon,
sounded on the downfall of Nicomedia. He
died during the reign of Leo andMajorianus,


1 Presbyter 434, died before 450.
* Syagrius of Lyons, died 486.

2 Isaac of AiniJa (Diarbekir) presbyter died about 460.


GENNADIUS.


397


CHAPTER LXVIII.

Salvianus,' presbyter of Marseilles, well
informed both in secular and in sacred litera-
ture, and to speak without invidiousness, a
master among bishops, wrote many things
in a scholastic and clear style, of which I
have read the following : four books On the
Excellence of virginity^ to Marcellus the
presbyter, three books Agahist avarice^ five
books On the present judgment ^^ and one
book On piinish7nent according to desert,
addressed to Salonius the bishop, also one
book of Coimnentary on the latter part of the
hod\f. oi Ecclesiastes^ addressed to Claudius
bishop of Vienne, one book of Epistles^^
He also composed one book in verse after
the Greek fashion, a sort of Hexaemeroii^
covering the period from the beginning of
Genesis to the creation of man, also many
Homilies delivered to the bishops, and I am
sure I do not know how many On the sacra-
??ients. He is still living at a good old
age.

CHAPTER LXIX.

Paulinus * composed treatises 0)i the
beginning of the Quadragesimal^ of which
I have read two. On the Passover Sabbath^
On obedience^ On penitence^ On neo-
phytes,

CHAPTER LXX.

Hilary,^ bishop of the church at Aries, a
man learned in Holy Scriptures, was de-
voted to poverty, and earnestly anxious to
live in narrow circumstances, not only in
religiousness of mind, but also in labour of
body. To secure this estate of poverty, this
man of noble race and very differently
brought up, engaged in farming, though it
was beyond his strength, and yet did not neg-
lect spiritual matters. He was an accept-
able teacher also, and without regard to
persons administered correction to all.* He
published some few things, brief, but show-
ing immortal genius, and indicating an eru-
dite mind, as well as capacity for vigorous
speech ; among these that work which is of
so great practical value to many, his Life of
Saint Honor atus^ his predecessor. He died
during the reign of Valentinianus and Mar-
tianus.


' Born about 390, Presbyter about 42S, died about 4S4.

^ present judgment more generally known as Divine Provi-
dence (De gubernatione Dei.)

^onebook of epistles a 25 30; omit A T 31 e 2i.

^ From position evidently flourished about 450.

^ Born about 401, bishop 429, died 449.

8 correction to nil; Her. adds ivork of preaching but has the
support of no good inss.


CHAPTER LXXI.

Leo,' bishop ^ of Rome, wrote a letter
to Flavlanus^ bishop of the church at Con-
stantinople, against Eutyches the presbyter,
who at that time, on account of his ambition
for the episcopate was trying to introduce
novelties into the church. In this he advises
Flavianus, if Eutyches confesses his error and
promises amendment, to receive him, but if
he should persist in the course he had entered
on, that he should be condemned together
with his heresy. He likewise teaches in this
epistle and confirms by divine testimony that
as the Lord Jesus Christ is to be considered
the true son of the Divine Father, so like-
wise he is to be considered true man with
human nature, that is, that he derived a body
of flesh from the flesh of the virgin and not
as Eutyches asserted, that he showed a body
from heaven.^ He died in the reitjn of Leo
and Majorianus.

CHAPTER LXXn.

MocHiMus," the Mesopotamian, a presby-
ter at Antioch, wrote an excellent book
Against Eutyches^ and is said to be writing
others, which I have not yet read.

CHAPTER LXXHL

TiMOTHEus,* ® when Proterius ' had been
put to death by the Alexandrians, in response
to popular clamour, willingly or unwillingly
allowed himself to be made bishop by a single
bishop in the place of him who had been put
to death. And lest he, having been illegally
appointed, should be deservedly deposed at
the will of the people who had hated Pro-
terius, he pronounced all the bishops of his
vicinity to be Nestorians, and boldly pre-
suming to wash out the stain on his conscience
by hardihood, wrote a very persuasive book
to the Emperor Leo, which he attempted to
fortify by testimonies of the Fathers, used in
a perverted sense, so fiir as to show, for the
sake of deceiving the emperor and establish-
ing his heresy, that Leo of Rome, pontiff' of
the city, and the synod of Chalcedon, and all
the Western bishops were fundamentally
Nestorians. But by the grace of God, the
enemy of the churcli was refuted antl over-
thrown at the Council of Chalcedon. He is
said to be living in exile, still an heresiarch,

1 Leo the Great, Bishop (Pope) 440, died 461.

-bishop: A 30 31 e have pontiff.

3 T and 21 add after heaveii " and he addressed another letter
on this same subject to the Emperor Eeo in whose reign also
he died."

^ Presbyter 457.

" Bishop of Alexandria 3S0, died 385.

" Timotheits 31 e add Bishop of Alexandria.

' Proterius; 25 30 i'^abr. Her. add the bishop.


598


J F.ROME AND GEXNADIUS.


and it is most likely so. This book of his
for learning's sake, I translated by request of
the hrethrcn into Latin and prefixed a caveat.'

CHAPTER LXXIV.

AscLEPius,^ the African, bishop of a large
see ' within the borders of Bagais, wrote
against the Arians, and is said to be now
writinsr airainstthe Donatists. He is famous
for his extemporaneous teaching.

CHAPTER LXXV.

Peter," presbyter of the cburch at Edessa,
a famous preacher, wrote Treatises on vari-
ous subjects, and Uytmis after the manner of
Saint Ephrem, the deacon.

CHAPTER LXXVI.

Paul* the presbyter, a Pannonian by
nationality, as I learned from his own mouth,
wrote On preservino- virginity^ and contc7npt
for the xoorld^ and the Ordering of life or
the correction of morals^ written in a medi-
ocre style, but flavoured with divine salt.
The two books were addressed to a certain
noble virgin devoted to Christ, Constantia
by name, and in them he mentions Jovinian
the heretic and preacher of voluptuousness
and lusts, who was so far removed from
leading a continent and chaste life, that he
belched forth his life in the midst of luxuri-
ous banquets. "

CHAPTER LXXVn.

Pastor ' the bishop composed a short
work, written in the form of a creed, and
containing pretty much the whole round of
Ecclesiastical doctrine in sentences. In this,
among other heresies which he anathema-
tizes without giving the names of their
authors, he condemns the Priscillians and
their author.

CHAPTER LXXVHI.

Victor," bishop of Cartenna in Mauritania,
wrote one long book against the Arians,
which he sent to king Gensericby his follow-
ers, as I learned from the preface to the
work,^ and a w^ork On the rcpenta^ice of the
piihlican^^'^ in which he drew up a rule of


2

F:il


25 ;i
31 a


This book . . . fdz/frt/ A T 35 30 3 1 a e 2 1 Fabr. ; omit

lie. llcr.

Bishop of Bagais (Vaf^en) about 4S5.

/jro-t" .sfi- A T 25 30 31 a? e earliest eds.; small villaj^e.

r. ^IilJnc•. 1 ler.

I'lourished 450. •■' T adds several lines.

Flourished 430?. ' Uishop in Spain? about 400.

Victor of Cartenna (Tcncz Afr.) bishop aliout 4:50.

•'jtiich be Stilt . . . ryo/X- A '1" 30 ji e 21 Fabr.; omit

Her.
/■///'/jWi;/ Fabr. Mljfne, Her. : On public l<enance, \ T 30
." e? ; oinil fiihlicitn 25 lianilj ISeru. the oUlest edilions.


life for the penitent, according to the author-
ity of Scriptures. He also wrote a consola-
tory work to one Basilius, On the death of a
son, filled with resurrection hope and good
counsel. Pie also composed nvAny Ilojni lies,
which have been arranjred as continuous
works and are as I know, made use of bv
brethren anxious for their own salvation.

CHAPTER LXXIX.

VocoNius,' bishop of Castellanum in
Mauritania, wrote Against the enetnies of
the church, fexvs. Arians, and other here-
tics. He composed also an excellent work
07i the Sacraments.'

CHAPTER LXXX.

MusAEUS,''' presbyter of the church at
Marseilles, a man learned in Divine Script-
ures and most accurate in their interpreta-
tion, as well as master of an excellent
scholastic st\le, on the request of Saint
Venerius the bishop, selected from Holy
Scriptures passages suited to the various
feast days of the year, also passages from the
Psalms for responses suited to the season,
and the passages for reading. The readers
in the chm-ch found this work of the greatest
value, in that it saved them trouble and
anxiety in the selection of passages, and was
useful for the instruction of the people as
well as for the dignity of the service. He
also addressed to Saint Eustathius" thebishop,
successor to the above mentioned man of
God, an excellent and sizable volume, a Sac-
ranie?itary,'' divided into various sections,
according to the various offices and seasons,
Readhigs and Psalms, both for reading and
chanting, but also filled throughout with
petitions to the Lord," and thanksgiving for
his benefits. By tliis work we know him to
have been a man of strong intelligence and
chaste eloquence. He is said to have also
delivered homilies, which are, as I know,
valued by pious men, but which I have not
read. He died in the reign of Leo and
Majorianus.

CHAPTER LXXXI.

ViNCENTius' the presbyter, a native of
Gaul, practised in Divine Scripture ami
possessed of a style polished by speaking

1 Rishop of Castellan in Mauritania about 450.
- Sticritmi'tiis or 0/ Sacranienis i.e. a Sacrementary.
■■ Died In lore 461".

■• Eiisialliiiis \\ c; EmtlasiHS \'Y -.x. cd. 1512; EiiseHiis 2i„
30; Kiisliicliiiis j'abr. Miijne, Her.

■"' .Sarriinii'iittiry or On the Sat raments.
'■' ///(■ Lo>\i'V 25 31) 31 a e God Fabr. Her.
" Apparently about 450.


GENNADIUS.


399


and by wide reading, wrote a Commentary
On the Psahuii. A part of this work, he
read in my iiearing, to a man of God, at
Cannatac, promising at the same time,
that if the Lord should spare his Hfe and
strength, he would treat the whole Psalter in
the same way.

CHAPTER LXXXII.

Cyrus,' an Alexandrian by race, and a
physician by profession, at first a philosopher
then a monk, an expert speaker, at first
wrote elegantly and powerfully against
Nestorius, but afterwards, since he began to
inveififh against him too intemperatelv " and
dealt in syllogism rather than Scripture, he
began to foster the Timothean doctrine.
Finally he declined to accept the decree of
the council of Chalcedon, and did not think
the doctrine that after the incarnation the
Son of God comprehended two natures, was
to be acquiesced in.

CHAPTER LXXXni.

Samuel,'' presbyter of the church at
Edessa, is said to have written inany things
in Syriac against the enemies of the church,
especially against the Nestorians, the Euty-
chians and the Timotheans, new heresies
all, but diflering from one another. On this
account he frequently speaks of the triple
beast, while he briefly refutes by the opinion
of the church, and the authority of Holy
ScriptuiX'S, showing to the Nestorians, that
the Son was God in man, not simply man
born of a Virgin, to the Eutychians, that he
had true human flesh, taken on by God, and
not merely a body made of thick air, or
shown from Heaven ; to the Timotheans,
that the Word was made flesh in such wise,
that the Word remains Word in substance,
and, human natiu"e remaining human nature,
one person of the Son of God is produced
by union, not by mingling. He is said to
be still living at Constantinople, for at the
beginning of the reign of Anthemius, I knew
his writings, and knew that he was in the
land of the livinsf.


1 Flourished 460.

2 since he hi'ga7i to inveiffh against him loo iniemperately
Norimb. and the cds., but the other mss. read " nex^ci-theless "
inveigh or '^ itiveighs less" or "more" and " is found" hr
" inveigh." T 21 25 a Wolfenb. aiiree in reading in illo
minus invenittir instead of in ilium nimius invenitur.
Norimb has same with nimius instead of minus. The reading-
of T 21 25 a Wolfenb. thus reinforced and in view of tlie fact
of the easy confusion of ntitius and nimius in transcribing, is
the most probable reading, but it is hard to decide and harder
still to make sense of it.

a Presbyter 467.


CHAPTER LXXXIV.

Claudianus,' presbyter of the church at
Vienne, a master speaker, and shrewd in
argument, composed three books. On the con-
dition and substance of the soul., in which
he discusses how far anything is incorporeal
excepting God.

[He wrote also some other things, among
which are, A Hymn on Our Lord's Passion.,
which begins " Pange lingua gloriosi." He
was moreover brother of Mamertus, bishop
of Vienne.]' {See note.)

CHAPTER LXXXV.

Prosper'^ of Aquitania, a man scholastic
in style and vigorous in statement, is said to
have composed many works, of which I
have read a Chronicle, which bears his
name, and which extends from the creation
of the first man, according to Divine Script-
ure, until the death of the Emperor Vaienti-
nianus and the taking of Rome by Genseric
king of the Vandals. I regard as his also
an anonymous book against certain works of
Cassianus, which the church of God finds
salutary, but which he brands as injurious,
and in fact, some of the opinions of Cassian
and Prosper on the grace of God and on
free will are at variance with one another.
Epistles of Pope Leo against Eutyches, On
the true Incarnation of Christ., sent to
various persons, are also thought ■* to have
been dictated by him.

CHAPTER LXXXVL

Faustus,* first abbot of the monastery at
Lerins, and then made bishop ^ of Riez in
Gaul, a man studious of the Divine Script-
ures, taking his text from the historic creed
of the church, composed a book On the
Holy Spirit, in which he shows from the
belief of the fathers, that the Holy Spirit is
consubstantial and coeternal with the Father
and the Son, the fulness of the Trinity and
therefore God.' He published also an ex-
cellent work, On the grace of God, through
which ive are saved.,^ in which he teaches
that the grace of God always invites, pre-

1 Claudianus EcdiciusMamertius died 473-4.

^vjrote. . . F»««^ is said to be in a certain manuscript
of the Monastery of" St. Michaelis de fumba" but is oniitte<l
by A T 25 30 31 a e 21 IJamb. Bern, etc etc. and certainly does
not belong in text. It is left in brackets above because given
in the editions.

3 Born 403, wrote chronicle 445? died 463.

^ thought A 25 30 31 a e 21 ; said T Fabr. Her.

B Abbot of Lerins 433-4, bishop of Riez 462, exiled 477-S4,
died 4cp.

*' Made bishop A T 31 e 21 ; bishop a 25 30.

^ and therefore God T 25 31 ae 21 [31 A?;] obtaining Fabr.
Her.; Bamb and ed. 1512 read and there/ore but join to next
sentence.

^ saz'ed AT 25; 7\AA. and tlie free will of the human mind
in zvhtch zve are saved 30 31 a e.


400


JEROME AND GKNNADIUS.


cedes and helps our will, and whatever
gain that freedom of will may attain for its
pious ertect, is not its own desert, but the
gift of grace. I have read also a little book
of his Against the Ai'ians and Macedoni-
atis, in which he posits a coessential Trinity,
and another against those wb.o s:iv that there
is anything incorporeal in created things, in
wiiich he maintains from the testimony of
Scriptures, and by quotations from the
fathers, that nothing is to be regarded as in-
corporeal but God. There is also a letter
of his, written in the form of a little book,
and addressed to a certain deacon, named
Graecus, who, leaving the Catholic faith, had
gone over to the Nestorian impiety.

In this epistle he admonishes him to be-
lieve that the holv Virgin Mary did not
bring forth a mere human being, who after-
wards should receive divinity, but true God
in true man. There are still other works by
him, but as I have not read, I do not care to
mention them. This excellent doctor is en-
thusiastically believed in and admired. He
wrote afterwards also to Felix, the Prae-
tonian prefect, and a man of Patrician rank,
son of Magnus the consul, a very pious letter,
exiiorting to the fear of God, a work well
fitted to induce one to repent with his whole
heart.

CHAPTER LXXXVH.

Servus Dei ' the bishop, wrote against
those who say that Christ while living in
this world did not see the Father with his
eyes of flesh — But after his resurrection
from the dead and his ascension into heaven
when he had been translated into the glory
of ( jod the Father as in reward so to speak
to him for his abnegation and a compensa-
tion for his martyrdom. In this work he
showed both from his own argument and
from the testimony of Sacred Scriptures that
the Lord Jesus from his conception by the
Holy Spirit and his birth of the Virgin
through which true God in true man him-
self also man made God was born, always
beheld with his eyes of flesh both the Father
and the Holy Spirit through the special and
complete union of God and man.

CHAPTER LXXXVni.

VicTORius * the A([uitanian, a carefnP
reckoner, on invitation of .St. Hilary bishop
of Rome, composed a Paschal cycle with
the most careful investigation following his
four predecessors, that is Hippolytus, Eu-

' Bishop of " Tiluirciscn " about 406-1 1 .
- Wicili; /\<^l. 30 a ri^ad V'ictoiinus.

^ iiiritid y^ i^ ,<" ,y •' I'abr.; iiioxt dilii^iiit A Xoiiinl)?;
Bern Xiirimb. ct ■.\\i ■.\'\A oj t )ie Scriptures: oj iiii<iMui.-i lli-r.


sebius, Theophilus and Prosper, and ex-
tended the series of years to the year five
hundred and thirty-two, reckoning in such
wise that in tlie year 533 the paschal festival
should take place again on the same month
and day and the same moon as on that first
year when the Passior^ and resurrection of
our Lord took place.

CHARIER EXXXLX.

Theodoretus.' '■ bishop of Cyrus (for the
city founded by Cyrus king of the Persians
preserves until the present dav in Syria the
name of its founder) is said to have written
many works. Such as have come to my
knowledge are the following : 0>i the in-
carnation of the JLord^ Agaitist Jintyches
the presbyter and Dioscorus bishop of Alex-
andria who deny that Christ had human
flesh ; strong works by which he confirmed
through reason and the testimonv of Script-
ure that He had real flesh from the maternal
substance which he derived from His Virgin
mother just as he had true deity which he
received at birth by eternal generation from
God the Father. There are ten books of
the ecclesiastical history which he wrote in
imitation of Eusebius of Caesarea beginning
where Eusebius ends and extending to his
own time, that is from the Vicennalia of
Constant! ne until the accession of the elder
Leo in whose reign he died.

CHAPTER XC.

Gennadius ^ Patriarch * of the church of
Constantinople, a man brilliant in speech
and of strong genius, was so richly equipped
by his reading of the ancients that he was
able to expound the prophet Daniel entire
commenting on every word.

He composed also many Homilies. He
died while the elder Leo was Emperor.

CHAPTER XCL

Theodulus,* " a presbyter in Coelesyria
is said to have written many works, but the
only one which has come to my hand, is the
one which he composed Oil the harmony oJ'
divine Scripture^ that is, the Scriptures of
the Old and New Testaments, against the
ancient heretics who on account of discrepan-
cies in the injunctions of the ritual, say that
the God of the Old Testament is diflcrent


1 Thcodoret born about 393, bishop of Cyrrhaus 423, wrote
450, (licil (57.

- riiiodoretus A-xc\ Theoiinri'lus i,\; Tlieoiionis T 2~, ^o.

■^ l!isli(i|) (or " Pontill ") 45S, died 471.

* I'atriarcli (PoiititT) A T 3031 e zi ; lusl-.oi) --j; a b'ahr. Her.

■' Died .(I)-' (C) — rather iH-tbre 401 ,

'■ 'J'liic>Jii/iis .\ 'r 31 ac; Theodorus 25 3021.


GENNADIUS.


40 J


from the God of the New. In this work he
shows it to have been by the dispensation of
one and the same God, the author of both
Scriptures, that one law should be given by
Moses to those of old in a ritual of sacrifices
and in judicial laws, and another to us
through the presence of Christ in the holy
mysteries and future promises, that thej^
should not be considered different, but as
dictated by one spirit and one author, since
these things which if observed only accord-
ing to the letter, would slay, if observed
according to the spirit, would give life to
the mind. This writer died three years
since ' in the reign of Zeno.

CHAPTER XCII.

[SiDONlus " bishop of the Arverni wrote
several acceptable works and being a man
sound in doctrine as well as thoroughly im-
bued with divine and human learning and
a man of commanding genius wrote a con-
siderable volume of Letters to different
persons written in various metres or in prose
and this showed his ability in literature.
Strong in Christian vigour even in the midst
of that barbaric ferocity which at that time
oppressed the Gauls he was regarded as a
catholic father and a distinguished doctor.
He flourished during the tempest which
marked the rule of Leo and Zenos.]^


CHAPTER XCni.

John * of Antioch first grammarian, and
then Presbyter, wrote against those who
assert that Christ is to be adored in one sub-
stance only and do not admit that two na-
tures are to be recognized in Christ. He
taught according to the Scriptural account
that in Him God and man exist in one
person, and not the flesh and the Word in one
nature.

He likewise attacked certain sentiments of
Cyril, bishop of Alexandria, imwisely ^ de-
livered by Cyril against Nestorius, which
now are an encouragement and give strength
to the Timotheans.** He is said to be still
living and preaching.


1 three years since A T 30? 31 21 ; omit 25 a.

- Caius Sollius ApoUinaris Sidonius born about 430, bishop
472, died about 4SS.

3 This chapter is in Norimb. and tliree only of the mss.
seen by the translator N. Britisli Museum Harl. 3155, xv
cent.; 43 Wolfenbiittel S3S xv cent.; k Paris B. N. I, at. S()6.
It is omitted by A T 25 30 31 a e 21 etc. etc. etc. and really has
no place in tlie text, hut as it was early introduced and is in
the editions (not however the earliest ones) it is given here.

* Flourished 477-495.

' unwisely T 25 30 3 1 e ; unwisely saying A ? a ?

» Timotheans A T 25 30 31 ae 21 etc; add which is absurd
Fabr. Migne, Her.


VOL. III.


D


CHAPTER XCIV.

[Gelasius,' * bishop of Rome wrote
Against Etityches and Nestorhis a great and
notable volume, also Treatises on various
parts of the scripture and the sacraments
written in a polished style. He also wrote
Epistles against Peter atzd Acaciiis which
are still preserved in the catholic church.
He wrote also Hymns after the fashion of
bishop Ambrosius. He died during the
reign of the emperor Anastasius.

CHAPTER XCV.

HoNORATUS,' bishop of Constantina in
Africa wrote a letter to one Arcadius who
on account of his confession of the catholic
faith had been exiled to Africa by King
Genseric.'' This letter was an exhortation
to endure hardness for Christ and fortified
by modern examples and scripture illustra-
tions showing that persevei"ance in the con-
fession of the faith not only purges past sins
but also procures the blessing of martyrdom.

CHAPTER XCVI.

Cerealis * the bishop, an African by
birth, was asked by Maximus bishop of the
Arians whether he could establish the catholic
faith by a few testimonies of Divine Script-
ure and without any controversial assertions.
This he did in the name of the Lord, truth
itself helping him, not with a few testi-
monies as Maximus had derisively asked,
but proving by copious proof texts from both
Old and New Testaments and published in
a little book.

CHAPTER XCVn.

EuGENius,® bishop of Carthage in Africa
and public confessor, commanded by Hu-
neric' King of the Vandals to write an expo-
sition of the catholic faith and especially to
discuss the meaning of the word Homoou-
sian, with the consent of all the bishops and
confessors of Mauritania in Africa and Sar-
dinia and Corsica, who had remained in the
catholic faith, composed a book of faith,
fortified not only by quotations from the
Holy Scriptures but by testimonies of the
Fathers, and sent it by his companions in
confession. But now, exiled as a reward
for his faithful tongue, like an anxious shep-

1 Bishop 492, died 496.

2 From this point to the end is bracketed, as a large part of
the mss. end with John of Antioch. Of our mss. Gelasius and
Gennadius are contained in 25 30 e •, Honoratus to Pomerius
in A 30 31 6240.

- Bishop of Constantina (Cirta) 437.

* exiled by Kitu:^ Genseric; omit e- 30 31 40.

= Bishop'of " Castelli Ripensis " in Africa 4S4.

' Bishop 479, died 505. ' Huneric A ; omit e 2 30 si <•■ D.

d


4o:


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


herd over his sheep he has left behind works
urging them to remember the faith and the
one sacred baptism to be preserved at all
hazards. He also wrote out the Discussions
which he held through messengers with the
leaders of the .Vrians and sent them to be
given to lluneric by his major domo. Like-
wise also he presented to the same, petitions
for tlic peace of the Christians which were
of the nature of an Apology^ and he is said
to be still living for the strengthening of the
church.

CHAPTER XCVni.

PoMERius ' the Mauritanian was ordamed
presbyter in Gaul. He composed a dialecti-
cal treatise in eight books On the nature of
the soul and its properties^ also one On the
resurrection and its particular bearing for
the faithful in this life and in general for all
men, written in clear language and style,
in the form of a dialogue between Julian
the bishop, and Verus the presbyter. The
first book contains discourses on what the
soul is and in what sense it is thought to be
created in the image of God, the second,
whether the soul should be thought of as
corporeal or incorporeal, the third, how the
soul of the first man '" was made, fourth,
whether the soul which is put in tlie body at
birth is newly created and without sin, or
produced from the substance of the first
man like a shoot from a root it brings also
with it the original sin of the first man,

» Died 49S.

* the first man A ; the first man's soul e 2 30 31 40.


fifth, a review of the fourth book of the dis-
cussion,' and an inquiry as to what is the
capability of the soul, that is its possibilities,
and that it gains its capability from a single
and pure will, the sixth, whence arises the
conflict between flesh and the spirit, spoken of
by the apostle, seventh, on the diflerence be-
tween the flesh and the spirit in respect of life,
of death and of resurrection, the eighth,
answers to questions concerning the things
which it is predicted will happen at the end
of the world, to such questions, that is, as
are usually propounded concerning the res-
urrection. I remember to have once read a
hortatory work of his, addressed to some
one named Principius, On contempt of
the worlds a?id of transitory tilings^ and an-
other entitled. On vices and virtues. He
is said to have written yet other works,
which have not come to my knowledge, and
to be still writing. He is still living, and
his life is worthy of Christian profession,
and his rank in the church.

CHAPTER XCIX.

I Gennadius,^ a presbyter of Marseilles,
have written eight books Against all her-
esies^ five ^ books Against Nestorius., ten *
books Against ^utyches, three books
Agaitist Pelagius., also treatises On the
Alillennium and On the Apocalypse of
Saint John^ also an epistle 0« my creed ^
sent to the blessed Gelasius, bishop of
Rome.]

' discussion 30 40 t- - ; discussioti and definition A 31 .
' Died 496. ^five e 25 30; six P'ahr. Her.

*ten e 25 30; six Norirab Her.; eleven Cuekfenb.


LIFE AND WORKS OF RUFINUS


WITH


JEROME'S APOLOGY AGAINST RUFINUS,

Translated with Prolegomena and Notes,


BY


THE HON. AND REV. WILLIAM HENRY FREMANTLE, M.A ,

Canon of Cautei-bury, FeUo~o and Tutor of Baliol College, Oxford.


D d 2


PROLEGOMENA


ON THE


LIFE AND WORKS OF RUFINUS


Note. — The References (where a simple number is given) are to the pages in this Volume.

Tyrannius RuFi-NUS is chiefly known from his relaticju to Jerome, first as an intimate
friend and afterwards as a bitter enemy. The immense influence of Jerome, throtigh all
the ages in which criticism was asleep, has imduly lowered his adversary. But he has
some solid claims of his own on our recognition. His work on the Creed, besides its
intrinsic merits, must always be an authority as a witness to the state of the creed as held
in the Italian churches in the beginning of the 5th century, as also to the state of the Canon
and tlie Apocrypha at that time. And it is to his translations that we are indel^ted for our
knowledge of many of the works of Origen, including the greatest of them all, the
Tlepi 'Apx'jv. We are the more grateftil for his services because they were so opportune.
The works of Origen, which had been neglected in the West for a century and to
such an extent that the Pope Anastasius says (433) that he neither knows who he was
nor what he wrote, came suddenly into notice in the last quarter of a century before Alaric's
sack of Rome A. D. 3S5-410: and it was at this moment that Rufinus appeared, according
to his friend Macarius' dream (439) like a ship laden with the merchandize of the East, an
Italian who had lived some 25 years in Greek lands, and sulficiently equipped for the work
of a translator. Through his labours during the last 13 years of that eventful time a
considerable part of the works of the great i\lexandrian have floated down across the ocean
of the Dark Ages, and, while lost in their native Greek, have in their Latin garb come to
enrich the later civilization of the West.

Rufinus was born at Concordia (Jer. Ep. v. 2. comp. with Ep. x. and De Vir. 111.

§ 53) between Aquileia and Altinum, a place of some importance, which was
A.D,344-s. destroyed by the Huns in 452 but aftei'wards rebuilt. His birth was about the

year 344 or 345, he being slightly older than Jerome. Nothing is known of his
education or the events of his youth ; but that he was early acquainted with Jerome and
was interested in sacred literature is seen from the fact that in 368 when Jerome went
with Bonosus to Gaul, Rufinus begged him to copy for him the works of Hilary on the
Psalms and on the Councils of the Cluu'ch (Jer. Ep. v. 2). His mother did not die till the

year 397, as is seen from Jerome's mention of her (Letter lxxxi, i), and it would
A.D, 372-3. appear that both his parents were Christians. But he was not baptized till about

his 28th year. He was at that time living at Aquileia, where he had embraced
the monastic state, and was a member of the company of yoinig ascetics to which Jerome
and Bonosus belonged. The presence among them of Hylas (Jerome Letter 111, 3) the
freedman of Melania, the wealthy and ascetic Roman matron, shows that that relation had
already begun which was afterwards of such importance in the life of Rufinus. It must
have been just before the breaking up of that company that he was baptized, for Jerome,
writing of him (Ep. iv. 2) in 374 from Antioch says " He has but lately been washed and is
as white as snow." He himself gives a full account of his baptism in his AjDology (436).
When this company of friends was scattered, Rufinus joined the noble Roman lady,
Melania, in her pilgrimage to the East (Jer. Letter iv. 2). He visited the monasteries of

Egypt, and apparently desired to remain there ; but a persecution arose against
A.D. 373. the orthodox monks from Lucius the Arian bishop of Alexandria, seconded by

the governor, both being prompted liy the Arian Emperor Valens : the monas-
teries were in many cases broken up (Sozomen, vij i9) Socrates ivj 21-3, Rufinus Eccl.


4o6 LIFE AND WORKS OF RUFINUS.


Ilist. ii, 3), and Rufliuis himself for a wliilc suflcrcd imprisonnicnt and was tlicn ban-
ished fnjni Eg}pt (430 Eccl. Hist, ii, 4). Rulinus pr(j])al)ly on coming out of prison
joined Melania who had then settled at DioCaesarea (Pallad. Hist. Laus. § 117) on the coast
of Palestine for the purpose of making a home for the Egyptian exiles on their way to
their various destinations. He states in his Apology (466) that he was 6 years in Egypt,
and that he retiuned there again, ;ifter an interval, for two years more. He was a pupil
luith of Didymus, then head of the catechetical school, who wrote for him a treatise on
the death of infants (534), and of Theophilus, afterward Bishop of Alexandria (52S),
and that he saw man)' of the well-known hermits (466), such as Serapion and Macarius,
whom he describes in his History of the Monks. Whether Melania returned with him
to Egypt, or whether she went to Jerusalem, we do not know: it is also uncertain whether
a journey which he made (Eccl. Hist. ii. S) to Edessa was undertaken at this time. The
date of the settlement of Melania on the ISIount of Olives acccjrding to Jerome's Chronicle
is 379? oi'i according to our present reckoning of dates, 377* ^^^ may suppose that Rufinus
joined her in 379. This was his home for eighteen years, till the year 397.

Rulinus \\ as ordained at Jerusalem, probably about the time when John, with whom
he was closely connected, succeeded Cyril in the Bishopric (A.D. 3S6). The great resources
of Melania were added to his own which seem to have been not inconsiderable. He built
habitations for monks on the Mount of Olives, and employed them in learned pursuits, and
in copying maiuiscripts. On the arrival of Jerome at Bethlehem, the old friendship was

renewed, though not apjoarently with all its former warmth. Jerome certainly
3S6. at times visited Rufinus and once at least stayed with him (465), and he and his

friends brought MS.S. to be copied by the monks of the ISIount of Olives (465).
He gave lectures on Christian writers and doctrine, of which a satirical account is given
at a later period by Jerome' in his letter to Rusticus (cxxv, § iS). The nick-name Grun-
nius which he there gives him was probably caused by some trick of the voice. But we
may gather from Jert)me that he read the Greek church writers diligently and lectured
upon them, a study which enabled him to do much good work at a later time. It is
probable that he lectured in Greek, since he says in 397 that his Latin was weak threnigh
disuse (439). We may set against Jerome's depreciatory description the account given by
Talladius (Hist. Laus. § iiS). "Rufinus, who lived with Melania, was a man of con-
genial spirit, and of great nobility and strength of character. No man has ever been
known of greater learning or of gentler disposition." Palladius also speaks of the
j)rincely hospitality of JMelania and Rufinus: "They received," he says, "bishops and
monks, virgins and matrons and helped them out of their own funds: They passed
their life ofiending none and being hel])ers of the whole world." It is said by Pal-
ladius that he had heard from Melania that she had been present at the death of Pam-
bas in Eg3pt which took place in the year 385, and it is probable that Rufinus accom-
l^anicd her on this occasion. He himself records " a journey which he made to Edessa and
Charrhoe, when he sawsettlements of the monks like those which he had previously seen
in Egypt. But the date of this journey does not appear. It may have been undertaken in
order to visit some of the exiles from Egypt before his establishment on the Mt. of Olives.
He records also the visits of the remarkal)le men who were entertained by him ; liacurius,
who had been king of the Ubii, and afterwards count of the Domestics under Theodosius,
and was governor or duke of Palestine when Rufinus settled there; and ^desius the com-
panion of Frumentius the Missionary to the tribes in the N. W. of India. But his chief
interest and occupation throughout seems to have been with his monks at Mt. 01i\et with
])erha])s some connection \vitli the diocesan work of his friend John, the Bp. of Jerusalem.
Palladius records that Rulinus and Melania were the means of restoring to the conniumion
of the church 400 monks. What was this schism, which Palladius describes as being "f)n
account of Paulinus " ? It is probable that the words relate to the monks of Bethlehem
whose alienation from the Church of Jerusalem had been due to the ordination of Paul-
inian, Jerome's brother, by Epiphanius. We know that Rufinus before leaving Palestine
was reconciled to Jerome (Jcr. Ap. iii. 26, 33) ; and we know also that Jerome's book
against John, Bishop of Jerusalem, which describes the schism was suddenly broken otV; '

1 " lie came in with a slow and stately step; he spoke with a broken utterance, sometimes with a kind of disjointed sobs
rather than words. He had a pile of tomes upon the tabic; and then, with a frown and a coiitractinn of the nostrils, and his
lorclicad wrinkled up, he snapped his rinj^ers to call the attention of his audience. What he said had no depth in it; hut he
crilicized others, and pointed out their defects, as tlunif^h he would collide them from the Senate ot Christian teachers. He
was rich, and entertained freely, ;ind many liocked round him in his ])ublic appearances. He was as Inxnrions as Nero at
home, as stern as Cato abroad; as full of contradictions as the Chira.-er:i."

2 Hist. Eccl. ii.S.

8 For the date of this work, see the Note prefixed to it in the truuslatioa of Jerome's works, Vol. vi. of this series.


PROLEGOMENA. 407


and that he remained from that time forward at one with his Bishop. We may be al-
lowed to beUeve that the influence of Melania as well as Rufinus had been exerted for
some time previously to bring about this happy result.

Rufinus' part in the controversy thus terminated i«s partly known and partly the subject
of inference. The original source of discord is not known. It is possible that Rutinus, who
had been mentioned by Jerome in his Chronicle (A.D. 37S) as being, together with Florentius

and Bonosus, a specially distinguished monk, did not find himself included in his
3S2. friend's Catalogue of Church writers (De Vir. 111.) published at Bethlehem.

When Aterbius began the Origenist troubles at Jerusalem, Rufinus, who treated
him with merited scorn (Jer. Ap. iii, 33) probably felt some resentment at Jerome who, by
" giving satisfaction " to the heresy hunter, had countenanced his proceedings. Rufinus

appears as Bishop John's adviser during the visit of Epiphanius (Jer. Letter li, 2,
392- 6), as the chief of a chorus of presbyters who applauded their own bishop and de-
rided Epiphanius as a " silly old man ;" ^ and as present when Epiphanius remon-
strated with his brother-bishop. He is also mentioned by Epiphanius in his letter to John
(Jer. Letter li. 6) as holding an important place in the Church, "May God free you and
all about you, especially the presbyter Rufnius, from the heresy of Origen, and all others."
This sentence will suggest to all who are familiar with church-controversies a whole series
of scenes in the schism which continued between Bethlehem and Jerusalem during the next
five years. Jerome believed Rufinus to have injmed him at every turn, to have procured
the abstraction of a Manuscript of his from the house occupied by Fabiola on her visit to
Bethlehem (Apol. iii, 4) perhaps to have been in league with Vigilantius (Comp. Jer. Ep.
Ixi, 3 with AjDol. iii, 4, 19). But such insinuations have the appearance rather of the sus-
picions prompted by anger than of actual fact. In any case they were condoned when

the two old companions who had been so long parted by ecclesiastical strife met
397- together at the Church of the Resurrection at a solemn eucharistic feast, and joined

hands in token of reconciliation, and when Jerome accompanied his friend some
way on his journey before their final parting (Jer. Vol. iii, 24).

He arrived in Italy, in company with Melania, early in the spring of 397. They were
there received by Pavdinus of Nola with great honour." Melania went on at once to Rome ;
but Rufinus stopped at the monastery of Pinetum near Terracina. His welcome by the
Abbot Urseius and the philosopher Macarius, and their request to him to translate various
Greek books, amongst others the Tlepl 'Apx^v of Origen, are described in his Prefaces to the Ben-
edictions of the Patriarchs, the Apology of Pamphilus and the translations of Origen (417,
41S, 420, 439). The preface to Origen's chief work (427) had the worst and most lasting
results. He says that, being aware of the odium attaching to the name of Origen, he had
feared to translate the work : but that the example of Jerome (whom he does not name but
whose great ability he extols) in translating Origen encourages him to follow in his steps.
This Pi'eface, with this translation of the Tlrpl 'Af>x'Ji', was published in Rome early in the
year 398, Rufinus having moved there to stay with Melania. At Rome he lived in the
circle of Melania, her son Publicola and his wife Albina, with their daughter the younger

Melania and her husband Pinianus, to whom we may probably add the Pope


4OT^?o; Siricius, and certainly Apronianus, a young noble whom he speaks of as his son in

the faith (435, 564) . Jerome's friend Eusebius of Cremona was also in Rome, and

on friendly terms with him (445). But on the appearance of the work of Origen with

Rufinus' Preface, a great ferment arose leading to the violent controversy between Rufinus

and Jerome which is described in the Preface to their Apologies (434, 4S2).

Meanwhile, Rufinus had left Rome probably in 39S, having obtained the usual Literae

Formata; from the Pope vSiricius, who died that year, to introduce him to other

A.D. 398. churches.^ We hear of him at Milan, where in the presence of the Bishop, Simplici-

anus,'* he met Eusebius of Cremona, and heard him readout a letter of Theophilus

containing some passages from the Tiepl 'Apj«v, against which he vehemently protested

(490). He then, having probably visited his native city of Concordia, where his mother,*

possibly his father also (430, 502) was still living, took up his abode at Acjuileia. There he

was welcomed by the bishop, Chi-omatius, by whom he had been baptized some 26 or 27

years before. Rufinus probably arrived at Aquileia in the beginning of 399, and remained

1 See Jerome's expressions in his book "Against John of Jerusalem " c. ii, which evidently refer to Rufinus ; " grin-
ning like a dog and turning up his nose."

- Paulinus Ep. xxix, 12. s jer. Ep. cxxvii, 9 Ap. iii. 21.

- Successor of Ambrose, and Bishop A.D. 397-400. See the Letter of Anastasius to him. Jer. Ep, xcv.
* She died soon after. Sec Jeioinc Ep. Ixxxi, i.


4o8 LIFE AND WORKS OF RUFINUS.


there 9 or lo years. It was during this period that all his principal works except
399-40S. the Commentary on the Benedictions of the patriarchs, tlie translation i>£ the ll'/'i

'A[)x<'->v andPamphilus' Apology, and the book on the Adulterations of Origen were
com])oseil. It was soon after his settlement at Aquileia that he heard from Apronianus of the
letter of Jerome to Panmiachius and Oceanus ' expressing his anger against him for the
mention he had made of Jerome in the Preface to the lltfn'Apxi)v. The conciliatory letter to
Rufinus which accompanied this and which was an answer to a friendly one from Rutinus ^
was not sent on by Jerome's friends (489) ; and Rufinus, thinking that his old friend had
completely turned against him, composetl his Apology (434-482) which drew forth Jerome's
reply (4S2-541). This controversy is placed in full before the reader of tliis \-oluine in an
English translation, with prefatory notes. It may therefore be treated very shortly here.

Rufiinis' Apology is an answer to Jerome's letter to Painmachius and Oceanus. It is addressed to
Apronianus of Rome. He makes a profession of his Christian standing and faith, especiallj on the
points raised by tlie Origenistic controversy ; he describes the circumstances which had led him to
translate tiie books of Origen, and defends his method of translation, which, he says, has been misrepre-
sented by men sent from liie East to lay snares for him. His method, he declares, was the same which
had been used by Jerome, who boasted that through him the Latins knew all that was good in Origen
and nothing of the bad. Where he found passages in Origen's writings, in flagrant contradiction to the
orthodox opinion he had maintained elsewhere, he concluded that the passage had been falsified by here-
tics, and restored the more orthodox statement which he believed to have been originally there. He
then turns round upon Jerome and points out that, in his Commentaries on the Ephesians, written
some 10 years before, to which he specially referred in his Letter as showing his freedom from heresy,
he had practically adopted the opinions now imputed to Origen as heretical, such as the fall of souls
from a previous state into the prison house of earthly bodies, and the universal restoration of spiritual
beings.

In the second book he clears himself from tlie imputation of following Origen and Plato in
believing in the lawfulness of using occasional falsehood in the government and training of men.
But he itnputes to his adversary a systematic use of falsehood in reference to his reading heathen
authors, while he professed in his letter to Eustochium (Jer. Ep. xxii) to have solemnly promised
never even to possess them. He then takes a wider view of Jerome's writings, showing how, in this
Letter to Eustochium, his books against Jovinian, etc., he had by his satirical pictures held up to ridi-
cule the various classes of Christians, clergy, monks, virgins : how he had praised Origen indiscrimi-
nately as a teacher second only to the Apostles : how he had defamed men like Ambrose, and therefore
his present accusations were little worth : how he boasted of having taken as his teachers not only
Origenists like Didymus or heretics like Apollinarius, but heathen like Porphyry, and Iiad made his
translation of the Old Testament under the inlluence of the Jew Baranina (whose name Rufinus per-
verts into Barabbas). He concludes by summarizing his accusations and calling upon the reader to
choose between him and his opponent.

This Ajiology was only sent to a few friends of Rufinus (530) ; but portions of it became known to
Jerome's iViends and liis brother Paulinian (493) carried them to Bethlehem, together with RufiTius'
Apology addressed to Pope Anastasius. Jerome had also before him the letter of Anastasius to John
Bishop of Jerusalem (509) showing his dislike of Rufinus' proceedings. On these he grounds his own
Apology, which was originally in two books and was addressed to Pammachius and Marcella y\.D. 402.

In the first book he blames Rufinus' breach of friendship after the reconciliation v/hich had
taken place at Jerusalem; he then shows that he was compelled to translate the Ilf/w 'A/),\Mr in order to
show what it really was. He declares that the Apology of Origen translated by Rufinus as the work of
Pamphilus was really written by Euscbius; that Origen had been condemned by Thcophilus and
Anastasius, by East and West alike, and by the decree of the Emperors. He defends himself for hav-
ing used heathen and heretical teachers, and help of a Jewish scholar in translating tiie Old Testament.
As to his Commentaries on the Ephesians he declares that he merely put side by side the opinions of
various commentators, indicating at times his knowledge that some were lieretical : and as to his anti-
Ciceronian dream, he ritlicules the idea that a man can be bound by his night visions.

In the second book he criticizes Rufinus' Apology addressed to Anastasius as to both its style and
its matter, and blames him for his treatment of I'3piphanius, and endeavours to implicate him in the
imputation of heresy. He then defends his translation of the Old Testament, sliowing by copious
quotations from the Prefaces to the Books that he had done nothing condemnatory of the Septuagint,
whose version he had himself translated into Latin and constantly used in familiar expositions.

This Apology was brought to Rufinus at Aquileia by a merchant who was leaving again in two
days (522). Chromatius no doubt urged him, as he urged Jerome (520) not to continue thy controversy
and he yielded. He Avrote, however, a private letter to Jerome, whicli has been lost, sending hirtj an
accurate copy of his Apology, and while declining public controversy.; yet declaring that he could have
said even more than before, and divulged things which would have lieeii worse to Jerome than death.
Jerome in his answer written A.D. 403, which forms B. iii of his ApoK)gy, declares that the controversy
is Rufinus' fault, and defeiuls his friends for their conduct towards him, even in hokling back the con-
ciliatory letter written in 399 ; but shows how a way might still be open for friendship, ih,* touches
again upon most of the points dwelt on in the previous hooks, defending himself and accusing Rufinus,
and ends by declaring that his bitter reply was necessitated first by Rufinus' threats, and secondly by
his abhorrence of heresy, from all complicity w^ith which he must at any price clear himself.

ijcr. Ep. Ixxxiv. 2 iicc Jcr. Ep. Ixxxi, i.


PROLEGOMENA. 409


This book closed the controversy. Rufinus did not reply, Jerome did not relent. Nothing in
Rufinus' subsequent writings reflects on Jerome; but Jerome is never weary of expressing his hatred of
Rufinus, speaking of him after his death as " the Scorpion " ' and writing malignant satirical descrip-
tions of him like that in his letter to Rusticus.'^

It may be observed, however, that notwithstanding the violent words used on both
sides, it was possible for eminent chinxhmen to esteem and befriend both parties. Augus-
tine, on receiving Jerome's Apology, laments, in words which must have been felt by
Jerome as a severe reproach, that two such men, so loved by the churches, should thus
tear each other to i^ieces. Chromatins, while he kept up communications with Jerome,
and supjolied him with funds for his literary work, was also the friend and adviser of
Rufinus,

Rufinus' friends at Aquileia, like those at the Pinetum and at Rome, were anxious to
gain from him a knowledge of the great church-writers of the East, and especially of Origen.
No one at Aquileia seems to have known Greek. He makes excuses in his Prefaces (430,
563, 565, etc.) for the difficulty of the task and his own short-comings which seem to be
partly conventional, partly genuine. But he did a work which he alone or almost alone at
that period was qualified to do. His translations of Origen and Pamphilus were already
known. We learn from Jerome (536) that Rufinus had translated parts of the LXX.
He now translated Eusebius' Church History, and added to it two books of his own ; he
translated the so-called Recognitions of Clement, which till then were almost unknown in
Italy. He wrote a History of the Monks of the East, partly from personal knowledge,
partly from what he had heard or read of them. And he translated the Commentaries of
Origen upon the Heptatevich or i st seven books of Scripture, except Numbers and Deuter-
onomy ; and those on the Epistle to the Romans. He also wrote his exposition of the Creed
(541-563), and probably some other works which have not come down to us.

The first part of his stay at Aquileia was troubled by the controversy with Jerome.

He also received from his friends at Rome the intelligence that his Preface and
400-402. translation of the Tlepl 'Apx^v had been brought to the notice of the Pope Anasta-

sius, by Pammachius and Marcella (430) ; and probably the letter of the Pope
to Venerius Bishop of Milan, which is quoted in Anastasius' letter to John of Jerusalem
(433) was also brought to his knowledge. Though there is no reason to suppose, as has

been often done, that the Pope passed sentence upon him, still less that he
400. summoned him to Rome. Rufinus was so far afiected by what he heard of the

adverse feeling excited in the Pope's mind toward him that he thought it desirable
to write an explanation or apology (430-3) vindicating his action in the translation of
Origen, and giving an exposition of his own belief on some of the principal points dealt
with in the Ilepl 'Apx^v. From the letter of Anastasius to John of Jerusalem we gather that
John had written to him in the interest of Rufinus, and had blamed Jerome's friends at
Rome, perhaps also Jerome himself, for the part they had taken in reference to him. It is
a curious fact that this letter was known to Jerome but not to Rufinus dining the con-
troversy (509) ; but it can hardly be inferred with any certainty from this that John had
changed sides and favoured Jerome at Rufinus' expense.

After 8 or 9 years at Aquileia Rufinus returned to Rome. His friend Chromatins of

Aquileia had died in 405. Anastasius of Rome had also passed away (A.D. 402),
40S. and hissuccessor Innocentiuswas without prejudice against Rufinus. Melania was

either there or with Paulinus at Nola. Her son Publicola had died in 406, but his
widow Albina was with her, and her granddaughter the younger Melania with her husband
Pinianus. The siege of Rome by Alaric was impending, and the whole party were starting
by way of Sicily and Africa, in both of which Melania had property, intending eventually to
reach Palestine. He joined their " religious company" as he tells us in the Preface to Ori-
gen on Numbers (56S) which, according to Palladius (Hist. Laus. 1 19) formed a vast caravan
with slaves, virgins and eunuchs ; and he was with them in Sicily when Alaric burned
Rhegium (56S) the flames of which they saw across the straits.

This translation of Numbers was his last work. He was at that time suffering in his
eyes ; and he died soon afterwards in Sicily, as we learn from Jerome's malicious words
"The Scorpion now lies underground between Enceladus and Porphyrion." '' The undy-
ing hatred of Jerome towards him has unduly lowered him in the estimation of the Church.
He was far below Jerome in literary ability, but in their great controversy he displayed more
magnanimity than his rival, being willing to forego a public answer to his provoking


1 Jcr. Ep. cxxvii. lo. 2 jer. Ep. cxxv. ^ jer, Prcf. to Cu...iii. on Ezek. B. 1.


:4io LIFE AND WORKS OF RUFINUS.

apology. He was highly esteemed by the eminent churchmen of his time and the Bishops
near whom he lived. Chromatins of Aquileia was his friend; for Petroniusof Bolo<^na he
wrote his monastic histoiy, for Gaudentius of Brixia he translated the Clementine Recogni-
tions, for Laurentius (pcrhaj^s of his nati\c Concordia) he composed his work on the Creed.
Faulinus of Nola continued his friendship for him to the end. Above all Augustine
speaks of him as the object of love and of honour; and, in his reply to Jerome' who had
sent him his Apology, says: " I grieved, when I had read your book, that such discord
should have arisen between persons so dear and so intimate, bound to all the churches by
a bond of all'ection and of renown."

We may conclude this notice by t\\ o quotations from writers who lived shortly after
the death of Rufinus ; the first of which shows how unfairly the fame of Jerome has
pressed on the memory of his antagonist, \\ hile the second may be taken as the verdict of
unprejudiced history. Pope Gelasius, at a Council at Rome in 494, drew up a list of
books to be received in the church, in which he says of Rufinus: " He was a religious
man, and wrote many books of use to the Chinch, and many commentaries on the Scrip-
ture ; but, since the most blessed Jerome infamed him on certain points, we take part
with him (Jerome) in this and in all cases in which he has pronounced a condemnation."
(Mignc's Patrologia vol. lix. col. 175) • On the other hand Gennadius, in his list of
Ecclesiastical writers (c. 17) says: " Rufinus, the presbyter, of Aquileia, was not the least
of the church-teachers, and showed an elegant genius in his translations from Greek into
Latin ;" and, after giving a list of his writings, he continues : " Pie also replied in two volumes
to him who decried his works, showing convincingly that he had exercised his powers
through the might which Goil had given him, and for the good of the church, and that it
was through a spirit of rivalry that his adversary had employed his pen in defaming him."

WORKS OF RUFINUS.

I. Originai- Works which still Survive.

1 . A Commentary on the Benedictions of the 12 Patriarchs. This short work was
composed at the monastery of Pinetum near Terraclna during Lent in the year 398, at the
request of Paulinus of Nola. Rufinus had stayed with Paulinus on his first arrival with
Melania in Italy (Paulinus. Ep. xxix, 13.) and Paulinus wrote to him (417) after he had
gone to Pinetum begging him to give an explanation of the blessing of Jacob in Judah.
Rufinus, though not replying for a time, sent his exposition, and afterwards, on a second
re([uest from Paulinus, added the exposition of the rest of the blessings in the Patriarchs,
like the son in the parable (as he explains in a graceful letter prefixed to the work) who
said " I go not," but afterwards repented and went.

The exposition is well written and clear ; but it is not in itself of much value. The
text on which he comments is very faulty : for instance, in the Blessing of Reuben, instead
of the words " the excellency of dignity and the excellency of power," it has " diirits con-
versationc^ et diiriis^ temerarius." When Rufinus adheres to the plain interpretation
of the passage his comments are sensible and clear; but he soon passes to the m> stic sense :
Reuben is God's first-born people, the Jews, and the couch which he defiles is the law of the
Olil Testament ; and the moral interpretation is grounded on the supposed meaningof Reuben,
" the Son who is seen," that is the visible, carnal man, who breaks through the law. So, in
Judah's "binding his foal to the vine," the explanation given, as he says, by the Jews,
that the vines will be so plentiful that they are used even for tying up the young colts, is
dismissed. The foal is the Christian Church the ofispring of Israel which is God's ass,
and is bound to Chris! I he true vine.

2. A dissertation on the adulteration oj" the works of Origcn by heretics., subjoined to
his translation of Pamphilus' Apology for Origen. This will be found in the present
volume pp. 421-427.

3. An apology addressed to the Pope Anastasius. Seethe introductory note prefixed
to the translation of this work (429) now first translated into English.

4. The Apology for himself against the attacks of Jerome. See the introductory
statement prefixed to the translation (434-5).

5. Ecclesiastical History in Tzvo Books., being a continuation of the History of
Eusebius translated by Rufinus into Latin. This work was composed at Aquileia at the

1 Auy. Letter ^3 (In Jerome's Letters No. no).


PROLEGOMENA. 41 1


request of the Bishop, Chromatius. The date is probably 401, since in tlie Preface Rufi-
nus saj^s that he had been recjuested to translate Eusebius at the time when Alaric was in-
vading Italy. This must allude to the first of Alaric's invasions, in 400, smce the second
invasion (403) would have been marked by some word such as " Iterum," and at the 3d in
40S Chromatius had already died. The history does not attempt to give more than the chief
events, and these are told with little sense of proportion, the Council of Ariminum occupying
about 20 lines, while the story of the right arm of Arsenius which Athanasius was ac-
cused of cutting otV takes up five times that space. Some documents of great importance,
however, are given, such as the canons of Nic^ea, and the Creed as it issued from the council.
But there is much credulity, as shown in the account of the Discovery of the True Cross by
Helena mother of Constantine, and the stories of the death of Arius and the attempted
rebuilding of the Jewish Temple under Julian. Rufinus has none of the critical power
leeded for a true historian. VVc may add that all that is valuable in his history is incor-
porated into the works of Socrates (translated in Vol. iii. of this Series). See especially
B. ii, c. I.

6. The History of the Monks which is a description of the Egyptian Solitaries ap-
pears to have no mark of its date : But it was, no doubt, composed at Aquileia between
39S and 409, probably in the later part of that period. It was written in the name of
Petronius Bishop of Bologna, and records his experiences, which he says he had been often
requested by the monks of Mt. Olivet to commit to writing. It is full of strange stories like
those in Jerome's Lives of the Hermits Hilarion and Malchus.^ There is often a verbal
resemblance between this book and the Lausiac History of Palladius ; indeed, they at times
record the same adventures (compare the story of the crocodiles, Ruf. Hist. Mon. xxxiii.
6 with Pall. Hist. Laus. cl., where even the same prayers and texts are put into the mouths
of the tw^o narrators.) But it is probable that in these cases Palladius is indebted to
Rufinus.

7. The Exposition of the Creed is described in the note prefixed to the Translation

(540-

S. The Prefaces to the Books of Origen^ translated by Rufinus, and to the Apology

of Pamphilus for Origen, together with the Book on the Adulteration of Origen's
Writings are given in this volume (420-437). That to the ITf/jt 'A^m-uv (427) is the docu-
ment on which the great controversy between Jerome and Rufinus turns. That to Nimi-
hers gives personal details of importance, while the Peroration to the Ep. to the Romans
exhibits the method used in translating. The Preface and Epilogue to the work of Pamphi-
lus are of great importance in connexion with the controversy between Jerome and Rufinus.

II. Translations from Greek Writers.

1. The Rule of St. Basil., translated at Pinetum for the Abbat Urseius in 397 or 39S.
This was the first work written by Rufinus of which we have any knowledge.

2. The Apology of Pamphilus for Origcn. This formed the ist book of an Apol-
ogy for Origen's teaching in 6 books, which were composed by Eusebius and Pamphilus
during the hitter's imprisonment at Caesarea previous to his martyrdom. Eusebius speaks
of this work in a general way (H. E. vi. 33) as written by himself and Pamphilus. The
last book, however, was written by Eusebius alone after the death of Pamphilus. The
part translated by Rufinus is only the ist book, and this he believed to be by Pamphilus
alone. Jerome in his Apology (487, 514) asserted that the whole was by Eusebius alone.
But his bitter feeling led him astray in this. The Apology for Origen has perished with
the exception of this ist book which survives in Rufinus' Translation. The Preface
which he prefixed to the work, and the Epilogue which he subjoined to it under the name
of " The book concerning the adulteration of the works of Origen " are given in our trans-
lation (420-427). This work was written at Pinetum near Terracina at the request of
Macarius, to whom the Preface is addressed, in the end of 397 or the beginning of 398.
For the questions relating to the authorship of the Apology the reader is referred to the
Apologies of Jerome and Rufinus (esp. pp. 487, 514), to Lightfoot's Article on Eusebius
in the Diet, of Eccl. Biography, and the Prolegomena to the Translation of Eusebius in this
Series, p. 36.

3. Origen'' s Ilepl 'Apxuv. This translation was also made at the request of Macarius,
and was finished as the Preface to B. iii. shows in the Lent of 398. The questions raised
by this Translation are discussed in the Introductions to the Works of Jerome (Vol. vi of

1 Suu those Lives translated in Vol. vi of this Series.


412 LIFE AND WORKS OF RUFINUS.


this Series), ami r)f Rutinus in this Volume ; and the controversy itself is developed in their
Apologies (434-540). The greater part of the Uefu 'Apxoiv is known to us only through this
translation.

4. Orlgen's Homilies. Those on the Books of Moses and of Joshua were trans-
lated at various times during the last 10 years of Rulinus' life. He had intended, as
he states in his Preface to the Book of Numbers, to translate all that had been written
by Origen on the Pentateuch : he accomplished this as regards the first three books, and
also as to the book of Joshua, at the request of Chromatins; the book of Numbers he
only finished in Sicily, just l)efore his death ; and the Commentaries on Deuteronomy he
did not live to translate. In these translations, as he tells us (567), he did not scru])lc to
supply what he found to be omitted in the Greek, the Homilies being of a hortatory
kind, whereas Rufinus' object was an exposition of the text.

The Translation of the Homilies on Judges., though there is no Preface to it, is ascril)ed
to Rufinus by Fontanini, who maintains that in this case, the name of Rulinus l)eing dis-
credited on account of Jerome's diatribe against him, the editors have suppressed the
Preface, while in some other cases they have substituted the name of Jerome for that of
Rufinus.

The Translation of Origen's Commentary on the 36th., syth and j8th Bsalms \s un-
questionably by Rufinus; it is dedicated to Apronianus, and may have been written in
Rome (Fontanini col. iSS, beginning of ch. viii). The Preface is given by us in this
volume. Fontanini also gives to Rufinus a Translation of Origen's Homilies on i Kings
and on Canticles. The books on Joshua and Judges he translated as he found them (567),
but in the next he adopted a different method.

The works of Origen on the Ep. to the Romans were very long, and Rufinus did not
scru])le to condense them (reducing the 25 books of Origen to 10), as he clearly states in
his Peroration (567). This work he addressed to Heraclius, and it was composed dur-
ing his stay at Aquileia.

Rufinus had hoped, as we learn from the same Peroration (567), to translate
some at least of the Commentaries of Origen upon the other Epistles of St. Paul ; but he
first determined to fiifish those upon the Pentateuch, a task in which, as we have seen, he
was overtaken by death.

5. The Translation of 10 Tracts of St. Basil aftd 8 of Gregory Nazianzcn. These
are to be found in the works of Basil and Gregory, but without Prefaces; they are, how-
ever, mentioned by Rufinus himself in his Eccl. Hist. ii. 9, and in a letter to Apronianus
quoted by Fontanini Vit. Ruf. II., viii, I. col. 1S9.

6. The Sentences of Xystus^ which have been variously attributed to a philosopher who
flourished in the reign of Augustus, and is quoted by Seneca, and to Xystus, or Sixtus, Bp.
of Rome, w ho suffered martyrdom in 358. They are called the Annulus (V;,Yf//"'''<oi>) as
inseparal)le from the hand. Rulinus speaks of them in his Preface, translated in this
volume, as being traditionally ascribed to the Bishop ; he does not pledge himself to this
opinion, but does not deny it ; and recent research has shown that, though they may have
a basis in heathen philosophy, they are in their present form the writings of a Christian.
Jerome, however, scoffs at Rufinus again and again, as either through ignorance or hetero-
doxy ascribing to a Christian Bishop and martyr the work of a Pythagorean (See Jerome
ad Ctesiphontem (Ep. cxxxiii. c. 3), Comm. on Ezek. B. vi. ch. 8, on Jerem. B. iv.
ch. 22. The whole matter is fully discussed in Diet, of Christian Biog. Art. Xystus.)

7. The Sentences of Evagriiis Ponticiis (or Iberita or Galatus) in three treatises,
{i) to Virgins., (2) To Monks., (3) On the Passionless State. These are described with
bitter depreciation as heretical works by Jerome (Ad Ctes. Ep. 133 c. 3. Pref. to Anti-
Pelagian Dialogue and to B. iv. of Comm. on Jerem.) but approved by Gennadius (c. 9.)
who issued an amended version of Rufinus' translation. Rufinus' translation is said to be
in the Vatican library by Fontanini (Vita Rufini Lib. II. c. iv. in Migne's Patrologia
Vol. 21 col. 205.)

8. The Recogiiitions of Clement supposed to have been written by Clement Bishop of
Rome, but now known to be a work of 50 or 60 years later. The translation of it was
asked for by vSilvia sister of Rufinus the Praitorian Prefect, and was unsuccessfull}' at-
tempted by Paulinus of Nola (see his letter to Rufinus in Fontanini as above, col. 208.)
After the death of Silvia, Gaudentius Bp. of Brixia where she died as a saint, urged Ru-
finus to make the translation (Peror. to Ep. to Rom. 567) Preface of Rufinus.)

9. The translation of Eusebius' Eccl. History in 9 books, a work much valued in


PROLEGOMENA. 413


Gaul, and often reprinted In later times. The Preface (Migne's Rufinus col. 461) is
addressed to Chromatius, and says that it was demanded by him at the time of Alaric's
invasion of Italy (A.D. 400) as an antidote to the unsettlement of men's minds. Ru-
finus speaks humbly of himself as having little practice in Latin writing. He says that he
has compressed the loth book which contained little of real history, and added what re-
mained of it to Book 9. See Prolegomena to Eusebius in this Series Vol. i p. 54.

It is a curious and important fact that all the translations known to have been made
by Rufinus have survived. This is due no doubt to their being the only translations ex-
tant in the Middle Ages of great writers like Origen and Basil, and to the impossibility of
procuring others. The uncritical spirit of the time may have been favourable to them. Had
they been recognized as the works of Rufinus, they might have been destroyed ; but it was
possible, even after the revival of learning, to attribute many of them to Jerome.

Gennadius mentions a series of Rufinus' letters, which have not survived, amongst
which were several of special importance addressed to Proba, a lady who is highly com-
mended by Jerome in his letter to Demetrias.^ Jerome also mentions (537) some trans-
lations of Rufinus from Latin into Greek, but his allusion is somewhat vague ; and
some translations from the LXX (536). A translation of Josephus, and a Commentary
on the first 75 Psalms, and on Hosea, Joel and Amos, a Life of St. Eugenia and a Book
on the Faith have been attributed to Rufinus but are believed not to be his. These, with
the exception of the translation of Josephus, are given by Vallarsi in his edition of Ru-
finus. Besides these, translations of Origen's Seven Homilies on Matthew and one on
John, and of his treatises on Mary Magdalen and on Christ's Epiphany have at times
been attributed to Rufinus.

We do not propose to go minutely into the Bibliography of Rufinus' Works. Some
of them were among the earliest printed books. The Editio Princeps of the Cojntnentary
on the Creed bears date Oxford^ 1468., but is commonly believed to be really of 1478 \ that
of the Ecclesiastical History^ Paj'is, 1474; that of the History of the Monks ^ undated, is be-
lieved to be of 147 1 ; \\\^toi\\\Q.Co7nmentaries of Origen is of 1503 (Aldus Minutius) ; that of
the Sayings of Xystus of 1507, and of the Ilfpt ^Kpx^^ is of 15 14 (Venice). They continued
to be reprinted up to 15S0; but, with the exception of the Sayings of Xysttis, no further
editions were published till the edition of Vallarsi (Verona, 1745), and the Life by Fonta-
nini (Rome, 1743). Since that date, though various editions and translations of the £^x-
■positions of the Cf-eed have appeared, no attempt has been made to give the whole of
Rufinus' writings. Migne (Patrologia, Vol. xxi., Paris, 1849) ^^ contented to reprint Val-
larsi without alteration.

No complete edition of Rufinus' Works, therefore, exists. The volume of Migne's
Patrologia (31) contains the Life by Fontanini (Rome, 1743), the Notice by Schoenemann
(Leipzig, 1793), and Vallarsi's edition (Verona, 1745) of Rufinus' chief works, viz. The
Benedictions of the Patriarchs, the Commentary on the Creed, the Monastic History, the
Ecclesiastical History, the Apology against Jerome, and the Apology addressed to An-
astasius. Vallarsi had intended to edit the Translations from Greek writers, but did not
accomplish this. The Prefaces to these translations, some of which are of great impor-
tance, have therefore to be sought by the student in the editions of the writers to whose
works they are prefixed. They are collected and translated in this Volume for the first
time.

We have in the present work not attempted to translate all the original works of
Rufinus. We have omitted the Exposition of the Benedictions of the Twelve patriarchs,
the Ecclesiastical History and the History of the Monks. The rest we have given. They
include his Apologies, together with the Letter of Pope Anastasius about him to John
of Jerusalem, the Prefaces to the YlepVApxi^v and the Apology of Pamphilus, and the Epi-
logue to the latter work, called the Dissertation on the adulteration of the Works of
Origen, together with the Pi'efaces which are still extant to his Translations of Origen's
Commentaries and his Peroration to Origen on Romans. We have also included his best-
known work, his Commentary on the Creed, a translation of which has kindly been
placed at our service by Dr. Heurtley, Lady Margaret Professor of Theology at Oxford.

^ Letter cxxx, 7.


WORKS OF RUFINUS TRANSLATED IN THIS YOLUMll


TWELV


RUFINUS


Preface to the Commentary on the Benedictions of the Twelve
Patriarchs ..........

Preface to the Commentary on the Benedictions of th
Patriarchs. Book II .......

Preface to the Apology of Pamphilus .....

Treatise on the Adulteration of the works of Origen .
Preface to the Translation of Origen's Uepl 'kpx^w B. I & II
Preface to the Translation of Origen's llepl "Apx^v B. Ill & IV
Apology of Rufinus addressed to Anastasius Bp. of Rome
Letters of Anastasius to John Bishop of Jerusalem concerning
Rufinus' Apology against Jerome B. I .
Rufinus' Apology against Jerome B. II .
Jerome's Apology in answer to Rufinus B. I
Jerome's Apology in answer to Rufinus B. II
Jerome's Apology in answer to Rufinus B. Ill
Rufinus on the Creed ......

Rufinus' Preface to his Translation of the Recognitions of Clement
Rufinus' Preface to his Translation of the Sayings of Xystus
Rufinus' Preface to his Translation of the Church History of
EuSEBIUS ............

Rufinus' Preface to his Translation of Origen on Pss. 36, 37, 38 .
Rufinus' Preface to his Translation of Origen on the Ep. to the Romans
Rufinus' Peroration appended to Origen on the Ep. to the Romans
Rufinus' Preface to his Translation of Origen on Numbers .


4^7

419
420
421
427

4-9
430
432

434
460

48 3

513
541
563
564

565
566

566

56S


WRITINGS OF RUFINUS.


PREFACE TO THE COMMENTARY ON THE BENEDICTIONS OF

THE TWELVE PATRIARCHS.


llufinus had arrived with Melania, in Italy, in the spring of 397, after a stay in the East of some 25 years.
They had visited Paulinus at Nola, and had been entertained by him with the highest honours. Melania probably
remained in Campania, where she had property, engaged in family affairs; but Rufinus set out for Rome. He
stopped, however, for some months at the monastery of Pinetum near Terracina, with his friend Urseius the

His work on Jacob's Benedictions on his sons in Gen. xlix was occasioned by the following letter from
Paulinus, who alludes to it in writing to Sulpicius Severus (Ep. xxviii). "I have written a short note to the
Presbyter Rufinus, the companion of the saintly Melania in her spiritual journey, a truly holy and truly learned
man, and one united with me on this account in the closest affection." The work itself, being an Exposition of
Scripture, is not given, but only the Preface.


Paulinus to his brother Rufinus, ail best
wishes.^

1. Even a short lettei* from one so like-
minded as yourself is a great refreshment,
like the dew which revives a thirsty field
■when the rivers are low. But while I con-
fess that I have been refreshed by this letter
which, though short, is still from you, and is
sent by the servant of our common children,
yet I have been troubled at hearing that all
at once through the disquiet of your anxiety
and the uncertainty caused by delay, you
have determined that you must go to Rome.
May the Lord grant you to receive joy in the
Lord from what we are doing : so that, as
now we share in your anxiety, so we may
rejoice in your joy, and that we may still
have some beginnings of hope that we may
enjoy your presence, when you begin to
see clearly your way and the will of the
Lord concerning you.

2. You are kind enough, with that affec-
tion which makes you love me as yourself,
to desire that I should take up more seri-
ously the study of Greek literature. I ac-
knowledge the kindness which dictates this
wish ; but I am unable to give it effect,
unless, through God's blessing on my earnest
desires, I should have the happiness of your
company for a longer time. How can I
gain any proficiency in a foreign tongue in


1 Saliitem, a word implying well-being generally as well as
health.


the absence of him who might teach me
what I do not know.? I think that, in the
matter of the translation of St. Clement,'
besides the other defects of my abilities, you
noticed this especially as showing the weak-
ness caused by my want of practice, that
where I had been unable to understand the
words or to express them accurately, I have
translated them according to my idea of their
drift, or, to speak more truly, set down what
I thought ought to be there. All the more
therefore do I need that, through God's
mercy, I may have your company in fuller
measure ; for that will be like wealth to the
poor or like gathering the crumbs which fall
from the rich man's table with the eager ap-
petite of the bondman's heart.

3. At the moment when I was writing
these words my eye fell upon a passage of
Scripture, occurring in a portion which I
had set down for reading, namely that in
which Judah is blessed by Jacob ; and I de-
termined after a time to knock at the door of
your mind, for which the Lord had given
me this most timely occasion. I beg you, if
you love me, or rather because you love me
so greatly, to write and say how you under-
stand this blessing of the Patriarchs; and, if
there are some things in it which are worth
knowing but hard to understand, impart to
me also the knowledge of them ; especially
of that passage which says: "Binding his

iTh;it is, the Recns^nitinns. See the Preface tn Rufinus'
Translation in this volume, with the explanatory note prefixed
1 to it.


VOL. III.


E e


4i8


RUFINUS.


colt to the vine and his ass's ' colt to the hair-
cloth." ^ Tell me what is the colt and the
ass's colt, and wliy his colt is to be bound to
the vine, but the ass's colt to the hair cloth.

The answer of Rufinus forms the Preface to
his Exposition of the Benedictions.

1. The more I excuse myself to you, and
the more I assert that I am unable to respond
to your inquiries, the more instant you
become in your requests, and the harder be-
come your demands : you treat me as you
would an ox whose laziness you have discov-
ered, and j^rick his flanks and back as he stops
and turns back with goads of ever increasing
sharpness. I must point out to you, there-
fore, that, even if I am able to bow my neck
low so as just to drag the heavy yoke which
you lay upon me, yet I have no chance of
bursting at a rapid pace into the open and
wide-spreading plains through a form of
speech which flows at large and pours itself
forth over far-extending space. Bear with
me therefore if my resolution has been but
tardily fulfilled, and if I come up onlv at a
feeble pace to the point to which you call me.

2. You ask me how the passage in Genesis
is to be understood in which Israel the father
of the patriarchs is represented as predicting
what he saw would happen to each of his
sons, and says of Judah, amongst other
things : " Binding his colt to the vine, and
his ass's colt to the tendril of the vine."
You write it " and his ass's colt to the hair-
cloth " (cilicium) ; but in the Greek it stands :

/cat rf; ikim rhv ■kg)7.ov ttjq ovov avTOv. The Greeks

call by the name 'HtKa (twist) not the sprigs
of the vine (as our copies have it) but

1 Gen. xlix, ii.

'This is a mistaken readins^ (th()ui;h said by Vallarsi to be
acc(.'ptf<l by both Ambrose and Augustin), Cilicium for iKiKi,
Uufinus adopts the latter, " Binding- his ass's colt to the tendril
of the vine."


those sickle-like shoots ' by which it supports
itself on branches of trees or poles or the
supports of the kind which I think the
fiirmers call goatikins ; ^ so that the vine is
made safe by these clinging shoots from all
danger of falling, and the tendril can either
become loaded with grapes or grow out in
unfettered length. I think therefore that this
very word (helici), like some others, must
have been set down a long time ago in the
Latin versions, and that it was afterwards
supposed by unintelligent copyists that by
helici, hair-cloth (cilicium) must be meant.

3. It is easy in this way to emend the mis-
takes of the translation ; but it is not so easy
to find out the meaning of the expression
itself unless we take into consideration the
whole passage. But the treatment of this
passage would be placed in a fuller and
clearer light if we could go back to the be-
ginning of the whole of these Benedictions.
But this implies no small amount of leisure
and of time; or, to speak in a more Chris-
tian sense, it demands a mind illuminated by
the Holy Spirit. My talent is but slight,
and there are many demands on my time ;
and my friends are urging me to comply
with their requests about Origen.^ But,
so far as these circumstances admit, and so
great a matter can be treated with brevity, I
will state at once what apptars to me the
true meaning of this passage, for the love
with which you bid me trust you in every-
thing, and without prejudice to the judgment
of others, who may have something better to
say about it.

1 The word, in the text nicinnulos is unknown in I-atin.
The most likely conjecture as to the right reading is ruscarias
guibits (that is ruscaria.'! falculas — sickles for weeding ou^
butcher's broom, as mentioned by Cato and Varrol.

-Capreolos. Projierly little goats, thus used for the props,
the fork of which resembled the horns of the goat. The word
is also used for the tendrils of the vine, and is by some derived
from capio.

3 That is about the translation of the Ilepl 'Kpxutv. See the
Preface to this further on.


PREFACE TO BOOK II.


Rufinus, as we see by his Preface to the former book, considered it unsatisfactory to expound the
Blessing upon Judah apart from those on his brethren. Paulinus therefore, taking the occasion of
their common friend Cercalis' journey to Rome, sends the following letter to induce Rufinus to
expound the remaining Benedictions.


Paulinus to his brother Rufinus, all good wishes.

I. Although our son Cercalis declared to
me that it was uncertain whether, in returning
as he now does to vSt. Peter,' he would be
able to visit you, yet it appears to me that it

» That is to Rome.


would be blamable in me and vexatious to
you were I not to write to you by him in
whom you have a part as well as I. It seems
to me preferable to lose some letter paper by
his not visiting you rather than to lose credit
with you as I think I should do by his visit-
ing you without it : and therefore I have en-


PREFACE TO BENEDICTIONS OF THE PATRIARCHS — BOOK II. 419


trusted this letter, I will not say to chance,
but to faith: for I believe that the Lord will
direct to you the way both of our son and of
my letter ; since to those who long for good
all will turn to good ; and indeed he longs for
you as you ought to be longed for by one who
understands the good he may gain from your
society. I believe that this longing of his
in a good matter will not be lost, according
to his faith and piety : and therefore I have
confidence that he will reach you and abide
with you, and that I shall see the saving
help of the Lord doubled towards you, since
in him you will have the accession of a good
son and pupil and assistant, and he will find
in you a father and teacher of all good things
given to him from the Lord, who will add to
the efficacy and power of his prayers the
strength of spiritual grace. As to myself,
though I have the assurance that when you
return to the East you will be unwilling to
depart without visiting me, yet my sins
make me fear that the daughter of Baby-
lon, may turn you away from me. I pray
therefore with earnest longings to the Lord
that he would give me not according to my
deserts but according to my desire and may
direct your course to me in the way of peace ;
for such as do not walk in that way are
reprobate and condemned and incapable of
truly longing for your presence.

2. But now for the business part of my
letter. I charge you, with the importunity,
with which I am in the habit of knocking
at your door even in the middle of the
night, being driven by fear of a refusal to
the modest attitude of a supplicant, to show
me kindness once moi"e, and to expound the
Benedictions on the twelve Patriarchs. You
have already made a beginning with the
prophecy relating to Judah, and have given,
according to the precept, a threefold inter-
pretation of it. I now beg you to expound
the prophecy as it relates to each of the
sons of Judah : so that I may myself become
possessed of the truth by your means, and
may also gain through your help the favor
and the praise which will accrue to me ;
for I shall thus be able to make answer to
those who have thought well to consult me on
the difficulties of this passage of vScripture not
with foolish words drawn from my own un-
derstanding but with divine truth flowing
from your inspiration.


Rufinus, though at this time busy with his


larger works, the translations of Pamphilus' de-
fence of Origen, and Origen's Uepl 'Apx'^v, and,
though about to set out for Rome, lost no time in
composing the work which Paulinus demanded,
and sent it him with the followinsc letter.


Rufinus to his brother Paulinus, the Man of
God, with all good wishes.

1. Though our common son Cerealis did
not visit me, he felt what pain he would cause
me if he delayed my reception of your letter,
and forwarded it to me. In reading it I felt,
as usual, a continual increase in my yearning
towards you : but I found towards its close a
request from which I have frequently begged
you to excuse me — I mean the request
which you make that I should write some-
thing in answer to your questions as to the
interpretation of passages of Scripture. 1
thought that I should lead you to desist from
these questions by the writings I have once
and again sent you, which have given evi-
dence of my ignorance and of the roughness
of my speech.

2. But since you still are not weary of
commanding me, I have at once, to the best
of my powers, added to what I had written
at your desire on the Benediction of Judah
the comments on the remaining eleven patri-
aixhs. I acted like the man in the parable of
the two sons. I thought that I should thus best
fulfil the fathei^'s will : and though when he
ordered me to go into the vineyard I had
said I will not go, yet after a while I went.
If, as I grant, there is some rashness in the
fact that with so little capacity we attempt
such a great task, I would say, with sub-
mission to you, that this must be most
justly imputed to you, since, through your
excessive love for me you do not see that my
measure of knowledge, as of other virtues,
is but slight. I wrote this work in the days of
Lent, while I was staying in the monastery of
Pinetum, and I wrote it for you. But I
found it impossible to coiiceal this poor work
from the brethren who were there : and they,
considering that a thing which had been
honoured by your approval must be of great
importance, extorted from me the permis-
sion to copy it for themselves. Thus, while
you demand from me food for yourself you
give refreshment to others also. Farewell,
and be in peace, my most loving brother,
most true worshipper of God, and an Israel-
ite in whom there is no guile. I entreat you
who are so full of the grace of God to hold
me still in remembrance.


E e 2


420


RUFINUS.


TRANSLATION OF PAMPHILUS' DEFENCE OF ORIGEN.

Written at Pincttim A.D. jp7'


While Rufinus was staying at Pinetum, a Christian named Macarius ' sought his advice and assistance.
He was engaged in a controversy with the Mathematici, a class of men who had deserted the scientific studies
from which they took their name, and had turned to astrology and a belief in Fatalism. Macarius, having heard
of Origen's greatness in the region of Christian speculation, earnestly desired some knowledge of his writings :
but was unable to attain it through ignorance of Greek. He declared to Rufinus that he had had a dream in
which he saw a ship laden with Eastern merchandize arriving in Italy, and that it was declared to him that this
ship would contain the means of attaining the knowledge he desired. The coining of Rufinus seemed to him
the fulfilment of his dream, and he earnestly besought him to impart to him some of the treasures of his Greek
learning, and especially to translate for him Origen's great speculative work, the \\.tpl 'A^'V'^i'. that is On First
Principles.' Rufinus hesitated, knowing that there was a strong prejudice against Origen, and that he was
looked on, especially in the West, as a heretic, though his writings were little known there. He yielded, how-
ever, to the solicitations of Macarius : but to guard against the imputation of heresy, he undertook three prelim-
inary works. First, he translated the Apology of the Martyr Pamphilus for Origen; secondly, he wrote a short
treatise on the Adulteration by heretics of the works of Origen; and, thirdly, in translating the Wrpl 'Ap;f(ji' he
prefixed to it an elaborate Preface in justification of his course in translating the work. All these documents
l)ecame the subject of vehement controversy which found its expression in the letter of Jerome to his friends at
Rome, and the Apologies of Rufinus and Jerome translated in this volume.

The Apology of Pamphilus for Origen forms the sixth book of a work undertaken by him in connexion with
Eusebius of Cresarea, the Church Historian. Pamphilus was a great collector of books, and a learned man, but
Eusebius was the chief writer. Pamphilus was put to death in the last persecution, that under Galerius; and
Eusebius having at a later time fallen under suspicion of Arianism, it was attempted by those who disliked
Origen, to dissociate Pamphilus from all connexion with the work. There seems however no reason to doubt,
notwithstanding Jerome's violent protestations, that Pamphilus was associated with Eusebius throughout the work,
and that he actually wrote the sixth book. The translation of this Apology was made first, and sent out with a
Preface which runs as follows :


You have been moved by your desire to
knovv^ the truth, Macarius, vv^ho are " a
man greatly beloved,"^ to make a request of
me, which will bring you the blessing at-
tached to the knowledge of the truth ; but it
will win for me the greatest indignation on
the part of those who consider themselves
aggrieved whenever any one does not think
evil of Origen. It is true that it is not my
opinion about him that you have asked for,
but that of tlie holy martyr Pamphilus ; and
you have requested to have the book which
he is said to have written in his defence in
Greek translated for you into Latin : never-
tlicless I do not doubt that there will be
some who will think themselves aggrieved
if I say anything in his defence even in the
words of another man. I beg them to do
nothing in the spirit of presumption and
of prejudice ; and, since we must all stand
before the judgment scat of Christ, not to re-
fuse to hear the truth spoken, lest haply they


should do


wrong


throusfh


Ignorance.


Let


them consider that to wound the consciences
of their weaker brethren by false accusations


is to sin against Christ; and therefore let
them not lend their ears to the accusers, nor
seek an account of another man's faith from
a third party, especially when an oppor-
tunity is given them for gaining personal
and direct knowledge, and the substance
and quality of each man's faith is to be
known by his own confession. For so the
Scripture says: ""With the heart man be-
lieveth imto righteousness, and with the
mouth confession is made unto salvation":
and : ^ " By his words shall each man be
justified, and by his word shall he be con-
demned." The opinions of Origen in the
various parts of Scripture are clearly set
forth in the present work : as to the cause
of our finding certain places in which he
contradicts himself, an explanation will be
offered in the short document subjoined.^
But as for myself, I hold that which has
been handed down to us froin the holy
fathers, namely, that the Holy Trinity is
cocternal, and of a single nature, virtue and
substance ; that the Son of God in these last
times has been made man, has suffered for


1 See the account in Rufinus' Apoloijy I. ii.
3 The word may also mean Oji bei^inninixs, or
the speculation of the Alexandrian theolog^y.
* Horn. X, 10. ^ Matt, xii, 37.


On Principalities and Powers : these ideas being connected together in
3 Daniel x. 11, ix. 23. The name Macarius means Blessed.
" Sec the Epilogue, infra.


EPILOGUE TO PAMPHILUS.


421


our transgressions and rose again from the
dead in the very flesh in which he suffered,
and thereby imparted the hope of the resur-
rection to the whole race of mankind.
When we speak of the resurrection of the
flesh, we do so, not with any subter-
fuges, as is slanderously reported by certain
persons ; we believe that it is this very flesh
in which we are now living which will
rise again, not one kind of flesh instead
of another, nor another body than the body
of this flesh. When we speak of the body
rising we do so in the words of the apostle ;
for he himself made use of this word : and
when we speak of the flesh, our confession
is that of the Creed. It is an absui'd inven-
tion of maliciousness to think that the human
body is different from the flesh. However,
whether we speak of that which is to rise,
according to the common faith, as the flesh,
or, according to the Apostle, as the body,
this we must believe, that according to the
clear statement of the Apostle, that which
shall rise shall rise in power and in glory ;
it will rise an incorruptible and a spiritual
body: for " corruption cannot inherit incor-


ruption." We must maintain this preemi-
nence of the body, or flesh, which is to be:
but, with this proviso, we must hold that
the resurrection of the flesh is perfect and
entire ; we must on the one hand main-
tain the identity of the flesh, while on the
other we must not detract from the dignity
and glory of the incorruptible and spiritual
body. For so the Scripture speaks. This
is what is preached by the reverend Bishop
John at Jerusalem ; this we with him both
confess and hold. If any one either believes
or teaches otherwise, or insinuates that we
believe differently from the exposition of our
faith, let him be anathema. Let this then
be taken as a record of our belief by an}'
who desire to know it. Whatever we reac
and whatever we do is in accordance with
this account of our faith ; we follow the
words of the Apostle, ' " proving all things,
holding fast that which is good, avoiding
every form of evil." '"And as many as
walk by this rule, peace be upon them and
upon the Israel of God."


1 Thess. V, 21, 22.


2 Gal. vi, 16.


RUFINUS'S EPILOGUE TO PAMPHILUS THE MARTYR'S

APOLOGY FOR ORIGEN,


OTHERWISB


The Book Concerning the Adulteration of the Works of Origen.


Addressed to Macarius at Pinetum A.D. jgy.


The next work was sent out at the same time with Pamphilus' Apology. Rufinus believed that Origen's
works had been adulterated by heretics so as to turn his assertions into support of their own opinions. He
thererore, in his translation of the Rf/ji 'Apx'^^'j altered many things which had a heterodox meaning as found
in the ordinary MSS. of Origen, so as to mal<e the work consistent with itself and with the orthodox views ex-
pressed in other parts of Origen's writings. How far this process was legitimate or honest must be judged
from a perusal of the controversy which followed; but it should be borne in mind, first, that the standard of
literary exactness and conscientiousness was not the same in those days as in ours; secondly, that when everything
depended on copyists, there was room for infinite variations in the copies, whether through negligence, igno-
rance or fraud; thirdly, that the principles adopted by Rufinus were precisely those acknowledged by his great
opponent Jerome, in his Treatise De Optimo Genere Interpretandi, and his Letter to Vigilantius (Letters Ixvi
and Ixi).


My object in the translation from Greek
into Latin of the holy martyr Pamphilus'
Apology for Origen, which I have given in
the preceding volume according to my abil-


ity and the requirements of the matter, is this :
I wish you to know through full information
that the rule of faith which has been set
forth above in his writings is that which we


422


RUFINUS.


must embrace and hold ; for it is clearly
shown that the Catholic opinion is contained
in them all. Nevertheless you have to al-
low that there are found in his books certain
things not only difTerent from this but in cer-
tain cases even repugnant to it ; things which
our canons of truth do not sanction, and which
we can neither receive nor approve. As to
the cause of this an opinion has reached me
wliicli has been widely entertained, and
which I wish to be fully known by you and
by those who desire to know what is true,
since it is possible also that some wdio have
before been actuated by the love of fault-
finding may acquiesce in the truth and reason
of the matter when they have it set before
them ; for some seem determined to believe
anything in the world to be true rather than
that which withdraws from them the occasions
of fault-finding. It must, I think, be felt to be
wholly impossible that a man so learned and
so wise, a man whom even his accusers may
well admit to have been neither foolish nor
insane, should have written what is contrary
and repugnant to himself and his own
opinions. But even suppose that this could
in some way have happened ; suppose, as
some perhaps have said, that in the decline
of life he might have forgotten what he had
written in his early days, and have made asser-
tions at variance with his former opinions ;
how are we to deal with the fact that we some-
times find in the very same passages, and, as
I may say, almost in successive sentences,
clauses inserted expressive of contrary opin-
ions? Can we believe that in the same work
and in the same book, and even sometimes, as
I have said, in the following paragraph, a
man could have forgotten his own views.''
For example that, when he had said just be-
fore that no passage in all the Scripture could
be found in which the Holy Spirit was
spoken of as made or created, he could have
immediately added tliat the Holy Spirit had
been made along with the rest of the creat-
ures? or again, that the same man who
clearly states that the Father and the Son are
of one substance, or as it is called in Greek
Homoousion, could in the next sentence say
that He was of another substance, and was a
created being, when he had but a little before
described him as born of the very nature of
God the Father.? Or again in the matter of
the resurrection of the flesh, could he who
so clearly declared that it was the nature of
the flesh which ascended with the Word of
God into heaven, and there appeared to the
celestial Powers, presenting a new image of
himself for them to worship, could he, I ask
you, possibly turn round and say that this flesh


was not to be saved ? Such things could not
happen even in the case of a man who had
taken leave of his senses and was not sound
in the brain. How, therefore, this came to
pass, I will point out with all possible brev-
ity. The heretics are capable of any vio-
lence, they have no remorse and no scruples :
this we are forced to recognize by the audac-
ities of which they have been frequently
convicted. And, just as their father the devil
has from the beginning made it his object to
falsify the words of God and twist them from
their true meaning, and subtilely to interpo-
late among them his own poisonous ideas, so
he has left these successors of his the same
art as their inheritance. Accordingly, when
God had said to Adam, "You shall eat of
all the trees of the garden ; " he, when he
wished to deceive Eve interpolated a sin-
gle syllable, by which he reduced within the
narrowest bounds God's liberality in permit-
ting all the fruits to be eaten. He said:
" Yea, hath God said, Ye shall not eat of
any tree of the garden ? " and thus, by
suggesting the complaint that God's com-
mand was severe, he more easily persuaded
her to transgress the precept. The heretics
have followed the example of their father, the
craft of their teacher. Whenever they found
in any of the renowned writers of old days
a discussion of those things which pertain to
the glory of God so full and faithful that
every believer could gain profit and in-
struction from it, they have not scrupled to
infuse into their writings the poisonous taint
of their own false doctrines; this they have
done, either by inserting things which the
writers had not said or by changing by in-
terpolation what they had said, so that their
own poisonous heresy might more easily be
asserted and authorized by passing under the
name of all the church writers of the greatest
learning and renown ; they meant it to ap-
pear that well-known and orthodox men had
held as they did. We hold the clearest
proofs of this in the case of the Greek writers ;
and this adulteration of books is to be found
in the case of many of the ancients ; but it
will suffice to adduce the testimony of a few,
so that it may be more easily understood
what has befallen the writings of Origen.

Clement, the disciple of the Apostles, who
was bishop of the Roman church next to
the Apostles, was a martyr, wrote the work
which is called in the Greek 'Avayvupiafidg, or
in Latin, The Recognition.' In these books

1 Rufinns was deceived ns was tlie whole world until tile
revival of learning, in helievinij tliis fabrication to be the work
of Clement. It is really a romance in the form of an autobiofr-
rapliy of Clement, supposed to be addressed to James of Jeru-
salem; and was written probably in Asia Minor or Syria


EPILOGUE TO PAMPHILUS.


423


he sets forth again and again in the name of
the Apostle Peter a doctrine which appears
to be truly apostolical : yet in certain pas-
sages the heresy of Eunomius is so brought
in that you would imagine that you were
listening to an argument of Eunomius him-
self, asserting that the Son of God was
created out of no existing elements. Then
again that other method of falsification is in-
troduced, by which it is made to appear that
the nature of the devil and of other demons
has not resulted from the wickedness of
their will a;id purpose, but from an excep-
tional and separate quality of their creation,
although he in all other places had taught
that every reasonable creature was endowed
with the facult}'^ of free will. There are
also some other things inserted into his
books which the church's creed does not
admit. I ask, then, what we are to think
of these things.'' Are we to believe that an
apostolic man, nay, almost an apostle (since
he writes the things which the apostles
speak), one to whom the apostle Paul bore
his testimony in the words, " With Clement
and others, my fellow labourers, whose
names are in the book of life " was the
writer of words which contradict the book of
life.? or are we to say, as we have said
before, that perverse men, in order to gain
authority for their own heresies by the use
of the names of holy men, and so procure
their readier acceptance, interpolated these
things which it is impossible to believe that
the true authors either thought or wrote?

Again, the other Clement, the presbyter
of Alexandria, and the teacher of that
church, in almost all his books describes the
three Persons as having one and the same
glory and eternity : and yet we sometimes
find in his books passages in which he
speaks of the Son as a creature of God.
Is it credible that so great a man as he, so
orthodox in all points, and so learned, either
held opinions mutually contradictory, or
left in writing views concerning God which
it is an impiety, I will not sav to believe,
but even to listen to ?

Once more, Dionysius the Bishop of
Alexandria, was a most learned maintainer
of the church's faith, and in passages without
end defended the unity and eternity of the
Trinity, so earnestly that some persons of
less insight imagine that he held the views
of Sabellius; yet in the books which he
wrote against the heresy of Sabellius, there
are things inserted of such a character that
the Arians endeavour to shield themselves

about A.D. 200. See Article " Clementine Literature " in Diet.
ofCh.Biog,


under his authority, and on this account the
holy Bishop Athanasius felt himself com-
pelled to write an apology for his work,
because he was assured that he could not
have held strange opinions or have written
things in which he contradicted himself, but
felt sure that these things had been inter-
preted by ill disposed men.

This opinion we have been led to form by
the force of the facts themselves, in the case
of these very reverend men and doctors of the
church ; we have found it impossible, I say,
to believe that those reverend men who again
and again have supported the church's belief
should in particular points have held opinions
contradictory to themselves. As to Origen,
however, in whom, as I have said above,
are to be found, as in those others, certain
diversities of statement, it will not be suffi-
cient to think precisely as we think or feel
about those who enjoy an established repu-
tation for orthodoxy; nor could a similar
charge be met by a similar excuse, were it
not that its validity is shown by words and
writings of his own in which he makes this
fact the subject of earnest complaint. What
he had to suffer while still living in the flesh,
while still having feeling and sight, from the
conaiption of his books and treatises, or from
counterfeit versions of them, we may learn
clearly from his own letter which he wrote to
certain intimate friends at Alexandria ; and
by this you will see how it comes to pass
that some things which are self-contradictory
are found in his writings.'

" Some of those persons who take a
pleasure in accusing their neighbours, bring
against us and our teaching the charge of
blasphemy, though from us they have never
heard anything of the kind. Let them take
heed to themselves how they refuse to mark
that solemn injunction which says that
^ ' Revilers shall not inherit the kingdom of
God,' when they declare that I hold that
the father of wickedness and perdition, and
of those who are cast foi^th from the kingdom
of God, that is the devil, is to be saved, a
thing which no man can say even if he has
taken leave of his senses and is manifestly
insane. Yet it is no wonder, I think, if my
teaching is falsified by my adversaries, and
is corrupted and adulterated in the same
manner as the epistle of Paul the Apostle.
Certain men, as we know, compiled a false
epistle under the name of Paul, so that they
might trouble the Thessalonians as if the day
of the Lord were nigh at hand, and thus

1 The letter is headed " On the adulteration and corruption
of his books; from the 4th hook of the letters of Origen: a
letter written to certain familiar friends at Alexandria."

2 I Cor. vi, 10.


424


RUFINUS.


beguile them. It is on account of that false
epistle that he wrote these words in the
second epistle to the Thessalonians : ''We
beseech you, bretlircn, by the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ and our gathering together
unto him ; to the end that ye be not quickly
shaken from your mind, nor yet be troubled,
either l)y spirit or by word or by letter as
sent from us, as that the day of the Lord is at
hand. Let no man beguile you in anywise.'
It is something of the same kind, I perceive,
which is happening to us also. A certain
promoter of heresy, after a discussion which
had been held between us in the presence of
many persons, and notes of it had been taken,
procured the document from those who
had written out the notes, and added or
struck out whatever he chose, and changed
things as he thought right, and published it
abroad as if it were my work, but pointing
in triumphant scorn at the expressions which
he had himself inserted. The brethren in
Palestine, indignant at this, sent a man to
me at Athens to obtain from me an authen-
tic copy of the work. L^p to that time I had
never even read it over again or revised it: it
liad been so completely neglected and thrown
aside that it could hardly be found. Nevei*-
theless, I sent it: and, — God is witness that
I am speaking the truth, — when I met the
man himself who had adulterated the work,
and took him to task for having done so,
he answered, as if he were giving me satis-
faction : ' I did it because I wished to im-
prove that treatise and to purge away its
faults.' What kind of a purging was this that
he applied to my dissertation ? such a purging
asMarcion or his successor Apelles after him
gave to the Gospels and to the writings of the
Apostle. They subverted the true text of
.Scripture; and this man similarly first took
awav the true statements which I had made,
and then inserted what was false to furnish
grounds for accusation against me. But,
though those who have dared to do this are
impious and heretical men, 3'et those who
give credence to such accusations against us
shall not escape the judgment of God.
There are others also, not a few, who have
done this through a wish to throw confu-
sion into the churches. Lately, a certain
heretic who had seen me at Ephesus and had
refused to meet me, and had not opened his
mouth in my presence, but for some reason
or other had avoided doing so, afterwards
composed a dissertation according to his own
fancy, partly mine, partly his own, and sent
it to his disciples in various places : I know

^2 Thcss. ii, 1-3.


that it reached those who were in Rome,
and I doubt not that it reached others also.
He was behaving in the same reckless way
at Antioch also before I came there : and the
dissertation which he brought with him came
into the hands of many of our friends. But
when I arrived, I took him to task in the
presence of many persons, and, when he
persisted, with a complete absence of shame,
in the impudent defence of his forgery, I
demanded that the book should be brought
in amongst us, so that my mode of speech
might be recognized by the brethren, who of
course knew the points on which I am
accustomed to insist and the method of
teaching which I employ. He did not,
however, venture to bring in the book,
and his assertions were refuted by them all
and he himself was convicted of forgery, and
thus the brethren were taught a lesson not
to give ear to such accusations. If then any
one is willing to trust me at all — I speak as
in the sight of God — let him believe what I
say about the things which are falsely
inserted in my letter. But if any man
refuses to believe me, and chooses to speak
evil of me, it is not to me that he does the
injury : he will himself be arraigned as a
false witness before God, since he is either
bearing false witness against his neighbour,
or giving credit to those who bear it."

Such are the complaints which he made
while still living, and while he was still
able to detect the corruptions and falsifica-
tions which had been made in his books.
There is another letter of his, in which I
remember to have read a complaint of the
falsifying of his writings; but I have not a
copy of it at hand, otherwise I could add to
those which I have quoted a second testi-
mony in favour of his good faith and veracity
direct from himself. But I think that I have
said enough to satisfy those who listen to
what is said, not in the interest of strife and
detraction, but in that of a love of truth. I
have shown and proved in the case of the
saintly men of whom I have made mention,
and of whose orthodoxy there is no question,
that, where the tenor of a book is presum-
ably right, anything which is found in it con-
trary to the faith of the church is more prop-
erly believed to have been inserted by heretics
than to have been written by the author:
and I cannot think it an absurd demand that
the same thing should be believed in the case
of Origen, not only because the argument is
similar but because of the witness given by
himself in the complaints which I have
brought out from his writings: otherwise wc
must believe that, like a silly or insane per-


EPILOGUE TO PAMPHILUS.


425


son, he has written in contradiction to him-
self.

As to the possibility that the heretics may
have acted in the violent manner supposed,
such w^ickedness may easily be believed of
them. They have given a specimen of it,
which makes it credible in the present case,
in the fact that they have been unable to keep
off their impious hands even fi^om the sacred
words of the Gospel. Any one who has a
mind to see how they have acted in the case
of the Acts of the Apostles or their Epistles,
how they have befouled them and gnawed
them away, how they have defiled them in
every kind of way, sometimes adding words
which expressed their impious doctrine, some-
times taking out the opposing truths, will un-
derstand it most fully if he will rend the books
of Tertullian written against Marcion. It is
no great thing that they should have corrupted
the writings of Origen when they have
dared to corrupt the sayings of God our
Saviour. It is true that some persons may
withhold their assent from what I am saying
on the ground of the difference of the
heresies; since it was one kind of heresy
the partisans of which corrupted the
Gospels, but it is another which is aimed at
in these passages which, as we assert, have
been inserted in the works of Origen. Let
those who have such doubts consider that,
as in all the saints dwells the one spirit of
God (for the Apostle says, *" The spirits of
the prophets are subject to the prophets,"
and again, ^"We all have been made to
drink of that one spirit") ; so also in all the
heretics dwells the one spirit of the devil,
who teaches them all and at all times the
same or similar wickedness.

There may, however, be some to whom
the instances we have given have less per-
suasive force because they have to do with
Greek writers ; and therefore, although it is
a Greek writer for whom I am pleading, yet,
since it is the Latin tongue which is, so to
speak, entrusted with the argument, and
they are Latin people before whom you
have earnestly begged me to plead the cause
of these men, and to show what wounds
they suffer by the calumnious renderings of
their works, it will be satisfactory to show
that things of the same kind have happened
to Latin as well as Greek writers, and that
men approved for their saintly character
have had a storm of calumny raised against
them by the falsification of their works. I
will recount things of still recent memory,
so that nothing may be lacking to the


* I Cor. xiv, 32.


> I Cor. xii, 13.


manifest credibility of my contention, and its
truth may lie open for all to see.

Hilary Bishop of Pictavium ' was a be-
liever in the Catholic doctrine, and wrote
a very complete work of instruction w^ith the
view of bringing back from their error those
who had subscribed the faithless creed of
Ariminum.' This book fell into the hands
of his adversaries and ill wishers, whether,
as some said, by bribing his secretary, or by
no matter what other cause. He knew
nothing of this : but the book was so falsified
by them, the saintly man being all the while
entirely unconscious of it, that, when his
enemies began to accuse him of heresy in the
episcopal assembly, as holding what they
knew they had corruptly inserted in his
manuscript, he himself demanded the pro-
duction of his book as evidence of his faith.
It was brought from his house, and was
found to be full of matter which he re-
pudiated : but it caused him to be excom-
municated and to be excluded from the
meeting of the synod. In this case, how-
ever, though the crime was one of unex-
ampled wickedness, the man who was the
victim of it was alive, and present in the
flesh ; and the hostile faction could be
convicted and brought to punishment, when
their tricks became known and their machi-
nations were exposed. A remedy was ap-
plied through statements, explanations, and
similar things : for living men can take
action on their own behalf, the dead can
refute no accusations under which they
labour.

Take another case. The whole collection
of the letters of the martyr Cyprian is
usually found in a single manuscript. Into
this collection certain heretics who held a
blasphemous doctrine about the Holy Spirit
inseited a treatise of Tertullian on the
Trinity, which was faultily expressed though
he is himself an upholder of our faith : and
from the copies thus made they wrote out a
number of others; these they distributed
through the whole of the vast city of Con-
stantinople at a very low price : men were
attracted by this cheapness and readily
bought up the documents full of hidden
snares of which they knew nothing; and
thus the heretics found means of gaining
credit for their impious doctrines through
the authority of a great name. It happened,

1 Poictiers.

2 There seem to be no means of throwing' light upon
this story. Hilary was not at the council of Ariminum, but
at that of Seleucia, held the same year (359). On his return to
Gaul in 361 he endeavoured, in various meetings of bishojis to
reunite with the Homoousians those who had subscribed the
creed of Ariminum. (See Art. on Hilary Pictav. in Diet, of
Christ. Biography.) It may have been in one of these meetings
that this scene occurred.


426


RUFINUS.


however, tliat, sliortly after the publication,
there were found there some of our cath<jlic
brothers who were able to expose this wicked
fabrication, and recalled as many as they
could reach from the entanglements of error.
In this they parti)' succeeded. But there
were a great many in those parts who re-
mained convinced that the saintly martvr
Cyprian held the belief which had been
erroneously expressed by Tertullian.

I will add one other instance of the falsi-
fication of a document. It is one of recent
memory, though it is an example of the
primeval subtlety, and it surpasses all the
stories of the ancients.

Bishop Damasus, at the time when a
consultation was held in the matter of the
reconciling of the followers of Apollinarius
to the church,' desired to have a document
setting forth the faith of the church, which
should be subscribed by those who wished to
be reconciled. The compiling of this docu-
ment he entrusted to a certain friend of his, a
presbyter and a highly accomplished man,^
who usually acted for him in matters of this
kind. When he came to compose the docu-
ment, he found it necessary, in speaking of
the Incarnation of our Lord, to apply to him
the expression "Homo Dominicus." The
ApoUinarists^ took oflence at this expression,
and began to impugn it as a novelty. The
writer of the document thereupon undertook
to defend himself, and to confute the ob-
jectors by the authority of ancient Catholic
writers ; and he happened to show to one of
those who complained of the novelty of the
expression a book of the bishop Athanasius
in which the word which was under dis-
cussion occurred. The man to whom this
evidence was offered appeared to be con-
vinced, and asked that the manuscript should
be lent to him so that he miofht convince the
rest who from their ignorance were still
maintaining their objections. When he had
got the manuscript into his hands he devised
a perfectly new method of falsification. He
first erased the passage in which the ex-
pression occurred, and then wrote in again
the same words which he had erased. He
returned the paper, and it was accepted
without question. The controversv about
this expression again arose; the manuscript

'This was in 3S2, the year after the Council of Constan-
tinople. Jcionie had come from Constantinople to Rome with
tlie Kastern lUshops Kjiiphanius of Sahmiis in Cv|irns and
raulinusof Antiocn. His position atRnnie is dcscrfhed in the
words of his Ictur (cxxiii) to A(reruchia, c. 10. " I was assist-
ing Damasus in matters of ecclesiastical literature, and .mswer-
ini;f tlie questions discussed in the Councils of the East and the
West."

* Jerome.

s ApoUinaris, in hia reaction from Arianism, held that the
Godhead. sup|dii-d tlio pl.ice of tliQ human soul in Christ.
Heucc their objection to this expression.


was brought forwartl : the expression in
question was found in it, but in a position
where there had been an erasure : and tlie
man who had brought forward such a manu-
script lost all authority, since the erasure
seemed to be the proof of malpractice and
falsification. However, in this case as in
one which I mentioned before, it was a living
man who was thus treated by a living man,
and he at once did all in his power to lay
bare the iniquitous fraud which had been
committed, and to remove the stain of this
nefarious act from the man who was inno-
cent and had done no evil of the kind, and
to attach it to the real author of the deed, so
that it should completely overwhelm him
with infamv.

Since, then, Origen in his letter complains
with his own voice that he has suffered such
things at the hands of the heretics who
wished him ill, and similar things ha\-e
happened in the case of many other orthodox
men among both the dead and the living, and
since in the cases adduced, men's writings are
proved to have been tampered with in a sim-
ilar way : what determined obstinacy is this,
which refuses to admit the same excuse when
the case is the same, and, when the circum-
stances are parallel, assigns to one party the
allowance due to respect, but to another in-
famy due to a criminal. The tioith must be
told, and must not lie hid at this point; for it
is impossible for any man really to judge so
unjustly as to form different opinions on cases
which are similar. The fact is that the
prompters of Origen's accusers are men who
make long controversial discourses in the
churches,' and even write books the whole
matter of which is borrowed from him, and
who wish to deter men of simple mind from
reading him, for fear that their plagiarisms
should become widely known, though, in-
deed, their appropriations would be no re-
proach to them if they were not ungrateful
to their master.

For instance, one of these men,** who
thinks that a necessity is laid upon him,^ like
that of preaching the Gospel, to speak evil
of Origen among all nations and tongues,
declared in a vast assembly of Christian
hearers that he had read six thousand of his
works. Surely, if his object in reading
these were, as he is in the habit of asserting,
only to acquaint himself with Origen's faults,
ten or twenty or at most thirty of these
works would have sufficed for the purpose.


* This is hclicvcd to refer to Epiphanius, whose anti-Orl-
g'enistic sermon at Jerusalem in the year 394 fjrcatly irritated
the ]?ishops John and UufinuSi See Jerome Ep. li« and
" Affiiinst jfohn of Jerusalem " c. 14,

* Epiphanius. ^ ' 81 Cor. iX| l6.


PREFACE TO TRANSLATIONS OF THE Uepl 'Apx^v. 427


But to read six thousand books is no longer
wishing to know the man, but giving up
ahnost one's whole life to his teaching and
researches. On what ground then can his
words be worthy of credit when he blames
men who have only read quite a few of these
books while their rule of faith is kept sacred
and their piety rmimpaired.

What has been said may suffice to show
what opinion we ought to form of the books
of Origen. I think that every one who has
at heart the interests of truth, not of contro-
versy, may easily assent to the well-proved
statements I have made. But if any man
perseveres in his contentiousness, we have no
such custom.^ It is a settled custom among
us, when we read him, to hold fast that
which is good, according to the apostolic in-

1 Adapted from i Cor. xi, i6.


junction. If we find in these books anything
discrepant to the Catholic faith, we suspect
that it has been inserted by the heretics, and
consider it as alien from his opinion as it is
from our faith. If, however, this is a mis-
take of ours, we run, as I think, no danger
from such an error ; for we oiu'selves, through
God's help, continue unharmed by avoiding
what we hold in suspicion and condemn: and
further we shall not be accounted accusers of
our brethren before God (you will remember
that the accusing of the brethren is the special
work of the devil, and that he received the
name of devil ' from his being a slandei'er).
Moreover, we thus escape the sentence pro-
nounced on evil speakers, which separates
those who are such from the kingdom of
God.

1 Aia/3oAos {diabolus) from hiafiaWoi to slander.


PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATIONS OF ORIGEN'S BOOKS


n ep t


9X


G) V.


Addressed to Macarius^ at Pinetum^ A.D. jp/.


The Translation of the two first Books of the Ilfpt 'A^jwi' was issued soon after, or contemporaneously with
the Apology of Pamphilus. The Preface to them was intended to remove prejudices by showing that Jerome
(who though not named is clearly described) had been Rufinus' precursor in translating Origen. The compli-
ments paid to Jerome were no doubt sincere : but the use made of his previous action can hardly be justified.
Rufinus knew well that Jerome's view of Origen had to some extent altered, that a disagreeable controversy had
sprung up at Jerusalem about him, in which he and Jerome had taken opposite sides: and that the animosity
aroused by this had with the greatest difficulty been allayed, and a reconciliation effected at the moment when he
had quitted Palestine. This Preface with the Translation of the TlapX 'Apx(^v was the most immediate cause of
the violent controversy and the final estrangement between Rufinus and Jerome.


I am aware that a great many of our
brethren were incited by their longing for
Scriptural knowledge to demand from vari-
ous men who were versed in Greek litera-
ture that they would give the works of
Origen to men who used the Latin tongue,
and thus make him a Roman. Among- these
was that brother and associate of mine to
whom this request was made by bishop
Damasus, and who when he translated the
two homilies on the Song of Songs from
Greek into Latin prefixed to the work a
preface' so full of beauty and so magnificent
that he awoke in every one the desire of read-
ing Origen and eagerly investigating his
works. He said that to the soul of that
great man the words might well be applied :
* " The King has brought me into his cham-


1 Translated among Jerome's works in this Series.
*Cant. i,4.


ber": and he declared that Origen in his
other books had surpassed all other men, but
in this had surpassed himself. What he
promises in this Preface is, indeed, that he
will give to Roman ears not only these books
but many others of Origen. But I find that
he is so enamoured of his own style that he
pursues a still more ambitious object, namely,
that he shovdd be the creator of the book,
not merely its translator. I am then follow-
ing: out a task begfun bv him and commended
by his example ; but it is out of my power
to set forth the words of this great man with
a force and an eloquence like his : and I
have therefore to fear that it may happen
through my fault that the man whom he
justly commends as a teacher of the church
both in knowledge and in wisdom second
only to the Apostles may be thought to have
a far lower rank through my poverty of


428


RUFINUS.


langaiage. When I reflected on this I was
incHncd to keep silence, and not to assent to
the brethren who were constantly adjuring
me to make the translation. But your in-
fluence is such, my most faithful brother
Macarius, that even the consciousness of my
unfitness is not sufficient to make me resist.
I have therefore yielded to your importunity
though it was against my resolution, so that I
might no longer be exposed to the demands
of a severe taskmaster ; but I have done so on
this condition and on this understanding, that
in making the translation I sliould follow as
far as possible the method of my predecessors,
and especially of him of whom I have ah^eady
made mention. He, after translating into
Latin above seventy of the books of Origen
whicli he called Ilomiletics, and also a cer-
tain number of the "Tomes," proceeded to
]:)urge and pare away in Ids tianslation all
the causes of stumbling which are to be
found in the Greek works; and this he did
in such a way that the Latin reader will find
nothing in them which jars with our faith.
In his steps, therefore, I follow, not, indeed,
with the power of eloquence which is his,
but, as far as may be, in his rules and
method, that is, taking care not to promul-
gate those things which are found in the
books of Origen to be discrepant and contra-
dictory to one another. The cause of these
variations I have set forth very fully for
your information in the Apology which
Pamphilus wrote for the books of Origen, to
which I have appended a very short treatise '
showing by proofs which seem to me quite
clear that his books have been in very many
cases falsified by heretical and ill-disposed
persons. This is especially the case with
the books which you now require me to
translate, namely, the Tlrpl 'Apxf^f^ which may
be rendered either Concerning First Princi-
ples or Concerning Principalities. These
books are in truth, apart from these ques-
tions, exceedingly obscure and difficult ; for
in them he discusses matters over which the
philosophers have spent their whole lives
without any result. But our Christian
thinker has done all tliat lay in his power to
turn to purposes of sound religion the belief
in a creator and the order of the created
world which they had made subservient to
their false religion. Wherever therefore I

' See the Translation in this Volume.


have found in his books anything contrar}- to
the truth concernins: the Trinitv which he
has in other places spoken of in a strictly
orthodox sense, I have either omitted it as a
foreign and not genuine expression or set it
down in terms agreeing with the rule of
faith which we find him constantly assenting
to. Thci-e are things, no doubt, which he has
developed in somewhat obscure language,
wishing to pass rapidly over them, and as ad-
dressing those who have experience and
knowledge of such matters ; in these cases I
have made the passage plain by adding
words which I had read in other books of
his where the matter was more fully treated.
I have done this in the interest of clearness:
but I have put in nothing of my own; I
have only given liini back his own words,
though taken from other passages. I have
explained this in the Preface, so that those
who calunmiate us should not think tliat
they had found in this fresh material for
their charges. But let them take heed what
they are about in their perversity and con-
teiitiousness. As for me, I have not under-
taken this laborious task (in which I trust
that God will be my helper in answer to
your prayers) for the sake of shutting the
mouths of calumnious men, but with the
view of supplying material for the increase
of real knowledge to those who desired it.
This only I require of every man who under-
takes to copy out these books or to read
them, in the sight of God the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, and adjure him
by our faith in the coming kingdom, by the
assurance of the resurrection of the dead, by
the eternal fire which is prepared for the
devil and his angels (even as he trusts that he
shall not possess as his eternal inheritance that
place where there is weeping and gnashing
of teeth, and where their fire will not be
quenched and their worm will not die)
that he should neither add nor take away,
that he should neither insert nor change,
anything in that wliich is written but that
he should compare his copy with that from
which it is copied and correct it critically
letter for letter, and that he should not keep
by him a copy which has not received
correction or criticism, lest, if his copy is
not thus distinct, the difficulty of the mean-
ing may beget a still greater obscurity in the
mind of the readers.


PREFACE TO mprAp;^^^ — BOOK III.


429


PREFACE TO BOOK III. OF THE Ilfpfc 'h^x^v.


Rufinus had now come to Rome. The translation of B. III. and IV. had been made probably at Pinetum
early in 398. He was already aware of the strong jfeelings aroused by his Translation of B. I. and II., and he
complains that parts of his worlc were obtained by Jerome's friends while still uncorrected, and used to his discredit
(Apol. i, 18-21, ii, 44) ; but he continued the work, prefixing to it the following Preface as his justification.


Reader, remember me in your sacred
moments of prayer, that I may be a worthy
follower of the Spirit. It was you, Maca-
rius, by whose instigation, I might say by
whose compulsion, I translated the two first
books of the liepl 'Ap^wv. I did it during
Lent ; and at that time your near presence,
my Christian brother, and your fuller leisure,
forced me also into fuller diligence. But
now that you are living at the opposite end
of Rome from me, and my taskmaster paj^s
his visits more seldom, I have taken longer
in unfolding the sense of the two last books.
You will remember that in my former pref-
ace I gave you warning that some people
would be full of indignation when they found
that I had no harm to say of Origen : and
this, as I think you have found, has not been
long in coming to pass. But if those demons
who excite men's tongues to evil speaking
have been already set on fire by that first
part of the work, though in it the author had
not yet fully laid bare their devices, what
will be the effect of this second part, in
which he is going to disclose all the secret
labyrinths through which they creep into the
hearts of men and deceive the hearts of the
weak and the frail.'' You will see disorder
springing up on all sides, and party spirit
will be raised, and an outcry will spread all
through the town, and Origen will be sum-
moned to the bar and condemned for his
attempt to dispel the darkness of ignorance
by the light of the Gospel's lamp. But all
this will matter very little to those who are
endeavouring to hold fast the sound form of
the catholic faith while exercising their
minds in the study of divine things.

I think it necessary, however, to remind
you of the principle which I acted upon in


reference to the former books, and which I
have observed in the present case also,
namely, not to set down in my translation
things evidently contradictory to our belief
and to the author's opinions as elsewhere ex-
pressed, but to pass them over as not genu-
ine but inserted by others. On the other
hand I have not, either in the former books
or in these, omitted the novel opinions which
he has expressed about the formation of
the reasonable creation, considering that it
is not in such things that the faith mainly
consists, but that what he is aiming at is
merely knowledge and the exercise of the
faculties, and that possibly there may be
certain heresies which may have to be an-
swered in this way. Only, in cases where
he may have chosen to repeat in these later
books what he had said before in the earlier,
I have thought it expedient to cut out certain
portions for the sake of brevity.

Those whose object in reading these books
is to gain knowledge, not to disparage their
author, would do well to seek the aid of
men more skilled than themselves in inter-
j^reting them. For it is an absurd thing
to get grammarians to explain to us the
fictions of the poets' writings and the laugh-
able stories of the comedians, and yet to
think that books which speak of God and
the celestial powers, and the whole universe,
and which discuss all the errors of pagan
philosophy and of heretical pravity are
things which any one can understand with-
out a teacher to explain them. In this way it
comes to pass that men prefer to remain in
ignorance and to pronounce rash judgments
on things which are difficult and obscure
rather than to gain an understanding of them
by diligent study.


430


RUFINUS.


RUFINUS' APOLOGY IN DEFENCE OF HIMSELF.


Sent to A?iastasius, Bishop of the City of Rome.


This document was called forth liy accusations against Rufinus made, soon aftei" his accession, to Anastasius,
who held the Roman see from 498 to 503. The authority of the Roman Popes at this time was'not what it afterwards
became, and it is improbable that Anastasius should have summoned Rufinus, as some suppose him to have
done, from Aquileia, where he was living on confidential terms with the Bishop Chromalius, to come to Rome to
answer a formal accusation or to be judged by him. But since Rome was the centre of information, a
Christian would not wish to be ill-thought of by its Bishop. Those who accused Rufinus were the friends
of Jerome at Rome, especially the noble widow Marcella and the Senator Pammachius. They had endeavoured
to gain some condemnation of Rufinus from Siricius before his death in November 398; but Siricius befriended
Rufinus ("his simplicity was imposed on," according to Jerome).' On the election of Anastasius, however, in
399, they accused Rufinus of having, by his translation of Origen's Wtpl 'A/<^(jy introduced heresy into the Roman
church. Jerome thus speaks of Marcella, Ep. cxxvii. 10. " She was the cause of the condemnation of the heretics :
she brought witnesses who had been at a former time under their instruction, and thus imbued with error and
heresy; she showed how many there were who had been deceived; she had the volumes of the T^ipl 'Ap;i-<Jv
brought in, and pointed out the alterations which the Scorpion" had made in them: till at last letters were
written, and that more than once, summoning the heretics to come and defend themselves; but they did not dare
to come. So great was the force of conviction brought to bear on them that, to prevent their heresy being
exposed in their presence, they chose to stay away and be condemned." From the letter of Anastasius to John
of Jerusalem about Rufinus we gather that, while he strongly disapproved the translation of Origen, he left
Rufinus himself to his own conscience, and did not care to know what had become of him. The letter of
Rufinus, though called an Apology, bears no trace of being an answer to a summons or judgment of the Pontiff,
but merely a reply to statements which were likely to prejudice him in the Pontiffs opinion. The year in which
the Apology was written was 400 A.D.


I. It has been brought to my knowledge
that certain persons, in the course of a con-
troversy which they have been raising in
your IIoHness' jurisdiction on matters of
faith or on other points, have made men-
tion of my name. I venture to beheve
that your Holiness, who have been trained
from your infancy in the strict principles of
the Church, has refused to listen to any
calumnies which may have been directed
against an absent person, and one who has
been favourably known to you as united with
you in the faith and love of God. Neverthe-
less, since I hear it reported that my reputa-
tion has been attacked, I have thought it
right to make my position clear to your Holi-
ness in writing. It was impossible for me to
do this in person. I have just returned to my
family^ after an absence of nearly 30 years;
and it would have been harsh and almost
inhuman to come away again so soon from
those whom I had been so late in revisiting.
The labour also of my long journey has
left me too weak to begin the journey again.
My object in this letter is not to remove
some stain of suspicion from your mind.


which I regard as a holy place, as a kind of
divine sanctuary which does not admit any
evil thing. Rather, I desire that the con-
fession I am about to make to you may be
like a stick placed in your hands to (h-ive
away any envious persons who may be bark-
ing like dogs against me.

2. My faith, indeed, was sufficiently
proved when the heretics persecuted me.
I was at that time sojourning in the church
of Alexandria, and underwent imprisonment
and exile which was then the penalty of
faithfulness ; yet for the sake of any who may
wish to put my faith to the test, or to hear
and learn what it is I will declare it. I
believe that the Trinity is of one nature and
godhead, of one and the same power and
substance; so that between the Father, the
Son and the Holy Ghost there is no diversity
at all, except that the one is the Father, the
second the Son, and the third the Holy
Ghost. There is a Trinity of real and
living Persons, a unity of nature and sub-
stance.

3. I also confess that the Son of God has
in these last days been born of the Virgin


1 Jerome Letter cxxvii, 9.

* The Scorpion is Jerome's name for Rufinus, especially after his death. He means that Rufinus had altered the too
palpable expressions of heresy, so that the more subtle exjircssions of it mij;ht g'ain acceptance.

' Rufinus uses the word " fayeiites." Jerome in his Apology (ii, 2) scons at the notion that a man of Rufinus' age (about
55) could have parents livinjr, and supposes that he is making a false suggestion by using the word in the sense in which it
was vulgarly used — that of relations generally, as it is now used in French.


RUFINUS' APOLOGY TO ANASTASIUS.


431


and the Holy Spirit : that he has taken upon
him our natural human flesh and soul ; that
in this he suffered and was buried and rose
again from the dead ; that the flesh in which
he rose was that same flesh which had been
laid in the sepulchre; and that in this same
flesh, together with the soul, he ascended
into heaven afl:er his resurrection : from
whence we look for his coming to judge the
quick and the dead.

4. But, further, as to the resurrection of
our own flesh, I believe that it will be in its
integrity and perfection ; it will be this very
flesh in which we now live. We do not
hold, as is slanderously reported by some
men, that another flesh will rise instead of
this; but this very flesh, without the loss of
a single member, without the cutting oft' of
any single part of the body ; none whatever
of all its properties will be absent except its
corruptibility. It is this which is promised
by the holy Apostle concerning the body :
It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incor-
ruption ; it is sown in weakness, it is raised
in power ; it is sown in dishonour, it is raised
in glory ; it is sown a natural body, it is
raised a spiritual body. This is the doctrine
which has been handed down to me by
those from whom I received holy baptism in
the Church of Aquileia; and I think that it
is the same which the Apostolic See has by
long usage handed down and taught.

5. I affirm, moreover, a judgment to
come, in which judgment every man is to
receive the due meed of his bodily life, ac-
cording to that which he has done, whether
good or evil. And, if in the case of men
the reward is to be according to their works,
how much more will this be so in the case
of the devil, who is the universal cause of
sin? Of the devil himself our belief is that
which is written in the Gospel, namely, that
both he and all his angels, will receive as
their portion the eternal fire, and with him
those who do his works, that is, who become
the accusers of their brethren. If then any
one denies that the devil is to be subjected
to the eternal fires, may he have his part
with him in the eternal fire, so that he may
know by experience the fact which he now
denies.

6. I am next informed that some stir has
been made on the question of the nature of
the soul. Whether complaints on a matter
of this kind ought to be entertained instead
of being put aside, you must yourself decide.
If, however, you desire to know my opinion
on the subject, I will state it frankly. I
have read a great many writers on this
question, and I find that they express divers


opinions. Some of those whom I have
read hold that the soul is infused together
with the material body through the channel '
of the human seed; and of this they give such
proofs as they can. I think that this was the
opinion of Tertullian or Lactantius among the
Latins, perhaps also of a few others. Others
assert that God is every day making new
souls, and infusing them into the bodies
which have been framed in the womb ; while
others again believe that the souls were all
made long ago, when God made all things
of nothing, and that all that he now does is
to plant out each soul in its body as it seems
good to him. This is the opinion of Origen,
and of some otliers of the Greeks. For
myself, I declare in the presence of God
that, after reading each of these opinions, I
am up to the present moment unable to hold
any of them as certain and absolute ; the
determination of the truth in this question I
leave to God and to any to whom it shall
please him to reveal it. My profession on
this point is therefore, first, that these several
opinions are those which I have found in
books, but, secondly, that I as yet remain
in ignorance on the subject, except so far as
this, that the Church delivers it as an article
of faith that God is the creator of souls as
well as of bodies.

7. Now as to another matter. I am told
that objections have been raised against me
because, forsooth, at the request of some of
my brethren, I translated certain works of
Origen from Greek into Latin. I suppose
that every one sees that it is only through
ill will that this is made a matter of blame.
For, if there is any offensive statement in
the author, why is this to be twisted into a
fault of the translator.'' I was asked to ex-
hibit in Latin what stands written in the
Greek text ; and I did nothing more than fit
the Latin words to the Greek ideas. If,
therefore, there is anything to praise in
these ideas, the praise does not belong to
me ; and similarly as to anything to which
blame may attach. I admit that I put
something of my own into the work ; as I
stated in my Preface, I used my own dis-
cretion in cutting out not a few passages ;
but only those as to which I had come to
suspect that the thing had not been so stated
by Origen himself ; and the statement ap-
peared to me in these cases to have been
inserted by others, because in other places I

^ Traducem, properly, the layer, by which the vine is propa-
gated, and hence the medium through which life is communi-
cated. This is the theory of the " traducianists " who thus
made the soul to be derived from the parent by procreation.
It is contrasted with that of the " creationists " who held that
each soul was separately created, and infused into the child at
the moment when life began.


432


RUFINUS.


had found the author state the matter in a
catholic sense. I entreat you therefore,
holy, venerable and saintly father, not to
permit a storm of ill will to be raised
against me because of this, nor to sanction
the employment of partisanship and of cal-
umny— weapons which ought never to be
used in the Church of God. Where can
simple faith and innocence be safe if they
are not protected in the Church? I am not
a defender or a champion of Origen ; nor am
I tile first who has translated his works.
Others before me had done the veiy same
thing, and I did it, the last of many, at tlie
request of my brethren. If an order is to be
given that such translations are not to be
made, such an order holds good for the
future, not the past ; but if those are to be


blamed who have made these translations
before any such order was given, the blame
must begin with those who took the first
step.

S. As for me, I declare in Christ's name
that I never held, nor ever will hold, any
other faith but that which I have set forth
above, that is, the faith which is held by
the Church of Rome, by that of Alexan-
dria, and by my own church of Aquileia ; and
which is also preached at Jenasalem ; and if
there is any one who believes otherwise,
whoever he may be, let him be Anathema.
But those who through mere ill will and
malice engender dissensions and oflbnces
among their brethren, and cause them to
stumble, shall give account of it in the day
of judgment.


THE LETTER OF ANASTASIUS,

BISHOP OF THE CHURCH OF ROME TO JOHN BISHOP OF JERUSALEM
CONCERNING THE CHARACTER OF RUFINUS.


The letter of Anastasius to John of Jerusalem was written in the year 401 ; it iS spoken of in Jerome's
Apol. iii., c. 21, which was written in the first half of 402, as " the letter of last year." Jerome intimates in the same
passage that it was only one of several letters of the same character which Anastasius wrote to the East. Rufinus
had not seen it, and refused to believe its genuineness. But there seems to be no reason for doubting this.
Anastasius had, at the earnest request of Theophilus of Alexandria, formally condemned Origenism. And
Rufinus' translations of Origen's Ilfyn 'A/ijwi' and of Pamphilus' Vindication of Origen, and his own book
on the Falsification of Origen's works were taken at Rome as a defence of Origenism generally. Rufinus,
however, appealed continually, and especially in his Apology to Anastasius, to the church of Jerusalem, where
he had been ordained. " My faith," he says, " is that which is preached at Jerusalem." Anastasius, therefore,
in condemning Origen would be understood as condemning Rufinus, and might also seem to condemn his
Bishop John of Jerusalem. This will account for the fulsome praises with which the letter opens. John,
moreover, had written "to consult" Anastasius about Rufinus, which probably implies some action in Rufinus'
interest; but the fact that Jerome knew the contents of the letter and Rufinus did not seems to show that Bishop
John had become more friendly with Jerome and less so with Rufinus.


I. The kind words of approval tliat you
have addressed, my dear Bishop, to your
brother Bishop, is a fresh mark of your long
tried aflection. It is a high commendation
which you confer upon me, a most lavish rec-
ognition of my services. I thank you for this
proof of your love ; and, following you at a
distance in my littleness, I bring the tribute
of my words to honour the splendour of your
holiness and those virtues which the Lord
has conferred upon you. You excel all
others so far, the splendour of your praise
shines forth so conspicuously, that no words
which I can use can equal your deserts. Yet
your glory excites in me such admiration
that I cannot turn away from the attempt to
describe it, even though I can never do so
adequately. And, first, the praise which
you have bestowed on me out of the serene


heaven of your gi'eat spirit forms part of
your own glory : for it is the majesty of your
episcopate, shining forth like the sun upon
the opposite quarter of the world, which has
reflected its own brightness upon us. And
you give me your friendship unreservedly ;
you do not weigh me in the balance of criti-
cism. If it is right for you to praise me,
must not your praise be echoed back to you.''
I beg you therefore, for your own sake no
less than mine, that you will not praise me
any more to my face. I ask this for two
reasons : if the praise is undeserved it must
excite in your brother-bishop a sense of
pain ; if it is tnie, it must make him blush.
3. Let me come to the subject of your
letter. Rufinus, about whom you have done
me the honour to ask my advice, must bring
his conscience to the bar of the divine majesty.


LETTER OF ANASTASIUS ABOUT RUFINUS.


433


It Is for him to see how he can approve him-
self to God as maintaining his true allegiance
to him.

3. As for Origen, whose writings he has
translated into our language, I have neither
formerly known, nor do I now seek to know
either who he was or what expression
he may have given to his thought. But
as to the feeling left by this matter on my
own mind I should be glad to speak with
your holiness for a moment. The impression
which I have received is this, — and it has
been brought out clearly by the reading of
parts of Origen's works by the people of our
City, and by the sort of mist of blindness
which it threw over tliem, — that his object
was to disintegrate our faith, which Is that
of the Apostles, and lias been confirmed by the
traditions of the fathei's, by leading us into
tortuous paths.

4. I want to know what is the meaning of
the translation of this work into the Roman
tongue. If the translator Intends by it to
put the authcM- in the wrong, and to de-
nounce to the world his execrable deeds,
well and good. In that case he will expose
to well-merited hatred one who has long
laboured imder the adverse weight of public
opinion. But if by translating all these
evil thinsis he means to give his assent to
them, and in that sense gives them to the
world to read, then the edifice which he has
reared at the expense of so much labour
serves for nothing else than to make the
guilt the act of his own will, and to give the
sanction of his unlooked for support to the
overthrow of all that is of prime importance
in the true faith as held by Catholic Chris-
tians from the time of the Apostles till now.

5. Far be such teaching from the cath-
olic system of the Church of Rome. It
can never by any possibility come to pass
that we should accept as reasonable things
which we condemn as matters of law and
right. We have, therefore, the assurance
that Christ our God, whose providence
reaches over the whole world, bestows his
approval on us when we say that it Is wholly
impossible for us to admit doctrines which
defile the church, which subvert its well-
tried moral system, which offend the ears of
all who are witnesses of our doings and lay the
ground for strife and anger and dissensions.
This was the motive which led me to write


my letter to Venerius ' our brother in the
Episcopate, the character of which, written as
It was in my weakness but with great care and
diligence, you will realize by what I now
subjoin : " Whence, then, he who translated
the work has gained and preserves this as-
surance of Innocence I am not greatly
troubled to know : It fills me with no vain
alarm. I certainlv shall omit nothlnof which
may enable me to guard the faith of the
Gospel amongst my own people, and to
warn, as far as in me lies, those who form
part of my body, in whatever part of the
\\ orld they live, not to allow any translation
of profane authors to creep In and spring up
amongst them, which will seek to unsettle
the mind of devout men by spreading Its
own darkness among I'.icm. Moreover, I
cannot pass over In silence an event which has
given me great pleasure, the decree Issued
by ovxr Emperors,' bv which every one who
serves God Is warned a;.;;nnst the reading of
Origen, and all who are convicted of reading
his Impious works are condemned by the
imperial judgment." In these words my
forinal sentence was pronounced. .

6. You are troubled by the complaint
which people make as to our treatment of
Rufinus, so that you pursue certain persons ^
with vague suspicions. But I will meet
this feeling of yours with an instance taken
from holv writ, namely, where It is said :
"■Man seeth not as God seeth ; for God
looketh upon the heart, but man upon the
countenance." Therefore, my dearly be-
loved brother, put away all your prejudice.
Weigh the conduct of Rufinus In your own
unbiassed judgment ; ask yourself whether
he has not translated Origen's words into
Latin and approved them, and whether a
man who gives his encouragement to \'icious
acts coinmitted by another differs at all from
the guilty party. In any case I beg you to
be assured of this, that he is so completely
separate from all part or lot with us, that I
neither know nor wish to know either what
he is doing or where he is living. I have
only to add that it is for him to consider
whei'e he ma^' obtain absolution.


J Appointed bishop of Milan in 400, in snccession to Sim.
plicianus.

2 Arcadius and Honorius.

"Probably the friends of Jerome at Rome, Pammachius
and Marcella.


VOL. ni.


Ff


434 RUFINUS.


THE APOLOGY OF RUFINUS.

Addressed to Apron i a mi s^ i?i Reply to jfcrotnc's Letter to Pa7)2inachhis^^ tvritten at

Aqiiileia A.D. 400.


IN TWO BOOKS.


In order to understand the controversy between Jerome and Rurmus it is necessary to look back over their
earlier relations. They liad been close friends in early youth (Jerome, Kp. iii, 3, v, 2.) and had together formed
part of a society of young Christian ascetics at Atpiileia in the years 370-3. Jerome's letter (3) to Rufinus in
374 is full of affection; in 381 he was placed in Jerome's Chronicle (year 378) as "a nK)nk of great renown," and
when, after some years, they were neighbours in Palestine, Rutinus witli Melania on the Mt. of Olives, Jerome
with Paula at liethlehem, they remained friends. (Ruf .\pol. ii. 8 (2) .) In the disputes about Origenism which
arose from the visits of Atcrbius (Jcr. Apol. iii, -iiT^^ and Epiphanius (Jerome Against John of Jerusalem, 11),
they became estranged, Jerome siding with Epiphanius and Rutinus witli John (Jer. Letter li, 6. Against John of
Jerusalem 11). They were reconciled before Rutinus left Palestine in 397 (Jer. Apol. i, i, iii, 1^. But when Rufi-
nus came to Italy and at the request of Macarius'' translated Origen's Vluju 'A/jj^'-^^ the Preface which he prefixed
to this work was the occasion for a fresh and final outbreak of dissension. The friends of Jerome of whom Pam-
machius, Oceanus and Marcella were the most prominent, were scandalized at some of the statements of the book,
and still more at the assumption made by Rutnius that Jerome, by his previous translations of some of Origen's
works, had proved himself his admirer. They also suspected that Rufinus' translation had made Origen speak in
an orthodox sense which was not genuine and that heterodox statements had been suppressed. They therefore
wrote to Jerome at Bethlehem a letter (translated among Jerome's letters in this Series No. Ixxxiii) begging for in-
formation on all these points. Jerome in reply made a literal translation of the Tltpl 'A/>jwi', and sent it accom-
panied by a letter (Ixxxiv) in which he declared that he had never been a partisan of Origen's dogmatic system,
though he admired him as a commentator. He fastened on some of the most questionable of Origen's specula-
tions, his doctrine of the resurrection, of the previous existence of souls and their fall into human bodies, and the
ultimate restoration of all spiritual beings; his permission, in agreement with Plato, of the use of falsehood in certain
cases; and some expressions about the relation of the Persons of the Godhead which, at least to Western ears,
seemed a denial of their equality. He appealed to his own commentaries on Ecclesiastes and on the Ephesians to
show that he rejected these doctrines; and he urged that, even if he had once had too indiscriminate an admira-
tion of Origen, he had in later years judged more clearly.

In the main Jerome's defence was valid. But it demanded considerateness in his judges; and this quality
was absent in himself. He judged Origen's opinions harshly, and spoke of his views as poisonous (Letter Ixxxiv,
3); and, when we contrast the lenity of his former judgments on the same points with his present violence, it be-
comes evident that he was more concerned for his own reputation than for truth. Rufinus charges him (Apol. i.
c. 23 to 44) with maintaining, in his Commentaries on the Ephesians (written twelve years earlier in 388) to which
Jerome had appealed (P3p. Ixxxiv, 2) the views which he now denounced; and the charge, though urged too
far, is substantially made out. The opinions of Origen which he introduced into this Commentary about
the fall of souls out of a previous state of bliss into human bodies are set down with hardly a word of ob-
jection (comm. on ch.i, v. 4), and his speculations on the Powers and Principalities of the world to come (ib. v. 21)
and on the rise of Lucifer and his angels to be sulijects of Christ's Kingdom (id. ii, 7) and their part in the final
restoration of all things (id. iv, 16) are adopted as his own, thus giving some justification for Rutinus' attack (Apol.
i, 34-36. &c.). His defenceof himself therefore is hardly candid. And his allusions to his opponent are exasperating,
e.g. when he speaks (Letter Ixxxiv, i) of some persons " who love me so well that they cannot be heretics with-
out me. " " I wonder that, while they speak in detraction of the flesh, they live carnally and thus cherish and
nourish delicately their enemy " (Id. 8). He hardly argues fairly as to Rutinus' assertion that Origen's works had
suffered from falsification; and he is carried so far by his animosity that he denies the Apology of Pamphilus for
Origen to be by Pamphilus, though he had himself attributed it to him (De Vir. 111. c. 7. 5) and no one can doubt
that it is his. (See Diet, of Christ. Biog. Art. Pamphilus.)

But though writing thus for his friends generally, Jerome wrote at the same time a friendly letter to Rufinus
himself in answer, it would seem, to one from him, (Letter Ixxxi.) in which he speaks of their common friends,
and of the death of Rutinus' mother, and says that he has charged a friend whom he is sending to Italy to visit
Rufinus and assure him of his high esteem; and, while remonstrating with him for his Preface to the Flf/n' 'A/ijwi',
merely says " I have begged my other friends to avoid a cjuarrel. I count on your sense of equity not to give oc-
casion to impatient persons; for you will not find every one, like me, able to take pleasure in praises framed to
suit a purpose." ■'

Had this letter reached Rufinus, the ensuing controversy would have been avoided. But it never reached
him. It was sent through Pannnachius, and he and Jerome's other friends kept it back, while they published the
letter sent them with Jerome's translation of the Vitpi 'A/)A'c""'. Rufinus, who was now at Aquileia, having left
Rome probably early in 399, wrote the Apology, addressing it to his friend and convert Apronianus at Rome.

' F-ii. Sj. 2 Sec the 'ri:iiisl;itinii of Uiilirms' l'ril';iccs giv<>ii ubnvi-, ;iiicl the notes prctixtd to them,

* Or J'\-igned praises — figuratis laudibus.


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


435


BOOK I.


The following is an epitome of the argument :

1. I must submit to the taunts of my adversary as Christ did to those of the Jews.

2. Yet the substantial charges must be answered.

3. I praised him but he has wounded me.

4. I am no heretic, but declare my faith, that of my baptism.

5. I give a further proof of my faith in the resurrection of the flesh.
6-9. The resurrection body is a spiritual body.

10. Origen's doctrines in the Hf/Jt 'Kpx^^-

11. What led to the translation.

12. 13. Pamphilus' Apology for Origen.

14. Preface to the Translation of the ITfpt 'Ap;i:wv.

15. Treatise on the Adulteration of the works of Origen.

16. The difficulties of translation.

17. Explanation of Origen's words "The Son does not see the Father."

18. Difference between seeing and knowing.

19. The Translation interpolated by Eusebius of Cremona.

20. Eusebius, if acting honestly, should have shown me what he thought dangerous.

21. Jerome's method of translation was the same as mine.

22. Jerome's reference to his Commentary on the Ephesians.

23. Jerome has not really changed his mind about Origen.

24. Women turned into men and bodies into souls.

25. The foundation (Karaj3o/Jj) of the world explained by Jerome as a casting down.

26. Jerome, under the name of " another," gives his own views.

27. The fall of souls into human bodies is taught by Jerome.

28. Predestination.

29. "Another," who gives strange views, is Jerome himself.

30. "Hopers" and " fore-hopers. "

31 and 30 (a). Jerome has confessed these views to be his own.

31 (a) and 32. Further identification of Jerome's views with Origen's.

33. The commentary on the Ephesians, selected by Jerome, is his condemnation.

34, 35. Principalities and Powers.

36. Jerome's complaint of new doctrines may be retorted on himself.
38, 39. Origin of men, angels, and heavenly bodies.
40, 41. The body as a prison.

42. All creatures, including the fallen angel, partaking in the final restoration.

43. Arrogance of Jerome's teaching.

44. If Origen is not to be pardoned, neither is Jerome.


I have read the document sent from the
East by our friend and good brother to a
distinguished member of the Senate, Pam-
machius, whicli you have copied and for-
warded to me. It brought to my mind the
words of the Prophet: ^ " The sons of men
whose teeth are spears and arrows and their
tongue a sharp sword." But for these
wounds which men inflict on one another
with the tongue we can hardly find a physi-
cian ; so I liave betaken myself to Jesus, the
heavenly physician, and he has brought out
for me from the medicine chest of the Gos-
pel an antidote of sovereign power ; he has
assuaged the violence of my grief with the
assurance of the righteous judgment which
I shall have at his hands. The potion which
our Lord dispensed to me was nothing else
than these words: ^"Blessed are ye when
men persecute you and say all manner of
evil against you falsely. Rejoice and leap
for joy, for great is your reward in heaven,
for so persecuted they the Prophets which


were before you." With this medicine I
was content, and, as far as the matter con-
cerned me, I had determined for the future
to keep silence ; for I said within mj^self ,
' " If they have called the Master of the house
Beelzebub, how much more them of his
household.'"' (that is, you and me, unworthy
though we are) . And, if it was said of
him, ^ " He is a deceiver, he deceiveth the
people," I mvist not be indignant if I hear
that I am called a heretic, and that the name
of mole is applied to me because of the
slowness of my mind, or indeed my blind-
ness. Christ who is my Lord, aye, and who
is God over all, was called ^"a gluttonous
man and a wine bibber, a friend of publicans
and sinners." How can I, then, be angr}'
when I am called a carnal man ■* who lives
in luxury.^

3. Nevertheless, a necessity, as it were,
is laid upon me to reply, as a simple matter
of justice : I mean, because many, as I hear,
are likely to be upset by what he has written


1 Ps. Ivii, 4.


Matt. V, II, 12.


> Matt. X, 25.
2 John vii, 13.


F f 2


3 Matt, xi, 19.

* Jerome Kp. Ixxxiv, 8.


43^


RUFINUS.


unless the true state of the case is laid before
them. I am compelled, against my resolu-
tion and even my vows, to make reply, lest
by keeping silence I should seem to acknowl-
edge the accusation to be true. It is, indeed,
in most cases, a Christian's glory to follow
our Lord's example of silence, and thereby
to repel the accusation ; but to follow this
course in matters of faith causes stumbling
blocks to spring up in vast numbers. It is
true that, in the beginning of his invective
he promises that he will avoid personalities,
and reply only about the things in question
and the charges made against him ; but his
profession in both cases is false ; for how
can he answer a charge when no charge has
been made ? and how can a man be said to
avoid personalities when he never ceases to
attack and tear to pieces the translator of the
books in question from the first line to the
last of his invective.? I shall avoid all pre-
tence of saying less than I mean, and similar
subterfuges of hypocrisy which are hateful
in God's sight; and, though my words may
he uncouth and my style unadorned, I will
make my reply. I trust, and I shall not
trust in vain, that my readers will pardon my
lack of skill, since my object is not to amuse
others but to endeavour to clear myself from
the reproaches directed against me. My
wish is that what may shine forth in me may
not be style but truth.

3. But, before I begin to clear up these
points, there is one in which I confess that he
has spnken the truth In an eminent degree ;
namely, when he says that he is not render-
ing evil speaking for evil speaking. This,
I say, is cpiite true ; for it is not for evil
speaking l)ut for speaking well of him and
praising iiim that he has rendered reproach
and evil speaking. But it is not true, as he
says, that he turns the left cheek to one who
smites him on the right. It is on one who
is stroking him and caressing him on the
cheek that he suddenly turns and bites him.
1 praised his eloquence and his industry in
the work of translating from the Greek. I
said notliing in derogation of his faith ; but
he condemns me on both these points. He
must therefore pardon me if I say some
things rather roughly and rudely ; for he has
challenged to a reply a man who has no
great rhetorical skill, and who has not, as he
knows, the power to make one whom he
wishes to injure and to wound appear to
liavc received neitlier wounds nor injuries.
Those who love this kind of eloquence must
seek it in a man whom every light report
stirs up to fault-finding and vituperation,
and who thinks himself bound, as if he were


the censor, to be always coming up to set
things to rights. A man who desires to clear
himself from the stains which have been cast
upon him, does not trouble himself, in the
answer which he is compelled to make,
about the elegance and neat turns of his re-
ply, but only about its truth.

4. At the very beginning of his work he
says, "As if they could not be heretics by
themselves, without me." I must first show
that, whether with him or without him, we
are no heretics : then, when our status is
made clear, we shall be safe from having the
infamous imputation hurled at us from other
men's reports. I was already living in a
monastery, where, as both he and all others
know, about 30 years ago, I was made
regenerate by Baptism, and received the seal
of the faith at the hands of those sainth' men.
Chromatins,' Jovinus^ and Eusebius,'' all of
them now bishops, well-tried and highly
esteemed in the church of God, one of whom
was then a presbyter of the church imder
Valerian of blessed memory, the second was
archdeacon, the third Deacon, and to me a
spiritual father, my teacher in the creed and
the articles of belief. These men so taught
me, and so I believe, namely, that the Father,
the Son and the Holy Spirit are of one God-
head, of one Substance : a Trinity coeternal,
inseparable, incorporeal, invisible, incompre-
hensible, known to itself alone as it truly is
in its perfection: For "No man'' knoweth
the Son but the Father, neither knoweth any
man the Father but the Son " : and the Holy
Spirit is he who " searcheth " the deep things
of God " : that this Trinity, therefore, is
without all bodily visibility, but that it is
with the eye of the understanding that the
Son and the Holy Spirit see the Father even
as the Father sees the Son and the Holy
Spirit ; and further, that in this Trinity there
is no diversity except that one is Father,
another Son and a third Holy Spirit. There
is a Trinity as touching the distinction of
persons, a imity in the reality of the Sub-
stance. We received, further, that the only
begotten Son of God, through whom in the
beginning all existing things were made,
whether visible or invisible, in these last days
took upon him a human body and Soul, and
was made man, and sufiered for oiu" salva-
tion ; and the third day he rose again from

1 Bp. of Aquilcia at the time of this Apology, and maintain-
ing friendly rchitions with both Jerome and Rufinus. (Ruf.
Pref. to Eusebius in this Volume. Jer. Ep. vii, Ix. 19, Pref.
to Bks. of Solomon &c. &c.)

2 See Jerome Ep. vii. It is not known of what cliiirch he
was Bp.

3 Brother of Chromatius. See an allusion to him in Jerome,
Ep. viii, and Ix, 19, His see is unknown.

* Mutt, xi, 2-;. ^ I Cor. ii, 10.


APOLOGY - BOOK I.


437


the dead in that very flesh which had been
hiid in the sepulchre ; and in that very same
flesh made glorious he ascended into the
heavens, whence we look for his coming to
judge the quick and the dead. But fin-ther
we confess that he gave us hope that we too
should rise in a similar manner, so that we
believe that oin" resurrection will be in the
same manner and process, and in the same
form, as the resurrection of our Lord himself
from the dead : that the bodies which we
shall receive will not be phantoms or thin
vapours, as some slanderously afhrm that we
say, but these very bodies of ours in which
we live and in which we die. For how can
we truly believe in the resurrection of the
flesh, imless the very nature of flesh remains
in it truly and substantially.^ It is then
without any equivocation, that we confess
the resurrection of this real and substantial
flesh of ours in which we live.

5. Moreover, to give a fuller demonstra-
tion of this point, I will add one thing more.
It is the compulsion of those who calumniate
me which forces me to exhibit a singular
and special mvstery of my own church. It
is this, that, while all the churches thus hand
down the Sacrament of the Creed in the
form which, after the words "the remission
of sins" adds '•' the resurrection of the flesh,"
the holy church of Aquileia (as though the
Spirit of God had foreseen the calumnies
which would be spoken against us) puts in
a particular pronoun at the place where it
delivers the resurrection of the dead ; instead
of saying as othei's do, " the resurrection of
the flesh," we say "the resurrection of this
flesh." At this point, as the custom is at
the close of the Creed, we touch the fore-
head of this flesh with the sign of the cross,
and with the mouth of this flesh, which we
have so touched, we confess the resurrection ;
that so we may stop up every entrance through
which the poisoned tongue might bring in its
calumnies against us. Can any confession
be fuller than this? Can any exposition of
the truth be more perfect? Yet I see that
this remarkable provision of the Holy Spirit
has been of no profit to us. Evil and busy
tongues still find room for cavilling. Unless,
says he, you name the members one by one,
and expressly designate the head with its
hair, the hands, the feet, the belly, and that
which is below the belly, you have denied
the resurrection of the flesh.

6. Behold the discovery of this man of
the new learning ! a thing which escaped the
notice of the Apostles when they delivered
the faith to the Church ; a thing which none
of the saints knew till it was revealed to this


man by the spirit of the flesh. He indeed
cannot expound it without bringing in an
indecency. Nevertheless, I will set it forth
in his hearing both more worthily and more
truly. Christ is the first fruits of those that
sleep;' he is also called '-' the first begotten
from the dead ; as also the Apbstle says,
^ " Christ is the beginning, afterward they that
are Christ's." Since then we have Christ as
the undoubted first fruits of our resurrection,
how can any question arise about the rest of
us? It must be evident that, whatever the
members, the hair, the flesh, the bones, were
in which Christ rose, in the same shall ^ve
also rise. For this purpose he offered him-
self to the disciples to touch after his resur-
rection, so that no hesitation as to his resur-
rection should remain. Since then Christ
has given his own resurrection as a typical
instance, one that is quite evident, and (as I
may say) capable of being felt and handled
by the "hand, who can be so mad as to think
that he himself will rise othenvise than as lie
rose who opened the door of the resurrec-
tion? This also confirms the truth of this
confession of ours that, while it is the actual
natural flesh and no other which will rise,
yet it will rise purged from its faults and
having laid aside its corruption ; so that the
saying of the Apostle is true : * " It is sown
in corruption, it will be raised in incorrup-
tion ; it is sown in dishonour, it will be raised
in glory; it is sown a natural^ body, it will
be raised a spiritual body." Inasmuch then
as it is a spiritual body, and glorious, and in-
corruptible, it will be furnished and adorned
with its own proper members, not with
members taken from elsewhere, according to
that glorious image of which Christ is set
forth as the perpetual type, as it is said by
the Apostle : "^ " Who shall change the body
of our humiliation, that it may be con-
formed to the body of his glory."

7. Since then, in reference to our hope of
the resurrection, Christ is set forth all through
as the archetype, since he is the first born of
those who rise, and since he is the head of
every creature, as it is written, ^" Who is the
head of all, the first born from the dead, that
in all things he might have the preemi-
nence ; " how is it that we stir up these vain
strifes of words, and conflicts of evil sur-
mises? Does not the faith of the church
consist in the confession which I have set
forth above? And is it not evident that men
are moved to accuse others not by difTerence
of belief, but by perversity of disposition?


1 1 Cor. XV, 20.

2Rev. i,s.

3 I Cor. XV, 23.


4 I Cor. XV, 4Z'4.
^ animate.


6 Phil, iii, 21.

7 Col. i, 18.


438


RUFTNUS.


At this point, however, in argning about the
resurrection of the ilesh, our friend, as his
liabit is, mixes up what is ridiculous and
farcical with what is serious. He says :

" Some poor creatures of the female sex among
us arc fond of askinj^ what good the resurrection
will be to them? They touch their breasts, and
stroke their beardless faces, and strike their thighs
and their bellies, and ask whether this poor weak
body is to rise again. No. they say, if we are to be
like angels we shall have the nature of angels."

Who the poor women are whom he thus
takes to task, and whether they are deserving
of liis attacks, he know's best. And if he
considers himself to be one of those who are
Itound to preach that it is not our part to
attack another out of revenge, ])ut that in
this histance he is right in attacking others
when they have given him no cause for re-
venge ; or if, again, he considers that it is
no business of his to take care that weak
women of his company shovdd be subjected
to attacks only for real causes, and not for
such false and fictitious reasons as these — of
all this, I say, he is himself the best judge.
For us it is sufficient to act as he said that he
would act : we shall not render evil for evil.
But it is evident that the man who is angry
with a woman because she says that she
hopes not to have a frail body in the resurrec-
tion is of the opinion that the frailties of the
body will remain. Only, what then, we ask,
are we to make of the words of the Apostle :
"It is sown in weakness, it will be raised in
power ; it is sown a natural body, it will be
raised a spiritual body" ? Wliat frailty can you
suppose to exist in a spiritual body .'' It is to
rise in power ; how then is it again to be
frail.'* If it is frail, how can it be in power.''
Are not those poor women after all more
right than you, wdien they say that their
bodily frailty cannot have dominion over
them in the world beyond.^ Why should
you mock at them, when they are only fol-
lowing the Apostle's words : '' This corrupt-
ible nnist put on incorrupticjn, and this mor-
tal must put on immortality "? The Apostles
never taught that the body which would rise
from the dead would be frail, but, on the
contrary, that it would rise in power and in
glory. Whence comes this opinion which
you now produce ? Perhaps it is one ob-
tained from some of yoiu" Jews,' which is
now to be promulgated as a new law for the
church, so that we may learn their ways: for
in truth the Jews have such an opinion as
this about the resurrection ; they belie\c that

' Rufinus frequently taunts Jerome with having paid too
much liecd to the Jewish teachers from whom he learned
Hebrew.


thev will rise, but in such sort as that they
will enjoy all carnal delights and luxuries,
and other pleasures of the body. What else,
indeed, can this "bodily frailty" of yoin-s
mean except members given over to corrup-
tion, appetites stimidated and liists inflamed.''

S. But sufTer it to be so, I beg you, as you
are lovers of Christ, that the body is to be
in incorruption and without these conditions
when it rises from the dead : then let such
thinsfs henceforward cease to be mentioned.
Let us believe that in the resurrection even
lawful intercourse will no longer exist be-
tween the sexes, since there would be danger
that unlawful intercoin'se would creej) in
if such things remained present and unfor-
gotten. What is the use of carefully and
minutely going over and discussing " the
belly and what is below it " .^ You tell us
that we live amidst carnal delights : but I
perceive that it is your belief that we are not
to give up such things even in the resurrec-
tion. Let us not deny that this very llesh in
which we now live is to rise again : but
neither let us make men think that the im-
perfections of the fiesh are w^rapped up in it
and will come again with it. The flesh, in-
deed, will rise, this very flesh and not
another : it will not change its natiu'e, but
it will lose its frailties and imperfections.
Otherwise, if its frailties remain, it catmot
even be immortal. And thus, as I said, we
avoid heresy, whether with you or without
you. For the faith of the Church, of which
we are the disciples, takes a middle path
between two dangers : it does not deny the
reality of the natural flesh and body when it
rises from the dead, but neither does it assert,
in contradiction to the Apostle's words,' that
in the kingdom which is to come corruption
will inherit incorruption. We therefore do not
assert that the flesh or body will rise, as you
put it, with some of its members lost or am-
putated, but that the body will be whole and
complete, having laid aside nothing but its
corruption and dishonoiu' and frailty and also
having amputated all the imperfections of
mortality: nothing of its own nature will be
lacking to that spiritual body which shall
rise from the dead except this corruption.

9. I have made answer more at length
than I had intended on this single article of
the resurrection, through fear lest by brevity
I shoidd lay myself open to fresh aspersions.
Consecjuently, I have made mention again
and again not only of the body, as to which
cavils are raised, but of the flesh : and not
only of the flesh ; 1 have added " this flesh ; "
and further I liave spoken not only of " this

1 Cor. x\, 50.


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


439


flesh" but of "this natural flesh;" I have
not even stopped here, but liave asserted that
not even the completeness of the several
members would be lacking. I have only
demanded that it should be held as part of
the faith that, according to the words of the
Apostle, it should rise incorruptible instead
of corruptible, glorious instead of dishonoured,
immortal instead of frail, spiritual instead of
natural ; and that we should think of the
members of the spiritual body as being
without taint of corruption or of frailty. I
have set forth my faith in reference to the
Trinity, the Incarnation of the Lord our
Saviour, to his Passion and Resurrection, his
second coming and the judgment to come.
I have also set it forth in the matter of the
resurrection of our flesh, and have left noth-
ing, I think, in ambiguity. Nothing in my
opinion remains to be said, so far as the
faith is concerned.

lo. But in this, he says, I convict you,
that you have translated the work of Origen,
in which he says that there is to be a restitu-
tion of all things, in which we must believe
that not only sinners but the devil himself
and his angels will at last be relieved from
their punishment, if we are to set before our
minds in a consistent manner what is meant
by the restitution of all things. And Origen,
he says, teaches further that souls have been
made before their bodies, and have been
brought down from heaven and inserted into
their bodies. I am not now acting on
Origen's behalf, nor writing an apology for
him. Whether he stands accepted before
God or has been cast away is not mine to
judge: to his own lord he stands or falls.'
But I am compelled to make mention of him
in a few words, since our great rhetorician,
though seeming to be arguing against him is
really striking at me ; and this he does no
longer indirectly, but ends by openly attack-
ing me with his sword drawn and turns his
whole fury against me. I say too little in
saying that he attacks me ; for indeed, in
order to vent his rage against me, he does
not even spare his old teacher : " he thinks
that in the books which I have translated he
can find something which may enable him
to hurl his calumnies against me. Li addi-
tion to other things w^hich he finds to blame
in me he adds this invidious remark, that I
have chosen for translation a work which
neither he nor any of the older translators
had chosen. I will begin, therefore, since it
is here that I am chiefly attacked, by stating


1 Rom. xiv, 4.

' That is, Origen. Rufinus insinuates that Jerome owed
and cared more for Origen than he chose to avow.


how it came to pass that I attempted the
translation of this work in preference to any
other, and I will do so in the fewest and
truest words. This is, no doubt, superfluous
for you, my well-beloved son, since you
know the whole affair as it occurred ; yet it
is desirable that those who are ignorant of it
should know the truth : besides, both he and
all his followers make this a triumphant ac-
cusation against me, that I promised in my
Preface to adopt one method of translation
but adopted a different one in the work itself.
Hence, I will make an answer which will
serve not only for them, but for many besides
Vv^hose judgment is perverted either by their
own malice or by the accusations which
others make against me.

II. Some time ago, Macarius, a man of
distinction from his faith, his learning, his
noble birth and his personal life, had in hand
a work against fatalism or, as it is called,
Mathesis,' and was spending much necessary
and fruitful toil on its composition ; but he
could not decide many points, especially
how to speak of the dispensations of divine
Piovidence. He found the matter to be one
of great difiiculty. But in the visions of the
night the Lord, he said, had shown him the
appearance of a ship far off" upon the sea
coming towards him, which ship, when it
entered the port, was to solve all the knotty
points which had perplexed him. When he
arose, he began anxiously to ponder the
vision, and he found, as he said, that that
was the very moment of my arrival ; so that
he forthwith made known to me the scope
of his work, and his difiiculties, and also the
vision which he had seen. He proceeded to
inquire what were the opinions of Origen,
whom he understood to be the most re-
nowned among the Greeks on the points in
question, and begged that I would shortly
explain his views on each of them in order.
I at first could only say that the task was
one of much difficulty: but I told him that
that saintly man the Martyr Pamphilus had
to some extent dealt with the question in a
work of the kind he wished, that is, in
his Apology for Origen. Immediately he
begged me to translate this work into Latin.
I told him several times that I had no prac-
tice in this style of composition, and that my
power of wi'iting Latin had grown dull
through the neglect of nearly thirty years.
He, however, persevered in his request,
begging earnestly that by any kind of words
that might be possible, the things which he

1 This word originally meant simply learning. It was then
applied in a special sense to mathematics. But the mathe-
matici under the later Roman Empire became identified with
astrologers.


440


RUFINUS.


longed to know should be placed within his
reach. I did what he wished in the best
language in my power ; but this only in-
flamed him with greater desire for the full
knowledge of the work itself from which, as
he saw, the few translations which I had
made had been taken. I tried to excuse
jnyself; but he urged me with vehemence,
taking God to witness of his earnest request
to me not to refuse him the means which
might assist him in doing a good work. It
was only because he insisted so earnestly,
and it seemed clear that his desire was ac-
cording to the will of God, that I at length
acquiesced, and made the translation.

12. But I wrote a Preface ' to each of these
works, and in both, but especially in the
Preface to the work of Pamphilus, which
was translated iirst, I set in the forefront an
exposition of my faith, affirming that my
belief is in accordance with the catholic
faith ; and I stated that whatever men might
iind in the original or in my translation, my
share in it in no way implicated my own
faith, and further, in reference to the Htpl
'A/JA'Mi' I gave this warning. I Inid found that
in these books some things relating to the
faith were set forth in a catholic sense, just
as the Church proclaims them, while in other
places, when the very same thing is in ques-
tion, expressions of a contrary kind are used.
I had thought it right to set forth these points
in the way in which the author had set them
forth when he had propounded the catholic
view of them: on the other hand, when I
found things which were contrary to the
author's real opinion, I looked on them as
things inserted by othei's, (for he witnesses
by the complaints contained in his letter that
this has been done), and therefore rejected
tliem, or at all events considered that I
might omit them as having none of the
" godly edifying in the faith." It will not,
I think, be considered superfluous to insert
tliese jjassages from my Prefaces, so that
proof may be at hand for each statement.
And furtlier, to prevent the reader from fall-
ing into any mistake as to the passages
which I insert from other documents, I have,
where the quotation is from my own works,
placed a single mark against the passage,
but, where the words are those of my oppo-
nent, a double inark.^

13. In the Preface to the Apology of
Pamphilus, after a few other remarks, 1
said :


1 Sec these Prefaces translated in the earlier part of this
Volume.

2 Corresponding to the single and double inverted commas
tised in this translation.


'What the opinions of Origen are maybe gathered
from the tenor of this treatise. But as for those
things in whiclihe is found to contradict himself,
I will point out how this has come to pass in a few-
words -which I have added at the close of tliis
Preface. Asforus,\ve believe what has been de-
livered to us by the holy Prophets, namely: that
the holy Trinity is coeternal, and is of one power
and substance : and that the Son of God in these
last days was made man and suffered for our sins,
and, in that very flesh in Avhich he suffered, rose
from the dead; and thereby imparted the hope of
a resurrection to the whole race of men. When
we speak of the resurrection of the tlesh, we do
so not with any subterfuges, as some slanderously
aflirm : we believe that the flesh which is to rise is
this very flesh in which we now live : we do not
put one thing for another, nor when we say
body, mean something diflerent from this flesh.
If, therefore, we say that the body is to rise
again, we speak as the Apostle spoke; for this
word body was the word which he employed : Or
if, again, we speak of the flesh, our confession coin-
cides with the words of the creed. It is a foolish and
calumnious invention to imagine that the human
body can be anything but flesh. Whether, then, we
say that it is flesh according to the common faith,
or body according to the Apostle, which is to rise
again, our belief must be held, according to the defi-
nition given by the Apostle, with the understanding
that that which is to rise again is to be raised in
power and in glory, an incorruptible and a spiritual
body. While, therefore, we maintain the superior
excellence of the body or flesh which is to be, we
must hold that the flesh which rises again will be
real and perfect; the actual nature of the flesh will
be preserved, while the glorious condition of the
uncorrupted and spiritual body will not be im-
paired. For so it is written : '" Corruption shall'not
inherit incorruption." This is what is preached
at Jerusalem in the church of God, by its reverend
bishop John : this is what we with him confess
and hold. If any one believes or teaches anything
besides this, or thinks that we believe otherwise
than as we have stated, let him be anathema.'

If then any one wishes to have a .statement
of our faith, he has it in these words. And
whatever we read or affirm, or whatever
translations we make, we do it without pre-
judice to this faith of ours, according to the
words of the apostle: "'"Prove all things,
hold fa.st that whicli is good. Abstain from
e\ery form of evil." '' And as many as
follow this rule, peace be upon them ; and
upon the Israel of God."

14. I wrote these words beforehand as a
.statement of mv faith, when as yet none of
these calumniators had arisen, so that it
should be in no man's power to say that it
was merely becau.se of their admonition or
their compulsion that I said things which I
had not believed before. Moreover,! promised
that, whatever the reciuirements of transla-
tion might be, I would, while complying
with them, maintain the principles of my faith
in\ iolate. How then can any room be left


1 I Cor. XV, 50.


! I Thcss. V, 21, Z2; Gal. vi, 16.


Ai'OLOGY — BOOK I.


441


for evil, when the very first word of my con-
fession preserves and defends me from the
suspicion of holding any doctrine inconsis-
tent with it? Besides, as I have said above,
I have learned from the words of the Lord
that every one shall be justified or con-
demned from his own words and not from
those of others.

But I wdl show how, in the Preface '
which I prefixed to the books TLept 'A/j.^wy, I
declared what was to be the regulative princi-
ple of my translation, and will prove it, as in
the former case, by quoting the words them-
selves: for it is right to quote from this doc-
ument also whatever is pertinent to the mat-
ter in hand. I had made honourable mention
of the man who now turns my praise of him
into an accusation against me, for his ser-
vices in having led the way and having
translated a great many works of Origen
before I had begun : I had praised both his
eloquence as an expositor and his diligence
as a translator, and had said that I took him
as my model in doing a similar work. And
then, after a few more sentences, I con-
tinued thus :

' Him therefore we take as our model so far as in
us lies, not indeed in the power of his eloquence,
but in his method of doing his work, taking care
not to reproduce things which are found in tlie
books of Origen discrepant and contrary to his
own true opinion.'

I beg the reader to observe what I have
said, and not to let this sentence escape him
because of its brevity. What I said was that
' I would not reproduce the things which
are found in the books of Origen discrepant
and contrary to his own true opinion.' I
did not make a general promise that I would
not reproduce v/hat was contrary to the
faith, nor yet what was contrary to me or to
some one else, but what was contrary to or
discrepant from Origen himself. My oppo-
nents must not be allowed to propagate a
false statement against me by snatching at a
part of this sentence and saying that I had
promised not to reproduce anything which
was contrary to or discrepant from my own
belief. If I had been capable of such con-
duct, I certainly should not have dared to
make a public profession of it. If you find
that this has been done in my work, you
will know how to judge of it. But if you
find that it has not been done, you will not
think that I am to blame, since I never gave
you any pledge which would bind me to
do it.


i See the translation of this document in this Volume.


15. But let me add what comes after.
My Preface continued as follows :

' The causes of these discrepancies I have more
fully set forth in the Apology which Pamphilus
expressly wrote for the works of Origen, to which
I added a very short paper in which I shewed by
proofs which appear to me quite clear, that his
books have been in very many places tampered
with by heretics and ill disposed men, and es-
pecially the very books which you ask me to trans-
late, namely, the lle^t Ap^^wi', which may be
rendered " Concerning Beginnings" 'or" Concern-
ing Principalities," which are in any case most
obscure and most difficult. For in these books
Origen discusses matters on which the philosophers
have spent their whole lives without finding out
the truth. In these matters, man's belief in a
creator and his reasoning about the created world
which had been made use of by the philosophers
for the purposes of their own profanity, the Chris-
tian writer turns to the support of the true faith.'

Here also I beg you to mark my words
carefully, and to observe that I said ' belief
in a Creator,' but ' reasoning about the
created world ; ' since what is said about
God belongs to the domain of faith, but our
discussions about created things to the
domain of reason. I continued :

' Wherever, therefore, in his works we find erro-
neous definitions of the Trinity as to which he has
in other places expressed liis views in accordance
with the true faith, we have either left them
out as passages which had been falsified or in-
serted, or else have changed the expression in
accordance with the rule of faith which the writer
again and again lays down.'

Have I here, I ask, written incautiously .-*
Have I said that I expressed the matter
according to the rule of our faith, which would
have been evidently going far beyond the
scope of a translator whose duty was merely
to turn Greek into Latin.'' On the contrary
I said that I expressed these passages accord-
ing to the rule of faith which I found again
and again laid down by Origen himself.
Moreover I added :

' I grant that, when he has expressed a thing
obscurely, as a man does when he is writing for
those who have technical knowledge of the subject
and wishes to go over it rapidly, I have made the
sentence plainer by adding the fuller expression
which he had given of the same thing in some of
his other works which I had read. I did this sim-
ply in the interests of clearness. But I have ex-
pressed nothing in my own words; I have only
restored to Origen what was really Origen's
though found in other parts of his works.'

16. I should have thought that this state-
ment, I mean the words, ' I have expressed
nothing in my own words ; I have only re-

Or First Principles (De Principiis).


442


RUFINUS.


stored to Ori^i^cn wliat was really Origen's,
th<)U<^h foiiiul in other part of his works,'
would of itself have been sufficient for ni\
defence even before the most hostile jud<i^es.
Have I thrust myself forward in any way?
Have I ever led men to expect that I should
put in anythino^ of my own ? Where can
thev find the words \vhich they j)reten(l that
I have said, and on \\ Inch they ground their
calunmious accusations, namely, that I ha\c
removed what was bad and put gootl words
instead, while I had translated literally all
that is good? It is time, I think, that they
should show some sense of shame, and
shoidd cease from false charges and from tak-
ing up(jn themselves the office of the devil
who is the accuser of thebrethen. Let them
listen to the words ' I have put in no words
of my own.' Let them listen to them again
and hear them constantly reiterated, ' I have
put in no words of my own ; I have only re-
stored to Origen what was really Origen's,
though found in other parts of his works.'
And let them see how God's mercy watched
over me when I put my hantl to this work ;
let them mark how I was led to forebode the
verv acts which they are doing. For my
Preface continues thus :

' I have given this statement in my Preface for
fear that my detractors should tiiink that they had
found a fresh reason for accusing me.'

When I said a fresh charge I alluded to
the charge which they had previously made
against the reverend l>ishop John for the
letter written by him ttj the reverend Jjishop
Theo])hilus' on the articles of faith: they pre-
tended that when he spoke of the himian
bodv he meant something — I know not what
— ditlerent fnnn flesh. Therefore I spoke of
a fresh charge. Take notice, then, I say,
of the conduct of these perverse and conten-
tious men.

' I have undertaken this great labour, (which I
have only done at your entreaty) not with a view
of shutting the mouths of my calumniators, which
indeed is iin[)ossible unless God himself should do
it, but in order to give solid information to those
who are seeking to advance in knowledge.'

l^ut, to show you that I foresaw and fore-
told that they would falsify what I was writ-
ing, (observe what I said in the following
passage :

' Of this I solemnly warn every one who ma}-
read or copy out these books, in the sight of God
the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, and


' Of Alexaiuiiia. He was at first friendly to Ori^eiiisin,
aftciwarils bitterly opposed to it. John wrote to liini coinplain-
ing of the conduct of lipiphanius, and cxphiining his own
vic\vs. Sec Jerome's letter (Ixxxii) to Tlicophihis, and his
Treatise Against John of Jerusalem. In tlic latter of these
churjjes occur like those here noticed by Kufinus,


adjure him by our belief in the kingdom which
is to come, by the assurance of the resurrection
fiom the dead, and by that eternal Ji re -Mhicli is pre-
pared for the dez'il and his angels, — I adjure him,
as he would not have for his eternal portion that
place where there is weeping and gnashing of
teeth, wheretheir worm dieth not and their fire is
not quenched, that he should add nothing to this
writing, take away nothing, insert nothing, and
change nothing.'

Nevertheless, after I had warned them by
all these dread and terrible forms of adjura-
tion, these men have not been afraid to be-
come falsifiers and corrtipters of my work,
though they profess to believe that the resur-
rection of the flesh is a reality of the future.
Why, if they even believed the simple fact
of the existence of God, they would never
set their hands to acts so injurious and so
impious. I ask, ftirther, what line of my
Preface can be pointed to in which I have,
as my accuser says, praised Origen up to the
skies, or in which I have called him, as he
once did, an Apostle or a Prophet, or any-
thing of the kind. I may ask indeed in
what other matter they find any ground of
acctisation. I made at the outset a confes-
sion of my faith in terms which I think agree
in all respects with the confession of the
Church. I made a clear statement of my
canons of translation, which indeed in most
respects were taken from the model fur-
nished by the very man who now comes for-
ward as my accuser. I declared what was
the purpose I set before me in making the
translation. Whether I have proved capable
of fulfilling the task more oi- less completely
is, no doubt, a matter for the judgment of
those who read the work, and who may be ex-
pected to praise it or to ridicule it, but not to
make it a ground for acctisation when it is
a qtiestion of turning words from one lan-
guage into another with more or less pro-
priety.

17. But I have said that these men would
have been unable to iind grounds for accusa-
tion on the points I have mentioned, how-
ever they may take them, unless they had
first falsified them. It appears to me
therefore desirable that the chief matter on
which they have laid their forgers' hantls
should be insertetl in this Apology, lest they
should think that I am intentionally with-
drawing it from notice because they after
making their own additions to it allege it as
a ground of false accusation. In the bot)k
which I translated there is a passage in
which I examine the tenets of those who
believe that God has a bodily shape and
who describe him as clothed with human
members uud dress. This is openly asserted


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


443


by the heretical sects of the Valentinians and
Aiithropoinorphites, and I see that those who
are now our accusers have been far too
ready to hold out the hand to them. Origen
in this passage has defended the faith of the
church against them, affirming that God is
wholly without bodily form, and therefore
also invisible; and then, following out his
scrutiny in a logical manner, he says a few
words in answer to the heretics, which I thus
translated into Latin.'

" But these assertions will perhaps be held to
have little authority by those whose desire is to be
instructed out of the Holy Scriptures in the things
of God, and who require that from that source
should be drawn the proof of the preeminence of
the nature of God over that of the human body.
Consider whether the Apostle does not say the same
thing when he speaks thus of Christ: * " Who is
the image of the invisible God, the first born of
every ci-eature." The nature of God is not, as
some think, visible to some and not to others, for
the Apostle does not say The image of God who
is invisible to men, or to sinners; but he speaks
quite distinctly of the nature of God in itself,
where he says " The image of the invisible God."
John also says in his Gospel, ^" No man hath seen
God at any time," by which he distinctly declares
to all who can understand, that there is no being
to whom God is visible; not as if he were naturally
visible and, like a being of attenuated substance,
escaped and eluded our glance ; but that, in his
own nature it is impossible for him to be seen.
But perhaps you will ask me my opinion as to the
Only begotten himself. Well, if I should say that
even to him the nature of God is invisible, since
it is its very nature to be invisible, do not dismiss
my answer as if it were impious or absurd, for
I will at once give you my reason for it. Observe
that seeing is a different thing from knowing. See-
ing and being seen belong to bodies ; to know and
to be known belong to the intellectual nature.
Whatever then is merely a property of bodies, this
we must not attribute to the Father or the Son ; but
that which belongs to the nature of Deity governs
the relations of the Father and the Son. More-
over, Christ himself in the Gospel * did not say
*' No man seeth the Son but the Father nor the
Father but the Son," but *' No man knoweth the
Son but the Father, neither doth any one know
the Father but the Son." By this it is clearly
shown that what is called seeing and being seen in
the case of bodily existence is called knowledge in
the case of the Father and the Son : their inter-
course is maintained through the power of knowl-
edge not through the weakness of visibility.
Since, therefore, an incorporeal nature cannot
properly be said to see or to be seen, therefore in
the Gospel it is not said either that the Father is
seen by the Son or the Son by the Father but that
each is known by the other. And if any one
should ask how it is that it is said * " Blessed are
the pure in heart for they shall see God," I think
that this text will confirm my assertion still more.
For what else is it to see God with the heart than,
according to the explanation I have given above,
to understand Him with the mind and to know
Him ? "


' riepi 'Apxiov Book I. c. 1.
«Johni, i8. < Matt.


2 Col. i, IS.
« Matt. V, g.


1 8. This is the chief passage which those
who were sent from the East to lay snares
for me tried to brand as heretical, not only
by perversely misunderstanding it, but by
falsifying the words. But I could see noth-
ing to suspect in it, as also in several similar
passages of the writer I was translating, nor
did I think that there was any reason to leave
it out, since there was nothing said in it as
to a comparison of the Son with the Father,
but the question related to the nature of the
Deity itself, whether in any sense the word
visibility could be applied to it. Origen was
answering, as I have said before, the heretics
who assert that God is visible because they
say that he is corporeal, the faculty of sight
being a property of the body ; for which
reason the Valentinian heretics, of whom I
spoke above, declare that the Father begat
and the Son was -begotten in a bodily and
visiblesense. He therefore shrank, I presume,
from the word Seeing as a suspicious term,
and says that it is better, when the question
turns upon the nature of the Deity, that is,
upon the relation of the Father and the Son,
to use the word which the Lord himself
definitely chose, when he said: "No man
knoweth the Son save the Father, neither
doth any know the Father save the Son."
He thought that all occasion which might be
given to the afoi^esaid heresies would be shut
out if, in speaking of the nature of the Deity
he used the word Knowledge rather than
Vision. ' Vision ' might seem to afford the
heretics some support. The word Knowl-
edge on the other hand preserves the true re-
lation of Father and Son in one nature never
to be set apart ; and this is specially con-
firmed by the authoritative language of the
Gospel. Origen thought also that this mode
of speaking would ensure that the Anthropo-
morphites should never in any way hear God
spoken of as visible. It did not seem to me
right that this reasoning, since it made no
difference between the persons of the Trinity,
should be completely thrown on one side,
though indeed there were some words in the
Greek, which perhaps were somewhat in-
cautiously used, and which I thought it well
to avoid using. I will suppose that readers
may hesitate in their judgment whether or
not even so, it is an argument \'\'hich can be
employed with effect against the aforesaid
heresies. I will even grant that those who
are practised in judging of words and their
sense in matters of this kind and who, besides
being experts, are God-fearing men, men
who do nothing through strife or \ain glory,
whose mind is equally free from envy and
favour antl prejudice may say that the point


444


RUFINUS.


is of little value either for edification or for
the conil^ating of heresy; even so, is it not
competent for them to pass it over and to
leave it aside as not valid for the repulse of
our adversaries? Suppose it to be super-
fluous, does that make it criminous? How
can we count as a criminal passa<i^c one
w^hich asserts the equality of the Fatlier the
Son and the Holy Spirit in this point of in-
visibility? I do not think that any one can
really think so. I say any one : for there is
no evidence that an\thin£r contained in niv
writin<i^s is offensive in the eves of my ac-
cusers; for, if they had thouj^lit so, they
vvoidd have set down my words as they
stood in my translation.

19. But what did they actually do? Con-
sider what it was and ask yourself whether
the crime is not unexampled? Recall the
passage which says : " But perhaps you will
ask me my opinion as to the Only-begotten
liimself. Well, if I should say that even to
him the nature of God is invisible, since it is
its very nature to be invisible, do not dismiss
my answer as if it were impious or absurd,
for I will at once give you my reason for it."
Well, in the place of the words which I had
written, " I will at once give you my reason
for it" they put the following words: "Do
not dismiss my answer as if it were impious
or absurd, for, as the Son does not see the
Father, so the Holy Spirit also does not see
the Son." If the man who did this, the man
who was sent from their monastery ' to
Rome as the greatest expert in calumny, had
been employed in the forum and had com-
mitted this forgery in some secular business
every one knows what would be the conse-
quence to him according to the public laws,
when he was convicted of the crime. But
now, since he has left the secular life, and
has turned his back upon business and en-
tered a monastery, and has connected himself
with a renowned master, he has learned
from him to leave his former self-restraint
and to become a furious madman : he was
quiet before, now he is a mover of sedition :
he was peaceable, now he jirovokes war :
instead of concord, he is the promoter of
strife. For faith he has learnt perfidious-
ness, for truth forgery. He would, you may
well think, have been the complete exemplar
of wickedness and criminality of this kind,
if you had not had before you the image of
that woman Jezebel." She is the same who
made up the accusation against Naboth the

1 Jcronie's friend Kusebius o-f Cronionii, of whom Rufinus
comiilains ;is having talicn occasion from this old friendship to
purloin and falsify his MSS. Sec below c. 20, 21.

2 Marcella. See below in this chapter. Also, Jerome Letter
cxxvii, c. 9, 10.


Zezreelite for the sake of the vineyard, and
sent word to the wicked elders to urge
against him a false indictment, saying that
he had blessed, that is cursed, God and the
king. I know not whether of the two is to
l)e accounted the happier, she who sends tlie
command or they who obey it in all its
iniquity. These matters are serious ; such a
crime, as far as I know, is hitherto all but
unheard of in the Church. Yet there is
something more to be said. What is that?
you ask. It is this, that those who are guilty
should become the judges, that those who
plotted the accusation should also jironounce
the sentence. It is, indeed, no new thing
for a writer to make a mistake or a slip in
his words, and in my opinion it is a venial
fault, for the Scripture also says, ' " In many
things we all stumble : if any stumbleth not
in word the same is a perfect man." Is it
thought that some word is wrong? Then
let it be corrected or amended, or, if expedi-
ency so require, let it be taken out. But to
insert in what another man has written
things he never wrote, to put in false
words for no other purpose than to defame
your brother, to corrupt his writings in
order to attach a mark of infamy to the
author, and to insinuate your ideas into tlie
ears of the multitude so as to throw con-
fusion into the minds of the simple ; and all
this with the object of staining a man's
reputation among his fellows ; I ask you
whose work this can be except that ol him
who was a liar from the beginning, and
who, from accusing the brethren, received
the name of Diabolus, which means accuser.
For when he to whom I have alluded "''
recited at Milan one of these sentences
which had been tampered with, and I
cried out that what he was reading was
falsified, he, being asked from whom he
had received the copy of the work said that
a certain Avoman named Marcella had
given it him. As to her, I say nothing,'
whosoever she may be. I leave her to her
own conscience and to God. I am content
with God's own witness and with yours.
When I say yours, I mean your own and
that of Macarius himself, the saintly man
for whom I was doing that work : for both
of you read my papers themselves at the
first, even before they had been completed,
and you have by you the completely cor-
rected copies. You can bear witness to
what I say. The words " as the Son does
not see the Father, so also the Holy Spirit


' James iii, 2.

'Eusebius of Cremona, Jerome's friend »nd emissary,
alluded to above in this chapter.


APOLOGY— BOOK I.


445


does not see the Son " not only were never
written by me, but on the contrary I can
point out the forger by whom they were
written. If any man says that as the Father
does not see the Son, so the Son does not
see the Father or that the Holy Spirit does
not see the Father and the Son as the Father
sees the Son and the Son and the Holy
Spirit, let him be anathema. For he sees,
and sees most truly ; only, as God sees God
and the Light sees the Light ; not as flesh
sees flesh, but as the Holy (Spirit sees, not
with the bodily senses, but by the powers of
the Deity. I say, if any one denies this,
let him be anathema for all eternity. But,
as the Apostle says, ' " He that troubles you
shall bear his judgment, whosoever he be."

30. I remember indeed that one of these
people, when he was convicted of having
falsified this passage, answered me that it
was so in the Greek, but that I had, of
purpose, changed it in the Latin. I do not,
indeed, treat this as a serious accusation,
because, though what they say is untrue,
yet, even supposing that the words did
stand so in the Greek, and I had changed
them in the Latin, this is nothing more than
I had said in my Preface that I should do.
If I had done this with the view of making
an expression which in the Greek was cal-
culated to make men stumble run more
suitably in the Latin, I should have been
acting only according to my expressed pur-
pose and plan. But I say to my accusers :
You certainly did not find these words in
the Latin copies of my work. Whence then
did it come into the papers from which he
was reading? I, the translator, did not so
write it. Whence then came the words which
you who have got no such words of mine
turn into a ground of accusation? Am I to
be accused on the ground of your forgeries ?
I put the matter in the plainest possible way.
There are four books of the work which I
translated ; and in these books discussions
about the Trinity occur in a scattered way,
almost as much as one in each page. Let
any man read the whole of these and say
whether in any passage of my translation
such an opinion concerning the Trinity can
be found as that which they calumniously
represent as occurring in this chapter. If
such an opinion can be found, then men may
believe that this chapter also is composed in
the sense which they pretend. But if in the
whole body of these books no such difter-
ence of the persons of the Trinity exists
anywhere, would not a critic be mad or fat-

1 Gal. V, 10.


uous if he decided, on the strength of a single
paragraph, that a writer had given his ad-
herence to a heresy which in the thousand
or so other paragraphs of his work he had
combated ? But the circumstances of the
case are by themselves sufficient to shew the
truth to anyone who has his wits about him.
For if this man had really found the pas-
sage in question in my papers, and had felt
a difiiculty in what he read, he would of
course have brought the documents to me
and have at once asked for explanations, since,
as you well know, we were living as neigh-
bours in Rome. Up to that time we often saw
one another, greeted one another as friends,
and joined together in prayer ; and therefore
he would certainly have conferred w ith me
about the points which appeared to Ifim ob-
jectionable ; he would have asked me how
I had translated them, and how they stood
in the Greek.

31. I am sure that he would have felt
that he had enjoyed a triumph if he could
have shown that through his representations
I had been induced to correct anything that
I had said or written. Or, if he had been
driven by his mental excitement to expose
the error publicly instead of correcting it, he
certainly would not have waited till I had
left Rome to attack me, when he might have
faced me there and put me to silence. But
he was deterred by the consciousness that he
was acting falsely ; and therefore he did not
bring to me as their author the documents
which he was determined to incriminate,
but carried them round to private houses, to
ladies, to monasteries, to Christian men one
by one, wherever he might make trouble by
his ex parte statements. And he did this just
when he was about to leave Rome, so that
he might not be arraigned and made to give
an account of his actions. Afterwards, by the
directions, as I am told, of his master, he
went about all through Italy, accusing me,
stirring up the people, throwing confusion
into the churches, jDoisoning even the minds
of the bishops, and everywhere represent-
ing my forbearance as an acknowledgment
tiiat I was in the wrong. Such are the arts
of the disciple. Meanwhile the master, out
in the East, who had said in his letter to
Vigilantius ' •' Through my labour the
Latins know all that is good in Origen and
are ignorant of all that is bad," set to work
upon the very books which I had trans-
lated, and in his new translation inserted all
that I had left out as untrustworthy, so that


'Jerome, I^etter Ixi, c. 2; a passage which slinws that
Jerome IkuI adopted much the same method as Rutinus ia
translatiiiii' Origen.


44^


RUFINUS.


now, tlie contrary of what he had boasted
has come to pass. The Romans by his
labour know all that is bad in Origen and
are ignorant of all that is good. By this
means he endeavours to draw not Origen
only but me also under the suspicion of
heresy : and he goes on unceasingly sending
out these dogs of his to bark against me in
every city and village, and to attack me with
their calumnies when I am quietly passing
on a journey, and to attempt every speakable
anil unspeakable mischief against me. What
crime, I ask you, have I committed in doing
exactly what you have done ? If you call
me wicked for following your example,
what judgment must you pronounce upon
yourself.''

22. But now I will turn the tables and
put my accuser to the question. Tell me, O
great master, if there is anything to l^lame
in a writer, is tlie blame to be laid on one
who reads or translates his works.'' Heaven
forbid, he will say; certainly not ; why do
you try to circumvent me l)y your enigmatical
questions .'' Am not I myself both a reader
and a translator of Origen .'' Read my trans-
lations and see if you can find any one of his
peculiar doctrines in them ; especially any of
those which I now mark for condemnation.
When driven to the point he says :

" If you wish thoroughly to see how abhorent
the very suggestion of such doctrines lias always
been to me, read my Commentaries on the Epistle
of Paul to the Ephesians, and you will see from
what I have written there what an opinion I formed
of him from reading and translating his works." >

I ask, can we accept this man as a great
and grave teacher, who in one of his works
praises Origen and in another condemns
iiim? who in his Introductions calls him a
master second only to the Apostles, but now
calls him a heretic ? What heretic, I ask, was
ever called a master of the churches.'' " It
is true, he replies, I was wrong about this;
Init why do you go on bringing up this un-
fortunate Preface ' against me.'' Read my
Commentaries, and especially those which
I liavc designated." Is there any one who
will think this satisfactory.? He has
composed a great many books, in almost all
of which he trumpets forth the praises of
Origen to the skies : these books tlnough
all tliese years have been read and are being
read by all men : many of these readers after


iTlie words arc not quoted literally from Jerome's letter to
Pammuchius and Oceaiuis (Kp. Ixxxiv. c. 2) the passage
referred to; hut they give the sense fairly well. See also the
letter to \'i<jilantius (Ixi. c.2).

'^Pnv/'iiti iinculam. That is, the Preface to Origen's Song of
Songs, in wliich he says that Origen has not only Knr|)assi(l
every one else, but also in this work has surpassed himself.


accepting his opinions have left this world
and gone into the presence of the Lord.
They hold the opinion about Origen which
they had learnt from the statements of this
man, and the}' departed in hope that, accord-
injT to tliis man's assurance, thev would
tind him there as a master second only to the
Apostles ; but if we are to trust his present
writings, they liave found him in a state of
condemntition, among the impious heretics
and the heathen. Is this man now to turn
round from his former contention, and to
say, " For some thirt}' years I have been, in
my studies and in my writings, praising
Origen as equal to the Apostles, but now I
pronounce him a heretic.''" How is this.-'
Has he come upon some new books of his
which he had never read before.^ Not at
all. It is from these same sayings of Origen
that he formerly called him an Apostle and
now calls him a heretic. But it is impossible
that this should really have been so. For
either he was right in his former praises,
and his judgment has since been perverted
by some kind of extreme ill feeling, and in
that case no attention is to be paid to him ;
or else his former praises were mistaken,
and he is now condemning himself, and in
that case what judgment does he think others
will pass upon him, when, according to the
words of the Apostle,' he passes condemna-
tion on himself.

23 {a). But, "Surely," he says, "this
judgment is done away with since I have re-
pented." Not so fast ! We all err, it is
true, and especially in word ; and we all
may repent of our errors. Btit can a man
do penance, and accuse others, and judge
and condemn them, all in the same moment.''
That would be as if a harlot who had
abstained from her harlotry for a night or
two, should feel called upon to begin writ-
ing laws in favour of chastity, and not only
to enact these laws, but to proceed to throw
down the monuments of all the women who
have died, because she suspected that they
had led lives like her own. You do penance
for having formerly been a heretic, and you
do right. But what has that to do with me
who never was a heretic at all.'' You are
right in doing penance for your error: but
the true way of doing penance is, not by
accusing others but by crying for mercy,
not by condemning but by weeping. For
what sincerity can there be in penitence
when the penitent makes a decree of indul-
gence for himself } He who repents of
what he has spoken ill does not cure his

» Perhaps from i Cor. xi, 29, or Rom. xiv, 23.


APOLOGY— BOOK I.


447


wound by speaking ill again, but by keeping
silence. For thus it is written: ' "Thou
hast sinned, be at peace." But now 3'ou
first bring yourself in a criminal, then you
absolve yourself from your crime, and fortli-
with change yourself from a criminal into a
judge. This may be no trouble to you who
thus mock at us, but it is a trouble to us if
we sutler ourselves to be mocked by you.

23. But let us come to these two Commen-
taries which he alone excepts from the general
condemnation and renunciation which he
pronounces upon all the rest of his works ;
we shall see with what modesty and self-
restraint he conducts himself in these:
Remember that it is by these alone that he
has chosen to prove that he is sound in the
faith, and that he is altogether opposed to
Origen. Let us examine then as witnesses
these two books which alone of all his
writings are satisfactory to him, namely, the
thi'ee books of his commentary on the
Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians, and the
single book (I think) on Ecclesiastes. Let
us for a moment look into the one which
comes forward first, the Commentary on the
Epistle to the Ephesians. Even here I
recognize in his arguments the influence of
him who is as his fellow, his partner and
his brother mystic, to use his own expression."
And first of all, as to these poor weak
women about whom he makes himself
merry, because they say that after the resur-
rection they will not have their frail bodies,
since they will be like the angels. Let us
hear what he has to say about them. In the
third book of his Commentaries on the
Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians, on the
passage in which it is said, '"He who
loveth his own wife loveth himself, for no
man ever hated his own flesh ; " after a few
other remarks, he says :

" Let us men then cherish our wives and let our
souls cherish our bodies in such a way as that the
wives may be turned into men and the bodies into
spirits, and that there may be no difference of sex,
but that, as among the angels there is neither male
nor female, so we who are to be like the angels niay
begin here to be what it is promised that we shall
be in heaven."

34. How, I ask, can you, seeing that yoiu*
Commentaries contain such doctrines, put
them forward to pro\'e your soundness in the
faith, and to confute those ideas which you
reprove ? How do yom* words tend to re-
prove those women whom we have spoken


1 Possibly a kind of paraphrase of our Lord's words to the
woman taken in adultery. John viii, ii.

s <Tufinv(TT>/r, that is one who partakes with us in the myste-
ries; hence, initiiited into the same secret, or special npinions.

3 Ephes. V, 2S.


of ? Besides, has any woman gone so far as
to say what you write, namely, that women
are to be turned into men and bodies into
souls? If bodies are to be turned into spirits,
then, according to you, there will be no
resurrection not only of the flesh l)ut even of
the body, which you admit to be the doctrine
even of those whom you have set down as
heretics. Where are we to look an\- more
for the body, if it is reduced to a spirit? In
that case everything will be spirit, the body
will be nowhere. And again, if the wives
are to be turned into men, according to this
suggestion of yours, that there is to be no
difference of sex whatever, by which I sup-
pose you mean that the female sex will en-
tirelv cease, being converted into the male,
and the male sex will alone remain ; I am
not sure that you would have the permission
of the women to speak here on behalf of
their sex. But, even suppose that thc\- grant
you this, then with what consistency can }'ou
argue that the male sex is any longer neces-
sary, when the female is shown not to l)e
necessary? for there is a natural bond which
unites the sexes in mutual dependence, so
that, if one does not exist, there is no need
of the other. And further, if it is man alone
who is to receive at the resiu-rection the form
of clay which was originally given in para-
dise, what becomes of that which is written,
' " He made them male and female, and
blessed them " ? And then, if, as both you
yourself say, and also these poor women
whom you arraign, there is neither man nor
woman, how can bodies be turned into souls,
or women into men, since Paradise does
not allow the existence of either sex, nor
does the likeness of angels, as you say, ad-
mit it? And I marvel how you can demand
from others a strict opinion upon the contin-
uance of the diversity of sex when you your-
self, as soon as you begin to discuss it, find
yom-self involved in so many knotty questions
that to evolve yourself out of them becomes
impossible. How much more right would
your action be if you were to imitate us
whom you blame in such matters as these
and allow God to be the only judge of them,
as is indeed the truth. It would be far better
for you to confess your ignorance of them
than to write things which in a little while
you have to condemn. I should like to ask
my accuser whether he can conscientiously
say that he would ever have found, I do not
say in any, even the least, work of mine, l)ut
even in any familiar letter which I might
have written carelessly to a friend, such


1 Gen, i, 27.


448


RUFINUS.


things as that bodies were to be turned into
spirits and wives into men, were it not that
he had put thcni forward as if he wished
them to be inserted in brazen letters on the
gates of cities, and recited in the forum, in
the Senate house and in front of the rostra.
If he had foiuid any such thing in my writ-
ings, imagine liow many heads of accusation
he would have set down, how many vohnnes
he would have compiled, how he would be
assailing me with all the arms and shafts of
that teeming breast of his; how he would
have said: " I tell you that he is deceiving
you by speaking of the resurrection of the
bod}-, for he denies the resurrection of the
flesh ; or even if he confesses the resiu'rcc-
tion of the flesh he denies that of the mem-
bers and the sex : but, if you do not believe
me, behold and see the very words of his
letter, in which he says that bodies are to be
turned into souls and wives into men." Yet,
when you write this, we are not to call you
a heretic, but are to give satisfaction to you
as though you were our master. And as for
those women whom you have attacked with
your indecent reproaches, they will, when
they stand before the judgment seat of Christ,
bring forward what you have taught them in
these Commentaries as well as the things
which you have since written, with insults
which show that you had forgotten yourself ;
and both the one and the other will be read
out there, where the favour of men will have
ceased, and the applause for which you pay
by flattery will be silent, and they will be
judged together with their author for these
words and deeds of yours before Christ the
righteous judge.

25. But now let us go on to discuss what
he writes further as to God's judgment,' for
this too is a matter of the faith. We shall
tind that as he alters the faith about the
resurrection of the flesh in other points, so
he does in reference to God's judgment. In
the first book of the Commentaries on the
Ep. of Paul to the Ephesians, he deals with
that passage in which the Apostle says :
" Even as he chose us in him before the
foundation of the world that we should be
holy and without blemish before him." On
this he says :

" For the foundation of the world the Greek has
Krt-a/Jo/l^f Kdcfiov, The word Karafio?:.// does not
mean the same which we understand hy foimda-
tion. We, therefore, shall not attempt to render
a word for a word, which is here impossihlc
on account of the poverty of oin- language and

1 ^inpstt'ones. Examinations orinquisitions. Itspemshere
to mean the method which God follows in clistinj»:iiishing
between individuals.


also the novelty of the sense, and because, as
some one has said, the Greeks have a larger dis-
course and a happier tongue than ours. We must
explain the force of the word by some sort of jieri-
phrasis. Karuiio?./'/ is properly used when something
is thrown down and is cast from a higher into a
lower place, or else when anything is taking its
beginning. Hence those who' lay the first foim-
dations of future houses are said Karaii^.i/.i/Ktvat,
that is to have thrown down the first foimdations.
Paul thus used the word to show that God framed
all things out of nothing: he assigned to Ilim not
a creation nor a building up, nor a making but a
Karafid'/i/, that is, a beginning of a foundation.
He wishes to show that there was not some otlu-r
thing antecedent to creatures, and out of which
creatures were formed, as is held hy the Manicliaiiiis
and other heretics, who begin with a maker and a
material, but that all things were made out of
nothing. But, as to our election to be holy and
without blemish before him, that is, before God,
previously to the making of the world, of which the
Apostle speaks, this belongs to the foreknowledge
of God, to whom all future things are as if they
were already done, and all things are known before
they come into being: as Paul is predestinated in
the womb of his mother, and Jeremiah before his
birth is sanctified, chosen, and confirmed, and, as a
tvpe of Christ, is sent to be a prophet of the
nations."

26. So far he has set forth a single
exposition of the passage ; but on whose
authority he wishes us to receive this in-
terpretation he has not made clear. What
he has done is to make -void this first in-
terpretation by what comes after : for he
goes on: " Btit there is another, who tries
to shew that God is just." He therefore
points out that by that first exposition the
justice of God is not vindicated, which of
course is contrary to the faith : and he goes
on through the mouth of this 'other,' wliose
assertions he evidently wishes to exhibit as
being what is everywhere held for catholic
and indul)itable, to gi\e a testimony l)y \vhich
he will, as he asserts, seek to show that (lod
is just. Let us see then what this ' other
man ' says, who proclaims the justice of
God.

" Another man," he says, " who seeks to vindi-
cate the justice of God, argues that it is not accord-
ing to his own pre-judgment and knowledge, but
according to the merit of the elect that God's
choice of men is determined; and he says that,
before the creation of the visible world, of sky and
earth and seas and all that they contain, there
existed other invisible creatures, among which
also were souls; and that these souls, for reasons
known to God alone, were casi dozvn ' into this vale
of tears, this place, of our mournful ])ilgrimage,
antl that this is shewn by the prayer uttered by a
holy man of old who, having his habitation fixed
here, yet longed to return to his original abode :
"Woe is me that my sojoiu'ning is prolonged, that
I have my habitation among the iniiabitants of

1 (caTo^oAi) '' foundation," means literally" casting down."


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


449


Kedar," ' " my soul has long been a pilgrim," and
ao-ain "O wretched man that I am, who will de-
lit-er me from the body of this death ?" ^ and in
another place "It is better to return and be with
Christ,"^ and elsewhere, " Before I was brought
low, I sinned;'"* and other words ofa like char-
acter."

This relates, they say to the souls' condi-
tion before they were cast doxvn into the
world. The reader of this will be apt to
say, Master, you seem to tell us, yet do not
really tell us, who these men are who say
this, that the souls of men existed before
they were cast down into the world. Then
he will reply, " Was I not right in saying
that you were blind, and no better than a
mole? Did I not say before, that they are
those who assert that God is just, — by
which, if you had any sense at all, you
would understand that I mean myself : for I
am not such a heretic as not to include my-
self among those who vindicate the justice of
God, which indeed all must do who have
the least tincture of good sense." Then they
will reply, "Tell us, then, master, tell us,
what it is that these men say, and you
among them ? We understand that you say
that before the souls were cast down into the
world, and before the world, which was
made up of souls, had been cast down to-
gether with its inhabitants into the abyss,
God chose Paul and those like him, who
were holy and undefiled. But if men are
chosen, they are chosen out of a great nuin-
ber; there must be many In a worse con-
dition out of whom the election is made.
However, just as in the Babylonian cap-
tivity, when Nebuchadnezzar carried away
the people into Chaldjsa, Ezekiel and Daniel
and the Three Children, and Haggai and
Zechariah were sent with them, not because
they deserved to become captives, but that
they might be a comfort to those who were
carried away; so also, in that 'casting
down' of the world, those who had been
chosen by God before the world was, were
sent to instruct and train the sinful souls, so
that these, through their preaching, might
return to the place from which they had
fallen; and this is what is meant by the
words of the eighty-ninth Psalm : * " Lord
thou hast been our refuge in generation and
in oflspring, before the mountains were es-
tablished, or the earth and the world were
made ; " that is to say, that before the world
was made, and a beginning was made of the
generation of all things, God was a refuge
to his saints."


1 Ps. cxx, S.

2 Rom. vii, 24.
8 Phil, i, J3.

VOL. III.


*Ps. cxix, (37.

Bin our numbering, Pe. xc.


27. Such are the doctrines which are to
be found in these works of yours which you
single out from all that you have written,
and which you desire men to read over
again to the prejudice of all the rest. It is
in these very Commentaries that these doc-
trines are written. There was, you say, an
invisible world before this visible one came
into being. You say that in this world, along
with the other inhalDitants, that is the angels,
there were also souls. You say that these
souls, for reasons known to God alone, enter
into bodies at the time of birth in this visible
world : those souls, you say, who in a
former age had been inhabitants of heaven,
now dwell here, on this earth, and that not
without reference to certain acts which they
had committed while they lived there. You
say further that all the saints, such as Paul
and others like him in each generation were
predestinated by God for the purpose of re-
calling them by their preaching to that
habitation from which they had fallen : and
all this you support by very copious war-
ranties of Scripture. But are not these state-
ments precisely those for which you now
arraign Origen, and for which alone
you demand that he should be condemned?
What ' other' than him who says such things
as these do you condemn in your writings?
And yet if these statements are to be con-
demned, as you now urge, you will first
pronounce judgment on these statements,
and then find that you have condemned your-
self by anticipation. No other refuge re-
mains for you. There is no room for any
of these "twists and turns for which you
blame others: for it is just when you are
doing penance and have been converted,
when you have been corrected and put
in the way of amendment, that you have
stamped these books with fresh authority,
to prove to us by their means what your
opinion was as to the doctrines which ought
to be condemned : and therefore what you
have there written must be taken as if we
heard you now distinctly making the state-
ments contained in them. Yet in these very
books you yourself make the statements
which you say are to be condemned. But
no ! you will say : it is not I that make them.
It is the 'other' who thus speaks, that is, of
course, the man who I now declare ought to
be condemned. Well, let us recall, if you
please, that particular line in which you
change the person of the speaker, that we
may see who it is whom you represent as
building up this strange theory. You say,
then, that it is ' another,' who is endeavour-
ing to show that God is just, who says these

g


450


RUFINUS.


thinsfs which wc have set down just above.
It" you say that this 'other' who by this as-
sertion of his proves God to be just is sepa-
rate and divers from yourself, what then, I
ask, is your own opinion? Must we say
that you deny that God is just? Oh, great
Master, you who see so sharply, and are so
hard upon the moles that ha\e no eyes : ' }ou
seem to have got yourself into a most im-
possible position, where you are shut in on
every side. Either you must deny that God
is just by declaring yourself other than, and
contrary to, him who says these things, or if
you confess God to be just, as all the Church
does, then it is you yourself who make the
assertions in question ; in which case the
sentence which you pass upon another falls
upon you, you are thrust through with your
own spear. I think that this is enough for
your conviction before the most righteous
judges whose judgment anticipates that of
God : not that they would condemn the man
who sees the mote in his brother's eye but
does not see the beam in his own ; but they
would try to bring him to a better mind and
to true repentance.

28. But it is possible that this particular
passage may have escaped his observation,
althousfh he thou"-ht that he had revised these
books so as to make them perfectly clear, and
put them forward as giving a profession of
his faith, to the prejudice of all the rest. Let
us see then what are his opinions in other
parts. In the same book when he comes to
the passage where it is written "According
to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise
of his glory," ho makes these remarks
among others :

" Here certain men seize upon the opportunity to
introduce their peculiar views : they believe that
before the foundation of the world, the souls ofmen
dwelt in the heavenly Jerusalem with the angels,
and with all the other celestial powers. They think
that it would be impossible, in accordance with the
good pleasure of God, and the praise of his glory
and of his grace, to explain the fact that some men
are born poor and barbarous, in slavery and weak-
ness, while others are born as wealthy Roman citi-
zens, free and with strong health ; that some are
born in a low, some in a high station, that they
are born in different countries, in dilTerent parts of
the world : unless there are some antecedent causes
for which each individual soul had its lot assigned
according to its merits. Moreover, the passage
which some think that they understand, (though
they do not) the passage of the Epistle to the
Romans which says, ^ " Hath not the potter a right
over the clay from the same lump to make one part
a vessel unto honour, and another unto dishonour ? "
these men take as supporting this same view; for
they argue that, just as the distinction between


1 Talpaa oculis Cantos. Virg, Georg. i, 1S3.
* Uoiii. ix, 21.


leading a good life or a bad, one of labour or self-
indulgence, would be of little account if we did not
believe in the judgment of God which is to come,
so also the difference of conditions under which
men are born would impugn the justice of God
unless they were the results of the soul's previous
deserts. For, if we do not accept this view, they
say, it cannot be ' the good pleasure of God ' nor
' to the praise of his glory and grace ' that he should
have chosen some before the foundation of the
world to be holy and undefiled, and to partake of
the adoption through Jesus Christ, and should
have appointed others to the lowest position and
to everlasting punishment; he could not have loved
Jacob before he came forth from the womb and
hated Esau before he had done anything worthy of
hatred, unless there were some antecedent causes
which would, if W'C knew them, prove God to be
just."

29. Whirt can be more distinct than this
statement? What could possibly be thought
or said whether by Origen or by any of those
whom you say that you condemn, which
would be clearer than this, that the inequality
of conditions which exists among those who
are born into this world is ascribed to the
justice of God? You say that the cause of
the salvation or perdition of each soul is to
be found in itself, that is, in the passions and
dispositions which it has shown in its pi'e-
vious life in that new Jerusalem which is the
mother of us all. "But this too," he will
say no doubt, "is not said by myself. I
described it as the opinion of another : more-
over, I used the expression ' they seize upon
the opportimity.' " Well, I do not deny that
yoti make it appear that you are speaking of
another. But you have not denied that this
man about whom you are speaking is in agree-
ment and accord with you : you have not said
that he is in opposition or hostility to you.
For, when you use this formula of ' another'
in reference to one who is really opposed to
you, you habitually, after setting down a few
of his words, at once impugn and overthrow
them : you do this in the case of Marcion,
Valentinus, Arius and others. But when, as
in this instance, you use, indeed, this formula
of ' anotlier,' but report his words fortified by
the strongest assertions and by the most
abundant testimonies of Scripture, is it not
evident even to us who are so slow of under-
standing, and whom you speak of as ' moles,'
that he whose words you set down and do
not overthrow, is no other than yourself, and
that we have here a case of the figure well
known to rhetoricians, when they use another
man's person to set forth their own opinions.
Such figiu'cs are resorted to by rhetoricians
when they are afraid of oflending particular
people, or when they wish to avoid exciting
ill-will against themselves. But, if you think
Ithat you have avoided blame by putting for-


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


451


ward ' another ' as the author of these state-
ments, how much more free from it is he
whom you accuse. For his mode of action
is much more cautious. He is not content
with merely saying, " This is what others
say," or "so some men think," but, "As to
this or that I do not decide, I only suggest,"
and, " If this seems to any one more proba-
ble, let him hold to it, putting the other
aside." He has been very careful in his
statements, as you know ; and yet you sum-
mon him to be tried and condemned. You
think that you have escaped because you
speak of ' another ' : but the points on which
you condemn him are precisely those in which
you follow and imitate him.

30. But let us proceed in our study of
these Commentaries; otherwise, in dwelling
too long upon a few special points, we may
be prevented from taking notice of the greater
number. In the same book and the same pas-
sagfe' are the words "To the end that we
should be unto the praise of his glory, we
who had before hoped in Christ." His com-
ment is :

•' If it had been simply said ' We have trusted in
Christ,' and there had not been the prefix ' before,'
which stands in the Greek tzpotjIttlkote^, the sense
would be quite clear, namely, that those who have
hoped in Christ have been chosen in due order ^
and liave been predestinated according to the pur-
pose of him who orders all things according to the
counsel of his own will. But, as it stands, the addi-
tion of the preposition ' before' compels us to ex-
plain it according to the same ideas which we
argued in a former place to be necessary for the
explanation of the passage, "Who hath blessed us
with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places
in Christ, even as he chose us in him before the
foundationof the world, that we should be holy and
without blemish before him:" namely, that God
had blessed us before in heaven with all spiritual
blessing, and had chosen us before the world was
framed; and that thus we are said to have hoped in
Christ 'before,' that is, in the time when we were
elected and predestinated and blessed in heaven."

31. But let this pass, for what follows is
of more importance. I thank God that he
has relieved me from a very serious burden
of suspicion. Perhaps I seemed to some
people to be acting contentiously and calum-
niously when I insinuated that, according to
a figure of rhetoric, when he spoke of
'another' he meant himself. But to pre-
vent all further doubt from resting in the
minds of his hearers, he has himself declared
that it is so. Like a truly good teacher, who
would not wish any ambiguity about his
sayings to remain in the minds of his pupils,
he has been so good as to shew quite clearly

' Eph. i. 12. 2 Reading ' sorte ' as in the Comra. itself.


who that ' other ' was of whom he had
spoken before. He therefore says, " But, as
it stands, the addition of the preposition
'before' leads us to explain it according to
the ideas which we argued in a former place
to be necessary." You see, he means that
it is we, and not some other, no one knows
who, as you may have thought, who in the
former place argued thus, when we were ex-
pounding the words " Who hath blessed us
with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly
places in Christ." It was to meet the case
of the less intelligent persons, who might
think that what was there said was spoken
by some one else, to prevent any error on the
point remaining in the minds of those whom
he had begged to read these books so that
they might see what his opinion of Origen
was, that he now acknowledges this opinion
as his own, and, no longer speaking of
' another,' says what we have quoted be-
fore ; namely, that, as God had before blessed
us with all spiritual blessing in Christ in the
heavenly places, and had chosen us before
the foundation of the world ; so also we
are said to have trusted in Christ at that
former time in which we were elected and
predestinated and blessed in heaven. He
himself therefore, as it seems to me, has
by his own testimony, absolved me fi'om all
suspicion of speaking a calumny when I say
that that ' other ' is no ' other ' than him-
self.

30 (a). But, I undertook to shew some-
thing of more importance still in what fol-
lows. After he had said that we had hoped
in Christ before, and that in the time before
the foundation of the world and before we
were born in our bodies, we had been blessed
and chosen in heaven, he again introduces
that 'other' of his, and says : "Another,
who does not admit this doctrine that we had
a previous existence and had hope in Christ
before we lived in this body, would have us
understand the matter in his own way." In
this passage this 'other,' whoever he maybe,
has put forth all his ill savour. Let him tell
us then whom he means by this ' other '
who does not admit this opinion that before
we lived in this body we both existed and
hoped in Christ — for which he requires us to
condemn Origen. Whom does he wish us
to understand by this ' other ' } Is it some
one opposed to himself.'' What do you say,
great master } You are pressed by that two-
horned dilemma of which you are so fond of
speaking to your disciples. For, if you say
that by this 'other' who does not admit
that souls existed before they lived in the
body you mean yourself, you have betrayed


g


452


RUFINUS.


the secret which in the previous passages
was concealed. It is now found out that
you by your own confession are that other
who have fashioned all the doctrines of
which you now demand the condemnation.
But if we are not to believe you to be the
' other ' of the former passage, so that the
doctrines which you now impugn may not
be ascribed to }ou, we have no right to con-
sider you in tliis case to be the 'other' who
does not admit that our souls existed before
we lived in bodies. Choose either side you
like as the ground of your acquittal. This
' other,' whom you so frequently bring in,
are we to understand by him yourself or some
one else.'' Do you wish that he should be
thought by us to be a catholic or a heretic.''
Is he to be acquitted or condemned.'* If that
'other' of yours is a catholic, the man who
said in the former passage that before this
visible world our souls had their abode among
the angels and the other heavenly powers in
the heavenly places in Jerusalem which is
above, and that they there contracted those
dispositions which caused the diversities of
their birth into the world and of the other
conditions to which they are now subject,
then these must be esteemed to be catholic
doctrines, and we know that it is an impiety
to condemn what is catholic. But if you call
this ' other ' a heretic, you must also brand
as a heretic the ' other ' who will not admit
that souls existed and hoped in Christ before
they were born in the body. Which way
can you get out of this dilemma, my master.''
Whither will you break forth.'' To what
place will you escape.'' Whichever way you
betake yourself, you will stick fast. Not only
is there no avenue by which you can with-
draw yourself ; there is not even the least
breathing space left you. Is this all the
profit you have gained from Alexander's
Commentaries on Aristotle, and Porphyry's
Introduction.'' Is this the result of the train-
ing of all those great Philosophers by whom
you tell us you were educated, with all their
learning, Greek and Latin, and Jewish into
the bargain.'' Have they ended by bringing
you into these inextricable straits, in which
you are so pitifully confined that the very
Alps could give you no refuge ?

31 {a). But let us spare him now. We
nnist bend to our examination of the books ;
for, to use an expression of his own, a great
work leaves no time for sleep ; though indeed
he himself spares nobody, and does not so
much use reasonable speech as lash with
the scourge of his tongue whomsoever he
pleases ; and any one who refuses to flatter
him must expect to be branded at once as a


heretic both in his treatises and in hundreds
of letters sent to all parts of the world. Let
us not follow his example, but rather that of
the patriarch David, who, ^\•hcn he had sur-
prised his enemy Saul in the cave and miglit
have slain him, refused to do so, but spared
him. This man knows well how often I
have done the same by him, both in word
and deed ; and if he does not choose to con-
fess it, he has it fixed at least in his mind and
conscience. I will pardon him then, though
he never pardons others, but condemns men
for their words without any consideration or
charity; and for the present I will let him
come out from this pit, until he falls into
that other, from which all of us together will
be unable to deliver him, however much we
may wish and strive. He has to explain how
it comes to pass that, in the first passage,
where that doctrine was being asserted which
sought to vindicate the justice of God, he
really meant to speak of some one else, and
that that person was the one whom he now
wishes to have condemned ; yet in the second
passage, where the speaker says the oppo-
site and does not admit what has been said
before, the ' other ' whom he speaks of
means himself. It is possible that he may
feel sure that this was what he meant, but
that he was not able to make it plain in writ-
inof. Let us Sfive him the benefit of the
doubt, and assume that in this latter passage
the 'other' is himself, and that it is he who
does not admit the doctrine which holds that
before our life in the body began our souls
existed and hoped in Christ. I will quote
the entire passage, and prosecute a fresh and
diligent inquiry to see what it tends to. He
savs thus :

"Another who does not admit this doctrine that
before our life in the body began our souls existed
and trusted in Christ, changes the sense of the
passage so as to mean that, in the advent of our
Lord and Saviour, wlien in his name ' every knee
shall bow, of things heavenly and earthly and
infernal, and every tongue shall confess that
Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father,
when all things shall be made subject to him, there
will be some who are made subject willingly, but
others only by necessity ; and that those who before
his coming in his majesty have hoped in him will
be to the praise of his glory; that these therefore
are called * Fore-hopers; but that those who are
only found to believe through necessity, when even
the devil and his angels will be unable to reject
Christ as King are to be called simply Ilopers.
and that they are not for the praise of his glory.
And this we see partly fulfilled even now, since we
can distinguish between the reward of those who
follow God willingly and those who follow Him


1 Phil, ii, 10, II.

2 Jerome uses the Greek word TrpoijXrriKOTa?. It seems btwt
to coin a new one to represent the peculiar idea.


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


453


knee shall bow
versal creation,


through necessity. But,' whether by pretence or in
truth, let Christ be proclaimed : only let each of
them understand, both the Hopers and the Fore-
hopers, that for the difterence of their hope they
■will receive different rewards."

32. In this passage all room for doubt
is removed. In the former passage you
said that those who before hoped in Christ
are those who, before they were born in
bodies in this visible world, dwelt in heaven
and had hope in Christ. But, to prevent
this being supposed to be your own doctrine,
you introduced another interpretation,
namely, that at that time when every
to Jesus as Lord, the uni-
of things heavenly, earthly
and infernal, will consist of persons subjected
to him in two different ways, some willingly,
some by necessity. You add that all the
saints, who now believe on him through
the word of preaching are subject to him
willingly, and that these are called Fore-
hopers, that is those who have beforehand
hoped in Christ: but that those who are
subject to him by necessity are those who
have not believed now through the preach-
ing of the word, but who then will no
longer be able to deny him, such as the devil
and his angels, and those who with them
have been obliged by necessity to believe :
and that all these, and amongst them the
devil and his angels, who shall afterwards
believe, shall not be called Fore-hopers,
because that name belongs to those who
believed in Christ before, and hoped in him
willingly, whereas these others only did so
afterward and by necessity : and you add that,
consequently, they will receive diflerent
rewards. But you assign rewards, though
they may be inferior ones, to all, even to
those who now do not believe, that is, the
devil and his angels ; and, though now you
hold the mere opinion, not the mature
judgment, of another worthy of condemna-
tion who thinks it possible that the devil
may one day have a respite from punishment,
you bring him into the kingdom of God to
receive the second reward. This also you
wish us to understand, that, as it matters not
whether Christ is preached in truth or by
necessity, so it is of no consequence whether
we believe by necessity or willingly.

33. These are the things which we learn
from the Commentaries to which you direct
us. These are the rules for the confusion ^
of our faith which you teach us. You wish


iPhil. 5, 18.
s Regulas confusionis
sionls. But probably "


us to condemn in others what you teach
yourself in private. For, of course, if you
are now that ' other ' who do not admit the
doctrine which holds that our souls existed
in heaven before they were joined to bodies,
you are undoubtedly the man who not only
promise pardon to the devil and his angels
and all unbelievers but also undertake that
they shall be endowed with rewards of the
second order. But if you deny this second
doctrine, you must be the author of that
which we first discussed. And I wonder
that those able and learned men who read
these writings of his about which he now
writes in commendation, should laugh at me
because he calls me a mole, and should not
feel that he is all the while thinking of them
much more as moles, for not seeing that the
things I have pointed out are imbedded in his
books. For, if he thought that they could
understand as well as read, he would never
have requested them to get a copy of those
books with a view to the condemnation of
the very things which their master there
teaches; for these very things which he
urges us to condemn are most plainly and
manifestly contained in them. I have shewn,
at all events, that he himself in these chosen
Commentaries of his asserts the doctrines
which he desires to have condemned in
another man's books, namely, that souls
existed in heaven before they were born in
bodies in this world, and that all sinners and
unbelievers, together with the devil and his
angels, will, at the time when every knee
shall bow. to Jesus of things heavenly and
things earthly and things infernal, not only
receive pardon, but also be summoned to
receive the second order of rewards.

34. It is indeed a thing so unheard of to
believe that a man can pronounce condem-
nation on the fabric which he himself has
reared, that I doubt not it will with difficulty
win credit ; and I feel that what you desire
is that I should, if possible, produce from
his writings instances of this so clear that no
room whatever may be left for doubting ; that
is, passages in which that ' other ' of which
he is so fond is not named at all ; and this I
will do. In this same book he declares his
belief that, in the end of the age,' Christ
and his saints will have their throne above
the demons In such a way that the demons
themselves will act according to the will of
Christ and his saints who reign over them.
In commenting upon the passage where the
Apostle says, * " That in the aees to come


fidei. Another reading- is Confes-
^ Rufinus meant to give point to his ex-
pression bysubstituting for the well known words " Rule of
faith," " Rule of confusion of faitli."


ages


1 Sceculi; usually translated by 'the end of the world,'
which, however, hardly gives the true meaning.
»Eph. ii, 7.


454


RUFINUS.


he might show the exceeding riches of his
grace iri kindness toward us in Christ Jesus,"
after a few other remarks, he says :

"We who formerly were held bound by the law
of the infernal place, and, through our vices and
sins were given over both to the works of the flesh
and to punishment, shall now reign with Christ
and sit together with him. But we shall sit, not
in some kind of low place, but' above all Princi-
palities and power and Dominion, and every name
that is named not only in this age but in the age
to come. For, if Christ has been raised from tlie
dead, and sits at tlie right hand of God in heavenly
places, far above all Principality and Power and
Dominion, and above every name that is named, not
only in this age but in the age to come, we also
must of necessity sit and reign with Christ and sit
above those things above which he sits. But the
careful reader will at this point make his inquiry
and say: What.'' is man then greater than the
angels and all the powers of heaven? I make ans-
svver, though it is hazardous to do so, that the
Principalities and Powers and Mights and Domin-
ions, and all names that are named not only in this
age but in that which is to come must refer (since
all things are subjected to the feet of Christ) not
to the good part of them but the opposite; the
Apostle means by these expressions the rebellious
angels, and the prince of this world, and Lucifer
who once was the morning star, over whoin in the
end of the age the saints must sit with Christ, who
con^municates this privilege to them. These Powers
are now infernal powers, abusing their freedom
for the worst purposes, wandering everywhere and
running together down the steep places of sin.
But when they have Christ and the saints sitting
on thrones above them, they will begin to be ruled
according to the will of those who reign over
them."

Surely there is no ambiguity remaining
here ; the passage needs no one to bring out
its points. He says in the most distinct
tenns, without bringing in the person of any
' other,' that the rebclHous angels and the
prince of this world, and Lucifer who once
was the morning star, will in the end, when
Christ sits and reigns over them with his
saints, be fellows and sharers, not only of his
kingdom but also of his will ; for to act ac-
cording to the will of Christ and of all his
saints is to have arrived at the highest blessed-
ness, and the perfection which we are taught
in the Lord's Prayer to ask of the Father is
none other than this, that his will may be
done in earth as it is in heaven.

35. But I beg you to listen patiently as I
follow him in his continual rccm-rencc to
these same doctrines — not indeed in all that he
says of them, for it is so much that I should
have to write many volumes if I tried to ex-
haust it — but as much as will satisfy the
reader that it is not by chance that he slips
into these notions which he now proposes


for imitation to his disciples, but that he sup-
ports them by large and frequent assertion.
Let us see what it is that he teaches us in
these the most approved of his Commen-
taries. In this same book he teaches that
there is for men the possibility of both rising
and falling, not in the present age only but
in that which is to come. On the passage in
which the words occur: "Far above all
Principality and Power and Might and Do-
minion, and every name that is named not
only in this age but in that which is to come,"
he has the following among other remarks :

"If, however, there are Principalities, Virtues,
Powers and Dominions, they must necessarily
have subjects who fear them and serve them and
gain power from their strength ; and this gradation
of offices will exist not only in the present age but
in that which is to come; and it must be possible
that one may rise through these various stages of
advancement and honour, while another sinks,
that there will be risings and fallings, and that our
spirits may pass under each of these Powers, Vir-
tues, Principalities, and Dominions one after the
other."

36. I will address the Master in one of
his own phrases.' Why, after nearly four
hundred years, do you give such teachings
as these to the Latin people with their peace-
able and simple minds 1 Why do you in-
flict on unaccustomed ears new-sounding
words, which no one finds in the writings of
the Apostles.'' I beseech you, spare the ears
of the Romans, spare that faith which the
Apostle praised.* Why do you bring out
in public what Peter and Paul were unwill-
ing to publish.'' Did not the Christian world
exist without any of these things until — not
as you say I made my translations, but up to
the time when you wrote what I have
quoted, that is till some fifteen years ago .''
For what is this teaching of yours, that in the
world to come there will still be risings and
fallings, — that some will go forward and
some go back.'' If that be true, then what
you say, that in this world life is either ac-
quired or lost, is not true ; unless it has some
occult meaning. I do not find that you re-
pent of any of these doctrines which these
commentaries contain. Again, you teach
that the Church is to be understood as being
one body made up not of men only but of
angels and all the powers of heaven. You
say in commenting on the passage of the
same book, in which the words occur '" And
gave him to be head over all the Church,"
a little way down: "The Church maybe
understood as consisting not of men alone,
but also of angels, and of all the powers, and

1 ^ Jerome, Letter Ixxxiv, S> * Rom. i, S. ' £ph. i, as.


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


455


reasonable creatures." Again, you say that
souls, because in that former life they knew
God, now know him not as one previously
unknown, but as though after having for-
gotten him they came to recognize him
again. These are the words used in a pas-
sage of the same book :

"The words which he uses "In the knowledge of
him"' some interpret by recalling that between
-yvfiaig and 'eirtyvuaii; (Gnosis and Epignosis) tliat
is, between knowing and recognition there is this
difference, that Knowing has reference to things
which we did not know before and have since be-
gun to know, while Recognition has to do with
those things which we afterwards remember. Our
souls, then, they say, have a kind of apprehension
of a former life, after they have been cast down
into human bodies, and have forgotten God their
Father; but now we know him by revelation, accord-
ing to that which is written : ^ " All the ends of this
world shall remember and turn to the Lord ; " and
there are many similar passages."

38.^ Now, as to the expression which he
uses, " Some persons say," I think it has been
made clear by what I have previously said,
that, when he says " some persons say" or
" Another says," and does not controvert the
opinions which are thus introduced, it is he
himself who is this 'certain' or 'other'
person. And this is proved by the numerous
cases which I have pointed out in which he
expresses opinions agreeing with these with-
out the introduction of any such person. We
must consider therefore in each case whether
he expresses any dissent from the ' other.'
For instance, an opinion is put forward that
the stars and the other things that are in
heaven are reasonable beings and capable of
sinning. We must see, therefore, what his
own opinion is on this point. Turn to his
note, in this book," upon the passage " He
must reign till he hath put all his enemies
under his feet."* You will find, some way
down, the words :

" It may be observed that no one is without sin,
that Even the stars are not clean in his sight,® and
Every creature trembles at the coming of the
Creator. Hence it is not only things on earth but
also things in heaven which are said to have been
cleansed by our Saviour's cross."

Again, as to the opinion that it is because
of their being in this body of humiliation or
body of death that men are called children of
wrath, he says, in commenting on the words'
' We were the children of wrath, even as
others.' (Comm. on Ephes. on this verse,
some way down.)

1 Eph. i, 17. ^ I Cor. XV, 25.

sPs.xxii, 27. 0 Job XXV, s.

8 There is no chapter numbered 37. ' Eph. ii, 3.
" Comm. oil Eph. i, m.


"We must hold that men are by nature chil-
dren of wrath because of this ' ' body of humilia-
tion ' and 2 'body of death,' and because ^ ' t'lt;
heart of man is disposed to evil from his youth.'"

Again, on the opinion that there is first a
creation of the soul and afterwards a fashion-
ing of the body he says (at the same passage,
a long way down)

"And observe carefully that he does not say,
' We are his forming and fashioning, but "• ' We
are his making.' For ' fashioning ' implies the fact
of man's origin from the slime of the earth: but
' making' from liis origin according to the image
and similitude of God. And this distinction is
confirmed by the words of the iiSth Psalm * " Thy
hands have made me and fashioned me." ' Mak-
ing' has the first place, ' fashioning' comes after.''

Are there any other things which he
wishes us to condemn.? He has only to
mention them, and we can draw them out
from his own books, or rather from the
bottom of his own heart. For instance. We
are to condemn as a pestilent assertion that
the nature of human souls and of angels is
the same. But let us see what his own
opinion is on this point as given in the
books whicli he specially puts before us as
containing the pattern of his profession and
his rule of faith. Turn to the passage, ^ " He
came and preached peace to them which
were afar off and to them that were nigh."
His comment on this first expounds the
words of Jews and Gentiles, and then goes
on :

" This has been said in accordance with the
Vulgate^ translation. But, if a man reads the
words of the Apostle when he says of Christ,
^ "Making peace through the blood of his cross for
those that are in earth and for those that are in
heaven" and the rest that is said in that place, he
will not consider that it is we who are called the
spiritual Israel are intended by ' those afar off,'
and that the Jews, who are merely called 'Israel
after the flesh ' are ' those who are nigh.' He will
modify the whole meaning of the passage, and
apply it to the angels and the heavenly powers
and to human souls, and as implying that Christ
by his blood joined together things in earth and
things in heaven which before were at variance.
who brought back the sheep which had grown
sickly upon the mountains to be with the rest, and
put back the last piece of money among those
which had before been safe."

39. You observe how much difference he
makes between the souls of men and the
angels. Merely the difference between the

1 Phil, iii, 21. * Workmanship Eng. Ver. Eph. ii, 10.

2 Rom. vii, 24. ^ With us Ps. cxix, 73.

3 Gen. viii, 21. « Eph. ii, 17.

7 That is, the old Latin Version, then commonly used, or
Vulffata. It was superseded by Jerome's Version, which in
its turn became the Vulgate.

8 Col. i, 30, slightly altered.


45^


RUFINUS.


one sheep and the others, between one
drachma and the rest. But he adds some-
thing more, a little way further; he says:

"As to what the Apostle sajs, " That he might
create in himself of two one new man, so making
peace," though it seems to be even more applicable
than the former passage to the case of Jews and
Gentiles, it may be adapted to our understanding
of the passage in this way : We may suppose him
to mean that man, who was made after the image
and similitude of God, is after his reconciliation to
receive the same form which the angels now have
and lie has lost: and he calls him a new man
because he is renewed day by day, and is to dwell
in the new world."

The souls of men then, differ, according to
him, from the angels as sheep from sheep or as
drachma from drachma ; and men will have
that form hereafter which the angels now
have, but which tnen once had and had lost.
If then there is no difference between them
in nature, in shape or in form, I wonder
that our learned man is not ashamed to con-
demn another person for saying what he
himself has said, and especially when you
observe that this is an exposition not of the
Vulgate rendering but of the real meaning
of the Apostle. But see what is added
fiuther in the same place. He presently
says:

" And the creation of the new man will be fully
and completely perfected when things in heaven
and things in earth shall be joined in one, and we
have access to the Father in one spirit, in one
feeling and mind. There is something similar
suggested by Paul to all thoughtful readers in
another Epistle (though some do not receive it as
his), in these words : ' " All these, having had wit-
ness borne of their faith, received not the promise,
God having provided some better thing for us,
that apart from us they should not be made per-
fect.'' For this reason the whole creation- groans
and travails with pain in sympathy with us who
groan in this tabernacle, who have conceived in
the womb by the fear of God,-* and are in grief and
wait for the revelation of the sons of God ; and it
waits to be delivered from the vanity of the
bondage to which it is now subject; so that there
may be one shepherd and one dock, and that the
petition in the Lord's Prayer may be fulfilled,
" Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven." "

We are to understand then that things in
heaven and those on earth, that is, Angels
and men, formerly had one form and one
sheepfold, and that so it will be in their
future restoration, since Christ will come to
make both into one flock, and men are to be
what angels now are, and what they, that
is their souls, previously were. I ask then,

> Heb. xi, 39, 40. » Rom. viii, 22.

' ^iii a timore Dei in utero concepimus . The expression
Is meant to carry out the metaphor of the word «rv»'<u6tcet
" travailctli together."


with what face you can mock, as we lately
saw you, so pleasantly, or rather not pleas-
antly at all but scurrilously, at those poor
women who, striking their bellies and thighs,
said that they should not after the resurrec-
tion have those frail bodies but would be
like the ansjels and have a life like theirs.
You reprove with bitter raillery these poor
women for saying the very things which are
now produced as passages from these .selected
Commentaries of yours. Do not you think
this is somewhat as if a man were to accuse
another of theft, while he had the very thing
that had been stolen concealed in the bosom
of his toga ; and as if, after inveighing
against the supposed thief in a long and mag-
nificent peroration, after bringing forward
witnesses and taking the oath in due form,
he should have the stolen article extracted
from his toga which he supposed himself to
have convicted another of stealing.

There is another point. You find fault with
others because, when questions are asked
thein about such matters, they do not answer
at once, but hesitate and use gestures rather
than words. Yet you say that the Apostle
does mtich the same, at least, that he ' insin-
uates'something of this kind in his Epistle
to thoughtful men. If Paul does not plainly
declare these things, but 'insinuates' them,
and this not to everybody but only to thought-
ful people, why do you, whom we are bring-
ing to see your errors, laugh at us poor
creatures when we say about things which
the Apostle has not plainly declared either
that we do not know, or that we stand in
doubt, and that, since we do not get a full un-
derstanding but a hint of his meaning, we do
not declare but suggest an explanation. If the
things which eye hath not seen nor ear heard,
and which have not entered into the heart
of man have been revealed to you ; if you
have attained to that which is perfect, and that
which is in part is done away for you ; shout
aloud and proclaim the truth, and make
quite plain the things which you say the
Apostle ' insinuates,' since not only what he
insinuates but what he asserts, as you tell
us, now falls under your ban. All these
things on which you now desire us to pro-
nounce anathema are those which you had
ascribed to the Apostle in your exposition of
his words, and had taught as contained in
the scope of his statements.

40. There are one or two tnore things on
which he wishes condemnation to be passed.
One is this : that these men say that the body
is a prison, and like a chain round the soul ;
and that they assert that the soul does not
depart, but "returns to the place where it


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


457


originally was. Let me give quotations to
show his opinion on this point also. In the
second book of these Commentaries, on the
passage " For this cause, I, Paul, the prisoner
of Jesus Christ," he says, a little way dqwn ;

" The Apostle in several passages calls the body
the chain of the soul, because the soul is kept shut
up as it were in a prison; and thus we may speak
of Paul being kept close in the bonds of the body
and does not return to be with Christ, so that his
preaching to the Gentiles maybe perfectly accom-
plished."

And again in the third book of these Com-
mentaries, on the words, " for which I am
an ambassador in chains," ' after some dis-
cussion of the passage, he speaks in the char-
acter of that ' other' which is himself:

" Another contends that he speaks thus because
of the ^ body of our humiliation and the chain with
which we are encompassed, so that we ^ know not
yet as we ought to know, and see '' by means of
a mirror in a riddle: and that he will be able to
disclose the mysteries of the Gospel only when he
has cast off this chain and gone forth free from his
prison. Yet perhaps even in chains that man may
be considered as free who has his conversation in
heaven, and of whom it may be said : * " You are
not in the prison nor in the flesh, but in the spirit,
if so be that the spirit of God dwelleth in you."

And in the Commentary on Paul's Epistle
to Philemon, at the place where he says
^ " Epaphras my fellow-prisoner greeteth
you," some way down he says :

" Possibly, however, as some think, a more
recondite and mysterious view is set before us,
namely, that the two companions had been cap-
tured and bound and brought down into this vale
of tears."

41. You see how he represents these
opinions as things which are held as a kind
of esoteric mystery by certain persons, of
whom, however, he is one, as we have
shewn over and over again : only, he uses
this figure of speech so that he may escape
the imputations attached to this mystic gnosis.
You see, he will tell us, how the matter
stands. You would never think of Jlttribut-
ing to me the opinion that all things are
eventually to be restored to one condition,
and to be made up again into one body. I
beg you not to impute this to me. If I say
that an opinion is another man's, let it be
another's ; if you afterwards find any opinion
written down v^^ithout any 'other' person
being thrown in, you will be right in ascrib-
ing it to me. What then.-* are we to lose
the fruit of all the trouble we have taken


> Eph. vi, 20.
' Col. iii, 21.


' I Cor. viii, 2.
* I Cor. xiii, 12.


* Rom. viii, 9.
« Philem. 23.


further back on this point .^ Such is the
power of effi-ontery. However, let it be as
he chooses ; I put aside the truth of the
matter and accept his own terms; but he will
still be convicted. I will refer on the matter
now in hand to the second book of these
Commentaries, at the passage ' " Giving dil-
igence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace. There is one body and one
spirit, even as ye were called in one hope of
your calling." After several remarks, he
proceeds :

"The question arises how there can be one hope
of our calling, when in the Father's house there are
many mansions : to which we reply that the king-
dom of heaven is the one hope of our calling, as
being the one house of our Father's but that in one
house there are many mansions or rooms. For
there is one glory of the sun, another of the moon,
another of the stars. But certainly it is possible
that there is a deeper meaning, namely, that in the
consummation of the world, all things are to be
restored to their primitive condition, and that then
we shall all be made one body, and formed anew into
the perfect man, and that thus the Saviour's Prayer
will be fulfilled in us, ^ ' Father, grant that, as thou
and I are one, so they also may be one in us.' "

42. I have given you one instance in
which he has expressed his own opinion
without any ambiguity on the universal
resurrection. I will give one more, and
with this bring to an end the first book of
my Apology. His statements, indeed, on
this point are innumerable. The one I select
is on the passage where it is written :
^ " From whom all the body, fitly framed and
knit together through that which every joint
supplieth according to the working in due
measure of each several part, maketh the
increase of the body unto the building up of
itself in love." He begins thus :

" In the end of all things, when we shall have
begun to know God face to face, and shall have
come to the measure of the age * of the ful-
ness of Christ, of whose fulness we all have
received,* so that Christ will not be in us in part
but wholly, and, leaving the rudiments of babes,
we shall have grown into the perfect man, of
whom the Prophet saj's, ® " Behold the man whose
name is the East," and whom John the Baptist
announces in the words : ' *' After me cometh a man
who has come to be* before me, for he was before
me " ; then by the concurrence in a common faith,
and in a common recognition of the Son of God,
whom now through the variety of men's minds we
cannot know and recognize with one and the same
faith, the whole body, which before had been
disintegrated and torn into many parts, will be
joined and fitted together, and brought into one;
so that there will be but one administration, and


1 Eph. iv, 3. » Eph. iv, 16.

'John xvii, 21 slightly altered.

* Eph. iv, 13. The Greek word means either age or stature.

fijohni, 16. 6 Zech. vi, 12. The Branch, Eng. Ver.

' John i, 30. * Ante me /actus est.


458


RUFINUS.


one and the same operation, and an absolute
perfection of the one age,' whereby the whole
body will grow equally, and all its members accord-
ing to their measure will receive an increase of age.
But this whole process of up-building, by which
the body of the church is increased in all its mem-
bers, will be completed by mutual love. We can
understand the whole mass of rational creatures by
the example of a single rational animal ; and
whatever we say of the single creature, we maybe
sure will be applicable to every creature. Let us
imagine this creature, then, to have had all its
limbs, veins and flesh so torn apart that neither
bone should cleave to bone nor muscle be
joined to muscle, that the eyes lie in one place
apart, the nose in another, that the hands are
placed here and the feet thrown out there, and the
rest of the members are in a similar way dispersed
and divided. Then let us suppose that a physician
arrives on the spot, of such skill as to be able to
imitate the acts of yEsculapius, as told in the
stories ot the heathen, and to raise up a new form,
the new man Virbius.'' It will be necessary for
him to restore each member to its own place, to
couple joint to joint, and to replace the various
parts and glue them together, so as to make
the body one again. So far this single compari-
son has carried us. But now let us take another
typical case, so as, by a similar illustration to make
clear that which we wish to have understood. A
child is growing up; moment by moment, though
the process is hidden from us, he is tending to
perfect maturity. His hands enlarge, his feet
undergo a proportional increase; the belly, though
we cannot see it, is filled, the shoulders widen
unmarked by the eyes, and all the members in
each part grow according to their measure, but in
such a way that they evidently increase not for
themselves but for the body. So will it be in the
time ot the restitution of all things, when the true
physician Jesus Christ, shall come to restore to
health the whole body of the church which is now
dispersed and torn. Every one, according to the
measure of his faith and his recognition of the
Son of God (it is called recognition because he
first knew him and afterwards ceased from knowing
him), will receive his proper place, and will begin
to be what he once had been : not that, according
to another opinion which is a heresy,^ all will be
placed in one condition,'' that is, all restored to the
condition of Angels, but that every member will
be perfected according to its measure and office :
for instance, that the apostate angel will begin to
be that which he was originally made, and man
who had been cast out of the garden of Eden will
be brought back to cultivate the garden again.
But all these things will be so constituted that
they will be joined to one another by mutual love,
each member rejoicing with its fellow and being
gladdened by its advancement; and so the church
of the first born, the body of Christ, will dwell in
the heavenly Jerusalem which the Apostle in
another place calls the mother of the Saints."

43. These things which you have said
are read by all who know Latin, and you

• Or stature, see above.

> Formerly Hippolytus. See the stnry in Ovid, Mot. xv, 544.

3 Or, " accordiiif^ to another heresy '" — Jiixta aliam h<xre-
^im. Sec Jcr. Apnl. i, 27.

■< Lit. age. The word may come either from taking the
wrong meaning of the Greek word for Stature, or may be a
synonym for the word ,^on, which would here mean a range
or order of being.


yourself request them to read them : such
sayings, I mean as these : that all rational
creatures, as can be iinagined by taking a
single rational animal as an example, are to
be formed anew into one body, just as if the
members of a single man after being torn
apart should be formed anew by the art of
yEsculapius into the same solid body as
before : that there will be among them as
amongst the members of the body various
offices, which you specify, but that the body
will be one, that is, of one nature : this one
bod>' made up of all things you call the
original church, and to this you give the
name of the body of Christ ; and further you
say that one member of this church will be
the apostate angel, that is, of course, the
devil, who is to be formed anew into that
which he was first created : that man in the
same way, who is another of the members,
will be recalled to the culture of the garden
of Eden as its original husbandman. All
those things }ou say one after the other,
without bringing in the person of that
' other ' whom you usually introduce when
you speak of such matters cautiously, and
like one treading warily, so as to make men
think that you had some hesitation in decid-
ing matters so secret and abstruse. Origen
indeed, the man whose disciple you do not
deny that you are, and whose betrayer you
confess yourself to be, always did this, as
we see, in dealing with such matters. But
yoti, as if you were the angel speaking by
the mouth of Daniel or Christ by that of
Paul, give a curt and distinct opinion on
each point, and declare to the ears of mortals
all the secrets of the ages to come. Then
yoti speak thus to us: " O multitude of the
faithful, place no faith in any of the ancients.
If Oriijen had some thoucrhts about the more
secret facts of the divine purposes, let none of
you admit them. And similarly if one of the
Clements said any such things, whether he who
was a disciple of the apostle or he of the church
of Alexandria who was the master of Origen
himself; yes even if they were said by the
great Gregory of Pontus, a man of apostolic
virtues, or by tlie other Gregory, of Nazianzus,
and Didymus the seeing ' prophet, both of
them my teachers, than whom the world has
possessed none more deepl}' taught in the
faith of Christ. All these have erred as
Origen has erred ; but let them be forgiven,
for I too have erred at times, and I am now
behaving myself as a penitent, and ought to
be forgiven. But Origen, since he said the

1 Didymus, the blind teacher of Alexandria. Jerome who
admired him, though he was a disciple of Origen, delights in
falling him, in contrast to his blindness, the Seer,


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


459


same things which I have said, shall receive
no forgiveness though he has done penance ;
nay, for saying the things which we all have
said, he alone shall be condemned. He it is
who has done all the mischief ; he who
betrayed to us the secret of all that we say or
write, of all which makes us seem to speak
learnedly, of all that was good in Greek but
which we have made bad in Latin. Of all
these let no man listen to a single one.
Accept those things alone which you find in
aiy Commentaries, and especially in those
on the Epistle to the Ephesians, in which I
have most painfully confuted the doctrines
of Origen. My researches have reached this
result, that you must believe and hold the
resurrection of the flesh in this sense that
men's bodies will be turned into spirits and
their wives into men ; and that before the
foundation of the world souls existed in
heaven, and thence, for reasons known to
God alone, were brought down into this
valley of tears, and were inserted into this
body of death ; that, in the end of the ages
the whole of nature, being reasonable, will
be fashioned again into one body as it was in
the beginning, that man will be recalled into
Paradise, and the apostate angel will be
exalted above Peter and Paul, since they,
being but men, must be placed in the lower
position of paradise, while he will be re-
stored to be that which he was originally
created ; and that all shall together make up
the Church of the first born in heaven, and,
while placed each in his separate office, shall
be equally members of Christ : but all of
them taken together will be the perfect body
of Christ. Hold then to these things, my
faithful and discreet disciples, and guard
them as my vmhesitating definitions of truth ;
but for the same doctrines pronounce your
condemnation upon Origen ; so you will do
well. Fai-e ye well."

44. You do all this, you know well enough,
laughing at us in your sleeve : and you pro-
fess penitence merely to deceive those to
whom you write. Even if your penitence
is sincere, as it should be, what is to become
of all those souls who for so many years
have been led astray by this poisonous doc-


trine as you call it which you then professed.
Besides, who will ever mend his ways on
account of your penitence, when that very
document, in which you are at once the
penitent, the accuser and the judge, sends
your readers back to those same doctrines as
those which they are to read and to hold.
Lastly, even if these things were not so, yet
you yourself, after your penitence, have
stopped up every avenue of forgiveness. You
say that Origen himself repented of these
doctrines, and that he sent a document to
that effect to Fabian who was at that time
Bishop of the city of Rome ; and yet after
this repentance of his, and after he has been
dead a hundred and fifty years, you drag
him into court and call for his condemnation.
How is it possible then that you should re-
ceive forgiveness, even though you repent,
since he who before was penitent for emitting
those doctrines gains no forgiveness? He
w^rote just as you have written : he repented
as you have repented. You ought there-
fore either both of you to be absolved for
your repentance, or, if you refuse forgiveness
to a penitent (which I do not desire to see
you insist upon), to be both of you equally
condemned. There is a parable of the Gos-
pel w^hich illustrates this. A woman taken
in adultery was brought before our Lord by
the Jews, so that they might see what judg-
ment he would pronounce according to the
law. He, the merciful and pitying Lord,
said: "He that is without sin among you
let him first cast a stone at her." And then,
it is said, they all departed. The Jews, im-
pious and unbelieving though they were, yet
blushed thi-ough their own consciousness of
guilt ; ' since they were sinners, they would
not appear publicly as executing vengeance
on sinners. And the robber upon the cross,
said to the other robber who was hanging
like him on a cross, and was blaspheming,
"Dost not thou fear God, seeing we are in
the same condemnation ? " But we condemn
in others the things of which we ourselves
are conscious ; yet we neither blush like the
Jews nor are softened like the robber.

1 John viii, 9.


460


RUFINUS.


RUFINUS* APOLOGY.


BOOK II.

1. Jerome says that the defenders of Origan are united in a federation of perjury.

2. Jerome's commentaries on Ephesians follow Origen's interpretation of the texts about a secret federation

to whom higher truths are to be told.

3. But I follow Christ in condemning all falsehood.

4. Jerome has not only allowed perjury but has practised it.

5. His treatise on Virginit)' (Ep. xxii to Eustochium) defames all orders of Christians.

6. In his anti-Ciceronian dream he promised never to read or possess heathen books.

7. Yet his works are filled with quotations from them.

8. In his " Best mode of Translation " he relies on the opinions of Cicero and Horace.

9. He confesses his obligations to Porphyry^

8 (2). Jerome at Bethlehem had heathen books copied and taught them to boys.

9 (2). He condemns as heathenish unobjectionable views which he himself holds.
10 (2). He spoke of Paula impiously as the mother-in-law of God.

11. Such impiety is unpardonable.

12. Jerome's boast of his teachers, Didymus and the Jew Baranina.

13. His extravagant praises of Origen.

14. Preface to Origen on Canticles.

15. Preface to Commentary on Micah.

16. Book of Hebrew Names.

17. A story of Origen.

18. Pamphilus the Martyr and his Library.

19. Jerome praises Origen but condemns others for doing the same.

20. Jerome praises the dogmatic as well as the expository works of OrigeOf

21. Contrast of Jerome's earlier and later attitude towards Origen.

22. The Book of Hebrew Questions.

23. Jerome's attack upon Ambrose.

24. Preface to Didymus on the Holy Spirit.

25. Jerome attacks one Christian writer after another.

26. His treatment of Melania.

27. I never followed Jerome's errors, for which he should do penance.
27 a. But I followed his method of translation.

28. Jerome in condemning me condemns himself.

29. He says I shew Origen to be heretical, yet condemns me.

30. His pretence that the Apology for Origen is not by Pamphilus needs no answer.

31. Others did not translate the Ilfpi 'Ap,t'"'i' because they did not know Greek.

32. Jerome's translation of the Scriptures impugned.

33. Authority of the LXX.

34. Has the Church had spurious Scriptures?

35. Danger of altering the Versions of Scripture.

36. Origen's Hexapla — Its object.

37. St. Paul's method of dealing with erring brethren.

38. How Jerome should have replied to Pammachius.

39. The Books against Jovinian.

40. My translation of the Tihpl 'Apx'''" was meant to aid in a good cause.

41. 42, 43. Recapitulation of the Apology.

44. An appeal to Pammachius.

45, 46. Why my translations of Origen had created offence, but Jerome's not.
47. A Synod, if called on to condemn Origen, must condemn Jerome also.


In the first book of my Apolo^jy I have dealt
with the accusations of doj^niatic error which
he endeavours unju.stly to fix upon others, and
have, by producing his own testimony,
turned them back against him. In the
second book, I shall be able, now that 1
have settled and put aside the matters which
have to do with controversies of faith, more
confidently to reply to him on the other
heads of his accusation. For there is another


and a very grave accusation, which has, like
the former, to be cut down by the scythe of
truth. It is this. He says ' that certain
persons have joined themselves to Ori<ren
in a secret society of peijury, and that
forms of initiation are to be found in
Sixth book of his Miscellanies : ^ and that

1 Letter Ixxxiv. 3 (end).

2 Stroniateis, meaninfr collections of short essnvs on im-
portant subjects, disconnected, nnd thrown out like things
scattered or strewn on the ground.


the
the


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


461


this mystery has been detected by no one
but himself through all this space of time.
I should only excite his ridicule were I to
declare, even with an oath, that I was an
entire stranger to such a secret society of
pei-jury. The road by which I propose to
reach the declaration of the truth is more
direct : it is by proving, which I can do
quite easily, that I have never possessed
those books nor borrowed them from others
to read. Not only cannot I defend myself
from an accusation the meaning of which I
do not know, but I do not see how a matter
can be made the subject of a charge against
me as to which I do not even know what
it is, or whether it exists at all. I only know
that my accuser declares that either Origen
wrote or his disciples hold, that, when the
Scripture says " He that speaketh truth with
his neighbour " the words apply to a neighbour
only in the sense of one of the initiated, a
member of this secret society : and again
that the Apostle's words " We speak wisdom
among them that are perfect" and the
words of Christ "Give not that which is
holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your pearls
before swine," imply that truth is not to be
communicated to all.

2. Let us see what my adversary himself
says on this point in those Commentaries
which he has selected. In the second book,
in commenting on the words '"Wherefore,
putting away lying, speak every man truth
to his neighbour, for we are members one
of another" (after a short introduction) he
speaks as follows :

" Hence Paul himself, who was one of the per-
fect, says in another Epistle " We speak wisdom
among them that are perfect." ^ This then is what
is commanded, that those mystic and secret things,
which are full of divine truth, should be spoken by
each man to his neighbour, so that day unto day
may utter speech and night to night shew knowl-
edge,^ that is, that a man should show all those
clear and lucid truths which he knows to those to
whom the words can be worthily addressed : " Ye
are the light of the world." * On the other hand,
he should exhibit everything involved in darkness
and wrapped up in the mist of symbols to others
who are themselves nothing but mist and darkness,
those of whom it is said " And there was darkness
under his feet,"* that is, of course, under the feet
of God. For on Mount Sinai Moses enters into
the whirlwind and the mist where God was ; and it is
written of God, " He has made darkness his secret
place." ^ Let each man then thus speak truth in a
mystery to his neighbour, and not give that which
is holy to dogs nor cast his pearls before swine; '
but those who are anointed with the oil of truth,
them let him lead into the bridechamber of the
spouse, into the inner sanctuary of the King."


1 Eph. IV,
» I Cor.
s Ps. xix, 3.


iv, 25.
. ii, 6.


* Matt. Vj 14.
8 Ps, xviii, 9.


" Ps. xviii, II.
» Matt, vii, 6.


Observe, I beg you, look carefully and
see whether in all this passage there is
any one else but himself on whom the
condemnation can fall. If his adver-
saries were looking for an opportunity
of convicting and destroying him on the
ground of what he has written, what
other course could they take, and what other
testimonies could they wish to produce
against him than these which he produces
against himself as if he were pleading
against another .'' If it were sought to pro-
nounce a condemnation against him, his own
letter would suffice. You have only to
change the name ; the test of the accusation
suits no one but himself alone. What he
calls on us on the one hand to condemn, he
exhorts us on the other hand to follow :
what he asserts, that he reproves : what he
hates, that he does. How happy must be his
disciples who obey and imitate him !

3. He has endeavoured, indeed, to brand
us with the stain of this false teaching by
speaking to some of our brethren, and he
repeats this by various letters, according to
his recognized plan of action. It is nothing
to me what he may write or assert, but,
since he raises this question about a doctrine
of perjury, I will state my opinion upon it,
and then leave him to pass judgment upon
himself. It is this. Since our Lord and
Saviour says in the Gospels " It was said to
them of old time. Thou shalt not forswear
thyself, but shalt pay to the Lord thy vows,
but I say unto you, Swear not at all ; " ' I say
that every, one who teaches that for any
cause whatever we may swear falsely, is
alien from the faith of Christ and from the
unity of the catholic church.

4. But I shoidd like, now that I have
satisfied you on my own account, and sup-
ported my opinion by an anathema, to make
this plain to you further, that he himself
declares that in certain orgies and mystical
societies to which he belongs perjury is
practised by the votaries and associates.
That is a certain and most true saying of our
God, " By their fruits ye shall know them," ^
and this also "A tree is known by its
fruits." ^ Well : he says that I have ac-
cepted this doctrine of peijury. If then I
have been trained to this practice, and this
evil tree has indeed its roots within me, it is
impossible but that corresponding fruits
should have grown npon me, and also that
I should have gathered some society of
mystic associates around me. As regards
myself whom alone he seeks to injure by all

1 Matt. V, 33, 34. * Matt, vii, 16-20. » Luke vi, 44.


462


RUFINUS.


that he writes, I will not bear witness to
myself, nor will I say that there are cases of
necessity in which it is right to swear : for
I wish to avoid reproach through timidity if
not through prudence ; and, at all events, if
I fail in obedience to the command, I will
acknowledge my error. I will therefore
make no boast of this. But, whether I have
erred or acted prudently, he at all events can
lay his finger on no act of mine by wdiich he
can convict me. But I can shew from his
writings, that he not only holds this doctrine
of perjury, but practises this foul vice as a
sacred duty. I will bring nothing against
him which has been trumped up by ill will,
as he does against me ; but I will produce
him and his writings as witnesses against him-
self, so that it may be made clear that it is not
his enemies who accuse but he who convicts
himself.

5. When he was living at Rome he
w^rote ' a treatise on the preservation of vir-
ginity, wdiich all the pagans and enemies of
God, all apostates and persecutors, and who-
ever else hate the Christian name, vied with
one another in copying out, because of the
infamous charges and foul reproaches which
it contained against all orders and degrees
among us, against all who profess and call
themselves Christians, in a word, against the
universal church ; and also because this man
declared that the crimes imputed to us by
the Gentiles, which were before supposed
to be false were really true, and indeed that
much worse things were done by our people
than those laid to their charge. First, he
defames the virgins themselves of whose
virtue he professed to be writing, speaking
of them in these words : ^

" Some of them change their dress and wear the
costume of men, and are ashamed of the sex in
which they were born; they cut their hair short,
and raise their heads with the shameless stare of
eunuchs. There are some who put on CiHcian
jackets,^ and with hoods made up into shape,
make themselves like horned owls and night birds,
as if they were becoming babies again."

There are a thousand such calumnies, and
worse than these, in the book. He docs not
even spare widows, for he says of them,^
" They care for nothing but the belly and
what is next it ; " and he adds many other
obscene remarks of this kind. As to the
whole race of Solitaries, it would take too
long to give the passages written by him in
which he attacks them with the foulest abuse.

1 See letter xxii. to Eustochium. In it Jerome pointed out
the worldlincss of professing Christians, and the inconsistcn-
cies and hypocrisies of many of the clergy and monks.

2 Letter xxii. c. 27 (end).

3 Of goats' hair, used by soldiers and sailors.
* Letter xxii. c. 29 (middle).


It would be a shame even to recount the in-
decent attacks w^hich he makes upon the
Presbyters and the deacons. I will, how-
ever, give the beginning of this violent invec-
tive, by which you may easily imagine what
a point he reaches in its later stages.'

"There are some," he says, "of my own order,
who only seek the office of Presbyter or deacon so
that they may have more license to visit women.
They care for nothing but to be well dressed, to be
well scented, to pre\ent their feet from being loose
and bulging. Their curly hair bears the mark of
the crisping iron; their fingers sparkle with rings;
and they walk on tiptoe, for fear a fleck of mud
from the road should touch their feet. When you
see them, you would take them for bridegrooms
rather than clerics."

He then goes on to hurl his reproaches
against our priests and ministers, specifying
their faults, or rather their crimes; and to
represent the access allowed them to married
ladies not only in a disgraceful light, but so
as to seem positively execrable : and after
having cut to pieces with his satirical defa-
mation the whole race of Christians, he does
not even spare himself, as you shall presently
hear,

6. For I will now return, after a sort of
digression, to the point I had proposed, and
for the sake of which it was necessary to
mention this treatise. I will shew that per-
jury is looked upon by him as lawful, to such
a point that he does not care for its being de-
tected in his writings. In this same treatise
he admonishes the reader that it is wrong to
study secular literature, and says," "What
has Horace to do with the Psaltery, or Vir-
gil with the Gospels, or Cicero with St.
Paul ? Will not your brother be oflended if
he sees you sitting at meat in that idol's tem-
ple.'"' And then, after more of the same
kind, in which he declares that a Christian
must have nothing to do with the study of
secular literatm-e, he gives an account of a
revelation divinely made to him and filled
with fearful threatenings upon the subject.
He reports that, after he had renoimced the
world, and had turned to God, he neverthe-
less was held in a tight grip by his love of
secular books, and found it hard to put
away his longing for them.^

Suddenly I was caught up in the spirit and
dragged before the judgment seat of the Judge;
and here the light was so bright, and those who
stood around were so radiant, that I cast myself
upon the ground and did not dare to look up.
Asked who and what I was I replied ' I am a
Christian.' But He who presided said: 'Thou
liest ; thou art a follower of Cicero and not of Christ.
For where thy treasure is there will thy heart be


» Id. c. 2S.


» Id. 29 (end).


» Id. 30,


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


■463


also.' Instantly I became dumb, and amid the
strokes of the lash — for He had ordered me to be
scourged — I was tortured more severely still by
the fire of conscience, considering with myself
that verse ' In the grave, who shall give thee
thanks?' Yet for all that I began to cry and to
bewail myself saying : ' Have mercy upon me, O
Lord; have mercy upon me.' Amid the sound of
the scourges this cry still made itself heard. At
last the bystanders, falling down before the knees
of Him who presided, pnayed that He would have
pity on my youth, and that He would give me space
to repent of my error. He might still, they urged,
inflict torture upon me, should I ever again read
the works of the Gentiles. Under the stress of that
awful moment I should have been ready to make
even still larger promises than these. Accordingly
I made oath and called upon His name, saying
' Lord, if ever again I possess worldly books, or if
ever again I read such, I have denied thee.' On
taking this oath, I was dismissed, and returned to
the upper world.

7. You observe how new and terrible a
form of oath this is which he describes. The
Lord Jesus Christ sits on the tribunal as
judge, the angels are assessors, and plead for
him ; and there, in the intervals of scourgings
and tortures, he swears that he will never
again have by him the works of heathen
authors nor read them. Now look back over
the work we are dealing with, and tell me
whether there is a single page of it in which
he does not again declare himself a Cicero-
nian, or in which he does not speak of ' our
Tully,' ' our Flaccus,' ' our Maro.' » As to

. Chrysippus and Aristides, Empedocles and
all the rest of the Greek writers, he scatters
their names around him like a vapour or
halo, so as to impress his readers with a
sense of his learning and literary attainments.
Amongst the rest, he boasts of having read
the books of Pythagoras. Many learned
men, indeed, declare these books to be non-
extant : but he, in order that he may illus-
trate every part of his vow about heathen au-
thors, declares that he has read even those
which do not exist in writing. In almost all
his works he sets out many more and longer
quotations from these whom he calls ' his
own ' than from the Prophets and Apostles
who are ours. Even in the works which he
addresses to girls and weak women, who de-
sire, as is right, only to be edified by teaching
out of our Scriptures, he weaves in illustra-
tions from 'his own' Flaccus and Tullius
and Maro.

8. Take the treatise which ^ he entitles
" On the best mode of translating," though
there is nothing in it except the addition of
the title which is of the best, for all is of the
worst ; and in which he proves those to be
heretics with whom he is now in commun-


1 Cicero, Horace and Virgil,


* Letter Ivii.


ion, thus incurring the condemnation of
our Apostle (not his, for those whom he
calls ' his' are Flaccus and Tully) who says,
" He who judges ' is condemned if he eat."
In that treatise, which tells us that no works
of any kind reasonably admit of a rendering
word for word (though he has come round
now to think such rendering reasonable)' he
inserts whole passages from a work of
Cicero.^ But had he not said, "What has
Horace to do with the Psalter, or Maro with
the Gospels, or Cicero vv^ith the Apostle.^
Will not your brother be offended if he sees
you sitting in that idol temple.^" Here of
course he brings himself in guilty of idola-
try ; for if reading causes offence, much
more does writing. But, since one who
turns to idolatry does not thereby become
wholly and completely a heatlien unless he
first denies Christ, he tells us that he said to
Christ, as he sat on the judgment seat with
his most exalted angel ministers around him,
" If I ever hereafter read or possess any
heathen books, I have denied thee," and now
he not only reads them and possesses them,
not only copies them and collates them, but
inserts them among the words of Scripture
itself, and in discourses intended for the edi-
fication of the Church. What I say is well
enough known to all who read his treatises,
and requires no proof. But it is just like a
man who is trying to save himself from such
a gulf of sacrilege and perjury, to make up
some excuse for himself, and to say, as he
does: "I do not now read them, I have a
tenacious memory, so that I can quote vari-
ous passages from different writers without
a break, and I now merely quote what I
learned in my youth." Well : if some one
were to ask me to prove that before the sun
rose this morning there was night over the
earth, or that at sunset the sun had been
shining all day, I should answer that, if a
man doubted about what all men knew, it
was his business to shew cause for his doubts,
not for me to shew cause for my certainty.
Still in this instance, where a man's soul is at
stake, and the crime of peijury and of im-
pious denial of Christ is alleged, a condem-
nation must not be thought to be a thing of
course, even though the facts are known and
understood by all men. We are not to imi-
tate him who condemns the accused before
they have undergone any examination ; and
not" only without a hearing, but without
summoning them to appear; and not only
unsummoned, but when they are already

1 Discerns it. Vulg. Rom. xiv, 23. He that doubteth A.V.

2 In the translation of the lUpi 'ApX'^" made by Jerome for
Pammachiiis and Oceanus, he rendered word for word.

8 Letter Ivii. 5. . •


464


RUFINUS.


dead ; and not only the dead, but those whom
he had always praised, till then; and not
only those whom he had praised, but whom
he had followed and had taken as his mas-
ters. We must fear the judgment of the
Lord, who says ' "Judge not and ye shall
not be judged," and again, " With what
measure ye mete it shall be measured to you
again." Therefore, though it is really super-
fluous, I will bring against him a single wit-
ness, but one who must prevail, and whom
he cannot challenge, that is, once more, him-
self and his own writings. All can attest
what I say in reference to this treatise of his ;
and my assertion about it seems to be super-
fluous ; but I must make use of some special
testimony, lest what I say should seem unsat-
isfactory to those who have not read his
works.

9. When he wrote his treatises against
Jovinian, and some one had raised objections
to them, he was informed of these objections
by Domnio, that old man whose memory
we all revere ; and in his answer to him ' he
said that it was impossible that a man like
him should be in the wrong, since his knowl-
edge extended to everything that could be
known: and he proceeded to enumerate
the various kinds of syllogisms, and the
whole art of learning and of writing (of
course supposing that the man who found
fault with him knew nothing about such
things) . He then goes on thus . ^

" It was foolish, it appears, in me to think that
I could not know all these things without the phil-
osophers, and to look upon tlie end of the stylus
which strikes out and corrects as better than the
end with which we write. It was useless for me,
it seems, to have translated * the Commentaries of
Alexander, and for my learned master to have
brought me into the knowledge of Logic through
the 'Introduction' of Porphyry; and, putting aside
humanistic teachers, there was no reason why I
should have had Gregory Nazianzen and Didymus
as my teachers in the Scriptures."

This, you observe, is the man who said to
Christ, I have denied thee if ever I am
found to possess or to read the works of the
heathen. He might, one would think, at
all events have left out Porfohyry, who was
Christ's special enemy, who endeavoured as
far as in him lay to completely subvert the
Christian religion, but whom he now glories
in having had as his instructor in his Intro-
duction to Logic. He cannot put in the
plea that he had learned these things at a
former time : for, before his conversion, he
and I equally were wholly ignorant of the


1 Matt, vii, I, 2.


Ep.I.


3Ep. 1. I.


* Verti. Possibly used like Versare for 'turning over
leaves/ ' making constant use of,'


the


Greek language and literature. All these
things came after his oath, after that solemn
engagement had been made. It is of no use
for us to argue in such a case. It will at
once be said to us : Man, you are wrong,
God is not mocked, and no syllogisms spun
out of the books of Alexander will avail with
him. I think, my brother, it was an ill-
omened event that you submitted to the In-
troduction of Porphyry. Into what has that
faithless man introduced you .'' If it is into
the place where he is now, that is the place
where there is weeping and gnashing of
teeth ; for there dwell the apostate and the
enemies of God ; and perhaps the peijurers
will go there too.

10. You chose a bad introducer. If you
will take my counsel, both you and I will by
preference tin"n to him who introduces us to
the Father and who said ' ' No man cometh
unto the Father but by me.' I lament for
you, my brother, if you believe this ; and if
yoti believe it not, I still lament that you
hunt through all sorts of ancient and anti-
quated documents for grounds for suspecting
other men of perjury, while perjury, lasting
and endless with all its inexplicable impiety,
remains upon your own lips. Might not
these words of the Apostle be rightly applied
to you : ^ " Thou that art called a Jew and
restest in the law, and makest thy boast in
God, being instructed out of the law, and
trustest that thou thyself art a leader of the
blind, a light of them that sit in darkness, an
instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes,
who hast a form of knowledge and of the
truth in the law : Thou therefore, that
teachest others, teachest thou not thyself.'*
Thou that sayest a man should not commit
adultery, dost thou commit adultery.^ Thou
that preachest that a man should not steal,
dost thou steal.'' Thou that abhorrest idols,
dost thou commit sacrilege" — that is per-
jury.'' And, what comes last and most im-
portant, " The name of God is blasphemed
among the Gentiles through you," and your
love of strife.

8 (2). We will pass on to clear up
another of the charges, if only he will con-
fess under the stress of his own consciousness
of wrong that he has been convicted both
of perjury and of making a false defence.
Otherwise, if he attempts to deny what I
say, I can produce as witnesses any number
of my brethren, who, while living in the
cells built by me on the Mount of Olives,
copied out for him most of the Dialogues
of Cicero. I often, as they wrote them out.


1 John xiv, 6.


* Rom. ii, 17-3^.


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


465


had in my hands quaternions' of these Dia-
logues ; and I looked them over myself, in rec-
ognition of the fact that he gave them much
larger pay than is usually given for writings
of other sorts. He himself also came to see
me at Jerusalem from Bethlehem, bringing
with him a book which contained a single
Dialogue of Cicero, and also one of Plato's
in Greek ; he will not pretend to deny hav-
ing given me that book, and having stayed
some time with me. But what is the use of
delaying so long over a matter which is
clearer than the light.'' To all that I have
said this addition is to be made, after which
all further comment is superfluous ; that after
he had settled in the monastery at Bethle-
hem, and indeed not so long ago, he took
the office of a teacher in grammar, and ex-
plained ' his own ' Maro and the comedians
and lyrical and historical writers to young
boys who had been entrusted to him that he
might teach them the fear of the Lord : so
that he actually became a teacher and pro-
fessor in the knowledge of those heathen
authors, as to whom he had sworn that if
he even read them he would have denied
Christ.

9 (3). But now let us look at the other
points which he blames. He says that the
doctrines in question are of heathen origin,
but in this judgment he condemns himself.
He calls these doctrines heathenish ; yet he
himself incorporates them into his w^orks.
He here makes a mistake. Still, we ought
to stretch out the hand to him, and not to
press him too far : for it is only because he
soars so completely above the world on the
wings of his eloquence, and is borne along
by the full tide of invective and vituperation
that he forgets himself and his reason loses
its place. Do not be so rash, my brother, as
to condemn yourself unnecessarily. Neither
you nor Origen are at once to be set down
among the heathen if, as you have yourself
said, you have written these things to vindicate
the justice of God, and to make answer to
those who say that everything is moved by
chance or by fiite : if, I say, it is from your
wish to show that God's providence which
governs all things is just that you have said
the causes of inequality have been acquired
by each soul through the passions and feel-
ings of the former life which it had in heaven ;
or even if you said that it is in accordance
with the character of the Trinity, which is
good and simple and unchangeable that every
creature should in the end of all things be
restored to the state in which it was first


1 ^iiaterniones rmy mean ' seta of four.* It seems more
likelv to Ul- UbCil for ;i ' Ciiliur ' of four sheets.


created ; and that this must be after long
pimishment equal to the length of all the
ages, which God inflicts on each creature in
the spirit not of one who is angry but of one
who corrects, since he is not one who is
extreme to mark iniquity ; and that, his de-
sign like a physician being to heal men, he
will place a term upon their punishment.
Whether in this you spoke truly, let God
judge ; anyhow such views seem to me to
contain little of impiety against God, and
nothing at all of heathenism, especially if
they were jDut forward with the desire and
intention of finding some means by which
the justice of God might be vindicated.

10 (3). I would not, therefore, have you
distress yourself overmuch about these
points, nor expose yourself needlessly either
to penance or to condemnation. But there
is a matter of real importance, as to which
I can neither excuse nor defend you ; namely,
a statement openly made by you which is
not only heathenish but beyond all heathen-
ism and impiety — the statement in the
treatise which I have inentioned above,'
that God has a mother-in-law. Has anything
so profane as this or so impious been said even
by any of the heathen poets? It would be a
foolish question to ask whether you find any-
thing of the kind in the holy Scriptures. I
only ask whether 'your' Flaccus or Maro,
whether Plautus or Terence, or even whether
any writer of Satires among all their unclean
and immodest sayings has ever uttered such
an outrage against God. No doubt you
were led astray by the fact that the girl to
whom you addressed the treatise ^ was called
the bride of Christ : and hence you thought
that her mother according to the flesh mis:ht
be called the mother-in-law of God. You
did not recollect that such things are said
not according to the order of the flesh, but
according to the grace of the spirit. For a
woman is called the bride of Christ because
the word of God is united in a kind of
mystic wedlock with the hvmian soul. But if
the mother of the girl in question is related to
Christ by this spiritual connexion, she herself
should be called the bride of Christ, not
the mother-in-law of God. As it is, you
might as well go on to call the father of the
girl God's fiither-in-law, and her sister his
sister-in-law, or to call the girl herself God's
daughter-in-law. The fact is, you were so
anxious to appear completely possessed of


1 Ep. xxii. c. 20.

2 The word "Z>(?/" has crept in, apparently, wrongly. If it
stands the meaninj^ would be, 'To whom you were teaching
the word of God,' or the allusion may be to Ps. xlv, 10, with
which the I^etter to Eustochiuni beg'ins, ' Hearken O
daughter so shall the King- desire thy beauty.'


VOL. III.


Hh


466


RUFINUS.


the eloquence of Plautus or of Cicero, that
you forgot that the Apostle speaks of the
whole church, parents and children, niotiiers
and tlaughters, brothers and sisters, all to-
gether, as one virgin or I)ride, when he says,
' '' I determined this very thing, to present you
as a chaste virgin to one man, which is
Christ." But you boast that you follow not
Paul's but Porphyry's Introduction, and,
since he wrote his impious and sacrilegious
books against Christ and against God, you
have fallen, tlirough his introduction, into
this abyss of blasphemy.

11. If, then, you really intend to do an act
of repentance for those evil speeches of
yours, if you are not merely mocking us by
saying this, and if you are not in your heart
such a lover of strife and contention that you
are willing even to defame yourself on this
sole condition that you may be able thereby
to besmirch another; if it is not in pretence
but in good faith that you repent of what
you have said amiss, come and do penance
for this great and foul blasphemy; for it is
indeed blasphemy against God. For if a
man oversteps the mark by speaking errone-
ously of mere creatures, this is not such a
very execrable crime, especially if he does
it, as you say, not with a set purpose of
blasphemy, but in seeking to vindicate the
justice of God. But to lift up your mouth
against the heaven is a grave oftence ; to
speak violence and blasphemy against the
Most High is worthy of death. Let us
bestow our lamentations upon that which is
hard to cure ; for what man is there who has
tlie jaundice,^ and is in danger both of looks
and life, who will complain loudly because
of a little hangnail on his foot or because a
scratch made with his own finger wdiich
easily yields to remedies, is not yet cured?

12. I think very little, indeed, of one
reproach which he levels against me, and
think it hardly worthy of a reply ; that,
namely, in which, in recounting the various
teacliers whom he hired, as he says, from
the Jewish sj'nagogue, he says, in order to
give me a sharp prick, " I have not been my
own teacher, like some people," meaning
me of course, for he brings the whole
weight of his invective to bear against me
from beginning to end. Indeed, I wonder
that he should have chosen to make a point
of this, when he had a greater and easier
matter at hand by which to disparage me,
namely this, that, though 1 stayed long among
many eminent teachers, yet I have nothing to

' 2 Cor. xi, 2.

2 Morbus reifius ; used variously for jaunilicc and leprosy.
See Jcr. I^il'e ot'Hilarion, c. 3^.


show which is worthy of their teaching or their
training. He indeed, has not in his whole
life stayed more than thirty days at Alexan-
dria where Didymus lived ; yet almost all
through his l^ooks he boasts, at length and at
large, tliat he was the pupil of Didymus the
seer, that he had Didymus as his initiator,'
that is, his preceptor in the holy Scriptures ;
and the material for all tliis boasting was
acquired in a single month. But I, for the
sake of God's work, stayed six years, and
again after an intcr\al for two more, where
Didymus lived, of whom alone 30U boast,
and where others lived who were in no way
inferior to him, but whom you did not know
even by sight, Serapion and Menites, men
who are like brothers in life and character
and learning; and Paul the old man, who
had been the pupil of Peter tiie Martvr ;
and, to come to the teachers of the desert,
on whom I attended frequently and earnestly,
Macarius the disciple of Anthony, and the
other iSlacarius, and Isidore and Pambas, all
of them friends of God, who taught me those
things which they themselves were learning
from God. What material for boasting
should I have from all these men, if boast-
ing were seemly or expedient! But the
truth is, I blush even while I weave togetlicr
these past experiences, which I do with the
intention, not of showing you, as you put
it, that my masters did not do justice to my
talents, but, what I grieve over far more,
that my talents have not done justice to my
masters.

But it is foolish in me to enumerate these
holy Christian men. It is not of tliem that
he is thinking when he savs that he has not
like me been his own teacher. It is of
Barabbas " whom, unlike me, he took as
his teacher from the Synagogue, and of
Porphyry by whose introduction he and not
I had his introduction into Logic. Pardon
me for this that I ha\e preferred to be
thought of as an unskilled and unlearned
man rather tlian to be called the disciple of
Barabbas. For, when Christ and Barabbas
were oll'ered for our choice, I in my sim-
plicity made choice of Christ. You, it
appears, are willing to join your shouts with
those who say, '"Not this man but Barab-
bas." And I should like to knovv' what
Porphyry, that friend of yours who wrote
his blasphemous books against our religion,
taught you ? What good did you get from
either of those masters of whom you boast so
much, the one drawing his inspiration from

1 The word is <jivon in Greek, Ka6))y>;T)J?.
■-The luiino oi" Jerome's Jcwisli tcaclier of Hebrew, which
Rufiiius here (^icrverts, w;is ISaraninu, Letter l.\.\xiv. c. 3.
■' John -wiii, 40.


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


467


the idols which represent demons, the other,
as you tell us, from the Synagogue of Satan.
Nothing, as far as I see, but what they knew
themselves. From Porphyry you gained
the art of speaking evil of Christians, to
strike at those who live in virginity and
continence, at our deacons and presbyters,
and to defame in your published writings,
every order and degree of Christians. From
that other friend of yours, Barabbas, whom
you chose out of the synagogue rather than
Christ, you learned to hope for a resurrec-
tion not in power but in frailty, to love the
letter which kills and hate the spirit which
gives life, and other more secret things,
which, if occasion so require, shall after-
wards in due time be brought to light.

13. But why should I prolong this discus-
sion ? I shall take no notice of his re-
proaches and railings ; I shall make no
answer to his violent attacks, that daily task
of his, for which Porphyry sharpened his
pen. For I have chosen Jesus, not Barab-
bas, for my master, and he has taught me
to be silent when reviled. I will come to
the point where I will shew how much truth
there is in the excuses for himself and the
accusations against me which he has heaped
together. He says ' that it is only in two
short Prefaces that he ever was known to
have praised Origen ; and that his praise ex-
tended only to his work as an interpreter of
Scripture, in which nothing is said of doc-
trine or of the faith, and that in those pai'ts
of his works which he has himself translated
there is absolutely nothing advanced of the
kind which he now reproves in the interest of
the Synagogue rather than that of the edifi-
cation of Christians. It ought, one would
think, be enough to put him to silence, that
those very things which he set forth in his own
books he blames in those of others ; never-
theless, let us see how far these other asser-
tions of his are true. In the Preface ' to the
commentaries of Origen on Ezekiel, con-
tained in fourteen homilies or short orations,
he writes thus to one Vincentius :

" It is a great thing which you ask of me, my
friend, that I should translate Origen into Latin,
and present to the ears of Roinans a man of whom
we may say in the words of Didymus the seer, that
he was a teacher of the churches second only to
the Apostles."

And a little way on he adds :

" I will briefly state for your information that Ori-
gan's works on the whole of Scripture are of three


' Letter Ixxxiv, 2.

- See this Preface trniT^latcd amonp;' Jerome's works in this
Serici.


kinds. First come the Extracts or Notes, called in
Gi^eek Scholia^ in which he shortly and summarily
touches upon the things which seemed to him ob-
scure or to present some difliculty. The second
kind is the Hoiniletics, of which the present com-
mentary is a specimen. The third kind is what he
called Tomes, or as we say Volumes. In this part of
his work he gives all the sails of his genius to the
breathing winds; and, drawing off from the land,
he sails away into mid ocean. I know that you
wish that I should translate his writings of all
kinds. I have before mentioned the reason why
this is impossible; but I promise you this, that if,
through your prayers, Jesus gives me back my
health, I intend to translate, I will not sa^' all, for
that would be rash, but very many of them; on
this condition, however, which I have often set
you, that I should provide the words and you the
secretary."

14. Take, again, the Preface to the Song
of Songs :

"To the most holy Pope Damasus. Origen in
his other books has surpassed all other men: in
the Song of Songs he has surpassed himself The
work consists of eleven complete volumes, and
reaches a length of nearly twenty thousand lines.
In these he discusses first the version of the Sep-
tuagint; then those of Aquila, Symmachus, and
Theodotion, and last of all a Fifth Version which
he states that he discovered on the coast of Acti-
um, and this he does so grandly and so freely that
it seems to me as if the words were fulfilled in liim
which say, '"The king has brought tne into his
bedchamber." It would require a vast amount of
time, of labour, and of money to translate a work
so great and of so much merit into the Latin
language. I therefore leave it unattempted; and
have merely translated, and that without elegance,
but correctly, these two Tracts which he composed
in ordinary language for babes and sucklings. I
give you a mere taste of his opinions, not a full
meal ; but enough to make you realize what is the
worth of his greater works, when the smaller give
you so much pleasure."

15. Also in the Preface of his Commen-
tary on Micah, which was written to Paula
and Eustochium, he says, after some few re-
marks :

"As to what they say, that it is not right for me
to rifle the works of Origen, and thereby to defile
the writings of the ancients, they think this a tell-
ing piece of abuse; but it is, in my opinion, the
highest praise, since I am seeking to imitate those
who are approved not only by us, but by all
thoughtful men."

16. Again, in the Preface to his book on
the meaning of Hebrew names, he says,
some way down :

" For fear that, when the edifice has been com-
pleted, the last touch, so to speak, should be want-
ing, I have explained the words and names of the
New Testament, partly through a wish to follow
the steps of Origen, whom all but the ignorant


I Cant,


1,4.


il !i 2


468


RUFINUS.


acknowledge to have been the greatest teacher of
the churches next to the Apostles. Among the
rest of the illustrious monuments of his genius is
the labour which ho has bestowed upon this, de-
siring to complete as a Christian what Philo as a
Jew had left undone."

17. Once more, in his letter to Mavcella
he says : '

" Ambrose, who supplied the paper, the money
and the secretaries by the aid of which our Adaman-
tius*^ and Chalcenterus-^ completed his innumer-
able books, in a certain letter written to the same
person from Athens, declares that he never had a
meal, when Origen was present, without some-
thing being read, and that lie never went to bed
without having some brother read aloud from the
holy Scriptures. This he said he continued day
and night, so that prayer waited upon reading and
reading upon prayer."

iS. Lastly, take the following from an-
other letter to Murcella :

"The blessed Martyr Pamphilus, whose life
Eusebius the Bishop of Crcsarea set forth in some
three volumes, wished to rival Demetrius Phale-
reusand Pisistratus, in his zeal to establish a library
of sacred books : he sought out all through the
world representative works of great minds, which
are their true and everlasting monuments; but
most of all he acquired at great expense all the
books written by Origen, and gave them to the
church at Cicsarea. This library was afterwards
partly destroyed ; but Acatius and later on
Euzoius, Bishops of that church, endeavoured to
reestablish it in parchment volumes. The last of
these recovered a great many works, and left us an
inventory of them, but he shews that he could not
find the Commentary on the hundred and twenty-
sixth Psalm and the Tract on the Hebrew letter
Pe, by the fact that he does not mention it. Not
that so great a man as Adamantius passed over
anything, but that, through the negligence of his
successors it did not remain to times within our
memory."

19. But perhaps you will say to me:
" Why do you fill your paper with this
superfluous matter? Does even my friend
say tliat it is a crime to name Origen, or to
give him praise for liis talents.'' If Origen is
proclaimed as ' such and so great a man,'
this makes us the more anxious to be told
whether he is in other passages spoken of as
' an apostolic man,' or ' a teacher of the
churches,' or by any similar expressions
which appear to commend not only his
talents but his faith." This then shall be
done. It was indeed for this purpose that I
produced the passage where he speaks of
him as ' such and so great a man,' bccatise
it was, if I am not mistaken, in the Preface
this laudatory expression is used about him
that he also claims the right of Origen to be

' Letter xliii, 1. 2 Indomit:iMc or made of adamant.

' lnJLr;iLiL;.il)le; lit. Brazen. bcjwcUcd.


called an Apostle or a Prophet, and to be
praised even to the heavens. And in the
same way, if there are passages in whicli I
happen to have praised Origen's learning, all
my praise is just of this kind. This man
rouses all this alarm in you because of such
expressions of mine ; but he maintains that
it is unjust to bring up similar expressions
against him when they occur in his own
writings. But, since he does not choose to
stand on equal terms with us before the tri-
bunal of opinion, but condemns us on mere
suspicion, while he himself does not hold
himself bound even by his own handwriting ;
since he, I say, does not think it necessary
in such a matter to observe the rule of holy
Scripture which demands that each man
should be judged without respect of persons ;
I will make answer for myself, not accord-
ing to the demands of justice, but according
to his wishes. He says to me : " If you
have translated Origen, you are to be blamed ;
but I, even if I have said the very things for
which I blame him, have done well, and
these oujjht to be read and held as true. If
you have praised his talents or his knowledge,
you have committed a crime ; if I have
praised his talents, it goes for nothing."

30. Well then ; he says," Give me an in-
stance in which I have so praised him as to
defend his system of belief." You have no
right to ask this, I reply ; yet I will follow
where you lead. There is a certain writing
of his ' in which he gives a short catalogue of
the works which Varro wrote for the Latins,
and of those which Origen wrote in Greek
for the Christians. In this he says :

Antiquity marvels at Marcus Terentius Varro
because of the countless books which he wrote for
Latin readers; and Greek writers are extravagant
in their praise of their man of brass, because he
has written more works than one of us could so
much as copy. But since Latin ears would find a
list of Greek writers tiresome, I shall confine myself
to the Latin Varro. I shall try to shew that w^e of
to-day are sleeping the sleep of Epimenides and
devoting to the amassing of riches the energy
which our predecessors gave to sound if secular
learning.

Varro's writings include forty-five books of
antiquities, four concerning the life of the Roman
people.

But why, you ask me, have I thus mentioned
Varro and the man of brass.? Simply to bring to
your notice our Christian man of brass, or, rather,
man of adamant — Origen, I mean — whose zeal
for the study of Scripture has fairly earned for him
this latter name. Would you learn what monu-
ments of his genius he has left us.' The following
list cxhil)its them. His writings comprise thirteen
books on Genesis, two books of Mystical Homilies,
notes on E.\odus, notes on Leviticus . . . also


> Letter xxxiii.


f


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


469


single books, four books on First Principles, two
books on the Resurrection, two dialogues on the
same subject.

And, after enumenxting all his works as if
making an exact index, he added what
follows :

So you seethe labours of this one man have sur-
passed those of all previous writers both Greek and
Latin. Who has ever managed to read all that he
has written? Yet what reward have his exertions
brought him? He stands condemned bv his bishop,
Demetrius, only the bishops of Palestine, Arabia,
Phoenicia, and Achaia dissenting. Imperial Rome
consents to his condemnation, and even convenes
a senate to censure him, not — as the rabid hounds
who now pursue him cry — because of the novelty
or heterodoxy of his doctrines, but because men
could not tolerate the incomparable eloquence and
knowledge, which, when once he opened his lips,
made others seem dumb.

I have written the above quickly and incautiously,
by the light of a poor lantern. You will see why,
if you think of those who to-day represent Epi-
curus and Aristippus.

21. Now suppose that while yoti were
writing this, as you tell us you did, quickly
not cautiously, by the poor glimmering light
of a lantern, some Prophet had stood by you
and had cried out ; " O writer, suppress
those words, restrain your pen ; for the time
is coming and is not far oft' when you will
make a schism and separate yourself from
the church ; and, in order that you may find
a colorable excuse for this schism, you will
begin to defame these very books which you
now make out to be so admirable. You will
then say that the man whom you call your
own Brazen-heart,' and whose name yoti are
just about to write down as Adamantine
because of the merit of his praise-worthy
labours, did not write books for the edifica-
tion of the sotil but venomous heresies.
This man, further, whom you rightly de-
scribe as not having been condemned bv
Demetrius on the ground of his belief, who
you say was not accused of bringing in strange
doctrines, you will then pronounce worthy of
execration because of his strange doctrines ;
as to what you are writing about mad dogs
bringing feigned charges against him, you
will yourself feign the same: and the Senate
of Rome as you call it, you will then stir up
against him as you complain that they now
do by your letters of admonition, your
vehement attestations, and satellites flying in
all directions. This is the rettu-n that you
will make to your admirable Brazen-heart for
all his labours. Therefore beware how you
write now, for, if you write as you are doing
and afterwards act as I have said, you will


1 Chalcenterus as above.


with more justice be condemned by your own
judgment than he by that of others." Would
you, do you think, have given credit to that
prophet.-^ Would you not have thought it
more likely that he was mad than that you
would ever come to such a pass.'' The fact
is that in controversies of this kind there
is no thought of sparing a friend if only an
enemy can be injured. But you go beyond
even this point : you do not spare yourself in
your attempt to ruin not your enemies but
your friends.

33. In the Preface to his book on Hebrew
Qiiestions, after many other remarks, he
says :

" I say nothing of Origcn. His name (if I may
compare small things to great) is even more than
my own the object of ill will, because though fol-
lowing the common version in his Homilies which
were spoken to common people, yet in his Tomes,
that is, in his fuller discussion of Scripture, he
yields to the Hebrew as the truth, and though sur-
rounded by his own forces occasionally seeks the
foreign tongue as his ally. I will only say this about
him, that I should gladly have his knowledge of the
Scriptures even if accompanied with all the ill-will
which clings to his name, and that I do not care a
straw for these shades and spectral ghosts whose
nature is said to be to chatter in dark corners and
be a terror to babies."

I really can no longer wonder or complain
of his unfriendly dealings with me since he
has not spared ' such men, such great men.'
For another man whom he tears to pieces is
Ambrose that Bishop of sacred memory.
In what manner, and with what disparage-
ment he attacks him, I will show in a similar
way from one of his Prefaces, in which,
nevertheless, he praises Origen. It is the
Preface to Origen's homilies on Luke ad-
dressed to Paula and Eustochium.

A few days ago you told me that you had read
some commentaries on Matthew and Luke, of
which one was equally dull in perception and ex-
pression, the other frivolous in expression, sleepy
in sense. Accordingly, you requested me to trans-
late without such trifling, our Adamantius' 39 hom-
ilies on I/Uke, just as they are found in the original
Greek : I replied that it was an irksome task and a
mental torment to write, as Cicero phrases it, with
another man's heart, not one's own : but yet I will
undertake it as your requests reach no higher than
this. The demand which the sainted Blresia once
made at Rome, that I should translate into our
language his twenty-five volumes on Matthew, five
on Luke and thirty-two on John is beyond my
powers, my leisure and my energy. You see
what weight your influence and wishes have with
me. I have laid aside for a time my books on
Hebrew Questions to use my energies which your
judgment holds fruitful in translating these com-
mentaries which, good or bad, are his work, and
not mine : especially as I hear on the left of me
the raven — that ominous bird — croaking and
mocking in an extraordinary way at the colours of


470


RUFINUS.


all the other birds, because of his own utter black-
ness. And so, before he change his note, I con-
fess that these treatises are Origcn's recreation no
less tiuin dice arc a hoy's : very dillcrcntarc the seri-
ous jiursuits of his manhood and of his old age. If
my pro]>osal meet Avith your approbation, if I am
still able to undertake the task, and if the Lord
grant me opportunity to translate them into Latin,
so that I may complete the \vork I haye now de-
ferred, you will then be able to see, aye, and all who
speak Latin will learn througiiyou, the massof valu-
able knowledge of which they have hitherto been ig-
norant, but which they have now begun to acquire.
Besides this I have arranged to send you shortly
the commentaries on Matthew of that eloquent
man Ililarius, and of the blessed martyr Victori-
nus, which, dilferent as their style may be, one
spirit has enabled them to Avrite : these will give
you some idea of the study which our Latins also
have in former days bestowed upon the Holy
Scriptures.

33. You see by this what his opinions are
about Ori^'cn and also about Ambrose. If
he shouhl deny that his strictures apply to
Ambrose, which every one knows, he will
be convicted in the first place by the fact
that there is a Commentary of his on Luke
which is current among the Latins, and none
by any other hand. But secondly he knows
that I possess a letter of his in which, while
he discharges others, he makes his strictures
fall upon Ambrose. But, since that letter
contains certain more secret matters, I do
not wish to see it published before the right
time ; and therefore I will corroborate what
I say by other proofs similar to it. Li the
meantime let this be counted as demonstrated
by what I have said alcove, that he extols
Origen's writings as in every way admirable,
and declares that ' if he translates them, the
Roman tongue will then recognize what a
store of good it had hitherto been ignorant of
and now has begun to understand,' that is
the twenty six books on JMatlhevv, the five
on Luke, and the thirty two on John. These
are the books to which he gives the hicfhest
honour; and in these absolutely everything
is to be found which is contained in the
books on Uei>l 'Apx''-)'', the groundwork of his
charges against me, only set fortli with greater
brcadtli and fulness. If then he promises
that he will translate these, why does he con-
demn me for a similar course.'' But now I
have undertaken to prove how violently he
attacks a man who is worthy of all admira-
tion, Ambrose, Bishop of ISiilan, who was
not to that church alone but to all the
churches like a column or an impregnable
fortress. I will therefore set forth a Preface
of his by which you may see in what foul
and unworthy terms he assails even a man of
such eminence, and also how he praises
Didymus to the sky, though he has since


cast him down even to the infernal region ;
and fiu-ther how he speaks of the city of
Rome, which now through the grace of God is
reckoned by Christians as their capital, words
which were only applicable when its inhab-
itants were a nation who were heathens and
princes who were persecutors.

24. The Prefiice is that for the treatise of
Didymus on the Holy Spirit. It is addressed
to Taulinianus, and is as follows.

" While I was an inhabitant of Babylon, a settler
in the hind of the purple harlot, and lived under
the law of the Qiiirites, I attempted to write some
poor slulY about the Holy Spirit and dedicated tlie
work to the Pontiff of that city. When on a sudden
that pot which Jeremiah saw after the almond rod '
began to seethe from the face of the North ; and
the whole senate of the Pharisees raised a clamour
and no mere imaginary scribe but the whole faction
of the ignorant as if I had declared war against
them, laid their heads together against me. I
therefore returned with all speed to Jerusalem, like
a inan going back to his home, and, after having
lived in sight of the cottage of Romulus and the
Lupercal - with its naked games, I am now in
sight of Mary's inn and the Saviour's cave. And so,
Paulinianus my deaj- brother, since the aforenamed
Pontiff Damasus, who had impelled me to under-
take this work, now sleeps in the Lord, it is here
in Judea that I warble the song which I could not
sing in a strange land, provoked thereto by you
and by Paula and Eustocliium those handmaids of
Christ whom I revere, and aided by your prayers;
for this land which bore the Saviour is more
august to me than that which bore the man who
slew his brother.^ I have in the title ascribed the
work to its true authors for I preferred to be known
as the translator of another man's work than to
imitate certain people and, like the ungainly jack-
daw, deck myself in another bird's plumage. I
read some time ago the treatise of a certain person
on the Holy Spirit, and I recognized then, accord-
ing to the sentence of Terence,'' bad things in Latin
taken from good things in Greek. There is noth-
ing in it of close reasoning, nothing downright
and manly, such as draws us into assent even
against our will, but all is flaccid and soft, sleek
and pretty, picked out with the rarest colours. I5ut
Didynuis,'' my oAvn Didymus, who has the eves of
the bride in the Song of Songs, those eyes which
Jesus bade us lift up upon tlie whitening fields,
looks alar into the depths, and has once more given
us cause to call him, as is our wont, the Seer
Prophet. Whoever reads the work will recognize
the plagiarisms of the Latins, and will despise the
derivative streams, as soon as he begins to drink at
the fountain head. He is rude in speech, yet not
in knowledge;* his very style marks him as one
like the apostle as well by the grandeur of the sense
as by the simplicity of the words."

25. You observe how he treats Ambrose.

'Jcr. i, II, 13.

- Tlicsc ijamcs took place at Rome each Februaiv in luniour
of Liipcrcus the god of fertility. Two noble yoviths, after a
s;icriticc "f ;;oats and dogs, ran ahnost naktd about the city
with thongs cut I'roin the skins, a stroke from which was be.
lii'ved to impart fertility to women.

" Komulus, the founder of Uonic who slew his brother
Remus.

■• Kun. Prol. The sentiment, not the words, are quoted
above.

<> The blind teacher of Alexandria. « 2 Cor. .xi, 6.


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


471


First, he calls him a crow and says that he is
black all over ; then he calls him a jackdaw
who decks himself in other birds' showy
feathers; and then he rends him with his foul
abuse, and declares that there is nothing
manly in a man whom God has singled out
to be the glory of the churches of Chi'ist,
who has ' spoken of the testimonies of the
Loid even in the sight of persecuting kings
and has not been alarmed. The saintly Am-
brose wi'ote his book on the Holy Spirit not
in words only but with his own blood ; for
he offered his life-blood to his persecutors,
and shed it within himself, although God
preserved his life for future labours. Suppose
that he did follow some of the Greek writers
belonging to our Catholic body, and bor-
rowed something from their writings, it
should hardly have been the first thought in
your mind, (still less the object of such
zealous efforts as to make you set to work
to translate the work of Didvmus on
the Holy Spirit,) to blaze abroad what you
call his plagiarisms, which were very possi-
bly the result of a literary necessity when he
had to reply at once to some ravings of the
heretics. Is this the fairness of a Christian ?
Is it thus that we are to observe the injunc-
tion of the Apostle, ' " Do nothing through
faction or through vain glory " ? But I
might turn the tables on you and ask, ^ Thou
that sayest that a man should not steal, dost
thou steal.'' I might quote a fact I have
already mentioned, namely, that, a little be-
fore you wi'ote your commentary on Micah,
you had been accused of plagiarizing from
Origen. And you did not deny it, but said :
" What they bring against me in violent
abuse I accept as the highest praise ; for I
wish to imitate the man whom we and all
who are wise admire." Your plagiarisms
redound to your highest praise ; those of
others make them crows and jackdaws in
your estimation. If you act rightly in imi-
tating Origen whom you call second only to
the Apostles, why do you sharply attack an-
other for following Didymus, whom never-
theless you point to by name as a Prophet
and an apostolic man.'' For myself I must
not complain, since you abuse us all alike.
First you do not spare Ambrose, great and
highly esteemed as he was ; then the man of
whom you write that he was second only to
the Apostles, and that all the wise admire
him, and whom you have praised up to the
skies a thousand times over, not as you say
in two, but in innumerable places, this man
who was before an Apostle, you now turn


1 Ps. cxix, 46.


sPhil.ii, 3.


3 Rom. ii, 31.


round and make a heretic. Thirdly, this
very Didymus whom you designate the vSeer-
Prophet, who has the eye of the bride in the
Song of Songs, and whom you call accord-
ing to the meaning of his name ' an
Apostolic man, you now on the other hand
criminate as a perverse teacher, and separate
him off' with what you call your censor's rod,
into the communion of heretics. I do not
know whence you received this rod. I know
that Christ once gave the keys to Peter : but
what spirit it is who now dispenses these
censors' rods, it is for you to say. How-
ever, if you condemn all those I have men-
tioned with the same mouth with which
you once praised them, 1 who in compari-
son of them am but like a flea, must not
complain, I repeat, if now you tear me to
pieces, though once you praised me, and in
your Chronicle * equalled me to Florentius
and Bonosus for the nobleness, as you said,
of my life.

26. There is also an astonishing action of
his in relation to MeUuiia, which I must not
pass by in silence because of the shame
which those who hear it may feel. .She was
the granddaughter of the Consul Marcelli-
nus ; and in these very Chronicles ^ he had
narrated how she was the first lady of the
Roman nobility to visit Jerusalem ; how she
had left her son, then a little child, behind
her at Rome, and how the name of Thecla
was given her on account of her signal merit
and virtue. But afterwards, when he found
that some of his deeds were disapproved by
this lady through the stricter discipline of
her life, he erased her name from all the
copies of his work.

it has been necessary for me to bring to-
gether the large number of passages which I
have adduced from his works, so as to put
to the test the truth of his statement," that
it is only in two short prefaces that he has
made mention of Origen with praise, and
that not because of his faith but his talent ; that
he has praised in him the commentator not
the doctrinal teacher. I have actually brought
forward ten.

37. But there is danger of expanding my
treatise too far and becoming biuxlensome to
the reader ; it is sufficient that in the passages
I have cited he speaks of Origen as almost
an Apostle and a teacher of the churches, and
says that it is not because of his novel doc-
trines as the mad dogs pretend that the senate


1 Sensuum nomine. Thomas the Apostle is called Didymus.
John xi, 16.

^Seethecontinuation byjcrome of the Chronicle of Eusebius
(not included in this translation) A.D. 3S1 " Florentius,
Bonosus and Rufinus became known as distinguished monks."

3 Chronicle. A.D. 377. ^ Letter Ixxxiv. 3.


472


RUFINUS.


of R(^inc is excited against him; that he
follows him because he himself and all the
wise approve him ; and all the other testi-
monies, adduced from his prefaces which
are inserted above. But, however these
matters may stand, and whatever your re-
lations may be to these writers whether
ancient or modern, and whether you call
them Apostles or mere wantons,' Prophets or
perverse teachers, what is that to me? It is
for you to do penance for all your changes
of opinion, your violent words and the
wounds you ha\e inflicted on good men,
whether you have yet tlone so or not. As
for myself, what is the meaning of your say-
ing "If they have followed me when I
erred, let them follow me also in my amend-
ment?" Get thee behind me! Far be such
a thing from me. I never followed you or
any other man in your errors, luit in the
strength of Christ I will follow, not you nor
any other man, but the Catholic church.
But you, who have written all these things
who have followed those whom you knew
to be in error, you who, as I have shewn,
have written so unworthily of God, go }()u, I
say, and do penance, if at least you have an\
hope that your crime of blasphemy can be
pardoned.

27 a. I ask whether you can produce any-
thing which I have written, by which you
may convict me of having fallen into heresy
even in my youth, — anything of such a
character as the heresies of which, though you
will not confess it, you now stand convicted.
I said that I had followed or imitated you
in your system of translating, in that alone
and in nothing else. Yet you say that by
this I have done you all the injury which you
complain of. I followed you in such things as
I saw that you had done in the Homilies on the
Gospel according to Luke. Take the pas-
sage : " My soul doth magnify the Lord, and
my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour."
When you found that the Greek Commentary
had something relating to the vSon of God
which was not right, you passed it over;
whereas the words about the Spirit, which
as you may remember, are expressed in the
ordinary wav, you not only did not pass over
but added a few words of your own to make
the expression more clear. And so in the note
on the words, ■''" Behold, when the voice
of thy salutation came into my ears, the
babe leaped in my womb," you render :
"Because this was not the beginning of his
substance," and you add of your own the
words "and nature, " though both these and

1 Veneranos, belonging to Venus or love. It might mean
'beloved ones.' = I.iikc i, 44.


a thousand other things in your translations of
these homilies or those on Isaiah or Jeremiah,
but more particularly in those on Ezekiel,
}()U have now withdrawn. But, in certain
places where you found things relating to the
faith, that is the Trinity, expressed in a
strange manner, you left out \vords at your
discretion. This mode of translation we have
both of us observed, and if anyone finds fault
with it, it is you who ought to make answer,
since you made use of it before me. But now
the practice which you blame is undoid)tetlly
one for which you may yourself incur blame.
The practice of translating word for word
you formerly pronounced to be both foolish
and injurious. In this I followed you. You
can hardly mean that I am to repent of this
because you have now changed your opinion,
and say that you have translated the present
work with literal exactness. In previous
cases you took out what was uncdifying in
matters of faith, though you did so in such a
way as not to excise them wholly nor in all
cases. For instance, in the Homilies on
Isaiah, at the Vision of God ' Origen refers
the words to the Son and the Holy Spirit;
and so you have translated, adding, how-
ever, words of your own which would make
the passage have a more acceptable sense.
It stands thus: "Who are then these two
Seraphim? My Lord Jesus Christ and the
Holy Spirit : " but you add of your own,
"And do not think tliat there is any diiler-
encc in the nature of the Trinity, when the
functions indicated by the several persons are
preserved." The same thing I have done in
a great many cases, either cutting out words
or bending them into a sounder meaning.
For this }ou bid me do penance. I do not
think that you are of this opinion as regards
yourself. If then on this ground no penitence
is due from cither of us, what other things
are there of which you invite me to repent?
38. I repeat that there arc no writings of
mine in which there is any error to be cor-
rected. There are many of yours which, as
I have shewn, according to your present
opinion, ought to be wholly condemned.
You made an exception in favour of the
Commentaries on the Ephcsians, in which you
imagined that you had written more correctl}-.
But even you must have seen, as I have
shewn, how like they are all through to
Origen's views ; and, indeed, how they
contain something more extreme than the
views of which you demand the condemna-
tion. And, were it not that you had cut
yourself off from the power of repentance

1 Is. vi.


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


473


liy saying "Read over my Commentaries on
the Ep. to the Ephesians, and you will ac-
knowledge that I have opposed the doctrines
of Origcn ; " possibly you might wish to
turn round and do penance for those, and
in this case, as in the rest, to condemn your-
self. As far as I am concerned, I give you
full leave to repent of these also ; indeed,
the best thing that you can do is to do pen-
ance for all that you have said and also for
all that you are going to say; for it is certain
that all that you have ever written is to be
repented of. But if any one blame me for
having translated anything at all of Origen's,
then I sa}^ that I am the last of many who
have done the deed, and the blame, if any,
should begin with the first. But does any
one ever punish a deed the doing of which he
had not previously forbidden. We did what
was permissible. If there is to be a new law,
it holds good only for the future. But it
may be said that the works themselves ought
to be condemned and their author as well.
If that be so, what is to happen to the other
author who writes the same things, as I have
shewn most fully above.'' He must receive
a similar judgment. I do not ask for this
nor press for it, although he acts a hostile
part towards me. But I cannot but see that
he is heaping up such a judgment for him-
self by his rash condemnation of others.

29. But I must deal with you once more
by quoting your own words. You say of
me in that invective of yours ' that I have
by my translation shewn that Origen is a
heretic while I was a Catholic. The words
are: " That is to say, I am a Catholic, but
he whom I was translating is a heretic."
Yes you say it, I have read it. Well then, if,
as you tell us, the result of my whole work
is to show that I am a Catholic and Origen
a heretic, what more do you want? Is not
your whole object gained if Origen is proved
a heretic and I a Catholic.'' If you bear
witness that I have said this and have thus
given you satisfaction by the whole of my
work, what cause of accusation against me
remains.'' What purpose was served by that
Invective of yours against me.'' If I proved
Origen to be a heretic and myself a Catholic,
was I right or not.'' If I was, then why do
you subject to blame and accusation what
was rightly done? But, if it was not
right that Origen should be called a heretic,
why do you make a charge against me on
that head? What need was there for you to
translate in a worse sense what I had already
translated according to your principles,

1 Namely, Ep. Ixxxiv, c. 7.


though in a less elegant style? Especially
what need was there for you to play your
readers false, and, when they expected one
thing, for you to do another? They imagine
that you are acting in opposition to those
who defend Origen as Catholic ; but the
person whom you combat and accuse is the
man who you say has pronounced him a
heretic. Perhaps it was for this that you
invited me to do penance ; and I had misun-
derstood you. But even of this I must say
that I could not repent, if my repentance
implied that I thought all things which are
found in his works are catholic. Whether
what is uncatholic is his own or, as I think,
inserted by others, God only knows : at all
events these things, wdien brought to the
standard of the faith and of truth are wholly
rejected by me. What then is it that you
want me to say? That Origen is a heretic?
That is what you say that I have done, and
you blame it. That he is a catholic then?
Again you make this a ground of accusation
against me. Point out more clearly what
you mean ; possibly there is something
which you can find out that lies between the
two. This is all the wit that you have
gathered from the acuteness of Alexander
and Porphyry and Aristotle himself: This
is the issue of all the boasting which you
make of having from infancy to old age been
versed and trained in the schools of rhetoric
and philosophy, that you set forth with the
intention of pronouncing sentence on Origen
as a heretic, and in the very speech in which
you are delivering judgment turn uj^on the
man whom you are addi'essing and accuse
him because he also has shown Origen to be
a heretic. I beg all men to note that there
is in all this no care for the faith or for truth,
no earnest thought of religion and sound
judgment; there is nothing but the practised
lust of evil speaking and accusing the brethren
which works in his tongue, nothing but rivalry
with his fellow men in his heart, nothing
but malice and envy in his mind. So much
is this the case that, before any cause of ill
feeling existed, and I spoke of you with
praise as my brother and colleague, you nev-
ertheless were angry at my advances. For-
give me for not knowing that you were what
the Greeks call acatonomastos (aKarovofiaaroc) ^
one whom no one dares to address by name.
Still, I wonder that you should call upon
me to condemn what you complain of me
for branding as wrong.

30. It seems needless to make any answer
to that part of his indictment in which he
says that the works of the Martyr Pamphilus,
expressed as they are with so much faithful-


474


RUFINUS.


ness and piety, are either not to be con-
sidered genuine or if genuine, to be treated
with contempt. Is there any one to whose
authority he will bow? Is there any one
whom he will refrain from abusing? All
the old Greek writers of the church, accord-
ing to him, have erred. As to the Latins,
how he disparages them, how he attacks
them one by one, both those of the old and
those of modern times, any one who reads his
various work knows well. Now even the
Martyrs fail, to gain any respect from him.
"I do not believe," he says ''that this is
really the work of the Martyr." If such an
argument were admitted in the case of the
works of any writer, how can we prove
their genuineness in any particular case? If
I were to say, It is not true that books of
Miscellanies are Origen's as you maintain,
how can they be proved to be his? His
answer is, From their likeness to the rest.
But, just as, when a man wants to forge
some one's signature, he imitates his hand-
writing, so he who wishes to introduce his
own thoughts under another man's name,
is sure to imitate the style of him whose
name he has assumed. But, to pass over
for brevity's sake all that might with great
justice be said on this point, if you were
determined to be so bold as to question the
works of the Martyr, you ought to have
brought out publicly the actual statements
which seemed to you liable to question, and
then every reader could have seen what was
absurd in them and what was reasonable,
what was unsuitable to or against the svstem
of the Apostles ; and especially the great im-
piety, whatever it may have been, in expiation
of which you tell us that the Martyr shed
his blood. A man who read those actual
words would be able to say, not, as now, on
vour jutlgment but on his own, either that
the martyr had gone wrong, or that a treatise
which was so full of absurdity and unbelief
.ad been composed by some one else. But,
as it is, you know well that if the writings
which you impugn are read by any one, the
blame will be turned back upon him who
lias unjustly found fault ; and therefore you
Jo not cite the passages which you impugn,
but with that ' censor's rod' of yours, and by
your own arrogant authority, you make your
decrees in this style : '' Let this book be cast
out of the libraries, let that book be re-
tained ; and again, if today a book is ac-
cepted, tomorrow if any one but myself has
praised it, let it be cast out, and with it
the man who praised it. Let this one be
counted as Catholic, even though he seems
at times to have gone wrong ; let that man


have no pardon for his error, even though
he has said the same things as myself, and
let no man translate him nor read him, for
fear he should recognize my plagiarisms.
Tliis man indeed was a heretic, but he was
my master. And this other, though he is a
Jew, and of the Synagogue of Satan, and is
hired to sell words for gain, yet he is my
master who must be preferred to all others,
because it is among the Jews alone that the
truth of the Scriptures dwells." If the uni-
versal Church had with one voice conferred
on you this authority, and had demanded of
you that you should be the judge of each and
all, would it not have been your duty to
refuse to allow so heavy and perilous a bur-
den to be laid upon you ? But now w^e have
made such progress in the daily habit of
disparaging others that we no longer spare
even the martyrs. But let us suppose that
the work is not that of the martyr Pamphilus,
but of some other unknown member of the
church ; did he, whoever he may have been,
employ his own words, I ask, so that we are
called upon to defer to the merits of the
writer? No. He sets out quotations from
the works of Origen himself, and exhibits his
opinion upon each question not in the words
of the apologist but in those of the ac-
cused himself; and, just as in the present
treatise what I have quoted from your writ-
ings carried much more force than what I
have said myself, so also the defence of Ori-
gen lies not in the authority of his apolo-
gist, but in his own words. The question of
authorship is superfluous, when the defence
is so conducted as to dispense with the
author's aid.

31. But I must come to that head of his
inculpation of me which is most injurious
and full of ill-will ; nay, not of ill-will only
but of malice. He says : Which of all the
wise and holy men before us has dared to
attempt the translation of these books which
you have translated ? I myself, he adds,
though asked by many to do it, have always
refused. But the fact is, the excuse to be
made for those holy men is easy enough ; for
it by no means follows because a man of
Latin race is a holy and a wise man, that he
has an adequate knowledge of the Greek
language ; it is no slur upon his holiness that
he is wanting in the knowledge of a foreign
tongue. And further, if he has the knowledge
of the Greek language, it does not follow that
he has the wish to make translations. Even
if he has such a wish, we are not to find fault
with him for not translating more than a few
works, and for translating some rather than
others. Every man has power to do as he


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


475


likes in such matters according to his own
free will or according to the wish of any one
who asks him to make the translation. But
he brings forward the case of the saintly men
Hilary and Victorinus, the first of whom,
though well-known as a commentator, trans-
lated nothing, I believe, from the Greek ;
while the other himself tells us that he em-
ployed a learned presbyter named Heliodorus
to draw what he needed from the Greek
sources, while he himself merely gave them
their Latin form because he knew little or
nothing of Greek. There is therefore a very
good reason why these men should not have
made this translation. That you should have
acted in the same way is, I admit, a matter
for wonder. For what further audacity,
what larger amount of rashness, would have
been required to translate those books of
Origen, after you had put almost the whole
of their contents into your other works, and,
indeed, had already published in books bear-
ing your own name all that is said in those
which you now declare worthy of blame ?

32. Perhaps it was a greater piece of
audacity to alter the books of the divine
Scriptures which had been delivered to the
Churches of Christ by the Apostles to be a
complete record of their faith by making a
new translation under the influence of the
Jews. Which of these two things appears
to you to be the less legitimate? As to the
sayings of Origen, if we agree with them,
we agree with them as the sayings of a man ;
if we disagree, we can easily disregard them
as those of a mere man. But how are we to
regard those translations of yours which you
are now sending about everywhere, through
our churches and monasteries, through all our
cities and walled towns? are they to be
treated as human or divine ? And what are
we to do when we are told that the books
which bear the names of the Plebrew Prohp-
ets and lawgivers are to be had from you
in a truer form than that which was approved
by the Apostles? How, I ask, is this mis-
take to be set right, or rather, how is this
crime to be expiated? We hold it a thing
worthy of condemnation that a man should
have put forth some strange opinions in
the interpretation of the law of God ; but to
pervert the law itself and make it different
from that which the Apostles handed down
to us, — how many times over must this be
pronounced worthy of condemnation? To
the daring temerity of this act we may much
more justly apply your words : " Which of
all the wise and holy men who have gone
before you has dared to put his hand to that
work?" Which of them would have pre-


sumed thus to profane the book of God, and
the sacred words of the Holy Spirit? Who
but you would have laitl hands upon the
divine gift and the inheritance of the
Apostles ?

33. There has been from tlie first in the
churches of God, and especially in that of
Jerusalem, a plentiful supply of men who
being born Jews have become Christians ;
and their perfect acquaintance with both
languages and their sufficient knowledge of
the law is shewn by their administration of
the pontifical office. In all this abundance
of learned men, has there been one who has
dared to make havoc of the divine record
handed down to the Churches by the Apos-
tles and the deposit of the Holy Spirit? For
what can we call it but havoc, when some
parts of it ai'e transformed, and this is called
the correction of an error? For instance,
the whole of the history of Susanna, which
gave a lesson of chastity to the churches of
God, has by him been cut out, thrown aside
and dismissed. The hymn of the three
children, which is regularly sung on festivals
in the Church of God, he has wholly erased
from the place where it stood. But why
should I enumerate these cases one by one,
when their number cannot be estimated?
This, however, cannot be passed over. The
seventy translators, each in their separate
cells, produced a version couched in conso-
nant and identical words, under the inspira-
tion, as we cannot doubt, of the Holy Spirit;
and this version must certainly be of more
authority with us than a translation made by
a single man under the inspiration of Ba-
rabbas. But, putting this aside, I beg you to
listen, for example, to this as an instance of
what we mean. Peter was for twenty-four
years Bishop of the Church of Rome. We
cannot doubt that, amongst other things nec-
essary for the instruction of the church, he
himself delivered to them the treasury of the
sacred books, which, no doubt, had even then
begun to be read under his presidency and
teaching. What are we to say then? Did
Peter the Apostle of Christ deceive the church
and deliver to them books which were false
and contained nothing of truth? Are we to
believe that he knew that the Jews possessed
what was true, and yet determined that the
Christians should have what was false? But
perhaps the answer will be made that Peter
was illiterate, and that, though he knew that
the books of the Jews were truer than those
which existed in the church, yet he could not
translate them into Latin because of his
linguistic incapacity. What then ! Was
the tongue of fire given by the Holy Spirit


476


RUFINUS.


from heaven of no avail to him? Did not
the Apostles speak in all languages?

34. But let us grant that the Apostle
Peter was unable to do what our friend has
lately done. Was Paul illiterate? we ask;
He who was a Hebrew of the Hebrews,
touching the law a Pharisee, brought up at
the feet of Gamaliel? Could not he, when
he was at Rome, have supplied any defi
ciencies of Peter? Is it conceivable that they,
who prescribed to their disciples that they
should give attention to reading,' did not
give them correct and true reading ^ These
men who bid us not attend to Jewish fables
and genealogies, which minister questioning
rather than edification ; and who, again, bid
us beware of, and specially watch, those of
the circumcision ; is it conceivable that they
couUl not foresee through the Spirit that a
time would come, after nearly four hundred
years, when the church would find out that
the Apostles had not delivered to them the
truth of the old Testament, and would send
an embassy to those whom the apostles
spoke of as the circumcision, begging and
beseeching them to dole out to them some
small portion of the truth which was in their
possession : and that the Church would
through this embassy confess that she had
been for all those four hundred years in
error; that she had indeed been called by
the Apostles from among the Gentiles to be
the bride of Christ, but that they had not
decked her with a necklace of genuine
jewels ; that she had fondly thought that
they were precious stones, but now had
found out that those were not true gems
which the Apostles had put upon her, so
that she felt ashamed to go forth in ^Dublic
decked in false instead of true jewels, and
that she therefore begged that they would
send her Barabbas, even him whom she had
once rejected to be married to Christ, so
that in conjunction with one man chosen
from among her own people, he might
restore to lier the true ornaments with which
the Apostles had failed to furnish her.

35. What wonder is there then that he
should tear me to pieces, being as I am of no
account ; or that he should wound Ambrose,
or find fault with Hilary, Lactantius and
Didymus? I must not greatly grieve over
any injury of my own in the fact that he has
attempted to do my work of translating over
again, when he is only treating mc with the
same contempt with which he has treated
the Seventy translators. But this emenda-
tion of the Seventy, what are we to think of
it? Is it not evident how greatly the

I Tim. iv, 13.


grounds for the heathens' unbelief have been
increased by this proceeding? For they
take notice of what is going on amongst us.
They know that our law has been amended,
or at least changed ; and do you suppose
tliey do not say among themselves, "These
people are wandering at random, they have
no fixed truth among them, for you see how
they make amendments and corrections in
their laws whenever they please, " and in-
deed it is evident that there must have been
previous error where amendment has super-
vened, and that things which undergo change
at the hand of man cannot possibly be divine.
This has been the present which you have
made us wTth your excess of wisdom, that
we are all judged even by the heathen as
lacking in wisdom. I reject the wisdom
which Peter and Paul did not teach. I will
have nothing to do with a truth which the
jVpostles have not approved. These are
your own words : ^ '"The ears of simple
men among the Latins ought not after four
hundred years to be molested by the sound
of new doctrines." Now you are yourself
saying: " Every one has been under a mis-
take who thought that Susanna had afforded
an example of chastity to both the married
and the unmarried. It is not true. And
every one who thought that the boy Daniel
was filled with the Holy Spirit and convicted
the adulterous old men, was inider a mis-
take. That also was not true. And every
congregation throughout the universe,
Avhether of those who are in the body or of
those who have departed to be with the
Lord, even though they were holy martyrs
or confessors, all who have sung the Hymn
of the three children have been in error, and
have sung what is false. Now therefore
after four hundred years the truth of the law
comes forth for us ,- it has been bought with
money from the Synagogue. When the
world has grown old and all things are
hastening to their end, let us change the in-
scriptions upon the tombs of the ancients, so
that it may be known by those who had
read the story otherwise, that it was not a
gourd" but an ivy plant under whose shade
Jonah rested^ and that, when our legislator
pleases, it will no longer be the shade of
ivy but of some other plant.

36. But Origen also, you will tell us, in
composing his work called the Hexapla,
adopted the asterisks,'^ taking them from the

1 Jer. Letter Ixxxiv. c. S.

2 This chani;;e of the f^foiircl for tlio ivy forms tlic ground-
work of ;i curious story toUl liy Augustine, to which no doubt
Kufnuis licre alludes'. See K]). civ, i; of the collection of
Jerome's letters. Augustin Letter Ixxl.

3 The asterisks denoted that the words to which thoy were
attached were added, and tlie obeli (t) that something had


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


477


translation of Theodotion. How is this?
You produce Origen sometimes for condem-
nation, sometimes for imitation, at your own
caprice. But can it be admitted as right
that you should bring in the same man as
your advocate whom just now you were
accusing? Can you take as an authority for
your actions one whom you yourself have
previously condemned, and to the condem-
nation of whom you stirred up the Roman
senate? You ought to have made provision
for this beforehand. No man begins by
cutting the trunk of a tree wdien he is in-
tending to lean against it ; and no man first
impugns the faith of another and then in-
vokes his faith in his own defence. Whether
Origen did as you say or not, makes no
difference to you. If you wish that his case
should be a precedent for yours, read over
your judgment upon him, and see what you
have said. You used the expression : " This
is not clearing yourself but only seeking
abettors of your crime." Apply this to
yourself; your business is not to seek abet-
tors of your crime, but to find means of
justification for your conduct. However,
let us see whether anything of the kind was
done by Origen whom you make both plain-
tift'and defendant. I do not find a single pas-
sage which he translated from the Hebrew.
How then can your action and his be said to
be alike? What he did was this. He proved
that apostates and Jews had translated the
writings which the Jews specially read :
and, since it would frequently happen in the
course of discussion that they falsely asserted
that some things had been taken out and
others put in in our copies of the Scriptures,
Origen desired to shew to our people what
reading obtained among the Jews. He
therefore wrote out each of their versions in
separate pages or columns, and pointed out
by means of certain specified marks at the
head of each line what had been added or
subtracted by them ; and he merely put
these marks of his in the work of others,
not in his own ; so that we might understand
not what we ourselves but what the Jews
believed to have been either removed or in-
serted. This was no more than what is
done in the army when a list is made out
containing the names of the soldiers. If the
captain wishes to see how many of them
have survived after an action, he sends a
man to make inquiry ; and he makes his
own mark, a (e) (theta), for instance, as is
commonly done, against the name of each
soldier who has fallen, and puts some other

been subtracted. See Jerome's Preface to the Books of
Kings in this Series.


mark of his own to designate the survivors.
Do you suppose that he who makes one
mark against the name of a dead man and
another of his own against that of a survivor,
will be thought to have done anything which
causes the one to be dead and the other to be
alive? He has only, as is well understood,
marked the names of those who have been
killed by others, so as to call attention to the
fact. Just in the same way, Origen pointed
out by certain marks of his own, namelv,
the signs of asterisks and obeli,' which words
had been, so to speak, killed by other trans-
lators, and those which had been super-
fluously introduced. But he put in no single
word of his own, nor did he make it appear
that the certainty of our copies was in any
point shaken ; but those things which, as
the actual words run, seemed wanting in
plainness and clearness, he showed to be
full of the mysteries of a spiritual meaning.
What comfort then can the conduct of Ori-
gen give you in this matter, when your
work is shown to be quite unlike his, and
when all your labour is spent upon making
one letter kill the next, whereas his en-
deavour, on the contrary, is to vindicate the
Spirit which giveth life?

37. This action is yours, my brother,
yours alone. It is clear that no one in the
church has been your companion or confed-
erate in it, but only that Barabbas whom you
mention so frequently. What other spirit
than that of the Jews would dare to tamper
with the records of the church which have
been handed down from the Apostles? It is
they, my brother, you who were most dear
to me before you were taken captive by the
Jews, it is they who are hurrying you into
this abyss of evil. It is their doing that
those books of yours are put forth in which
you brand your Christian brethren, not spar-
ing even the martyrs, and heap up accusa-
tions speakable and unspeakable against
Christians of every degree, and mar our
peace, and cause a scandal to the church.
It is they who cause you to pass sentence
upon 3ourself and your own writings as upon
words which you once spoke as a Christian.
We all of us have become worthless in your
eyes, while they and their evil acts are all
your delight. If you had but listened to
Paul w^here he says in his Epistle : ^ " If any
brother be overtaken in a fault ye who are
spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of
meekness," you w^ould never have let your
passions swell up so as altogether to break
through the order of our spiritual discipline.


1 Stars and spits.


Gal. vi, I.


478


RUFINUS.


Suppose that I had written something which
was injurious to you; suppose that I had
done some injustice to you a man of the
highest eloquence, who were my brother
and my brother presbyter, whom also I had
pronounced worthy of Imit.ition in your
method of translation; even so, this was the
first complaint which you had received of
any injury on my part since friendship had
been restored between us, and that with
difficulty and much trouble. But suppose
that you had reason to be offended at the
fact that, in my translation of Origen, I
passed o\er some things which appeared to
me unedifving in point of doctrine — thougli
in this I only did what you liad done.
Possibly I was deserving of blame and
correction for this. You say that some of the
brethren sent letters to you demanding that
the faults of the translator should be pointed
out. What then did \ou do, you who are
a man of spiritual attainments? What a
model, what an example of conduct in such
matters is this which you have given ! You
not only blazen forth the shame of your
lirother's nakedness to those who are with-
out, but you yourself tear away the covering
of his nakedness. Suppose even that what
I did was not done as you had done it, sup-
pose that, through some access of drunken-
ness creeping imawares upon me, I had
laid bare my own shame as the Patriarch did ;
would it have been a curse which you would
have incurred if you had walked backward
and made your reply like a soft cloak to cover
my reproach, if the letter of the brother
who was wide-awake had veiled the brother
who lay exposed through his own drowsiness
in writing?

38. Put you will say, Tt was impossible
for me to reply otherwise than I did. The
letter which t received was such that, if I
had not replied and retranslated literally
the books which you had translated para-
phi-astically, I should myself liave been
thought to be a follower of Origen. I will
not at present say anything as to the
character of that letter, except that it bears
the name of a man of high rank, Pamma-
chius : but I ask, would there have been
anything uncourteous in such a reply as this:
" My brothers we ought not readily to judge
of other men's works. You remember what
you did when I had sent my books against
Jovinian to Rome,' and when some persons
understood them in a diflcrent sense from
that in which, if my memory serves me, I
had composed them. They were read by a


1 See Jerome's letter to Pammachius (Letter xlviii) describ.
ing his Iriend's renioiistranec, and deteiiding hiinselt.


great manj' people, and almost every one
was offended by them, you yourself, as was
believed, amongst them. Did you not on that
occasion withdraw from ch'culation the copies
which had been exposed to sale publicly in
the forum, and send them, not to some one
else, but to me, at the same time pohiting
out the grounds on which you thought so
many had been offended? And I. as you
remember, wrote an Apology in new terms,
so as to give a sounder meaning, as far as I
could, to expressions to which a diflcrent
sense had been attributed. Well, it is but
fair that as we would that men should do to us
so we shoidd do to them ; and therefore, as you
sent me back my books for correction, so do
now with these books : send them back to
their author, and hint to him what you think
blameable in them, so that, if in anything
he has gone wrong, he may correct it.
Besides, though I have exercised my talents
on many subjects, and laboured out many
works, this is almost the first work which he
has attempted, and possibly even this he
has done under compulsion, so that it is not
strange if he has not gone quite straight at
first. We should not seize upon opportu-
nities for disparaging men who are
Christians, but seek their advantage by cor-
recting what they have done w^'ong."

39. If yourreply to him had been couched
in terms like these, would you not have
ministered grace and edification both to him,
since he has been initiated into the fear of
God, and to all your other readers, whereas
these invectives of yours are the cause of
sadness and confusion to all who fear God,
since they see you a prey to this hideous
lust of detraction, and me driven to the
wretched necessity of recrimination. But, as
I have said, this evidence was unnecessary.
You yourself in the books you published
against Jovinian, at one time assert, as can
be shewn, the same things which you blamed
in him, while at another you fall into the
opposite extreme, and declare marriage to
be so disgraceful a state that its stain cannot
even be washed away by the blood of
martyrdom. But, if it appeared to you an
easy thing for your friend to procure what
amounts to a correction of the clogma of the
Manichajansas it was originally expressed in
these books, and that when they were already
published and placed in the hands of many
persons to copy, what difficulty would there
have been in my correcting a work which
was not my own but a translation of that of
another man, if any mistakes coultl be
pointeil out in it, I will not say by reason,
but even by envy? especially when it was


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


479


still in rough sheets, which I had not read
over agahi or corrected, and which were not
pubHshed when your friends took possession
of them. Was it an impossibihty to get
these writings corrected which were then in
an uncorrected state.? But the sting does
not proceed from that quarter; he would
have found nothhig to blame there It
proceeds wholly from the fact that he was
afraid that it might come to lioht what is the
source of all that he says, and whence he gains
the reputation of a learned man and a great
expounder of the Scriptures.

40. I explained the reasons which in-
duced me to make the translation so that it
should be seen that I acted, not in the spirit
of contention and rivalry, in which he so often
acts, but from the necessity which I have
explained above ; and I did it as an aid to a
good and useful undertaking.' I hoped that
it might impart something both of lucidity
and of brightness to one who, though with
little culture, was composing a serious work.
Do we not know cases in which old houses
have been of use in the construction of new
ones? Sometimes a stone is taken from the
parts of an old house which are remote and
concealed, to decorate the portal of the new
house and adorn its entrance. And at times
an edihce of modern architecture is supported
by the strength of a single ancient beam.
Arc we then to place ourselves in opposi-
tion to those who rightly use what is old in
building up what is new.? Are we to say,
You are not allowed to transfer the materials
of the old house to the new, unless you
join each beam to its beam, each stone to its
stone, unless you make a portico of what
was a portico befoi'e, a chamber of what was
a chamber ; and this must further involve
building up the most secret recesses from
what were such before, and the sewers from
the former sewers : for every large house must
have such places. This is the process of
translating word for word, which in former
days you esteemed inadmissible, but which
you now approve. But you claim that what
is in itself unlawful is lawful for you, while
for us even what is lawful you impute as a
crime. You think it right that you should
be praised for changing the words of the
Sacred Books and Divine volumes ; but if
we, when we imitate you in translating a
human work, pass over anything which
seems to us not to be edifying, we are to
have no pardon for this at your hands, though
you yourself set us the example.

41. However, let him act in these mat-


1 That is, the work which Macarius was writing upon Fate,
as explained in this Apology i. 11.


ters as he hhnself thinks lawful or expedient.
Let me recapitulate in the end of this book
what I have said in a scattered way in my
own defence. He had said of me that it
seemed as li 1 could not be a heretic witliout
him; I therefoie set fortli my belief and, in
respect of the resurrection of the dead I
proved that he rather than I was in error,
since he spoke of the resurrection body as
frail. I shewed also that he did away witli
the disthiction of sex in the other world,
saying that bodies would become souls women
men. I next revealed the causes which had
led to my translation — very proper causes in
my opinion ; I shewed that it was not be-
cause I was stimulated by contentiousness,
nor because I was desirous of glory, but
because I was incited by the fear of God,
that I imported a store of old Greek
material to be used m the new Latin con-
struction, that I furbished up the old armour
which had become enveloped in rust, not
with a view to excite a civil war but to repel
a hostile attack. I then introduced the chief
matter on which they have laid their forgers'
hands, the adulterous blasphemy against the
Son of God and the Holy Spirit, a thing
quite alien from me, but brought in by these
men in their wickedness as I shewed by
quotations.

42. I then took up one by one the points
in which he had blamed Origen, with the
intention of striking at me and discrediting
my work of translation. I shewed from
those very Commentaries of his from which
he had said that we might expect to learn
and test his belief, that on three points,
namely the previous state of the soul, the
restitution of all things, and his views con-
cerning the devil and apostate angels, he has
himself written the same things which he
blames in Origen. I convicted him of hav-
ing said that the souls of men were held
bound in this body as in a prison; and I
proved that he had asserted in these very
Commentaries that the whole rational crea-
tion of angels and of human souls formed but
a single body. I next shewed that, as to an
association for perjury, there was no one who
had so much to do with it in its deepest
mysteries as himself; and in accordance witli
this I proved that the doctrine that truth and
the higher teaching ought not to be disclosed
to all men was taught by him in these same
Commentaries. I next took up the question of
secular literature, as to which he had made
this declaration to Christ as he sat on the
judgment seat and ordered him to be beaten :
" If ever I read or possess the books of the
heathen, I have denied Thee ; " and I shewed


48o


RUFINUS.


clearly that he not only reads and possesses
these books now, but that he supports all the
brairsrhicr of which his teaching' is full on his
knowledge of them ; so much so that he
boasts of having been introduced to the
knowledge of logic through the Introduction
of Porphyry the prince of unbelievers. And,
while he says that it is a doctrine of the
heathen, to speak in this or that manner
both about the soul and about other creat-
ures, I shewed that he had spoken of God
in a more degrading nianner tlian anv of the
heathen v/hcn he said that (jod had a
mother-in-law. But further, whereas he
had declared that he had only mentioned
Oi'igen in two short Prefaces, and then not
as a man of apostolic rank but merely as a
man of talent, I, though for brevity's sake
only bringing forward ten of his Pi^efaces,
established the fact that in each of them he
had spoken of him not only as an apostolic
man but as a teacher of the churches next
after the apostles, and as one whose teaching
was followed by himself and all wise men.

43. Moreover, I pointed out clearly that
it is habitual to him to disparage all good
men, and that, if he can find something to
blame in one man after another of those who
are highly esteemed and have gained a name
in literature, he thinks that he has added to
his own reputation. I shewed also how
shamefully some of Christ's ' j^riests have been
assailed by him ; and how he has spared
neither the monks nor the virgins, nor those
who live incontinency, whom he had praised
before ; how he has defamed in his lampoons
every order and degree of Christians ; how
shamefully and foully he assailed even
Ambrose, that saintly man, the memory of
whose illustrious life still lives in the hearts
of all men : how even Didymus, whom he
had formerly ranked among the seer-proph-
cts and Apostles, now he places among
those whose teaching diverges from that of
the churches; how he brands witli the
marks of ignorance or of folly every single
writer of ancient and of modern days ; and
fmally does not spare even the martvrs. All
these things I have brought to the proof of
his own works and his own testimony, not
to that of external witnesses. I have gone
through each particular, and have brought
out the evidence from those very books of his
which he most commends, books which alone
he excepted as containing nothing of which he
needed to repent, while he says that he repents
of all his other sayings and writmgs; not


1 Sacerdoies. This is almost always applied to Bishops.
Here the allusion is chictly to Jcniiuc's attack upon AmbrnsL-.
Sec Sect. 23-:?S.


that his repentance is sincere, but that he is
driven into such straits that he must choose
either to feign penitence or to forfeit the
vantacfe ground which enables him to bite
and wound any one whom he pleases. I
therefore preferretl not to touch liis other
writings, so that his conviction might come
out of those alone out of which he had him-
self closed the door of repentance. Last of
all I have shown that he has altered the
sacred books which the Apostles had com-
mitted to the churches as the trustworthy
dcjDosit of the Holy Spirit, and that he who
calls out about the audacity shewn in trans-
lating mere human works himself com-
mits the greater crime of subverting the
divine oracles.

44. It remains that every reader of this
book should give his sutfrage for one or the
other of us, judging as he desires that he
may himself be judged by God; and that he
should not injure his own soul by fiivoring
either party unjustlv. Also, my beloved son
Apronianus, go to "Pammachius, that saintly
man whose letter is put forward l)y our
friend in this Invective or Bill of Indictment
of his, and adjure him in Christ's name to in-
cline in his judgment to the cause of inno-
cence not that of party-spirit : it is tlie cause
of truth that is at stake, and religion not
party should be our guide. It is a precept
of our Lord ' to " judge not according to the
ajDpearance, but judge a righteous judgment,"
and, just as in each one of the least of his
brethren it is Christ who is thirsty and hungry,
who is clothed and fed ; so in these who are
unjustly judged it is He who is judged un-
righteously. When some are hated without
a cause, he will speak on their behalf and
say : "
cause

be formed of this cause and of his action in
it before the tribunal of Christ.'' He remem-
bers well no doubt how, when the men we
are speaking of had written and published
his books against Jovinian, and men were
already reading them and finding fault with
them, he withdrew them from the haiuls of
the readers, and stopped their remarks, ami
blamed them for their blame of his friend ;
and how, further, he sent the books back to
the author, with the suggestion that he should
either correct those passages which had been
found fault with, or in any way that he would
set matters right. But when what I hat!
written fell into his hands, — it was not then
a book but merely a number of imperfect,
uncorrected papers, which had been sub-


" " You have hated me without a
" What judgment does he think will


' .Tdhii vii, J4.


■John XV, 25.


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


481


tracted by fraud and theft by some scoun-
drel ; he did not bring it to me and complain
of it, though I was close at hand ; he did not
deign even to rebuke me or to convict me of
wrong through some friend, as it might have
been, or even some enemy; but sent my
papers to the East, and set to work the tongue
of that man who never yet knew how to
control it. Would it have been against the
precepts of our religion if he had met me
face to face? Did he think me so utterly un-
worthy of holding converse with him, that
it was not worth while even to argue with
me? Yet for us too Christ died, for our
salvation also He shed his blood. We are
sinners, I grant, but we belong to his flock
and are numbered among his sheep. Pam-
machius, however, must be held in honour
for his excellent deeds wrought through faith
in Christ, which should be an example to all
others ; for he has counted his rank as noth-
ing worth, and has made himself equal to
the humble; consequently, I was unwilling
to see him carried away by human partisan-
ship and contention, lest his faith should suf-
icr damage in any way. At all events we shall
see how far he preserves a right judgment
when he sees that that great master Jerome '
taught, in the commentaries which he selected
as satisfactory even after his repentance, the
very things which he condemns in others as
being alien to his own teaching. We shall
think that his former action was a mistake
due to Ignorance if he recognizes it and sets
it right. As for myself, though ^ under the
compulsion of necessity, I have endeavoured
to make answer to him who had attacked
me with such great bitterness, yet for this also
I ask for forgiveness if I have handled the
matter too sharply ; for God is my witness
how truly I can say that I have kept silence
on many more points than I have brought
forward. I could not wholly keep silence in
the presence of accusations which I know to
be undeserved, when I heard from many that
my silence would bring their own faith into
peril.

45. After this Apology had been written,
one of the brethren who came to us from you
at Rome and helped me in revising it, ob-
served that one point in my defence had
been passed over which he had heard ad-
versely dwelt upon by my detractors there.
The point turns upon a statement in my
Preface, where I said of him who is now my
persecutor and accuser that in the works of
Orisren which he translated there are found


1 The older editions do not contain the name.

2 Some copies read vist instead of nisi sumus : I seemed
to be compelled.

VOL. III. I i


certain grounds of ofTence in the Greek, but
that he has in his translation so cleared them
away that the Latin reader will find notliing
in them which is dissonant from our faitli.
On this sentence they remark: "You see
how he has praised his method of translation
and has borne his testimony that in the books
he has translated no grounds of oflence are
to be found, and promised that he would
himself follow the same method. Why then
is not his own translation free from grounds
of offence, as he bears witness is the case
with the writings of the other?

46. I suppose it is not to be wondered at
that I am always blamed for the points in
which I have praised him. It is quite right,
no doubt. But to come to the matter itself.
I said that when grounds of offence appeared
in the Greek he had cleared them away in
his Latin translation ; and not wrongly ; but
he had done this just in the same sense as I
have done it. For instance, in the Homilies
on Isaiah, he explains the two Seraphim as
meaning the Son and the Holy Ghost, and
he adds this of his own : " Let no one think
that there is a difference of nature in the
Trinity when the offices of the Persons are
distinguished"; and by this he thinks that
he has been able to remedy the grounds of
offence. I in a similar way occasionally re-
moved, altered or added a few words, in the
attempt to draw the meaning of the writer
into better accordance with the straight path
of the faith. What did I do in this which was
different or contrary to our friend's system?
what which was not identical with it? But
the difference lies in this, that I was judging
of his writings without ill-will or detraction,
and therefore saw in them not what misfht
lend itself to depi-eciation, but what the trans-
lator aimed at; whereas he is seeking for
occasions for calumniating others, and there-
fore finds fault with those things in my writ-
ings which he himself has formerly written.
And indeed he is right in blaming me, since
I have pronounced what he has said to be
right, whereas in his judgment it is reprehen-
sible. This holds in refei'ence to the doc-
trine he has expressed about the Trinity ;
namely, that the two Seraphim are the Son
and the Holy Ghost, from which especiallv
the charge of blasphem}^ is drawn, that is, if
he is to be judged according to the system
which he has adopted in dealing with me.
But according to the system which I have
adopted in judging of his writings, apart from
the matter of calumny, he is not to be held
guilty because of what he has added on his
own account to explain the author's mean-
ing.


482


JEROME.


47. As regards the resurrection of the
flesh, I think that my transhition contains the
same doctrines which are preached in the
churches. As to the other points which re-
late to the various orders of created beings,
1 have ah-eady said that they have nothing to
do with our faith in the Deity. But if he
appeals to these for the sake of calumniating
others, though they have hitherto presented
no ground of offence, I do not deny his right
to do so, if he thinks well to revoke my
judgment by which he might have been ab-
solved, and to enforce his own, by which he
ought to be condemned. It is not my judg-
ment on him which is blameable, but his
own, which takes others to task for doing
what he approves in himself. But this is
a new method of judgment according to
which I am defending my own accuser, and
he considers that he has at last gained the


victory over me when he has brought him-
self in guilty. But suppose that a Synod of
Bishops should accept the sentences you
have pronounced, and should demand that
all the books which contain the impugned
doctrines, together with their authors, should
be condemned ; then these books must be
condemned first as they stand in the Greek ;
and then what is condemned in Greek must
undoubtedly be condemned in the Latin.
Then v\'ill come the turn of your own books ;
they will be found to contain the same things,
even according to your own judgment. And
as it has been of no advantage to Origen that
you have praised him, so it will be of no
profit to you that I have pleaded in your
behalf. I shall then be bound to follow the
judgment of the Catholic Church whether
it is given against the books of Origen or
against yours.


JEROME'S APOLOGY FOR HIMSELF AGAINST THE

BOOKS OF RUFINUS.

Addressed to Pamfnachius and Marcella from Bethlehem^ A,D. 4.02.


BOOK I.

The documents which Jerome had before him when he wrote his Apology were (i) Rufinus' Translation of
Pamphilus' Apology wi'th the Preface prefixed to it and the book on the Falsification of the Books of Origen,
(2) the Translation of the Ilept 'Kpx'^^ ^nd Rufinus' Preface, (3) The Apology of Rufinus addressed to Anastasius
(see p. 430), and (4) Anastasius' letter to John of Jerusalem (p. 432 Apol. ii, 14, iii, 20). He had also other
letters of Anastasius like that addressed to the Bishop of Milan (Jerome Letter 95. See also Apol. iii, 21). But
he had not the full text of Rufinus' Apology (c. 4, 15). He received letters from Pammachius and Marcella, at
the beginning of the Spring of 402, when the Apology \vritten at Aquileia at the end of 400 had become known
to Rufinus' friends for some time. They had been unable to obtain a full copy, but had sent the chief heads of it,
and had strongly urged Jerome to reply. At the same time his brother Paulinianus who had been some three
years in the West, returned to Palestine by way of Rome, and there heard and saw portions of Rufinus' Apology,
which he committed to memory (Apol. i, 21, 28) and repeated at Bethlehem. To these documents Jerome
replies.

The heads of the First Book are as follows.

1. It is hard that an old friend with whom I had been reconciled should attack me in a book secretly cir-
culated among his disciples.

2. Others have translated Origen. Why does he single me out?

3. He gave me fictitious praise in his Preface to the Ilept ^ kpx'^^- Now, since I defend myself, he writes
3 books against me as an enemy.

4. 5. He spoke of me as united in faith with him; but what is his faith? Why are his books kept secret?
I can meet any attack.

6. I translated the Ilept 'A/3;<;wv because you demanded it, and because his translation slurred over Origen's
heresies.

7. My translation put away ambiguities, and showed the real character of the book, and of the previous
translation.

8. My translation of Origen's Commentaries created no excitement; his first translation, of Pamphilus'
Apology, roused all Rome to indignation.

9. But the work was really Eusebius's, who tells us that Pamphilus wrote nothing.

10. After the condemnation of Origen by Theophilus and Anastasius, it would be wise in Rufinus to give
up this pretended defence.

11. I had praised Eusebius as well as Origen only as writers; and was forced to condemn them as heretics.
Why should this be taken amiss?

12. I wrote a friendly letter to Rufinus, which my friends kept back.

13. There is nothing to blame in my getting the help of a Jew in translating from the Hebrew.

14. There is uuthiiig strange in my praising OrigcMi Ijcforc I knew the T^^pi- 'A/a^wi'.


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


483


The accusations seem inconsistent, but I knew them only by report.
The office of a commentator.

17. We must distinguish methods of writing, and not expect a vulgar simplicity in the various compositions
of cultured men.

18. My assertion was true, that Origen permitted the use uf falsehood.
The accusation about a mistranslation of Ps. ii is easily explained.

In the difficulties of the translator and the commentator we must get help where we can.
In the Commentary on Ephesians I acted straightforwardly in giving the views of Origen and others.
As to the passage " He hath chosen us before the foundation of the world."
As to the passage " Far above all rule and authority &c."
As to the passage "That in the ages to come &c."
As to " Paul the prisoner of Jesus Christ."
As to " The body fitly framed &c."
I quoted Origen's views as, " According to another heresy."

28, 29. As to " Men loving their wives as their own bodies."

30. To the charge of reading secular books I reply that I remember what I learned in youth.

31. Also, a promise given in a dream must not be pressed. Why should such things be raked up by old
friends against one another?

32. I am right in my contention that all sins are remitted in baptism.


15-
16.


19.
20,
21.
22.

23.
24.

25-
26.
27.


I have learned not only from your letter
but from those of many others that cavils
are raised against me in the school of Tvr-
annus, " by the tongue of my dogs from
the enemies by himself"^ because I have
translated the books Hepl 'Ap,i<jy into Latin.
What unprecedented shamelessness is this !
They accuse the physician for detecting the
poison : and this in order to protect their ven-
dor of drugs, not in obtaining the reward of
innocence but in his partnership with the
criminal ; as if the number of the offenders
diminished the crime, or as if the accusation
depended on our personal feelings not on the
facts. Pamphlets are written against me ;
they are forced on every one's attention ; and
yet they are not openly published, so that
the hearts of the simple are disturbed, and
no opportunity is given me of


answer mg.


This is a new way of injuring a man, to
make accusations which you are afraid of
sending abroad, to write what you are
obliged to hide. If what he writes is true,
why is he afraid of the public .'' if it is false,
why has he written it.'' We read when we
were boys the words of Cicero : "I consider
it a lack of self-control to write anything
which you intend to keep hidden." ^ I ask.
What is it of which they complain ? Whence
comes this heat, this madness of theirs.'' Is
it because I have rejected a feigned lauda-
tion .'' * Because I refused the praise offered
in insincere words .'' Because under the name
of a friend I detected the snares of an en-
emy.'' I am called in this Preface brother
and colleague, yet my supposed crimes are
set forth openly, and it is proclaimed that I
have written in favour of Origen, and have by

1 Acts xix, 9. Rufinus's prsenomen was Tyrannius.

* Ps. Ixviii, 23 Jerome's version is here, as in many cases
unintellitrible through a perverse literalism and an incorrect '
Hebrew text. In our Revised Version it stands: " That the
tongue of thy dogs may have its portion from thine enemies."

sCic. Quaest. Acad. Lib. i.

* That is, The Preface of Rufinus to his Translation of the
Hept 'ApxCiy (p. 42^-8).

I i


my praises exalted him to the skies. The
writer says that he has done this with a good
intention. How then does it come to pass
that he now casts in my teeth, as an open
enemy, what he then praised as a friend.''
He declared that he had meant to follow me
as his predecessor in his translation, and to
borrow an authority for his work from some
poor works of mine. If that was so, it
would have been sufficient for him to have
stated once for all that I had written.
Where was the necessity for him to repeat
the same things, and to force them on men's
notice by iteration, and to turn over the same
words again and again, as if no one would
believe in his praises.'' A praise which is
siinple and genuine does not show all this
anxiety about its credit with the reader.
How is it that he is afraid that, unless he pi'o-
duces my own words as witnesses, no one
will believe him when he praises me.'' You
see that we perfectly understand his arts ; he
has evidently been to the theatrical school,
and has learned up by constant practice the
part of the mocking encomiast. It is of no
use to put on a veil of simplicity, when the
schemer is detected in his malicious purpose.
To have made a mistake once, or, to stretcli
the point, even twice, may be an unlucky
chance ; but how is it that he makes the
supposed mistake with his eyes open, and re-
peats it, and weaves this mistake into the
whole tissue of his writings so as to make it
impossible for me to deny the things for which
he praises me? A true friend who knew
what he was about would, after our previous
misunderstanding and our reconciliation,
have avoided all appearance of suspicious
conduct, and would have taken care not to
do through inadvertence what might seem to
be done advisedly. Tully says in his book
of pleadings for Galinius : "I have always
felt that it was a religious duty of the highest
kind to preserve every friendship that I have
2


484


JEROME.


formed; but most of all those in which
kindness has been restored after some disa-
greement. In the case of friendships which
have never been shaken, if some attention
has not been paid, the excuse of forgetful-
ness, or at the worst of neglect is readily
accepted; but after a return to friendship, it
anything is done to cause offence, it is im-
puted not to neglect but to an unfriendly in-
tention, it is no longer a question of thought-
lessness but of breach of faith." So Horace
writes in his Epistle to Florus

•" Kindness, ill-knit, cleaves not but flies apart."

2. What good does it do me that he de-
clares on his oath that it was through sim-
plicity that he went wrong.? His praises are,
as you know, cast in my teeth, and the lau-
dation of this most simple friend (which
however has not much either of simplicity or
of sincerity in it) is imputed to me as a
crime. If he was seeking a foundation of
authority for what he was doing, and wish-
ing to shew who had gone before him in this
path he had at hand the Confessor Hilary,
who translated the books of Origen upon Job
and the Psalms consisting of forty thousand
lines. He had Ambrose whose works are,
almost all of them, full of what Origen has
written ; and the martyr Victorinus, who acts
really with ' simplicity,' and without set-
ting snares for others. As to all these he
keeps silence ; he does not notice those who
are like pillars of the church ; but me, who
am but like a flea and a man of no account,
he hunts out from corner to corner. Per-
haps the same simplicity which made him
unconscious that he was attacking his friend
will make him swear that he knew nothing
of these writers. But who will believe that
he does not know these men whose memory
isquite recent, even though they were Latins,
being as he is such a very learned man, and
one who has so great a knowledge of the old
writers, especially the Greeks, that, in his zeal
for foreign knowledge he has almost lost his
own language?^ The truth is it is not so
much that I have been praised by him as
that those writers have not been attacked.
But whether what he has written is praise
(as he tries to make simpletons believe) or an
attack, (as I feel it to be from the pain which
his wounds give me), he has taken care that I
should have none of my contemporaries to
bi ing me honor by a partnership in praise, nor
consolation by a partnership in vituperation.

' Hor. Ei). n. i, Ep. iii, 32.

'SeeRuf Apol. i, II. "I had grown dull in my Latinity
through thL- disuse of nearly 30 years."


3. I have in my hands your letter,* in
which you tell me that I have been accused,
and expect me to reply to my accuser lest
silence should be taken as an acknowledg-
ment of his charges. I confess that I sent
the reply ; but, though I felt hurt, I observed
the laws of friendship, and defended myself
without accusing my accuser. I put it as if
the objections which one friend had raised at
Rome were being bruited about by many
enemies in all parts of the world, so that
every one should think that I was replying
to the charges, not to the man. Will you
tell me that another course was open to me,
that I was bound by the law of friendship to
keep silence under accusation, and, though
I felt my face, so to say, covered with dirt
and bespattered with the filth of heresy, not
even to wash it with simple water, for fear
that an act of injustice miglit be imputed to
him. This demand is not such as any num
ought to make or such as any man ought to
accept. You openly assail your friend, and
set out charges against him under the mask
of an admirer; and he is not even to be al-
lowed to prove himself a catholic, or to reply
that the supposed heresy on which this lau-
dation is grounded arises not from any agree-
ment with a heresy, but from admiration of
a great genius. He thought it desirable to
translate this book into Latin ; or, as he pre-
fers to have it thought he was compelled,
though unwilling, to do it. But what need
was there for him to bring me into the ques-
tion, when I was in retirement, and separated
from him by vast intervals of land and sea.'*
Why need he expose me to the ill-will of the
multitude, and do more harm to me by his
praise than good to himself by putting me
forward as his example.'* Now also, since I
have repudiated his praise, and, by erasing
what he had written, have shewn that I am
not what my friend declared, I am told
that lie is in a fury, and has composed three
books against me full of graceful Attic rail-
lery, making those very things the object ot
attack which he had praised before, and
turning into a ground of accusation against
me the impious doctrines of Origen ; although
ill that Preface in which he so lauded me,
lie says of me: " I shall follow the rules of
translation laid down by my predecessors,
and particularly those acted on by the writer
whom I have just mentioned. He has ren-
dered into Latin more than seventy of Ori-
gen's homiletical treatises, and a few also of
his commentaries on the Apostle; and in


J Jerome Letter Ixxxiii Pnmmachius to Jerome: "Refute
your accuser; else, if you do not speak out, you will appear
to consent"


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


4^5


these, wherever the Greek text presents a
stumbling' block, he has smoothed it clown
in his version and has so emended the lan-
guage used that a Latin writer can find no
word that is at variance with our faith. In
his steps, therefore, I propose to walk, if not
displaying the same vigorous eloquence, at
least observing the same rules."

4. These words are his own, he cannot
deny them. The very elegance of the style
and the laboured mode of speech, and, sur-
passing all these, the Christian ' simplicity '
which here appears, reveal the character of
their author. But there is a different phase
of the matter: Eusebius, it seems, has de-
praved these books ; and now my friend who
accuses Origen, and who is so careful of my
reputation, declares that both Eusebius and I
have gone wrong together, and then that we
have held correct opinions together, and that
in one and the same work. But he cannot
now be my enemy and call me a heretic,
when a moment before he has said that his
belief was not dissonant from mine. Then,
I must ask him what is the meaning of his
balanced and doubtful way of speaking:
"The Latin reader," he says, "will find
nothing here discordant from our faith."
What faith is this which he calls his? Is it
the faith by which the Roman Church is
distinguished? or is it the faith which is con-
tained in the works of Origen? If he
answers "the Roman," then we are the
Catholics, since we have adopted none of
Origen's errors in our translations. But if
Origen's blasphemy is his faith, then, though
he tries to fix on me the charge of inconsist-
ency, he proves himself to be a heretic. If
the man who praises me is orthodox, he
takes me, by his own confession as a sharer
in his orthodoxy. If he is heterodox, he
shews that he had praised me before my ex-
planation because he thought me a sharer
in his error. However, it will be time
enough to reply to these books of his which
whisper in. corners and made their venomous
attacks in secret, when they are published
and come out from their dark places into the
light, and when they have been able to reach
me either through the zeal of my friends or
the imprudence of my adversaries. We
need not be much afraid of attacks which
their author fears to publish and allows only
his confederates to read. Then and not till
then will I either acknowledge the justice of
his charges, or refute them, or retort upon
the accuser the accusations he has made :
and will shew that my silence has been the
result not of a bad conscience but of for-
bearance


5. In the meantime, I desired to free
myself from suspicion in the implicit judg-
ment of the reader, and to refute the gravest
of the charges in the eyes of my friends. I
did not wish it to appear that I had been the
first to strike, seeing that I have not, even
when wounded, aimed a blow against my
assailant, but have only sought to heal my
own wound. I beg the reader to let the
blame rest on him who struck the first blow,
without respect of persons. He is not con-
tent with striking; but, as if he were dealing
with a man whom he had reduced to silence
and who would never speak again, he has
written three elaborate books and has made
out from my works a list of " Conti'adictions "
worthy of Marcion.' Our minds are all on
fire to know at once what his doctrine is and
what is this madness of mine which we had
not expected. Perhaps he has learnt (though
the time for it has been short) all that is
necessary to make him my teacher, and a
sudden flow of eloquence will reveal what
no one imagined that he knew.

^ " Grant it, O Father; mighty Jesus, grant.
Let him begin the engagement hand to hand."

Though he may brandish the spear of his
accusations and hurl them against us with
all his might, we trust in the Lord our
Saviour that his truth will encompass us as
with a shield, and we shall be able to sing
with the Psalmist : ^ " Their blows have be-
come as the arrows of the little ones," and
* " Though an host should encamp against me,
my heart shall not fear ; though war should
rise against me, even then will I be confi-
dent." But of this at another time. Let
us now return to the point where we began.

6. His followers object to me, (and

® " Weary of work
They ply the arms of Ceres,")

that I have translated into the Latin tongue
the books of Origen nfpt'Ap;!:"'', which are
pernicious and repugnant to the faith of the
Church. My answer to them is brief and
succinct: "Your letters, my brother Pam-
machius, and those of your friends, have
compelled me. You declared that these
books had been falsely translated by another,
and that not a few things had been inter-


1 'AfT^fleo-fi?. Marcion, a Gnostic of the second century
drew out a list of Contradictions between the Law (which he
rejected) and tlie Gospel.

2 This is altered from Y\rg. Mn. x, 875.

" Sic Pater tile Detim facial, sic alius Apollo,
Incipias co7iferre ntaHiim."

3 Supposed to be a version of Ps. Ixiv, 8.
* Ps. xxvii, 3, 4.

» Mn: i, 177.

Cefealiaqtie artna
ExJ>ediunt,fessi rerum.


486


JEROME.


polated or added or altered. And, lest your
letters should fail to carry conviction, you
sent a copy of this translation, together with
the Preface in which I was praised. As
soon as I had run my eye over these docu-
ments, I at once noticed that the impious
doctrine enunciated by Origen about the
Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, to which
the ears of Romans could not bear to listen,
had been changed by the translator so as to
give a more orthodox meaning. His other
tloctrines, on the fall of the angels, the lapse
of human souls, his prevarications about the
resurrection, his ideas about the world, or
rather Epicurus's middle-spaces,' on the res-
titution of all to a state of equality, and
(jthers much worse than these, which it would
take too long to recount, I found that he
had either translated as they stood in the
Greek, or had stated them in a stronger and
exaggerated manner in words taken from the
books of Didymus, who is the most open
champion of Origen. The eftect of all this
is that the reader, finding that the book ex-
pressed the catholic doctrine on the Trinity,
would take in these heretical views without
warning.

7. One who was not his friend would
probably say to him : Either change every-
thing which is bad, or else make known
everything which you think thoroughly
good. If for the sake of simple Christians
you cut out everything which is pernicious,
and do not choose to put into a foreign lan-
guage the things that you say have been
added by heretics ; tell us everything which
is pernicious. But, if you mean to make a
veracious and faithful translation, why do
you change some things and leave others un-
touched.'' You make an open profession
in the prologue that you have amended what
is bad and have left all that is best: and
tiierefore, if anything in the work is proved
to be heretical, you cannot enjoy the license
given to a translator but must accept the
authority of a writer: and you will be openly
convicted of the criminal intent of be-
smearing with honey the poisoned cup so
that the sweetness which meets the sense
may hide the deadly venom. These tilings,
and things much harder than these, an
enemy would say ; and he would draw you
before the tribunal of the church, not as the
translator of a bad work but as one who
assents to its doctrines. But I am satisfied
with having simply defended myself. I ex-
pressed in Latin just what I found hi the
Greek text of the books llf/'' 'A/)^(jv, not wish-

• Intermiindia. Spaces between the worlds, in which, ac-
cording to Kpicurus, tho Guds reside.


ing the reader to believe what was in my
translation, but wishing him not to believe
what was in yours. I looked for a double
advantage as the result of my work, first to
unveil the heresv of the author and secondly
to convict the untrustvvorthiness of the trans-
lator. And, that no one might think that I
assented to the doctrine which I had trans-
lated, 'I asserted in the Preface how I had
been compelled to make this version and
pointed out what the reader ought not to
believe. The first translation makes for the
glory of the author, the second for his shame.
The one summons the reader to believe its
doctrines, the other moves him to disbelieve
them. In that I am claimed against my will
as praising the author; in this I not only do
not praise him, but am compelled to accuse
the man who does praise him. The same
task has been accomplished by each, but
with a different intention : the same journey
has had two different issues. Our friend has
taken away words which existed, alleging
that the books had been depraved by heretics :
and he has put in those which did not exist,
alleging that the assertions had been made
by the author in other places ; but of this he
will never convince us unless he can point
out the actual places whence he says that he
has taken them. My endeavour was to change
nothing from what was actually there ; for
my object in translating the work was to ex-
pose the false doctrines which I translated.
Do you look upon me as merely a translator?
I was more. I turned informer. I informed
against a heretic, to clear the church of heresy.
The reasons which led me formerly to praise
Origen in certain particulars are set forth in
the treatise prefixed to this work. The sole
cause which led to my translation is now
before the reader. No one has a right to
charge me with the author's impiety, for I
did it with a pious intention, that of betray-
ing the impiety which had been commended
as piety to the churches.

8. I had given Latin versions, as my
friend tauntingly says, of seventy books of
Origen, and of some parts of his Tomes, but
no question was ever raised about my work ;
no commotion was felt on the subject in
Rome. What need was there to commit to
the ears of the Latins what Greece denounces
and the whole world blames.? I, though
translating many of Origen's work in the
course of many years, never created a
scandal : but you, though unknown before,
have by your first and only work become
notorious for your rash proceeding. Your
Preface tells us that you have also translated
the work of Pamphilus the martyr in defence


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


48;


ot* Origen ; and you strive with all your
might to prevent the church from condemning
a man whose faith the martyr attests. The
real fact is Hhat Eusebius Bishop of Coesarea,
as I have already said before, who was in his
day the standard bearer of the Arian faction,
wrote a large and elaborate work in six books
in defence of Origen, showing by many testi-
monies that Origen was in his sense a cath-
olic, that is, in our sense, an Arian. The
first of these six books you have translated
and assigned it to the martyr. I must not
wonder, therefore, that you wish to make
me, a small man and of no account, appear
as an admirer of Origen, when you bring the
same calumny against the martyr. You
change a few statements about the Son of
God and the holy Spirit, which you knew
would offend the Romans, and let the rest
go unchanged from beginning to end ; you
did, in fact, in the case of this Apology of
Pamphilus as you call it, just what you did
in the translation of Origen's Uspt 'Apx<^i'- If
that book is Pamphilus's, which of the six
books is Eusebius's first? In the very
Volume which you pretend to be Pamphilus's,
mention is made of the later books. Also,
in the second and following books, Euse-
bius says that he had said such and such
things in the first book and excuses himself
for repeating them. If the whole work is
Pamphilus's, why do you not translate the
remaining books.'' If it is the work of the
other, why do you change the name.'' You
cannot answer ; but the facts make answer
of themselves: You thought that men
woidd believe the martyr, though they would
have turned in abhorrence from the chief of
the Arians.

9. Am I to say plainly what your inten-
tion was, my most simple-minded friend?
Do you think that we can believe that you
unwittingly gave the name of the martyr to
the book of a man who was a heretic, and
thus made the ignorant, through their trust
in Christ's witness, become the defenders of
Origen? Considering the erudition for which
you are renowned, for which you are
praised throughout the West as an Illustrious
litterateur,^ so that the men of your party
all speak of you as their Coryphaeus, I will
not suppose that you are ignorant of Euse-
bius' ^ Catalogue, which states the fact that
the martyr Pamphilus never wrote a single

1 See this question fully argued out by Lightfoot in the
Diet, of Christian Biog^raphy, Art. Kusebius of Cces?..rea. He
says : " The Defence of Origen was the joint work of Pam-
philus and Eusebius:" and " Terome's treatment of this
matter is a painful exhibition of disingenuousness, &c." See
De V. 111. Ixxv. 2 ivYVpi^eu?.

3 Sui'Toiyna. No work of Eusebius appears to have borne
this title. The work alluded to is either the Life of Pamphilus
or the Book On the Martyrs of Palestine.


book.' Eusebius himself, the lover and com-
panion of Pamphilus, and the herald of iiis
praises, wrote three books in elegant language
containing the life of Pamphilus. In these
he extols other traits of his character with
extraordinary encomiums, and praises to the
sky his humility ; but on his literary interests
he writes as follows in the third book :
"What lover of books was there who did not
find a friend in Pamphilus? If he knew of
any of them being in want of the necessaries
of life, he helped them to the full extent of
his power. He would not only lend them
copies of the Holy Scriptures to read, but
would give them most readily, and that not
only to men, but to women also if he saw
that they were given to reading. He there-
fore kept a store of manuscripts, so that he
might be able to give them to those who
wished for them whenever occasion de-
manded. He himself however, wrote noth-
ing whatever of his own, except private
letters which he sent to his friends, so
humble was his estimate of himself. But
the treatises of the old writers he studied
with the greatest diligence, and was con-
stantly occupied in meditation upon them."
10. The champion of Origen, you see,
the encomiast of Pamphilus, declares that
Pamphilus wrote nothing whatever, that he
composed no single treatise of his own.
And you cannot take refuge in the hypoth-
esis that Pamphilus wrote this book after
Eusebius's publication, since Eusebius wrote
after Pamphilus had attained the crown of
martyrdom. What then can you now do?
The consciences of a great many persons
have been wounded by the book which j^ou
have published under the name of the
martyr ; they give no heed to t!ie authority
of the bishops who condemn Origen, since
they think that a martyr has praised him.
Of what use are the letters of tlie bishop
Theophilus or of the pope Auastasius, who
follow out the heretic in every part of the
world, when your book passing under the
name of Pamphilus is there to oppose their
letters, and the testimony of the martyr can
be set against the authority of the Bishops?
I think you had better do with this mistitled *
volume what you did with the books Hfpt
^Apx<'->v. Take my advice as a friend, and do
not be distrustful of the power of your art ;
say either that you never wrote it, or else


iri-


1 " The existence of a work which consisted mainly of ex-
tracts from Oriu:in with Comments, and of which he was only
the joint author, is quite reconcilable with this statement,
de ' " '" "'' "■"

foot, Art. Eusebius of Casarea, in Diet, of Christian Biog-
raphy.

* ifivSinlypd(f>ia,


488


JEROME.


that it has been depraved by the presbyter
Eusebius.' It will be impossible to prove
against you that the book was translated by
you. Your handwriting is not forthcoming
to shew it ; your eloquence is not so great as
that no one can imitate your style. Or, in
the last resort, if the matter comes to the
proof, and your effrontery is overborne by
the multitude of tcstnnonies, sing a palinode
after the manner of Stesichnus. It is
better that you should repent of what you
have done than that a martyr should remain
under calumny, and those who have been
deceived under error. And you need not
feel ashamed of changing your opinion ; you
are not of such fame or authority as to feel
disgraced by the confession of an error.
Take me for your example, whom you love
so much, and without whom you can neither
live nor die, and say what I said when you
had praised me and I defended myself.

II. Eusebius the Bishop of Caesarea, of
whom I have made mention above, in the
sixth book of his Apology for Origen makes
the same complaint against Methodius the
bishop and martyr, which you make against
me in your praises of me. He says : How
could Methodius dare to write now against
Origen, after having said this thing and that
of his doctrines? This is not the place in
which to speak of the martyr ; one cannot dis-
cuss every thing in all places alike. Let it suf-
fice for the present to mention that one who
was an Arian complains of the same things
in a most eminent and eloquent man, and a
martyr, which you first make a subject of
praise as a friend and afterwards, when of-
fended turn into an accusation. I have gfiven
you an opportunity of constructing a calumny
against me if you choose, in the present pas-
sage. "How is it," you may ask, " that I
now depreciate Eusebius, after having in
other places praised him?" Thename Euse-
bius indeed is diflcrentfrom Origen ; but the
ground of complaint is in both cases identi-
cal. I praised Eusebius for his Ecclesiastical
History, for his Chronicle, for his description
of the holy land ; and these works ^ of his I
gave to the men of the same language as my-
self by translating them into Latin. Am I to
be called an Arian because Eusebius, the
autlior of those books, is an Arian? If you
should dare to call me a heretic, call to mind
your Preface to the Uepl 'A^jwv, in which
you bear me witness that I am of the same
faith with yourself : and I at the same time

1 Eusebius of Cremona, Jerome's fricncl, whom Rufinus ac-
cused of stealing and publishing his MSS.

^Jerome translated the Chronicle and the Description of the
Holy Land, but not this History. This was done later by
Rufinus. ' ■'


entreat }ou to hear patiently the expostula-
tion of one who was tormerly your friend.
You enter into a warm dispute with others,
and bandy mutual reproaches with men of
your own order ; whether you are right or
wrong in this is for you to say. But as
against a brother even a true accusation is
repugnant to me. I do not say this to blame
others ; I only say that I would not myself
do it. We are separated from one another
by a vast interval of space. What sin had I
committed against you ? What is my ofl'ence ?
Is it that I answered that I was not an Ori-
genist? Are you to be held to be accused
because I defend myself? If you say you
are not an Origenist and have never been
one, I believe your solemn affirmation of
this : if you once were one, I accept your re-
pentance. Wh}^ do you complain if I am
what you say that you are? Or is my
oflence this that I dared to translate the Uepl
'Apx(jv after you had done it, and that my
translation is supposed to detract from your
work ? But what was I to do ? Your lauda-
tion of me, or accusation against me, was
sent to me. Your 'praise' was so strong
and so long that, if I had acquiesced in it,
every one would have thought me a heretic.
Look at what is said in the end of the letter
which I received from Rome : * " Clear your-
self from the suspicions which men have
imbibed against you, and convict your ac-
cuser of speaking falsely ; for if you leave
him unnoticed, you will be held to assent to
his charges." When I was pressed by such
conditions, I determined to translate these
books, and I ask your attention to the answer
which I made. It was this: * *' This is the
position which my friends have made for me,
(observe that I did not say ' my friend,' for
fear of seeming to aim at you) ; if I keep
silence I am to be accounted guilty : if I
answer, I am accounted an enemy. Both
these conditions are hard ; but of the two I
will choose the easier : for a quarrel can be
healed, but blasphemy admits of no forgive-
ness." You obsei-ve that I felt this as a bur-
den laid upon me ; that I was unwilling and
recalcitrating ; that I could only quiet my
presentiment of the quarrel which would
ensue from this undertaking by the plea of
necessity. If you had translated the books
n.-pt 'Apxi'iv without alluding to me, you would
have a right to complain that I had after-
wards translated them to your prejudice.
But now you have no right to complain,
since my work was only an answer to the
attack you had made on me under the guise


1 Jerome Letter Ixxxiii.


* Letter Ixxxiv, i3.


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


489


o£ praise ; for what you call praise all under-
stand as accusation. Let it be understood be-
tween us that you accused me, and then you will
not be indignant at my having replied. But
now suppose that you wrote with a good in-
tention, that you were not merely innocent
but a most faithful friend, out of whose
mouth no untruth ever proceeded, and that it
was quite unconsciously that you wounded
me. What is that to me who felt the wound ?
Am I not to take remedies for my wound
because vou inflicted it without evil intention.'*
I am stricken down and stricken through,
with a wound in the breast which will not be
appeased ; my limbs which were white be-
fore are stained with gore ; and you say to
me : " Pray leave your wound untouched, for
fear that I may be thought to have wounded
you." And yet the translation in question is
a reproof to Origen rather than to you. You
altered for the better the passages which you
considered to have been put in by the here-
tics. I brought to light what the whole
Greek world with one voice attributes to him.
Which of our two views is the truer it is not
for me nor for you to judge ; let each of
them be touched by the censor's rod of the
reader. The whole of that letter in which I
make answer for myself is directed against
the heretics and against my accusers. How
does it touch you who profess to be both
an orthodox person and my admirer, if I am
a little too sharp upon heretics, and expose
their tricks before the public.'' You should
rejoice in my invectives : otherwise, if you
are vexed at them, you may be thought to be
yourself a heretic. When anything is writ-
ten against some particular vice, but without
the mention of any name, if a man grows
angry he accuses himself. It would have
been the part of a wise man, even if he felt
hurt, to dissemble his consciousness of wrong,
and by the serenity of his countenance to dis-
sipate the cloud that lay upon his heart.

12. Otherwise, if everything which goes
against Origen and his followers is supposed
to be said by me against you, we must sup-
pose that the letters of the popes Theophilus
and Epiphanius and the rest of the bishops
which at their desire I lately translated * are
meant to attack you and tear you to pieces ;
we must suppose too that the rescripts of the
Emperors which order that the Origenists
should be banished from Alexandria and
from Egypt have been written at my dicta-
tion. The abhorrence shown by the Pontifl
of the city of Rome against these men was
nothing but a scheme of mine. The out-

* Jerome, Letters 91-94.


burst of hatred which immediately after your
translation blazed up through the whole
world against Origen who before had been
read without prejudice was the work of my
pen. If I have got all this power, I wonder
that you are not afraid of me. But I really
acted with extreme moderation. In my pub-
lic letter ' I took every precaution to prevent
your supposing that anything in it was di-
rected against you ; but I wrote at the same
time a short letter^ to you, expostulating with
you on the subject of your ' praises.' This
letter my friends did not think it right to send
you, because you were not at Rome, and
because, as they tell me, you and your com-
panions were scattering accusations of things
unworthy of the Christian profession about
my manner of life. But I have subjoined a
copy of it to this book, so that you may
understand what pain }ou gave me and with
what brotherly self-restraint I bore it.

13. I am told, further, that you touch
with some critical sharpness upon some
points of my letter, and, with the well-known
wrinkles rising on your forehead and your
eyebrows knitted, make sport of me with a
wit worthy of Plautus, for having said that I
had a Jew named Barabbas for my teacher.
I do not wonder at your writing Barabbas
for Baranina, the letters of the names being
somewhat similar, when you allow your-
self such a license in changing the names
themselves, as to turn Eusebius into Pamphi-
lus, and a heretic into a martyr. One must
be cautious of such a man as you, and give
you a wide berth ; otherwise I may find my
own name turned in a trice, and without my
knowing it, from Jerome to Sardanapalus.
Listen, then, O pillar of wisdom, and type of
Catonian severity. I never spoke of him as
my master; I merely wished to illustrate my
method of studying the Holy Scriptures by
saying that I had read Origen just in the
same way as I had taken lessons from this
Jew. Did I do you an injury because I
attended the lectures of ApoUinarius and
Didymus rather than yours? Was there
anything to prevent my naming in my letter
that most eloquent man Gregory.?^ Which
of all the Latins is his equal? I may well
glory and exult in him. But I only men-
tioned those who were subject to censure, so
as to show that I only read Origen as I had
listened to them, that is, not on account of
his soundness in the faith but on account
of the excellence of his learning. Origen
himself, and Clement and Eusebius, and


1 Ep. Ixxxiv to Painmachius and Oceanus. 2 Letter Ixxxi.
3 Nazianzen, to whose instructions Jerome attached himself
at Constantinople in 381.


490


JEROME.


many others, when they are discussing script-
ural points, and wish to have Jewish author-
ity for w"hat they say, write: " A Hebrew
stated this to me," or " I heard from a
Hebrew," or, "That is the opinion of the
Hebrews." Origen certainly speaks of the
Patriarch Huillus who was his contemporary,
and in the conclusion of his thirtieth Tome on
Isaiah (that in the end of which he explains
the words ' " Woe to Ariel which David took
by storm ") uses his exposition of the words,
and confesses that he had adopted through
his teaching a truer opinion than that which
he had previously held. He also takes as
written by Moses not only the eighty-ninth
Psalm ^ which is entitled "A prayer of
Moses the Man of God," but also the eleven
following Psalms which have no title ac-
cording to Huillus's opinion ; and he makes
no scruple of inserting in his commentaries
on the Hebrew Scriptures the views of the
Hebrew teachers.

14. It is said that on a recent occasion,
where the letters of Theophilus exposing the
errors of Origen were read, our friend stopped
his ears, and along with all present pro-
nounced a distinct condemnation upon the
author of so much evil ; and that he said that
up to that moment he had never known that
Origen had written anything so wrong. I
say nothing against this : I do not make the
observation which perhaps another might
make, that it was impossible for him to be
ignorant of that which he had himself trans-
lated, and an apology for which by a heretic
he had published under the name of a martyr,
whose defence also he had undertaken in his
own book; as to which I shall have some ad-
verse remarks to make later on if I have
time to write them. I only make one ob-
servation which does not admit of contradic-
tion. If it is possible that he should have
misunderstood what he translated, why is it
not possible that I should have been ignorant
of the book Uepl 'Apx<^v which I had not be-
fore read, and that I should have only read
those Homilies which I translated, and in
which he himself testifies that there is noth-
ing wrong.'' But if, contrary to his expressed
opinion, he now finds fault with me for those
things for which he before had given me
praise, he will be in a strait between two ;
cither he praised me, believing me to be a
heretic but confessing that he shared my
opinion ; or else, if he praised me before as
orthodox, his present accusations come to
nothing, and are due to sheer malice. But
perhaps it was only as my friend that he for-

> Is. xxix, I," Where David encamped." Rev. Ver.

SPS.XC.


merly was silent about my errors, and now
that he is angry with me brings to light what
he had concealed.

15. This abandonment of friendship gives
no claim to my confidence ; and open enmity
brings with it the suspicion of falsehood.
Still I will be bold enough to go to meet him,
and to ask what heretical doctrine I have ex-
pressed, so that I may either, like him, ex-
press my regret and swear that I never knew
the bad doctrines of Origen, and that his in-
fidelity has now for the first time been made
known to me by the Pope Theophilus ; or
that I may at least prove that my opinions
were sound and that he, as his habit is, had
not understood them. It is impossible that
in my Commentaries on the Ephesians which
I hear he makes the ground of his accusa-
tion, I should have spoken both rightly and
wrongly ; that from the same fountain should
have proceeded both sweet water and bitter ;
and that whereas throughout the work I con-
demned those who believe that souls have
been created out of angels, I should suddenly
have forgotten myself and have defended the
opinion which I condemned before. He can
hardly raise an objection to me on the score
of folly, since he has proclaimed me in his
works as a man of the highest culture and
eloquence ; otherwise such silly verbosity as
he imputes is the part, one would think, of a
pettifogger and a babbler rather than of an
eloquent man. What is the point of his
written accusations I do not know, for it is
only report of them, not the writings, which
has reached me; and, as tlie Apostle tells us
it is a foolish thing to beat the air. How-
ever, I must answer in the uncertainty till
the certainty reaches me : and I will begin
by teaching my rival in my old age a lesson
which I learned in youth, that there are
many forms of speech, and that, according to
the subject matter not only the sentences but
the words also of writings vary.

16. For instance, Chrysippus and AntijD-
atcr occupy themselves with thorny ques-
tions: Demosthenes and ^schines speak
with the voice of thunder against each other ;
Lysias and Isocrates have an easy and
pleasing style. There is a wonderful difier-
ence in these writers, though each of them is
perfect in his own line. Again: read the
book of Tully To Hcrenui'us ; read his
Rhetoricians; or, since he tells us that these
books fell from his hands in a merely inchoate
and imfinished condition, look through his
three books On the oratoi-^ in which he
introduces a discussion between Crassus and
Antony, the most eloquent orators of that
day ; and a fourth book called The Orator


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


491


which he wrote to Brutus when ah'eady an
old man ; and you will realize that History,
Oratory, Dialogue, Epistolary writing, and
Commentaries, have, each of them, their
special style. We have to do now with
Commentaries. In those which I wrote upon
the Ephesians I only followed Origen and
Didymus and ApoUinarius, (whose doctrines
are very different one from another) so far
as was consistent with the sincerity of my
faith: for what is the function of a Com-
mentary.'' It is to interpret another man's
words, to put into plain language what he
has expressed obscurely. Consequently, it
enumerates the opinions of many persons,
and says. Some interpret the passage in this
sense, some in that ; the one try to support
their opinion and understanding of it by such
and such evidence or reasons : so that the
wise reader, after reading these different ex-
planations, and having many brought before
his mind for acceptance or rejection, may
judge which is the truest, and, like a good
banker, may reject the money of spurious
mintasre. Is the commentator to be held re-
sponsible for all these different interpreta-
tions, and all these mutually contradicting
opinions because he puts down the exposi-
tions given by many in the single work on
which he is commenting? I suppose that
when you were a boy you read the commen-
taries of Asper upon Virgil and Sallust,
those of Vulcatius upon Cicero's Orations,
of Victorinus upon his Dialogues and upon
the Comedies of Terence, and also those of
my master Donatus on Virgil, and of others
on other writers such as Plautus, Lucretius,
Flaccus, Persius and Lucan. Will you find
fault with those who have commented on these
writers because they have not held to a single
explanation, but enumerate their own views
and those of others on the same passage ?

17. I say nothing of the Greeks, since
you boast of your knowledge of them, even
to the extent of saying that, in attaching
yourself to foreign literature, you have for-
gotten your own language. I am afraid that,
according to the old proverbs, I might be
like the pig teaching Minei-va, and the man
carrying fagots into the wood. I oidy won-
der that, being as you are the Aristarclius^
of our time, you should have shewn igno-
rance of these matters which every boy knows.
It is, no doubt, from your mind being fixed
on the meaning of what you write, but partly
also from your being so sharp-sighted for the
manufacture of calumnies against me, that


1 A native of Sairothrace who died at Cyprus B. C. 157. lie
was tutor to the children of Ptolemy Philometor, and was re-
nowned as a rhetorician and a critic.


you despise the precepts of Grammarians
and orators, that you make no attempt to set
straight words which have got transposed
when the sentence has become complicated,
or to avoid some harsh collocation of con-
sonants, or to escape from a style full of gaps.
It would be ridiculous to point to one or two
wounds when the whole body is enfeebled
and broken. I will not select portions for
criticism ; it is for him to select any portion
which is free from faults. He must have
been ignorant even of the Socratic saying :
"Know thyself."

To steer the ship the untaught landsman fears;
Th' untrain'd attendant dares not give the sick
The drastic southernwood. The healing drug
The leecli alone prescribes. Th' artificer
Alone the tools can wield. But poetry
Train'd or untrain'd we all at random write.'

Possibly he will swear that he has never
learned to read and write ; I can easily be-
lieve that without an oath. Or perhaps he
will take refuge in what the Apostle says of
himself: "Though I be rude in speech, yet
not in knowledge." But his reason for say-
ing this is plain. He had been trained in
Hebrew learning and brought up at the feet
of Gamaliel, whom, though he had attained
apostolic rank, he was not ashamed to call
his master ; and he thought Greek eloquence
of no account, or at all events, in his humil-
ity, he would not parade his knowledge of
it. So that ^ ' his preaching should stand not
in the persuasive wisdom of words but in the
power of the things signified.' He despised
other men's riches since he was rich in his
own. Still it was not to an illiterate man
who stumbled in every sentence that Festus
cried, as he stood before his judgment seat:
" Paul thou art beside thyself ; much learn-
ing doth make thee mad." You who can
hardly do more than mutter in Latin, and
who rather creep like a tortoise than walk,
ought either to write in Greek, so that among
those who are ignorant of Greek you may
pass for one who knows a foreign tongue ;
or else, if you attempt to write Latin, you
should first have a grammar-master, and
flinch from the ferule, and begin again as an
old scholar among children to learn the art
of speaking. Even if a man is bursting
with the wealth of Croesus and Darius, let-
ters will not follow the money-bag. They
are the companions of toil and of labour, the
associates of the fasting not of the full-fed,
of self-mastery not of self-indulgence.'* It is

1 Horace Ep. ii, i, IH"?-

2 I Cor. ii, 4. "Not in persuasive words of wisdom, but
in demonstration of the Spirit and of power." Rev. Ver.

3 Acts xxvi, 24.

4 Jerome often accuses Rufinus of self-indulgence. See
esp. Letter cxxv, c. 18.


492


JEROME.


told of Demosthenes that he consumed more
oil than wine, and that no workman ever
shortened his nights as he did. He for the
sake of enunciating the single letter Rho
was willing to take a dog as his teacher ; and
yet you make it a crime in me that I took a
man to teach me the Hebrew letters. This
is the sort of wisdom which makes men re-
main unlearned : they do not choose to learn
what they do not know. They forget the
words of Horace :

Why through false shame do I choose ignorance,
Rather than seek to learn?

That Book of Wisdom also which is read
to us as the work of Solomon says : > " Into
a malicious soul wisdom sliall not enter, nor
dwell in the body that is subject to sin. For
the Holy Spirit of discipline "^ will flee deceit
and remove from thoughts which are with-
out understanding." The case is diBerent
with those who only wish to be read by the
vulgar, and do not care how they may offend
the ears of the learned ; and they despise the
utterance of the poet which brands the for-
wardness of noisy ignorance.

'Twas you, I think, whose ignorance in the streets
Murder'd the wretched strain with creaking reed.

If you want such things, there are plenty
of curly-pated fellows in every school who
will sing you snatches of doggrel from
Miletus ; or you may go to the exhibition
of the Bessi ' and see people shaking with
laughter at the Pig's Testament, or at any
jesters' entertainment where silly things of
this kind are run after. There is not a day
but you may see the dressed-up clown in the
streets whacking the buttocks of some block-
head, or half-pulling out people's teeth with
the scorpion which he twists round for them
to bite. We need not wonder if the books
of know-nothings find plenty of readers.

1 8. Our friends take it amiss that I have
spoken of the Origenists as confederated to-
gether by orgies of false oaths. I named the
book in which I had found it written, that
is, the sixth book of Origen's Miscellanies,
in which he tries to adapt our Christian
doctrine to the opinions of Plato. The
words of Plato in the third book of the Re-
public * are as follows : " Truth, said Socrates,
is to be specially cultivated. If, however,
as I was saying just now, falsehood is dis-
graceful and useless to God, to men it is
sometimes useful, if only it is used as a stinui-
lant " or a medicine ; for no one can doubt that

' Wisd. of Sol. i, 4, 5. 2 Erjtdilionis.

3 A tribe of Thrace; probably troupes of tliem c;mic to ex-
hibit in Uoiue.

P" 339' ' C'o«<//";«*«/h;h, or seasoning.


some such latitude of statement must be al-
lowed to physicians, though it must be taken
out of the hands of those who are unskilled.
That is quite true, it was replied ; and if one
admits that any person may do this, it must
be the duty of tlie rulers of states at times
to tell lies, either to baffle the enemy or to
benefit their country and the citizens. On
the other hand to those who do not know how
to make a good use of falsehood, the prac-
tice should be altogether prohibited." Now
take the words of Origen : " When we con-
sider the precept ' ' Speak truth every man
with his neighbour,' we need not ask, Who is
my neighbour? but we should weigh well the
cautious remarks of the philosopher. He
says, that to God falsehood is shameful and
useless, but to men it is occasionally useful.
We must not suppose that God ever lies,
even in the way of economy ; ^ only, if the
good of the hearer requires it, he speaks in
ambiguous language, and reveals what he
wills in enigmas, taking care at once that
the dignity of truth should be preserved and
yet that what would be hurtful if produced
nakedly before the crowd should be envel-
oped in a veil and thus disclosed. But a
man on whom necessity imposes the respon-
sibility of lying is bound to use very great
care, and to use falsehood as he would a
stimulant or a medicine, and strictly to pre-
serve its measure, and not go beyond the
bounds observed by Judith in her dealings
with Ilolofernes, whom she overcame by
the wisdom with which she dissembled her
words. He should act like Esther who
changed the purpose of Artaxerxes by hav-
ing so long concealed the truth as to her
race ; and still more the patriarch Jacob
who, as we read, obtained the blessing of
his father by artifice and falsehood. From
all this it is evident that if we speak falsely
with any other object than that of obtaining
by it some great good, we shall be judged as
the enemies of him who said, I am the truth."
This Origen wrote, and none of us can deny
it. And he wrote it in the book which he
addressed to the ' perfect,' his own disciples.
His teaching is that the master may lie, but
the disciple must not. The inference from
this is that the man who is a good liar, and
without hesitation sets before his brethren
any fabrication which rises into his mouth,
shows himself to be an excellent teacher.

19. I am told that he also carps at me
for the translation I have given of a phrase
in the Second Psalm. In the Latin it

1 Epli. iv, 25.

" Pro Dispensatione. The word Economy is used in modern
discussions on this subject in the sense of dispensing- truth
partially to those not wholly fit for its full disclosure.


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


493


stands : " Learn discipline," in the Hebrew
it is written Nescu Bar ; and I have given it
in my commentary, Adore the Son ; and then,
when I translated the whole Psalter into the
Latin language, as if I had forgotten my
previous explanation, I put " Worship
purely." No one can deny, of course, that
these interpretations are contrary to each
other ; and we must pardon him for being
ignorant of the Hebrew writing when he is
so often at a loss even in Latin. Nescu,
translated literally, is Kiss. I wished not
to give a distasteful rendering, and preferring
to follow the sense, gave the word Worship ;
for those who worship are apt to kiss their
hands and to bare their heads, as is to be
seen in the case of Job who declares that he
has never done either of these things," and
says ^ " If I beheld the sun when it shined,
or the moon walking in brightness, and
my heart rejoiced in secret and I kissed my
hand with my mouth, which is a very great
iniquity, and a lie to the most high God."
The Hebrews, according to the peculiarity
of their language use this word Kiss for adora-
tion ; and therefore I translated according
to the use of those whose language I was
dealing with. The word Bar, however,
in Hebrew has several meanings. It means
Son, as in the words Barjona (son of a
dove) Bartholomew (son of Tholomaeus),
Bartimseus, Barjesus, Barabbas. It also
means Wheat, and A sheaf of corn, and
Elect and Pure. What sin have I com-
mitted, then, when a word is thus uncertain
in its meaning, if I have rendered it difter-
ently in different places? and if, after taking
the sense "Worship the Son" in my Com-
mentary, where there is more freedom of
discussion, I said "Worship purely" or
" electively" in my version of the Bible itself,
so that I should not be thought to translate ca-
priciously or give grounds for cavil on the part
of the Jews. This last rendering, moreover,
is that of Aquila and Symmachus : and I
cannot see that the faith of the church is in-
jured by the reader being shewn in how
many different ways a verse is translated by
the Jews.

20. Your Origen allow^s himself to treat
of the transmigration of souls, to introduce
the belief in an infinite number of worlds,
to clothe rational creatures in one body after
another, to say that Christ has often suffered,
and will often suffer again, it being always
profitable to undertake what has once been
profitable. You also yourself assume such
an authority as to turn a heretic into a

' To the elements of nature, or the idols.
2 Job xxxi,26, a8.


martyr, and to invent a heretical falsification
of the books of Origen. Why may not I
then discuss about words, and in doing the
work of a commentator teach the Latins
what I learn from the Hebrews ? If it were
not a long process and one which savours of
boasting, I should like even now to shew
you how much profit there is in waiting at
the doors of great teachers, and in learning
an art from a real artificer. If I could do
this, you would see what a tangled forest of
ambiguous names and words is presented by
the Hebrew. It is this which gives such a
field for various renderings : for, the sense
beingf uncertain, each man takes the transla-
tion which seems to hnn the most consistent.
Why should I take you to any outlandish
writers.'' Go over Aristotle once more and
Alexander the commentator on Aristotle ;
you will recognize from reading these what
a plentiful crop of uncertainties exists ; and
you may then cease to find fault with your
friend in reference to things which you have
never had brought to your mind even in
your dreams.

31. My brother Paulinian tells me that
our friend has impugned certain things in
my commentary on the Ephesians : some of
these criticisms he committed to menwry,
and has indicated the actual passages im-
pugned. I must not therefore refuse to
meet his statements, and I beg the reader, if
I am somewhat prolix in the statement and
the refutation of his charges, to allow for
the necessary conditions of the discussion.
I am not accusing another but endeavouring
to defend myself and to refute the false
accusation of heresy which is thrown in my
teeth. On the Epistle to the Ephesians
Origen wrote three books. Didymus and
Apollinarius also composed works of their
own. These I partly translated, partly
adapted ; my method is described in the
following passage of my prologue: "This
also I wish to state in my Preface. Origen,
you must know, wrote three books upon this
Epistle, and I have partly followed him.
Apollinarius also and Didymus published
certain commentaries on it, from which I
have culled some things, though but few;
and, as seemed to me right, I put in or took
out others ; but I have done this in such
a way that the careful reader may from the
very first see how far the work is due to me,
how far to others." Whatever fault there is
detected in the exposition given of this
Epistle, if I am unable to shew that it exists
in the Greek books from which I have
stated it to have been translated into Latin,
I will acknowledge that the fault is mine


494


JEROME.


and not another's. However, that I should
not be thought to be raising quibbles, and
by this artifice of self-excuse to be escaping
from boldly meeting him, I will set out the
actual passages which are adduced as evi-
dences of my fault.

22. To begin. In the first boolv I take
the words of Paul : ' "As he hath chosen us
before the foundation of the world, that we
might be holy and unspotted before him."
This I have interpreted as referring not,
according to Origen's opinion, to an election
of those who had existed in a previous state,
but to the foreknowledge of God ; and I close
the discussion with these words :

" His assertion that we have been chosen before
the foundation of the world that we should be holy
and without blemish before him, that is, before
God, belongs to the foreknowledge of God, to
whom all things which are to be are already made,
and are known before they come into being. Thus
Paul was predestinated in the womb of his mother:
and Jeremiah before his birth is sanctified, chosen,
confirmed, and, as a type of Christ, sent as a
prophet to the Gentiles."

There is no crime siu'ely in this exposition
of the passage. Origen explained it in a
heterodox sense, but I followed that of the
church. And, since it is the duty of a
commentator to record the opinions expressed
by many others, and I had promised in the
Preface that I would do this, I set down
Origen's interpretation, though without men-
tioning his name which excites ill will.

" Another," I said, " who wishes to vindicate
the justice of God, and to shew that he does not
choose men according to a prejudgment and fore-
knowledge of his own but according to the deserts
of the elect, thinks that before the visible creation
of sky, earth, sea and all that is in them, there ex-
isted the invisible creation, part of which consisted
of souls, which, for certain causes known to God
alone, were cast down into this valley of tears,
this scene of our affliction and our pilgrimage; and
that it is to this that we may apply the Psalmist's
prayer, he being in this low condition and longing
to return to his former dwelling place: * " Woe is
me that my sojourn is prolonged; I have inhabited
the habitations of Kedar, my soul hath had a long
pilgrimage." And also the words of the Apostle :
^ " O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death.'" and * " It is
better to return and to be with Christ;" and ^ "Be-
fore I was brought low, I sinned." He adds much
more of the same kind."

Now observe that I said " Another who
wishes to vindicate," I did not say " who suc-
ceeds in vindicating." But if you find a stum-
bling block in the fact that I condensed a very
long discussion of Origen's into a brief
statement so as to give the reader a glimpse


» Eph, i, 4.
• Ps. cxx, 5.


* Rom. vii, 34.,
« Phil, i, ai.


B Ps. cxix, 67.


of his meaning } if you declare me to be a
secret adherent of his because I have not left
out anything which he has said, I would
ask you whether it was not necessary for me
to do this, so as to avoid your cavils. Would
you not otherwise have declared that I had
kept silence on matters on which he had
spoken boldly, and that in the Greek text his
assertions were much stronger than I repre-
sented.'' I therefore put down all that I
found in the Greek text, though in a shorter
form, so that his disciples should have
nothing which they could force upon the
ears of the Latins as a new thing ; for it is
easier for us to make light of things which
we know well than of things which take us
unprepared. But after I had shewn Origen's
interpretations of the passage, I concluded
this section with woi-ds to which I beg your
attention :

"The Apostle does not say • He chose us before
the foundation of the world because we were then
holy and without blemish;' but 'He chose us
that we might be holy and without blemish,' that
is, that we who before were not holy and without
blemish might afterwards become such. This ex-
pression will apply even to sinners who turn to
better things; and thus the words remain true, 'In
thy sight shall no man living be justified,' that is,
no one in his whole life, in the whole of the time
that he has existed in the world. If the passage
be thus understood, it makes against the opinion
that before the foundation of the world certain
souls were elected because of their holiness, and
that they had none of the corruption of sinners.
It is evident that Paul and those like him were not
elected because they were holy and without blem-
ish, but they were elected and predestinated so
that in their after life, by means of their works
and their virtues, they should become holy and
without blemish."

Does any one dare, then, after this state-
ment of my opinion, to accuse me of assent
to the heresy of Origen ? It is now almost
eighteen years since I composed those books,
at a time when the name of Origen was
highly esteemed in the world, and when as
yet his work the Uepl 'Apjwj' had not reached
the ears of the Latins : and yet I distinctly
stated my belief and pointed out what I did
not agree with. Hence, even if my opponent
could have pointed out anything heretical in
other places, I should be held guilty only of
the fault of carelessness, not of the perverse
doctrines which both in this place and in my
other works I have condemned.

23. I will deal shortly with the second pas-
sage which my brother tells me has been
marked for blame, because the complaint is
exceedingly frivolous, and bears on its face its
calumnious character. The passage' is that in

- ■■ — - ' — ■■ -- ■■■I. — ^^^^^^w^^i I I ■ »i

* £ph. i, 20, 31.


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


495


which Paul declares that God " made him to
sit at his right hand in tlie heavenly places, far
above all rule and authority and power and
dominion, and every name that is named,
not only in this world but also in that which
is to come," After stating various exposi-
tions which have been given, I came to the
offices of the ministers of God, and spoke of
the principalities and powers, the virtues and
dominions : and I add :

" They must assuredly have others who are sub-
ject to them, who are under their power and serve
them, and are fortified by their authority: and this
distribution of offices will exist not only in the
present world but in the world to come, so that
each individual will rise or fall from one step of
advancement and honour to another, some as-
cending and some descending, and will come suc-
cessively under each of these powers, virtues,
principalities, and dominions."

I then went on to describe the various
divine offices and ministries after the simili-
tude of the palace of an earthly king, which
I fully described ; and I added :

"Can we suppose that God the Lord of lords
and King of kings, is content with a single order
of servants? We speak of an archangel because
there are other angels of whom he is chief: and so
there would be nothing said of Principalities,
Powers and Dominions unless it were implied
that there were others of inferior rank."

But, if he thinks that I became a follower
of Origen because I mentioned in my expo-
sition these advancements and honours, these
ascents and descents, increasings and dimin-
ishings ; I must point out that to say, as
Origen does, that Angels and Cherubim and
Seraphim are turned into demons and men,
is a very different thing from saying that the
Angels themselves have various offices allotted
to them, — a doctrine which is not repugnant
to that of the church. Just as among men
there are various degrees of dignity distin-
guished by the different kinds of work, as the
bishop, the presbyter and the other Ecclesi-
astical grades have each their own order,
while yet all are men ; so we may believe that,
while they all retain the dignity of Angels,
there are various degrees of eminence among
them, without imagining that angels are
changed into men, and that men are new-
made into angels.

24. A third passage with which he finds
fault is that in which I gave a threefold in-
terpretation of the Apostle's words : ' " That
in the ages to come he might shew the ex-
ceeding riches of his grace in kindness
towards us in Christ Jesus." The first was

1 Eph. ii, 7.


my own opinion, the second the opposite
opinion held by Origen, the third the simj^le
explanation given by Apollinarius. As to
the fact that I did not give their names, I
must ask for pardon on the ground that it
was done through modesty. I did not wish
to disparage men whom I was partly follow-
ing, and whose opinions I was translating
into the Latin tongue. But, I said, the
diligent reader will at once search into these
things and form his own opinion. And I
repeated at the end : Another turns to a
different sense the words ' That in the ages
to come he might shew the exceeding riches
of his grace.' "Ah," you will say, " I see
that in the character of the diligent reader
you have unfolded the opinions of Origen."
I confess that I was wrong. I ought to
have said not The diligent but The blasphe-
mous reader. If I had anticipated that you
would adopt measures of this kind I might
have done this, and so have avoided vour
calumnious speeches. It is, I suppose, a
great crime to have called Origen a diligent
reader, especially when I had translated
seventy books of his and had praised him up
to the sky, — for doing which I had to defend
myself in a short treatise ' two years ago in
answer to your trumpeting of my praises. In
those ' praises ' which you gave me you laid
it to my charge that I had spoken of Origen
as a teacher of the churches, and now that you
speak in the character of an enemy you
think that I shall be afraid because you
accuse me of calling him a diligent reader.
Why, even shopkeepers who are particularly
frugal, and slaves who are not wasteful, and
the care-takers who made our childhood a
burden to us and even thieves when they are
particularly clever, we speak of as diligent ;
and so the conduct of the unjust steward in
the Gospel is spoken of as wise. Moreover
' " The children of this world are wiser than
the children of light," and ^"The serpent
was wiser than all the beasts which the Lord
had made on the earth."

2^. The fourth ground of his censure is
in the beginning of my Second Book, in
which I expounded the statement which St.
Paul makes "For this cause I Paul, the
prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles."
The passage in itself is perfectly plain ; and
I give, therefore, only that part of the com-
ment on it which lends itself to malevolent
remark :

" The words which describe Paul as the prisoner
of Jesus Christ for the Gentiles may be under-
stood of his martyrdom, since it was when he was


1 Jerome Letter 84.


5 Luke xvi, S.


s Gen. ui, I.


49<5


JEROME.


thrown into chains at Rome that he wrote this
Epistle, at the same time with those to Philemon
and the Colossians and the Philippians, as we have
formerly shewn. Certainly we mii^ht adopt an-
other sense, namely, that, since we find this body
in several places called the chain of the soul, in
which it is held as in a close prison, Paul may
speak of himself as confined in the chains of the
body, and so that he could not return and be with
Christ-, and that thus he might perfectly fulfil his
office of preaching to the Gentiles. Some com-
mentators, however, introduce another idea,
namely, that Paul, having been predestinated and
consecrated from his mother's womb, and before
he was born, to be a preacher to the Gentiles,
afterwards took on the chains of the flesh."

Here also, as before, I gave a three fold ex-
position of the passage : in the first my own
view, in the second the one supported by
Origen, and the third the opinion of Apolli-
narius going contrary to his doctrine. Read
over the Greek commentaries. If you do not
find the fact to be as I state it, I will con-
fess that I was wrong. What is my fault in
this passage .'' The same, I presume, as that
to which I made answer before, namely,
that I did not name those whose views I
quoted. But it was needless at each sepa-
rate statement of the Apostle to give the
names of the writers whose works I had
declared in the Preface that I meant to trans-
late. Besides, it is not an absurd way of
understanding the passage, to say that the
soul is bound in the body until Christ re-
turns and, in the glory of the resurrection,
changes our corruptible and mortal body for
incorruption and immortality : for it is in
this sense that the Apostle uses the expres-
sion, "O wretched man that I am; who
shall deliver me from the body of this
death.'"' calling it the body of death because
it is subject to vices and diseases, to disor-
ders and to death ; until it rises with Christ
in glory, and, having been nothing but fragile
clay before, becomes baked by the heat of the
holy Spirit into a jar of solid consistency,
thus changing its grade of glory, though not
its nature.

26. The fifth passage selected by him for
blame is the most important, that in which
I explain the statement of the Apostle.
' " From whom all the body fitly framed and
knit together through every juncture of
ministration, according to the working in
due measure of every several part, maketh
the increase of the body unto the building
up of itself in love." Here I simimed up
in a short sentence Origen's exposition
which is very long and goes over the same
ideas in various words, yet so as to leave

1 Eph. iv, 16.


out none of his illustrations or his assertions.
And when I had come to the end, I added :

"And so in the restitution of all things, when
Jesus Christ the true physician comes to restore to
health the whole body of the Church, which now
lies scattered and rent, every one will receive his
proper place according to the measure of his faith
and his recognition of the Son of God (the word
' recognize ' implies that he had formerly known
him and afterwards had ceased to know him), and
shall then begin to be what he once had been;
yet not in such a way as that, as held by another
heresy, all should be placed in one rank, and, by
a renovating process, all become angels ; but that
each member, according to its own measure and
office shall become perfect : for instance, that the
apostate angel shall begin to be that which he was
by his creation, and that man who had been cast
out of paradise shall be restored again to the
cultivation of paradise; " and so on.

37. I wonder that you with your con-
summate wisdom have not understood my
method of exposition. When I say, ' But
not in such a way that, as held by another
heresy, all should be placed in one rank,
that is, all by a reforming process become
angels, ' I clearly shew that the things which
I put forward for discussion are heretical,
and that one heresy differs from the other.
Which (do you ask?) are the two heresies.?
The one is that which says that all reason-
able creatures will by a reforming process
become angels ; the other, that which asserts
that in the restitution of the world each
thing will become what it was originallv
created ; as for instance that devils will
again become angels, and that the souls of
men will become such as they were originall}-
formed ; that is, by the reforming process
will become not angels but that which God
originally made them, so that the just and
the sinners will be on an equality. Finally,
to shew you that it was not my own opinion
which I was developing but two heresies
which I was comparing with one another,
both of which I had found stated in the
Greek, I completed my discussion with this
ending :

*' These things, as I have said before, are more
obscure in our tongue because they are put in a
metaphorical form in Greek; and in every meta-
phor, when a translation is made word for word
from one language into another, the budding sense
of the word is choked as it were with brambles."

If you do not find in the Greek the very
thought which I have expressed, I give you
leave to treat all that I say as my own.

28. The sixth and last point which I am
told that he brings against me (that is if my
brother has not left anything unreported) is
that, in the interpretation of the Apostle's


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


497


words, '"He that loveth his wife loveth
himself, for no one ever hated his own
flesh, bnt nourisheth and cherisheth it, even
as Christ also the church," after my own
simple explanation I propounded the ques-
tion raised by Origcn, speaking his views,
though without mentioning his name, and
saying :

" I may be met by the objection that the state-
ment of the Apostle is not true when he says that
no man liates his own flesli, since tliose wlio labour
under the jaundice or consumption or cancer or
abscesses, prefer death to life, and hate their own
bodies ;" and my own opinion follows immediately :
" The words, therefore, may be more properly
taken in a metaphorical sense."

When I say metaphorical, I mean to shew
that what is said is not actually the case, but
that the truth is shadowed forth throuo-h a
mist of allegory. However, I will set out
the actual words which are found in Orisen's
thinl book ; " We may say that the soul loves
that flesh which is to see the salvation of God,
that it noiu^ishes and cherishes it, and trains
it by discipline and satisfies it with the bread
of heaven, and gives it to drink of the blood
of Christ: so that it may become well-liking
through wholesome food, and may follow its
husband freely, without being weighed down
by any weakness. It is by a beautiful image
that the soul is said to nourish and cherish
the body as Christ noin"ishes and cherishes
the chiu'ch, since it was he who said to
Jerusalem : ^

" How often would I have gathered thy children
together as a hen gathereth her chickens under her
wings and thou wouldst not;" and that thus this
corruptible may put on incorruption, and that,
being poised lightly, as upon wings, may rise more
easily into the air. Let us men then cherish our
Avives, and let our souls cherish our bodies in such
a way as that wives may be turned into men and
bodies into spirits, and that there may be no differ-
ence of sex, but that, as among the angels there is
neither male nor female, so we, who are to be like
the Angels, may begin to be here what it is prom-
ised that we shall be in heaven."

39. The simple explanation of my own
opinion in reference to the passage I stated
before in these words :

"Taking the simple sense of the words, we have
a command, following on the precept of mutual
kindness between man and wife, that we should
nourish and cherish our wives : that is, that we
should supply them with the food and clothing
which are necessary."

This is my own understanding of the
passage. Consequently, my words implj-


that all that follows after and might be
brought up against me must be understood
as spoken not as my own view but that of
my opponents. But it might be thought that
my resolution of the difticidty of the passage
is too short and peremptory, and that it
wraps the true sense, according to what has
been said above, in the darkness of allegory,
so as to bring it down from its true mean-
ing to one less rue. I will therefore come
nearer to the matter, and ask what there is
in the other interpretation with which you
need disagree. It is this I suppose, that I
said that souls should cherish their bodies as
men cherish their wives, so that this cor-
ruptible may put on incorruption, and that,
being lightly poised as upon wings, it may
rise more easily into the air. When I say
that this corruptible must put on incorrup-
tion, I do not change the nature of the body,
but sive it a higher rank in the scale of
being. And so as regards what follows,
that, being lightly poised as upon wings. It
may more easily rise into the air : He who gets
wings, that is, immortality, so that he may
fly more lightly up to heaven, does not cease
to be what he had been. But you may say,
I am staggered by what follows :

** Let us men then cherish our wives, and let
our souls cherish our bodies, in such away as that
wives may be turned into men and bodies into
spirits, and that there may be no difference of sex,
but that, as among the angets there is neither male
nor female, so we, who are to be like the angels,
may begin to be on earth what it is promised that
we shall be in heaven."

You might justly be staggered, if I had
not, after what goes before, said "We maj^
begin to be what it is promised that we shall
be in heaven." When I say, "We shall be-
gin to be on earth," I do not take away the
difference of sex ; I only take away lust, and
sexual intercourse, as the Apostle does when
he says, " The time is short ; it remaineth
therefore that those wdio have wives be as
though they had none ; " and as the Lord
implied when, in reply to the question of
which of the seven brothers the woman
would be the wife, he answered : ' " Ye err,
not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of
God ; for in the resurrection they shall neither
marry nor be given in marriage : but they
shall be as the angels of God." And, indeed,
when chastity is observed between man and
woman, it begins to be true that there is
neither male nor female ; but, though living in
the bod\-, they are being changed into angels,
anions: whom there is neither male nor female.


1 Eph. V, 28, 29.
VOL. III.


2 Matt, xxiii, 37.


1 Matt. xxii.


Kk


498


JEROME.


The same is said by the same Apostle in an-
other place: '"As many of you as were
bapti/^ed into Christ did put on Christ.
There can be neither Jew nor Greek, tliere
can be neither bond nor free, there can be no
male and female : for ye are all one in Christ
Jesus."

30. But now, since my pleading has
steered its course out of these rough and
broken places, and I have refuted the charge
of heresy which had been urged against me
by looking my accuser freely in the face, I
will pass on to the other articles of charge
with which he tries to assail mc. Tlie first
is that I am a scurrilous person, a detractor
of every one ; that I am always snarling and
biting at my predecessors. I ask him to
name a single person whose reputation I
have disparaged, or whom, according to an
art practised by my opponent. I have galled
by pretended praise. But, if I speak against
ill-disposed persons, and wound with the
point of my pen some Luscius Lanuvinus ^ or
an Asinius Pollio of the race of tlie Cornelii,'
if 1 repel the attacks of a man of boastful
and curious spirit, and aim all my shafts at
a single butt, why does he divide with others
the wounds meant for him alone .^ And why
is he so unwise as to shew, by the irritation
of his answer to my attack, his consciousness
that it is he alone whom the cap fits ?

He brings against me the charge of per-
jury and sacrilege together, because, in a
book written for the instruction of one of
Christ's virgins, I describe the promise which
I once made when I dreamed that I was before
the tribunal of the Judge, that I would never
again pay attention to secular literature, and
that nevertheless I have sometimes made
mention of the learning which I then con-
demned. I think that I have here lighted on
the man who, under the name of Sallustianus
Calpurnius, and through the letter written to
me by the orator Magnus, raised a not very
* great question. My answer on the general
subject is contained in the short treatise
which I then wrote to him.* But at the
present moment I must make answer as to
the sacrilege and perjury of my dream. I
said that I would thenceforward read no

1 Gal. iii, 27, 2S.

2 A rival of Terence, to whom Jerome often compares Ru-
finus.

3 Asinius Pollio was a rival of Cicero. It seems that some
detractor of Jerome boasted that he was of the race of the
Cornclii. Sec Comra. on Jonah iv, 6. " A curtain Canthcrius,
of the most ancient race of tlic Cornelii, or, as he boasts, of the
stock of Asinius Pollio, is said to liave accused nie at Itome
lon<j; ag-o for havinjr translated ' ivy ' instead of ' gourd.' "

■■ Per oratoreni Afii^^num non man'nam moveral qua'stioncm.

^ Icronie, Inciter llXX, c. 6. "Perhaps the iiueslion (as
to christians reading heathen books) is suggested bv one who,
lor his love of Sallust, might go by the name of C'alpmEiius
Lanarius."


secular books : it was a promise for the
futtu'e, not the aliolition of my memory of
the past. How, you may ask me, can you
retain what you have been so long without
reading.'' I must give my answer by recur-
rinsf to one of these old books : '

'Tis much to be inured in tender youth.

But by this mode of denial I criminate
myself; for bringing Virgil as my witness I
am accused by my own defender. I suppose
I must weave a long web of words to prove
what each man is conscious of. Which of
us does not remember his infancy? I shall
make you laugh though you are a man of
such extreme gravity ; and you will have at
last to do as Crassus did, who, Lucilius tells
us, laughed but once in his life, if I recount
the memories of my childhood : how I ran
about among the offices where the slaves
worked ; how I spent the holida}S in play ;
or how I had to be dragged like a ca})tive
from my grandmother's lap to the lessons of
my enraged Orbilius.' You may still more
be astonished if I say that, even now that
my head is gray and bald, I often seem in
my dreams to be standing, a curly youth,
dressed in my toga, to declaim a contro-
versial thesis before the master of rhetoric ;
and, when I wake, I congratulate myself on
escaping the peril of making a speech.
Believe me, our infancy brings back to us
many things most accurately. If you had
had a literary education, your mind would
retain what it was originally imbued with as
a wine cask retains its scent. The purple
dye on the wool cannot be washed out with
water. Even asses and other brutes know
the inns they have stopped at before, how-
ever long the journey may have been. Are
you astonished that I have not forgotten my
Latin books when you learnt Greek without
a master } I learned the seven forms of Syllo-
gisms in the Elements of logic ; I learned the
meaning of an Axiom, or as it might be
called in Latin a Determination ; I learned
how every sentence must have in it a verb
and a noun ; ho\v to heap up the steps of the
Sorites,^ how to detect the clever turns of the
Pseudomenos'' and the frauds of the stock
sophisms. I can swear that I never read any
of these things after I left school. I suppose
that, to escape from having what I learned
made into a crime, I must, according to the
fables of the poets, go and drink of the river

1 Virg. Gcor. 11,273.

- The name of a pedagogue recorded by Horace (Ep. ii,
'1 7')i which passed into a general name for boys' tutors.

3 'fhe "Heap-argument," in which a number of separate
arguments ccmverge on the same point.

♦ " The I.iar," another logical puzzle.


APOLOGY — BOOK I.


499


Lethe. I summon you, who accuse me for
my scanty knowledge, and who think your-
self a literateur and a Rabbi, tell me how was
it that vou dared to write some of the thinos
you have written, and to translate Greg-
ory,' that most eloquent man, with a splen-
dour of eloquence like his own? Whence
have you obtained that flow of words, that
lucidity of statement, that variety of transla-
tions,— you who in youtli had hardly more
than a first taste of rhetoric? I must be very
much mistaken if you do not study Cicero
in secret. I suspect that, being yourself so
cultivated a person, you forbid me under
penalties the reading of Cicero, so that you
may be left alone among our church writers
to boast of your flow of eloquence. I must
say, however, that you seem rather to follow
the philosophers, for your style is akin to
that of the thorny sentences of Cleanthcs^
and the contortions of Chrysippus,^ not from
any art, for of that you say you are ignorant,
but from the sympathy of genius. The
Stoics claim Logic as their own, a science
which you despise as a piece of fatuity; on
this side, therefore, you are an Epicurean,
and the principle of your eloquence is, not
style but matter. For, indeed, what docs it
matter that no one else understands what you
wish to say, when you write for your own
friends alone, not for all? I must confess
that I myself do not always understand what
you write, and think that I am reading
■^Heraclitus; however I do not complain, nor
lament for my sluggishness ; for tlie trouble
of reading what you write is not more than
the trouble you must have in writing it.

31. I might well reply as I have done even
if it were a question of a promise made with
full consciousness. But this is a new and
shameless thing ; he throws in my teeth a
mere dream. How am I to answer? I have
no time for thinking of anything outside my
own sphere. I wish that I were not pre-
vented from reading even the Holy Scriptures
by the throngs that beset this place, and the
gathering of Christians from all parts of the
world. Still, when a man makes a dream
into a crime, I can quote to him the words
of the Prophets, who say that we are not to
believe dreams; for even to dream of adultery
does not condemn us to hell, and to dream
of the crown of martyrdom does not raise us
to heaven. Often I have seen m3'self in
di'eams dead and placed in the grave : often
I have flown over the earth and been carried

1 Nazianzen. See Prolegomena.

2 Stoic philosopher of Assiis in Lydia B. C. 300-240.

3 Of Cilicia; disciple of Clcanthes, B. C. 280-208.

* Born at Ephesus B. C. 503. His philosophy was tinged
with melancholy, and his style obscure.


as if swimming through tlie air, over moun-
tains and seas. My accuser might, therefore,
demand that I should cease to live, or that
I should have wings on my shoulders, be-
cause my niind has often been mocked in
sleep by vague fancies of this kind. How
many people are rich while asleep and wake
to find themselves beggars ! or are drinking
water to cool their thirst, and wake up with
their throats parclied and burning ! You
exact from me the fulfilment of a promise
given in a dream. I will meet you with a
truer and closer question : Have you done
all that you promised in your baptism?
Have you or I fulfilled all that the profession
of a monk demands? I beg you, think
whether you are not looking at the mote in
my eye through the beam in vour own. I
say this against my will ; it is by sorrow that
my reluctant tongue is forced into words.
As to you, it is not enough for you to make
up charges about my waking deeds, but you
must accuse me for my dreams. You have
such an interest in my actions that you must
discuss what I have said or done in my
sleep. I will not dwell on the way in
which, in your zeal to speak against me,
you have besmirched your own j^rofcssion,
and have done all you can by word and deed
for the dishonouring of the whole body of
Christians. But I give you fair warning,
and will repeat it again and again. You
are attacking a creature who has horns : and,
if it were not that I lay to heart the words of
the Apostle ' " The evil speakers^ shall not
inherit the kingdom of God," and ^ " By hat-
ing one another you have been consumed one
of another," I would make you feel what a
vast discord you have stirred up after a
slight and pretended reconciliation. What
advantage is it to you to heap up slanders
against me both among friends and stran-
gers? Is it because I am not an Origenist,
and do not believe that I sinned in heaven,
that I am accused as a sinner upon earth?
And was the result of our renewal of friend-
ship to be, that I was not to speak against
heretics for fear that my notice of them
should be taken for an assault upon you?
So long as I did not refuse to be belauded by
you, you followed me as a master, you called
me friend and brother, and acknowledged
me as a catholic in every respect. But
when I asked to be spared your praises, and
judged myself unworthy to have such a great
man for my trumpeter, you immediately
ran your pen through what you had written,
and began to abuse all that you had praised

il.Cor. vi,9. 2 Revilers, Rev. Ver. ^ Gal. v, 15.


500


JEROME.


before, and to pour forth from the same
mouth both sweet and bitter words. I wish
you could understand what self-repression
1 am exerting in not suiting my words to the
boiling heat of my breast ; and how I pray,
like the Psalmist: ' " Set a watch, O Lord,
before my mouth, keep the door of my lips.
Incline not my heart to the words of mal-
ice ; " and, as he says elsewhere : * " While
the wicked stood before me I was dumb and
was humbled and kept silence even from good
words;" and again : •''' I became as a man
that heareth not and in whose mouth are no
reproofs." But for me the Lord the Aven-
ger will reply, as he says through the
Prophet: ''"Vengeance is mine, I will
repa}-, saith the Lord " : and in another
place: ''"'Thou satest and spakcst against
thy brother, and hast slandered thy mother's
son. These things hast thou done, and I
kept silence ; thou thoughtest indeed by that I
should be such an one as thyself; but I will
reprove thee, and set them before thine
eyes ; " so that you may see yourself brought
in guilty of those things which you falsely
lay to another's charge.

32. I am told, to take another point,
that one of his followers, Chrysogonus, finds
fault with me for having said that in baptism
all sins are put away,** and, in the case of
the man who was twice married, that he
had died and risen up a new man in Christ ;
and further that there were several such
persons who were Bishops in the churches.
I will make him a short answer. He and
his friends have in their hands my letter, for
which they take me to task. Let him give
an answer to it, let him overthrow its reason-
ing by reasoning of his own, and prove my

1 Ps. cxli, 3, 4. = Ps. xxxix, I, 2. 3 ps. xxxviii, 14.

* Dent, xxxii, 35. " Ps. 1 , 20.

"The allusion "is to Jerome's letter (LXIX) to Oceanus
on the case of Cartcrius a Spanish Bishop, who had been
mariied before his baptism, and, his wife liavinic died, had
married again. Oceanus ari;ucd tlial he was to be condemned.
Jerome contended in his f ivour, resfarding' his first marriage I
as part of the old life obliterated by buptisnj, '


writings false by his writings. Why should
he knit his brow and draw in and wrinkle
up his nostrils, and weigh out his hollow
words, and simulate among the common
crowd a sanctity which liis conduct belies.''
Let me j^roclaim my principles once more in
his cars: That tlie old Adam dies com-
pletely in the laver of baptism, and a new
iTian rises then with Christ ; that the man
that is earthly perishes and the man from
heaven is raised up. I say this not because
I myself have a special interest in this ques-
tion, through the mercy of Christ; but that
I made answer to my brethren when they
asked me for my opinion, not intending to
prescribe for others what they may think
right to believe, nor to overturn their resolu-
tion by my opinion. For we who lie hid in
our cells do not covet the Bishop's office.
We are not like some, who, despising all
humility, are eager to buy the episcopate
with gold; nor do we wish, with the minds
of rebels, to suppress the Pontiff' chosen by
God ; ' nor do we, by favouring heretics,
show that we are heretics ourselves. As
for money, we neither have it nor desire to
have it. ^ " Having food and clothing, we
are tbercwith content; " and meanwhile we
constantly chant the words describing the
man who shall ascend to the hill of the
Lord : ^ " He that putteth not out his money
to usury, nor taketh reward against the inno-
cent ; he who doeth these thingfs shall not be
moved eternally." We may add that he
who does the opposite to these will fall
eternally.

Almost every sentence in this last chapter is
an insidious allusion to Rufinus. His " wrinkled-
up brow" and " turncd-up nose," his weighing out
his words, his supposed wealth, are all alluded to
in other places and especially in the satirical de-
scription of him given after his death in Jerome's
letter (cxxv. c. iS) to Rusticus.

1 The allusion is, perhaps, to Rufinus' answer to Pope
Anastasius translated in this volume.

- 1. Tim, vi, S. 3 Ps. xxiv, 3; xv, 5.


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


501


JEROME'S APOLOGY AGAINST RUFINUS — BOOK II.

Summary of the CiiArxERs.


1-3. A criticism on Rufinus' Ajiology to Anastasius, His excuses fur not coming to Rome are absurd.
His parents are dead and the journey is easy. No one ever heard before of his being imprisoned or exiled for
the faith.

4-8. His confession of faitli is unsatisfactory. No one aslvcd him aljout the Trinity, but about Origen's
doctrines of the Resurrection, the origin of souls, and the salvability of Satan. As to the Resurrection and to
Satan he is ambiguous. As to souls he professes ignorance.

9. What Latin ! The poor souls must be tormented by his barbarisms.

10. It is not permitted to you to be ignorant of such a matter which all the churches know.

11. As to translating the llepl ^Kpx<^v^ it is not a question, but a charge that you unjustiliably altered the
book.

12,13. Origen asserts Christ to be a creature, and maintains universal restitution. Where has he contra-
dicted, this?

14. The question is, as Anastasius says to John of Jerusalem, with what motive you translated the
Hf/jt 'A/>;i;wi\

15. You pretend not to be Origen's defender, but you publish and enlarge the Apology for him and allege
the heretics' falsification of his works.

16. Your defence gains no support from Eusebius or Didymus, who, each for his own reason, defend the
lls/ji ^Kpx^v as it stands.

1 7. If we may allege falsification at every turn we make a chaos of all past literature.

18. The object of Origen's letter, of which he translates only a part, is not to shew the falsification of his
writings but to vituperate the Bishops who condemned him.

19. It is only in reference to a particular point in his dispute with Candidus that Origen alleges this falsi-
fication. The story of Hilary's being condemned through his writings having been falsified has no foundation.

20. That which you tell about myself in Damasus' council is mere after-dinner gossip.

21-2. The attack on Epiphanius as a plagiarist of Origen is an outrage on the ]3ishops generally. Origen
never wrote 6000 books.

23. I ascertained, at the library at Csesarea that the Apology you quote as Pamphilus' is the work of Euse-
bius.

24. The letter falsely circulated in Africa as mine, and expressing regret for my translation of the Old
Test, from the Hebrew bears the mark of your hand. I have always honoured the Seventy Translators.

25-32. In proof of this, I bring forward the prefaces to my Translation of the Books from Genesis to
Isaiah.

33. As to Daniel, it was necessary to point out that Bel and the Dragon, and similar stories were not
found in the Hebrew.

34. A vindication of the importance of the Hebrew Text of Scripture.

35. Though the LXX has been of great value, we should be grateful for fresh translations from the


original.

I . Thus far I have made answer about my
crimes, and indeed in defence of my crimes,
which my crafty encomiast formerly urged
against me, and which his disciples still con-
stantly press. I have done so not as well as
I ought but as I was able, putting a check
upon my complaints, for my object has been
not so much to accuse others as to defend
myself. I will now come to his Apology,^
by which he strives to justify himself to
Anastasius, Bishop of the City of Rome,
and, in order to defend himself, constructs a
mass of calumnies against me. His love for
me is like that which a man who has been
carried away by the tempest and nearly
drowned in deep water feels for the strong
swimmer at whose foot he clutches : he is de-
termined that I shall sink or swim with him.

3. He professes in the first place to be re-
plying to insinuations made at Rome against
his orthodoxy, he being a man most fully ap-
proved in respect both of divine faith and of

^ See this Apology translated above.


[charity. He says that he would have wished
to come himself, were it not that he had
lately returned, after thirty years' absence, to
his parents, and that it would have seemed
harsh and inhuman to leave them after having
been so long in coming to them ; and also
if he had not become somewhat less robust
through his long and toilsome journey, and too
infirm to begin his labours again. As he
had not been able to come himself, he had
sent his apology as a kind of literary cudgel
which the bishop might hold in his hand
and drive away the dogs who were raging
against him. If he is a man approved for
his divine faith and charity by all, and
especially by the Bishop to whom he writes ;
how is it that at Rome he is assailed and re-
viled, and that the reports of the attacks upon
his reputation grow thicker. Further, what
sort of humility is this, that a man speaks
of himself as approved for his divine faith
and charity.^ The Apostles prayed, '" Lord

^ Luke xvii, Si 6.


502


JEROMK.


increase our faith/' and received for answer:
" If ye had faith as a grain of mustard seed ; "
and even to Peter it is said: ' " O thou of
little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?"
Why shoukl I speak of charit}', \vliich is
greater tliau either faith or ho})e, and which
Paul says he hopes for rather than assumes:
without which even the blood shed in
martyrdom and the body given up to the
flames has no reward to crown it. Yet both
of these our friend claims as his own; in
such a way, however, that there still remain
creatures who bark against him, and who
will go on barking unless the illustrii)u.s Pon-
tiir drives them away witli his stick. But
how absurd is this plea which he puts for-
ward, of having returned to his parents after
thirty years. Why, he has got neither father
nor mother! He left them alive when he
was a young man, and, now that he is old.
he pines for them when they are dead. But
perhaps, he means by " parents," what is
meant in the talk of the soldiers and the
common people, his kinsfolk and relations;
well, he says he does not wish to be tliought
so harsh and inhuman as to desert them ; and
thei-efore he leaves his home^ and goes to
live at Aquileia. That most ajjproved faith
of his is in great peril at Rome, and yet he
lies on his back, being a l)it tired after thirty
years, and cannot make that very easy journey
in a carriage along that Flaminian Way.
lie puts forward his lassitude after his long
journey, as if he had done nothing but move
about for thirty years, or as if, after resting
at Aquileia for two years, he was still worn
out with the labour of Ids past travels.

3. I will touch upon the other jDoints,
and set down the actual words of his letter :

" AUlioui^Ii my faitli w;is prowd, at. the lime of
the porscciitioii by the heretics, when [ ^v•as living
in tlie holy chureli of Alex;indiia, by imprison-
ments and exiles, to \vhich I was subjected because
of the <"aith."

I only wonder that lie did not add ^ " The
prisoner of Jesus Christ," or " I was delivered
from the jaw of the lion," or " I fought with
beasts at Alexandria," or " I have (inisiied my
course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth there
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness."
What exiles, what im])risonments are these
which he describes.'' I blush fortius open
falsehood. As if imprisoniTient and exile
would be inflicted without judicial sentences !
I should like to have a list of these imprison-


]er. Kji. V, 2 ; coiiip.


1 Matt. xiv. 31.

- 'Phis old home was at Concordia,
with title of Kp. X.

3 Expressions of St. I'aul in Eph. iii, i; aTim.iv, ]•;
Cor. XV, 32; aTim.iv.y.


ments and of the various provinces to which
he tells us that he was forced into exile.
Next there appear to have been numerous
imprisonments and an infinite numixn- of
exiles ; so that he might at least name one of
them all. Let us have the acts of his con-
fessorship protlticed, for hitherto we have
been in ignorance of them ; and so let us
have the satisfaction of recitinsr his deeds
with those of the other martyrs of Alexan-
dria, and that he may be able to meet the
people who bark against him with the
words: '"From henceforth let no man
trouble me, for I bear in my body the marks
of our Lord Jesus Christ."
4. He goes on :

" Still, since tiicre may be some persons, wlio
may wish to prove my faith, or to hear and learn
wiiat it is, I will declare that I thus think of the
Trinity; "

and so on. At first you said that you en-
trusted your faith to the Bishop as a stick
with which he luight fortify himself on your
behalf against those barking dogs. Now
you speak a little less confidently, " There
may be some persons who wish to prove my
faith." You begin to hesitate when the
barkings ^\•hich reach your ears are so nu-
merous. I will not stop to discuss the forms
of diction whicli you use, for these you look
down upon and condemn : I will answer
according to the meaning alone. You are
asked about one thing, and you give account
for yourself upon another. As to the doc-
trines of Arius, you contended against them
at Alexandria a long time ago, by inqn-ison-
ment and exile, not with words but with
blood. But the qtiestion now relates to the
heresy of Origen, and the feeling aroused
against you on the subject. I should be
sorry that yoti should trouble yotu^self to cure
wounds which are already healed. You
confess a Trinity in one Godhead. The
whole world now confesses this, and I think
that even the devils ct)nfess that the .Son of
God was born of the Virgin Marv, and took
upon him the flesh and the soul belonging to
human natiu-e. But I must besf you not
to think me a contentious man if I ex-
amine you a little more strictly. You sa}'
that the Son of God took the flesh and soul
belonging to human nature. Well then, I
would ask you not to be vexed with me but
to answer this qtiestion. That soul which
Jesus took upon him, did it exist before it
was born of Mary.? Was it created togeUier
with the body in that original Virgin nature
which was begotten by the Holy Spirit.? or,

iGul.vi.17.


APOLOGY— BOOK II.


503


when the body was already formed within
the womb, was it made all at once, and sent
down from heaven? I wish to know which
one of these you choose as your opinion. If
it existed before it was born from Mary, then
it was not yet the soul of Jesus ; and it was
employed in some way, and, for a reward of
its virtues, it was made his soid. If it arose
by traduction,' then human souls, which we
believe to be eternal, are subject to the same
condition as those of the brutes, which
perisli with the body. But if it is created
and sent into the body after the body has
been formed, tell us so simply, and free us
from anxiety.

5. None of these answers will you give
us. You turn to other things, and by your
tricks and shew of words prevent us from
paying close attention to the question.
What ! you will say, was not the question
about the resurrection of the flesh and the
punishment of the devil? True; and there-
fore I ask for a brief and sincere answer. I
raise no question as to your declaration that
it is this very flesh in which we live which
rises again, without the loss of a single
member, and without any part of the body
being cut oft' (for these are your own words).
But I want to know whether you hold, wliat
Origen denies, that the bodies rise with the
same sex with which they died ; and that
Mary will still be Mary and John be John ;
or whether the sexes will be so mixed and
confused that there will be neither man nor
woman, but something which is both or
neither ; and also whether you hold that the
bodies remain uncorrupt and immortal, and,
as you acutely suggest after the Apostle,
spiritual bodies forever; and not only the
bodies, but the actual flesh, with blood in-
fused into it, and passing by channels through
the veins and bones, — such flesh as Thomas
touched ; or that little by little they are dis-
solved into nothing, and reduced into the four
elements of which they were compoimded.
This you ought either to confess or deny,
and not to say what Origen also says, but in-
sincerely, as if he were playing upon the
weakness of fools and children, " without
the loss of a single member or the cutting ofl'
of any pail of the body." Do you suppose
that what we feared was that we mitrht rise
without noses and ears, that we should find
that our genital organs would be cut oft' or
maimed and that a city of eunuchs was built
up in the new Jerusalem ?

1 Ex traduce, that is, from a layer like that of the vine.
This eiiit^odies the view that the soul is derived, with the
body, from the parent. There is no English word for the pro-
cess ; and since the word Traducianism is used to express tlic
theory, ' Traduction' is used here to e.vprcss the process.


6. Of the devil he thus frames his opin-


ion


"We allinu also a judgment to come, in which
judgment every man is to receive the due meed of
his bodily life, according to that which he has
done, wliether good or evil. And, if in the case of
men the reward is according to their Avorks how
much more will it be so in the case of the devil
who is the universal cause of sin. Of the devil
himself our belief is that which is written in the
Gospel, namely that both he and all his angels
will receive as their jjortion the eternal fire, and
with him those who do his works, that is, who be-
come the accusers of their brethren. If then any
one denies that the devil is to be subjected to
eternal fires, may he have his part with him in the
eternal fire, so that he may know by experience the
fact which he now denies."

I will repeat the words one by one. " We
aftirm also a judgment to come, in which judg-
ment &c." I had determined to say nothing
about verl)al faidts. But, since his disciples
admire the eloquence of their master, I will
make one or two strictures upon it. He had
already said "a future judgment;" but,
being a cautious man, he was afraid of say-
ing simply " in which," and therefore wi'ote
'•' in which judgment;" for fear that, if he
had not said "judgment" a second time,
we, forgetting v^^hat had gone before, might
have supplied the word "'• ass." That which
he brings in afterwards " those who become
the accusers of their brethren will with him
have their portion in the eternal fire," is in a
style of equal beauty. Who ever heard of
' possessing * the flames ' .'' It would be like
' enjoying tortures.' I suppose that, being
now a Greek, he had tried to translate him-
self, and that for the word Kljjpovouijaovciv^'
which can be rendered in Latin by the
single word Hicrcditabunt, he said Haeredi-
tate potientur ^ supposing it to be something
more elaborate and ornate. With such trifles
and such improprieties of speech his whole
discourse is teeming. But to return to the
meaning of his words.

7. To proceed :

"This is a great spear with which the devil is
pierced, he, ' who is the universal cause of sin,' if
he is to render account of his works, like a man,
and ' with his angels possess the inheritance of
eternal fires.' This, no doubt, was what was lack-
ing to him, that, having brought mankind into
torment, he should himself ' possess the eternal
fires ' which he had all the while been longing for."

You seem to me here to speak a little too
hardly of the devil, and to assail the accuser
of all with false accusations. You say ' he


1 Poti'ri, rendered above ' have their portion.*
- Kleronomcsousin, tliey shall inherit.

2 They will enjoy tlic inheritance.


S04


JEROME.


is the universal cause of sin;' and, while you
make hiui the author of all crimes, you free
men from fault, and take away the freedom
of the will. Our Lord sa}s that ' ' from our
heart come forth evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witnesses,
railins^s,' and of Judas we read in the Gos-
pel ; ■ " After the sop vSatan entered into
him," that is, because he had before the sop
sinned voluntarily, and had not been brought
to repentance either by humbling himself or
by the forbearance of the Saviour. So also
the Apostle says; ^ '■• Such men I delivered
to Satan, that they might be taught not to
blaspheme." He delivered to Satan as to
a torturer, with a view to their punishment,
those who, before they had been delivered
to him learned to blaspheme by their own
will. David also draws the distinction in a
few words between the faults due to his own
will and the incentives of vice when he says
^"Cleanse thou me from my secret faults,
and keep back thy servant from alien sins."
We read also in Ecclesiastes *" If the spirit
of a ruler rise up against thee, leave not
thy place;" from which we may clearly see
that we commit sin if we give opportunity
to tlie power which rises up, and if we fail
to hurl down headlong the enemy who is
scaling our walls. As to your threatening
your brothers, that is, those who accuse
you, with eternal fire in company with the
devil, it seems to me that you do not so much
drag your brethren down as raise the devil up,
since he, according to you, is to be punished
only with the same fires as Christian men.
But you well know, I think, what eternal
fires mean according to the ideas of Origen,
namely, the sinners' conscience, and the re-
morse which galls their hearts within. These
ideas he thinks are intended in the words of
Isaiah : '^ " Tiieir worm shall not die neither
shall tlieir fire be quenched." And in the
words addressed to Babylon : '" Thou hast
coals of fire, thou shalt sit upon them, these
shall be thy help." So also in the Psalm it
is said to the penitent; ** •' What shall be
given to thee, or what shall be done more for
thee against the false tongue .'' Sharp arrows
of the mighty, with desolating coals ;" wdiich
means (according to him) that the arrows of
God's precepts (concerning which the
Prophet says in another place, " " I lived in


1 Malt. XV, iQ. * Ps. xix, 12, 13. Vulg.

- jolin xiii, 27. '''Eccl.x,4.

•I I. Tim. i, 20. " Is. Ixvi, 24.

' Is. xlvii, 14, jj. " Tlieic shall not be ;i C(i:il to \v;inn .it nor
fire to sit before it. Thus shall they be niilo thee lor whom th 11
hast laboured." A. V. in ahnostexact ai^reemeul with \'ulL',-He
Jerome must have quoted jiicmoriter from an oUler version.

8 Vs. cxx, 3,4. Vuli^.

" Probably a loose reference to Ps. xlii, 9, 10.


misery while a thorn pierces me"') should
woiuid and strike tlnough the crafty tongue,
and maJvc an end of sins in it. He also inter-
prets the place where the Lord testifies saying :
''•1 came to send fire on theeartli, ami how I
wish lliat it may burn " as meaning " I wish
that all may repent, and burn out through the
Holy spirit their vices and their sins ; for I
am he of whom it is written, * "Our God is
a consuming fire;" it is no great thing then
to say this of the devil, since it is prepared also
for men." You ought rather to have said, if
you wished to avoid the suspicion of believing
in the salvation of the devil ; ^ " Thou hast
become perdition and shalt not be for ever ;"
and as the Lord speaks to Job concerning the
devil, ''" Behold his ho])e shall fail him and
in the sight of all shall he be cast down. I
will not arouse him as one that is cruel, for
who can resist my countenance.^ W^ho has
first given to me that I may return it to him.^
tor all things beneath the heaven are mine.
I w'ill not spare him and his words that are
powerful and fashioned to turn away wrath."
Hence, these things may pass as the work of
a plain man. Their bearing is evident enough
to those who understand these matters ; but to
the unlearned they may wear the appearance
of innocence.

S. But what follows about the condition of
souls can by no means be excused. He says :

"I am next informed that some stir has l:)ceii
made on the ciucstion of tlie nature of the soul.
Wliether comphiints on a matter of this kind ought
to be entertained instead of being put aside, you
must yourself decide. If, however, you desire to
know my opinion upon tliis subject, I will state
it frankly. I have read a great many writers on
this question, and I find that they express divers
opinions. Some of these whom I have read hold
that the soul is infused together with the material
body through the channel of the human seed, and of
this tlieygive such proofs as they can. I think that
this was the opinion of TertuUian or Lactantius
among the Latins, jicrhaps also of a few others.
Others assert that God is every day making new
soids and infusing them into the bodies which
have been framed in the womb; while others
again believe that the soids were all made long
ago. when God made all things of nothing, and
tli.M all that he now docs is to send out each soul
to be born in its body as it seems good to him.
This is the opinion of Origen, and of some
others among the Greeks. For myself, I declare
in the presence of God that, after reading each
of these opinions, I am imable to hold any of
them as certain and absulute: the determination of
the truth in this question I leave to God and to any
to whom it shall please him to reveal it. My pro-
fession on this point is, therefore, first, that these
several ojiinions are those which I have found in
books, but, secondly, that 1 as yd ren.ain in igno-
rance on the subject, except so far as this, that the

' T.uVc xii, 40. 3 Perhaps from Jer. li, 26.

- ])eut. iv, 24, Ilcb. xii, 2y. ^ Leviathan, Job xli, 9-1J. Vulg.


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


505


Church delivers it as an article of faith that God is
the creator of souls as well as of bodies."

9. Before I enter upon the subject matter
of this passage, I must stand in admiration of
words worthy of Theophrastus :

"I am informed, he says, that some stir has been
made on the question of the nature of the soul.
Whether complaints on a matter of this kind ought
to be entertained instead of being put aside, you
must yourself decide."

If these questions as to the origin of the
soul have been stirred at Rome, vviiat is the
meaning of this comphiint and murmuring
on the question whether they ought to be
entertained or not, a question which belongs
entirely to the discretion of bishops.? But
perhaps he thinks that question and com-
plaint mean the same thing, because he
finds this form of speech in the Commen-
taries of Caper. Then he writes: "Some
of those whom I have read hold that the
soul is infused together with the material
body through the channel of the human
seed ; and of these they give such proofs
as they can." What license have we
here in the forms of speech ! What mix-
ing of the moods and tenses ! ' " I have
read some saying — they confirmed them
with what assertions they could." And in
what follows: "Others assert that God is
every day making new souls and infusing
them into the bodies which have been
framed in the womb ; while others again
believe that the souls were all made long
ago when God made all things of nothing,
and that all that he now does is to send out
each soul to be born in its body as seems
good to him." Here also we have a most
beautiful arrangement. Some, he says, as-
sert this and that ; some declare that the
souls were made long ago, that is, when
God made all things of nothing, and that
He now sends them forth to be born in their
own body as it pleases him. He speaks so
distastefully and so confusedly that I have
more trouble in correcting his mistakes than
he in writing them. At the end he says:
" I, however, though I have read these
things;" and, while the sentence still hang-s


unfinished, he adds, as if he had brought
forward something fresh: "I, however, do
not deny that I have both read each of these
things, and as yet confess that I am igno-
rant."

10. Unhappy souls ! stricken through
with all these barbarisms as with so many
lances ! I doubt whether they had so much

' The words are translated literally here, so as to shew how
they lend themselves to Jerome's strictures.


trouble when, according to the erroneous
theory of Origen, they fell from heaven to
earth, and were clothed in these gross bodies,
as they have now in being knocked about on
all sides by these strange words and sen-
tences : not to mention that word of ill omen
which says that they are infused through
the channel of the human seed. I know
that it is not usual in Christian writings to
criticise mere faults of style j but I thought
it well to shew by a few examples how rash
it is to teach what you are ignorant of, to
write what you do not know : so that, when
we come to the subject-matter, we may be
prepared to find the same amount of wis-
dom. He sends a letter, which he calls a
very strong stick, as a weapon for the Bishop
of Rome; and on the \ery subject about
which the dogs are barking at him he pro-
fesses entire ignorance of the question. If
he is ignorant on the subject foi- which ill-
reports are current against lum, what need
was there for him to send an Apology,
which contains no defence of himself, but
only a confession of his ignorance.? This
course is calculated to sow a crop of sus-
picions, not to calm them. He gives us
three opinions about the origin of souls ;
and his conclusion at the end is: "I do not
deny that I have read each of them, and I
confess that I still am ignorant." Ycu
would suppose him to be Arcesilaus ' o*-
Carneades^ who declare that there is no cer-
tainty ; though he surpasses even them in
his cautiousness ; for they were driven by
the intolerable ill-will wdiich they aroused
among philosophers for taking all truth out
of human life, to invent the doctrines of
probability, so that by making their prob-
able assertions they might temper their ag-
nosticism; but he merely says that he is un-
certain, and does not know which of these
opinions is true. If this was all the answer
he had to make, what could have induced
him to invoke so great a Pontiff as the
witness of his lack of theological cidtiue.
I presume this is the lassitude about A\hich he
tells us that he is exhausted with his thirtv-
years' journey and cannot come to Rome.
There are a great many things of which we
are all ignorant ; but we do not ask for
witnesses of our ignorance. As to the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as to the na-
tivity of our Lord and Saviour, about which
Isaiah cries, ''• Who shall declare his gen-


1 Of Pilanc in ^olia, B. C.,y6-24i. Foundcrofthe Middle
Academy, lialf-way between the Platonic idealism and the
sce|)ticisni of Pyrrho.

= Of Cyrene,'l3. C. 214-1 j(. Founder of the Third or Xew
Academy, a disputant rather than a philosopher of fixed princi-
ples. ' 3 Is. liii, S.


5o6


JEROME.


eration ? " he speaks Ijoldly, and a m3-stcry
of which all past ages knew notliing he
claims as quite within his knowledge: this
alone he docs not know, the ignorance of
which causes men to stuml:»le. As to how
a virgin became the mother of God, lie has
full knowledge ; as to how^ he himself was
born he knows nothing, lie confesses that
God is the maker of souls and bodies,
whether souls existed before bodies or
whether they came into being with the
germs of bodies, or are sent into them when
they are already formed in the womb. In
any case we recognize God as their author.
The question at issue is not whether the
souls were made by God or by another, but
which of the three opinions which he states
is true. Of this he jjrofesses ignorance.
Take care! You may find people saying that
the reason for your confession of your ig-
norance of the three is that you do not wish
to be compelled to condemn one. You
spare Tertullian and Lactantius so as not to
condemn Origen with them. As for as I
remember (though I may be mistaken) I am
not aware of having read that Lactantius spoke
of the soul as planted at the same time
as the body.' But, as you say that you have
read it, please to tell me in what book it is
to be found, so that you may not be thought
to have calumniated him in his death as you
have me in my slumber. But even here you
walk with a cautious and hesitating step.
You say: " I think that, among the Latins,
Tertullian or Lactantius held this opinion,
perhaps also some others. You not only
are in doubt about the origin of souls, but
you have only ' thoughts ' as to the opinion
which each writer holds : yet the matter is
of some importance. On the question of the
soul, however, you openly proclaim your
ignorance, and confess your untaught condi-
tion : as to the authors, your knowledge
amounts only to ' thinking,' hardly to ' pre-
suming.' But as to Origen alone you are
quite clear. " This is brigen's opinion,"
you say. But, let me ask you : Ls the opin-
ion sound or not.? Your reply is, " I do not
know." Then why do you send me mes-
sengers and letter-carriers, who are constantly
coming, merely to teach me that you are
ignorant.? To prevent the possibility of
my doubting whether your incapacity is as
great as you say, and thinking it possible
that you are cunningly concealing all you
know, you take an oath in the presence of
God that up to the present moment you
hold nothing for certain and definite on


* SUCXTTtipo/XcVjJI',


this subject, and that you leave it to God to
know what is true, and to any one to whom
it may please Him to reveal it. What!
Through all these ages does it seem to you
that there has been no one worthy of having
this revealed to him? Neither patriarch,
nor prophet, nor apostle, nor martyr.?
Were not these mysteries made clear even to
yourself when you dwelt amidst princes and
exiles.? The Lord says in the Gospel:
' " Father, I have revealed thy name to men."
Did he wlio revealed the Father keep
silence on the origin of souls .? And are you
astonished if your brethren are scandalized
when you swear that you know nothing of
a thing which the churches of Christ profess
to know .? "

II. After the exposition of his faith, or
rather his lack of knowledge, he passes on
to another matter, and tries to make excuses
for having turned the books Uepl 'Apxi^v into
Latin. I will put down his words literally :

" I am told that objections have been raised
against me because, forsooth, at the request of
some of my brethren, I translated certain works of
Origen from Greek into Latin. I suppose that
every one sees that it is only through ill-will that
this is made a matter of blame. For, if there is
any offensive statement in the author, whj' is this
to be twisted into a fault of the translator? I was
asked to exhibit in Latin what stands written in
the Greek text; and I did nothing more than fit
Latin words to Greek ideas. If, therefore, there is
anything to praise in these ideas, the praise does
not belong to me : and similarly as to anything to
which blame may attach."

" I hear," he says, " that thence dispute
has arisen." ' How clever this is, to speak
of it as a dispute, when it is really an accusa-
tion against him. " That I have, at the re-
quest of my brethren, translated certain
things of Origen's into Latin." Yes, but
what are these " certain things " ? Have they
no name.? Are you silent.? Then the bills
of charge brought by the accusers will sj^eak
for you. " 1 suppose," he sa3'S, " that
every one understands that it is only through
envy that these things aie made matters of
blame." What envy.? Are people envious
of your eloquence .? Or have you done what
no other man has ever been able to do.?
Here am I, who have translated many works
of Origen's; yet, except you, no one shews
envy towards me or calumniates me for it.
*' If there is any offensive statement in the au-
thor, why is it to be twisted into a fault of


1 T"lin xvii, 6.

2 'rhnuiili Jironic lu-te speaks .is if the question li:i<l l>cca
(Ictenniiied by church auUiority, the perusal of liis correspond-
ciicc with Augustiii (|croiiie's I^eUers 126, i,y, 134) shows
that he was iu the s.-iuie perplexity us Rulinus, but less in-
{fenuous in confcssini^ it.

2 As above, the word for word rendering is given.


APOLOGY— BOOK II.


507


the Lranslatoi ? I was asked to exliiliit in
Latin what stands written in the Greek
text; and I did nothing more than fit Latin
words to Greek ideas. If, therefore, there is
anything to praise in these ideas, the praise
does not belong to me, and similarly as to
anvtiiing to wliich l)l:niie may attach." Can
you ho astonislied that men think ill of you
when you say of open blasphemies nothing
more than, " If there are any oflensive
statements in the author"? What is said in
those books is otTensive to all men ; and you
stand alone in your doubt and in your com-
plaint that this is " twisted into a fault of the
tianslator," when you have praised it in your
Prefixce. ' You were asked to turn it into
Latin as it stood in the Greek text.' I wish
you hatl done what you pretend you were
asked. You would not then be the object
of any ill will. If you had kept faith as a
tianslator, it would not have been necessary
for mc to counteract yom* false translation by
my true one. You know in your own con-
science what you added, what you sub-
tracted, and what you altered on one side or
the other at your discretion; and after this
you have the audacity to tell us that what is
good or evil is not to be attributed to you
but to the author. You shew your sense of
I he ill will aroused against you by again
toning down your words : and as if you
were walking with your steps in the air or
on the tops of the ears of corn, you say,
" Whether there is praise or blame in these
opinions." You dare not defend him, but
you do not choose to condemn him. Choose
which of the two you please ; the option is
}ours ; if this which you have translated is
good, praise it, if bad, condemn it. But he
makes excuses, and weaves another artifice.
He says :

" I admit that I put something of my own into
the work : as I stated in my Pretace, I used my
own discretion in cutting out not a few passages;
but only those as to wliich I liad come to suspect
that the thing liad not been so stated by Origen
himself, and the statement appeared to me in these
cases to have been inserted by others, because in
other places I had found the author state the same
matter in a catholic sense."'

What wonderful eloquence ! Varied, too,
with flowers of the Attic style. " More-
over also!" ^ and " Thingfs which came to
me into suspicion ! " I marvel that he
should have dared to send such literary por-
tents to Rome. One would think that the
man's tongue was in fetters, and bound with


iSee Rufinus' position vindicated in his treatise on the cor-
ruption of Origen's writinijs, transhitcd in tliis volume.

^ ^uin iiiimo etiam, the first words of the passage. They
are literally, " Yes,<moreover also."


cords that cannot be disentangled, so that it
could hardly break forth into human speech.
However, I will return to the matter in
hand.

\i {a). I wish to know who gave you pei'-
mission to cut out a number of passages from
the work vou were translating.^ You were
asked to turn a Greek book into Latin, not to
correct it ; to draw out another man's words,
not to write a book of your own. You con-
fess, by the fact of pruning away so much,
that you did not do what you were asked.
And I wish that what you curtailed had all
been the bad parts, and that you had not put
in many things of your own which go to
support what is bad. I will take an exam^
pie, from which men may judge of the rest.
In the first book of the rif/n ^Apx^' where
Origen had uttered that impious blasphemy,
that the Son does not see the Father, you
supply the reasons for this, as if in the name
of the writer, and translate the note of
Didymus, in which he makes a fruitless ef-
fort to defend another man's error, trying to
prove that Origen spoke riglitl}^ ; but we, poor
simple men, like the tame creatures spoken of
by Ennius, can understand neither his wisdom
nor that of his translator. Your Preface,
which you allege in explanation, in which
you flatter and praise me so highly shows
you to be guilty of the most serious faults of
translation. You say that you have cut out
many things from the Greek, but you say
nothing of what you have put in. Were the
parts cut out good or bad.^ Bad, I suppose.
Was what you kept good or bad .^ Good, I
presume ; for you could not translate the
bad. Then I suppose you cut off what was
bad and left what was good? Of coiu'se.
But what you have translated can be shewn
to be almost wholly bad. Whatever there-
fore in your translation I can shew to be bad,
must be laid to your account, since you
translated it as being good. It is a strange
thing if you are to act like an imjust censor,
who is himself guilty of the crime, and are
allowed at your will to expel some from the
Senate and keep others in it. But you say :
" It was impossible to change everything. I
only thought I might cut away what had
been added by the heretics." Very good.
Then if you cut away all that you thought had
been added by the heretics, all that you left
belongs to the work which you were trans-
lating. Answer me then, are these good or
bad? You could not translate what was
Ixid, since once for all you had cut away
what had been added by the heretics, that is,
imless you thought it your duty to cut away
the bad pai'ts due to the heretics, while trans-


5o8


JEROME.


lating the errors of Origeii himself unaltered
into Latin. Tell me then, why you turned
Origen's heresies into Latin. Was it to ex-
pose the author of the evil, or to praise him ?
If your object is to expose him, why do you
praise him in the Prefixce? If you praise
him you are convicted of being a heretic.
The only remaining hypothesis is that you
published these things as being good. But
if they are proved to be bad, then author
and translator are involved in the same
crime, and the Psalmist's word is fulfilled :
' " When thou sawest a thief, thou consent-
edst unto him and hast been partaker with the
adulterers." It is needless to make a plain
matter doubtful by arguing about it. As to
what follows, let him answer whence this
suspicion arose in his mind of these additions
by heretics. " It was," he says, "because I
found the same things treated by this author
in other places in a catholic sense."

13. We must consider the fact, which
conies first, and so in order reach the infer-
ence, which comes after. Now I find among
many bad things written by Origen the fol-
lowing most distinctly heretical : that the Son
of God is a creature, that the Holy Spirit is
a servant : that there are innumerable worlds,
succeeding one another in eternal ages : that
angels have been turned into human souls ;
that the soul of the Saviour existed before it
was born of Mary, and that it is this soul
which " being in the form of God thovight
it not robbery to be equal with God, but
emptied itself and took the form of a ser-
vant ; " ^ that the resurrection of our bodies
will be such that we shall not have the same
members, since, when the functions of the
members cease they will become superfluous :
and that our bodies themselves will sfrow
aerial and spirit-like, and gradually vanish
and disperse into thin air and into nothing :
that in the restitution of all things, when
the fulness of forgiveness will have been
reached. Cherubim and Seraphim, Thrones,
Principalities, Dominions, Virtues, Powers,
Archangels and Angels, the devil, the
demons and the souls of men whether
Christians Jews or Heathen, will be of one
condition and degree; and when they have
come to their true form and weight, and the
new army of the whole race returning from
the exile of the world presents a mass of
rational creatures with all their dregs left
behind, then will begin a new world from a
new origin, and other bodies in which the
souls who fall from heaven will be clothed ;
so that we may have to fear that we who are


' Ps. 1, iS.


» Phil. ii.


now men may afterwards be born women,
and one who is now a virgin may chance
then to be a prostitute. These things I point
out as heresies in the books of Origen. It is
for you to point out in which of his books
you have found them contradicted.

13. Do not tell me that " you have found
the same things treated by the same author
in other places in a catholic sense," and thus
send me to search through the six thousand
books of Origen which you charge the most
reverend Bishop Epiphanius with having
read ; but mention the passages with exact-
ness : nor will this suffice ; you m.ust produce
the sentences word for word. Origen is no
fool, as I well know ; he cannot contradict
himself. The net result arising from all this
calculation is, then, that what vou cut out
was not due to the heretics, but to Origen
himself, and that you translated the bad
things he had written because you considered
them good ; and that both the good and the
bad things in the book are to be set to your
account, since you approved his writings in
the Prologue.

14. The next passage in this apology is as
follows :

"I am neither a champion nor a defender of
Origen, nor am I the first who has translated his
works. Others before me have done the same
thing : and I did it, the last of many, at the re-
quest of my brethren. If an order is to be given
that such translations are not to be made, such an
order holds good for the future, not the past : but
if those are to be blamed who have made these
translations before any such order was given, the
blame must begin with those who took the first
step."

Here at last he has vomited forth what he
wanted to say, and all his inflamed mind has
broken out into this malicious accusation
against me. When he translates the TlFf.l
'A/u'wt', he declares that he is following me.
When he is accused for having done it, he
gives me as his example : whether he is in
danger or out of danger, he cannot live with-
out me. Let me tell him, therefore, what he
professes not to know. No one reproaches
you because you translated Origen, otherwise
Hilary and Ambrose would be condemned :
but because you translated a heretical work,
and tried to gain support for it by praising
me in the Preface. I myself, whom you
criminate, translated seventy homilies of Ori-
gen, and parts of his Tomes, in order that by
translating his best works I might withdraw
the worst from notice : and I also have openly
translated the Hept 'Apxi^v to prove the falsity
of your translation, so as to shew the reader
what to avoid. If you wish to translate
Origen into Latin, you have at hand many


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


509


homilies and Tomes of his, in which some topic
of morality is handled or some obscure pas-
sage of Scripture is opened. Translate these ;
give tliese to those who ask them of you.
Why should your tirst labour begin with what
is infamous.? And why, when you were
about to translate a heretical work, did you
preface and support it by the supposed book
of a martyr, and force upon the ears of
Romans a book the translation of which
threw the world into panic? At all events,
if you translate sucli a work with the view
of exhibiting the author as a heretic, change
nothing from the Greek text, and make this
clear in the Preface. It is this which the
Pope Anastasius most wisely embodies in the
letter which he has addressed to the Bishop
John against you ; he frees me who have
done this from all blame, but condemns you
who would not do it. You will perhaps
deny the existence of this letter ; I have
therefore subjoined a copy of it; so that, if
you will not listen to your brother when he
advises, you may listen to the Bishop when
he condemns.

15. You say that you are not the defender
or the champion of Origen ; but I will at
once confront you with your own book of
which 3^ou spoke in that notorious preface to
your renowned work in these terms :

"The cause of this diversity I hnve set forth
more fully for you in the Apology which Pamphilus
wrote among his treatises, adding a very short doc-
ument of my own, in which I have shewn by what
appear to me evident proofs, that his works have
been depraved in many places by heretics and ill-
disposed persons, and especially those which I am
now translating, the ne/n 'Apx^^v"

The defence made by Eusebius, or if you
will have it so, by Pamphilus, was not suffi-
cient for you, but you must add something
from your superior wisdom and learning to
supply what you thought insufficient in what
they had said. It would be a long business
if I were to insert the whole of your book into
the present treatise, and, after setting out
each paragraph, to reply to each in turn, and
shew what vices there are in the style, what
falsehoods in the assertions, what inconsist-
ency in the actual tissue of the language.
And therefore, to avoid a redundant dis-
cussion which is distasteful to me, I will
compress the verbal matter into a narrow
compass, and reply to the meaning alone.
As soon as he leaves the harbour he runs his
ship upon a rock. He recalls the words of
the Apology of the Martyr Pamphilus (which
however, I have proved to be the work of
Eusebius the Chief of the Arians) of which
he had said, *' I translated it into the Latin


tongue as best I was able and as the matter
demanded ; " he then adds : " It is this as to
which I wish to give you a charge, Maca-
rius, man of desires,' that you may feel sure
that this rule of faith which I have above .set
forth out of his books, is such as ought to be
embraced and held fast : it is clearly shewn
that there is a catholic meanins in them all."
Although he took away many things from
the book of Eusebius, and tried to alter in a
good sense the expressions about the Son and
the Holy Spirit, still there are found in it
many causes of offence, and even open blas-
phemies, which our friend cannot refuse to
accept since he pronounces them to be cath-
olic. Eusebius (or, if you please, Pamplii-
lus) says in that book that the Son is the Ser-
vant of the Father, the Holy Spirit is not of
the same substance with the Father and the
Son ; that the souls of men have fallen from
heaven ; and, inasmuch as we have been
changed from the state of Angels, that in the
restitution of all things angels and devils and
men will all be equal ; and many other things
so impious and atrocious that it would be a
crime even to repeat them. The champion
of Origen and translator of Pamphilus is in
a strange position. If there is so much
blasphemy in these parts which he has cor-
rected, what sacrilegious things must there
be in the parts which, as he pretends, have
been falsified by heretics ! What makes him
hold this opinion, as he says, is that a man
who is neither a fool nor a madman could not
have said things mutually repugnant ; and,
that we may not suppose that he had written
different things at different times, and that
he put forth contrary views according to the
time of writing, he has added :

" What are we to say when sometimes in the
same place, and, so to speak, almost in the follow-
ing paragraph, a sentence with an opposite mean-
ing is found inserted? Can we believe that, in the
same work and in the same book, and sometimes,
as I have said in the sentence immediately follow-
ing, he can have forgotten his own words.-* For
exampIe,couId he who had before said, we can find
no passage throughout the Scriptures in which the
Holy Spirit is said to be created or made, imme-
diately add that the Holy Spirit was made among
the rest of the creatures? or again, could he who
defined the Father and the Son to be of one sub-
stance, that namely which is called in Greek Ho-
moousion, say in the following portions that he was
of another substance, and that he was created,
when but a little before he had declared him to be
born from the nature of God the Father?"

16. These are his own words, he can-
not deny them. Now I do not want to be
put off with such expressions as " since he

1 Taken from Daniel x, 11, "Thou rnan greatly beloved"
(" a man of desires ").


JEROME.


said above " but I want to have the name of
the book in which he first spoke rightly and
then wrong-ly : in which he first says that
the Holy Spirit and the Son arc of the sub-
stance of God, and in what immediately fol-
lows declares that they are creatures. Do
you not know that I possess the whole of
Origen's works and have read a vast num-
I)er of them?

" Your trappings to the mob! I know you well;
What lies within and on the skin I see." '

Eusebins who was a very learned man,
(observe I say learned not catholic: you
must not, according to your wont make this
a ground for calumniating me) takes up six
volumes with nothing else but the attempt
to shew that Origen is of his way of believ-
ing, that is of the Arian perfidy. He brings
out many test-passages, and effectually proves
his point. In what dream in an Alexan-
drian prison w^as the revelation given to you
on the strength of which you make out these
passages to be falsified which he accei:>ts as
true? But possibly he being an Arian, took
in tliese additions of the heretics to support
his own error, so that he should not be
thought to be the only one who had held
false opinions contrary to the Church.
What answer will you make, then, as to
Didymus, who certainly is catholic as
regards the Trinity ? You know that I trans-
lated his book on the Holy Spirit into Latin.
He surely could not have assented to the pas-
sages in Origen's works which were added
by heretics ; yet he wrote some short com-
mentaries on the Uqu 'Apx<''>^ which you have
translated ; in these he never denies that what
is there written was written by Origen, but
only tries to persuade us simple people that
we do not understand his meaning and how
these passages ought to be taken in a good
sense. So much on the Son and the Holy
Spirit alone. But in reference to the rest of
Origen's doctrines, both Eusebius and Didy-
mus adhere to his views, and defend, as said
in a catholic and Christian sense, what all
the churches reprobate.

1 7. But let us consider what are the argu-
ments by which he tries to prove that Origen's
writings have been corrupted by the heretics,

" Clement," he says, " who was the disciple of
the Apostles, and who succeeded the apostles both
in the episcopate and in martyrdom, wrote the
books which go by the name of Anagnorismus,
that is, Recognitions. In these, though, speaking
generally, the doctrine which is set forth in the
name of the Apostle Peter is genuinely apostolical,
yet in certain passages the doctrine of Eunomius


1 i.e


;isins, 111, -^o.


is brought in in such a way as that you would sup-
pose Eunomius liimself to be conducting the argu-
ment and asserting his view that the Son was
created out of nothing."

And, after a passage too long to reproduce,
he adds :

'•What then are we to think of these flxcts ?
Must we believe that an Apostolic man wrote
heresy.' or is it not more likely that men of per-
verse mind, wishing to gain support for their own
doctrines, and win easier credit for them, intro-
duced under the names of holy men views which
they cannot be believed eitlier to have held or to
have written down?"

He tells us that Clement the presbyter of
Alexandria also, who was a catholic man,
writes at times in his works that the Son of
God is created ; and thatDionysius Bishop of
Alexandria, a most learned man, in the four
books in which he controverted the doctrines
of Sabellius, lapses into the dogma of Arius.
What he aims at by quoting these instances
is not to shew that Churchmen and catliolics
have erred, but that their writings have been
corrupted by heretics, and he closes the dis-
cussion with these words :

"And when we find in Origen a certain diver-
sity of doctrine, just as we have found it in those of
whom we have spoken above, will it not be suf-
ficient for us to believe the same in his case which
we believe or understand in the case of the catholic
men whom we have passed in review.'* Will not
the same defence hold good when the case is the
same .' "

If, I reply, we admit that everything in a
book which is offensive is corruptly inserted
by others, nothing will remain belonging to
the author imder whose name the book
passes, but everything can be assigned to
those by whom it is supposed to have been
corrupted. But then it will not belong to
them either, since we do not know who they
were : and the result will be that every book
belongs to everybody and nothing to any one
in particidar. In this confusion which this
method of defence introduces, it will be im-
possible to convict Marcion of error, or
Manichieus or Arius or Eunomius ; be-
cause, as soon as we point out a statement
of their tmbelief, their disciples will an-
swer that that was not what the master
wrote, but was corruptly inserted by his
opponents. According to this principle,
this very book of yoLU"s will not be yoiu's nor
mine. And as to this very book in which
I am making reply to your accusations,
whatever you find fault with in it will be
held not l)e written by me but by 3'ou who
now find fault with it. And further, while
you assign everything to the heretics, there


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


511


will be nothing left which you can assign
to churchmen as their own.

But you may ask, How is it then that in
their books some false views occur? Well,
if I answer that I do not know the parties
whence these false views came, I must not be
thought to have said that they are heretics.
It is possible that they may have fallen into
error unawares, or that the words bore a dif-
ferent meaning, or that they may have been
gradually corrupted by unskilful copyists. It
must be admitted that, before Arius arose in
Alexandria as a demon of the south, things
were said incautiously which cannot be de-
feuded against a malevolent criticism. But
when glaring faults are exposed in Origen,
you do not defend him but accuse others ; you
do not deny the faults, but summon up a host
of criminals. If you were asked to name
those who have been the companions of
Origen in his heresies, it would be right
enough to call in these others. But what
you are now asked to tell us is whether those
statements in the books of Origfen are sfood
or evil ; and you say nothing, but bring in
irrelevant matters, such as; This is what
Clement says ; this is an error of which Dio-
nysius is found guilty ; these are the words
in which the bishop Athanasius defends the
error of Dionysius; in a similar way the
writings of the Apostle have been tampered
with : and then, while the charge of heresy
is fastened upon you, you say nothing in your
own defence, but make confessions about me.
I make no accusations, and am content
with answering for myself. I am not what
you try to prove me : whether you are what
you are accused of being, is for you to con-
sider. The fact that I am acquitted of blame
does not prove me innocent nor the ftict that
you are accused prove you a criminal.

iS. After this preface as to the falsifica-
tion by heretics of the apostles, of both the
Clements, and of Dionysius, he at last comes
to Origen ; and these are his words :

" I have shewn from his own words and writings
how he himself complains of this and deplores it :
lie explains clearly in the letter which he wrote to
some of his intimate friends at Alexandria what he
siiflered while living here in the flesh and in the full
enjoyment of his senses, by the corruption of liis
books and treatises, or by spurious editions of
them."

He subjoins a copy of this letter ; and he
who imputes to the heretics the falsification
of Origen's writings himself begins b}'
falsifying them, for he does not translate the
letter as he finds it in the Greek, and does
not convey to the Latins what Origen states
in his letter. The object of the whole letter


is to assail Demetrius the Pontiff of Alexan-
dria, and to inveigh against the bishops
! throughout the world, and to tell them that
their excommunication of him is invalid ;
he says further that he has no intention of
retorting their evil speaking; indeed he is
so much afraid of evil speaking that be does
not dare to speak evil even of the devil ; inso-
much that he gave occasion to Candidus an
adherent of the errors of Valentinian to
represent him falsely as saying that the devil
is of such a nature as could be saved. But our
friend takes no notice of the real purport of the
letter, and makes up for Origen an argument
which he does not use. I have therefore
translated a part of the letter, beginning a
little way below what has been already
spoken of, and have appended it to the part
which has been translated by him in a cur-
tailed and disingenuous manner, so that the
reader may perceive the object with which
he suppressed the earlier part. He is con-
tending, then, against the Bishops of the
church generally, because they had judged
him unworthy of its commiuiion; and he
continues as follows :

" Why need I speak of the language in which
the prophets constantly threaten and reprove the
pastors, elders, the priests and the princes? These
things you can of yourselves without my aid draw
out from the Holy Scriptures, and you may clearly
see that it may well be the present time of which
it is said ' ' Trust not in your friends, and do not
hope in princes,' and that the prophecy is now
gaining its fulfilment, -'The leaders of my people
have not .known me ; my sons are fools and not
wise : they are wise to do evil, but know not to do
good.' We ought to pity them, not to hate them,
to pray for them, not to curse them. For Ave haye
been created for blessing, not for cursing. There-
fore even Michael,^ when he disputed against the
devil concerning the body of Moses, did not dare
to bring a railing accusation even for so great an
eyil, but said; 'The Lord rebuke thee.' And we
read something similar in Zachariah,'' ' The Lord
rebuke thee, O Satan ; the Lord which hath chosen
Jerusalem rebuke thee.' So also we desire that
those who will not humbly accept the rebuke of their
neighbours may be rebuked of the Lord. But, since
Michael says, ' The Lord rebuke thee, O Satan,'
and Zechanah says the same, the deyil knows well
whether the Lord rebukes him or not; and must
acknowledge the manner of the rebuke."

Then, after a passage too long to msert
here, he adds :

" We believe that not only those who have com-
mitted great sins will be cast out from the kingdom
of heaven, such as fornicators and adulterers, and
those who defile themselves with mankind, and
thieves, but those also who have done evil of a less
flagrant kind, since it is written ; ^ ' Neither drunk-


1 M!c. vii, s-

* Jcr. iv, 22.


s Jnde, 9
*'Z;ich. iii, 2.


1 Cor. vl, g.


512


JEROME.


ards nor evil speakers shall inherit the kingdom of
God;" and that the standard by which men will
be judged is as much the goodness as the severity
of God. Therefore we strive to act thoughtfully in
all things, in drinking wine, and in moderation of
language, so that we dare not speak evil of any
man. Now, because, through the fear of God, we
are careful not to utter maledictions against any
one, remembering that the words ' He dared not
bring against him a railing accusation,' are spoken
of Michael in his dealing with the devil; as it is
said also in another place, ' ' They set at naught
dominions and rail at dignities;' certain of these
men who seek for matters of contention, ascribe to
us and our teaching the blasphemy (as to which
they have to lay to heart the words which apply to
them, ' Neither drunkards nor evil speakers shall
inherit the kingdom of God'), namely, that the
father of wickedness and perdition of those who
shall be cast out of the kingdom of God can be
saved ; a thing which not even a madman can
say."

The rest wliich comes in the same letter
he has" set down instead of the hiter
words of Origen wliich I have translated :
"Now, because through the fear of God we
are careful not to utter maledictions against
any one," and so on ; he fraudulently cuts off
the earlier part, on which tlic later depends,
and begins to translate the letter, as though
the former part began with this statement,
and says :

" Some of those who delight in bringing com-
plaints against their neighbours, ascribe to us and
our teaching tiie crime of a blasphemy, which we
have never spoken, (as to which they must con-
sider whether they are willing to stand by the
decree which says 'The evil speakers shall not
inherit the kingdom of God,') for they say that
I assert that the father of the wickedness and per-
dition of those who shall be cast out of the king-
dom of God, that is, the devil, will be saved; a
thing which no man even though he had taken
leave of his senses and was manifestly insane could
say."

19. Now compare the words of Origen,
which I have translated word for word
above, with these which by him have been
turned into Latin, or rather overturned ; and
you will see clearly how great a discrepancy
between them there is, not only of word
but of meaning. I beg you not to con-
sider my translation wearisome because it is
longer; for the object I had in translating
the whole passage was to exhibit the ptn-
pose which he had in suppressing the earlier
part. There exists in Greek a dialogue be-
tween Origen and Candidus the defender of
the heresy of Valentinian, in which I confess
it seems to me when I read it that I am
looking on at a fight between two Andaba-
tian gladiators. Candidus maintains that


»Jude,S.


* Rufinus.


the Son is of the substance of the Father,
fallins: into the error of asserting a Probole
or Production.' On the other side, Origen,
like Arius and Eunomius, refuses to admit
that He is produced or born, lest God the
Father should thus be divided into parts ; but
he says that He was a sublime and most
excellent creation who came into being by
the will of the Father like other creatures.
They then come to a second question. Can-
didus asserts that the devil is of a nature
wholly evil whicli can never be .saved.
Against this Origen rightly asserts that he
is not of perishable substance, but that it
is by his own will that he fell and can be
saved. This Candidus falsely turns into a
reproach against Origen, as if he had said
that the diabolical nature could be saved.
What therefore Candidus had falsely ac-
cused him of, Origen refutes. But we see
that in this Dialogue alone Origen accuses
the heretics of having falsified his writings,
not in the other books about which no
question was ever raised. Otherwise, if we
are to believe that all which is heretical is
not due to Origen but to the heretics, while
almost all his books are full of these errors,
nothino; of Origen's will remain, but every-
thing must be the work of those of whose
names we are ignorant.

It is not enousfh for him to calumniate the
Greeks and the men of old time, about
whom the distance either of time or space
gives him the power to tell any falsehood he
pleases. He comes to the Latins, and first
takes the case of Hilary the Confessor,
whose book, he states, was falsified by the
heretics after the Council of Ariminum. A
question arose about him on this account in
a council of bishops, and he then ordered
the book to be brought from his own house.
The book in its heretical shape was in his
desk, though he did not know it ; and wheit
it was produced, the atithor of the book was
condemned as a heretic and excommuni-
cated, and left the council room. This is
the story, a mere dream of his own, which
he tells to his intimates; and he imagines
his authority to be so great that no one will
dare to contradict him when he says such
things. I will ask him a few questions. In
what city was the synod held by which
Hilary was excommunicated.'' What were
the names of the Bishops present? Who
subscribed the sentence .'' Who were content,
and who non-content.? Who were the con-
suls of the year.? and who was the emperor

1 A brinci-ins;;- foith of ono thing from another, th;it is, ac
cording to Vulcnliniun, of Christ as a production from another
<4£on.


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


513


who ordered the assembly of the council ?
Were the Bishops present those of Gaul alone,
or of Italy and Spain as well ? and for what
purpose was the council called together? You
tell us none of these things ; yet, in order to
defend Origen, you treat as a criminal and as
excommunicated a man of the highest elo-
quence, the very clarion of the Latin tongue
against the Arians. But we are in the pres-
ence of a confessor, and even his calumnies
must be borne with patience. He next
passes to Cyprian the illustrious martyr,
and he tells us that a book by Tertullian en-
titled " On the Trinity" is read as one of his
works by the partisans of the Macedonian
heresy at Constantinople. In this charge of
his he tells two falsehoods. The book in
question is not Tertullian's, nor does it pass
under the name of Cyprian. It is by Nova-
tian and is called by his name ; the peculiarity
of the style proves the authorship of the Vv'ork.

20. What nonsense is this out of which
they fabricate a charge against me ! It
seems hardly worth while to notice it. It is
a story of my own about the council held by
Damasus Bishop of Rome, and I, under the
name of a certain friend of his, am attacked
for it. He had given me some papers about
church affairs to get copied ; and the story
describes a trick practised by the Apolli-
narians who borrowed one of these, a book
of Athanasius' to read in which occur the
words ' 'Dominicus homo,' and falsified it by
first scratching out the words, and then writ-
ing them in again on the erasure, so that
it might appear, not that the book had
been falsified by them, but that the words had
been added by me. I beg you, my dearest
friend, that in these matters of serious inter-
est to the church, where doctrinal truth is in
question, and we are seeking for the au-
thority of our predecessors for the well-
being of our souls to put away silly stuff' of
this kind, and not take mere after-dinner
stories as if they were arguments. For it is
quite possible that, even after you have
heard the true story from me, another who
does not know it may declare that it is made
up, and composed in elegant language by
you like a mine of Philistion or a song of
Lentulus or Marcellus.

21. To what point will not rashness
reach when once the reins which check it
are relaxed.'' After telling us of the excom-
munication of Hilaiy, the heretical book
falsely bearing the name of Cyprian, the
successive erasure and insertion in the work
of Athanasius made while I was asleep, he


* " A man of the Lord," perhaps applied to Christ.
VOL. III.


as a last effort breaks forth in.o an attack
upon the pope Epiphanius : the chagrin en-
gendered in his heart because Epiphanius in
the letter which he wrote to the bishop John
had called him a heretic, he pours out in
his apology for Origen, and comforts him-
self with these words :

"The whole truth, which has been hidden,
must here be laid bare. It is impossible that any
man should exercise so unrighteous a judgment as
to judge unequally where the cases are equal. But
the fact is, the prompters of those who defame
Origen are men who either make it a habit to dis-
course in the churches at great length or write
books, the whole of which, both books and dis-
course are taken from Origen. To prevent men
therefore from discovering their plagiarism, the
crime of which can be concealed so long as they
act ungratefully towards their master, they deter
all simple persons from reading him. One of
them, who considers himself to have a necessity
laid upon him to speak evil of Origen through
every nation and tongue, as if that were to preach
the Gospel, once declared in the audience of a vast
multitude of the brethren that he had read six
thousand of his books. If he read them, as he is
wont to declare, in order to know what harm there
was in him, ten or twenty books, or at most thirty,
would have been sufficient for that knowledge.
To read six thousand books is not like one who
wants to know the harm and the errors that are in
him, but like one who consecrates almost his
whole life to studies conducted under his tuition.
How then can he claim to be listened to when he
blames those who, for the sake of instruction, have
read a small portion of his works, taking care to
maintain whole their own system of belief and
their piety.-"'

22. Who are these men who are wont to
dispute at such great length in the churches,
and to write books, and whose discourses
and writings are taken wholly from Origen ;
these men who are afraid of their literary
thefts becoming known, and shew ingrati-
tude towards their master, and who there-
fore deter men of simple mind from reading
him.? You ought to mention them by name,
and designate the men themselves. Are the
reverend bishops 'Anastasius and Theophi-
lus, Venerius and Chromatins, and the
whole council of the Catholics both in the
East and in the West, who publicly de-
nounce him as a heretic, to be esteemed to
be plagiarists of his books.'' Are we to be-
lieve that, when they preach in the churches,
they do not preach the mysteries of the
Scriptures, but merely repeat what they
have stolen from Origen ? Is it not enough
for you to disparage them all in general, but
you must specially aim the spear of your
pen against a reverend and eminent Bishop
of the church.'* Who is this who considers


1 Bishops respectively of Rome, Alexandria, Milan, and
Aquileia.

Li


514


JEROME.


that he has a necessity laid on him of revil-
ing Origen, as the Gospel which he must
preach among all nations and tongues? this
man who proclaimed in the audience of a
vast multitude of the brethren that he had
read six thousand of his books? You your-
self were in the very centre of that multitude
and company of the brethren, when, as he
complains in his letter,' the monstrous doc-
trines of Origen were enlarged upon by you.
Is it to be imputed to him as a crime that
he knows the Greek, the Syrian, the He-
brew, the Egyptian, and in part also the
Latin language? Then, I suppose, the
Apostles and Apostolic men, who spoke
with tongues, are to be condemned ; and you
who know two languages may deride me
wlio know tliree. But as for the six thou-
sand books which you pretend that he has
read, who will believe that you are speaking
the truth, or that he was capable of telling
such a lie? If indeed Origen had written
six thousand books, it is possible that a man
of great learning, who had been trained
from his infancy in sacred literature might
have read books alien from his own convic-
tions, because he had an inquiring spirit and
a love of learning. But how could he read
what Origen never wrote ? Count up the
index contained in the third volume of Eu-
sebiuG, in which is his life of Pamphilus:
you will not find, I do not say six thousand,
but not a third of that number of books. I
have by me the letter of the above named
Pontiff, in which he gives his answer to this
calumny of yours uttered when you were
still in the East ; and it confutes this most
manifest falsehood with the open counte-
nance of truth.

23. After all this you dare to say in
your Apology, that you are not the defender
nor the champion of Origen, though you
think that Eusebius and Pamphilus said all
too little in his defence. I shall try to write
a reply to those works in another treatise if
God grants me a sufficient span of life. For
the present let it suffice that I have met
your assertions, and that I have set the care-
ful reader on his guard by stating that I
never saw in writing tlie book which was
known as the work of Pamphilus till I read
it in your own manuscript. It was no great
concern of mine to know what was written
in favour of a heretic, and therefore I always
took it that the work of Pampliilus was
different from that of Eusel)ius ; but, after
the question had been raised, I wished to
reply to their works, and with this object I

1 Epiphanius to John of Jerusalem. Jerome's Letters, LI, 3.

Sec also Jerome Against John ot'Jenisalcra, 11, 14.


read what each of them had to say in Ori-
gen's behalf; and then I discerned clearly that
the first of Eusebius' six books was the same
which you had published both in Greek and
Latin as the single book of Pamphilus, only
altering the opinion about the Son and the
Holy Spirit, which bore on their face the
mark of open blasphemy. It was thus
that, when my friend. Dexter, who held
the office of praetorian prefect, asked me, ten
years ago, to make a list for him of the
writers of our faith,' I placed among the
various treatises assigned to various authors
this book as composed by Pamphilus, sup-
posing the matter to be as it had been
brought before the public by you and by
your disciples. But, since Eusebius himself
says that Pamphilus wrote nothing except
some short letters to his friends, and the first
of his six books contains the precise words
which are fictitiously given by you under the
name of Pamphilus, it is plain that your
object in circulating this book was to in-
troduce heresy under the authority of a
martyr. I cannot allow you to make my
mistake a cloak for your fraud, when you
first pretend that the book is by Pamphilus
and then pervert many of its passages so as
to make them different in Latin from what
they are in Greek. I believed the book to
be by the writer whose name it bore, just as
I did in reference to the TlEpi*Apx''->v, and
many other of the works of Origen and of other
Greek writers, which I never read till now,
and am now compelled to read, because the
question of heresy has been raised, and I
wish to know what ought to be avoided and
what opposed. In my youth, therefore, I
translated only the homilies which he de-
livered in public, and in which there are
fewer causes of oflence ; and this in igno-
rance and at the request of others : I did not
try to prejudice men by means of the parts
which they approved in favour of the accept-
ance of those which are evidently heretical.
At all events, to cut short a long discussion,
I can point out whence I received the
Uepi 'Apx<'»', namely, from those who copied
it from your manuscript. We want in like
manner to know whence your copy of it
came ; for if you are unable to name any
one else as the source from which it was
derived, you will yourself be convicted of
falsifying it. * " A good man from the good
treasure of his heart bringeth forth what is
good." A tree of a good stock is known by
the sweetness of its fruit.

1 The Catalogue of Illustrious Men translated in this vol-
ume forms the response to this request.

2 I.ukc vi, 4^, M:ltt. vii, 17,


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


515


34. My brother Eusebius writes to me
that, when he was at a meeting of African
bishops which had been called for certain
ecclesiastical aflairs, he found there a letter
purporting to be written by me, in which I
professed penitence and confessed that it was
through the influence of the press in my youth
that I had been led to turn the Scriptures
into Latin from the Hebrew ; in all of which
there is not a word of truth. When I heard
this, I was stupefied. But one witness was
not enough ; even Cato was not believed on
his unsupported evidence: ' "■ In the mouth
of two or three witnesses shall every word
be established." Letters were soon brought
me from many brethren in Rome asking
about this very matter, whether the facts were
as was stated : and they pointed in a way
to make me weep to the person by whom
the letter had been circulated among the
people. He who dared to do this, what will
he not dare to do? It is well that ill will
has not a strength equal to its intentions.
Innocence would be dead long ago if wicked-
ness were always allied to power, and calumny
could prevail in all that it seeks to accomplish.
It was impossible for him, accomplished as
he was, to copy my style and manner of
writing, whatever their value may be ; amidst
all his tricks and his fraudulent assump-
tion of another man's personality, it was
evident who he was. It is this same man,
then, who wrote this fictitious letter of re-
tractation in my name, making out that my
translation of the Hebrew books was bad,
who, we now hear, accuses me of having
translated the Holy Scriptures with a view
to disparage the Septuagint. In any case,
whether my translation is right or wrong, I
am to be condemned : I must either confess
that in my new work I was wrong, or else
that by my new version I have aimed a blow
at the old. I wonder that in this letter he
did not make me out as guilty of homicide,
or adultery or sacrilege or parricide or any
of the vile things which the silent working
of the mind can revolve within itself. Indeed
I ought to be grateful to him for bavins' im-
puted to me no more than one act of error
or false dealing out of the whole forest of
possible crimes. Am I likely to have said
anything derogatory to the seventy transla-
tors, whose work I carefully purged from
corruptions and gave to Latin readers many
years ago, and daily expound it at our con-
ventual gatherings ; ^ whose version of the
Psalms has so long been the subject of my

1 Deut. xvii, 6.

2 This translation has been almost wholly lost. The parts
which remain are the Book of Job, the Psalms, and the Pref-
ace to the Books of Chronicles.


meditation and my song? Was I so foolish
as to wish to forget in old age what I learned
in youth? All my treatises have been woven
out of statements warranted by their version.
My commentaries on the twelve prophets
are an explanation of their version as well as
my own. How uncertain must the labours
of men ever be! and how contrary at times
to their own intentions are the results which
men's studies reach. I thought that I desei*ved
well of my countrymen the Latins by this
version, and had given them an incitement to
learning ; for it is not despised even by the
Greeks now that it is retranslated into their
language ; yet it is now made the subject of a
charge ajjainst me : and I find that the food
pressed upon them turns upon the stomach.
What is there in human life that can be safe if
innocence is made the object of accusation?
I am the householder ' who finds that while
he slept the enemy has sown tares among his
wheat. "^ " The wild boar out of the wood
has rooted up my vineyard, and the strange
wild beast has devoured it." I keep silence,
but a letter that is not mine speaks against
me. I am ignorant of the crime laid against
me, yet I am made to confess the crime all
through the world. ^ " Woe is me, my
mother, that thou hast borne me a man to
be judged and condemned * in the whole
earth."

25. All my prefaces to the books of the Old
Testament, some specimens of which I sub-
join, are witnesses for me on this point ; and
it is needless to state the matter otherwise
than it is stated in them. I will begin there-
fore with Genesis. The Prologue is as fol-
lows:

I have received letters so long and eagerly
desired from my dear Desiderius* who, as if the
future had been foreseen, shares his name with
Daniel,® entreating me to put our friends in pos-
session of a translation of the Pentateuch from
Hebrew into Latin. The work is certainly hazard-
ous and it is exposed to the ' attacks of my calum-
niators, who maintain that it is through contempt
of the Seventy that I have set to work to forge a
new version to take the place of the old. They
thus test ability as they do wine; whereas I have
again and again declared that I dutifully offer in
the Tabernacle of God what I can, and have
pointed out that the great gifts which one man
brings are not marred by the inferior gifts of
another. But I was stimulated to undertake the
task by the zeal of Origen, who blended with the
old edition Theodotion's translation and used
throughout the work as distinguishing marks the

1 Matt, xiii, 25. 2 ps. Ixxx, 13. 'Jer. xv, 10 (lxx).

4 Or examined. The Vulgate agrees with A. V. 'A man
of contention.'

5 In the origin:il there is a play upon words — Desideril
desiderata^.

6 That is, Miui of desires, Dan. ix, 23, Margm,
' Lit. barkings.


L 1 2


5i6


JEROME.


asterisk * and the obelus -I—, that is the star and
the spit, the first of which makes what had previ-
ously been defective to beam with light, while the
other transfixes and slaughters all that was super-
fluous. But I was encouraged above all by the
authoritative publications of the Evangelists and
Apostles, in which we read much taken from the Old
Testament which is not found in our manuscripts.
For example, ' Out of Egypt have I called my Son '
(Matt. ii. 15) : ' For he shall be called a Naza-
rene' {Ibid. 23): and 'They shall look on him
whom they pierced ' ("John xix. 37) : and ' Rivers of
living water shall flow out of his belly' (John vii.
38) : and ' Things which eye hath not seen, nor ear
heard, nor have entered into the heart of man,
which God hath prepared for them that love him '
(I. Cor. ii. 9), and many other passages which
lack their proper context. Let us ask our oppo-
nents then where these things are written, and
when they are unable to tell, let us produce them
from the Hebrew. The first passage is in Rosea,
(xi. i), the second in Isaiah (xi. i), the third in
Zechariah (xii. 10), the fourth in Proverbs (xviii.
4), the fifth also in Isaiah (Ixiv. 4). Being igno-
rant of all this many follow the ravings of the
Apocrypha, and prefer to the inspired books the
melancholy trash which comes to us from Spain.'
It is not for me to explain the causes of the error.
The Jews say it was deliberately and wisely done
to prevent ^ Ptolemy who was a monotheist from
thinking the Hebrews acknowledged two deities.
And that which chiefly influenced them in thus
acting was the fact that the king appeared to be
falling into Platonism. In a word, wherever
Scripture evidenced some sacred truth respecting
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, they either trans-
lated the passage differently, or passed it over
altogether in silence, so that they might both
satisfy the king, and not divulge the secrets of the
faith. I do not know whose false imagination led
him to invent the story of the ^ seventy cells at
Alexandria, in which, though separated from each
other, the translators were said to have written
the same words. Aristeas,* the champion of that
same Ptolemy,and Josephus, long after, relate noth-
ing of the kind; their account is that the Seventy
assembled in one basilica consulted together, and
did not prophesy. For it is one thing to be a
prophet, another to be a translator. The former
through the Spirit, foretells things to come;
the latter must use his learning and facility in
speech to translate what he understands. It can

* The passage is explained by Jerome's own words in the
commentary on Is. Ixiv. " Certain silly women in Spain, and
especially in Lusitania, have been deceived into accepting
as truth the marvels of Basilidcs and Balsaneus' treasury, and
even of Barbelo and Leusiboras." Jerome goes on to add that
Iren;Bus In explaining the origin of many heresies pointed
out that the Gnostics deceived many noble women of tlie parts
of Gaul about the Rhone, and afterwards those of Spain, fram-
ing a system partly of myths partly of immorality, and calling
their folly by the name of philosophy. See also Ep. Jer. Let-
ter 120 to Iledibia, and Com. <m Amos cf. III.

2 That is Ptolemy commonly known as the son of Lagus,
but the reputed son of Philip of Macedon by Arsinoe Philip's
concubine. lie reigned over Egypt from B.C. .-^23-285. He
was a great patron of learning, and, according to traditions
current among the fathers, wishing to adorn his Alexandrian
library with the writings of all nations, he requested the Jews
of Jerusalem to furnish him with a Greek version of their
Scriptures, and thus originated the Septuagint.

3 Irenicus, Justin Martyr, Epiphanius, and Augustine
among tlie Latins, adhere to the inspiration of the translators
which Jerome here rejects.

* Aristeas was an ofhcer of Ptolemy Philadelphus, son and
successor of Ptolemy I^agus. The so-called letter of Aris-
te;is to his brother Philocrates is still extant in Hody's De
Biblioriim Textibtis Originalibus,e.X.iz. (Oxon. 1705), and sepa-
rately in a small volume published ;!t Oxford 1692.


hardly be that we must suppose Tully was in-
spired with oratorical spirit when he translated
Xenophon's CEconomics, Plato's Protagoras, and
the oration of Demosthenes in defence of Ctesi-
phon. Otherwise the Holy Spirit must have
quoted the same books in one sense through the
Seventy Translators, in another through the Apos-
tles, so that, whereas they said nothing of a given
matter, these falsely affirm that it was so written.
What then.'' Are we condemning our predeces-
sors.' By no means; but following the zealous
labours of those who have preceded us we contrib-
ute such work as lies in our power in the name
of the Lord. They translated before the Advent
of Christ, and expressed in ambiguous terms that
which they knew not. We after His Passion and
Resurrection write not prophecy so much as
history. For one style is suitable to what we hear,
another to what we see. The better we under-
stand a subject, the better we describe it. Hearken
then, my rival: listen, my calumniator; I do not
condemn, I do not censure the Seventy, but I am
bold enough to prefer the Apostles to them all. It is
the ApostTe through whose mouth I hear the voice
of Christ, and I read that in the classification of
spiritual gifts they are placed before prophets
(i Cor. xii. 28; Eph. iv. 11), while interpreters
occupy almost the lowest place. Why are you
tormented with jealousy .'' Why do you inflame
the minds of the ignorant against me.? Wherever
in translation I seem to you to go wrong, ask the
Hebrews, consult their teachers in diff'erent towns.
The words which exist in their Scriptures concern-
ing Christ your copies do not contain. The case
is different if they have ' rejected passages which
were afterward used against them by the Apostles,
and the Latin texts are more correct than the
Greek, the Greek than the Hebrew.

[Chapters 36 to 32 are taken up with tlie
quotation, ahnost in full, of the Preface to
the Vulgate translation of the books of the
Old Testament. It is unnecessary to give
them here. They have all the same design
as the Preface to Genesis already given,
namely to meet the objections of those who
represented the work as a reproach to the
LXX which was then supposed to have al-
most the authority of inspiration. The same
arguments, illustrations, and even words,
are reiterated. Readers who may desire to
go more fully into Jerome's statements will
find these Prefaces translated at length in
his works. Vol. VI of this Series.]

33. In reference to Daniel my answer
will be that I did not say that he was not a
prophet; on the contrary, I confessed in the
very beginning of the Preface that he was a
prophet. But I wished to show what was
the opinion upheld by the Jews; and what
were the ai-guments on which they relied for
its proof. I also told the reader that the
version read in the Christian churches was
not that of the Septuagint translators but
that of Theodotion. It is true, I said tiiat
the Septuagint version was in this book very

1 1 Reading rtfroha-verunt ,


APOLOGY — BOOK II.


51^


difTerent from the original, and that it was
condemned by the right judgment of the
churches of Christ ; but the fault was not
mine who only stated the fact, but that of
those who read the version. We have four
versions to choose from : those of Aquila,
Symmachus, the Seventy, and Theodotion.
The churches choose to read Daniel in the
version of Theodotion. What sin have I
committed in following the judgment of the
churches? But when I repeat what the
Jews say against the Story of Susanna and
the Hymn of the Three Children, and the
fables of Bel and the Dragon, which are not
contained in the Hebrew Bible, the man
who makes this a charge against me proves
himself to be a fool and a slanderer ; for I
explained not what I thought but what they
commonly say against us. I did not reply
to their opinion in the Preface, because I was
studying brevity, and feared that I should
seem to be writing not a Preface but a book.
I said therefore, " As to which this is not
the time to enter into discussion." Other-
wise from the fact that I stated that Porphyry
had said many things against this prophet,
and called, as witnesses of this, Methodius,
Eusebius, and Apollinarius, who have re-
plied to his folly in many thousand lines, it
will be in his power to accuse me for not
having written in my Preface against the
books of Porphyry. If there is any one who
pays attention to silly things like this, I must
tell him loudly and freely, that no one is
compelled to read what he does not want ;
that I wrote for those who asked me, not for
those who would scorn me, for the grateful
not the carping, for the earnest not the in-
different. Still, I wonder that a man should
read the version of Theodotion the heretic
and judaizer, and should scorn that of a
Christian, simple and sinful though he may
be.

34. I beg you, my most sweet friend,
who are so curious that you even know my
dreams, and that you scrutinize for purposes
of accusations all that I have written durins'
these many years without fear of future
calumny ; answer me, how is it you do not
know the prefaces of the very books on which
you ground your charges against me? These
prefaces, as if by some prophetic foresight,
gave the answer to the calumnies that were
coming, thus fulfilling the proverb, "The
antidote before the poison." What harm has
been done to the churches by my translation ?
You bought up, as I knew, at great cost the
versions of Aquila, Symmachus, and Theo-
dotion, and the Jewish authors of the fifth
and sixth translations, Your Origen, or,


that I may not seem to be wounding you
with fictitious praises, our Origen, (for I
may call him ours for his genius and learn-
ing, though not for the truth of his doc-
trines) in all his books explains and
expounds not only the Septuagint but the
Jewish versions. Eusebius and Didymusdo
the same. I do not mention Apollinarius,
who, with a laudable zeal though not ac-
cording to knowledge, attempted to patch up
into one garment the rags of all the transla-
tions, and to weave a consistent text of Scrip-
ture at his own discretion, not according to
any sound rule of criticism. The Hebrew
Scriptures are used by apostolic men ; they
are used, as is evident, by the apostles and
evangelists. Our Lord and Saviour himself
whenever he refers to the Scriptures, takes
his quotations from the Hebrew ; as in the
instance of the words ' "He that believeth
on me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water," and
in the words used on the cross itself, " Eli,
Eli, lama sabachthani," which is by inter-
pretation " My God, my God, why hast thou
forsaken me ? " not, as it is given by the Sep-
tuagint, "My God, my God, look upon
me, why hast thou forsaken me? " and many
similar cases. I do not say this in order to
aim a blow at the seventy translators ; but
I assert that the Apostles of Christ have an
authority superior to theirs. Wherever the
Seventy agree with the Hebrew, the apostles
took their quotations from that translation ;
but, where they disagree, they set down in
Greek what they had found in the Hebrew.
And further, I give a challenge to my
accuser. I have shown that many things are
set down in the New Testament as coming
from the older books, which are not to be
found in the Septuagint; and I have
pointed out that these exist in the Hebrew.
Now let him show that there is anything in
the New Testament which comes from the
Septuagint but which is not found in the
Hebrew, and our controversy is at an end.

35. By all this it is made clear, first that
the version of the Seventy translators which
has gained an established position by having
been so long in use, was profitable to the
churches, because that by its means the Gen-
tiles heard of the coming of Christ before he
came ; secondly, that the other translators
are not to be reproved, since it was not their
own works that they published but the divine
books which they translated ; and, thirdly,
that my own familiar friend should frankly
accept from a Christian and a friend what

ijohn vil, 38, supposed to be taken from Prov. xviii,^, or
Is, Iviii, II .


518


JEROME.


he has taken great pains to obtain from the
Jews and has written down for him at great
cost. I have exceeded the bounds of a letter ;
and, though I had taken pen in hand to con-
tend against a wicked heresy, I have been
compelled to make answer on my own be-
half, while waiting for my friend's three


books, and in a state of constant mental
suspense about the charges he had heaped
up against me. It is easier to guard against
one who professes hostility than to make head
against an enemy who lurks under the guise
of a friend.


JEROME'S APOLOGY IN ANSWER TO RUFINUS — BOOK III.


The two first books formed a complete whole, but it was intimated that there might be more to come when
Jerome should have received Rufinus' work in full. The two first books were brought to Rufinus by the captain
of a merchant-ship trading with Aquileia, together with a copy of Jerome's friendly letter which had been sup-
pressed by Pammachius. The bearer had (as stated by Rufinus, though Jerome mocks at this as impossible) only
two days to wait. Chromatins the Bishop of Aquileia urged that the strife should now cease, and prevailed so
far as that Rufinus made no public reply. He wrote a private letter, however, to Jerome, which has not come
down to us, and which does not seem, from the extracts given in c. 4, 6, etc., to have been of a pacific tenor. Its
details may be gathered from Jerome's reply. Jerome intimates that it sought to involve him in heresy, that it
renewed and aggravated the former accusations, speaking of him in language fit only for the lowest characters
on the stage; and that it declared that, if its writer had been so minded, he could have produced facts which
would have been the destruction of his adversary. Jerome, though receiving some expressions of the desire of
Chromatius that he should not reply (perhaps also the regretful expostulation of Augustin, — Jer. Letter ex, 6,
Aug. Letter 73) declared that it was impossible for him to yield. He could not refrain from defending himself
from a capital charge, nor could he spare the heretics. Peace could only come by unity in the faith.

1. Your letter is full of falsehood and violence. I will try not to take the same tone.

2. Why cannot we differ as friends? Why do you, by threats of death, compel me to answer?

3. 4. Your shameful taunt that I wished to get copies of your Apology by bribing your Secretary is an
imputation to me of practices which are your own.

5. Eusebius should not have accused you; but your charges against him will not stand.

6. You taunt me with boasting of my eloquence. Will you l)oast of your illiteracy?

7. 8. You wish first to praise, then to amend me, but both with fisticuffs; and make it impossible for me
to k-jep silence.

9. Why cannot you join with me in condemning Origen, and so put an end to our quarrel?

10. The assertion that you had only two days for your answer is a fiction.

11. Your translation, contrariwise to my Commentaries, vouches for the soundness of Origen.

12. You try to shield Origen liy falsely attributing the Apology for him to Pamphilus.

13. In my Commentaries my ([notation of opposite opinions shows that neither is mine.

14. Had you translated honestly, you would not have had Origen's heresies imputed to you.

15. You say the IJishops of Italy accept your views on the Resurrection. I doubt it.

16. You rashly say that you will agree to whatever Theophilus lays down. You have to consider your
friendship for Isidore now his enemy.

17. 18. You speak of the ^^gyptian Bishop Paul. We received him, though an Origenist, as a stranger;
and he has united himself to the orthodox faith. Not only Theophilus but the Emperors condemn Origen.

19. Against Vigilanlius I wrote only what was right. I knew who had stirred him up against me.

20. As to the letter of Pope Anastasius condemning you, you will find that it is genuine.

21. Siricius who is dead may have written in your favour; Anastasius who is living writes to the East
against you.

22. My departure from Rome for the East had nothing blameable in it as you insinuate.

23. Epiphanius, it is true, gave you the kiss of peace; but he showed afterwards that he had come to
distrust you.

24. When we parted as friends I believed you a true believer; no one was sent to Rome to injure you.

25. You swear that you did not write my pretended retractation. Your style betrays you, and I have
given a full answer about my translations already.

26. You bid me beware of falsification and treachery. You warn me against yourself.

27. There is nothing inconsistent in praising a man for some things and blaming him in others. You
have done it in my case.


APOLOGY — BOOK III.


519


28-31. My ignorance of many natural phenomena is no excuse for your ignorance as to the origin of souls.
You ought, according to your boasting dream to know everything. The thing of most importance was forgotten
in your cargo of Eastern wares.

32. Your dream was a boast : mine of which you accuse me humbled me.

2;^. It was not I who first disclosed your heresies, but Epiphanius long ago and Aterbius before him.

34-36. As to our translations of the Uepl 'Apx^^v, yours was doing harm, and mine was necessary in self-
defence. You should be glad that heresy is exposed.

37. Your Apology for Origen did not save him but involved you in heresy.

38. My friendly letter was to prevent discord : the other to crush false opinions.

39. 40. Pythagoras was rightly quoted by me. I produce some of his sayings.

41, 42. You threaten me with destruction. I will not replv in the same way. Personalities should be
excluded from controversies of faith.

43, 44. The way of peace is through the wisdom taught in the Book of Proverbs, and through unity in the
faith.


I have read the letter * which you in your
wisdom have written me. You inveigh
against me, and, though you once praised
me and called me true partner and brother,
you now write books to summon me to
reply to the charges with which you ter-
rify me. I see that in you are fulfilled
the words of Solomon : ^ " In the mouth of
the foolish is the rod of ^ contumely," and
* " A fool receives not the words of prudence,
unless you say what is passing in his heart ; "
and the words of Isaiah : * " The fool will
speak folly, and his heart will understand
vain things, to practise iniquity and speak
falsehood against the Lord." For what
need was there for you to send me whole
volumes full of accusation and malediction,
and to bring them before the public, when
in the end of your letter you threaten me
with death if I dare to reply to jiour slan-
ders— I beg pardon — to your praises.^
For your praises and your accusations
amount to the same thing ; from the same
fountain proceed both sweet and bitter. I
beg you to set me the example of the modesty
and shamefacedness which you recommend
to me ; you accuse another of lying : cease
to be a liar yourself. I wish to give no one
an occasion of stumbling, and I will not be-
come your accuser ; for I have not to con-
sider merely what you deserve but what is
becoming in me. I tremble at our Saviour's
words. " '' Whosoever shall cause one of
these little ones that believe in m.e to stum-
ble, it were better for him that a great mill
stone were hanged about his neck and he
were drowned in the depths of the sea ; "
and ' "Woe unto the world because of occa-
sions of stumbling : for it must needs be
that occasions arise ; but woe to the man
through whom the occasion cometh." It
would have been possible for me too to pile


1 That is, private letter, now lost, which was sent with the
two books of Rufinus' Apology.

2 Prov. xiv, 3. 3 Pride A. V. and Vulgate.
* Prov. xviii, 2, as in Vulgate version.

" Is. xxxii, 5. The words are not those of the Vulgate, nor
of the A. V.

« Mark ix, 42. ^ Matt, xviii, 7.


up falsehoods against you and to say that I
had heard or seen what no one had observed,
so that among the ignorant my efirontery
might be taken for veracity, and tny violence
for resolution. But far be it from me to be
an imitator of you, and to do myself what
I denounce in you. He who is capable of
doing filthy things may use filthy words.
' " The evil inan out of the evil treasure of
his heart bringeth forth that which is evil ;
for out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaketh." You may count it as
good fortune that one whom you once called
friend but now accuse has no mind to make
vile imputations against you. I say this not
from any dread of the sword of your accusa-
tion, but because I prefer to be accused
than to be the accuser, to suffer an injury
than to do one. I know the precept of the
Apostle: ^"Dearly beloved avenge not
yourselves but rather give place unto wrath :
for it is written Vengeance is inine, I will
repay saith the Lord. Therefore, if thine
enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give
him drink ; for in so doing thou shalt heap
coals of fire upon his head." For he that
avenges himself cannot claiin the vindication
of the Lord.

2. But, before I make my answer to
your letter, I must expostulate with you ;
you who are first in age among the monks,
good presbyter, follower of Christ ; is it
possible for yoti to wish to kill your brother,
when even to hate him is to be a homicide.?
Have you learned from your Saviour the
lesson that if one strike you on the one
cheek you should turn to him the other also ?
Did not he make answer to the man who
struck him, ' " If I have spoken evil, bear
witness of the evil, but if well, why smitest
thou me.''" You threaten me with death,
which can be inflicted on us even by ser-
pents. To die is the lot of all, to commit
homicide only of the weak man. What
then.? If you do not kill me shall I never
die.? Perhaps I ought to be grateful to you


1 Luke vi, 45. 3 Rom. xii, 19, 20.


' John xviii, 23.


520


JEROME.


that you turn this necessity into a virtue.
VVe read of Apostles quarrelling, namely
Paul and Barnabas who were angry with
each other on account of John whose sur-
name was Mark ; those who were united by
the bonds of Christ's gospel were separated
for a voyage; but they still remained friends.
Did not the same Paul resist Peter to
the face because he did not walk uprightly
in the Gospel ? Yet he speaks of him as
his predecessor in the Gospel, and as a
pillar of the church ; and he lays before him
his mode of preaching, ' ' lest he should be
running, or had run in vain.' Do not chil-
dren differ from parents and wives from
husbands in religious matters, while yet
'domestic affections remain unimpaired. If
you are as I am, why should you hate me?
Even if you believe differently, why should
you wish to kill me? Is it so, that whoever
differs from you is to be slain? I call upon
Jesus who will judge what I am now writing
and your letter also, as a witness upon my
conscience, that when the reverend bishop
Chromatins begged me to keep silence, my
wish was to do so, and thus to make an end
of our dissensions, and to overcome evil
with good. But, now that you threaten me
with destruction, I am compelled to reply ;
otherwise, my silence will be taken as an
acknowledgment of the crime, and you will
interpret my moderation as the sign of an
evil conscience.

3. The dilemma in which I am placed is
of your making: it is brought out, not from
the resources of dialectics, of which you are
ignorant, but from among the tools of the
murderer and with an intention like his. If
I keep silence, I am held guilty : if I speak, I
become an evil speaker. You at once for-
bid me to answer and compel me. Well,
then ; I must shun excess on both sides. I will
say nothing that is injurious ; but I must dissi-
pate the charges made against me, for it is
impossible not to be afraid of a man who is
prepared to kill you. And I will do this in
the order of what you have now set before
me, leaving the rest as they are in those most
learned books of yours which I confuted be-
fore I had read them.

You say that ' you sent your accusation
against me not to the many but only to those
who had been offended by what I had said ; for
one ought to speak to Christians not for dis-
play but for edification.' Whence then, I beg
you to consider, did the report of your having
written these books roach me? Who was it
that sowed them broadcast through Rome and


1 Gal. li, 3.


Italy and the islands of the coast of Dalmatia?
How did these charges against me ever come
to my ears, if they were only lurking in your
desk, and those of your friends ? How can you
dare to say that you are speaking as a Chris-
tian not for display but for edification when
you set yourself in mature age to say things
against your equal which a murderer could
hardly say of a thief, or a harlot against one of
her class, or a buffoon against a farce-player ?
You have for ever so long been labouring to
brinsr forth these mountains of accusations
against me and sharpening these swords to
pierce my throat. Your cries have been as
loud as Ceres' complaints • or a driver's shouts
to his horses. Was this to make all the prov-
inces through which tliey resounded read
the praise you wrote of me? and recite your
panegyrics upon me in every street, every
corner, even in the weaving-shops of the
women? This is the religious restraint and
Christian edification of which you speak.
Your reserve, vour reticence is such that men
come to me from the West, crowd upon
crowd, and tell me of your abuse of me ; and
this, though only from memory, yet with
such exact agreement that I was obliged * to
make my answer, not to your writings which
I had not then read, but to what was said
to be contained in them, and to intercept
with the shield of truth the missiles of
mendacity which were flying about through
all the world.

4. Your letter goes on :

"Pravdo not trouble yourself to give alargesum
of gold to bribe m J secretary, as your friends did in
the case of my papers containing the Tlepl 'Apx'J^',
before they had been corrected and brought to com-
pletion, so that they might more easily falsify
documents which no one possessed, or at least very
few. Accept the document which I send you
gratis, though you would be glad to pay a large
sum to buy it."

I should have thought you would be
ashamed of such a beginning of your work.
What ! I bribe your Secretary ! Is there any
one who would attempt to vie with the wealth
of Croesus^ and Darius?' who is there that
does not tremble when he is suddenly con-
fronted with a Demaratus'' or a Crassus?*
Have you become so brazen-faced, that you
put your trust in lies and think lies will pro-
tect you and that we shall believe every fiction
which you choose to frame? Who then was


1 When she lost her daughter Proserpine and lamented her
throufiliout tlie world.

2 In the two first books of the Apology.

3 Kings of I-ydi:i and Persia notorious for their wealth.

•• Father of Tarquinius Priscus, said to have been a wealthy
inunigrant from Corinth.

'' The triumvir ; surnamed the Rich : murdered in Persia B.C.

52.


APOLOGY— BOOK III.


521


it who stole that letter in which you were so
highly praised, from the cell of our brother
Eusebius ? Whose artfulness was it, and whose
accomplices, through which a certain docu-
ment was found in the lodgings of that Chris-
tian woman Fabiola and of that wise man
Oceanus, which they themselves had never
seen? Do you think that you are innocent be-
cause you can cast upon others all the imputa-
tions which properly belong to you? Is every
one who offends you, however guiltless and
harmless he may be, at once held to become a
criminal? You think so, I suppose, because
you are possessed of that through which the
chastity of Danae^was broken down, that
which had more power with Gihazi than his
master's sacred character, that for which
Judas betrayed his Master.^

5. Let us understand what was the
wrong done by my friend ^ who, you say
' falsified parts of your papers when they
had not yet been corrected nor carried to
completion, and it was the more possible to
falsify them because very few if any as yet
possessed them.' * I have already said, and
I now repeat, with protestations in the
presence of God, that I did not approve his
accusing you, nor of any Christian accusing
another Christian ; for what need is there
that matters which can be corrected or set
right in private should be published abroad
to the stumbling and fall of many? But
since each man lives for his own gullet, and
a man does not by becoming your friend
become master of your will, while I blame
the accusinar of a brother even when it is
true, so also I cannot accept against a man
of saintly character this accusation of falsify-
ing your papers. How could a man who
only knows Latin change anything in a
translation from the Greek? Or how could
he take out or put in anything in such books
as the Uepl 'Apx<iv, in which everything is so
closely knit together that one part hangs
upon another, and anything that may be
taken out or put in to suit your will must at
once show out like a patch on a garment?
What you ask me to do, it is for you to do
yourself. Put on at least a small measure
of natural if not of Christian modesty in
your assertions ; do not despise and trample
upon your conscience, and imagine yourself
justified by a show of words, when the facts
are against you. If Eusebius bought your


1 Jove was said to have seduced Danae by changing' himself
into a shower of gold.

2 Jerome often taunts Rufinus with being rich and luxu-
rious. See Letter cxxv, iS.

3 Necessarius. This no doubt applies to Eusebius of
Cremona or to Paulinian, Jerome's brother, (Jer Ap. i, 21, 28.)
See Ruf. Ap. i, 19, where a similar charge is made.

*Qvioted from Rufinus' letter to Jerome, novir lost.


uncorrected papers for money in order to
falsify them, pi-oduce the genuine papers
which have not been falsified : and if you
can shew that there is nothing heretical in
them, lie will become amenable to the charge
of forgery. But, however much you may
alter or correct them, you will not make
them out to be catholic. If the error
existed only in the words or in some few
statements, what is bad might be cut off
and what is good be substituted for it. But,
when the whole discussion ' proceeds on a
single principle, namely, the notion that the
whole universe of reasonable creatures have
fallen by their own will, and will hereafter
return to a condition of unity : and that
again from that starting point another fall
will begin : what is there that you can
amend, unless 3'ou alter the whole book ?
But if you were to think of doing this, you
would no longer be translating another
man's work ])ut composing a work of your
own.

However, I hardly see which way your
argument tends. I suppose you mean that
the papers being uncorrected and not having
undergone a final revising were more easily
falsified by Eusebius. Perhaps I am stupid ;
but the argument appears to me somewhat
foolish and pointless. If the papers were
uncorrected and had not undergone their
final revision, the errors in them must be
imputed not to Eusebius but to your sloth
and delay in putting oft^ their correction ;
and all the blame that can be laid upon him
is that he circulated among the body of
Christians writings which you had intended
in course of time to correct. But if, as you
assert, Eusebius falsified them, why do you
put forward the allegation that they were
uncorrected, and that they had gone out
befoi-e the public without their final revision?
For papers whether corrected or uncorrected
are equally susceptible of falsification. But,
No one, you say possessed these books, or
very few. What contradictions this single
sentence exhibits! If no one had these
books, how could they be in the hands of
a few? If a few possessed them, why do
you state falsely that there were none?
Then, when you say that a few had them,
and by your own confession the statement
that no one had them is overthrown, what
becomes of your complaint that your secre-
tary was bribed with money ? Tell us the
secretary's name, the amount of the bribe,
the place, the intermediary, the recipient.
Of course the traitor has been cast oft' from

iThat is in Origen's nepi ■Apx'"»'»


522


JEROME.


you, and one convicted of so great a crime
has been separated from all familiarity with
you. Is it not more likely to be true that
the copies of the work which Eusebius
obtained were given him by those few
friends whom you speak of, especially since
tliese copies agree and coincide with one
another so completely that there is not the
diderence of a single stroke. We might ask
also whether it was quite wise to give a
copy to others which you had not yet cor-
rected.'* The documents had not received
their last corrections, and yet other men
possessed these errors of yours which needed
correction. Do you not see that your false-
hood will not hold together.'' Besides, what
profit was there for you, at that particular
moment — how would it have helped you
in escaping from the condemnation of the
bishops — that the book which was the sub-
ject of discussion should be open to every-
one, and that you should thus be refuted by
your own words.'' From all this it is clear,
according to the epigram of the famous
orator, that you have a good will for a lie,
but not the art of framing it.

6. I will follow the order of your letter,
and subjoin your very words as you spoke
them. " I admit, that, as you say, I praised
your eloquence in my Preface ; and I would
praise it again now were it not that contrary
to the advice of your TuUy, you make it
hateful by excessive boastfulness." Where
have I boasted of my eloquence .'' I did not
even accept willingly the praise which you
bestowed on it. Perhaps your reason for
saying this is that you do not wish, yourself,
to be flattered by public praise given in
guile. Rest assured you shall be accused
openl}' ; you reject one who would praise
you ; you shall have experience of one who
openly arraigns you. I was not so foolish as
to criticize your illiterate style ; no one can
expose it to condemnation so strongly as you
do whenever you write. I only wished to
show your fellow-disciples who shared your
lack of literary training what progress you
had made during your thirty years in the
East, an illiterate writer, who takes impu-
dence for eloquence, and universal evil speak-
ing a sign of a good conscience. I am not
going to administer the ferule ; I do not as-
sume, as you put it, to apply the strokes of
the leather thong to teach an aged pupil his
letters. But the fact is your eloquence and
teaching is so sparkling that we mere tract-
writers cannot bear it, and you dazzle our
eyes with the acuteness of your talents to
such an extent that we must all seem to be
envious of you ; and we must really join in


the attempt to suppress you, for, if once you
obtain tlie primacy among us as a writer, and
stand on the summit of the rhetorical arch,
all of us who profess to know anything will
not be allowed to mutter a word. I am,
according to you, a philosopher and an ora-
tor, grammarian, dialectician, one who knows
Hebrew, Greek and Latin, a ' trilingual '
man. On this estimate, you also will be
' bilingual,' who know enough Latin and
Greek to make the Greek think you a Latin
scholar and the Latin a Greek : and the
bishop Epiphanius will be a ' pentaglossic '
man ' since he speaks in five languages
against you and your favorite.* But I won-
der at the rashness which made you dare
to say to one so accomplished as you profess
to think me : " You, whose accomplishments
give you so many watchful eyes, how can you
be pardoned if you go wrong.? How can you
fail to be buried in the silence of a never
ending shame.-'" When I read this, and re-
flected that 1 must somewhere or other have
made a slip in my words (for ^ " if any man
does not go wrong in word, the same is a
perfect man ") and was expecting that he
was about to expose some of my faults ; all
of a sudden I came upon the words : " Two
days before the carrier of this letter set out
your declamation against me was put into my
hands." What became then of those threats of
yours, and of your w^ords : " How can you
be pardoned if you go wrong.? How can
you fail to be covered with the silence of a
never ending shame.?" Yet perhaps, not-
withstanding the shortness of the time, you
were able to put this in order ; or else you
were intending- to hire in one of the learned
sort, who would expect to find in my works
the ornaments and gems of an eloquence like
yours. You wrote before this : " Accept the
document which I send which you wished to
buy at a great price ; " but now you speak
with the pretence of humility. " I intended
to follow your example ; but, since the mes-
senger who was returning to you was hurry-
ing back again I thought it better to write
shortly to )'ou than at greater length to
others." In the meantime you boldly take
pleasure in your illiteracy. Indeed you once
confessed it, declaring that ' it was superflu-
ous to notice a few faults of style, when it
was acknowledged that there were faults in
every part.' 1 will not therefore find fault
with you for putting down that a document
was acquired when you meant that it was
bought; though acquiring is said of things
like in kind, whereas buying implies the


1 Five tongued.

» Ainusium, sweelhcart; namely, Origen. »Jas. iii, 3.


APOLOGY — BOOK III.


523


counting out of money : nor for such a sen-
tence as " as he who was returning to you
was hurrying back again " which is a redun-
dancy wortiiy of the poorest style of diction.
I will only reply to the arguments, raid will
convict you, not of solaecisms and barbarisms,
but of falsehood, cunning and impudence.

7- If it is true that you write a letter to
me so as to admonish me, and because you
wish that I should be reformed, and that you
do not wish that men should have a stumbling
block put in their way, and that some may
be driven mad and others be put to silence ;
why do you write books addressed to others
against me, and scatter them by your myrmi-
dons for the whole world to read? And
what becomes of your dilemma in which
you try to entangle me, " Whom, best of
masters, did you think to correct? If those
to whom you wrote, there was no fault to
find with them ; if me whom you accuse, it
was not to me that you wrote "? And I will
reply to you in your own words: "Whom
did you wish to correct, unlearned master?
Those who had done no wrong? or me to
whom you did not write? You think your
leaders are brutish and are all incapable of
understanding your subtilty, or rather your ill
will, (for it was in this that the serpent was
more subtile than all the beasts in paradise,)
in asking that my admonition to you should be
of a private character, when you were press-
ing an indictment against me in public. You
are not ashamed to call this indictment of
yours an Apology : And you complain that I
opposeashield to your poniard, and with much
religiosity and sanctimoniousness you assume
the mask of humility, and say : " If I had
erred, why did you write to others, and not
try to confute me ? " I will retort on you
this very point. What you complain that I
did not do, why did you not do yourself? It
is as if a man who is attacking another with
kicks and fisticufls, and finds him intending
to shew fight, should say to him : "Do you
not know the command, ' If a man smites
you on the cheek, turn to him the other'?"
It comes to this, my good sir, you are deter-
mined to beat me, to strike out my eye ; and
then, when I bestir myself ever so little, you
harp upon the precept of the Gospel. Would
you lilie to have all the windings of your
cunning exposed? — those tricks of the foxes
who dwell among the ruins, of whom Eize-
kiel writes,^ " Like foxes in the desert, so
are thy prophets, O Israel." Let me make
you understand what you have done. You
praised me in your Preface in such a way

1 Ezek. xiii, 4,


that your praises are made a ground of accusa-
tion against me, and if I had not declared
myself to be without any connexion with my
admirer, I should have been judged as a
heretic. After I repelled your charges,
that is your praises, and without shewing
illwill to you personally, answered the accu-
sations, not the accuser, and inveighed against
the heretics, to shew that, though defamed
by you, I was a catholic; you grew angry,
and raved and composed the most magnifi-
cent works against me ; and when you had
given them to all men to read and repeat,
letters came to me from Italy and Rome and
Dalmatia, shewing, each more clearly than
the last, what all the encomiums were worth
with which in your former laudation you had
decorated me.

S. I confess, I immediately set to work
to reply to the insinuations directed against
me, and tried with all my might to prove
that I was no heretic, and I sent these books
of my Apology to those whom your book had
pained, so that your poison might be fol-
lowed by my antidote. In reply to this, you
sent me your former books, and now send me
this last letter, full of injurious language and
accusations. My good friend, what do you
expect mc to do? To keep silence? That
would be to acknowledge myself guilty. To
speak? But you hold your sword over my
head, and threaten me with an indictment,
no longer before the church but before the
law-courts. What have I done that deserves
punishment? Wherein have I injured you?
Is it that I have shewn myself not to be a
heretic? or that I could not esteem myself
worthy of your praises? or that I laid bare
in plain words the tricks and perjuries of
the heretics? What is all this to you who
boast yourself a true man and a catholic, and
who shew more zeal in attacking me than in
defending yourself? Must I be thought to
be attacking you because I defend myself?
or is it impossible that you should be ortho-
dox unless you prove me to be a heretic ?
What help can it give you to be connected
with me? and what is the meaning of your
action ? You are accused by one set of
people and you answer only by attacking
another. You find an attack made on you
by one man, and you turn your back upon
him and attack another who was for leaving
vou alone.

9. I call Jesus the Mediator to witness that
it is against my will, and fighting against
necessity, that I come down into the arena
of this war of words, and that, had you not
challenged me, I would have never broken
silence. Even now, let your charges against


524


JEROME.


me cease, and my defence will cease. For
it is no edifying spectacle that is presented to
our readers, that of two old men engaging in
a gladiatorial conflict on account of a heretic ;
especially when both of tliem wish to be
thought catholics. Let us leave oft' all
favouring of heretics, and there will be no
dispute between us. We once were zealous
in our praise of Origen ; let us be equally
zealous in condemning him now that he is
condemned by the whole world. Let us join
hands and hearts, and march with a ready
step behind the two trophy-bearers of the
East and West.' We went wrong in our
youth, let us mend our ways in our age. If
you are my brother, be glad that I have seen
my errors ; if I am your friend, I must give
you joy on your conversion. So long as we
maintain our strife, we shall be thought to
hold the right faith not willingly but of
necessity. Our enmity prevents our afibrd-
ing the spectacle of a true repentance. If
our faith is one, if we both of us accept and
reject the same things, (and it is from this,
as even Catiline testifies, that firm friend-
ships arise), if we are alike in our hatred of
heretics, and equally condemn our former
mistakes, why should we set out to battle
against each other, when we have the same
objects both of attack and defence? Pardon
me for having praised Origen's zeal for
Scriptural learning in my youthful days
before I fully knew his heresies; and I will
grant you forgiveness for having written an
Apology for his works when your head was
grey.

lo. You state that my book came into
your hands two days before you wrote yoiu'
letter to me, and that therefore you had no
sufficient leisure to make a reply. Otherwise,
if you had spoken against me after full
thought and preparation, we might think
that you were casting forth lightnings rather
than accusations. But even so veracious a
person as you will hardly gain credence
when you tell us that a merchant of Eastern
wares whose business is to sell what he has
brought from these parts and to buy Italian
goods to bring over here for sale, only stayed
two days at Aquilcia, so that you were
obliged to write your letter to me in a hur-
ried and extempore fashion. For your
books which it took you three years to put
into complete sliape are harilly more care-
fully written. Perhaps, however, you had
no one at hand then to amend your sorry
productions, and this is the reason why your
literary journey is destitute of the aid of

1 Theophilus of Alexandria — Anastasius of Rome.


Pallas, and is intersected by faults of style,
as by rough places and chasms at every turn.
It is clear that this statement about the two
days is false ; you would not have been able
in that time even to read what I wrote,
much less to reply to it; so that it is evident
that either you took a good many days in
writing your letter, which its elaborate style
makes probable ; or, if this is your hasty
style of composition, and you can write so
well oft-hand, you would be very negligent
in your composition to write so much worse
when you have had time for thought.

II. You state, with some prevarication,
that you have translated from the Greek what
I had before translated into Latin ; but I do
not clearly understand to what you are allud-
ing, unless you are still bringing up against
me the Commentary on the Ephesians, and
hardening yourself in your eftrontery, as if
you had received no answer on this head.
You stop your ears and will not hear the
voice of the charmer. What I have done in
that and other commentaries is to develop
both my own opinion and that of others,
stating clearly which are catholic and which
heretical. This is the common rule and cus-
tom of those who undertake to explain books
in commentaries : They give at length in
their exposition the various opinions, and
explain what is thought by themselves and
by others. This is done not only by those
who expound the holy Scriptures but also
by those who explain secular books whether
in Greek or in Latin. You, however, can-
not screen yourself in reference to the Uepl
'Apxf-iv by this fact; for you will be convicted
by your own Preface, in which you under-
take that the evil parts and those which have
been added by heretics have been cut oft' but
that all that is best remains ; so that all that
you have written, whether good or bad,
must be held to be the work, not of the
author whom you are translating, but of
yourself who have made the translation.
Perhaps, indeed, you ought to have cor-
rected the errors of the heretics, and to
have set forth publicly what is wrong in
Origen. But on this point, (since you refer
me to the document itself,) I have made
you my answer before reading your letter.

13. About the book of Pamphilus, what
happened to me was, not comical as you call
it, but perhaps ridiculous ; > namely that,
after I had asserted it to be by Eusebius
not by Pamphilus, I stated at the end
of the discussion that I had for many years
believed that it was by Pamphilus, and that I


' non ridiadosa ut In sciibis sed ridicuia, Jerome seems
to object to ridiculosus as bad Latin.


APOLOGY — BOOK III.


525


had borrowed a copy of this book from you.
You may judge how little I fear your derision
from the fact that even now I make the same
statement. I took it from your manuscript as
being a copy of a workof Pamphilus. I trusted
in you as a Christian and as a monk : I did
not imagine that you would be guilty of
such a wicked imposture. But, after that
the question of Origen's heresy was stirred
throughout the world on account of your trans-
lation of his work, I was more careful in exam-
ining copies of the book, and in the library of
Caesarea I found the six volumes of Eusebius'
Apology for Origen. As soon as I had
looked through them, T at once detected tlie
book on the Son and the Holy Spirit which
you alone have published under the name of
the martyr, altering most of its blasphemies
into words of a better meaning. And this
I saw must have been done either by Didy-
mus or by you or some other (it is quite clear
that you did it in reference to the ncp^ 'ApxCjv)
by this decisive proof, that Eusebius tells us
that Pamphilus published nothing of his own.
It is for you therefore to say from whence
you obtained your copy ; and do not, for the
sake of avoiding my accusation, say that it
was from some one who is dead, or, because
you have no one to point to, name one who
cannot answer for himself. If this rivulet
has its source in your desk, the inference is
plain enough, without my drawing it. But,
suppose that the title of this book and the
name of the author has been changed by some
other lover of Origen, what motive had you
for turning it into Latin? Evidently this, that,
through the testimony given to him by a mar-
tyr, all should trust to the writings of Origen,
since they were guaranteed beforehand by a
witness of such authority. But the Apology
of this most learned man was not sufficient for
you ; you must write a treatise of your own
in his defence, and, when these two documents
had been widely circulated, you felt secure in
proceeding to translate the Tlepl 'Apxo)v itself
from the Greek, and commended it in a Pre-
face, in which you said that some things in
it had been corrupted by the heretics, but
that you had corrected them from a study of
others of Origen's writings. Then come
in your praises of me for the purpose of pre-
venting any of my friends from speaking
against you. You put me forward as the
trumpeter of Origen, you praise my eloquence
to the skies, so that you may drag down the
faith into the mire ; you call me colleague
and brother, and profess yourself the imi-
tator of my works. Then, while on the
one hand you cry me up as having trans-
lated seventy homilies of Origen, and some


of his short treatises on the Apostle, in which
you say that I so smoothed things down
that the Latin reader will find nothing in
them which is discrepant from the Catholic
faith ; now on the other hand you brand these
very books as heretical ; and, obliterating
your former praise, you accuse the man whom
you had preached up when you thought he
would figure as your ally, because you find
that he is the enemy of your perfidy. Which
of us two is the calumniator of the martyr.^
I, who say that he was no heretic, and that
he did not write the book which is con-
demned by every one ; or you, who have
published a book written by a man who
was an Arian and changed his name into that
of the martyr? It is not enough for you
that Greece has beer, scandalized ; you must
press the book upon the ears of the Latins,
and dishonor an illustrious martyr as far as
in you lies by your translation. Your in-
tention no doubt was not this ; it was not to
accuse me but to make me serve for the
defence of Origen's writings. But let me
tell you that the faith of Rome which was
praised by the voice of an Apostle, does not
recognize tricks of this kind. A faith which
has been guaranteed by the authority of an
Apostle cannot be changed though an Angel
should announce another gospel than that
which he preached. Therefore, my brother,
whether the falsification of the book proceeds
from you, as many believe, or from another,
as you will perhaps try to persuade us,
in which case you have only been guilty of
rashness in believing the composition of a
heretic to be that of a martyr, change the
title, and free the innocence of the Romans
from this great peril. It is of no advantage
to you to be the means of a most illustrious
martyr being condemned as a heretic : of
one who shed his blood for Christ being
proud to be an enemy of the Christian faith.
Take another course : say, I found a book
which I believed to be the work of a martyr.
Do not fear to be a penitent. I will not
press you further. I will not ask from
whom you obtained it ; you can name some
dead man if you please, or say you bought
it from an unknown man in the street : for I
do not wish to see you condemned, but con-
verted. It is better that it should appear that
you were in error than that the martyr was
a heretic. At all events, by some means or
other, draw out your foot from its present
entangleme-nt : consider what answer you will
make in the judgment to come to the com-
plaints which the martyrs will bring against
you.

13. Moreover, you make a charge against


526


JEROME.


yourself which has been brought by no
one against you, and make excuses where
no one has accused you. You say that
you have read these and in my letter: "I
want to know who has given you leave,
when translating a book, to remove some
things, change others, and again add others."
And you go on to answer yourself, and
to speak against me: " I say this to you:
Who I pray, has given you leave, in your
Commentaries, to put down some things
out of Origen, somo from Apollinarius, some
of your own, instead of all from Origen
or from yourself or from some other.-"' All
this while, wlaile you are aiming at some-
thing different, you have been preferring a
very strong charge against yourself; and you
have forgotten the old proverb, that those
who speak falsehood should have good
memories. You say that I in my Commen-
taries hav^e set down some things out of
Origen, some from Apollinarius, some of
my own. If then these things which I liave
set down under the names of others are the
words of Apollinarius and of Origen; what
is the meaning of the charge which you
fasten upon me, that, when I say " Another
says this," " The following is some one's
conjecture," that "other" or "some one"
means myself.'' Between Origen and Apol-
linarius there is a vast ditference of interpre-
tation, of style, and of doctrine. When I set
down discrepant opinions on the same passage,
am I to be supposed to accept both the con-
tradictory views .'' But more of this hereafter.
14. Now I ask you this: Who may have
blamed you for having either added or
changed or taken away certain things in the
books of Origen, and have put you to the
question like a man on the horse-rack;'
Are those things which you put down in
your translation bad or good.'' It is useless
for you to simulate innocence, and by some
silly question to parry the force of the true
inquiry. I have never accused you for
translating Origen for your own satisfaction.
1 have done the same, and so have Victori-
nus, Hilary, and Ambrose ; but I have ac-
cused you for fortifying your translation of
a heretical work by writing a preface ap-
proving of it. You compel me to go over
the same ground, and to walk in the lines
I myself have traced. For you say in that
Prologue that you have cut away what had
been added by the heretics, and have re-
placed it with what is good. If you have
taken out the false statement of the heretics,
then what you have left or have added must


> Equuleus, the little horse, an instrument of torture.


be either Origen's, or yours, and you have
set them down, presumably, as good. But
that many of these are bad you cannot deny.
"What is that," you will say, "to nie.^'"
You must impute it to Origen ; for I have
done no more than alter what had been
added by the heretics. Tell us then for
what reason you took out the bad things
written by the heretics and left those written
by Origen untouched. Is it not clear that
parts of the false doctrines of Origen you
condemned under the designation of the doc-
trines of heretics, and others you accepted
because you judged them to be not false but
true and consonant with your faith .'' It was
these last about which I inquired whether
those things which you praised in your
Preface were good or bad : it was these
which you confessed you have left as per-
fectly good when you cut out all that was
worst ; and I thus have phiced you, as I said,
on the horse-rack, so that, if you say that
they are good, you will be proved to be a
heretic, but if you say they are bad, you
will at once be asked: "Why then did you
praise these bad things in your Preface.''"
And I did not add the question which you
craftily pretend that I asked; "Why did
you by your translation bring evil doctrines
to the ears of the Latins.''" For to exhibit
what is bad may be done at times not for the
sake of teaching them but of warning men
against them : so that the reader may be on
his guard not to follow the error, but may
make light of the evils which he knows,
whereas if unknown they might become
objects of wonder to him. Yet after this,
you dare to say that I am the author of
writings of this kind, whereas you, as a
mere translator would be going beyond the
translator's province if you had chosen to
correct anything, but, if you did not correct
anything, you acted as a translator alone.
You would be quite right in saying this if
your translation of the Uepl 'hpxi^v had no
Preface ; just as Hilary, when he translated
Origen's homilies took care to do it so that
both the good and evil of them should be
imputed not to the translator but to their
own author. If you had not boasted that
you had cut out the worst and left the best,
you would, in some way or other, have
escaped from the mire. I3ut it is this that
brings to nought the trick of your invention,
and keeps you bound on all sides, so that you
cannot get out. And I must ask you not to
have too mean an opinion of the intelligence
of your readers nor to think that all who
will read your writings are so dull as not to
laugh at you when they see you let real


APOLOGY — BOOK III.


527


wounds mortify while you put plasters on a
healthy body.

15. What your opinions are on the res-
urrection of the flesh, we have already
learned from your Apology. "No member
will be cut oft", nor any part of the body
destroyed." This is the clear and open pro-
fession which you make in your innocence,
and which you say is accepted by all the
bishops of Italy. I should believe your state-
ment, but that the matter of that book which
is not Pamphilus' makes me doubt about
you. And I wonder that Italy should have
approved what Rome rejected ; that the
bishops should have accepted what the
Apostolic see condemned.

16. You further write that it was by my
letters that you had been informed that the
pope Theophilus lately put forth an exposi-
tion of the faith which has not yet reached you
and you pi'omise to accept whatever he may
have written. I am not aware that I ever
said this, or that I sent any letters of the
sort. But you consent to things of which
you are still in uncertainty, and things as to
which you do not know what and of what
kind they will turn out to be, so that you
may avoid speaking of things which you
know quite well, and may not be bound by
the consent you have given to them. There
are two letters of Theophilus,' a Synodal
and a Paschal letter, against Origen and
his disciples, and others against Apolli-
narius and against Origen also, which,
within the last two years or thereabouts, I
have translated and given to the men who
speak our language for the edification of the
church. I am not aware that I have translated
anything else of his. But, when you say
that you assent to the opinion of the pope
Theophilus in everything, you must take care
not to let your masters and disciples hear you,
and not to offend these numerous persons
who call me a robber and you a martyr, and
also not to provoke the wrath of the man ^
who wrote letters to you against the bishop
EpijDhanius, and exhorted you to stand fast
in the truth of the faith, and not to change
your opinion for any terror. This epistle in
its complete form is held by those to whom
it was brought. After this you say, after
your manner : " I will satisfy you even when
you rage against me, as I have in the matter
you spoke of before." But again you say,
"What do you want? have 3'ou anything


^ For the years 401 and 402. See Jerome Letters 96 and 9S.

- Isidore, the Orig'enist monk who was sent to inquire into
the quarrel between Jerome and John of Jerusalem. His letter,
written to John and Rufinus prejudging the case, was brought
by mistake to Jerome's friend Vincentius. See Jerome Against
John of Jerusalem c. 37.


more at which you may shoot with the bow
of your oratory ? " And yet you are indig-
nant if I find fault with your distasteful way
of speaking, though you take up the lowest
expressions of the Comedians, and in writing
on church affairs adopt language fit only for
the characters of harlots and their lovers on
the stage.

17. Now, as to the question which you
raise, when it was that I began to admit the
authority of the pope Theophilus, and was
associated with him in community of belief.
You make answer to yourself: "Then, I
suppose, when you were the supporter of
Paul whom he had condemned and made
the greatest effort to help him, and insti-
gated him to recover through an imperial
rescript the bishopric from which he had
been removed by the episcopal tribunal."
I will not begin by answering for myself,
but first speak of the injury which you have
here done to another. What humanity or
charity is there in rejoicing over the mis-
fortunes of others and in exhibiting their
wounds to the world.'* Is that the lesson
you have learned from that Samaritan who
carried back the man that was half dead to
the inn.? Is this what you understand by
pouring oil into his wounds, and paying the
host his expenses.'' Is it thus that you
interpret the sheep brought back to the
fold, the piece of money recovered, the
prodigal son welcomed back ? Suppose
that you had a right to speak evil of me,
because I had injured you, and, to use
your words, had goaded you to madness
and stimulated you to evil speaking: what
harm had a man who remains in obscurit}-
done you, that you should lay bare his scars,
and when they were skinned over, should
tear them open by inflicting this uncalled for
pain ? Even if he was worthy of your re-
proaches, were you justified in doing this?
If I am not mistaken, those whom you wish
to strike at through him (and I speak the
open opinion of many) are the enemies of
the Origenists ; you use the troubles of one
of them to show your violence against both.^
If the decisions of the pope Theophilus so
greatly please you, and you think it impious
that an episcopal decree should be nullified,
what do you say about the rest of those
whom he has condemned? And what do
you say about the pope Anastasius, about
whom you assert most truly that no one
thinks him capable as the bishop of so great
a city, of doing an injury to an innocent or
an absent man? I do not say this because I


1 Perhaps both Paul and Jerome.


528


JEROME.


set myself up as a judge of episcopal de-
cisions, or wish what they have determined
to be rescinded ; but I say, Let each of them
do what he thinks right at his own risk, it is
for him alone to consider how his judgment
will be judged. Our duties in our monas-
tery are those of hospitality ; we welcome all
who come to us with the smile of human
friendliness. We must take care lest it
should again happen that Mary and Joseph
do not find room in the inn, and that Jesus
should be shut out and say to us, " I was
a stranger and ye took me not in. " The
only persons we do not welcome are heretics,
who are the only persons who are welcomed
by you : for our profession binds us to wash
the feet of those who come to us, not to dis-
cuss their merits. Bring to your remem-
brance, my brother, how he whom we speak
of had confessed Christ: think of that breast
which was gashed by the scourges : recall to
mind the imprisonment he had endured, the
darkness, the exile, the work in the mines,
and you will not be surprised that we wel-
comed him as a passing guest. Are we to
be thought rebels by you because we give a
cup of cold water to the thirsty in the name
of Christ.?

i8. I can tell you of something which
may make him still dearer to us, though
more odious to you. A short time ago, the
faction of the heretics which was scattered
away from Egypt and Alexandria came to
Jerusalem, and wished to make common
cause with him, so that as they suffered to-
gether, they might have the same heresy
imputed to them. But he repelled their ad-
vances, he scorned and cast them from him :
he told them that he was not an enemy of the
faith and was not going to take up arms
against the Church : that his previous action
had been the result of vexation not of un-
soundness in the faith ; and that he had
sought only to prove his own innocence, not
to attack that of others. You profess to
consider an imperial rescript upsetting an
episcopal decree to be an impiety. That is
a matter for the responsibility of the man
who obtained it. But what is your opinion
of men who, when they have been them-
selves condemned, haunt the palaces of the
great, and in a serried column make an at-
tack on a single man who represents the
faith of Christ.'' However, as to my own
communion with the Pope Thcophilus, I
will call no other witness than the very man
whom you pretend that I injured.^ His
letters were always addressed to me, as you


* Theophilus himself.


well know, even at the time when you pre-
vented their being forwarded to me, and
when you used daily to send letter carriers
to him repeating to him with vehemence that
his opponent was my most intimate friend,
and telling the same falsehoods which you
now shamelessly write, so that you might
stir up his hatred against me and that his
grief at the supposed injury done him might
issue in oppression against me in matters of
faith. But he, being a prudent man and a
man of apostolical wisdom, came through
time and experience to understand both our
loyalty to him and your plots against us. If,
as you declare, my followers stirred up a
plot against you at Rome and stole your un-
corrected manuscripts while you were asleep ;
who was it that stirred up the pope Theoph-
ilus against the public enemy in Egypt? Who
obtained the decrees of the princes against
them, and the consent of the whole of this
quarter of the world ? Yet 3'ou boast that
you from your youth were the hearer and
disciple of Theophilus, although he, before
he became a bishop, through his native
modesty, never taught in public, and you,
after he became a Bishop, were never at
Alexandria. Yet you dare, in order to deal
a blow at me, to say " I do not accuse, or
change, my masters." If that were true it
would in my opinion throw a grave suspi-
cion on your Christian standing. As for
myself, you have no right to charge me with
condemning my former teachers: but I stand
in awe of those words of Isaiah : ^ " Woe unto
them that call evil good and good evil, that
put darkness for light and light for darkness,
that call bitter sweet and sweet bitter." But
it is you who drink alike the honeywine of
your masters and their poisons, who have
fallen away from your true master the Apos-
tle, who teaches that neither he himself or an
angel, if they err in matters of faith, must
not be followed.

19. You allude to Vigilantius. What
dream this is tliat you have dreamed about
him I do not know. Where have I said
that he was defiled by communion with
heretics at Alexandria ? Tell me the book,
produce the letter : but you will find
absolutely no such statement. Yet with
your wonted carelessness of statement or
rather impudence of lying, which makes
you imagine that every one will believe
what you say, you add : " When you
quoted a text of Scripture against him in
so insulting a way that I do not dare to
repeat it with my own mouth." You

1 Is. V, 30.


APOLOGY — BOOK III.


529


do not dare to repeat it because you can
make the charge seem worse by keeping
silence; and, because your accusation has
no facts to rest upon, you simulate modesty,
so that the reader may imagine that you
are acting from consideration towards me,
although your lies show that you do not
consider your own soul. What is this text
of Scripture which is too shameful to pro-
ceed out of that most shameless mouth of
yours.'* What shameful thing, indeed, can
you mention in the sacred books ? If you are
ashamed to speak, at any rate you can write
it down, and then I shall be convinced of
wantonness by my own words. I might
be silent on all other points, and I should
still prove by this single passage how brazen
is your effrontery. You know how little I
fear your impeachment. If you produce
the evidence with which you threaten me,
all the blame which now rests on you will
rest on me. I gave my reply to you when
I dealt with Vigilantius ; for he brought the
same charges against me which you bring
first in the guise of friendly eulogy, after-
wards in that of hostile accusation. I am
aware who it was that stiiTed up his ravings
against me ; I know your plots and vices ;
I am not ignorant of his simplicity which
is proclaimed by every one. Through his
folly your hatred against me found an out-
let for its fury; and, if I wrote a letter to
suppress it, so that you should not be
thought to be the only one who possesses a
literary cudgel, that does not justify you in
inventing shameful expressions which you
can find in no part of my writings what-
ever. You must accept and confess the fact
that the same document which answered his
madness aroused also your calumnies.

20. In the matter of the letter of the
pope Anastasius, you seem to have come on
a slippery place ; you walk unsteadily, and
do not see where to plant your feet. At one
moment you say that it must have been writ-
ten by me ; at another that it ought to have
been transmitted to you by him to whom it
was sent. Then again you charge the writer
with injustice ; or you protest that it matters
nothing to you whether he wrote it or not,
since you hold his predecessor's testimonial,
and, while Rome was beggmg you to give
her the honor of your presence, you dis-
dained her through love of your own little
town. If you have any suspicion that the
letter was forged by me, why do you not
ask for it in the chartulary of the Roman
See and then, when you discover that it
was not written by the bishop, hold me
manifestly guilty of the crime? You would

VOL. III. M


then instead of trying to bind me with
cobwebs, hold me fast bound in a net
of strong cords. But if it is as written by
the Bishop of Rome, it is an act of folly
on your part to ask for a copy of the letter
from one to whom it was not sent, and not
from him who sent it, and to send to the
East for evidence the source of which you
have in your own country. You had better
go to Rome and expostulate with him as
to the reproach which he has directed
against you when you were both absent and
innocent. You might first point out that
he had refused to accept your exposition
of faith, which, as you say, all Italy has
approved, and that he made no use of
your literary cudgel against the dogs you
spoke of. Next, you might complain that
he had sent to the East a letter aimed at
you which branded you with the mark of
heresy, and said that by your translation of
Origen's books Uepl 'Apxi^f the Roman church
which had received the work in its simpli-
city was in danger of losing the sincerity of
faith which it had learned from the Apostle ;
and that he had raised yet more ill will
against you by daring to condemn this very
book, though it was fortified by the attesta-
tion of your Preface. It is no light thing
that the pontiff of so great a city should have
fastened this charge upon you or have rashly
taken it up when made by another. You
should go about the streets vociferating and
crying over and over again, " It is not my
book, or, if it is, the uncorrected sheets were
stolen by Eusebius. I published it difierently,
indeed I did not publish it at all ; I gave it
to nobody, or at all events to few ; and my
enemy was so unscrupulous and my friends
so negligent, that all the copies alike were
falsified by him." This, my dearest brother,
is what you ought to have done, not to
turn your back upon him and to direct the
arrows of your abuse across the sea against
me ; for how can it cure your wounds that
I should be wounded.'' Does it comfort
a man who is stricken for death to see his
friend dying with him.?

21. You produce a letter of Siricius^
who now sleeps in Christ, and the letter of
the living Anastasius you despise. What
injury you ask, can it do you that he should
have written (or perhaps not written at all)
when you knew nothing of it.'' If he did
write, still it Is enough for you that you have
the witness of the whole world in your
favor, and that no one thinks it possible that
the bishop of so great a city could have done

1 Bishop of Rome in succession to Damasus. (A.D. 3S5-
398) and succeeded by Anastasius.

m


530


JEROME.


an injury to an innocent man, or even to one
who was simply absent. You speak of
yourself as innocent, though your translation
made all Rome shudder ; you say you \vere
absent, but it is only because you dare not
reply when you are accused. And you so
shrink from the judgment of the city of
Rome that you prefer to subject yourself to
an invasion of the barbarians ^ than to the
opinion of a peaceful city. Suppose that
the letter of last year was forged by me ;
who tlien wrote the letters which have
lately been received in the East.'* Yet in
these last the pope Anastasius pays you
such compliments that, whoa you read
them, you will be more inclined to set to
work to defend yourself than to accuse me.

I should like you to consider how inevitable
is the wisdom which you are shunning and
the Attic Salt and the eloquence of your
diction in religious writing. You are
attacked by others, you are pierced through
by their condemnation, yet it is against me
that you toss yourself about in your fury,
and say: "I could unfold a tale as to the
manner of your departure from Rome; as
to the opinions expressed about you at the
time, and written about you afterwards, as
to your oath, the place where you embarked,
the pious manner in which you avoided com-
mitting perjury ; all tliis I could enlarge upon,
but I have determined to keep back more
than I relate." These are specimens of
your pleasant speeches. And if after this
I say anything sharp in answer to you you
threaten me with immediate proscription and
with the sword. You are a most eloquent
person, and have all the tricks of rhetoric ;
you pretend to be passing over things which
you really reveal, so that what you cannot
prove by an open charge, you may make
into a crime by seeming to put it aside. All
this is your simplicity; this is what you
mean by sparing your friend and reserving
your statements for the judicial tribunal;
you spare me by heaping up a mass of
charge against me.

22. If any one wishes to hear the arrange-
ments for my journey from Rome, they were
these. In the month of August,^ when the
etesian winds were blowing, accompanied
by the reverend presbyter Vincentius and
my young brother, and other monks who
are now living at Jerusalem, I went on
board ship at the port of Rome, choosing
my own time, and with a very large body of
the saints attending me, I arrived at Rhe-
I stood for a while on the shore of


guim.


1 The Goths under Alaric passed throufjh Aquileia to in-
vade Italy in 401. » A.D. 385.


Scylla, and heard the old stories of the
rapid voyage of the versatile Ulysses, of the
songs of the sirens and the insatiable whirl-
pool of Charybdis. The inhabitants of
that spot told me many tales, and gave me
the advice that I should sail not for the col-
umns of Proteus but for the port where
Jonah landed, because the former of those
was the course suited for men who were
hurried and flying, but the latter was best
for a man who was imprisoned ; but I pre-
ferred to take the course by Malea and the
Cyclades to Cyprus. There I was received
by the venerable bishop Epiphanius, of
whose testimony to you you boast. I came
to Antioch, where I enjoyed the communion
of Paulinius the pontiff' and confessor and
was set forward by him on my journey to
Jerusalem, which I entered in the middle
of winter and in severe cold. I saw there
many wonderful things, and verified by the
judgment of my own eyes things which had
before come to my ears by report. Thence
I made my way to Egypt. I saw the mon-
asteries of Nitria, and perceived the snakes ^
which lurked among the choirs of the monks.
Then making haste I at once returned to
Bethlehem, which is now my home, and
there poured my perfume upon the manger
and cradle of the Saviour. I saw also the
lake of ill-omen. Nor did I give myself to
ease and inertness, but I learned many
things which I did not know before. As to
what judgment was formed of me at Rome,
or what was written afterwards, you are
quite welcome to speak out, especially since
you have writings to trust to ; for I am not
to be tried by your words which you at
your will either veil in enigma or blurt out
with open falsehood, but by the documents
of the church. You may see how little I
am afraid of )'0U. If you can produce
against me a single record of the Bishop of
Rome or of any other church, I will confess
myself to be chargeable v^ith all the iniq-
uities which I find assigned to you. It
would be easy for me to tell of the circum-
stances of your departure, your age, the
date of sailing, the places in which you
lived, the companv you kept. But far be it
from me to do what I blame you for doing,
and, in a discussion between churchmen, to
make up a story worthv of the ravings of
quarrelling hags. Let this word be enough
for your wisdom to remember. Do not
adopt a method with another which can at
once be retorted on yourself.

23. As regards our reverend friend

1 He means Origenistic heresies ; but there is no trace in
his early works of this detection of heresy.


APOLOGY — BOOK III.


531


Epiphanius, this is strange shuffling of youi'S,
when you say that it was impossible for him
to liave written against you after his giving
you the Iciss and joining with you in prayer.
It is as if you were to contend that he would
not be dead if a short time before he had been
alive, or as if it were not equally certain
that he had first reproved you and then,
after the kiss of peace, excommunicated you.
" They went out from us," it is said, ^ " but
they were not of us ; otherwise they would
no doubt have continued with us." The
apostle bids us avoid a heretic after a first
and second admonition : of course this im-
plies that he was a member of the flock of
the church befoi*e he was avoided or con-
demned. I confess I cannot restrain my
laughter when, at the prompting of some
clever person, you strike up a hymn in hon-
our of Epiphanius. Why, this is the ' silly
old man,' the ' anthropomorphite,' this is
the man who boasted in your presence of the
six thousand books of Origen that he had
read, who ' thinks himself entrusted with
the preaching of the Gospel against Origen
among all nations in their own tongue '
who ' will not let others read Origen for
fear they should discover what he has stolen
from him.' Read what he has written, and
the letter, or rather letters, one of which I
will adduce as a testimonial to your ortho-
doxy, so that it may be seen how worthy he
is of your present praise. ^ " May God set
you free, my brother, and the holy people of
Christ which is entrusted to you, and all the
brethren who are with you, and especially
the Presbyter Rufinus, from the heresy of
Origen, and all other heresies, and from the
perclition which they bring. For if many
heresies have been condemned by the Church
on account of one word or of two, which
are contrary to the faith, how much more
must that man be counted a heretic who has
invented so many perverse things, so many
false doctrines ! He stands forth as the en-
emy of God and of the church." This is
the testimony which this saintly man bears
to you. This is the garland of praise which
he gives you to parade in. Thus runs the
letter which your golden coins extracted from
the chamber of our brother Eusebius, so
that you might calumniate the translator of
it, and might fix upon me the guilt of a
most manifest crime — that of rendering a
Greek word as ' dearest' which ought to have
been ' honourable ! ' But what is all this to
you who can control all events by your pru-


1 I John ii, 19.

2 From Epiphanius' letter to John, Bishop of Jerusalem,
translated by Jerome (Jer. Ep. 51 c. 6).


dent methods, and can trim your path be-
tween difterent possibilities, first saying, if
you can find any one to believe you, that
neither Anastasius nor Epiphanius ever
wrote a line against you ; and, secondly,
when their actual letters cry out against you,
and break down your audacious efirontery,
despising the judgment of them both, and
say it does not matter to you whether they
wrote or not, since it was impossible for
them to write against an innocent and an
absent man.

Then again, you have no right to speak
evil of that saintly man, as you do when
you say " that it may be seen that he gave
me peace with his words and his kiss, but
kept evil and deceit in his heart" — for this
is your reasoning, and it is thus that you
defend yourself. That this is the letter of
Epiphanius and that it is hostile to you, all the
world knows : and that it came in its genuine
form into your haads we can prove ; and it is
therefore an astounding shame or rather utter
shamelessness in you to deny what you cannot
doubt to be true. What! Is Epiphanius
to be befouled with the imputation that he
gave you the sign of peace but had deceit in
his heart? Is it not much truer to believe that
he first admonished you because he wished to
save you from error and bring you back to
the right way ; and that therefore he did not
reject your Judas kiss, wishing to break
down by his forbearance the betrayer of the
faith, — but that afterwards when he found
that all his toil was fruitless, and that the
leopard could not change its spots nor the
Ethiopian his skin, he proclaimed in his
letter what had before been only a suspicion
in his mind?

24. It is somewhat the same argument
which you use against the pope Anastasius,
namely, that, since you hold the letters of
the bishop Siricius, it was impossible that he
should write against you. I am afraid you
suspect that some injury has been done you.
I cannot understand how a man of your
acuteness and capacity can condescend to
such nonsense ; you suppose that your readers
are foolish, but you shew that you are fool-
ish yourself. Then after this extraordinary
argumentation, you subjoin this little sen-
tence: "Far be such conduct from these
reverend persons. It is from your school that
such actions proceed. You gave us all the
signs of peace at our departure, and then threw
missiles charged with venom from behind
our backs." In this clause or rather declama-
tory speech, you intended, no doubt, to
shew your rhetorical skill. It is true we
gave you the signs of peace, but not to em-


M m 2


532


JEROME.


brace heresy ; we joined hands, we accom-
panied you as you set forth on your journey,
on the understanding that you were cathohc
not that we were heretical. But I want to
learn what these poisoned missiles are which
you complain that I threw from behind your
back. I sent the presbyters, Vincentius.
Paulinianus, Eusebius, Rufinus. Of these,
Vincentius went to Rome long before you ;
Paulinianus and Eusebius set out a year
after vou had sailed ; Rufinus two years
after, for the cause of Claudius ; all of them
either for private reasons, or because an-
other was in peril of his life. Was it pos-
sible for me to know that when you entered
Rome, a nobleman had dreamed that a ship
full of merchandise was entering with full
blown sails? or that all questions about fate
were being solved by a solution which should
not itself be fatuous ? or that you were trans-
lating the book of Eusebius as if it were
Pamphilus'? or that you were putting your
own cover upon Origcn's poisoned dish by
lending your majestic eloquence to tiiis trans-
lation of his notorious work rirpt 'Api'Ji^ ? This
is a new way of calumniating a man. We
sent out the accusers before you had com-
mitted the crime. It was not, I repeat, it
was not by our plan, but by the providence
of God, that these men, who were sent out
for another reason, came to fight against the
rising heresy. They were sent, like Joseph,
to relieve the coming famine by the fervour
of their faith.

35. To what point will not audacity
burst forth when once it is freed from re-
straints? He has imputed to himself the
charge made against another so that we may
be thought to have invented it. I made a
charge against some one unnamed, and he
takes it as spoken against himself ; he purges
himself from another man's sins, being only
sure of his own innocence. For he takes
his oath that he did not write the letter that
passed under my name to the African bishops,
in which I am made to confess that I had
been induced by Jewish iniluence to make
false translations of the Scriptures ; and he
sends me writings which contain all these
things which he declares to be unknown to
him. It is remarkable to know how his
subtlety has coincided with another man's
malice, so that the lies which this other told
in Africa, he in accord with him declared
to be true ; and also how that elegant style
of his could be imitated by some chance and
unskilled person. You alone have the
privilege of translating the venom of the
heretics, and of making all nations drink a
draught from the cup of Babylon. You may


correct the Latin Scriptures from the Greek,
and may deliver to the Churches to read
something different from what they received
from the Apostles; but I am not to be al-
lowed to go behind the Septuagint version
which I translated after strict correction
for the men of my native tongue a great
many years ago, and, for the confutation of
the Jews, to translate the actual copies of
the Scriptures which they confess to be the
truest, so that when a dispute arises between
them and the Christians, they may have no
place of retreat and subterfuge, but may be
smitten most effectually with their own
spear. I have written pretty fully on this
point if I rightly remember, in many other
places, especially in the end of my second
book ; and I have checked your popularity-
hunting, with which you seek to arouse ill
will against me among the innocent and the
inexperienced, by a clear statement of fact.
To that I think it enough to refer the reader.
26. I think it a point which should not
be passed over, that you have no right to
complain that the falsifier of your papers
holds in my esteem the glorious position of
a confessor, since you who are guilty of
this very crime are called a martyr and an
apostle by all the pai-tisans of Origen, for
that exile and imprisonment of yours at
Alexandria. On your alleged inexperience in
Latin composition I have answered you above.
But, since you repeat the same things, and,
as if forgetful of your former defence, again
remind me that I ought to know that you
have been occupied for thirty years in de-
vouring Greek books, and therefore do not
know Latin, I would have you observe that
it is not a few words of yours with which I
find fault, though indeed all your writing is
worthy of being destroyed. What I wished
to do was to shew your followers, whom
you have taken so much pains in teaching to
know nothing, to understand what amount
of modesty there is in a man who teaches
what he does not know, who writes what he
is ignorant of, so that they may expect to
find the same wisdom in his opinions. As
to what you add " That it is not faults of
words which are offensive, but sins, such as
lying, calumny, disparagement, false witness,
and all evil speaking, and that the mouth
which speaketh lies kills the soul," and your
deprecation, "Let not that ill-savour reach
my nostrils ; " I would believe what you say,
were it not that I discover facts inconsist-
ent with this. It is as if a fuller or a tanner
in speaking to a dealer in pigments should
warn him that he had better hold his nose
as he passed their shops. I will do what


APOLOGY — BOOK III.


533


you recommend ; I will stop my nose, so
that it may not be put to the torture by the
delightful odour of your truth-speaking and
your benedictions.

37. In reference to your alternate praise
and disparagement of me, you argue with
great acuteness that you have the same right
to speak good and evil of me that I have to
find fault with Origen and Didymus whom
I once praised. I must instruct you, then,
wisest of men and chief of Roman dialecti-
cians, that there is no fault of logic in prais-
ing a man in certain respects while you
blame him in others, but only in approving
and disappi-oving one and the same thing.
I will take an example, so that, though you
may not understand, the wise reader may
join me in understanding the point. In the
case of Tertullian we praise his great talent,
but we condemn his heresy. In that of
Origen we admire his knowledge of the
Scriptures, but nevertheless we do not ac-
cept his false doctrine. As to Didymus,
however, we extol both his powers of mem-
ory, and the purity of his faith in the Trinity,
while on the other point in which he erred
in trusting to Origen we withdraw from
him. The vices of our teachers are not to
be imitated, their virtues are. There was
a man at Rome who had an African, a very
learned man, as his grammar teacher; and
he thought that he was rising to an equality
with his teacher because he copied his stri-
dent voice and his faulty pronunciation.
You in your Preface to the Uepl'Apx<^v speak
of me as your brother and call me your
most eloquent colleague, and proclaim my
soundness in the faith. From these three
points you cannot draw back ; carp at me
on all other points as you please, so long as
you do not openly contradict this testimony
which you bear to me ; for in calling me
friend and colleague, you confess me worthy
of your friendship; when you proclaim me
an eloquent man, you cannot go on accusing
me of ignorance ; and when you confess
that I am in all points a catholic, you cannot
fix on me the guilt of heresy. Beyond these
three points you may charge me with any-
thing you like without openly contradicting
yourself. From all this calculation the net
result is that you are wrong in blaming in
me what you formerly praised ; but that I
am not in fault when, in the case of the
same men, I praise what is laudable and
blame what is censurable.

28. You pass on to the origin of souls,
and at great length exclaim against the
smoke which you say I raise. You want to
be allowed to express ignorance on a point


on which you advisedly dissemble your
knowledge ; and therefore begin questioning
me about angels and archangels ; as to the
mode of their existence, the place and nature
of their abodes, the differences, if there be
any, existing between them ; and then as to
the course of the sun, the waxing and
waning of the moon, the character and
movements of the stars. I wonder that you
did not set down the whole of the lines : '

Whence come the earthquakes, -whence the high-

swoll'n seas
Breaking their bounds, then sinking back to rest;
The Sun's ecHpse, the labours of the moon;
The race of men and beasts, the storm, the fire,
Arcturus' rainy Hjads, and the Bears :
Why haste the winter's suns to bathe themselves
Beneath the wave, what stays its lingering nigfits.

Then, leaving things in heaven, and con-
descending to those on earth, you philos-
ophize on minor points. You say: "Tell
us what are the causes of the fountains, and
of the wind ; what makes the hail and the
showers ; why the sea is salt, the rivers
sweet ; what account is to be given of clouds
and storms, thunderbolts, and thunder and
lightning." You mean that if I do not know
all this, you are entitled to say you know
nothing about the origin of souls. You
wish to balance your ignorance on a single
point by mine on many. But do not you,
who in page after page stir up what you
call my smoke, understand that I can see
your mists and whirlwinds.'' You wish to
be thought a man of extensive knowledge,
and among the disciples of Calpurnius * to
enjoy a great reputation for wisdom, and
therefore you raise up the whole physical
world in front of me, as if Socrates had said
in vain when he passed over to the study of
Ethics: "What is above us is nothing to
us." So then, if I cannot tell you why the
ant, which is such a little creature, whose
body is a mere point, has six feet, whereas
an elephant with its vast bulk has only four
to walk on; why serpents and snakes glide
along on their chests and bellies ; why the
worm which is commonly called the millipede
has such a swarming array of feet ; I am
prohibited from knowing anything about the
origin of souls ! You ask me what I know
about souls, so that, when I make any state-
ment about them, you may at once attack it.
And if I say that the church's doctrine is that
God forms souls every day, and sends them
into the bodies of those who are born, you
will at once bring out the snares your master
invented, and ask. Where is God's justice if

1 Virg-il Georg. ii, 473, ^n. i, 746.

2 A Latin rhetorician of the time of Hadrian and Antoninus
Pius. Some of his exercises are still extiint.


534


JEROME.


he grants souls to those who are born of
adultery or incest? Is he not an accessoiy to
men's sins, if he creates souls for the adul-
terers who make the bodies? as if, when
you hear that seed corn had been stolen,
you arc to suppose the fault to lie in the
nature of the corn, and not in the man who
stole the wheat ; and that therefore the earth
had no business to nourish the seed in its
bosom, because the hands of the sower who
cast them in were unclean. Hence comes
also your mysterious question. Why do in-
fants die? since it is because of their sins,
as you hold, that they received bodies.
There exists a treatise of Didymus addressed
to you, in which he meets this inquiry of
yours, with the answer, that they had not
sinned much, and therefore it was enough
punishment for them just to have touched
their bodily prisons. He, who was your
master and mine also, when you asked this
question, wrote at my request three books of
comments on the prophet Hosea, and dedi-
cated them to me. This shows what parts
of his teaching we respectively accepted.

29. You press me to give my opinions
about the natiu'e of things. If there were
room, I could repeat to you the views of Lu-
cretius who follows Epicurus, or those of
Aristotle as taught by the Peripatetics, or of
Plato and Zeno by the Academics and the
Stoics. Passing to the church, where we
have the rule of truth, the books of Genesis
and the Prophets and Ecclesiastes, give us
much information on questions of this kind.
But if we profess ignorance about all these
things, as also about the origin of souls,
you ought in your Apology to acknowledge
your ignorance of all alike, and to ask your
calumniators why they had the impudence
to force you to reply on this single point
when they themselves know nothing of all
those great matters. But Oh ! how vast was
the wealth contained in that trireme^ which
had come full of all the wares of Egypt and the
East to enrich the poverty of the city of Rome.

* "Thou art that hero, well-nam'd Maximus,
Thou who alone by writing sav'st the state."

Unless you had come from the East, that
very learned man would be still sticking fast
among the mathematici,^ and all Christians
would still be ignorant of what might be
said against fatalism. You have a right to
ply me with questions about astrology and

' In Macarius' ilream, see Ruf. Apol. i, 11.

-A parody uonn the verse nf V'irjjil and Knnius on Fabius
Maximus called Cunctator because liy his tactics of delay he
saved Rome from the Carthaijinians. " Thou art Maximus
(greatest) who savedst the state by delaying (cunctattdo) ,"

•Astrologers or magicians.


the cause of the sky and the stars, when
you brought to land a ship full of such
wares as these. I acknowledge my poverty;
I have not grown rich to this extent in the
East like you. You learned in your long so-
journ under the shadow of the Pharos what
Rome never knew : Egypt instructed you in
lore which Italy did not possess till now.

30. Your Apology says that there are three
opinions as to the origin of souls : one held
by Origen, a second by Tertullian and Lac-
tantius (as to Lactantius what you say is
manifestly false), a third by us simple and
foolish men, who do not see that, if our opin-
ion is true, God is thereby shewn to be unjust.
After this you say that you do not know what
is the truth. I say, then, tell me, whether
you think that outside of these three opinions
any truth can be found so that all these three
may be false ; or whether you think one of
these three is true. If there is some other
possibility, why do you confine the liberty
of discussion within a close-drawn line? and
why do you put forward the views which are
false and keep silence about the true ? But
if one of the three is true and the two others
false, why do you include false and true in
one assertion of ignorance? Perhaps you
pretend not to know which is true in order
that it may be safe for you, whenever you
may please, to defend the false. This is the
smoke, these are the mists, with which you
try to keep away the light from men's eyes.
You are the Aristippus ^ of our day : you
bring your ship into the port of Rome full
of merchandize of all kinds ; you set your
professorial chair on high, and represent to
us Hermagoras" and Gorgias^ of Leontinum :
only, yoti were in such a htu'ry to set sail that
you left one little piece of goods, one little
question, forgotten in the East. And yoti
cry out with reiteration that you learned both
at Aquileia and at Alexandria that God is
the creator of both our bodies and our souls.
This then, forsooth, is the pressing question,
whether our souls were created by God or
by the devil, and not whether the opinion of
Origen is true that our souls existed before
oin- bodies and committed some sm because
of which they have been tied to these gross
bodies; or whether, again, the}' slept like
dormice in a state of torpor and of slumber.
Every one is asking this question, but you
say nothing about it ; nobody asks the other,
but to that you direct your answer.

31. Another part of my ' smoke' which

1 of Cyrene. A disciple of Socrates, founder of the Cyrenaic
sect, the precursors of the Epicureans.

2 Rhetorician of Rhodes.

' Statesman and Sophist, Came to Athens on a mission B.C.
327, and settled there.


APOLOGY — BOOK III.


535


you frequently laugh at is my pretence, as
you say, to know what I do not know, and
the parade I make of great teachers to de-
ceive the common and ignorant people.
You, of course, are a man not of smoke but
of flame, or rather of lightning; you ful-
minate when you speak ; you cannot con-
tain the flames which have been conceived
within your mouth, and like Barchochebas,^
the leader of the revolt of the Jews, who
used to hold in his mouth a lighted straw
and blow it out so as to appear to be breath-
ing forth flame : so you also, like a second
Salmoneus,^ brighten the whole path on
which you tread, and reproach us as mere
men of smoke, to whom perhaps the words
might be applied, ^" Thou touchest the hills
and they smoke." You do not understand
the allusion of the Prophet " when he speaks
of the smoke of the locusts ; it is no doubt
the beauty of your eyes which makes it im-
possible for you to bear the pungency of our
smoke.

32. As to your charge of perjury, since
you refer me to your book ; and since I have
made my reply to you and Calpurnius ^ in the
previous books, it will be sufficient here to
observe that you exact from me in my sleep
what you have never yourself fulfilled in your
waking hours. It seems that I am guilty of
a great crime because I have told girls and
virgins of Christ, that they had better not
read secular works, and that I once promised
when warned in a dream not to read them.
But your ship which was announced by rev-
elation to the city of Rome, promises one
thing and effects another. It came to do
away with the puzzle of the mathematici :
what it does is to do away with the faith of
Christians. It had made its run with sails
full set over the Ionian and ^gean, the Adri-
atic and Tyrrhenian seas, only to make ship-
wreck in the Roman port. Are you not
ashamed of hunting up nonsense of this kind
and putting me to the trouble of bringing up
similar things against you? Suppose that
some one had seen a dream about you such as
might make you vainglorious ; it would have
been modest as well as wise in you not to
seem to know of it, instead of boasting of
other people's dreams as a serious testimony
to yourself. What a difference there is be-
tween your dream and mine ! Mine tells
how I was humbled and repressed ; yours
boasts over and over again how you were

1 Son of a Star; the leader of the Jewish revolt against Ha-
drian, A.D. 132-g.

2 King: of Elis whom Jove destroyed for imitating thunder
and liglitning- by his chariot and brazen bridge and torches.

3 Ps. civ, 52. * Supposed to refer to Rev. ix, 7, 17.

fi Possibly a nick-name for one of Rufinus' friends : or ' to you
even when you pose as Calpurnius.' See above c. 28, note.


praised. You cannot say. It matters nothing
to me what another man dreamed, for in
those most enlightening books of yours you
tell us that this was the motive which led you
to make the translation ; you could not bear
that an eminent man should have dreamed
in vain. This is all your endeavour. If you
can make me out guilty of perjury, you think
you will be deemed no heretic.

33. I now come to the most serious charge
of all, that in which you accuse me of having
been unfaithful after the restoration of our
friendship. I confess that, of all the re-
proaches which you bring against me or
threaten me with, there is none which I
would so much deprecate as that of fraud,
deceit and breach of faith. To sin is human,
to lay snares is diabolical. What ! Was it
for this that I joined hands with you over
the slain lamb in the Church of the Resurrec-
tion, that I might ' steal your manuscripts at
Rome ' ? or that I might ' send out my dogs
to gnaw away your papers before they were
corrected ' .'* Can any one believe that we
made ready the accusers before you had
committed the crime.'' Is it supposed that
we knew what plans you were meditating in
your heart.'' or what another man had been
dreaming.'' or how the Greek proverb was
having its fulfilment in your case, "the pig
teaches Minerva".'' If I sent Eusebius to
bai'k against you, who then stirred up the
passion of Aterbius and others against you.^
Is it not the fact that he thought that I also
was a heretic because of my friendship with
you .'' And, when I had given him satisfac-
tion as to the heresies of Origen, you shut
yourself up at home, and never dared to
meet him, for fear you should have to con-
demn what you wished not to condemn, or
by openly resisting him should subject your-
self to the reproach of heresy. Do you
think that he cannot be called as a witness
against you because he is your accuser.''
Before ever the reverend bishop Epiphanius
came to Jerusalem, and gave you the signs
of peace by word and kiss, ' yet having evil
thoughts and guile in his heart ' ; before I
translated for him that letter^ which was
such a reproof to you, and in which he wrote
you down a heretic though he had before
approved you as orthodox ; Aterbius was
barking against you at Jerusalem, and, if he
had not speedily taken himself oft", would
have felt not your literary cudgel but the
stick you flourish in your right hand to drive
the dogs away.'*

34. "But why," you ask, "did you

1 Jerome Letter li., Epiphanius to John of Jerusalem.
* See Ruf. Apol. to Anastasius, i.


536


JEROME.


accept my manuscripts which had been falsi-
fied? and why, when I had translated the
rifpt 'Apxiji' did you dare to put your pen to
the same work? If I had erred, as any man
may, ought you not to summon me to reply
by a private letter, and to speak smoothly to
me, as I am speaking smoothl}' in my present
letter?" My whole fault is this that, when
accusations were brought against me in the
guise of disingenuous praise, I tried to purge
myself from them, and this without invidi-
ously introducing your name. I wished to
refer to many persons a charge which you
alone had brought, not so as to retort the
charge of heresy upon you, but to repel it
from myself. Could I know that you would
be angry if I wrote against the heretics ? You
had said that you had taken away the hereti-
cal passages from the works of Origen. I
therefore turned my attacks not upon you but
upon the heretics, for I did not believe that
you were a favourer of heresy. Pardon me,
if I did this with too great vehemence. I
thought that I should give you pleasure.
You say that it was by the dishonest tricks
of those who acted for me that your manu-
scripts were brought out before the public,
when they were kept secretly in your cham-
ber, or were in possession only of the man
who had desired to have the translation
made for him. But how is this reconcilable
with your former statement that either no
one or very few had them ? If they were
kept secret in your chamber, how could they
be in the possession of the man who had
desired to have the translation made for
him ? If the one man for whom the manu-
scripts had been written had obtained them
in order to conceal them, then they were not
kept secret in your chamber, and they were
not in the hands of those few who, as you
now declare, possessed them. You accuse us
of having stolen them away; and then again
you reproach us with having bought them
for a great sum of money and an immense
bribe. In a single matter, and in one little
letter, what a tissue of various and discordant
falsehoods ! You have full liberty for accu-
sation, but I have none for defence. When
you bring a charge, you think nothing about
friendship. When I begin to reply, then
your mind is full of the rights of friendship.
Let me ask you : Did you write these manu-
scripts for concealment or for publication?
If for concealment, why were they written?
If for publication, why did vou conceal them ?
35. But my fault, you will say, was this,
that I did not restrain your accusers who
were my friends. Why, I had enough to
do to answer their accusations against my-


self; for they charged me with hypocrisy,^
as I could shew by producing their letters,
because I kept silence when I knew you to
be a heretic ; and because by incautiously
maintaining peace with you, I fostered the
intestine wars of the Church. You call them
my disciples; they suspect me of being your
fellow-discij^le ; and, because I was some-
what sparing in my rejection of your praises,
they think me to be initiated, along with you,
into the mysteries of heresy. This was the
service your Prologue did me ; you injured
me more by appearing as my friend than you
would had you shewn yourself my enemy.
They had persuaded themselves once for all
(whether rightly or wrongly is their business)
that you were a heretic. If I should deter-
mine to defend you, I should only succeed in
getting myself accused by them along with
you. They cast in my teeth your laudation
of me, which they suppose to have been
written not in craft but sincerity ; and they
vehemently reproach me with the very things
which you always praised in me. What am
I to do? To turn my disciples into my
accusers for your sake ? To receive on my
own head the weapons which were hurled
against my friend? _

36. In the matter of the books Uepl 'Apxuv,
I have even a claim upon your gratitude.
You say that you cut off anything that was
offensive and replaced it by what was better.
I have represented things just as they stood
in the Greek. By this means both things
are made to appear, your faith and the heresy
of him whom you translated. The leading
Christians of Rome wrote to me : Answer
your accuser; if you keep silence, you will
be held to have assented to his charges. All
of them unanimously demanded that I should
bring to light the subtle errors of Origen, and
make known the poison of the heretics to the
ears of the Romans to put them on their
guard. How can this be an injury to you ?
Have you a monopoly of the translation of
these books ? Are there no others who take
part in this work? When you translated
parts of the Septuagint, did you mean to pro-
hibit all others from translating it after your
version had been published? Why, I also
have translated many books from the Greek.
You have full power to make a second trans-
lation of them at your pleasure ; for both the
good and the bad in them must be laid to the
charge of their author. And this would hold
in your case also, had you not said that you
liad cut out the heretical parts and translated
only what was positively good. This is a

»See the end of the letter of Pamraachius and Oceanus;
Jerome Letter Ixxxiit.


APOLOGY — BOOK III.


537


difficulty which you have made foi" yourself,
3nd which cannot be solved, except by con-
fessing that you have erred as all men err,
and condemning your former opinion.

37- But what defence can you make in
reference to the Apology which you have
written for the works of Origen, or rather
in reference to the book of Eusebius, though
you have altered much, and translated the
work of a heretic under the title of a martyr,
yet you have set down still more which is
incompatible with the faith of the church.
You as well as I turn Latin books into
Greek ; can you prohibit me from giving the
works of a foreigner to my own people? If I
had made my answer in the case of some other
work of yours in which you had not at-
tacked me, it might have been thought that,
in translating what you had already trans-
lated, I was acting m hostility to you, and
wishing to prove you inaccurate or tmtrust-
worthy. But this is a new kind of com-
plaint, when you take it amiss that an an-
swer is made you on a point on which you
have accused me. All Rome was said to
have been upset by your translation ; everj-
one was demanding of me a remedy for
this ; not that I was of any account, but that
those who asked this thought me so. You
say that you who had made the translation
were my friend. But what would you have
had me do .'' Ought we to obey God or man ?
To guard our master's property or to con-
ceal the theft of a fellow-servant.'' Can I not
be at peace with you unless I join with you in
committing acts which bring reproach.'* If
you had not mentioned my name, if you had
not tricked me out in your flatteries, I might
have had some way of escape, and have
made many excuses for not translating what
had already been translated. But you, my
friend, have compelled me to waste a good
many days on this work, and to bring out
before the public eye what should have been
engulfed in Charybdis ; yet still, though I
had been injured, I observed the laws of
friendship, and as far as possible defended
myself without accusing you. It is a too
suspicious and complaining temper which
you shew when you take home to yourself
as a reproach what was spoken against the
heretics. If it is impossible to be your
friend unless I am the friend of heretics, I
shall more easily put up with your enmity
than with their friendship.

38. You imagine that I have contrived
yet another piece of falsehood, namely, that
I have composed a letter to you in my own
name, pretending that it was written long
ago, in which I make myself appear kindly


and courteous ; but which you never received.
The truth can easily be ascertained. Many
persons at Rome have had copies of this
letter for the last three years ; but they re-
fused to send it to you knowing that you
were throwing out insinuations against my
reputation, and making up stories of the
most shameful kind and unworthy of our
Christian profession. I wrote in ignorance
of all this, as to a friend ; but they would
not transmit the letter to an enemy, such as
they knew you to be, thus sparing me the
effects of my mistakes and you the reproaches
of your conscience. You next bring argu-
ments to shew that, if I had written such a
letter, I had no right to write another con-
taining many reproaches against you. But
here is the error which pervades all that you
say, and of which I liave a right to complain ;
whatever I say against the heretics you im-
agine to be said against you. What ! Am
I refusing you bread because I give the here-
tics a stone to crush their brains.'' But, in
order to justify your disbelief in my letter,
you are obliged to make out that that of
pope Anastasius rests upon a similar fraud.
On this point I have answered you before.
If you really suspect that it is not his writ-
ing, you have the means of convicting me
of the forgery. But if it is his writing, as
his letters of the present year also written
against you prove, you will in vain use your
false reasonings to prove my letter false,
since I can shew from his genuine letter that
mine also is genuine.

39. In order to parry the charge of false-
hood, it is your humour to become quite
exacting. You are not to be called to pro-
duce the six thousand books of Origen, of
which you speak ; but you expect me to be
acquainted with all the records of Pythagoras.
What truth is there in all the boastful lan-
guage, which you blurted out from your
inflated cheeks, declaring that you had cor-
rected the U.£fjl 'Apx(^^' by introducing words
vvh'ch you had read in other books of Origen,
and thus had not put in other men's words
but restored his own.-* Out of all this forest
of his works you cannot produce a single
bush or sucker. You accuse me of raising
up smoke and mist. Here you have smoke
and mist indeed. You know that I have
dissipated and done away with them ; but,
though your neck is broken, you do not bow
it down, but, with an impudence which
exceeds even your ignorance, you say that
I am denying what is quite evident, so as to
excuse yourself, after promising mountains
of gold, for not producing even a leatherlike
farthing from your treasury. I acknowledge


538


JEROME.


that your animosity against me rests on good
grounds, and that your rage and passion is
genuine; for, unless I made persistent de-
mands for what does not exist, you would
be tliought to have what you have not. You
ask me for the books of Pythagoras. But
who has informed you that any books of his
are extant? It is true that in my letter which
you criticize these words occur: "Suppose
that I erred in youth, and that, having been
trained in profane literature, I at the begin-
ning of my Christian course had no sufficient
doctrinal knowledge, and that I attributed to
the Apostles things which I had read in
Pythagoras or Plato or Empedocles; " but I
was speaking not of their books but of their
tenets, with which I was able to acquaint
myself through Cicero, Brutus, and .Seneca.
Read the short oration for ' Vatinius, and
others in which mention is made of secret so-
cieties. Turn over Cicero's dialogues. Search
through the coast of Italy which used to be
called Magna Grascia, and you will find there
various doctrines of Pythagoras inscribed
on brass on their public monuments. Whose
are those Golden Rules? They are Pythag-
oras's ; and in these all his principles are
contained in a summary form. lamblicus ^
wrote a commentary upon them, following
in this, at least partly, Moderatus a man of
great eloquence, and Archippus and Lysides
who were disciples of Pythagoras. Of these,
Archippus and Lysides held schools in
Greece, that is, in Thebes ; they retained so
fully the precepts of their teacher, that they
made use of their memory instead of books.
One of these precepts is: "We must cast
away by any contrivance, and cut out by fire
and sword and contrivances of all kinds, dis-
ease from the body, isrnorance from the soul,
luxury from the belly, sedition from the state,
discord from the family, excess from all
things alike." ^ There are other precepts of
Pythagoras, such as these. " Friends have all
things in common." "A friend is a second
self." "Two moments are specially to be
observed, morning and evening: that is,
things which we are going to do, and things
wliich we have done." " Next to God we
must worship truth, for this alone makes
men akin to God." Tliere are also enigmas
which Aristotle has collated with much dili-
gence in his works: " Never go lieyond the
Stater," that is, " Do not transgress the rule
of justice; " " Never stir the fire with the
sword," that is, " Do not provoke a man
when he is angry and excited with hard


' In the oration affaiiiat Vatinius mention is made of his
boastini^ himself to be :i Pythajjoiian.

' Nco-Phitonist of Alexandria, 4th century.
•This is given by Jerome both in Greek and Latin.


words." " We must not touch the crown,"
that is "We must maintain the laws of the
state." "Do not eat out your heart," that
is, " Cast away sorrow from your mind."
"When you have started, do not return,"
that is, "After death do not regret this life."
" Do not walk on the public road," that is,
" Do not follow the errors of the multitude."
" Never admit a swallow into the family,"
that is, " Do not admit chatterers and talka-
tive persons vmder the same roof with you."
"Put fresh burdens on the burdened; put
none on those who lay them down ; " that is,
" When men are on the road to virtue, ply
them with fresh precej^ts ; when they aban-
don themselves to idleness, leave them
alone." I said I had read the doctrines of the
Pythagoreans. Let me tell you that Pythag-
oras was the first to discover the immortality
of the soul and its transmigration from one
body to another. To this view Virgil gives
his adherence in the sixth book of the yEneid
in these words : ^

These, when the wheel full thousand years has

turned,
God calls, a long sad line, in Lethe's stream
To drown the past, and long once more to see
The skies above, and to the flesh return.

40. Pythagoras taught, accordingly, that he
had himself been originally Euphorbus, and
then Callides, thirdly Hermotimus, fourthly
Pyrrhus, and lastly Pythagoras ; and that those
things which had existed, after certain revolu-
tions of time, came into being again ; so that
nothing in the world should be thought of as
new. He said that true philosophy was a medi-
tation on death ; that its daily struggle was to
draw forth the soul from the prison of the body
into liberty : that our learning was recollec-
tion, and many other things which Plato
works out in his dialogues, especially in the
Phaido and Timieus. For Plato, after having
formed the Academy and gained innumera-
ble disciples, felt that his philosophy was
deficient on many points, and therefore went
to Magna Gnecia, and there learned the
doctrines of Pythagoras from Archytas of
Tarentum and Timaitis of Locris : and this
system he embodied in the elegant form and
style which he had learned from Socrates.
The whole of this, as we can prove, Origen
carried over into his book Tlepl'Kpxuv, only
changing the name. What mistake, then, was I
making, when I said that in my youth I had
imputed to the Apostles ideas which I had
found in Pythagoras, Plato and Empedocles?
I did not speak, as yoti calumniously pretend,
of what I had read in the books of Pythag-
oras, Plato and Empedocles, but of what I

iVirg, .(En. 748-51.


APOLOGY — BOOK III.


539


had read as having existed in their writings,
that is, what other men's writings shewed me
to have existed in them. This mode of speak-
ing is quite common. I might say, for
instance " The opinions which I read in
Socrates I beheved to be true," meaning what
I read as his opinions in Ph;to and others of
the Socratic school, though Socrates him-
self wrote no books. So I might say, I
wished to imitate the deeds which I had read
of in Alexander and Scipio,^ not meaning
that they described their own deeds, but
that I had read in other men's works of the
deeds which I admired as done by them.
Therefore, though I may not be able to inform
you of any records of Pythagoras himself as
being extant, and proved by the attestation
of his son or daughter or others of his
disciples, yet you cannot hold me guilty of
falsehood, because I said not that I had read
his books, but his doctrines. You are quite
mistaken if you thought to make this a screen
for your falsehood, and to maintain that
because I cannot produce any book written
by Pythagoras, you have a right to assei't that
six thousand books of Orlgen have been lost.
41. I come now to your Epilogue, (that
is to the revilings which you pour upon me,)
in which you exhort me to repentance, and
threaten me w^ith destruction unless I am
converted, that is, unless I keep silence under
your accusations. And this scandal, you say,
will recoil upon my ov^n head, because it is
I who by replying have provoked you to the
madness of writing when yovi are a man of
extreme gentleness and of a meekness worthy
of Moses. You declare that you are aware of
crimes which I confessed to you alone when
you were my most Intimate friend, and that
you will bring these befoi-e the public ; that
I shall be painted in my own colours ; and
that I ought to remember that I am lying at
5'our feet, otherwise you might cut oft' my
head with the sword of your mouth. And,
after many such things, in which you toss
yourself about like a \^madman, you draw
yourself up and say that you wish for peace,
but still with the intimation that I am to
keep quiet for the future, that is that I am
not to write against the heretics, nor to
answer any accusation made by you ; if I do
this, I shall be your good brother and col-
league, and a most eloquent person, and your
friend and companion ; and, what is still
more, you will pronounce all the translations
I have made from Origen to be orthodox.
But, if I utter a word or move a step, I shall at
once be unsound and a heretic, and unworthv


1 Gestaqua in Alexandra et Scipione Ugeram. The Latin
construction will bear Jerome's meaning, but cannot be exactly
or elegantly rendered in English.


of all connexion with you. This is the way
you trumpet forth my praises, this is the way
you exhort me to peace. You do not grant
me liberty for a groan or a tear in my grief.

43. It would be possible for me also to
paint you in your own colours, and to meet
your insanity with a similar rage ; to say
what I know and add what I do not know ;
and with a license like yours, or rather fury
and madness, to keep up things false and
true alike, till I was ashamed to speak and
you to hear : and to upbraid you in such a
way as would condemn either the accused
or the accuser; to force myself on the reader
by mere eftrontery, make him believe that
what I wrote unscrupulously I wrote truly.
But far be it from the practice of Christians
while oftering up their lives to seek the life
of others, and to become homicides not with
the sw^ord but the will. This may agree with
your gentleness and innocence ; for you can
draw forth from the dung heap within your
breast alike the odour of roses and the stench
of corpses ; and, contrary to the precept of
the Prophet, call that bitter which once you
had praised as sweet. But it is not neces-
sary for us, in treating of Christian topics,
to throw out accusations which ought to be
brought before the law courts. You shall hear
nothing more from me than the vulgar saying :
"When you have said what you like, you
shall hear what you do not like." Or if the
coarse proverb seems to you too vulgar, and,
being a man of culture, you prefer the words
of philosophers or poets, take from me the
words of Horner.^

"What words thou speakest, thou the like shalt
hear."

One thing I should like to learn from
one of such eminent sanctity and fastid-
iousness, (whose holiness is such that in
the presence of your very handkerchiefs and
aprons the devils cry out) ; whom do you
take for your model in your writings? Has
any one of the catholic writers, in a contro-
versy of opinions, imputed moral oftences to
the man with whom he is arguing ? Have your
masters taught you to do this? Is this the
system in which you have been trained, that,
when you cannot answer a man, you should
take oft' his head? that when you cannot
silence a man's tongue, you should cut it
out ? You have nothing much to boast of, for
you are doing only what the scorpions and
cantharides do. This is what Fulvia ^ did
to Cicero and Herodias to John. They
could not bear to hear the truth, and there-

iTiiad.xx.2s0.

2 Antony's wife who had Cicero's head brought to her, and
bored through the tongue with a golden bodkin.


540


JEROME.


fore they pierced the tongue that spoke
truth with the pin that parted their hair.
Tlie duty of dogs is to barlv hi then* masters'
service ; why may I not bark in the service of
Clirist? Many have written against Marcion
or Valentinus, Arius or Eunomius. By
which of them was any accusation brought
of immoral conduct? Did they not in each
case bring their wliole eflort to bear upon
the refutation of the heresy ? It is the mach-
ination of the heretics, that is of your mas-
ters, when convicted of betrayal of the faith,
to betake themselves to evil speaking. So
Eustathius ' the Bishop of Antioch was made
into a father unawares. So Athanasius
Bishop of Alexandria cut off a third hand
of Arsenius ; for, when he appeared ^ alive
after having been supposed to be dead, he
was found to have two. Such things also
now are falsely charged against the Bishop
of the same church, and the true faith is
assailed by gold, which constitutes the
power of yourself and your friends. But I
need not speak of controversy with heretics,
who, though they are really without, yet call
themselves Christians. How many of our
writers have contended with those most im-
pious men, Celsus and Porphyry! but which
of them has left the cause he was engfas^ed in
to busy himself with the imputation of crime
to his adversary, such as ought to be set down
not in church-writings but in the calendar
of the judge.? For what advantage have you
gained if you establish a man's criminality
but tail in your argument.'' It is quite un-
necessary that in bringing an accusation
you should risk your own head. If your
object is revenge, you can hire an execu-
tioner, and satisfy your desire. You pretend
to dread a scandal, and yet you are ready to
kill a man who was once your brother,
whom you now accuse, and whom you
always treat as an enemy. Yet I wonder
how a man like you, who knows what he is
about, should be so blinded by madness as
to wish to confer a benefit upon me by draw-
ing forth my soul out of prison,^ and should
not suffer it to remain with you in the dark-
ness of this world.

43. If you wish me to keep silence, cease
from accusing me. Lay down your sword,
and I will throw away my shield. To one
tiling only I cannot consent; that is, to spare
the hei'etics, and not to vindicate my ortho-

1 Eustathius was deposed at the instigntion of Euseblus the
Ari;in bishop of Nicoinedia, wlin brought charj^es both of
-Sabcllianism and of iininorality against him. Socrates, Eccl.
Hist. i. 24.

2 At the Synod at Tyre in .^35. See Socrates Eccl. Hist. i. iq.
^ This expression was us^'d by the Origcnists of death.

This life was a prison house into which souls had fallen;
Jerome imputes this opinion to RuHnus, and Rufinus to him.
See Ruf. Apol. i. a6.


doxy. If that is the cause of discord be-
tween us, I can submit to death, but not to
silence. It would have been right to go
through the whole of the Scriptures for
answers to your ravings, and, like David
playing on his harp, to take the divine words
to calm your raging breast. But I will con-
tent myself with a few statements from a
single book ; I will oppose Wisdom to folly ;
for I hope if you despise the words of men
you will not think lightly of the word of
God. Listen, then, to that which Solomon
the wise says about you and all who are
addicted to evil speaking and contumely :

" Foolish men, while they desire injuries, be-
come impious and hate wisdom.' Devise not evil
against thy friend. Be not angry with a man
without a cause. The impious exalt contumely.
^Remove from thee the evil mouth, keep far from
thee the wicked lips, the eyes of him that speaketh
evil, the tongue of the unjust, the hands which
shed the blood of the just,^ the heart that de-
vi.seth evil thoughts, and the feet which hasten to
do evil. He that resteth upon falsehood feedeth
the winds, and followeth the flying birds. For he
hath left the ways of his own vineyard, and hath
made the wheels of his tillage to err. He walketh
through the dry and desert places, and with his
hands he gathereth barrenness,'' The mouth of the
frovvard is near to destruction, and ^he who uttereth
evil words is the chief of fools. Every simple man
is a soul that is blessed; but a violent man is dis-
honourable. ^ By the fault of his lips the sinner
falleth into a snare. ''All the ways of a fool are
right in his own eyes. ^The fool showeth his anger
on that very day. ^ Lying lips are an abomination
to the Lord. ''' He that keepeth his lips guardeth
his own soul ; but he that is rash with his lips
shall be a terror to himself "The evil man in his
violence doeth evil things, and the fool spreadeth
out his folly. '''Seek for wisdom among the evil
and thou shalt not find it. ''The rash man shall
eat of the fruit of his own ways. '*The wise man
by taking heed avoideth the evil ; but the fool is
confident, and joins himself to it. '^A long-sufler-
ing man is strong in his wisdom; the man of little
mind is very unwise. '* He whooppresseth the poor
reproacheth his Maker. "The tongue of the Avise
knoweth good things, but the mouth of fools speak-
eth evil. '*A quarrelsome man preferreth strife,
and every one that lifteth up his heart is unclean
before God. "Though hand join with hand unjust-
ly, they shall not be unpunished. ^" He that loveth
life must be sparing to his mouth. ^^ Insolence go-
eth before bruising, and evil thoughts before a fall.
^' He whocloseth his eyes speaketh perverse things,
and provoketh all evil with his lips. " The lips of a
fool lead him into evil, and the foolhardy speech
calleth down death. The man of evil counsel shall
suffer much loss. ** Better is a poor man who is
just than a rich man that speaketh lies. ** It is a
glory to a man to turn away from evil words ; but
he that is foolish bindeth'himself therewith. *'"' Love


> Prov. iii,

29, 30. These

quotations

are from the LXX.

version.

« xii, 16.

^•' xiv, 29.

2» vj, 30.

2 iv, 24.

"xii, 22.

1" xiv, 31.

23 xviii, 6, 7.

3 vi, iS.

10 xiii,3.

'■ XV, 12.

^* xix, I.

< X, 14.

"x. iS.

1* xiii,i6.

" XV, iS.

i'- XX, 3.

1= xiv,6.

"vi.s.

''"■ XX, 13.

'■ xli. 13-

'^ xiv,i4.

■" vi, 17.

'xii, 15,

1* xiv, 16.

" vi, 18.

A COMMENTARY ON THE APOSTLES' CREED


541


not detraction, lest thou be rooted out. - The bread
of Ijing is sweet to a man, but afterwards his
mouth shall be filled with gravel. ' He that gaineth
treasures with a lying tongue followeth vanitj, and
shall come into the snares of death. ^ Saj thou
nought in the ear of a fool, lest haply the wise
mock at thy words. '' The bludgeon and the sword
and the arrow are hurtful things; *so is the man
who beareth false witness against his friend. *As
the birds and the sparrows fly away, so the curse
shall be vain and shall not overtake him. 'Answer
not an unwise man according to his lack of wis-
dom, lest thou become like unto him ; but answer
a fool according to his folly, lest he appear to him-
self to be wise. * He who layeth wait for his friends,
when he is discovered saitli, I did it in sport. ^A
faggot for the coals, and wood for the fire, and a
man of evil words for the tumult of strife. '"If
thine enemy ask thee aught, sparingly but with a
loud voice, "consent thou not to him, for there are
seven degrees of wickedness in his heart. '-The
stone is heavy, and the sand hard to be borne; but
the anger of a fool is heavier than either; indigna-
tion is cruel, anger is sharp, and envy is impatient.
'^The impious man speaketh against the poor ; and
he that trusteth in the audacity of his heart is most
foolish. '* The unwise man putteth forth all his
anger, but the wise dealeth it out in parts. '' An
evil son — his teeth are swords, and his grinders
are as harrows, to consume the weak from off the
earth, and the poor from among men."

Such are the lessons in which I have been
trained ; and therefore I was unwilling to
return bite for bite, and to attack you by way
of retaliation ; and I thought it better to


1 Prov. XX, 17.
5 xxi, (1.

* xxiii, 9.

♦ XXT, 18.


^ XXV, 18. ^ xxvii, 21.

6 xxvi, 2. 1" xxvii, 14.

7 xxvi, 4, 5. 1' xxvi, 24, 25.

8 xxvi, 19. 12 xxvii, 3, 4.


'3 xxviii, 25, 26,
1* xxix, II.
1" xxx, 14.


exorcise the madness of one who was raving,
and to pour in the antidote of a single book
into his poisoned breast. But 1 fear I shall
have no success, and that I shall be com-
pelled to sing the song of David, and to take
his words for my only consolation : ^

"The wicked are estranged from the womb, they
go astray even from the belly. They have spoken
lies. Their madness is like the madness of the
serpent; like the deaf adder which stoppeth her
ears, which will not hear the voice of the charm-
ers, and of the magician wisely enchanting.
God shall break their teeth in their mouth ; the
Lord shall break the great teeth of tlie lions. They
shall come to nothing, like water that runneth
away. He bendeth his bow until they be brought
low. Like wax that melteth, they shall be carried
away; the fire hath fallen upon them and they
have not seen the sun."

And again : ^

" The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the
vengeance upon the impious; he shall wash his
hands in the blood of the sinner. And man shall
say, Verily, there is a reward for the righteous ;
verily, there is a God that judgeth those that are
on the earth."

44. In the end of your letter you say : " I
hope that you love peace." To this I will
answer in a few words : If you desire peace,
lay down your arms. I can be at peace with
one who shews kindness ; I do not fear one
who threatens me. Let us be at one in
faith, and peace will follow immediately.


iPs. lviii,3-S.


2 Ps. Iviii, 10, II.


A COMMENTARY ON THE APOSTLES' CREED.


This exposition of the Creed was made at the request of Laurentius, a Bishop whose see is unknown, but is
conjectured by Fontanini, in his Hfe of Rufinus, to have been Concordia, Rufinus' birthplace.

Its exact date cannot be fixed ; but from the fact that he says nothing of his difficulty in writing Latin after
being so long in the East, as he does in several of his books, and from the comparative ease of the style, it is
most probable that it was written in the later years of his sojourn at Aquileia, that is, about 3'^7~3^9-

Its value is considerable (i ) as bearing witness to the state of the Creed in local churches at the beginning
of the 5th century, especially their variations. (In the church of Aquileia, in Jes« Christ^?. Patrem invisibilem
et impassibileni. Resurrectio hiijus carnis) ; (2) as showing the adaptation of Eastern ideas to the formation of
Western theology; (3) as giving the Canon of the books of Scripture, and the Apocrypha of both the Old and
New dispensations.

The exposition is clear and reasonable; and, with the exception of a very few passages, such as the argu-
ment from the Phcenix for the Virgin Birth of our Lord, is still of use to us.

We prefix the words of the creed on which Rufinus makes his commentary.

It seems desirable to give the original Latin, as well as the English version of the Creed of Aquileia. The
words or letters which are peculiar to this creed are put in italics.

1. I believe in God the Father Almighty, invisible
and impassible.

2. And in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord;

3. Who was born from the Holy Ghost, of the Virgin
Mary;

4. Was crucified under Pontius Pilate, and buried;

5. He descended to hell ; on the third day he rose
again from the dead.


1. Credo in Deo Patre omnipotenti invisibili et im-

passihili.

2. Et i n Jesu Christo, unico Filio ejus. Domino nostro ;

3. Qui natus est de Spiritu Sancto ex Maria Virgine;

4. Crucifixus sub Pontio Pilato, et sepultus;

5. Descendit ad infernaj tertia die resurrexit a mor-

tals;


542


RUFINUS.


6. Ascendit in coelos; sedct ad dexteram Patris;

7. Inde venturus est judicare vivos et mortuos;

8. Et in Spiritu Sancto ;

9. Sanctam Ecclesiam;

10. Remissionem peccatorum;

11. Hiijus carnis resurrectionem.

My mind has as little inclination for
writing as sufficiency, most faithful Bishop
( Papa) Laurentius,' for I well know that it
is a matter of no little peril to submit a
slender ability to general criticism. But,
since in your letter you rashly (forgive my
saying so) require me, by Christ's sacra-
ments, which I hold in the greatest rever-
ence, to compose something for you concern-
ing the Faith, in accordance with the tradi-
tional and natural meaning of the Creed,
although in so doing you impose a burthen
upon me beyond my strength to bear (for I
do not forget the opinion of the wise, which
so justly says, that "to speak of God even
what is true is perilous ") ; still, if you will
aid with your prayers the necessit)' which
your requisition has laid upon me, I will try
to say something, moved rather by a reveren-
tial regard for your injunction than by pre-
sumptuous confidence in my ability. What
I write, however, will hardly seem worthy
of the consideration of persons of mature un-
derstanding, but suited rather to the capacity
of children and young beginners in Christ.

I find, indeed, that some eminent writers
have published treatises on these matters
piously and briefly written. Moreover, I
know that the heretic Fhotinus has written
on the same ; but with the object, not of ex-
plaining the meaning of the text to his read-
ers, but of wresting things simply and truth-
fully said in support of his own dogma,
while yet the Holy vSpirit has taken care that
in these words nothing should be set down
which is ambiguous or obscure, or inconsist-
ent with other truths : for therein is that
prophecy verified, " Finishing and cutting
short the word in equity : because a short
word will the Lord make upon the earth." ^
It shall be our endeavour, then, first to restore
and emphasize the words of the Apostles in
their native simplicity ; and, secondly, to
supply such things as seem to have been
omitted by former expositors. But that the
scope of this " short word," as we have
called it, may be made more plain, we will
enquire from the beginning how it came to
be given to the Churches.


6. He ascended to the heavens; he sitteth at the right

hand of the Father;

7. Thence he is to come to judge the quick and the

dead.

8. And in the Holy Ghost;

9. The Holy Church.

10. The remission of sins.

11. The resurrection of this flesh.

2. Our forefathers have handea down to
us the tradition, that, after the Lord's ascen-
sion, when, through the coming of the Holy
Ghost, tongues of flame had settled upon
each of the Apostles, that they might speak
diverse languages, so that no race however
foreign, no tongue however barbarous,
might be inaccessible to them and beyond
their reach, they were commanded by the
Lord to go severally to the several nations to
preach the word of God. Being on the eve
therefore of departing from one another,
they first mutually agreed upon a standard of
their future preaching, lest haply, when sepa-
rated, they might in any instance vary in the
statements which they should make to those
whom they should invite to believe in Christ.
Being all therefore met together, and being
filled with the Holy Ghost, they composed,
as we have said, this brief formulary of their
future preaching, each contributing his sev-
eral sentence to one common summary: and
they ordained that the rule thus framed
should be given to those who believe.

To this formulary, for many and most
sufficient reasons, they gave the name or
Symbol. For Symbol {Kviijiolov) in Greek
answers to both "Indicium" (a sign or
token) and " CoUatio " (a joint contribution
made by several) in Latin. For this the
Apostles did in these words, each contribut-
ing: his several sentence. It is called " In-


» Nothing' is kno^vTl oPthis Popp Laurentius. The title
" Papa," at first given to IJishops promiscuously, was not yet
restricted to the Bishop of Rome. Gregory VII., in a CouQCil
held at Rome in 1073, forbade it to be g-ivcn to any otlier.

» Isaiah x. 23, 33, Septuag., and so cited Rom. ix. 2S.


or " Signum," a sign or token, be-


't5

dicium "

cause, at that time, as the Apostle Paul says,
and as is related in the Acts of the Apostles,
many of the vagabond Jews, pretending to
be apostles of Christ, went about preaching
for gain's sake or their belly's sake, naming
the name of Christ indeed, but not deliver-
ing their message according to the exact tra-
ditional lines. The Apostles therefore pre-
scribed this formulary as a sign or token by
which he who preached Christ truly, accord-
ing to Apostolic rule, might be recognised.
Finally, they say that in civil wars, since the
armour of both sides is alike, and the lan-
guage the same, and the custom and mode
of warfare the same, each general, to guard
against treachery, is wont to deliver to his
soldiers a distinct symbol or watchword — in
Latin "signum" or "indicium" — so that
if one is met with, of whom it is doubtful to
which side he belongs, being asked the sym-


A COMMENTARY ON THE APOSTLES' CREED.


543


bol (watchword) , he discloses whether he is
friend or foe. And for this reason, the tra-
dition continues, the Creed is not written on
paper or parchment, but is retained in the
hearts of the faithful, that it may be certain
that no one has learnt it by reading, as is
sometimes the case with unbelievers, but by
tradition from the Apostles.

The Apostles therefore, as we have said,
being about to separate in order to preach
the Gospel, settled upon this sign or token
of their agreement in the faith ; and, unlike
the sons of Noah, who, when they were
about to separate from one another, builded
a tower of baked bricks and pitch, whose
top might reach to heaven, they raised a
monument of faith, which might withstand
the enemy, composed o£ living stones and
pearls of the Lord, such that neither winds
might overthrow it, nor floods undermine it,
nor the force of storms and tempests shake
it. Right justly, then, were the former,
when, on the eve of separation, they builded
a tower of pride, condemned to the confusion
of tongues, so that no one might understand
his neighbour's speech ; while the latter, who
were building a tower of faith, were endowed
with the knowledge and understanding of all
languages ; so that the one might prove a
sign and token of sin, the other of faith.

But it is time now that we should say
something about these same pearls, among
which is placed first the fountain and source
of all, when it is said, —

3. I Believe in God the Father
Almighty.

But before I begin to discuss the meaning
of the words, I think it well to mention that
in different Churches some additions are
found in this article. This is not the case,
however, in the Church of the city of Rome ;
the reason being, as I suppose, that, on the
one hand, no heresy has had its origin there,
and, on the other, that the ancient custom is
there kept up, that those who are going to be
baptized should rehearse the Creed publicly,
that is, in the audience of the people ; the
consequence of which is that the ears of
those who are already believers will not ad-
mit the addition of a single word. But in
other places, as I understand, additions ap-
pear to have been made, on account of cei"-
tain heretics, by means of which it was
hoped that novelty in doctrine would be ex-
cluded. We, however, follow that order
which we received when we were baptized
in the Church of Aquileia.

I Believe, therefore, is placed in the
forefront, as the Apostle Paul, writing to the
Hebrews, says, " He that cometh to God


must first of all believe that He is, and that
He is a rewarder of those who believe on
Him." ' The Prophet also says, " Except
ye believe,* ye shall not understand." That
the way to understand, therefore, may be
open to you, you do rightly first of all, in
professing that you believe ; for no one em-
barks upon the sea, and trusts himself to the
deep and liquid element, unless he first be-
lieves it possible that he will have a safe
vovasre ; neither does the husbandman com-
mit his seed to the furrows and scatter his
grain on the earth, but in the belief that the
showers will come, together with the sun's
warmth, through whose fostering influence,
aided bv favouring winds, the earth will pro-
duce and multipl}' and ripen its fruits. In
fine, nothing in life can be transacted if there
be not first a readiness to believe. What
wonder then, if, coming to God, we first of
all profess that we believe, seeing that, with-
out this, not even common life can be lived.
We have premised these remarks at the out-
set, since the Pagans are wont to object to
us that our religion, because it lacks reasons,
rests solely on belief. We have shewn,
therefore, that nothing can possibly be done
or remain stable unless belief precede.
Finally, marriages are contracted in the be-
lief that children will be born ; and children
are committed to the care of masters in the
belief that the teaching of the masters will
be transferred to the pupils ; and one man
assumes the ensigns of empire, believing that
peoples and cities and a well-equipped army
also will obey him. But if no one enters
upon any one of these several undertakings
except in the belief that the results spoken
of will follow, must not belief be much more
requisite if one would come to the knowledge
of God? But let us see what this "short
word " of the Creed sets forth.

4. " I Believe in God the Father
Almighty." The Eastern Churches almost
universally deliver the article thus, " I be-
lieve in one God the Father Almighty ; "
and again in the next article, where we say,
"And in Christ Jesus, His only Son, our
Lord," they deliver it, "And in one (Lord)
our Lord Jesus Christ, His only Son ; " con-
fessing, that is, " one God," and"" one Lord,"
in accordance with the authority of the
Apostle Paul. But we shall return to this
by-and-by. For the present, let us turn our
attention to the words, " In God the Father
Almighty."

"God," so far as the human mind can
form an idea, is the name of that nature


» Heb. xi. 10.


»Dan. xii. 10, or Is. vii. g.


544


RUFINUS.


or substance which is above all things.
"Father" is a word expressive of a secret
and iiietrable mystery. When you hear tlie
word " God," you must understand thereby
a substance without beginning, without end,
simple, uncompounded, invisible, incorporeal,
inertable, inappreciable, vvhicii has in it
nothinsr which has been either added or
created. For He is without cause who is
absolutely the cause of all things. When
you hear the word *•' Father," you must un-
derstand by this the Father of a Son, which
Son is the image of the aforesaid substance.
For as no one is called "Lord" unless he
have a possession or a sei"vant whose lord he
is, and as no one is called " master " unless
he have a disciple, so no one can possibly be
called " father" unless he have a son. This
very name of "Father," therefore, shews
plainly that, together with the Father there
subsists a Son also.

But I would not have you discuss how
God the Father begat the Son, nor intrude
too curiously into the profound mystery, lest
haply, by prying too eagerly into the bright-
ness of light inaccessible, you should lose
the faint glimpse which, by the gift of God,
has been vouchsafed to mortals. Or, if you
suppose that this is a subject to be investi-
gated with all possible scrutiny, first propose
to yourself questions which concern oui*-
selves, and then, if you are able to deal
satisfactorily with them, speed on from
earthly things to heavenly, from visible to
invisible. Determine first, if you can, how
the mind, which is within you, generates a
word, and what is the spirit of the memory
which is in it ; and how these, though
diverse in reality and in operation, are yet
one in substance or nature ; and though they
proceed from the mind, yet are never sepa-
rated from it. And if these, though they are
in us and in the substance of our own soul,
yet seem to be hidden fi*om us in proportion
as they are invisible to our bodily sight, let
us take for our enquiry things which are
more open to view. How does a spring
generate a river from itself? By what spirit
is it borne into a rapidly flowing stream ?
How happens it that, while the river and the
spring are one and inseparable, yet neither
can the river be understood to be, or can be
called, the spring, nor the spring the river,
and yet he who has seen the river has seen
the spring also.? Exercise yourself first in
explaining these, and explain, if you are able,
things which you have under your hands ;
and then you may come to loftier matters.
Do not think, however, that I would have
you ascend all at once from the earth above


the heavens : I would first, with your leave,
draw your attention to this firmament which
our eyes behold, and ask you to explain, if
you can, the nature of this visil^le luminary,
— how that celestial fire generates from itself
the brightness of light, how it also produces
heat ; and though these arc three in reality,
how they are yet one in substance. And if
you are capable of investigating each of
these, even then you must acknowledge that
the mystery of the Divine generation is by
so much the more diverse and the more
transcendent as the Creator is more powerful
than the creatures, as the artificer is more
excellent than his work, as He who ever is
is more noble than that which had its begin-
ning out of nothing.

That God then is the Father of His only
Son our Lord is to be believed, not dis-
cussed ; for it is not lawful for a servant to
dispute about the nativity of his lord. The
Father hath borne witness from heaven,
saying, ' " This is My beloved Son, in
Whom I am well pleased: hear Him."
The Father saith that He is His Son and
bids us hear Him. The Son saith, " He
who seeth Me seeth the Father also," ^ and
" I and the Father are one," ' and " I came
forth from God and am come into the
world." * Where is the man who can thrust
himself as a disputant between these words
of Father and Son, who can divide the God-
head, separate its volition, break asunder the
substance, cut the spirit in parts, and deny
that what the Truth speaks is true? God
then is a true Father as the Father of the
Truth, not begetting extrinsically, but gener-
ating the Son from that which Himself is ;
that is, as the All-wise He generates Wis-
dom, as the Just Justice, as the Everlasting
the Everlasting, as the Ln mortal Immor-
tality, as the Livisible the Lwisible ; because
He is Light, He generates Brightness, be-
cause He is Mind, He generates the Word.

5. Now whereas we said that the Eastern
Churches, in their delivery of the Creed,
say, "In one God * the Father Almighty,"
and " in one Lord," the "one" is not to be
understood numerically but absolutely. For
example, if one should say, "one man" or
"one horse," here "one" is used numeri-
cally. For there may be a second man and
a third, or a second horse and a third. But
where a second or a third cannot be added, if
we say " one" we mean one not numerically
but absolutely. For example, if we say, " one
Sun," here the meaning is that a second or a
third cannot be added, for there is but one


> Matt. xvii. 5. » John x. jo.
» John xiv. 9. * John xvi. aS.


CDeum, not| as before, Deo,


A COMMENTARY ON THE APOSTLES' CREED.


545


Sun. Much more then is God, when He is
said to be "one," called " one," not numeri-
cally but absolutely, that is, He is therefore
saitl to be one because there is no other. In
like manner, also, it is to be vmderstood of
the Lord, that He is one Lord, Jesus Christ,
by or through Whom God the Father pos-
sesses dominion over all, whence also, in the
next clause, God is called " Almighty."

God is called Almighty because He
possesses rule and dominion over all things.^
But the Father possesses all things by His
Son, as the Apostle says, "By Him were
created all things, visible and invisible,
whether they be thrones, or dominions, or
principalities, or powers."^ And again,
writing to the Hebrews, he says, " By Plim
also He made the worlds," and " He ap-
pointed Him heir of all things." ' By
" appointed " we are to understand " gener-
ated." Now if the Father made the worlds
by Him, and all things were created by Him,
and He is heir of all things, then by Him
He possesses rule also over all things. Be-
cause, as light is born of light, and truth of
truth, so Almighty is born of Almighty. As
it is written of the Seraphim in the Revela-
tion of John, "And they have no rest day
and night, crying Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord
God of Sabaoth, which was and which is
and which is to come, the Almighty."'* He
then who "is to come" is called "Al-
mighty." And what other is there who " is
to come " but Christ, the Son of God.'*

To the foregoing is added " Invisible
AND Impassible." I should mention that
these two words are not in the Creed of the
Roman Church. They were added in our
Church, as is well known, on account of the
Sabellian heresy, called by us " the Patri-
passian," that, namely, which says that the
Father Himself was born of the Virgin and
became visible, or aftirms that He suffered in
the flesh. To exclude such impiety, therefore,
concerning the Father, our forefathers seem
to have added these words, calling the Father
" invisible and impassible." For it is evi-
dent that the Son, not the Father, became
incarnate and was born in the flesh, and that
from that nativity in the flesh the Son became
" visible and passible." Yet so far as re-
gards that immortal substance of the God-
head, which He possesses, and which is one
and the same with that of the Father, we must
believe that neither the Father, nor the Son,
nor the Holy Ghost is "visible or passible."

1 Compare Cyril's words, ^itoJ omnium teneat poieiilatitm

T^ortlship over ;ill ; o TrafroKpaTwp, 6 -navToiU Kaaruii'^ 6 Trui-n-r^

i^outTia^inv. {Calt'ch., S, § },) . Riifinus evidently h:id St.
Cyril's ex|)Osition in view here ;is repeatedly elsewlii_-rc.
' s Col. i. i6. 2 Heb. i. 2., ■» II«b. iv. S.


But the Son, in that He condescended to as-
sume flesh, was both seen and also suflered
in the flesh. Which also the Prophet fore-
told when he said, "This is our God: no
other shall be accounted of in comparison of
Him. He hath found out all the way of
knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob His
servant and to Israel His beloved. After-
ward He shewed Himself upon the earth,
and conversed with men."^

6. Next there follows, "And in Christ
Jesus, His only Son, our Lord." "Jesus "
is a Hebrew word meaning " Saviour."
"Christ" is so called from "Chrism," i.e.
unction. For we read in the Books of
Moses, that Auses, the son of Nave," when
he was chosen to lead the people, had his
name changed from "Auses" to "Jesus," to
shew that this was a name proper for princes
and generals, for those, namely, who should
"save" the people vv^ho followed them.
Therefore, both were called "Jesus," both
the one who conducted the people, who had
been brought forth out of the land of Egypt,
and freed from the wanderings of the wil-
derness, into the land of promise, and ih\
other, who conducted the people, who' had
been brought forth from the darkness of
ignorance, and recalled from the errors of
the world, into the kingdom of heaven.

" Christ" is a name proper either to High
Priests or Kings. For formerly both high
priests and kings were consecrated with the
ointment of chrism : but these, as mortal
and corruptible, with material and corrupti-
ble ointment. Jesus is made Christ, being
anointed with " the Holy Spirit, as the
Scripture saith of Him "Whom the Father
hath anointed with the Holy Spirit sent down
from heaven." ^ And Isaiah had prefigured
the same, saying in the person of the Son,
" The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because
He hath anointed Me, He hath sent Me to
preach good tidings to the poor."*

Having shewn them what "Jesus" is,
Who saves His people, and what "Christ"
is, Who is made a High Priest for ever, let
us now see in what follows, of Whom these
things are said, " His only Son, our Lord."
Here we are taught that this Jesus, of whom
we have spoken, and this Christ, the mean-
ing of whose name we have expounded, is
"die only Son of God" and "our Lord."
Lest, perchance, you should think that these
human names have an earthly significance,

iBanich iii. 35-37. Baruch is not specified by name in
Rnfinus's list of tlie Canonical books, but it is in Cyril's, as
tliougli a part of Jeremiah, "Jeremiah, with Baruch, ami the
Lamentations and the Epistle." ( Caterli. a, § 36.)

2 That is Joshua tlie son ot Nun. It does not appear what
passasfe is referred to.

3 Acts X. 3S. * Isa. Ixi. I. Comp. Luke iv. iS.


VOL. III.


N n


546


RUFINUS.


therefore it is added that He is " the only
Son f)f God, our Lord." For He is born
One of One, because there is one loriglitness
of Hght, and there is one word of the un-
derstanding. Neither docs an incorporeal
generation degenerate into the plural num-
ber, or suffer division, where He \Vho is
born is in no wise separated from Him Who
begets. He is "only" (unique), as thought
is to the mind, as wisdom is to the wise, as a
word is to the understanding, as valour is to
the brave. For as the Father is said by the
Apostle to be " alone wise," ^ so likewise the
Son alone is called wisdom. He is then
the "only Son." And, although in glory,
cverlastingness, virtue, dominion, power. He
is what the Father is, yet all these He hath
not unoriginately as the Father, but from the
Father, as the Son, without beginning and
equal ; and although He is the Head of all
things, yet the Father is the Head of Him.
For so it is written, " The Head of Christ is
God." '

7. When you hear the word " Son,"
you must not think of a nativity after the
flesh ; but remember that it is spoken of an
incorporeal substance, and a simple and
vuicompounded nature. For if, as we said
above, whether when the understanding
generates a word, or the mind sense, or light
brings forth brightness from itself, nothing
of this sort is sought for, or any manner of
weakness and imperfection imagined in this
kind of generation, how much purer and
more sacred ought to be our conception of
the Creator of all these !

But perhaps you say, " The generation of
which you speak is an unsubstantial genera-
tion. For light does not produce substantial
brightness, nor the understanding generate a
substantial word, but the vSon of God, it is
affirmed, was generated substantially." To
this we reply, first, When in other things
examples or illustrations are used, the re-
semblance cannot hold in every particular,
l)ut only in some one point for which the
illustration is employed. For instance. When
it is said in the Gospel, "The kingdom of
heaven is like leaven, which a woman hid in
three measures of meal," ' are we to imagine
that the kingdom of heaven is in all respects
like leaven, so that like leaven it is palpable
and perishable so as to become sour and
imfit for use? Obviously the illustration was
employed simply for this object — to shew
how, through the preaching of God's word
which seems so small a thing, men's minds
couUl be imbued witli the leaven of faitli.
So likewise, when it is said, "The kingdom


of heaven is like unto a net cast into the sea,
which draws in fishes of every kind," ^ are we
to suppose that the substance of the kingdom
of heaven is likened in all respects to the
nature of twine of which a net is made, and
to the knots with which the meshes are tied."*
No ; the sole object of the comparison is to
shew that, as a net brings fishes to the shore
from the depths of the sea, so by the preach-
ing of the kingdom of heaven men's souls
are liberated from the depth of the error of
this world. From whence it is evident that
examples or illustrations do not answer in
every particular to the things which thev are
brought to exemplify or illustrate. Other-
wise, if they were the same in all respects,
they would no longer be called examples or
illustrations, but rather would be the things
themselves.

8. Then further it is to be observed that
no creature can be such as its Creator. And
tliercfore, as the divine substance or essence
admits of no comparison, so neither does the
Divinity. Moreover, every creature is of
nothing. If therefore a spark which is so un-
substantial but yet is fire, begets of itself a
creature which is of nothing, and maintains
in it the essential nature of that from which
it springs, (i.e. the fire of the parent spark),
why cotdd not the substance of that eternal
Light, which ever has been because it has
in itself nothing which is not substantial,
produce from itself substantial brightness.-'
Rightly, therefore, is the Son called "only,"
" unique." For He who hath been so born
is "only" and "unique." That which is
unique can admit of no comparison. Nor
can He who made all things be like in sub-
stance to the things which He has made.
This then is Christ Jesus, the only Son
of God, who is also our Lord. "Only"
may be referred both to Son and to Lord.
For Jesus Christ is "only" both as truly
Son and as one Lord. For all other sons,
though they are called sons, are so called
by the grace of adoption, not by verity
of nature ; and if there be others who
are called lords, they are called so from
an authority bestowed not inherent. But
Christ alone is the only Son and the only
Lord, as the Apostle saith, "One Lord
Jesus Christ, by Whom are all things."*
Therefore, after the Creed has in due order
set forth the ineffal)le mystery of the nativity
of the Son from the Father, it now descends
to the dispensation which He vouchsafed to
enter upon for man's salvation. And of
Him whom just now it called the " only Son
of God " and " our Lord," it now says.


» 1 Tim.i. 17.


2 I Cor. xi. 3. S Matl. xiii. 33.


1 Matt. xiii. 47.


2 I Cor, viii. 6.


A COMMENTARY ON THE APOSTLES' CREED.


547


9. " Who was born by {de) the Holy
Ghost of the Vhigin Mary." This
nativity among men is in the way of dis-
pensation,^ whereas the former nativity is of
the divine substance ; the one results from his
condescension, the other from his essential
nature. He is born by the Holy Ghost of
the Virgin. Here a chaste ear and a pure
mind is required. For you must understand
that now a temple hath been built within the
secret recesses of a Virgin's womb for Him
of Whom erewhile you learnt that He was
born ineffably of the Father, And just as
in the sanctification of the Holy Ghost no
thought of imperfection is to be admitted, so
in the Virgin-birth no defilement is to be im-
agined. For this birth was a new birth given
to this world, and rightly new. For He Who
is the only Son in heaven is by consequence
the only Son on earth, and was uniquely
born, born as no other ever was or can be.

The words of the Prophets concerning
Him, " A Virgin shall conceive and bring
forth a Son," " are known to all, and are
cited in the Gospels again and again. The
Prophet Ezekiel too had predicted the mirac-
ulous manner of that birth, calling Mary
figuratively " the Gate of the Lord," the
gate, namely, through which the Lord en-
tered the world. For he saith, "The gate
which looks towards the East shall be closed,
and shall not be opened, and no one shall
pass through it, because the Lord God of
Israel shall pass through it, and it shall be
closed." ^ What could be said with such
evident reference to the inviolate preserva-
tion of the Virgin's condition.? That Gate
of Virginity was closed ; through it the
Lord God of Israel entered ; through it He
came forth from the Viro-in's womb into this
worlil ; and the Virgin-state being preserved
inviolate, the gate of the Virgin remained
closed for ever. Therefore the Holy Ghost
is spoken of as the Creator of the Lord's
flesh and of His temple.

10. Starting from this point you may
understand the majesty of the Holy Ghost
also. For the Gospel witnesses of Him that
when the angel said to the Virgin, " Thou
shalt bring forth a Son and shalt call His
name Jesus, for He shall save Plis people
from their sins," ■* she replied, " How shall
this be, seeing I know not a man?" on
which the angel said to her, "The Holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power
of the Highest shall overshadow thee.
Wherefore that holy Thing which shall be

1 Correspondinofto the Grrek word Economy — the " arrange-
ment" or ''plan " by wliiih tlie Word became incarnate,
s Isa. vii. 14. " Ezek. xhv. 2, LXX. * Matt. i. 21.


born of Thee shall be called the Son of
God." ^ See here the Trinity mutually co-
operating with each other. The Holy Ghost
is spoken of as coming upon the Virgin, and
the Power of the Highest as overshadowing
her. What is the Power of the Highest but
Christ Himself, Who is the Power of God
and the Wisdom of God.? Whose is this
Power.? The Power of the Highest. There
is here then the Plighest, there is also the
Power of the Highest, there is also the Holy
Ghost. This is the Trinity, everywhere
latent, and everywhere apparent, distinct in
names and persons, but inseparable in the
substance of the Godhead. And although
the Son alone is born of the Virgin, yet
there is present also the Highest, there is
present also the Holy Ghost, that both the
conception and the bringing forth of the
Virgin may be sanctified.

II. These things, since they are asserted
upon the warrant of the Prophetical Script-
ures, may possibly silence the Jews, infidel
and incredulous though they be. But the
Pagans are wont to ridicule us when they
hear us speak of a Virgin-birth. We must,
therefore, say a few words in reply to their
cavils. Every birth, I suppose, depends
upon three conditions. There must be a
woman of mature age, she must have inter-
course with a man, her womb must not be
barren. Of these three conditions, in the
birth of which we are speaking, one was
wanting, the man. And this, forasmuch as
He of Whose birth we speak was not an
earthly but a heavenly man, was supplied by
the Ileavenly Spirit, the virginity of the
mother being preserved inviolate. And yet
why should it be thought marvellous for a
virgin to conceive, when it is well known
that the Eastern bird, which they call the
Phoenix, is in such wise born, or born again,
without the intervention of a mate, that it
remains continually one, and continually by
being born or born again succeeds itself.?*
That bees know no wedlock, and no bring-
ing forth of young, is notorious. There are
also other things which are found to be sub-
ject to some such law of birth. Shall it be
thought incredible, then, that that was done
by divine power, for the renewal and restora-
tion of the whole world, of which instances

iLukei. 31,34, 35. ^, . ,,,,..-

i^Tlie fable ot the Phoenix was very generally bchcved in
the ancient Church, and was used as an illustration both ot
the Virgin-birth, as here, and of the Resurrection. Cyril ot
Jerusalem (xviii. S), whom Rulinus evidently had in view.
refers to it as a providentially designed conhrmalion of the
latter. Possibly the Septuagint translation of Ps. xcii. 12,
"The righteous shall flourish as a palm tree," cu« ij>oivi$ may
have been thought to sanction the fable. On the Literature
connected with the Phtenix, see Bp. Jacobson's edition of the
Apostolical Fathers, Clemens Romanus, Ep. i. § 25, note, ji
104.


N n


548


RUFINUS.


are obseiTed in the nativity of animals?
And yet it is strange that the Gentiles should
think this impossible, \vho believe tlicir own
Minerva to have been born from the brain
of Jupiter. What is more difficult to
believe, or what more contrary to nature?
Here, there is a woman, the order of nature
is kept, there is conception, and in due time
birth ; there, there is no female, but a man
alone, and — birth! Why does he who
believes the one marvel at the other? Again,
they say that Father Bacchus was born from
Jupiter's thigh. Here is another portent,
yet it is believed. Venus also, whom they
call Aphrodite, was born, they believe, of
tlie foam of the sea, as her compounded
name shews. They affirm that Castor and
Pollux were born of an egg, the Myrmidons
of ants. There are a thousand other things
which, though contrary to nature, find credit
with them, such as the stones thi'own by
Deucalion antl Pyrrha, and the crop of men
sprung from thence. And when they believe
such myths and so many of them, does one
thing seem impossible to them, that a woman
of mature age, not defiled by man but impreg-
nated by the Holy Ghost, should conceive
a divine progeny? who, forsooth, if they are
hard of belief, ought in no wise to have
given credence to those prodigies, being, as
they are, so many and so degrading; but if
they do believe them, they ought much more
readily to receive these beliefs of ours, so
honourable and so holy, than theirs so dis-
creditable and so vile.

1 2. But they say, perhaps, If it was
possible to God that a virgin should con-
ceive, it was possible also that she should
bring forth, but they think it unmeet that a
being of so great majesty should enter the
world in such wise, that even though there
had been no defilement from intercourse
with man, there should yet be the unseemli-
ness attendant upon the act of delivery. To
which let us reply briefly, meeting them on
their own level. If a person should see a
little child in the act of being sufibcated in a
a quagmire, and himself, a great man and
powerful, should go into the mire, just at
its verge, so to say, to rescue the dying
child ; would you blame this man as defiled
for having stepped into a little mire, or
would you praise him as merciful, for hav-
ing preserved the life of one that was
perishing? But the case supposed is that
of an ordinary man. Let us return to the
nature of Him Who was born. How much,
think you, is the nature of the Sun inferior to
him ? How much beyond doubt, the Creature
to the Creator? Consider now if a ray of the


sun alights upon a quagmire, does it receive
any pollution from it? or is the sun the worse
for shedding his light upon foul objects?
Fire, too, how far inferior is its nature to the
things of which we are speaking? Yet no
substance, whether foul or vile, is believed to
pollute fire if applied to it. When the case
is plainly thus with regard to material things,
do you suppose that aught of pollution and
defilement can befall that supereminent and
incorporeal nature, which is above all fire
and all light? Then, lastly, note this also:
we say that man was created by God out of
the clay of the earth. But if God is thought
to be defiled in seeking to recover His own
work, much more must He be thought so in
making that work originally. And it is idle
to ask why He passed through what is re-
pugnant to our sense of modesty, when you
cannot tell why He made what is so repug-
nant. And therefore it is not nature but
general estimation that has made us think
these things to be such. Otherwise, all
things that are in the body, being formed
from one and the same clay, are distin-
guished from one another only in their uses
and natural offices.

13. But there is another consideration
which we must not leave out in the solution
of this question, namely, that the substance
of God, which is wholly incorporeal, cannot
be introduced into bodies or be received by
them in the first instance, unless there be
some spiritual substance as a medium, which
is capable of receiving the divine Spirit.
For instance, if we say that light is able to
irradiate all the members of the body, yet by
none of them can it be received except by
the eye. For it is the eye alone which is
receptive of light. So the Son of God is
born of a virgin, not associated with the
flesh alone in the first instance, but begotten
with a soul as a medium between the flesh
and God. With the soul, then, serving as a
medium, and receiving the Word of God in
the secret citadel of the rational spirit, God
was born of the Virgin without any such
disparagement as you imagine. And there-
fore nothing is to be esteemed base or un-
seemly wherein was the sanctification of the
Spirit, and where the soul which was capa-
ble of God became also a partaker of flesh.
Account nothing impossible where the power
of the Most High was present. Have no
thought of human weakness where there
was the plenitude of Divinity.

14. He was Crucified under Pontius
Pilate and was Buried: He Descended
INTO Hell. The Apostle Paul teaches us that
we ought to have " the eyes of our understand-


A COMMENTARY ON THE APOSTLES' CREED.


549


ing enlightened"^ "that we may understand
what is the height and breadth and depth." "
" The height and breadth and depth" is a
description of the Cross, of which that part
which is fixed in the earth he calls the depth,
the height that which is erected upon the
earth and reaches upward, the breadth that
which is spread out to the right hand and
to the left. Since, therefore, there are so
many kinds of death by which it is given to
men to depart this life, why docs the Apostle
wish us to have our understanding enlight-
ened so as to know the reason why, of all of
them, the Cross was chosen in preference
for the death of the Saviour. We must
know, then, that that Cross was a triumph.
It was a signal trophy. A triumph is a
token of victory over an enemy. Since then
Christ, when He came, brought three king-
doms at once into subjection under His sway
(for this He signifies when he says, " That
in the name of Jesus every knee should bow,
of things in heaven, and things on earth, and
things under the earth "),^ and conquered
all of these by His death, a death v/as sought
answerable to the mystery, so that being
lifted up in the air, and subduing the powers
of the air, He might make a display of His
victory over these supernatural and celestial
powers. Moreover the holy Prophet says
that " all the day long He stretched out His
hands"* to the people on the earth, that He
might both make protestation to unbelievers
and invite believers : finally, by that part
wliich is sunk under the earth, He signified
His bringing into subjection to Himself the
kingdoms of the nether world.

15. Moreover, — to touch briefly some
of the more recondite topics, — when God
made the world in the beginning, He set
over it and appointed certain powers of
celestial virtues, by whom the race of mortal
men might be governed and directed. That
this was so done Moses signifies in the vSons
in Deuteronomv, " When the Most Hicrh
divided the nations. He appointed the bounds
of the nations according to the numl^er of
the angels of God." But some of these, as
he who is called the Prince of this world,
did not exercise the power which God had
committed to them according to the laws by
which they had received it, nor did they
teach mankind to obey God's command-
ments, but taught them rather to follow
their own perverse guidance. Thus we
were brought under the bonds of sin, be-
cause, as the Prophet saith, " We were sold
under our sins." ® For every man, when he


lEph. i. iS.
SEph. iii. 18.


3 Phil. ii. 10.
* Isa. Ixv. 2.


B Deut. xxxii. S, LXX.
* Rom. vii. 14.


yields to lust, is"^ receiving the purchase-
money of his soul. Under that bond then
every man was held by those most wicked
rulers, which same bond Christ, when He
came, tore down and stripped them of this
their power. This Paul signifies under
a great mystery, when he says of Him,
" He destroyed the hand-writing which was
against us, nailing it to Plis cross, and led
away principalities and powers, triumphing
over them in Himself." ^ Those rulers,
then, whom God had set over mankind,
having become contumacious and tyrannical,
took in hand to assail the men who had been
committed to their charge and to rout them
utterly in the conflicts of sin, as the Prophet
Ezekiel mystically intimates when he says,
" In that day angels ^ shall come forth hasten-
ing to exterminate Ethiopia, and there shall
be perturbation among them in the day of
Egypt; for behold He comes."' Having
stript them then of their almighty power,
Christ is said to have triumphed, and to
have delivered to men the power which was
taken from them, as also Himself saith to
His disciples in the Gospel, " Behold I have
given you power to tread upon serpents and
scorpions, and upon all the might of the
enemy." ■* The Cross of Christ, then,
brought those who had wrongfully abused
the authority which they had received into
subjection to those who had before been in
subjection to them. But us, that is, man-
kind, it teaches first of all to resist sin even
unto death, and willingly to die for the sake
of religion. Next, this same Cross sets
before us an example of obedience, in like
manner as it hath punished the contumacy
of those wdio were once our rulers. Hear,
therefore, how the Apostle would teach us
obedience by the Cross of Christ: "Let
this mind be in you, which was in Christ
Jesus, Who, being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be equal with God,
but made Himself of no reputation, taking
upon Him tlie form of a servant, being
made in the likeness of men ; and, being
found in fashion as a man, He became
obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cr.


oss


>» 5


As, then, a consummate master
teaches both by example and precept, so
Christ taught the obedience, which good
men are to render even at the cost of death,
by Himself first dying in rendering it.

16. But perhaps some one is alarmed
at hearing us discourse of the death of Him
of Whom, a short while since, we said that


1 Col. ii. 14, 15. * Luke x. 19.

2 ' \7yeA01 LXX, Nu}itii,Yu\i^.

3 Ezck. XXX. g. ^ pha. ;i, ^.s.


550


RUFINUS.


He is everlasting vvitli God tlic Fatlier,
and that He was begotten of the Father's
substance, and is one with God the Father,
in dominion, majesty, and eternity. But be
not alarmed, O faithful hearer. Presentl}'
tliou wilt see Him of Whose death thou
hearest once more immortal; for the dcatli
to which He submits is about to spoil death.
For the object of that mystery of the Incarna-
tion which we expounded just now was that
the divine virtue of the Son of God, as
though it were a hook concealed beneath
the form and fasliion of human flesh (He
being, as the Apostle Paul says, " found in
fashion as a man"),^ might lure on the
Prince of this world to a conflict, to wliom
ollering His flesh as a l^ait, His divinity
underneath might catch him and hold him
fast with its hook, through the shedding of
His immaculate blood. For He alone Who
knows no stain of sin hath destroyed the
sins of all, of those, at least, who have
marked the door-posts of their faith with
His blood. As, therefore, if a fish seizes a
baited hook, it not only does not take the
bait ofl' the hook, but is drawn out of the
water to be itself food for others, so He Who
had the power of death seized the body of
Jesus in death, not being aware of the liook
of Divinity inclosed within it, but having
swallowed it he was caught forthwith, and
the bars of hell being burst asunder, he was
drawn forth as it were from the abyss to
become food for others. Which result the
Prophet Ezekiel long ago foretold under this
same figure, saying, " I will draw thee out
with My hook, and stretch thee out upon the
earth : the plains shall be filled with thee,
and I will set all the fowls of the air over
thee, and I will satiate all the beasts of the
earth with thee." "^ The Prophet David also
says, " Thou hast broken the heads of the
great dragon. Thou hast given him to be
meat to the people of Ethioj^ia." '' And Job
in like manner witnesses of the same mys-
tery, for he says in tlie person of the Lord
speaking to him, " Wilt thou draw forth the
dragon with a hook, and wilt thou put thy
bit in his nostrils? " '

17. It is with no loss or disparagement
therefore of His Divine nature that Christ
suiFers in the flesh, but His Divine nature
through the flesh descended into death, that
by the infirmity of the flesh He might ctlcct
salvation ; not that He might be detained by
death according to the law of mortality, luit
that He might by Himself in his resur-
rection open the gates of death. It is as if


iPhil.ii.S.

* Ezck. xxix. 4, 5.


3 Ps. Kxir. 14, LXX.
ijobxli. I.


a king were to proceed to a prison, and to
go in and open the doors, undo the fetters,
break in pieces the chains, the bars, and the
bolts, and bring forth antl set at liberty the
prisoners, and restore those who are sitting
in darkness and in the shadow of death to
light and life. The king, therefore, is said
indeed to have been in prison, but not under
the same condition as the prisoners who were
detained there. They were in prison to be
punished. He to free them from punishment,

1 8. They who have handed down the
Creed to us have with much forethought
specified the time when these things were
done — "under Pontius Pilate," — lest in
any respect the tradition should falter, as
thouirh vagfuc and luicertain. But it should
l)e known that the clause, " He descended
into Hell," is not added in the Creed of the
Roman Church, neither is it in that of the
Oriental Churches. It seems to be implied,
however, when it is said that " He was
buried." Ikit in the love and zeal for the
Divine Scriptures which possess you, you
say to me, I doubt not, " These things ought
to be proved by more evident testimonies
from the Divine Scriptures. For the more
important the things are which are to be be-
lieved, so much the more do they need apt
and undoubted witness." True. But we, as
speaking to those who know the law, have left
unnoticed, for the sake of brevity, a whole
forest of testimonies. But if this also be
required, let us cite a few out of many,
knowing, as we do, that to those who are
acquainted with the Scriptures, a very ample
sea of testimonies lies open.

19. First of all, then, we must know that
the doctrine of the Cross is not regarded by
all in the same light. It is one thing to the
Gentiles, to the Jews another, to Christians
another ; as also the Apostle says, " We
preach Christ crucified, — to the Jews a
stunibling-block, to the Gentiles foolishness,
but to those who are called, both Jews and
Greeks, Christ, the power of God and the
wisdom of God ; " ' and, in the same place,
" For the preaching of the Cross is to those
who perish foolishness, but to those who are
saved," that is, to us, it is " the Power of
God." • The Jews, to whom it had been
delivered out of the Law, that Christ should
abitle for ever, were oflended by His Cross,
because they were unwilling to believe His
resurrection. To the Gentiles it seemed
foolishness that God shoultl have submitted
to death, because they were ignorant of the
mystery of the Incarnation. , But Christians,
who had accepted His birth and passion in


1 I Cor. i. 23, 24.


> 1 Cor, i. iS.


A COMMENTARY ON THE APOSTLES' CREED.


551


the flesh and His resurrection from the
dead, of course believed that it was the
power of God which had overcome death.

First, therefore, hear how this very thing
is prophetically declared by Isaiah, that the
Jews, to whom the Prophets had foretold
these things, would not believe, but that
they who had never heard them from the
Prophets, would believe them. " To whom
He was not spoken of they shall see, and
they that have not heard shall understand." ^
Moreover, this same Isaiah foretells that,
while those who were engaged in the study
of the Law from childhood to old age be-
lieved not, to the Gentiles every mystery
should be transferred. His words are :
"•And the Lord of Hosts shall make a feast
on this mountain unto all nations : they shall
drink joy, they shall drink wine, tliey shall
be anointed with ointment on this mountain.
Deliver all these things to the nations." '
This was the counsel of the Almighty re-
specting all the nations. But they who
boast themselves of their knowledge of the
Law will, perhaps, say to us, " You blas-
pheme in saying that the Lord was subjected
to the corruption of death and to the suffering
of the Cross." Read, therefore, what you
find written in the Lamentations of Jere-
miah: "The Spirit of our countenance,
Christ the Lord, was taken in our ^ corrup-
tions, of whom we said, we shall live under
His shadow among the nations." * Thou
hearest how the Prophet says that Christ
the Lord was taken, and for us, that is, for
our sins, delivered to corruption. Under
whose shadow, since the people of the Jews
have continued in unbelief, he says the
Gentiles lie, because we live not in Israel,
but among the Gentiles.

20. But, if it does not weary you, let me
point out as briefly as possible, specific refer-
ences to prophecy in the Gospels, that those
who are being instructed in the first elements
of the faith may have these testimonies writ-
ten on their hearts, lest any doubt concerning
the things v^^hich they believe should at any
time take them by surprise. We are told in
the Gospel that Judas, one of Christ's friends
and associates at table, betrayed Him. Let me
show you how this is foretold in the Psalms :
" He who hath eaten My bread hath lifted up
his heel against Me : " " and in another place ;
"My friends and My neighbours drew near
and set themselves against Me : " "^ and again ;
" His words were made softer than oil and yet
be they very darts." ' What then is meant by

ilsa. Hi. 15. Comp. Rom. XV. 31. sps.xli.g.

2 Isa. XXV. 6. " Ps. XXXV. 15.

3 Their corruptions, LXX. ' Ps. Iv. 21.
* Lamentations iv. 20.


his words were made soft.^ " Judas came to
Jesus and said unto Ilim, Hail, Master,
and kissed Him."' Thus through the soft
blandishment of a kiss he implanted the
execrable dart of betrayal. On which the
Lord said to him, "Judas, betrayest thou
the Son of Man with a kiss .^ " ' You ob-
serve that He was appraised by the traitoi"'s
covetousness at thirty pieces of silver. Of
this also the Prophet speaks, "And I said
unto them, If ye think good, give me my
price, or if not, forbear;" and presently,
"I received from them," he says, "thirty
pieces of silver, and I cast them into the
house of the Lord, into the foundry." '
Is not this what is written in the Gospels,
that Judas, " repenting of what he had
done, brought back the money, and threw
it down in the temple and departed?"*
Well did He call it His price, as though
blaming and upbraiding. For He had done
so many good works among them. He had
given sight to the blind, feet to the lame, the
power of walking to the palsied, life also to
the dead ; for all these good works they paid
Him death as His price, appraised at thirty
pieces of silver. It is related also in the
Gospels that He was bound. This also the
word of prophecy had foretold by Isaiah,
saying, " Woe unto their soul, who have
devised a most evil device against them-
selves, saying, Let us bind the just One,
seeing that He is unprofitable to us." ^

21. But, says some one, "Are these
things to be understood of the Lord.^ Could
the Lord be held prisoner by men and
dragged to judgment.^" Of this also the
same Prophet shall convince you. For he
says, " The Lord Himself shall come into
judgment with the elders and princes of the
people." ^ The Lord is judged then accord-
ing to the Prophet's testimony, and not only
judged, but scourged, and smitten on the
face with the palms (of men's hands), and
spitted on, and suffers every insult and in-
dignity for our sake. And because all
who should hear these things preached by
the Apostles would be perfectly amazed,
therefore also the Prophet speaking in their
person exclaims, " Lord, who hath believed
our report.'' " ' For it is incredible that God,
the Son of God, should be spoken of and
preached as having sutTered these things.
For this reason they are foretold by the
Prophets, lest any doubt should sjjring up in
those who are about to believe. Christ the
Lord Himself therefore in His own person,

1 Matt. xxvi. 49. ^ Matt, xxvii. 3, 5. ' Isa. liii. i.

2 Luke xxii. 48. ^ Isa. iii. 9, LXX.

3 Zech. xi. 12, 13, LXX. <5 Isa. iii. 14.


552


RUFINUS.


says, "I gave ISIy l)ack to the scourges,
and My cheeks to the palms,^ I turned not
away My face from shame and spitting." "
This also is written among His other suf-
ferings, that they bound Him, and led Him
away to Pilate. This also the Prophet
foretold, saying, "And they bound him and
conducted Him as a pledge of friendship
{xcnium) to King Jarim."^ But some one
ol)jects, " But Pilate was not a king." Hear
then what the Gospel relates next, " Pilate
hearing that He was from Galilee, sent
Him to Herod, who was king in Israel at
that time."* And rightly does the Prophet
add the name "Jarim," which means "a
wild-vine," for Herod was not of the house
of Israel, nor of that Israelitish vine which
the Lord liad brouglit out of Egypt, and
" planted in a very fruitful hill," * but was
a wild vine, i.e. of an alien stock. Rightly,
therefore, was he called " a wild-vine," be-
cause he in nowise sprung from the shoots
of the vine oi Israel. And whereas the
Prophet used the ])hrase ''^ xcnium^^^ "A
pledge (jf friendship," this also corresponds,
"For Herod and Pilate," as the Gospel
witnesses, "from being enemies were made
friends," * and, as though in token of their
reconciliation, each sent Jesus bound to the
other. What matter, so long as Jesus, as
Saviour, reconciles those who were at vari-
ance, and restores peace, and also brings
back concord ! Wherefore of this also it
is written in Job, "May the Lord reconcile
the hearts of the princes of the earth." '

22. It is related that when Pilate would
fain have released Him all the people cried
out, "Crucify Him, Crucify Him!"" This
also the Prophet Jeremiah foretells, saying,
in the person of the Lord Himself, "My
inheritance is become to Me as a lion in tlie
forest. He hath uttered his voice against
Me, wherefore I have hated it. And there-
fore (saith He) I have forsaken and left
My house." ^ And again in anotlier place,
" Against whom have ye opened your
mouth, and against whom have ye let loose
your tongues?"'" When He stood before
His judge, it is written that "He held His
peace."" Many Scrijjtures testify of this.
In the Psalms it is written, " I became as a
man that heareth not, and in whose mouth
are no reproofs." '- And again, "I was as a
deaf man, and heard not, and as one that is
dumb and openeth not his mouth." And
again another Prophet saith, "As a lamb

1 PaTrio-fioTa, LXX. " I^uUe xxiii. 12.

2 Isa. 1.6. ■ Job xii. 2^. AiaAAao-ffwr, I,XX.

3 Hos. X. 6. 8 Luke xxiii. 21. ^' M;itt. xxvi. 63.

* Luke xxiii. 6, 7. " Jer. xii. 7, S. '= Ps. xxxviii. ij, 14.

f' Js:i. V. 1. 10 Isa. Ivii. 4,


before her shearer, so He opened not His
mouth. In His humiliation His judgment
was taken away." ' It is written that there
was put on Him a crown of thc^rns. Of this
hear in the Canticles the voice of God the
Fatlier marvelling at the iniquity of Jerusa-
lem in the insult done to His Son : " Go forth
and see, ye daughters of Jerusalem, the
crown w'herewith His mother hath crowned
Him." "■■' Moreover, of the thorns another
Prophet makes mention : "I looked that she
should bring forth grapes, and she brought
forth thorns, and instead of righteousness
a cry." "* But that thou mayest know the
.secrets of the mystery, it behoved Him,
Who came to take away the sins of the
world, to free the earth also from the
curse, which it had received through
the sin of the first man, when the Lord said
" Ctu'sed be the earth in thy labours : thorns :
and thistles shall it bring fortli to thee." *
For this cause, therefore, is Jesus crowned
with thorns, that that first .sentence of con-
demnation might lie remitted. He is led to
the cross, and the life of the whole world is
suspended on the wood of which it is made.
I would point out how this also is confirmed
by testimony from the Prophets. You find
Jeremiah speaking of it thus, " Come and let
us cast wood into His bread, and crush Him
out of the land of the living." " And again,
Moses, mourning over them, says, " Thy life
shall be suspended before thine eyes, and
thou shalt fear day and night, and shalt not
believe thy life." ^ But we must pass on, for
already we are exceeding our proposed
measure of brevity, and are lengthening
out our "short w^ord " by a long disserta-
tion. Yet we will add a few words more,
lest we should seem altogether to have
passed over what we undertook.

23. It is written that when the side of
Jesus was pierced " He shed thereout blood
and water." ' This has a mystical meaning.
For Himself had said, "Out of His belly
shall flow rivers of living water." ^ But He
shed forth blood also, of wliich the Jews
sought that it might be upon themselves and
upon their children. He shed forth water,
therefore, which might wash believers; He
shed forth blood also which might condemn
unbelievers. Yet it might be understood also
as prellguring tlie twofold grace of baptism,
one that which is given by the baptism of
water, the other that which is sought through
martyrdom in the outpouring of blood, for
both are called baptism. But if you ask


1 Isa. liii. 7,8.
= Cant. iii. ii.
i 3 isa. V. 4, 7.


< Gen. iii. 17, iS.

^ ]cx. xi. 19.

' Deut. xxviii. 66.


" Jolin xix. 34.
* Jolin vii. 3S.


A COMMENTARY ON THE APOSTLES' CREED.


553


further why our Lord is said to have poured
forth blood and water from His side rather
than from any other member, I imagine that
by the rib in the side the woman is signified.
Since tlae fountain of sin and deatli proceeded
from the first woman, wlio was tlie rib of the
first Adam, the fountain of redemption and Hfe
is drawn from tlie rib of the second Adam.

24. It is written that in our Lord's passion
there was darkness over the earth from the
sixtli hour until the ninth. To this also you
will find the Prophet witnessing, "Thy Sun
shall go down at mid-day."^ And again,
the Prophet Zechariah, " In that day there
shall be no more light. There shall be cold
and frost in one day, and that day known
to the L-ord ; and it shall be neither day nor
night, but at evening time there shall be
light."' What plainer language could the
Prophet have used for his words to seem not
so much a prophecy of the future as a narra-
tive of the past? He foretold both the cold
and the frost. For Peter was warming him-
self at the fire because it was cold : and he
was suffering cold not only in respect of the
time (the early hour), but also of his faith.
There is added, "" and that day shall be
known to the Lord ; and it shall be neither
day nor night." What is " neither day nor
night ? " Did he not plainly speak of the
darkness interposed in the day, and then the
light afterwards restored? That was not
day, for it did not begin with sun-rise,
neither was it complete night, for it did not,
when the day was ended, receive its due
space from the beginning or prolong it to
tlie end ; but the light which had been
driven away by the crime of wicked men
is restored at evening time. For after the
ninth hour, the darkness is driven away, and
the sun is restored to the world. Again,
another Prophet witnesses of the same,
" The light shall be darkened upon the
earth in the day-time." ^

2^. The Gospel further relates that the
soldiers parted the garments of Jesus among
themselves, and cast lots upon His vesture.
The Holy Spirit provided that this also
should be witnessed beforehand by the Proph-
ets, for David says, " They parted my
garments among them, and upon my vesture
they did cast lots." * Nor were the Proph-
ets silent even as to the robe, the scarlet
robe, which the soldiers are said to have put
upon Him in mockery. Listen to Isaiah,
" Who is this that cometh from Edom, red
in his garments fi^om Bozrah ? Wherefore
are thy garments red, and thy raiment as


though thou hadst trodden in the wine-
press?" To which Himself replies, "I
have trodden the wine-press alone, O
daughter of Sion." ^ For He alone it is
Who hath not sinned, and hath taken away
the sins of the world. For if by one man
death could enter into the world, how much
more by one man. Who was God also, could
life be restored !

26. It is related also that vinegar was
given Him to drink, or wine mingled with
myrrh which is bitterer than gall. Hear
what the Prophet has foretold of this :
" They gave Me gall to eat, and when I
was thirsty they gave Me vinegar to drink.""
Agreeably with which Moses, even in his
day, said to the people, " Their vine is of
the vineyards of Sodom, and their branch of
Gomorrah ; their grape is a grape of gall,
and their cluster a cluster of bitterness." ■*
And again, the Prophet upbraiding them
says, " Oh foolish people and unwise, have
ye thus requited the Lord?" * Moreover, in
the Canticles the same things are foretold,
where even the garden in which the Lord
was crucified is indicated : " I have come
into my garden, my sister, my spouse, and
have gathered in my myrrh."" Here the
Prophet has plainly set forth the wine
mingled with myn^h which the Lord has
given Him to drink.

37. Next it is written that " He gave up
the ghost." •* This also had been foretold
by the Prophet, who says, addressing the
Father in the Person of the Son, "Into
Thy hands I commend My Spirit." ' He is
related also to have been buried, and a great
stone laid at the door of the sepulchre.
Hear what the word of prophecy foretold
by Jeremiah concerning this also, " They
have cut oft' my life in the pit, and have
laid a stone upon Me." '^ These \vords_ of
the Prophet point most plainly to His burial.
Here are yet others, " The righteous hath
been taken away from beholding iniquity,
and his place is in peace." ^ And in another
place, " I will give the malignant for his
burial;"^*' and yet once more, "He hath
lain down and slept as a lion, and as a
lion's whelp ; who shall rouse Him up ? " "
2S. That He descended into hell is also
evidently foretold in the Psalms, where it is
said, " Thou hast brought Me also into
the dust of the death." ^- And again,
"What profit is there in my blood, when
I shall have descended into corruption?"'^


1 Ainos, viii. 9.

» Zech. xiv. 6, 7, LXX.


3 Amos viii. 9.
* Ps. xxii. iS.


1 Isa. Ixiii. 1-3.
~ Ps. Ixix. 21.
3 Deut. xxxii. 32.
* Deut. xxxii. 6.
6 Cant. V. I.


6 Mark xv.'37.

7 Ps. xxxi.S-

8 Lara. iii. 53.
0 Isa. Ivii. I, 2.

10 Isa. liii. 9, LXX.


" Gen. xlix. 9.
'2 Ps. xxii. 15.
J3 Ps, XXX. 0.


554


RUFINUS.


And again, " I descended into tlie deep
mire, where there is no bottom." ^ More-
over, Jolin says, "Art Thou He that sliall
come (into hell, witliout doubt), or do ^s■c
look for another?"-' Whence also Peter
says that " Christ being put to death in the
llesh, but quickened in the Spirit which
dwells in Him, descended to the spirits who
were shut up in prison, who in the days of
Noah believed not, to preach unto them ; " ^
where als(j what lie did in hell is declared.
Moreo\ er, the Lord says by the Prophet, as
though speaking of the future, " Thou wilt
not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt Thou
suHer Tliy Holy One to see corruption." "*
Which again, in prophetic language he
speaks of as actually fulfilled, "■ O Lord,
TIkju hast brought my soul out of hell :
Tluva hast saved me from them that go
down into the pit," ' There follows next, —
39. The third dav He rose again
FiiOM THE DEAD. The glory of Christ's
resurrection threw a lustre upon everything
which before IkkI the appearance of weak-
ness and frailty. If a while since it seemed
to you impossible that an immortal Being
could die, you see now that He who has
overcome death and is risen again cannot be
mortal. But understand herein the good-
ness of the Creator, that so far as you by
sinning have cast yourself down, so far has
He descended in following you. And do
not impute lack of power to God, the Crea-
tor of all things, by imagining his work to
have ended in the fall into an abyss which
He in His redemptive purpose was unable to
reach. We speak of infernal and supernal,
because we are bounded by the definite cir-
cumference of the body, and are confined with-
in the limits of the region prescribed to us.
But to God, Who is present everywhere and
absent nowhere, what is infernal and what
supernal? Notwithstanding, through the as-
sumption of a body there is room for these
also. The flesh which had been deposited in
the sepulchre, is raised, that that might be
fullilled which was spoken by the Prophet,
" Thou wilt not sufier Thy Holy One to see
c(jrruption." " He returned, therefore, a
victor from the dead, leading with Him the
spoils of hell. For He led forth those who
were held in ca]5tivity by death, as He Him-
self had foretold, when He said, " When
I shall be lifted up from the earth I shall
draw all unto Me." ' To this the Gospel
bears witness, when it says, " The graves
were opened, an<l many bodies of saints
which slept arose, and appeared imto many,


' Ps. Ixix. 2.
2 Luke vii. 20.
* 1 Pet. iii. 10-20.


* Ps. xvi. 10.
" Ps. XXX. 3.


" Ps. xvi. 10.
'John xii, 3a.


and entered into the holy City,"^ that city,
doubtless, of which the Apostle says, "Jeru-
salem which is above is free, which is the
Mother of us all." ^ As also he says again
to the Hebrews, " It became Him, for
Whom are all things, and by Whom are all
things, Who had brought many sons into
glory, to make the Author of their salvation
perfect through sutlering." ^ Sitting, there-
fore, on the right hand of God in the high-
est heavens, He placed there that human
flesh, made perfect through sufferings,
which had fallen to death by the lapse of
the first man, but was now restored by the
virtue of the resurrection. Whence also the
Apostle says, " Who hath raised us up
together and made us sit together in the
heavenly places." * For He was the potter.
Who. as the Prophet Jeremiah teaches,
" took up again with His hands, and
formed anew, as it seemed good to Him,
the vessel which had fallen from His
hands and was broken in pieces." ** And
it seemed good to Him that the mortal
and corruptible body w^hich He had as-
sumed, this body raised from the rocky
sepulchre and rendered immortal and in-
corruptible. He should now place not on
the earth but in heaven, and at His Father's
right hand. The Scriptures of the Old
Testament are full of these mysteries. No
Prophet, no Lawgiver, no Psalmist is silent,
but almost every one of the sacred pages
speaks of them. It seems superfluous,
therefore, to linger in collecting testimonies ;
yet we will cite some few , remitting those who
desire to drink more largely to the well-
springs of the divine volumes themselves.

30. It is said then in the Psalms, " I laid
me down and slept, and rose up again,
because the Lord sustained me." ^ Again,
in another place, " Because of the wretched-
ness of the needy and the groaning of the
poor, now will I arise, saith the Lord." '
And elsewhere, as we have said above, " O
Lord, thou hast brought my soul out of
hell ; Thou hast saved me from them that go
down into the pit." ** And in another place,
" Because Thou hast turned and quickened
me, and brought me out of the deep of the
earth again."* In the Syth Psalm He is
most evidently spoken of: "He became as
a man without help, free among the dead." '"
It is not said "a man," but "as a man."
For in that He descended into hell. He was
" as a man :" but He was "free among the
dead," because He could not be detained by

1 Matt, xxvii. 53, 53. s Jcrem. xviii. 4. 0 Ps. Ixxi. in.

-Gal.iv.23. ePs. iii. s. 10 Ps. lxxxviii.4, s.

3 Ileb. ii. 10. ' Ps. xii. S.

* Eph. ii. 6. * Ps. XXX. 3.


A COMMENTARY ON THE APOSTLES' CREED.


555


death. And therefore in the one nature the
power of human weakness, in the other the
power of divine majesty is exhibited. The
Prophet Hosea also speaks most manifestly of
the third day in this wise," After two days He
will heal us ; but on the third day we shall
rise and shall live in His presence." ' This
he says in the person of those who, rising
with Him on the third day, are recalled
from death to life. And they are the same
persons who say, "On the third day we
shall rise again, and shall live in His pres-
ence." But Isaiah says plainly, " Who
brought forth from the earth the great
Sliepherd of the sheep." ^ Then, that the
women were to see His resurrection, while
the Scribes and Pharisees and the people
disbelieved, this also Isaiah foretold in these
words, " Ye women, who come from be-
holding, come : for it is a people that hath
no understanding." '' But as to the women
who are related to have gone to the sepul-
chre after the resurrection, and to have sought
Him without finding, as Mary Magdalene,
who is related to have come to the sepul-
chre before it was light, and not finding
Him, to have said, weeping, to the angels
who were there, " They have taken away
the Lord, and I know not where they have
laid Him"'* — even this is foretold in the
Canticles: "On my bed I sought Him
Whom my soul loveth ; I sought Him in
the night, and found Plim not." ^ Of those
also who found Him, and held Him by the
feet, it is foretold, in the same book, " I
will hold Him Whom my soul loveth, and
will not let Him go."" Take these pas-
sages, a few of many ; for being intent on
brevity we cannot heap together more.

31. He ascended into Heaven, and
sitteth on the right hand of the
Father : From thence He shall come

TO JUDGE the quick AND THE DEAD.

These clauses follow with suitable brevity
at the end of this part of the Creed which
treats of the Son. What is said is plain, but
the question is how and in what sense it is
to be understood. For to " ascend," and to
"sit," and to "come," unless you under-
stand the words in accordance with the
dignity of the divine nature, appear to point
to something of human weakness. For
having consummated what was to be done
on earth, and having recalled souls from the
captivity of hell, He is spoken of as ascend-
ing up to heaven, as the Prop'^et had
foretold, " Ascending up on high He led
captivity captive, and gave giftii unto

iHoseavi.2. 3 jsa. xxvii. 11, LXX. ^Cant. iii. i.
2 Heb. xiii. 20. *Johnxx. 13. 6 Cant, iii.4.


men," ^ those gifts, namely, which Peter,
in the Acts of the AjDostles, spoke of con-
cerning the Holy Ghost, " Being therefore by
the right hand of God exalted, He hath shed
forth this gift which ye do see and hear." '
He gave the gift of the Holy Ghost to men,
because the captives, whom the devil had
before carried into hell through sin, Christ
by His resurrection from death recalled to
heaven. He ascended therefore into heaven,
not where God the Word had not been
before, for He was always in heaven, and
abode in the Father, but where the Word
made flesh had not been seated before.
Lastly, since this entrance within the gates
of heaven seemed new to its ministers and
princes, they say to one another, on seeing
the nature of flesh penetrating into the secret
recesses of heaven, as David full of the Holy
Ghost, declares, " Lift up your gates, ye
princes, and be ye lift up ye everlasting
gates, and the King of glory shall enter in.
Who is the King of glory.? The Lord
strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in bat-
tle." ^ Which words are spoken not with
reference to the power of the divine nature,
but with reference to the novelty of flesh
ascending to the right hand of God. The
same David says elsewhere, " God hath
ascended jubilantly, and the Lord with the
sound of the trumpet." " For conquerors
are wont to return from battle with the
sound of the trumpet. Of Him also it is
said, "Who buildeth up His ascent in
heaven."* And again, "Who hath as-
cended above the cherubims, flying upon
the wings of the winds." ®

33. To sit at the right hand of the Father
is a mystery belonging to the Incarnation.
For it does not befit that incorporeal nature
without the assumption of flesh ; neither is
the excellency of a heavenly seat sought for
the divine nature, but for the human.
Whence it is said of Him, " Thy seat, O
God, is prepared from thence forward;
Thou art from everlasting." ' The seat,
then, whereon the Lord Jesus was to sit,
was prepared from everlasting, " in whose
name every knee should bow, of things
in heaven and things on earth, and things
under the earth ; and every tongue shall
confess to Him that Jesus is Lord in the
glory of God the Father;"** of Whom
also' David thus speaks, "The Lord said
unto my Lord, Sit Thou on my right hand
until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool."'
Referring: to which words the Lord in the
Gospel said to the Pharisees, " If therefore

■ Ps. Ixviii. 18. * Ps. xlviii. 5. ' Ps. xciii. 2.

2 Acts ii. 33. 0 Ps. Ixxxix. 2, s phil. ii. 10, 11.

3 Ps. xxiv. 7, LXX. eps.xviii. 10. ^ps.cx. i.


556


RUFINUS.


David in spirit calleth Ilim Lord, how is
He his Son?" ' By which He shewed that
according to the Spirit He was the Lord,
according to the flesh He was the Son, of
David. Whence also the Lord Himself says
in another place, "■ Verily I say unto you,
henceforth ye shall see the Son of Man bit-
ting at the right hand of tlie power of
God." " And the Apostle Peter says of
Clu'ist, " Who is on the right hand of God,
seated in tlie heavens." ^ And Paul also,
writing to the Ephesians, " According to
the working of the might of His power,
which He wrought in Christ, when He
raised Him from the dead, and seated Him
on His right hand."*

33. That He shall come to judge the
quick and the dead we are taught by many
testimonies of the divine Scriptures. But
before we cite what the Prophets say on this
point, we think it necessary to remind you
that this doctrine of the faith would ha\e us
daily solicitous concerning the coming of the
Judge, that we may so frame our conduct as
having to give account to the Judge who is
at hand. For this is what the Propliet said
of the man who is blessetl, that, " He or-
dereth his words in judgment." " When,
however. He is said to judge the quick and
the dead, tliis does not mean that some will
come to judgment wlio are still living, others
who are already dead ; but that He will
judge both souls and bodies, where, by souls
are meant " the quick," and the bodies " the
dead ; " as also the Lord Himself saith in
the Gospel, " Fear not them who are al)lc
to kill the body, but are not able to hurt the
soul ; but rather fear Him who is able to
destroy both soul and body in Gehenna." "

34. Now let us shew briefly, if you will,
that these things were foretold by the Proph-
ets. You will yourself, since you are so
minded, gather together more from the am-
ple range of the Scriptures. The Prophet
Malachi says, •' Behold tlie Lord Almighty
shall come, and who sliall ai^ide the day ot
His coming, or who shall abide the sight of
Him.'' For He doth come as the fire of a
furnace and as fuller's soap : and He shall
sit, rehning and purifying as it were gold
and silver." ' But that thou mayest know
more certainly Who this Lord is- of Whom
these things are said, hear what the Prophet
Daniel also foretells : " I saw," saith he,
" in the vision of the night, and, l)ehold,
One like the Son of Man coming with the
clouds of heaven, and He came nigh to the

* IMatt. xxii. 4.?-45 ^ Ps. cxii. j.
- iMatt. xxvi. 04 ; Luke xxii. 69. " Matt. x. 28.

3 I Pet. iii. 22. 7 Matt, iii. 1-3.

♦ Jiph. j. 19, au.


Ancient of days, and was brought near
before Him ; and there was given to Him
dominion, and honour, and a kingdom.
And all peoples, tribes, and languages sliall
serve Him. And His dominion is an eter-
nal dominion which shall not pass away,
and His kingdom shall not be destroyed." '
By these words we are tauglit not only of
His coming and judgment, but of His
dominion and kingdoni, that His dominion
is eternal, and His kingdom indestructible,
without end; as it is said in the Creed,'
" and of His kingdom there shall be no
end." So that one who says that Christ's
kingdom shall one day have an end is very
far from the faith. Yet it behoves us to
know tliat the enemy is wont to counterfeit
this salutary advent of Christ with cunning
fraud in order to deceive the faithful, and
in the place of the vSon of Man, Who is
looked for as coming in the majesty of His
Father, to prepare the Son of Perdition with
prodigies and lying signs, that instead of
Christ he may introduce Antichrist into the
world ; of whom the Lord Himself warned
the Jews beforehand in the Gospels, " Be-
cause I am come in My Father's Name, and
ye received INIe not, another will come in his
own name, and him ye will receive." ^ And
again, *' VVhen ye shall see the abomination
of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the
Prophet, standing in the holy place, let him
that readeth understand."* Daniel, there-
fore, in his visions speaks very fully and
amply of the coming of that delusion : but
it is not worth while to cite instances, for
we have enlarged enough already; we
therefore refer any one who may wish to
know more concerning these matters to the
visions themselves. The Apostle also him-
self says, " Let no man deceive you by any
means, for that day shall not come except
there come a falling away first, and that
man of sin be revealed, the Son of Perdi-
tion, who opposeth and exalteth himself
above everything that is called God, or that
is worshipped, so that he sitteth in the tem-
ple of God, shewing himself as though him-
self were God."* And soon afterwards,
"Then shall that wicked one be revealed,
whom the Lord Jesus shall slay with the
breath of His mouth, and shall destroy with
the brightness of His coming: whose com-
ing is after the working of Satan with all
power and signs and lying wonders." * And

1 Dan. vii. 13, 14.

2 "The Creed" is cither the Constantinnpolitan, or, more
probably, that ol |erusaleni, with which Kutiiuis, as a Presbyter
of tliat church, inust have been familiar. There is no reason
to suppose that tlie clause was in the Creed of Aquileia.

3 John V. 4 V B 2Thess. ii. 3, 4.
* Matt. xxiv. 15. « 2 Tliess. ii. S, 9.


A COMMENTARY ON THE APOSTLES' CREED.


557


again, shortly afterwards, " And therefore
the Lord shall send unto them strong dehi-
sion, that they may believe a lie, that all
may be judged who have not believed the
truth." ' For this reason, therefore, is this
"delusion" foretold unto us by the words
of Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles, lest
any one should mistake the coming of Anti-
christ for the coming of Christ. But as the
Lord Himself says, " When they shall say
unto you, lo, here is Christ, or lo, He is
there, believe it not. For many false Christs
and false prophets shall come and shall
seduce many." ' But let us see how He
hath pointed out the judgment of the true
Christ: " As the lightning shineth from the
east unto the west, so shall the coming of the
Son of ]Mau be."' When, therefore, the
true Lord Jesus Christ shall come. He will
sit and set up his throne of judgment. As
also He says in the Gospel, "He shall
sejDarate the sheep from the goats," ■* that is,
the righteous from the unrighteous ; as the
Apostle writes, " We must all stand before
the judgment-seat of Christ, that every man
may i"eceive the awards due to the body,
according as he hath done, whether they be
good or evil." ^ Moreover, the judgment
will be not only for deeds, but for thoughts
also, as the same Apostle saith, " Their
thoughts mutually accusing or else excusing
one another, in the day when God shall
judge the secrets of men." ® But on these
points let this suffice. Next follows in the
order of tlie faith, —

35. And in the Holy Ghost. What
■ has been delivered above somewhat at large
concerning Christ relates to the mystery of
His Incarnation and of His Passion, and, by
thus intervening, as belonging to His Per-
son, has somewhat delayed the mention of
the Holy Spirit. Otherwise, if the divine
nature alone be taken into account, as in the
beginning of the Creed we say " I believe
in God the Father Almighty," and after-
wards, " In Jesus Christ His only Son our
Lord," so in like manner we add, "And in
the Holy Ghost." But all of these particu-
lars which are spoken of above concerning
Christ relate, as we have said, to the dispen-
sation of the flesh (to His Incarnation).
By the mention of the Holy Spirit, the mys-
tery of the Trinity is completed. For as
one Father is mentioned, and there is no
other Father, and one only-begotten Son is
mentioned, and there is no other only-begot-
ten Son, so also there is one Holy Ghost,
and there cannot be another H0I3' Ghost.


1 Ibid. II, 12.

2 Matt. xxiv. 23, 24.


3 Ibid. 27.
* Matt. XXV,


32-


" 2 Cor. V.
* Rom. ii.


10.
IS, 16.


In order, therefore, that the Persons may
be distinguished, the terms expressing rela-
tionship (the properties) are varied, where-
by the first is understood to be the Father,
of Whom are all things. Who Himself also
hath no Father, the second the Son, as born
of the Father, and the tliird the Holy Ghost,
as proceeding from both,' and sanctifying all
things. But that in the Trinity one and
the same Godhead may be set forth, since,
prefixing the preposition " in " we say that
we believe " in God the Father," so also we
say, " in Christ His Son," so also " in the
Holy Ghost." But our meaning will be
made more plain in what follows. For the
Creed proceeds, —

36. " The holy Church ; the for-
giveness OF SIN, THE RESURRECTION OF
THIS FLESH." It is not Said, " hi the holy
Church," nor " In the forgivness of sins,"
nor " /// the resurrection of the flesh." For
if the preposition " in" had been added, it
would have had the same force as in the
preceding articles. But now in those
clauses in which the faith concerning the
Godhead is declared, we say " In God the
Father," and " In Jesus Christ His Son,"
and "/« the Holy Ghost," but in the rest,
where we speak not of the Godhead but of
creatures and mysteries, the preposition
" in " is not added. We do not say " We
believe /;/ the holy Church," but " We be-
lieve the holy Church," not as God, but as
the Church gathered together to God : and
we believe that there is " forgiveness of
sins;" we do not say "We believe in the
forgiveness of sins ; " and we believe that
there will be a " Resurrection of the flesh ; "
we do not say " W^e believe /;^ the resur-
rection of the flesh." By this monosyllabic
preposition, therefore, the Creator is distin-
guished from the creatures, and things divine
are separated from things human.

This then is the Holy Ghost, who in the
Old Testament inspired the Law and the
Prophets, in the New the Gospels and the
Epistles. Whence also the Apostle says,
"All Scripture given by inspiration of God is
profitable for instruction." ^ And therefore it
seems proper in this place to enumerate, as we
have learnt from the tradition of the Fathers,
the books of the New and of the Old Testa-
ment, which, according to the tradition of our
forefathers, are believed to have been inspired
by the Holy Ghost, and have been handed
down to the Churches of Christ.

37. Of the Old Testament, therefore, first
of all tlicre have been handed down five

' Or, according to another reading, " from the mouth of
God." » 3 Tim. iii. i6.


558


RUFINUS.


books o£ Moses, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus,
Numbers, Deuteronomy ; Then Jesus Nave,
(Joshua tlie son of Nun), The Book of
judges together with Ruth ; then four
"books of Kings (Reigns), which the
Hebrews reckon two; the Book of Oinis-
sions, which is entitled the Book of Days
(Chronicles), and two books of Ezra (Ezra
and Nehemiah), which the Hebrews reckon
one, and Esther; of the Prophets, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel ; moreover
of the twelve (minor) Prophets, one book ;
Job also and the Psalms of David, each one
book. Solomon gave three books to the
Churches, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles.
These comprise the books of the Old Testa-
ment.

Of the New there are four Gospels, Mat-
thew, Mark, Luke, John ; the Acts of the
Apostles, written by Luke ; fourteen Epistles
of the Apostle Paul, two of the Apostle
Peter, one of James, brother of the Lord
and Apostle, one of Jude, three of John, the
Revelation of John. These are the books
which the Fathers have comprised within
the Canon, and from which they would
have us deduce the proofs of our faith.

38. But it should be known that there are
also other books which our fathers call not
"Canonical" but "Ecclesiastical:" that is
to sav, Wisdom, called the Wisdom of Solo-
mon, and another Wisdom, called the
Wisdom of the Son of Syrach, which
last-mentioned the Latins called by the gen-
eral title Ecclesiasticus, designating not the
author of the book, but the character of the
writing. To the same class belong the
Book of Tobit, and the Book of Judith, and
the Books of the Maccabees. In the New
Testament the little book which is called the
Book of the Pastor of Hermas, [and that]
which is called The Two Ways,' or the
Judgment of Peter ; all of which they would
have read in the Churches, but not appealed
to for the confirmation of doctrine. The
other writings they have named " Apocry-
pha." These they would not have read in
the Churches.

These are the traditions which tlic Fathers
have handed down to us, which, as I said,
I have thouglit it opportune to set forth in
this place, for the instruction of those who
are being tausflit the first elements of the
Church and of the Faith, that they may
know from what fountains of the Word of
God their draughts must be taken.

39. We come next in the order of belief


> It is believed that this book forms p:irt of " The 'roachinj^
of the Twelve Apostles " lately discovered and luiblishcd at
Constantinople.


to the Holy Church. We have mentioned
above why the Creed does not say here, as
in the preceding article, " Li the Holy
Church." They, therefore, w'ho were
taught above to believe in one God, under
the mystery of the Trinity, must believe
this also, tliat there is one holy Church in
which there is one faith and one Ixiptism, in
which is believed one God the Father, and
one Lord Jesus Christ, His Son, and one
Holy Ghost. This is that holy Church
which is without spot or wrinkle. For many
others have gathered together Churches,
as Alarcion, and Valentinus, and Ebion,
and AIanicha3us, and Arius, and all the
other heretics. But those Churches are not
without spot or wrinkle of unfaithfulness.
And therefore the Prophet saitl of them, " I
hate the Church of the malignants, and I
will not sit with the ungodly." ' But of this
Church which keeps the faith of Christ
entire, hear what the Holy Spirit says in the
Canticles, " My dove is one ; the perfect one
of her mother is one." '^ He then who re-
ceives this faith in the Church let him not
turn aside in the Council of vanity, and let
him not enter in with those who practise
iniquity.

For Marcion's assemblv is a Council of
vanity in that he denies that the Father
of Christ is God, the Creator, who by His
Son made the world. Ebion's is a Council
of vanity since he teaches that, while we
believe in Christ, we are withal to observe
the circumcision of the flesh, the keeping
of the Sabbath, the accustomed sacrifices,
and all the other ordinances according to
the letter of the Law. Manichajus' is a
Council of vanity in regard of his teach-
ing; first in that he calls himself the Para-
clete, then that he says that the world
was made by an evil God, denies God the
Creator, rejects the Old Testament, asserts
two natures, one good the other evil,
mutually opposing one another, aflfirms that
men's souls are co-eternal with God, that,
according to the Pythagoreans, they return
through divers circles of nativity into cattle
and animals and beasts, denies the resurrec-
tion of our flesh, maintains that the passion
and nativity of the Lord were not in the
verity of flesh, but only in appearance.
It was the Council of vanity when Paul
of Samosata and his successor Photinus
afterwards taught, that Christ was not born
of the Father before the world, but had His
beginning from Mary, and believed not that
being God He was born man, but that of


> Ps. xxvi. 5.


» Cant. vi. Q.


A COMMENTARY ON THE APOSTLES' CREED.


559


man He was made God. It was the
Council of vanity when Arius and Eiinomius
taught as their determinate opinion that the
Son of God was not born of tlie very sub-
stance of the Father, Init was created out of
nothing, and that the Son of God had a
beginning, and is inferior to the Father ;
moreover they affirm that the Holy Ghost
is not only inferior to the Son, but is also a
ministering Spirit.' Theirs also is a Council
of vanity who confess indeed that the Son is
of the substance of the Father, but distin-
guish and separate the Holy Spirit, while
yet the Saviour shews in the Gospel that the
power and Godhead of tlie Trinity are one
and the same, saying, "Baptize all nations
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost," ' and it is plainly
impious for man to put asunder what God
hath joined together. That also is the
Council of vanity which a pertinacious and
wicked contention formerly gathered to-
gether, affirming that Christ assumed human
flesh indeed, but not a rational soul withal,
since Christ conferred one and the same
salvation on the flesh, and the animal soul,
and the reason and mind of man. That also
is the Council of vanity which Donatus
drew together throughout Africa, by charg-
ing the Church with traditorship (deliver-
ing up the sacred books), and with which
Novatus disturbed men's minds by denying
the grant of repentance to the lapsed, anol
condemning second marriages, though con-
tracted possibly of necessity. All of these
then avoid as congregations of maKgnants.
Those also, if such there be, who are said to
assert that the Son of God does not see or
know the Father, as Himself is known and
seen by the Father; or that the kingdom of
Christ will have an end ; or that the flesh
will not be raised in the complete restoration
of its substance ; these also who deny that
there will be a just judgment of God in re-
spect of all, and affirm that the devil will be
absolved from the punishment of damnation
due to him. To all these, I say, let the be-
liever turn a deaf ear. But hold fast by the
holy Church, which confesses God the
Father Almighty, and His only Son, Jesus
Christ our Lord, and the Holy Ghost, of
one concordant and harmonious substance,
believes that the Son of God was born of the
Virgin, suffered for man's salvation, rose
again from the dead in the same flesh in

1 Mittendarium, "-Miltendarii, Palatini qui in sacro Palatio
militahant, el in provincias extraordinarie mittebantur, a
Principe, lit eorum niandata perferrenl ," Officers attached to
the Palace, who were sent into the provinces by the Emperor
on extraordinary occasions, as bearers of his orders. — Glos-
sarium Maniiale ex Magnis Glossariis Du Fresne, etc.
i Matt, xxviii. ig.


which he was born ; and, lastly, hopes that
He will come the Judge of all, through
Whom also both the forgiveness of sins

AND THE RESURRECTION OF THE FLESH

are preached.

40. As to the Forgiveness of Sins, it
ought to be enough simple to believe. For
who would ask the cause or the reason when
a Prince grants indulgence.'' When the lib-
erality of an earthlj' sovereign is no fit sub-
ject for discussion, shall man's temerity
discuss God's largess.'' For the Pagans are
wont to ridicule us, saying that we deceive
ourselves, fancying that crimes committed
in deed can be purged by words. And
they say, " Can he who has committed
murder be no murderer, and he who has
committed adultery be accounted no adul-
terer.'' How then shall one guilty of crimes
of this sort all of a sudden be made holy.'"'
But to this, as I said, we answer better by
fcxith than by reason. For he is King of all
who hath promised it : He is Lord of heaven
and earth who assures us of it. Would
you have me refuse to believe that He who
made me a man of the dust of the earth can
of a guilty person make me innocent? And
that He who when I was blind made me
see, or when I was deaf made me hear, or
lame walk, can recover for me my lost in-
nocence.'' And to come to the witness of
Nature — to kill a man is not always crimi-
nal, but to kill of malice, not by law, is
criminal. It is not the deed then, in such
matters, that condemns me, because some-
times it is rightly done, but the evil intention
of the mind. If then my mind which had
been rendered criminal, and in which the
sin originated, is corrected, why should I
seem to you incapable of being made inno-
cent, who before was criminal? For if it is
plain, as I have shewn, that crime consists not
in \.\vi deed but in the will, as an evil will,
promptetl by an evil demon, has made me
obnoxious to sin and death, so the will
prompted by the good God, being changed
to good, hath restored me to innocence and
life. It is the same also in all other crimes.
In this way there is found to be no opposi-
tion between our faith and natural reason,
while forgiveness of sins is imputed not to
deeds, which when once done cannot be
changed, but to the mind, which it is certain
can be converted from bad to good.

41. This last article, which affirms the
Resurrection of the Flesh, concludes
the sum of all perfection with succinct
brevity. Although on this point also the
faith of the Church is impugned, not only
by Gentiles, but by heretics likewise. For


56o


RUFINUS.


Valentinus altogether denies the resurrection
of the flesh, so do the Manicheans, as we
shewed above. But they refuse to listen to
the Prophet Isaiali when he says, "The dead
shall rise, and they who are in the graves
shall be raised," ' or to most wise Daniel,
when he declares, "Then they who are in
the dust of the earth shall arise, these to
eternal life, but those to shame and confu-
sion." * Yet even in the Gospels, which
they appear to receive, they ought to learn
from our Lord and Saviour, Who says,
when instructing the Sadducees, " As touch-
ing the I'csurrection of the dead : have ye not
read how lie saith to Moses in the Bush, I am
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the
God of Jacob? Now God is not the God of
the dead but of the living." ' Where in what
goes before He declares what and how great
is the glory of the resurrection, saying,
*' But in the resurrection of the dead they
will neither marry or be given in marriage,
but will be as the angels of God." " But the
virtue of the resuncction confers on men an
angelical state, so that they who have risen
from the earth shall not live again on the
earth with the brute animals but with angels
in heaven — yet those only whose purer life
has fitted them for this — those, namely, who
even now preserving the flesh of their soul
in chastity, have brought it into subjection
to the Holy Spirit, and thus with every stain
of sins done away and changed into spiritual
glory by the virtue of santification, have
been counted worthy to have it admitted into
the society of angels.

42. But unbelievers cry, " How can the
flesh, which has been putrifiedand dissolved,
or changed into dust, sometimes also swal-
lowed up by the sea, and dispersed by the
waves, be gathered up again, and again
made one, and a man's body formed anew
out of it.'' " To whom our first answer is in
Paul's words: " Thou fool, that which thou
sowest is not quickened, except it die. And
that which thou sowest, tliou sowest not the
body, which shall be, but bare grain of
wheat or of some other seed : but God giveth
it a body as seemeth good to Ilim." ''' Did
you not believe that that which you see taking
place every year in the seeds which you cast
into the ground will come to pass in your
flesh which by the law of God is sown in
the earth.'' Why, pray, have you so mean
an opinion of God's power that you do not
believe it possible for the scattered dust of
which each man's flesh was composed to be
re-collected and restored to its own original


' Is. xxvi. 19. * Mark xii. 26, 27.
* Dan. xii. 3. * Matt. xxii. 30,


0 I Cor. XV. 36-3S.


fabric.'' Do you refuse to admit the fact
when you see mortal ingenuity search for
veins of metal deeply buried in the ground,
and the experienced eye discover gold where
the inexperienced thinks there is nothing but
earth .'' Why should we refuse to grant
these things to Him who made man, when
he whom He made can do so much ? And
when mortal ingenuity discovers that gold
has its own proper vein, and silver another,
and that a far diflerent vein of copper, and
diverse and distinct veins of iron and lead
lie concealed beneath what has the appeai-
ance of earth, shall divine power be thought
unable to discover and distinguish the com-
ponent particles belonging to each man's
flesh, even though they seem to be dis-
persed ?

43. But let us endeavour to assist those
souls which fail in their faith through reasons
drawn from nature. If one should mix dif-
ferent sorts of seeds together and sow them
indiscriminately in the earth, will not the
grain of each several kind, wherever it may
have been thrown, shoot forth at the proper
time in accordance with its own specific
nature so as to reproduce the condition of its
own form and its own body.

Thus then the substance of each individual
flesh, though its particles have been vari-
ously and diversely scattered, has within it
an immortal principle, since it is the flesh
of an immortal soul, and at the time which
God in His good pleasure shall appoint,
there will be collected from the earth and
drawn to it, its own component particles,
which will be restored to that form which
death had formerly dissolved. And thus it
will come to pass that to each soul will be
restored, not a confused or foreign body but
its own which it had when alive, in order
that the flesh together with its own soul may
for the conflicts of the present life either be
crowned if undefiled, or punished if defiled.
And accordingly our Church,' in teaching
the faith, instead of "the Resurrection of
the flesh," as the Creed is delivered in other
Churches, guardedly adds the pronoun
"this" — "the resurrection of f/i/s flesh,"
" Of this," that is, no doubt, of the person
who rehearses the Creed, making the sign of
the cross upon his forehead, while he says
the word, that each believer may know that
his flesh, if he have kept it clean from sin,
will be a vessel of honour, useful to the
Lord, prepared for every good work ; but,
if defiled by sins, that it will be a vessel of
wrath destined to destruction.

' The Cluirch of Aquileia.


A COMMENTARY ON THE APOSTLES' CREED.


561


But now, concerning the glory of the
resurrection and the greatness of the promise
by which God has bound Himself, if any
one desires to be more fully informed, he
will find notices in ahnost all the divine
volumes, out of which, simply by way of
bringing them to remembrance, we will
mention a few passages in the present
place, and then make an end of the work
which you have enjoined. The Apostle
Paul makes use of such arguments as the
following in asserting that mortal flesh will
rise again. " But if there be no resurrection
of the dead, then is not Christ risen. And
if Christ be not risen, our preaching is vain
and your faith is vain."* And presently
afterwards, "But now is Christ risen from
the dead, the first-fruits of them that sleep.
For since by man came death, by man came
also the resurrection of the dead. For as in
Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all
be made alive. But every man in his own
order. Christ the first-fruits, afterwards they
that are Christ's at His coming, then cometh
the end." ^ And afterways he adds, "Be-
hold I shew you a mystery : We shall all
rise indeed, but we shall not^ all be
changed;" or as other copies read, "We
shall all sleep, indeed, but we shall not all
be changed ; in a moment, in the twinkling
of an eye, at the last trump ; for the trumpet
shall sound, and the dead shall rise incor-
ruptible, and we shall be changed." * How-
ever, whichever be the true text, writing to
the Thessalonians, he says, " I would not
have you ignorant, brethren, concerning
those who ai*e asleep, that ye sorrow not,
as the others who have no hope. For if we
believe that Jesus died and rose again, so
those also who sleep through Jesus shall God
bring with Him. For this we say unto you
by the word of the Lord, that we who are
alive and remain at the coming of the Lord
shall not prevent them that sleep. For the
Lord Himself shall descend from heaven
with a shout, with the voice of the arch-
angel, with the trump of God, and the
dead who are in Christ shall rise first : then
we who are alive and remain shall be caught
up together with them in the clouds to meet
Christ in the air, and so shall we ever be
with the Lord."'

44. But that you may not suppose this to be
a novel doctrine peculiar to Paul, I will ad-
duce also what the Prophet Ezekiel foretold
by the Holy Ghost. " Behold," saith he,
" I will open your graves and bring you forth


1 I Cor. XV. 13, 14. * Ibid. 51,53.

* Ibid. 30-24. » I Thess. iv. 13-17.

» A reading current in Rufinus' time.

VOL. III.


out of your graves." ' Let me recall, further,
how Job, who abounds in mystical lan-
guage, plainly predicts the resurrection of the
dead. "There is hope for a tree ; for if it
be cut down it will sprout again, and its
shoot shall never fail. But if its root have
waxed old in the earth, and the stock thereof
be dead in tlie dust, yet through the scent of
water it will flourish again, and put forth
shoots as a young plant. But man, if he be
dead, is he departed and gone ? And mortal
man, if he have fallen, shall he be no
more.''"^ Dost thou not see, that in these
words he is appealing to men's sense of
shame, as it were, and saying, "Is mankind
so foolish, that when they see the stock of a
tree which has been cut down shooting forth
again from the ground, and dead wood again
restored to life, they imagine their own case
to have no likeness to that of wood or
trees ? " But convince you that Job's words
are to be read as a question, when he says,
" But mortal man when he hath fallen shall
he not rise again .'' " take this proof from what
follows; for he adds immediately, "But it
a man be dead, shall he live.'* " ^ And pre-
sently afterwards he says, " I will wait till
I be made again ; " * and afterwards he re-
peats the same: "Who shall raise again
upon the earth my skin, which is now
draining this cup of suffering.'"'*

45. Thus much in proof of the profession
which we make in the Creed when we say
" The resurrection of this flesh." As to the
addition " this," see how consonant it is
with all that we have cited from the divine
books. What else does Job signify in the
place which we explained above, " He will
raise again my skin, which is now draining
this cup of suffering, "that is, which is under-
going these torments? Does he not plainl}-
say that there will be a resurrection of this
flesh, this, I mean, which is now undergo-
ing the extremity of trials and tribulations.?
Moreover, when the Apostle says, "This
corruptible must put on incorruption, and
this mortal must put on immortality," ^ are
not his words those of one who in a manner
touches his body and places his finger upon
it.-* This body then, which is now corruptible,
will by the grace of the resurrection be in-
corruptible, and this which is now mortal
will be clothed with virtues of immortality,
that, as " Christ rising from the dead dietli
no more, death hath no more dominion over
Him," ^ so those who shall rise in Christ
shall never again feel corruption or death.


1 Ezek. xxxvii.
'Job xiv. 7-10.
'Job xiv. 14.


< Ibid.

"Job xxvi. 26, 27.


^ I Cor. XV. S3.
' Rom. vi. Q.


o o


562


RUFINUS.


not because the nature of flesh will have
been cast off, but because its condition and
quality will have been changed. There will
be a body, therefore, which will rise from
the dead incorruptible and immortal, not
only of the righteous, but also of sinners ; of
the righteous that they may be able ever to
abide with Christ, of sinners that they may
undergo without end the punishment due to
them.

46. That the righteous shall ever abide
with Christ our Lord we have proved above,
where we have shewn that the Apostle says,
" Then we which are alive and remain shall
be caught up together with them in the
clouds to meet Christ in the air, and so shall
we ever be with the Lord." ' And do not
marvel that the flesh of the saints is to be
changed into such a glorious condition at the
resurrection as to be caught up to meet God,
suspended in the clouds and borne in the air,
since the same Apostle, setting forth the
great things which God bestows on them
that love Him, says, " Who shall change
our vile body that it may be made like unto
His glorious body."^ It is nowise absurd
then, if the bodies of the saints are said to
be raised up into the air, seeing that they
are said to be renewed after the image of
Christ's body, which is seated at God's right
hand. But this also the holy Apostle adds,
speaking either of himself or of others of his
own place or merit, " He will raise us up
together with Christ and make us sit to-
gether in the heavenly places." ^ Whence,
since God's saints have these promises and
an infinite number like them respecting the
resurrection of the righteous, it will now not
be difficult to believe those also which the
Prophets have foretold, namel}'^, that " the
righteous shall shine as the sun and as the
brightness of the firmament in the kingdom
of God."* For who will think it diflicult
that they should have the brightness of the
sun, and be adorned with the splendour of
the stars and of this firmament, for whom the
life and conversation of God's angels are
being prepared in heaven, or who are repre-
sented as being hereafter to be conformed to
the glory of Christ's body.? In reference to
which glory, promised by the Saviour's
mouth, the holy Apostle says, "It is sown
as an animal body ; it will rise a spiritual
body." * For if it is true, as it certainly is
true, that God will vouchsafe to associate
every one of the righteous and of the saints
in companionship with the angels, it is cer-


1 1 Thess. iv.
» Phil. iii. 21.
^ Eph. ii. 6.


17-


* Matt. xiii. 43.
■• I Cor. XV. 44.


tain that He will change their bodies also
into the glory of a spiritual body.

47. Nor let this promise seem to you con-
trary to the natural structure of the body.
For if we believe, according to what is
written, that God took clay of the earth and
made man, and that the origin of our body
was this, that, by the will of God, earth was
changed into flesh, why does it seem absurd
to you or contrary to reason if, on the same
principles on which earth is said to be ad-
vanced to an animal body, an animal body
in turn should be believed to be advanced to
a spiritual body.'' These things and many
like these you will find in the divine
Scriptures concerning the resurrection of the
righteous. There will be given to sinners
also, as we said above, a condition of incor-
ruption and immortality at the resurrection,
that, as God assigns this state to the right-
eous for perpetuity of glory, so He may as-
sign the same to sinners for prolongation of
confusion and punishment. For this also
the Prophet's words, which we referred to
above, state clearly: "Many shall rise from
the dust of the earth, some to life eternal, and
others to confusion and eternal shame." '

48. If then we have understood in what
august significance God Almighty is called
Father, and in what mysterious sense our
Lord Jesus Christ is held to be His only
Son, and with what entire perfection of
meaning His Spirit is called the Holy Spirit,
and how the Holy Trinity is one in sub-
stance but has distinctions of relation and
of Persons, what also is the birth from a
Virgin, what the nativity of the Word in
the flesh, what the mystery of the Cross,
what the purpose of our Lord's descent into
hell, what the glory of the Resurrection, and
the delivery of souls from their captivity in
the infernal regions, what also His ascension
into heaven, and the expected advent of the
Judge ; moreover how the holy Church ought
to be acknowledged as opposed to the con-
gregations of vanity, what is the number of the
sacred Volume, what conventicles of here-
tics ought to be avoided, and how in the
forgiveness of sins there is no opposition
whatever between the divine freedom and
natural reason, and how not only the sacred
oracles but also the example of Lord and
Saviour Himself, and the conclusions of nat-
ural reason, confirm the truth of the resur-
rection of our flesh; — if, I say, we have
intelligently followed these in succession
in accordance with the rule of the tradition
hereinbefore expounded, we pray that the

> Dan. xii, 2.


PREFACE TO THE RECOGNITIONS OF CLEMENT.


563


Lord will grant to us, and to all who hear
these words, that having kept the faith
which we have received, having finished our


course, we may await the


crown


of right-


eousness laid up for us, and be found among


those who shall rise


agam


to eternal life,


and be delivered from confusion and eternal
shame, through Clirist our Lord, through
Whom to God the Father Almighty with
the Holy Ghost is glory and dominion for
ever and ever. Amen.


THE PREFACE TO THE BOOKS OF RECOGNITIONS OF ST. CLEMENT

Addressed to Bishop Gaudetithis.
(For the occasion and date' of this work see the Prolegomena, p. 412.)


You possess so much vigour of character,
my dear Gaudentius, you who are so signal
an ornament of our teachers, or as I
would rather say, you have the grace of
the Spirit in so large a measure, that even
what you say in the way of daily conversa-
tion, or of addresses that you preach in
church,^ ought to be consigned in writing
and handed down for the instruction of pos-
terity. But I am far less quick, my native
talent being but slender, and old age is
already making me sluggish and slow ; and
this work is nothing but the payment of a
debt due to the command laid upon me by
the virgin Sylvia whose memory I revere.
She it was who demanded of me, as you
have now done by the right of heirship, to
translate Clement into our language. The
debt is paid at last, though after many de-
lays. It is a part of the booty, and in my
opinion no small one, which I have carried
oft' from the libraries of the Greeks, and
which I am collecting for the use and ad-
vantage of our countrymen. I have no food
of my own to bring them, and I must import
their nourishment from abroad. However,
foreign goods are apt to appear sweeter ;
and sometimes they are really more useful.
Moreover, almost anything which brings
healing to our bodies or is a defence against
disease or an antidote to poison comes from
abroad. Judsea sends us the distillation of the
balsam tree, Crete the leaf of the dictamnus,
Arabia her aromatic flowers, and Lidia the
crop of the spikenard. These goods come
to us, no doubt, in a less perfect condition
than those which our own fields produce, but
they preserve intact their pleasant scent and
their healing power. Therefore, my friend

1 The date is after the Peroration to the Epistle to the
Romans (see p. 56S) ; but it seemed better not to divide the
Prefaces, etc., to the translations of Origen's Commentaries.

* Si quid in Ecclesia declamatur,

O


who are as my own soul, I present to you
Clement returning to Rome. I present him
dressed in a Latin garb. Do not think it
strange if the aspect which his eloquence
presents is less bright than it might be. It
makes no difference if only the meaning is
felt to be the same.

These are foreign wares, then, which I am
importing at a great expense of labour ; and
I have still to see whether our countrymen


will regard with


gratitude one who is brmg-


ingthem the spoils (spolia) of his warfare, and
who is unlocking with the key of our language
a treasure house hitherto concealed, though he
does it with the utmost good will. I only
trust that God may look favourably on your
good wishes, so that my present may not be
met in any quarter by evil eyes and envious
looks ; and that we may not witness that ex-
tremely monstrous phenomenon, expressions
of illwill on the part of those on whom the
gift is conferred, while those from whom it is
taken part with it ungrudgingly. It is but
right that you, who have read this work in
the Greek should point out to others the de-
sign of my translation — unless indeed, you
feel that in some respects I have not ob-
served the right method of rendering the
original. You are, I believe well aware
that there are two Greek editions of this
work of Clement, his Recognitions ; that
there are two sets of books, which in some
few cases differ from each other though the
bulk of the narrative is the same. For In-
stance, the last part of the woi-k, that which
gives an account of the transformation of
Simon Magus, exists in one of these, while
in the other it is entirely absent. On the
other hand there are some things, such as the
dissertation on the unbegotten and the be-
gotten God, and a few others, which, though

I they are found in both editions, are, to say

o 2


564


RUFINUS.


the least of them, beyond my understanding ;
and these I have preferred to leave others
to deal with rather than to present them in
an inadequate manner. As to the rest, I have
taken pains not to swerve, even in the slight-
est decree from either the sense or the die-
tion ; and this, though it makes the expres-
sion less ornate, renders it more faithful.

There is a letter in which this same Clem-
ent writing to James the Lord's brother,
gives an account of the death of Peter, and
says that he has left him as his successor, as
ruler and teacher of the church ; and further
incorporates a whole scheme of ecclesiasti-
cal government. This I have not prefixed to
the work, both because it is later in point of
time, and because it has been previously
translated and published by me. Neverthe-
less, there is a point which would perhaps
seem inconsistent with facts were I to place
the translation of it in this work, but which I
do not consider to involve an impossibility.
It is this. Linus and Cletus were Bishops of


the city of Rome before Clement. How
then, some men ask, can Clement in his
letter to James say that Peter passed over to
him his position as a church-teacher.' The
explanation of this point, as I understand,
is as follows. Linus and Cletus were, no
doubt. Bishops in the city of Rome before
Clement, but this was in Peter's life-time ;
that is, they took charge of the episcopal
work, while he discharged the duties of the
apostolate. He is known to have done the
same thing at Ca3sarea ; for there, though he
was himself on the spot, yet he had at his side
Zacchieus whom he had ordained as Bishop.
Thus we may see how both things may be
true ; namely how they stand as predecessors
of Clement in the list of Bishops, and yet how
Clement after the death of Peter became his
successor in the teacher's chair. But it is
time that we should pay attention to the be-
ginning of Clement's own narrative, which
he addresses to James the Lord's brother.

I CatAedram docendi.


PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION OF THE SAYINGS OF XYSTUS.

Composed at Aquileia about the year JO'J A.D.
(For the questions relating to Xystus see the Prolegomena, p. 412.)


RUFINUS TO APRONIANUS, HIS OWN FRIEND.


I know that, just as the sheep come gladly
when their own shepherd calls them, so in
matters of religion men atteiid most gladly
to the admonitions of a teacher who speaks
their own language : and therefore, my very
dear Apronianus, when that pious lady who
is my daughter but now your sister in Christ,
had laid her commands on me to compose
for her a treatise of such a nature that its
understanding should not require any great
effort, I translated into Latin in a very
open and plain style the work of Xystus,
who is said to be the same man who at
Rome is called Sixtus, and who gained
the glory of being both bishop and martyr.
I think that, when she reads this, she will
find it expressed with such brevity that a vast
meaning is unfolded in each several line,
with such power that a sentence only a line
long would suflice for a whole life's training,
and yet with such simplicity that one who
looked over tlie shoulder of a girl as she read
it might c^uestion whether I Avcre not quite


weak in intellect. And the whole work is
so concise that it would be possible for her
never to let go of it. The entire book would
hardly be bigger than the finger ring of one
of oiu" ancestors. And indeed it seems but
right that one who has learnt throusrh the
word of God to count as dross the ornaments
of the world should now receive at my hands
by way of ornament a necklace of the word
and of wisdom. For the jDresent let this little
book sei^ve for a ring and be kept constantly
in the hands: but it will not be long before
it will penetrate into the treasure house and
be wholly laid up in the heart, and bring
fcMth from its innermost chamber the germs of
instruction and of a participation in all good
works. I have added further a few choice
sayings addressed by a pious father to his
son, but all so succinct that the whole of this
little work may rightly be called in Greek
the Enchiridion^ or in Latin the Annulus.*


1 A thing- held in the hand.


» A ring.


PREFACE TO BOOKS OF ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY.


565


PREFACE TO THE TWO BOOKS OF ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, ADDED
BY RUFINUS TO HIS TRANSLATION OF EUSEBIUS.

Addressed to Chromatms, Bishop of Aquileia^ A.D. 401.
(For the occasion of writing, and the date, see Prolegomena, p. 412.)


It is the custom, they say, of skilful phy-
sicians, when they perceive that some epi-
demic disease is near at hand in one of our
cities, to provide some kind of medicine,
whether solid or liquid, which men may use
as a preventative to defend themselves from
the destruction which is hanging over them.
You have imitated this method of the doctors,
my venerable Father, Chromatins, at the
moment when the gates of Italy were broken
through by Alaric the commander of the
Goths, and thus a disease and plague poured
in upon us, which made havoc of the fields
and cattle and men throughout the land.
You then sought a remedy against the cruelty
and destruction, so that the minds of men
which were languishing might be drawn
away from the contagion of the prevailing
malady, and might preserve their balance
through an interest in better pursuits. This
you have done by enjoining on me the task
of translating into Latin the ecclesiastical
history which was written in the Greek lan-
guage by that most learned man, Eusebius of
Ctesarea. You thought that the mind of
those who heard it read to them might be so
held fast by it that, in its eager desire for the
knowledge of past events, it might to some
extent become oblivious of their actual suf-
ferings. I tried to excuse myself from the
task, as being, through my weakness unequal
to it, and as having in the lapse of years lost
the use of the Latin tongue. But I reflected
that your commands were not to be divari-
cated from your position in the Apostolic
order. For, at the time when the multitude
in the desert were hungering, and the Lord
said to his Apostles, " Give ye them to eat,"
Philip who was one of them instead of
bringing out the loaves which were hid in
the wallet of the Apostles, said that there
was a little lad there who had five loaves and
two fishes. He knew that the exhibition of
the divine virtue would be none the less
brilliant if the ministry of some of the little
ones were used in its fulfilment. He mod-
estly excused his action by adding, " What
are these among so many?" So that the
divine power might be more conspicuous
through tne difficult and desperate circum-
stances in which it acted. I felt that, since


you were a scion of the Apostolic order, you
had possibly acted in i-emembrance of Philip's
example, and that, when you saw that the
time was come for the multitudes to be fed,
you had engaged the sei'vices of a little lad
who might be able to contribute, twice told,
the five loaves^ which he had received, but
who further, to fulfil the Gospel type, might
add two small fishes * which he had captured
by his own efforts. I have therefoi-e made the
attempt to execute what you had ordered, hav-
ing the assurance that the deficiency of my
inexperience would be excused on account of
the authority of him who gave the command.
I must point out the course I have taken
in reference to the tenth book of this work.
As it stands in the Greek, it has little to do
with the process of events. All but a small
part of it is taken up with discussions tend-
ing to the praise of particular Bishops, and
adds nothing to our knowledge of facts. I
have therefore left out all this superfluous
matter; and, whatever in it belonged to gen-
uine history I have added to the ninth book,
with which I have made his history close.
The tenth and eleventh books I have myself
compiled, partly from the traditions of the
former generation, partly from facts within
my own memory ; and these I have added to
the previous books, like the two fishes to the
loaves. If you bestow your approval and
benediction upon them, I shall have a sure
confidence that they will suffice for the mul-
titude. The work as now completed con-
tains the events from the Ascension of the
Saviour to the present time ; my own two
books those from the days of Constantine
when the persecution came to an end on to
the death of the Emperor Theodosius.


The following note occurs at the end of the ninth
book of Rufinus' Latin Version of Eusebius.

Thus far Eusebius has given us the record
of the history. As to the subsequent events,
as they have followed on up to the present
time, as I have found them recorded in the
writings of the last generation, or so far as
they are covered by my own knowledge, I
will add them, obeying, as best I may, in
this point also the commands of our father
in God.^*


1 That is, the ten books of Eusebius' History. s That is, the two books -^^^^A hy Rufinus. » Chromatius,


566


RUFINUS.


RUFINUS' PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION OF ORIGEN'S
COMMENTARY ON PSALMS 36, 37. AND 38.

Addressed to Apronianus^ either at Rome or at Aguileia, between A.Z). jgS and

A.D. 407.


The whole exposition of the thirty-sixth,
thirty-seventh and thirty-eighth Psahns is
ethical in its character, being designed to
enforce more correct methods of life ; and
teaches at one time tlie way of conversion
and repentance, at another that of purifica-
tion and of progress. I have therefore
thought it well to translate it into Latin for
you, my dearest son Apronianus, having
first arranged it in nine of the short sermons
which are called in Greek Homilies, and in-
corporated it into one whole ; and thus this
discourse which in all its parts aims at the
correction and the advancement of the moral
X\'iQ.^ is collected into a single volume. My
translation will at all events be of use so far
as to put the reader without effort in posses-


sion of the meaning of the author, which is
here fully laid open, and to bring home to
him the simplicity of life which he enjoins
with clearness of thought and in simple
words ; and thus the voice of prophecy may
reach not men alone but also god-fearinsf
women, and lend subtlety to the minds of the
simple. Yet I fear that that pious lady, who
is my daughter but your sister in Christ, may
think that she owes me no thanks for my
work if it brings her nothing but puzzling
thoughts and thorny questions : for the
human body could hardly hold together if
divine providence had formed it of bones and
muscles alone without blending with them
the ease and grace of the softer tissues.


1 A Roman noble converted by Rufinus and Melania, with the latter of whom he was connected.


RUFINUS' PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION OF ORIGEN'S COM-
MENTARY ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS.

Addressed to HeracUus at Aquileia about A.D. 407.


My intention was to press the shore of the
quiet land in the little bark in which I was
sailing, and to draw out a few little fishes
from the pools of Greece : but you have
compelled me, brother Heraclius, to give
my sails to the wind and go forth into the
deep sea ; you persuade me to leave the work
which lay before me in the translation of the
homilies written by the Man of Adamant '
in his old age, and to open to you the fifteen
volumes in which he discussed the Epistle
of Paul to the Romans. In these books,
while he aims at representing the Apostle's
thoughts, he is carried away into a sea of


* Or man of steel : (it might also be translated, Tho in-
domitable); a name j^iven to Origcn, :in account of the fjreat-
ness of liis labours. It is said by Wcstcott (Diet, of Xtn. Biog.
"Ori2:en ") to have been adopted by Origcn himself, and to form
part of liis real name.


such depth that one who follows him into it
may well be afraid of being drowned in the
greatness of his thoughts as in the vastness
of the waves. Then also you do not con-
sider this, that my breath is but scanty for
filling a grand trumpet of eloquence like his.
And beyond all these difficulties is this, that
the books themselves have been interpolated.
In almost all the libraries (I grant that no
one can tell how it happened) some of the
volumes are absent from the body of the
work ; and to supply these, and to restore
the continuity of the work in the Latin
version is beyond my talent, but would be,
as you must know when you make your
demand, a special gift of God. You add,
however, so that nothing may be w^nnting
to the labour I am undertaking, that I had


PERORATION OF RUFINUS.


567


better abbreviate this whole body of fifteen
vokimes, which in the Greek reaches to the
length of forty thousand lines or more, and
bring it within moderate compass. Your in-
junctions are hard indeed, and might be
thought to be imposed by one who did not
care to consider what the burden of such a


work must be. I will, however, attempt it,
hoping that through your prayers, and the
favour of the Lord, what seems impossible to
man may become possible. But we will now,
if you please, listen to the Preface whicli
Origen himself prefixes to the work on which
he was entering.


THE PERORATION OF RUFINUS APPENDED TO HIS TRANSLATION OF
ORIGEN'S COMMENTARY ON THE EPISTLE TO THE ROMANS.

Addressed to Hei'acUus at Aqtiilcia^ probably about 40Y.


A satisfactory conclusion has now, I trust,
been reached of the Commentary on the
Epistle to the Romans, the writing of which
has been a work of very great labour and time.
I confess, my most loving brother Pleraclius,
that in the attempt to respond to your request
I have almost forgotten the precept; "Do
not lift a burden above your strength." Even
in the other translations of Origen's works
into Latin, which were made because you
earnestly requested it, or rather exacted it as
a journeyman's task, the labour was very
great ; for I made it my object to supplement
what Origen spoke extempore in the lecture
room of the church; for his aim there was
the application of the subject for the sake of
edification rather than the exposition of the
text. This I have done in the case of the
Homilies, and the short lectures on Genesis
and Exodus, and especially in those on the
book of Leviticus, where he spoke in a
hortatory manner, whereas my translation
takes the form of an exposition. This duty
of supplying what was wanted I took up be-
cause I thought that the jDractice of agitating
questions and then leaving them unsolved,
which he frequently adopts in his homiletic
mode of speaking, might prove distasteful to
the Latin reader. The works upon Jesus
Nave ^ and the book of Judges and the thirty-
sixth, thirty-seventh and thirty-eighth Psalms,
I translated simply as I found them, with
no gfreat labour. While then in the other
cases which I have mentioned above, I em-
ployed much labour in supplying what
Origen had omitted, in this work on the
Epistle to the Romans the labour that fell on
me for the causes described in the Preface
was immense and full of complexity. But

1 Joshua.


there will have been notliing but pleasure in
these labours, provided only that my experi-
ence in other cases, of ill-disposed minds
requiting my toils and vigils with contumely,
be not repeated and that I do not gain for
my studies the reward of detraction and for
my labour a conspiracy to ruin me. For
in dealing with these men I have to un-
dergo a new form of accusation. They say
to me ; When you write these things, in which
are found many pieces the composition 01
which is due to yourself, you should place your
own name in the title, and let it run thus:
' The books of Rufinus' commentary on(for
instance) the Epistle to the Romans ; ' for so,
they sa}', in the case of profane writers, the
name in the title is not that of the Greek
author who is translated but of the Latin
author who translates him. But all this
complaisance, by which the works are as-
cribed to me, is caused not by love to me
but by hatred to the author. I am much
more observant of my conscience than of my
reputation ; it may be apparent that I have
added some things to supply what was want-
ing; and that I have abbreviated what was
too lengthy ; but to steal the title from the
man who laid the foundations on which the
buildinsT has been reared is what I cannot
think right. It must be, I grant, in the
discretion of the reader, when he has ex-
amined the work, to ascribe the work to any
one he thinks I'lght ; but my intention has
been not to seek the applause of students but
the good of those who wish to be edified.

I shall turn next to the work which was
long ago imposed upon me but now is de-
manded with still greater vehemence by the
Bishop Gaudentius, namely to turn into
Latin the books called the Recognition of
Clement the Bishop of Rome, the successor


568


RUFINUS.


and companion of the Apostles. In this
work I well know that, to judge by the ordi-
nary rule, I shall have labour upon labour.
In this case I will do what my friends desire,
I will put my own name in tlie title of the
work, though I shall have that of the author
also. It shall be called Rufmus's Clement.
If the Lord enable me to fulfil this task, I


shall afterwards return to that which you
desire, and say something, God willing, on
the books of Numbers or of Deuteronomy
(for this alone is wanting to my whole work
on the Heptateuch) : or else I shall write
what I can, the Lord being my guide, on the
remaining epistles of the Apostle Paul.


PREFACE TO ORIGEN'S HOMILIES ON NUMBERS.

Addressed to Ursacius.^ Written in 410.^


My dear brother, I might rightly address
you in the words of the blessed master, "You
do well, dearest Donatus, in reminding me
of this;" for I well remember my promise
that I would collect all that Adamantius
wrote in his old age on the Law of Moses,
and translate it into Latin for the use of our
people. But, as he says, the season was not
seasonable for the fulfilment of my promise,
but was full of storm and confusion. How
can the pen move freely when a man is in
fear of the missiles of the enemy, when he
has before his eyes the devastation of cities
and country, when he has to fly from dangers
of the sea, and there is no safety even in exile ?
As you yourself saw, the Barbarian was
within sight of us ; he had set fire to the
city of Rhegium, and our only protection
against him was the very narrow sea which
separates the soil of Italy from Sicily. In
such a position, what leisure could there be
for writing, and especially for translating,
a work in which one's duty is not to develop
one's own opinions but to express those of
another? However, when there was a quiet
night, and our minds were relieved from the
fear of an attack by the enemy, and we got
at least some little leisure for thought, I set
to work, as a solace from our troubles, and
to relieve the burden of our pilgrimage, to
gether into one and arrange all that Origen
had written on the book of Numbers,
whether in the way of homilies or in writ-


ings such as are called Excerpts,' and to trans-
late them into the Roman tongue. You
urged me to do this, Ursacius, and aided me
with all your might, indeed, so eager were
you, that you thought the youth who acted
as secretary too slow in the execution of his
ofiice. I wish, however, to point out to
you, my brother, that the object of this
method of studying scripture is not to deal
with each clause separately, as you find done
in commentaries, but to open up a path for
the understanding, so that the reader mav
not be made negligent, but as it is written '*
may " stir up his own spirit " and draw out
the meaning, and, when he has heard the
good word, may add to it by his own wisdom.
In this wav I have tried to give all the ex-
positions which you desired; and now of all
the writings that I have found upon the Law
the short comments upon Deuteronomy alone
are wanting ; these, if God so will, and if he
restores my eye-sight, I hope to add to the
body of the work. Indeed, my very loving
son Pinianus, whose truly Christian com-
pany I have joined in their flight because of
my delight in their chaste conversation,
requires yet other tasks from me. But do
you and he join your prayers that the Lord
may be present with us, and may give peace
in our time, and shew mercy to those who
are in trouble, and make our work fruitful for
tlie edification of the reader.


1 Nothing more is known of Ursacius than is to be jjathered from the mention of hiin here.

2 The date is fixed liy the burning- of Rhegium by Alaric, who intended to invade Sicily, but his transports were scattered
'oy a storm a.ul he liimscit died soon after. See Gibbon cli. xxxi.

3 Apparently a longer style of note. * Possibly from Ps. Ixxvii, 7.


INDICES.


THEODORET.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Abbott, Dr. E. A., 103 n., 104 n.

Abcavius, 94 n.

Abdas, bp., 157.

Abraames, 128.

Abraham, robber of church prop-
erty, 252.

Abraham the CEconomus, 288.

Abramius, 294, 296.

Abundius, bp. of Como, 347.

Acacius, bp. of Csesarea, 70, 87, 89,
92.

Acacius, bp. of Beroea, 128, 134, 136,
I49» 151. 15311-. 290, 292.

Acacius, presbyter, 289.

Acacius, bp. of Melitene, 336.

Acepsemas, 128.

Achillas, archbishop of Alexandria,

34.
Achillas, Arian deacon, 35, 38, 40,

41.

Accemetre, 309 n.

Adelphius, 75, 114, 115.

Adrianople, Battle of, 131.

.^desius, 58, 154 n.

^lia, 63, 87 n.

^mona, 142, 149.

/Emilianus, martyr, 60 n., 97.

Aerius, 260, 269.

yEschylus, 97, 114 n., 260.

Aetius, bp. of Lydda, 41, 57, 135.

Aetius, conqueror of Attila, 293 n.

Aetius the Anomcean, 41 n., 82 n, 85,
88, 89, 90.

Agapetus, bp. of Apamea, 128, 151,

Agapius, bp., 75.

Agapius, presbyter, 266.

Agathias, 60 n.

Aithales, 41.

Alaric, 149 n.

Alcinous, 260.

Alexander, officer of imperial house-
hold, 309 n.

Alexander, archbishop of Alexandria,
34, 35,41. 47, 51, 52, 60, 280,

315. 332-
Alexander, bishop of Byzantium, 34,

35.55-
.Vloxander, bishop of Antioch, 96,

154. '55. ?290.
Alexander, bp. of Hierapolis, 6, 341,

345. 346.
Alexander, King of Epirus, 106 n,
Alexander the coppersmith, 160.
Alexnndra, 254, 2S6.
Alexandria, 34, 35, 89.
Alford, dean, 17, 37 n., 32 J n.
y\lypius, 294, 296.
Amantius, 1 13.


Amathus, 1 28 n.

Ambrosius, bp. of Milan, 41 n., 52 n.,
81 n., 85 n., no, III, 129, 137,
141, 143, 144, 14s, 146, 174,
205, 238, 315, 332, 340, 343.

Amegetius, 102.

Ammianus Marcellinus, 78 n., 91 n.,
93 ^-f 99 n., 102 n., 104 n., 106
n., 128 n., 130 n.

Ammonius, 41, 75.

Amphilochius, bishop of Tconium,
114, 129, 136, 142, 181, 208,

239, 315. 332.
Amphion, 56.
Anagamphus, 75.
Anastasia, Church of, 136.
Anastasius, bp. of Rome, 148, 149.
Anatolius, bp. of Constantinople, 9 n.
Anatolius, the patrician, 8, 275, 284,

290, 296, 297, 307.
Ancilla;, or ministrse, in Pliny's letter,

100 n.
Ancyra, 86 n.
Andiberis, 295.
Andreas, bp. of Samosata, 259, 300

n-. 336, 346.
Andreas, monk of Constantinople,

310, 345 n.
Andronicus, presbyter of Antioch,

13-

Anemius, 137,

Anthropomorphism, 1 14 n.
Antinoupolis, 1 18.

Antioch, succession of bishops at, 57.
Antioch, riots at, 145.
Antioch ia Mygdonia, 91.
Antiochus, bp. of Ptolemais, 21 1.
Artiochus, prsefect, 285.
Antiochus, presbyter, 117.
Anthony, Saint, 5in., 91 n., 121, 128.
Antiphonal singing, 85.
Anytus, 258.

Apamea ad Orontem, 133.
Apella, 295.
Apellion, 260.
Aphthonms, 299.
Apion, 40, 52.

Aphraates, monk, i, 127, 128.
Apollinarius, 132, 133, 138, 139,
159, 160, 182, 214, 242, 288,

294. 313. 314. 324> 327. 334.

339. 340. 344. 346.
Apollo, Shrine of, 98.
Apollo, 104 n.
ApoUonia, 89 n.
ApoUonius of Tyana, 106 n,
Apollonius comes Sacrarum Largiti-

onium, 271, 287.


Apringius, 337.

Aquilinus, 248, 260, 347.

Arbogastes, 149 n.

Arcadia, 155 n.

Arcadius, 142, 126 n., 145 n., 151,
152.

Archibius, 268.

Areobindas, 259.

Ares, 106.

Ariminum, 83, 87.

Arintheus, 1 30.

Aristolaus, 346.

Aristophanes, 97 n.

Aristotle, 41 n., 194 n., 255 n., 329 n.

Arius, 34, 35, 38, 40, 41, 42 n., 50 n.,
51, 52, 54, 56, 65, 75, 84, 92,
108, 122, 123, 135, 138, 139,
159, 258, 278, 287, 291, 295,
313, 314, 325, 326, 327, 339,

340, 342, 343. 346-
Arius the deacon, 41.
Arsacius, 332 n.
Arsenius, 62, 63, 69.
Artemas, 38.
Artemius, 102.
Ascholius, 137.
Asclepas, lip. of Gaza, 62, 67, 68, 69,

70. 77-

Asclepiades, 113.

Aspar, 308.

Asterius, bp. of Petra in Arabia, 70.

Athanasius, bp. of Anazarbus, 41.

Athanasuis, archbp. of Alexandria,
41 n., 42 n., 44, 45 n., 56 n.,
57 n., 58, 60, 61, 62 n., 65, 66,
67, 68, 69, 72-78, 83, 84, 86 n.,
94. 95. 97. 98, 108, 120, 128,
135, 174, 178, 237, 257, 280,

315. 331 n-. 332, 343-
.\thanasius, bp. of Perrha, 264, 301

n-. 323. 336 n-
Athanasius, orator, 259.
Athenius, 323.
Athenodorus, 75.
Atticus, bp. of Constantinople, 154,

213. 315.332-
Attila, 156 n.
Audeeus, 114.
Augustus, 96 n.
Aurelia Eusebia, 79.
Aurelianus, 60 n., 153 n.
Auxentius of Milan, 79, 81, 83, 84,

no.
Avitus, 128.
.\xum, 58 n.
Al/d, 169.

Babylas, martyr, 94 n., 98.


572


THEODORET.


Bacarius, 149 n.

Bacurius King, 58 n.

Banicia, 86 n.

Bardesanes, 288, 299, 312, 313, 314,

327-
Barca, 44 n.
Baronius, 18, 45 n., 56 n., 81 n., 108

n., 277 n., 342 n., 346 n.
Barses, 117, 134.
Barsumas, 7, 323.
Basil, advocate, 129 n.
Basil, of Ancyra, 82 n., 86.
Basilides, 288, 313.
Basiliscus, martyr, 154.
Basiliscus, usurper, 12.
Basilius, bp. of Coesarea, 33 n., 70,

86 n., 88, 90, 116 n., 119, 129,

136, 137, 177, 238, 280, 283,

287,315.332,343-
Basilius, presbyter, 257.
Bayle, Diet., 52 n.,
Bel and the dragon, 315 n.
Belisarius, 12.
Benjamin, deacon, 158.
Beyrout, 122.
Bezaleel, 59.
Binchester, 148 n.

Body, identification of self with, 223.
Bonifacius, 157.
Boyle, 103 n.
Brentiscus, 112.
Bretanis, bp., 130.
Bright, canon, 7 n., 54 n., 120 n.,

292 n., 307 n., 346 n.
Britain, Church in, 109.
Britten, 137.

Browne, bp., Harold, 206 n.
Browning, Robert, 183 n.
Byzantium, 55.
^ifSXia, 53 n.

Cselestinus, 155 n., 157.

Csesar, Julius, 97 n., 106 n.

Csesarea ad Argaeum, 119.

Caesarea, 87.

Caesarius, prefect, 146.

Caius, 60 n., 75, 81.

Callistus, 290 n.

Cambyses, 106 n.

Candidianus, 292 n., 323, 3:^3, 339.

Candidas, 300.

Caracalla, 60 n.

Carus, 60 n.

Cartcrius, 77.

Casiana, 256,

Casaubon, 103 n.

Casca, 97 n.

Castabala, 89 n.

Castricia, 153 n.

Cauca, 134 n.

Ceillier, R., 19.

Celarina, 286.

Celestiniaiius, 4, 260, 26 1, 304 n.

Celestius, 343.

Cerdo, 313.

Ceronius, 112.

Chalcedon, council of, 9, 10, 11,

316 n.
Chapters of Cyril, 25, 334, 335, 336,

337, 339, 341, 342, 343. 345-
Chapters, the Three, 12.
Charles the Bold, 282 n.
Charrae, 119.


Cheetham, archd., 109 n., Ii2n.
Chilon of Sparta, 329.
Chosroes Nushirvan, 1 14 n.
Chrestus, bp. of Nicrea, 56.
Christian, name of, 320 n.
Chromatius, bp. of Aquileia, 9 n.
Chrysaphius, the Eunuch, 7, 9, 156 n.,

304-
Chrysostom, 9 n., 33 n., 85 n., 98,

loi n., 102 n., 107 n., 130 n.,

145 n., 151, 1 52, 153, 154, 209,

241, 283, 331, 332, 343.
Cicero, 53 n., 104 n.
Cilicia, 44 n.
Claudian, 150 n.
Claudianus, 263, 267, 286.
Claudius, 60 n.
Clavijo, Battle of, 150 n.
Clement of Alexandria, 1 12 n, 109 n.
Clement of Rome, ordained by Peter

for Jewish brethren, 293 n.
Cleobulus, 329 n.
Cleopater, 113,
Cletus, 293 n.
Clotho, 347 n.
Clovis, 12.

Codex Alexandrinus, 1G6 n.
Codex Sinaiticus, 53 n, .
CoUuthus, 35.
Colophon, 262 n., 293.
Colosseum, 147 n.
Comana, 154.
Comes fisci, 53 n.
Commodus, 60 n.

Constans, 63, 66, 72, 74, 74 n., 135.
Constantia, 65, 79 n.
Constantine I, 33, 47, 51, 52, 53,

53 n., 54, 55 n-. 56, 59, 60, 61,

63, 64, 65, 66, 96, 97.
Constantine II, 63,65, 65 n., 66, 135.
Constantinople, 53 n., 55, 86 n., 87.
Constantinople, Patriarchate of,

152 n,
Constantius I, 54 n., 265 n.
Constantius II, 58 n., 59 n., 63, 65,

66, 68 n., 70 n., 72, 73, 74, 77,

78, 79 n., 80, 82 n., 84, 86, 87,

88, 89, 90, 91. 92, 93. 94, 95, 9^,

104, 108, 135, 146.
Constantius, the prefect, 263.
Corybantes, 96 n.
Coryphe Mt., 128.

Cosmo, S.S. and Damian, 295 n., 311.
Criipus, 54 n., 94 n.
Critias, 104.

Cross, Discovery of; Exaltation of, 55.
Cross, sign of, 102.
Cucusus, 67.
Cunaxa, 97 n.
Cymatius, 77.
Cyniscus, 347 n.
Cynegius, 147 n.
Cyprian, 267, 273 n., 315,332.
Cyriacus, 137.
Cyril, deacon, 97.
Cyril, bishop of Antioch, 38 n.
Cyril, bp. of Jerusalem, 87 n., 100, 136,

138, 211, 273 n.
Cyril, bp. of Alexandria, 2, 5, 6, 154,

213, 259 n., 268, 292 n., 323 n.,

324. 333. 334. 335. 336, 337,

339, 340. 341. 343. 343, 346,

348 n.


Cyzicus, 88, 90.
Cyrus, bp. of Berrea, 77.
Cyrus, presbyter, 291 n.
Cyrus Magistrianus, 253, 306.
Cyrus, the younger, 97 n.
Cyrus, town and diocese, 3.
Xecf>orovia, 125.
Xpn/^ariCo, 37 n.
Xpia-e/iTTopia, 35 n,

Dadastane, 1 10.

Dadoes, 1 14.

Daemon, 201 n.

Dalmatius, 94 n.

Damasus, 82, 83, 85 n., 87 n., 112,
124, 129, 132, 137, 139, 238,
312,315,332,343,344.

Damianus, bp. of Sidon, 266.

Damian, SS. Cosmo and, 295 n.

Daniel, bp. of Carrae, 8.

Dante, 91 n.

Daphne, 98, 99, 100.

David, 64.

Deaconesses, 100.

Death of Christ, physical cause of,

.235-
Decius, 609.

Demeter, 126.

Demophilus, 84.

Demosthenes, 120, 258.

Deogratias, 273 n.

Dialogues :

Prologue, 160.

Dialogue I., 161.
II., 182.
III., 216.
Diana, 148 n.
Dichotomy, 194 n.
" Didache," 35 n.
Didymus, 129.
Diocletianus, 34 n., 60 n., 83 n., 158,

303 n-
Diocaesarea, 125.

Dioecesis, 53 n.

Diodorus, 85, 88, 126, 127, 128, 136,

148, 159, 256.
Diogenes, 290.
Dionysius, martyr, 311.
Dionysius, bp. of Rome, 45 n., 76.
Dionysius, bp. of Alexandria, 45 n.
Dionysius, count, representative of

Constantine at Tyre, 62.
Dionysus, 97, 126, 146.
Dioscorus, bp. of Alexandria, 6, 7, 8,

266 n., 268 n., 276 n., 27S, 281,

282, 292, 293, 295 n., 304 n.,

307 n., 323 n.
Doliche, 134.
DoUinger, 332 n.
Domitian, 60 n., 79 n., 106 n.
Domninus, 290.
Domnus, bp. of Antioch, 7, 8, 38 n.,

260, 264, 277, 278, 282, 284,

290,291,323,346.
Donatus, 77.
Dracilianus, 54.
Dracontius, 75.
Du Pin, 53 n.
f?/7rri';t;ov, 155.

East, turning to, 112.

Ebion, 38, 139.

Edward, the Confessor, 156 n.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


573


Elebichus, 146.

Eutropius, 77, 94 n., 149 n.,

151

n.

Gratianus, iii, 132, 134, 135, 141,

Electron, 192.

Eutyches, 7,8, 156 n., 281 n.

,283

n..

142.

Eleusius, 87, 88, 89, 90.

300 n., 304 n, 305 n..

309

n.,

Gregorius of Berytus, 41, 135.

Eleutheropolis, 89 n., 95 n.

310 n., 323 n.

Gregorius of Nyssa, 91 n., 92 n.,

Elias, the learned, 252.

Euzoius, 41, 93, 95, 99, 120, 122,

129, 180, 208, 238, 332.

Elias, presbyter, 282.

132,291.

Gregorius the Wonder-worker, 91 n.

Ellinmas, 55 n.

Evagrius, 121 n., 148, 155.

Gregorius of Nazianzus, 74 n., 94 n.,

Elpidius, 99, 113, 151.

Evolcius, 117.

116 n., 129, 136, 179, 239, 280,

Emmelia, mother of Gregory of

tKKh/aia, 23, n.

282 n., 283, 315, 332, 343.

Nyssa, 129 n.

tAeTTohg fit/xavT/, 91.

Gregorius the Cappadocian, 66, 70.

Emperors, violent deaths of, 60 n.

enapxla, 53 n.

Gregorius I., bp. of Rome, 12, 13.

Eothen, Kinglake's, 105 n.

eTriEiKEca, 85.

yXioaaoKo/ioi', 105.

Ephesus, 94 n.

epavog, 160.

Epictetus, 78, 79, 83 n., 281,

r/ye/io i^fi'w, 53 n.

Hadrian, 55 n., 320 n.

Epiphanius, 50 n., 91 n., 269.

7/TraToaKonia, 106.

Hale, Sir Matthew, 18.

Ephraim, 92, 129, 315, 332.

Halys, 86 n.

Euchitce, 114.

Fausta, 54 n.

Hannibalianus, 94 n.

Eudaemon, 270.

Faustina, 79.

Hamaxobians, 323.

Eudoxia, 151 n., 153 n., 333.

Faustus, 113.

Harmonius, 129, 313.

Eudoxius of Antioch, afterwards of

Felix, bp. of Rome, 78, 79.

Hebdomon, 96.

Constantinople, 67 n., 84, 86,

Felix the treasurer, 99, 100.

Helladius, 41, 136.

87, 88, 89,90, 91, 92, 115, 119,

Firmus, 292.

Hellanicus, 41, 42.

131-

Flaccilla, 145 n., 155 n.

Hellas, 54, 55 n., 57.

Eugenius, the usurper, 149, 150.

Flaccillus, bishop of Antioch

.57-

Heliodorus, 89.

Eugraphia, 153 n., 252, 269.

Flagellum, the Roman, 124 r

Heliopolis, 97.

EulaHus, bishop of Antioch, 57, 272.

Flavia, Julia Helena, 54 n.

Heliogabalus, 60 n.

Eulogius, presbyter of Edessa, 117,

Flavianus, bp. of Antioch, 85,

88,114,

Henry IV., emperor, 9.

118, 119, 134, 136.

115, 126, 127, 128, 133, I

48,

Henry IV., King of England, 106 n.

Eulogius, Oiconomus of Constanti-

151, 155, 240,315,348.

Henry VI., King of England, 156 n.

nople, 288.

Flavianus, Ijp. of Constantinople,

Heraclion, 554.

Eunomius, bp. of Cyzicus, 82, 88,

8,253,281,287,293,294

.295

n..

Hercules, 149.

89,90, 138, 139, 259,287,295,

297. 304, 307. 310,

323

n.,

Hermas, 114.

313. 314, 325, 326, 327, 339.

332.

Hermesigenes, 271.

340, 342, 343, 346.

Flora, 148 n.

Hermon, bishop of Jerusalem, 34.

Eunomius, bp. of Samosata, 116,

Florentius, bp. of Sardis, 296.

Herod the Great, 96 n.

"7-

Florentius the patrician, 265, 266,

Herods, pedigree of the, 170 n.

Eunomius, bp. of Theodosiopolis,

283, 296.

Herodotus, 83 n.

156.

Fremantle, Canon, 121 n.

Hierax, 76. ♦

Euphratas, bp. of Cologne, 72, 73.

Frigidus, 149.

Hieronymus, S3 n.

Euphratensian Synod, 344 n.

Frumentius, 58, 58 n.

Hilarius, archdeacon, afterwards bp.

Euphration, 77.

of Rome, 87, 295 n., 296.

Euphronius, bishop of Antioch, 57.

Gainas, 149 n., 152, 153.

Hilarius, bp. of Pavia, 95 n.

Euphronius, General, 7.

Galla, 142 n., 149 n.

Hilarius, bp. of Poictiers, 211.

Euprepius, St.

Gallio, 41 n.

Hilarius, bp. of Aries, 293.

Euripus, 93.

Gallienus, 60 n.

Himerius, 336, 337, 342, 345.

Eusebia, 53 n., 79.

Gallus, 60 n, 94.

Hippolytus, 177, 202, 235, 315, 332.

Eusebius, bp. of Ancyra, 267, 277,

Garnerius, i n., 8 n., 268 n..

275

n.,

Hodgkin, T., 131 n., 142 n., 149 n..

289, 303 n.

281 n., 286 n., 287 n.,

289

n.,

157 n-

Eusebius, bp. of Csesarea, 33, 38 n..

290 n., 291 n., 292 n..

294

n.,

Hole, Rev. E., 109 n., 148 n.

41.45.49, 57,87-

296 n., 298 n., 300 n..

303

n.,

Homer, 255 n., 258, 262 n., 285.

Eusebius, bp. of Dorylaeum, 8.

308 n., 310 n., 316 n..

323

n.,

Honorius, 150 n., 151, 295,

Eusebius, bp. of Emesa, 243.

324 n., 336 n., 341 n.,

342

n.,

Hooker, 5, 6, 85 n., 214 n.

Eusebius the Eunuch, 77, 78, 79, 94 n.

344 n., 345 n., 346 n.

Horace, 261 n.

Eusebius, bp. of Nicomedia, 38 n., 41,

"Garum," 97.

Ilormisdas, 158.

42, 42 n., 45, 52, 53, 55, 56,

Gelasius, 136, 241.

Hosius, 35 n., 68, 76, 77.

56 n., 63 n., 64, 65, 65 n., 66,

Gennadius, 309 n.

Hypatius, consul, 81 n.

68, 69, 332 n.

Genseric, 260 n.

Hypatius, reader, 253.

Eusebius, bp. of Samosata, 92, 93,

Georgius, bp. of Laodicea,

70.

92,

Hypatius, chorepiscopus, 1 1 n., 294,

115, 116, 133, 134.137. 155-

135-

296.

Eusebius, presbyter, 268.

Georgius, Arian bp. of .\lexand

ria,

Eusebius, bishop of VercellK, 76 n..

75. 88, 89.

Ibas,bp. of Edessa, 12, 266, 282,291,

95. 96.

Georgian church, 58 n.

298 n., 303, 347 n., 348.

Eusebius, the learned, 257.

Germanicia, 86.

Iberians, conversion of, 58.

Eustathius, bishop of JEgx, 270.

Germanius, 81.

Ignatius, 72 n., 85 n., 99 n., 175,

Eustathius, bishop of Antioch, 41,

.Gerontius, sub-deacon, 252.

176,201, 234, 283, 315.

43. 44, 57. 77, 95. •'13, 132,

Gerontius of Nicomedia, 15^

n.

Indians, conversion of, 58.

177, 203, 235, 283.

Gerontius Archimandrite, 266.

Innocent, bishop of Rome, 9, 149,

Eustathius. bishop of Berytus, 266.

Gibbon, 7 n., 52 n., 60 n., 78

n., 94

n..

156.

Eustathius, bishop or Sebasteia, 86,

99 n., 105 n., 108 n..

147

n.,

Irenreus, bp. of Lyons, 106 n., 176,

87, 88.

148 n., 154 n.

201, 234, 302 n., 315, 331, 332.

Eustolia, 84.

Glubokowski, 2 n., 3, 5, 6, 9

Irenteus, bp. of Tyre, 78, 250, 253,

Eutherius, 292.

Goodmanham, 148 n.

255, 262, 275, 290.

Eutrechius, 267, 276, 284,

Gordianus, 60 n.

Irenopolis, 44 n.

574


THEODORET.


Isaac, sacrifice of, 225.

Letters, pp. 250-348.

Letters, pp, 250-348,

Isaac, monk, 130.

to .\gapius, li.

to John, bishop of Antioch, cl,

Ischyras, 69.

.•Verius, xxx, Ixvi.

clxxi, clxxx.

Isdigirdcs II., 155 n., 157, 159 n.

Alexandra, xiv, c.

John, bishop of Germanicia,

Isidorus, 1 21, 134, 136, 264.

Alexander of Hierapolis, clxix.

cxxxiii, cxlvii.

Ister, The, 153.

clxxv, clxxvi, clxwiii.

John, a-conomus, cxlvi.

'upareiov, 52 n.

Anatolius, xlv, Ixxix, xcii, cxi.

John, presbyter, Ixii.

cxix, cxxi, cxxxviii.

John, magistrate, cxxv.

Jacobus, 91, 92, 264.

Andiberis, cxiv.

Jobius, cxxvii.

Jacobus, presbyter, 260.

Andrew of Samosata, xxiv, clxii.

Leo, bishop of Rome, cxiii.

Jacobus Ascetic, 265.

Andrew, monk of Constantino-

Longinus, cxxxi.

James, St., 150 n.

ple, cxliii, clxxiii, clxxvii.

Lupicinus, xc.

James, bp. of Antioch, 43.

Antiochus, xcv.

Lupicius, cxx.

James of Nisibis, 91 n.

Apella, cxv.

Magnus Antoninus, presbyter.

Jameson, Mrs., 150 n.

Apellion, xxix.

cxxbc.

Jerome, 57 n., 129 n., 155 n., 332 n.

Aphthonius, cxxv.

Maranas, Ixvii, cxxiv.

Jerusalem, 87.

ApoUonius, Ixxiii, ciii.

Marcellus, c.xli, cxlii.

John Archimandrite, 306.

Aquilinus, xxvii.

Martyrius, xx.

John Ascetic, 149.

Archibius, Ixi.

Neoptolemus, xviii.

John the Baptist, 96, 150 n., 298 n.

Archdeacon, the, of Rome,

Nestorius, clxxii.

John, bp, of Antioch, 4, 6, 292, 324,

cxviii.

Nomus, Iviii, Ixxxi, xcvi.

344. 446.

Areobindas, xxiii.

Osrhoene monks, cli.

John, bp. of Apamea, 133, 147.

Aspar, cxxxix.

Pancharius, xcviii.

John, bp. of Aquikia, 342 n.

Basil, bishop, Ixxxv, cii.

Patricius, xxxiv.

John, bp. of Constantinople, v. Chrys-

Basil, presbyter, xix.

Petrus, xlvi.

ustom.

Benea, clergy of, Ixxv.

Phoenicia, monks of, cli.

John, Comes largitionum, 339.

Casiana, deaconess, xvii.

Pompeianus, bishop of Emesa,

John, count, 143 n.

Candidus, presbyter, cxxviii.

xxxvi.

John, bp. of Gernianicia, 304, 323.

Celerina, deaconess, ci.

Proclus, bishop of Constantino-

John, Magistrate, 299.

Cilicia, bishops of, Ixxxiv.

ple, xlvii.

John, bp. of Ravenna, 342 n.

Cilicia, monks of, cli.

Protogenes, xciv.

Jortin, archdeacon of London, 108 n.,

Claudianus, xli, lix, xcix.

Pulcheria Augusta, xliii.

150 n.

Constantinople, monks of, cxlv.

Renatus, cxvi.

Jovian, 48, 58 n., 87 n., 91 n., 92 n.,

Constantius, prtefect, xlii.

Rome, archdeacon of, cxviii.

107, 108, no, 123, 146.

Cyrus, xiii, cxxxvi.

Romulus, bishop, cxxxv.

Jovinianus, 81 n.

Damianus, bishop of Si Ion,

Rufus, bishop, clxx.

Julian, 48, 59 n., 87 n., 94-107,

xlix.

Sabinianus, bishop, cxxvi.

122, 146, 307 n., 320 n., 331 n.

Dioscorus, bishop of Alexandria,

Salustius, xxxvii.

Julian, bp. of Sardica, 342.

Ix, Ixxxiii.

Scylacius, cxxv.

Julian, .St., monk, 105, 128.

Domnus, bishop of Antioch,

Senator, xl, xciii.

Julius, heretic deacon, 41.

xxxi, ex, cxii, clxxx.

vSilvanus, xv.

Julius, bp. of Rome, 66, 68, 74 n., 77,

Domnus, bishop of Apamea,

Soldiers, the, cxliv.

Julius, bp. of Puteoli, 293. 295 n.

Ixxxvii.

Sophronius, bishop of Con-

Justin, Martyr, 315.

Elias, the learned, x.

stantine, liii.

Justin I,, emperor, 12.

Epiphanius, Ixviii.

Sporacius, xcvii.

Justina, 85 n., 141.

Eugraphia, viii, Ixix.

Stasimus, xxxiii.

Justinian, 12.

Eulalius, Ixxvii.

Syria, monks of, cli.

Juvenal bp. of Jerusalem, 323 n., 338.

Eulogius, cv.

Taurus, Ixxxviii,

Juventinus, Martyr, lOO, loi.

Euphratensian monks, cli.

Theoctistus, xxxii, cxxxiv.

Eusebius, bishop of Ancyra,

Theodoretus of Zeugma, cxxv.

Kinglake, 156 n.

Ixxxii, cix.

Theodorus, xl.

Ktvuaic, 38 n.

Eusebius of Armenia, Ixxviii.

Theodotus, cvii.

Ko?.o(l)(l)v, 262, 293.

Eusebius, the learned, xxi.

Theonilla, vii.

Eustathius, bishop of Berytus,

Timotheus, cxxx.

Lactantius, 60 n.

xlviii.

Ulpianus, xxii.

I^ampon, 112.

Eustathius, bishop of^Egiv, Ixx.

Unknown, i, ii, ix.

Laodicea (Latakia), 145.

Eutrechius, Ivii, Ixxx, xci.

Uranius, bishop of Emesa, cxxii,

Latrocinium, 2S7 n., 291 n., 293 n.,

Festal, iv, v, vi, xxv, xxvi, xxxviii,

cxxiii.

295 n., 298 n., 300 n., 303 n..

xxxix, liv, Iv, Ivi, Ixiii, Ixiv.

Uranius, governor of Cyprus,

323 n., 332 n., 347 n.

Flavianus, bishop of Constanti-

Ixxvi,

Leo, emperor, 12.

nople, xi, Ixxxvi, civ.

Urbanus, Ixxiv.

Leo, l)p. of Rome, 156 n., 293, 295,

Florentius, bp., cxvii.

Vincomalus, cxl.

297, 300 n., 307 n., 310 n., 324

Florentius, patrician, Ixxxix,

Zeno, Ixv, Ixxi.

n., 347 n., 348.

Gerontius the archimandrite, 1.

Zeugmatensians, the, cxxv.

Leontius, bp. of Antioch, 73, 84, 85,

Hermesigenes, Ixxii.

86, 88, 92.

Himerius, bp. of Nicomedia,

Letters of Cyril of Alexandria, cxlviii,

Leontius, bp. of Ancyra, 151, 152.

clxxiv.

clxxix.

Letoius, bp. of Melitene, 114.

Ibas, bishop of Edessa lii.

Eastern bishops at Ephesus, clii,

Le Quien, 345 n.

cxxxii.

clxi.

Letters, pp. 250-348.

Irena^us, bishop of Tyre, iii, xii.

Easterns sent to Chalcedon,

to Abraham, oeconomus, cvi.

xvi, XXXV,

clxiii, clxviii, clxx.

Abundius, clxxxi.

Jacobus, presbyter, xxviii.

John, of Antioch, cxlix, civ,

Acacius, cviii.

John, archimandrite, cxxxvii.

clxi.

INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


575


Letter of Leo, uf Rome, cxiil I) is.

Marmarica, 44 n.

Nicene creed, 50.

Libanius, 105.

Mars, 264 n.

Nicerte, 3.

Liberius, 76, 77, 79. 82, 132, 295 n.

Marsa, 153 n.

Nicomedia, 87 n.

Libya Prima, 89 n.

Martin, Abbe, 290 n.

Nicholas, of Myra, 91 n.

Licinius, 33, 34, 43, 53 n., 65.

Martinus, bp. of Milan, 342 n.

Nilamraon, 75.

Lightfoot, bishop, 35 n., 53 n., S3 n.,

Martyrus, 257.

Nina, St., 58 n.

85 n., 98 n., 106 n., 126 n., 155

Mavia, Queen, 125, 126.

Nisibis, 91.

n., 164 n., 201 n., 289 n., 320 u.

Maxentius, ^2, 53 "•

Nomus,Consul, 267, 276, 285.

Linus, 293, 303 n.

Maximianus, 265, 339 n.

Nonnus, 299.

Longinus, 303.

Maximinus, Caesar, 23, 4i n., 60 n.

Northcote and Brownlow, "Roma

Loxias, Apollo, 106.

Maximinus, bp. of Treves, 65 n.

sotterranea," 83 n.

Lucianus, presbyter of Antioch, 38,

Maximinus, martyr, 100, loi.

Nuremburg Chronicle, gin.

38 n., 41, 44 n.

Maximus, bp. of Jerusalem, 87.

veuKopog, 99.

Luciferus, bishop of Calaris, 76, 95,

Maximus, magician, 107.

96.

Maximus the cynic, bp. of Alexan-

Ogdoad, 177.

Luciferians, 96 n.

dria, 136.

Olympius, 77.

Lucius, deacon, 41.

Maximus, emperor, 141, 142.

Oak, Synod of the, 153, 154.

Lucius, Arian bishop of Alexandria,

Maximus, bp. of Seleucia, 151.

Optatus, 94 n.

120, 121, 122, 123, 126.

Mecimas, 300.

Optimus, 129, 136.

Lucius, bishop of Hadrianople, 68

Megapenthes, 347 n.

Onager, 73.

n., 77.

.Melchisedec, priesthood of, 188.

Oracles, 104.

Lucius, Arian bishop of Samosala,

Meletius, the Egyptian, 46, 47, 61,

Origen, 201 n.

116, 117.

6.9-

Orosius, 60 n.

Lupicinus, 283.

Meletius, bp. of Antioch, 92, 93, 95,

Osrhoene clergy, 282 n.

Lupicius, 297.

100, 115, 132, 133, 135, 136, 148,

Oxyrhyncus, 117.

Lycopolis, 149.

151. 315. 332.

Ozeas,304.

Lydda, 41 n.

Meletus, 258.

OV, TO, 161.

Lysimachus, 43 n.

Memnon, bp. of Ephesus, 292 n..

ovata, 36, 161.

XaKuvafjia, 54 n.

333.334, 335. 336 n., 337, 341,

342, 343-

Paganus = heathen, loi.

Macarius, bishop of Jerusalem, 34,

Menander, 313.

Palaa, 34.

, 41,42, 42 n., 54, 55, 70, 87. '

Menas, 41.

Palladius, bishop of Helenopolis,

Macarius, presbyter of Alexandria,

Menedemus, 253 n.

153 n., 154 n.

52, 69.

Menophantus, bishop of Ephesus,

Palladius, governor of Egypt, 1 21,

Macarius, hermit, 121.

44, 68, 70, 135.

124.

Macedonius, bishop of Constanti-

Mephibosheth, 64.

Palladius, monk, 128.

nople, 67, 87 n., 138, 295.

Meropius, 58 n.

Palladius, prefect of the East, 335,

Macedonius Critophagus, 1,2, 146.

Messaliani, 114.

339-

Machpelah, cave of, 222.

Methodius, bp. of Patara, 177, 332.

Palmer, Rev. A. Smythe, 103 n.

Magisterianus, 346.

Milman, dean, 66 n., 307 n.

Paltus, 77.

Magnentius, 74 n., 78, 94, 95.

Miltiades, bishop of Rome, 34.

Pancharius, 286.

Magnus Antoninus, presbyter, 301.

Milton, Ode on " the Nativity," 104 n.

Panegyrici, 54 n.

Magnus, treasurer, 122, 124, 125.

Misopogon, 107 n.

Paphnutius, of Egypt, 43, 87 n.

Malchus, 129.

Mithridates, 97 n.

Papias, 155 n.

Mamas, martyr, 94 n. ■

Modestus, 117, 119.

Parietonium, 89 n.

Man, definition of, 194.

Montanus, 277.

Paschasinus, bp. of Lilybreum, 9 n.

Manes, 114, 169, 277, 299, 325,

Mopsucrene, 93 n.

Patricius, 261, 286.

327-

Mopsus, 262 n.

Patroinus, 267.

Manichees, 293.

Moses of Chorene, 58 n.

Patrophilus, bishop of Scythopolis,

Manzoni, 347 n.

Moses, monk, 125, 129.

44, 57. 76 n., 135.

Maranas, 299.

Mozley, J. R., 105 n.

Paul, bishop of Emesa, 6, 262, 336 n.

Maras, 291 n.

Muius, 75.

337-

Marash, 86 n.

fieTanoiTjair, 206.

Paul of Samosata, patriarch of Anti-

Marcellina, 141 n.

och, 38, 13S, 244, 288, 327.

Marcellinus, bishop of Rome, 34.

Naples, museum at, 14S n.

Paul, bishop of Neo-Casarea, 43.

Marcellus, bp. of Ancyra, 67, 68, 69,

Napoleon, 98 n.

Paulinus, of Gaul, 76.

70, 77, 86.

Narcissus, bishop of Neronias (Ire-

Paulinus of Nola, 55 n.

Marcellus, bp. Apamea, 146, 147,

nopolis), 44, 63, 70, 135.

Paulinus, Eustathian bp. of Antioch,

151, 288.

Nectarius, 136, 145, 151.

132, 133-

Marcellus, archimandrite, 309.

Nehemiah, 91 n.

Paulinus of Tyre, 38 n., 41, 42, 135,

Marcianus, emperor, 9 n, 307.

Neoceesarea, 125.

13?-

Marcianus, solitary of Cyrus, 128.

Neoptolemus, 256.

Pausanias, 83 n.

Marcion, 15 n., 169, 277, 278, 288,

Nero, 60 n.

Paul us, (Zeugmatensianmonk,) 128.

295. 299. 313. 314. 325. 327-

Nestorius, 3, 4, 5, 280, 292 n., 304

Paulus, bishop of Constantinople, 67.

Marcus Aurelius, 60 n.

n., 323 n., 324 n., 333 n., 336,

Pelagius, presb. of Antioch.

Marcus of Arethusa, Si n., 97.

337. 339 n-, 344, 345. 346-

Pelagius, bishop of Laodicea, 1 15,

Mareotis, 63.

Newman, cardinal, 7,9, II, 38 n. 43

136.

Marianus, 128.

n., 49 n., 50 n., 67 n., 72 n., 103

Pelagius, heretic, 343.

Marina, 155 n.

n., 104 n., 147 n.,346 n.

Pelagius L, bp. of Rome, 12.

Maris, bp. of Chalcedon, 63, 68, 77,

Nica in Thrace, council at. 82.

Pelagius IL, 12, 13.

135-

Nicrea, council of, 43, 84.

Peleus, 324 n.

Maris, bp. of Doliche, 134.

Nicsea, 2d council of, 86.

Pergamius, I.

Marius Mercator, 344.

Nicanor, 105 n.

Pericles, 271. ,,->--

576


THEODORET.


Perinthus, 6i n.

Perrha, 264 n.

Pessinus, Coryl)antic worship at.

Pertinax, 60 n.

Peter, St., chair of, 282.

Peter, presbyter, 295.

Petrus I., bishop of Alexandria, 3.',

46.
Petrus Mongus, Monophysite bishop

of Alexandria, 12.
Petrus, the Galatian, i, 2, 128.
Petrus, bishop of Sebaste, 129 n.
Petrus, " the learned," 265.
Phaethon, 329 n.
Philagrius, 77.
Philip, emperor, 98 n.
Philip, Prefect, 263, 265.
Philippus, Flavius, 67 n.
Philo, 75.
Philogonius, bishop of Antioch, 34,

. 41. 42,43-
Philostorgius, 65 n., 99 n , 154 n.

Philotheus, 43.

Philumenus, 61 n.

Phoebus, 329 n.

Photinus, 138, 139, 288, 327.

Phrjgia Pacatiana, III.

Pistus, 66 n.

Pius VI., 13, 55 n.

Placidus, 84, 85.

Placilla, 145.

Placillus, 57 n.

Platina, 85 n.

Plato, 38 n., 194 n., 199 n.

Platonic psychology, 132.

Plenius, 75.

Pliny, 77 n., 100 n.

Plumptre, dean, 273 n.

Plutarch, 97 n.

Polycarp, 106 n., 315, 332.

Polychronius, 113, 159.

Polydorus, tomb of, 77 n.

Pompeii, 148 n.

Pompey, 58 n.

Pompeianus, bp. of Emesa, 262.

Pontius Pilate, 53 n., 112.

Pontus, 87.

Pope, the name, 41 n.

Porphyrius, 155.

Posidonius, 324.

Praylius, 157, 290.

Principius, 290.

Priscillian, 141 n.

Priscianus, 137.

Frobus, 60 n., 1 10 n.

Proclus, 265, 290.

Protogenes, 117, u8, 1 19, 134, 284.

Psinosiris, Libyan bishop, 75.

Ptolemais in Upper Egypt, 44 n.

Ptolemais on the Red Sea, 44 n.

Publia, 102.

Publius, 128.

Pulcheria, 4, 155 n., 264, 304, 307 n.,

333-
Pythagorean oath, 302 n.
Tvpoedfua, 54 n.
Tcp(')E(^pnr, 54 n.
TvpoKdirru, 38 n.

Quintianus, 70.
Quirinus, 53 n.

Regillus, Battle of Lake, 1 50 n.


Remus, 295.

Rcnatus, 7 n., 293 n., 295.

RhoKlas, 156.

Ridley, bp., 168 n.

Robertson, F. \V., 17.

Roman, i.e., civilized rites, 58.

Romanus, martyr, 102, 303.

Romanus Severus, 129.

Romulus, bp. of Chalcis, 305.

Rubens, 143 n.

Kulinus, 58 n., S7 n., 98 n., 143,

144, 151 n., 283 n.
Rufus, Count, 275.
Rufus, bp., 7, 342.

Sabbas, 105, 114.

Sabellius, 39, 138, 139, 288 n., 327.
Sabinianus, bp., 300, 323.
Salianus, Roman General, 72.
Salmon, Dr., 2 n., 8 n., 66 n., 73 n.,

155 n., 177 n.
.Salustianus, 263 n.
Salustius, Governor of the Euphra-

tensis, 262.
Samaria, 96 n.
Samosata, 116.
Samuel, presbyter, 291 n.
Sapor IL, King of Persia, 59 n., 60 n.,

91-
Sapor, Roman General, 132, 133.
Sardica, 67, 86 n., 87.
Sarmates, Arian deacon, 41.
Sasima, 129.
Saturninus, 153 n.
Saul, Teuton chieftan, 147 n.
SauromatK, 162.
Scapegoat, the, 226.
Schaff, doctor, 12.
Schleiermacher, 155 n.
Schrockh, professor, 2, 19, 24.
Schulze, III n., 285.n., 323 n., 344n.
Scotumis, 145.
Scylacius, 299.
Scythopolis, 44 n.
Sebaste, 96.
Sebasteia, 86 n.
Sebastianus, 74, 75.
Secundus, bishop of Ptolemais, 44,

46, 89 n.
Seleucus Nicator, 145 n.
Seleuceia in Cilicia, 44 n., 86, 87, 89.
Senator, 284.
Seneca, 41 n.
Sepulchre, Holy, 54 n.
Serapeum, 97.
Serapion, bishop of Thmuis, 51 n.,

52 n., 128 n.
Serapis, 148.
Seras, 89.

Serpent, brazen, 226.
Severianus, bishop of Gabala, 175,

213, 241.
.Severus, Alexander, 60 n.
Shakespeare, 105 n.
" Shepherd," the, of Ilermas, 45.
Shimei, 160.
Siever, E. R., 105 n.
Silvester, bishop of Rome, 34, 43 n.,

77-
Silvanus, riv.nl of Constnntine, 78.
Silvanus, the primate, 255.
Silvanus, bishop of Tarsus, 87, 88,

89.


Simeon, Syrian ascetic, 128.
Simeones, leader of Euchit;\;, 114.
Simon Mat,'us, 2S8, 313.
Sin, original, 164, 1S3.
Siricius, bp. of Rome, 148.
.Sisura, a goat skin garment, 127.
Socrates, 50 n., 55 n., 58 n., 77 n.,
85 n., 87n., 92 n ,93 n., 104, 126
n., 127 n., 141 n., 25S.
Sophocles, 97, 260.
.Sophronius, bishop of Constantina.

267.
.Southey, 156 n ,

Sozomen, 57 n., 58 n., 83 n., 87 n.,
92 n., 106 n., 126 n., 142 n.,
150 n.
Sozysa, 89 n.
Sporacius, count, 11, 285.
.Stanley, dean, 7 n., 12, 42 n., 43 n.,

54 n., 63 n.
-Stasimus, 261.
Stephanus, bp. of Antioch, 68, 70,

72, 73, 84, 85.
.Stephanus, Libyan bp., 89.
.Ucphanus, muri'.crer of Domitian,

106 n.
Stephanus, a presljyter, 274.
Stephen, St., 134, 226.
Stilus, 97.
Stokes, Dr., 156 n.
Storms, effect of, on history, 103 n.
Strabo, 117 n.
Stroud, Dr., physical cause of the

de.-ith of Christ, 235.
Sucnes, 158.
Sulpicius Severus, 55 n.
Symeon, 291.
Syrianus, 74 n.
aiM(i)€vaig, 97 n.
GTiyfiaTa, 43 n.
arixapia, 61 n,
ai'va^i^, 52 n.
acjfia Kar/jpTtccj, 169 n.

Tacitus, 320 n.

Tarsus, 40 n., 87.

Taurus the patrician, 283.

Taylor, Jeremy, bp., 329 n.

Telemachus, 113, 151.

Temple, attempt of Julian to rebuild,
103.

Terentius, count, 130.

Tertullian, 38 n., 94 n., 109 n., 1:2
n., 158 n., 331 n.

Tertullus, 85 n.

Tetrad, 177 n.

Thales, 91 n.

Themistocles, 271 n.

Theoctistus, 261, 271 n., 304,

Theodolinda, (jueen, 55 n.

Theodora, 12.

Theodoretus, presbyter and martyr,
99 n.

Theodoretus, bp. of Cyrus. Paren-
tage, birth, and education, i, 2,
3. Ordination, consecration,
and episcopate at Cyrus, 3, 4.
Relations with Nestorius and
Nestorianism, 4, 5, 6, 7. Con-
demned at the Latrocinium, 7,

8, 9. Restored at Chalcedon,

9. Condemns Nestorius, 10,
II. Retirement and death,


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


577


II, 12. Condemnation of the
"Three Chapters," 12, 13.
Works, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 276 n., 278, 310
n., 324. 33(> n., 337, 342, 346 n.

Theodoric, 12.

Theodoritus, 299.

Theodorus, bishop of Mopsuestia, 2,
85 n., 151, 159.

Theodorus, bishop of Perinthus, 61,
63,66,68, 70,78, 135.

Theodorus the confessor, 98, 99.

Theodorus the vicar, 263.

Theodorus, lector, 11.

Theodosius I., 52 n., 87 n., 96 n.,

134. 135. 137. 138, 142, 143.

144, 145, 146, 149, 150, 151,

155, 256.
Theodosius IL, 9, 155 n., 156, 263 n.,

275, 276 n., 285 n., 295 n., 304,

306, 307 n., 3S3 n., 339, 347 n.
Theodotus, bp. of Hierapolis, 134.
Theodotus, bishop of Ancyra, 292.
Theodotus, bishop of Antioch, 156,

159, 279, 294.
Theodotus, bishop of Laodicea, 38 n.,

41, 57. 135-
Theodotus, presbyter, 288.

Theodulus, bishop of Trajanapolis,

68,77.
Theognis, bishop of Nic^a, 44, 56,

61, 63, 65, 66, 68, 77, 135.
Theognis of Megara, 329 n.
Theonas, archbishop of Alexandria,

34 n-
Theonas, bishop of Marmarica, 44,

46, 266.
Theonilla, 252.
Theophilus, bishop of Alexandria,

147, 149, 153 n., 154, 209, 240,

332 n.
Theophilus, an Arian, 58 n.
Theophilus, bishop of Antioch, 109

n.
Theophilus, bishop of Castabala, 89.
Therapeutes, Egyptian, 85 n.
Theophrastus, 253 n.
Thmuis, 51 n.
Thucydides, 258 n.
Tiberius, 60 n.


Timasus, 38 n.

Tillemont, i n., 55 n., 56 n., 81 n.,
88 n., 99 n., 275 n., 290 n.,
294 n., 295 n., 325 n.,346n.

Timotheus, heretic, 344.

Timotheus, bishop of Doliche, 301 n.

Timotheus, presbyter, 62.

Timotheus, martyr, 303.

Timotheus, bishop of Alexandria,
136, 139, 147.

Timotheus "thecal," 12.

Timothy, St., 274.

Titus, 261.

Toledo, council at, 279 n.

Tozer, Rev. H. F., 96 n.

Trajan, 60 n., 130.

Tralles, 94 n.

Transubstantiation, 206.

Trench, archbishop, 85 n., 254 n.

Treves, 63, 65.

Trichotomy, 1 74 n.

Trinity, the word, 109 n.

Tripolis, 41 n.

Tyrannus, bishop of Antioch, 34.

Tyre, council of, 6i n., 62.

Tpdize^a, 99.

Ulphilas, bishop,]i3i.

Ulpianus, 259.

Union and incarnation, 192.

TJranius, 272, 282, 298.

Urbanus, 271.

Ursacius, bp. of Singidunum, 68, 70,

71, 77, 80, 81, 84.
Ursinus, antipope, 82 n.

vTzovTioq, 90.

vTzoaraac^, 36 n., 112.

Valla, George, of Piacenza, 52 n.

Valens, 68. 70, 71, 77, 80, 81, 82,

84, 87 n., no, III, 115, 118,

123, 125, 129, 130, 131, 132,

134 n., 135, 146.
Valentinian I., 87 n., loi, no, in,

141.
Valentinian II., 135, 141, 149, 150.
Valentinian III., 293, 333 n.
Valentinus, 39, 169, 177, 277,288,

299, 312, 313, 314, 325, 327.
Valerianus, 60 n., 82, 137.


Valerius, bp. of Aquileia, 83 n.

Valesius, 50 n., 71 n., 78 n., 89 n.,
108 n., 112 n., 126 n., 139 n.,
140 n., 144 n., 145 n., 146 n.,
147 n., 157 n.

Vandyke, 143 n.

Vararanes, 156, 157.

Venables, canon, 87 n., 296 n.,

323 n-. 324 n-. 346 n.
Vena Cava, 217.
Venerius, bp. of Milan, 9 n.
Venus, Temple of, at Jerusalem, 55

n.
Victor, Magister equitum, 130.
Vienne, 149.

Vigilius, bp. of Rome, 12,
Viminacium, 65 n.
Vincentius, Roman presbyter at

Nicaia, probably same as V.,

bishop of Capua, 43 n.
Vincentius, bishop of Capua, 72, 73,

83.
Vincomalus, 308.
Vinovium, 148.
Virgil, 77 n., 199 n.
Vitalis, bishop of Antioch, 34.
VitaHus, 133, 344.
Vitellius, 60 n.
Vitus, Roman presbyter at Nicaea,

43 n-

Walch, Hist, of Heresies, 22.

Warburton, bp., 103 n.

Watkins, archdeacon, 136 n.

William of Malmesbury, 54 n.

William I. and III., Kings of Eng-
land, 9 n.

Wordsworth, 309 n.

Wordsworth, bishop, 103 n., 108 n.,
288 n.,

Zeno, the ascetic, 2, 129.
Zeno, a general, 269, 270.
Zeno, the Isaurian, 12.
Zenobia, 97 n.
Zephyrinus, 38 n.
Zeugma, II 6.
Ziba, 64.
Zosimus, 142 n., 157.


VOL. III.


THEODORET.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Gen. i. 26

,

114

Dcut. xxi. 23 . . .

23s

Ps. 1. I . . .

• 319

Prov.viii. 30

• • • 37

i. 27 . .

, ,

1 88

xxxii. 18

42

Iv. 6 .

• 137

ix. I .

. . 180

ii. 7 . .

.183,

313

xxxii. 43, Ixx .

319

Ix. 8 .

• 179

xxvii. I

. . . 260

ii. 17

.

217

Ixx

319

Ixv. 2 .

. 184

XXX. 19

. . . 38

ii. 18

, ,

168

Ixvi. 20

• 330

ii. 24 . .

•253,

256

Josh. i. 5 . . .

301

Ixvii. I .

. . 103

Cant. ii. 16, 3

. . . 320

iii. 8 . .

•

195

Ixix. 26

• 177

iii. 10

. 254,

257

Judges XV. 16 .

255

Ixxii. 18, 19

• • 305

Isa. i. 2 . 36,

38, 124, 319

iv. 25

•

189

Ixxv. 8 and 9

• • 305

i. 9 .

• • 347

xii. 3 . .

.

164

I Sam. vii. 12 . .

. 300

Ixxviii. 65 anc

66 306

i- 13, 14

196

xiii. 15 .

.

300

ix. 18 . .

. 220

Ixxix. 4

. 3.30

ii. 13 .

179

XV. 5 . .

.

37

xvii. . .

255

Ixxxii. 6 .

• • 3'9

iii. 3 .

250

xvii. 19 .

.

93

xvii. 26 .

347

Ixxxii. 6, 7

• 177

vi. I .

166

xviii. I .

,

166

XX. 5 . .

227

Ixxxiii. 2, 3, 4

. 86

vi. 2 .

199

xviii. 20, 2

I

297

Ixxxviii. 4, 5

• 179

vii. 13

176

xviii. 21 .

.

195

1 Kings xix. I . .

251

Ixxxviii. 8 .

. 176

viii. 9 .

44

xxii. 12 .

.

195

XX. 42 . .

3C5

Ixxxix. I, 2

. 169

ix. 6 .

332

xxii. 16 ,

, ,

225

xvi. 5

ifc

Ixxxix. 3 .

. 169

xi. I .

171

xxii. 18 .

•

329

Ixxxix. 4 .

169, 170

xi. I, 2

171

xxvii. I .

.

220

Job i. 21 . . .25

5.306

Ixxxix. 25

. 170

xi. I, 2, 3,

7 •

329

xxxi. 39 .

.272,

274

ix. 33 • ' •

187

Ixxxix. 26

. 170

xi. 4 .

171

xlvi. 20 .

183

X.9 ...

219

Ixxxix. 27

• 170

xi. 6 .

171

xlix. 2

, ,

1C8

X. 13 . . .

219

l.xxxix. 28, 29

. 170

xi.9 .

172

xlix. 10 .

164,

167

xxxviii. 28

42

Ixxxix. 35, 36,

37 171

xi. 10 .

• 172.329

xlix. II .

. 167,

178

xl.3 . . .

253

xc. I . .

. 215

xix. I .

. .177,328

xlix. 29 .

. 222,

3"

xc. 15 .

. 330

xxiv. 16

• . 37

xlix. 31 .

. 222,

311

Ps. i. 2 . . . .

327

xciv. 14

. 263

xxvii. 6

. . 201

ii. I, 2 . . .

318

xcvi. 5 .

• 319

xxix. 13

. . 46

Ex. ii. II.

.

251

ii. 6, 7, 8 . .

31S

xcvi. 7 .

. 98

xxxiii. 15

. . 287

iv. 22

,

319

ii. 7 ...

38

xcvi. 13

• 312

xxxvii.

• • 347

vii. I

.

1S7

iii. 27 . . .

163

cii. 27 .

• 311

XI.5 .

. . 184

xii. 30 .

.

125

ix. 6, 7

304

ciii. 22 .

. 127

xl. 28 .

. 222, 247

xii. 41

.

4.S

xii. 22 . . ,

178

civ. 4 .

. 320

xl. 31 .

. . 222

xvii. 13 .

. ,

300

xiv. I . . .

123

cvi. 2 .

. 211

xii. 8 .

. . 164

xix. 21 .

.

298

xiv. 3 . . .

342

cvii. 16

. 328

xliv. 17

• • 319

xxiii. I .

.278,

316

xiv. 7 . . .

36

ex. I

. 204, 2 1 1

xliv. 20

• -319.331

xxiii. 2 .

2S7

xvi, 10 . 196, 23

S, 241,

ex. 3 .

• 38

xiv. 14, 15

- . 326

xxiii. II .

.

166

314

exii. 4 .

. 318

xlix. 15 .

• • 255

xxiii. 20 .

.

166

xviii. 16, 17 .

304

exv. 4 .

. 102

liii. 2, 3

. . 236

xxxiii. 20

248,

321

xix. 4 . . .

296

cxv. 5 .

. 102

liii. 3 and

4 - • 327

xxi. 12 .

179

exviii. 15

• 330

liii. 4 .

- • 174

Lev. V. I . .

, ,

184

xxii. I . . .

343

exix. 25

• 144

liii. 7 .

. . 226

xvi. I

.

226

xxiii. I . . .

177

cxix. 46

. 130

liii. 8 .

37. 188, 331

xix. 15 .

•

287

xxiv.

203

exx. 6 and

7

. 281

Iviii. I

. . 298

xxxvi. 9

39,45

exxi. 4 .

. 247

Iviii. 14

. . 196

Num. ix. 13

•

184

xxxvii. 5, 6

289

exxxii. 1 1

176,246

lix.5 .

. 286, 333

xii. 8 .

• •

166

xxxvii. 20 . .

305

exxxv. 6

. 163

lix. 6 . .

• . 333

XXV. 7 .

a

29s

xxxviii. 5 .

177

cxxxvii.

• 127

Ixi. I . .

. . 181

xl. 2, 3 . .

. 273

exlv. 21

. . 246

Ixiii. I

• • 239

Deut. i. 16

•

316

xl. 7 ...

169

cxlvi. 4

320, 347

Ixv. 3 . .

. , 171

V. 5 • •

. •

187

xliv. 23

330

exlvi. 9

• 255

Ixv. 4, 5 .

. . 171

viii. 15 .

• .

318

xiv. 6 . . .

318

cxlvii. 2

• 330

Ixv. 5 .

. . 114

X. 6 . .

.

227

xiv. 7 . . .

. 318

Ixv. 15, 16

. . 320

"• .^.7 •

•

180

xlvi. 7 . . .

45

Prov.viii. 22 .

• 23s

xviii. 19

• •

184

xlvi. 20 . .

330

viii. 22-26,4

2,44; XX.

Jer. ii. 12 .

. . 124

xix. 15 .

• •

57

xlix. 20 . ,

163

178.

[So

, 203

ii- 13 •

1 •

84

INDEX OF TEXTS.


579


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Jer.iv. 19 .... 325

Matt. V. 45 ... 309

Mark. xv. 39 • . . 249

John vi. 19 ... 211

X. II . . . . 319

vii. 6 ... 153

XV. 42-46 . . 227

vi. 24 . . . 208

xxiii. 24 . . . 204

vii. 14 . . . 289

vi. 46 . . . 166

xl. 3 . • • . 253

vii. 24 . 158, 211

Luke i. 3 . . . 49,51

vi. 51 ... 243

X. 23 . 97, 250, 289

i. 28 .

. • 329

vi. 51 .54,114,168,

Lamentations of Jer.

X. 24 ... 182

i.31 .

. . 302

201, 243, 248, 303,

iii. 25 • . . 274

X. 25 ... 312

i-35 •

. . 180

314-

X. 26 ... 312

i.3S .

• . 205

vi. 53 • • • 314

Ezek. iii. 18 ... 340

X. 28 183, 223, 218,

i.51 .

. . 60

vi. 54 . . . 314

230, 238, 313

i. 52 .

. . 60

vi. 62 . . 233, 280

Dan. vii. 10 . . . 216

X. 32, 33 . . 212

ii. 2 .

• . . 53

vii. 10 . . . 327

ix. 18 . . . 196

xi. 27 . . 37, 39

ii. 4 .

. . . 176

vii. 24 . . . 287

xi. 29

. 60, 268

ii. II . 183,301. 319

vii. 39 . • . 204

Hos. viii. 7 ... 84

xii. 43 .

. . 321

ii. 12 and 16 . 198

viii. 40 . 1 86, 327

xii. 10 . . . 166

xui. 43 .

. . 200

ii. 22, 23 . . 203

viii. 44 . . . 309

xiv. 15 .

. . 210

ii. 40 . . . . 196

viii. 56 . . . 225

Bar. i. II . . . . 122

XV. 22 .

. . 191

ii. 51 .

. . . 194

viii. 58 . . . 194

ii. 25 . . . . 45

xvi. 16 .

. . 318

ii. 52 .

. 38, 196

i.K. 16 ... 173

xvi. 18 .

. . 309

iii. 23

• 193. 332

X. 10 ... 330

Joel i. 1 1 . . . . 122

xvi. 28 .

• . 315

iii. 38

. . . 179

X. II ... 330

ii. 25 . . . . 45

xvii. 26 .

. . 231

vi. 30.

. . . 310

X. 12, 13 . . 272

xviii. 6 .

. 287, 303

viii. 52 .

. . 270

X. 14, 15 . . 248

Amos vii. 12 . . . 220

xviii. 9 .

• . 34

ix. 9 . .

. . 211

X. 17. . . . 314

xviii. 10

166,167,287

xi. 4 . .

. . 251

X. 18 . 236, 237, 196,

Jonah ii. 8 . . . . 298

xviii. 15 .

. . 285

xii. 4, 5 .

. . 183

209, 314, 328

ii. 17 . . . 330

xviii. 17 .

. . 308

xix. 40

. . 191

X. 30 . . 38, 45, 71,

xviii. 18.

• I43» 343

xxi. 26 .

. . 326

205, 221, 326, 330

Micah V. 2 . . 165, 331

xix. 26 I

63, 209, 219

xxii. 19 .

•231,303

X. 32 . . . . 190

XX. 31 .

. . 191

xxii. 31

. . 272

X. 33. 173. 190, 233

Hab. X. 38 ... 298

xxi. 9

. . 191

xxii. 44 .

• • 177

X. 34, 38 . . 190

xxi. 27 .

. • 193

xxiii. 46

. 243, 249

X. 38 . . . . 326

Zech. xii. 10 . . . 199

xxii. 21. . . Ill

xxiii. 50 et seq. . 227

xi. 35 ... 177

xiv. 20 . . . 55

xxii. 36-40 . . 304

xxiv. 30 . . . 191

xi. 43 ... 211

xxii. 42 . . 190, 194

xxiv. 38 and 39 198

xii. 21 . . . 198

Mai. iii. 6 . 163, 237, 311

xxii. 43, 44 .190

xxiv. 39 . 199, 202,

xii. 23 . , . 168

iv. 2 . . . . 200

xxiii. 35 . . 112

205, 208, 210, 231,

xii. 24 . . . 168

xxiv. 23, 27 . 321

235. 247. 331-

xii. 27 . 195, 196,

Apocrypha.

XXV. 23 . . . 312

John i. I . 36, 178, 183,

230, 314. 327. 343

XXV. 25 . .158, 289

192, 302, 323, 326

xiv. 9 . . . 38

Ecclus. i. 2 ... 37

XXV. 26, 27 . . 274

i. 2 . . . . 208

xiv. 10 . . . 71

iii. 21 . . . 37

XXV. 31, 33 . . 199

i. 1-3. 36, 7^ 183,

xiv. 28 . 39, 40, 181,

XXV. 32 . . . 226

192, 193

208, 209, 221, 240,

Wisdom iv. 2 . . . 306

XXV. 36 . . . 303

i. 3 .... 179

326, 330

vii. 6 . . 254

XXV. 40 . . . 303

i. 5 .... 245

xv. I . . . . 167

vii. 22 . . 71

XXV. 41 . . . 218

i. 9 . . . . 326

XV. 5. . . . 178

xxvi. 28 168, 177, 204,

i. 14 . 162, 163, 172,

XV. 20 . . 289, 312

Song of the three child-

231,314, 327

173, 178, 210,211,

xvi. 2 . . . 289

ren .. . loi, 320

xxvi. 38 196, 209,

245. 279. 343

xvi. 15 . . 248, 330

314, 343

i. 15 . . . . 279

xvi. 33 . . 40, 289

Susannah, history of, 290

xxvi. 39 195, 240,

i. 18 . 36, 166, 321

xvii. 5 . . . 216

241, 243

i. 29, 36 . . . 226

xvii. 21 . . . 72

Bel and the Dragon . 315

xxvi. 41 . . 180, 251

ii.4 . . . . 194

xix. 30 . . . 249

xxvi. 64 . 199, 248

ii. 18. . . . 241

xix. 34 . . 167, 177

Matt. i. I 193, 322, 328, 332

xxvii. 24 . . 112

ii. 19 . 178, 205, 230,

xix. 38, 42 . . 227

i. 2 . . . . 172

xxvii. 50 . . 249

237,240, 241, 245,

xix. 37 . . . 331

i. 17 . . . . 193

xxvii. 57, 60 . 227

314, 326, 328.

XX. 7 . . . . 235

i. 20 . . . . 169

xxviii. 6 226, 227,

ii. 21, 22 230, 237, 241

XX. 27 . . 202, 210

i. 21 183, 302, 318

3033"

ii. 29. . . . 331

XX. 28 . . . 280

i. 23 . . . 228, 326

xxviii. 19 . . 49

iii. 13. 140, 179, 206,

i. 25 . . . . 332

xxviii. 20 . . 301

233, 280

Acts i. 2 .199, 248, 315

ii. 5, 6 . . . 165

xxviii. 53 . . 237

iii. 14, 15 . . 226

i. 4 .... 198

ii. 6 . . . . 331

xxxvii. I, 2 . . 315

iii. 16 . . . 220

i. II . . . . 332

ii. 12 ... 37

iii. 19 . . . 237

i. 18 . . . . 52

ii. 13 . . . 198

Mark ii. 16 . . . 114

iii. 20 . . . 330

ii. 21 . 186, 190, 204,

ii. 20 . . . 328

V. 43.

. . . 198

iv. 6 . 176, 221, 222

327

iii. 15 . . . 176

vi. I .

. . . 194

iv. 24 . . . 208

ii. 24 . . . . 240

iii. 17 . . . 38

vi. 35

. . . 211

V. 17 . . • . 241

iL 29, et seq. . 23 1

iv. 6 . . . . 25

ix.43

• • . 34

v. 19 180, 181, 208,

ii. 30, 31. 172, 246,

V. n, 12 .283,310

X. 27

. . 209, 219

215, 240.

314. 329

V. 14 . . . . 200

xii. 13

. . . 142

V. 23. . . . 39

ii. 31 . . . . 196

V. 23, 24 . . 285

xii. 25

. . . 198

V. 24 . . . . 240

ii. 33 . . . . 20S

V. 29 . . 34,93

xiv. 22

. . . 231

V. 26 . . . . 237

ii. 34. . . . 215

V. 44, 46 • • 305

xiv. 24

209, 231

vi. 5 . . . . 211

' ii. 35 . . . . 216

P

P 2

580


THEODORET.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Acts ii. 38. ... 321

iCor. i. 23, 24 . . 318

2 Cor. xii. II. . . 279

I Tim. iii. 2 . . . 100

ii. 36 . 208, 235, 238,

ii. 2 . . . .

318

xiii. 4 . . , 328

iii. 16 . . 166, 167

240

ii. 4 ...

206

xiii. 14 . . . 317

V. 19 . . . 57

vii. 14 . . . 183

ii. 8 . 206, 23

2,233

vi. 3, 4 . . . 40

vii. 55 • • • 248

"•9,37 • •

254

Gal. i. 8 ... 70, 139

vi. 16 . . 165, 229

vii. 56 . .190, 200

iii. 10, 11 . .

3'8

i. 9 40

vi. 13, 14, 15, 16,

vii. 57 . . . 178

iv.5 . . .

250

i. 15-17 . . 184, 318

322, 340

viii. 2 222, 303, 311

iv. 8 . . .

137

i. 19 . . . . 232

ix. 5 . . . . 130

iv. 9 . . .

124

ii. 19 . . . . 318

2 Tim. ii. 8 172, 191, 328

ix. 25 . . . 251

iv. 17 . . .

274

iii. 1,6... 170

ii. 9 ... 191

X. 41 . . . . 198

V. 7 . . . .

202

iii. 13 174, 175, 226,

ii. 13 . . . 312

xi. 26 . 37, 138, 320

vi. 10 . . .

170

235. 320

ii. 14 . . . 312

xii, 2 . . . . 223

vii. 31 . . .

298

iii. 16 . 164, 288, 328

ii. 24 . . . 60

xii. 12 . . . 251

viii. 2 . . .

289

iii. 19 . . . . 187

iii. 6 . . . 40

xiii, 23 . . . 172

viii. 5,6. .

320

iii. 27 ... . 320

iii. 8 ... 170

xiii. 30 . . 222, 237

viii. 6 . 45,

222,

iv. 4 . . .179,203

iii. 12 . .277, 289

xvi. 16 . . . 121

279, 280, 313,

iv. 6, 7 . . . 319

iv. 14 . . , 160

xvii. 30, 31 1 86, 327.

317

iv. 19 . . . . 273

iv. I . . 322, 341

xvii. 31 . . . 199

ix. 20, 21 . . 250

iv. 24 ei seq. . . 226

iv. 2 . . . 298

xviii. 9 . . . 298

X. 4 ... 38

vi. 3 . . . . 108

XX. 10 . . . 183

x. II . . . 226

vi. 7 . . . . 108

Titus i. I .... 317

XX. 26 . 244, 341

X. 13 . 255, 273,

vi. 16 . . . . 325

ii- 13- 319.321,326

XX. 29 . . . 70

345

vi. 17 . • . . 43

iii. I .... 116

xxii. 12 . . . 251

X. 25 . . . lOI

iii. 14 . . . 261

xxii. 25 . . . 251

xi. 7 . . 45, 188

Eph. i. 4, 5 . . . 319

xxiii. I . . . 49

xi. 12 . . . 179

i.9, 10 . . . 322

Phil. i. 21 . . . . 318

xxiii. II. . . 247

xi. 24 . 204, 231,

i. 21 . . . . 210

i. 27. . . . 49

xxiii. 6 . . . 251

303. 314

ii. 5 . . . . 210

i. 29 . . . . 309

XXV. II. . . 251

xii. 4 . . . 163

ii. 6 . . .172,210

ii. 5> 6, 7 . . 326

XXV. 16 . . . 276

xii. 8 . .

. 171

ii. 7 .... 210

ii. 6, 7 . . 180, 299

XXV. II, 24 . . 247

xii. II. .

. 163

ii. 13 . . . . 234

302, 327, 330

xii. 26 . .

272

iii. 14 . . 320, 322

ii. 7 . 140, 180, 182,

Romans i. 1-3 172,317,

xiii. 9 . .

. 289

iii. 17. . . . 1 79

209,213

328

xiii. 10. .

. 40

iii. 20, 21 . . 322

ii. 9 . . . . 204

i 1-4 . . 319

xiii. 13 .

. 281

iv. 5 . . . 279,313

ii. 21 . . . . 341

13-4 • • 279

xiii. 26 . .

, 268

iv. 10. . . . 179

iii. 19 . 170, 200

1.7, • • • 317

XV. 3, 4 .

. 227

iv. 14 . . . 303

iii. 20 49, 203, 315,

11. 6 . . . 298

XV.

209

iv. 25 . . . 272

322

iii. 21 . . 155

XV. 12, 13, 17 228

iv. 26 . . . 285

iii. 21 216, 315,322

V. 10. . 220, 222

XV. 12 . . . 234

V. 5 .... 319

iv. 19 . . . 322

V. 15. 16, 17 224

XV. 20 . . 235, 248

v. 12 . . . . 122

V. 18, 19 . 224

XY. 20, 21, 22, 224,

V. 19 . . . . 103

Heb. i. 2 . . . . 37

V. 19 . . 177

300.

V. 20 . . . . 322

i-3 . 37, 39, 45.

vi. 3 . . . 320

XV. 21 . 190, 234,

V. 25 . . . . 320

209, 279, 326

viii. 14, 17 . 319

327-

V. 31, 32 . . 320

ii. II, 12, 13 . 223

viii. 17 . . 200

XV. 22 . . 190, 327

vi. 11 and 13190. 303

ii. 14. 214,238,330

viii. 18 . . 257

XV. 42, 43, 44 199,

vi. 13 . . . . 269

ii. 14, IS .223,247

viii. 29 . . 203

316

vi. 14 . . 190, 298

ii. I 6. 164, 166, 168,

viii. 32 . 38, 243

XV. 47 . .179, 181

246, 288, 330.

viii. 35. 3^ • 257

XV. 48 . . . 179

Col. i. 15 . 37,189,209

iv. 12 . . . 237

viii. 37 . . 257

XV. 53 . . 240, 322

i. 16, 17 . . 37, 208

iv. 13 . . . 284

viii. 38, 39 . 257

i. 18, 140, 203, 235,

iv. 14 . . . 318

ix. I . . . 287

2 Cor. 21 ... . 174

248, 272

V. I . . . . 168

ix. 5 . 165, 236,

i. 12 . . .

. 287

ii. 14 . . . . 249

V.8 . . . . 239

279, 319. 326,

ii. 7 . . .

. 273

vi. 17 . . . 171

328, 331

ii. II . .

• 273

I Thess. i. 9, 10 . . 321

vi. 18 . 171, 220,

ix. 22 . . 122

iii. 6. . .

. 241

iii. 2 . . .

312

ix. 25 . . 296

iv, II . .

• 45

iii. II . . 317

vi. 19, 20 . . 321

xii. 11 . . 147

iv. 13 . .

. 163

iii. 12, 13 . 321

vi. 20 . . 187, 189

xii. 15 . . 306

V. 4 . . .

. 322

iv. 13 . . 254

vii. I, 2, 3 . . 187

xiii. 14 . . 320

V. 10 . .

. 284

iv. 14 . 228, 274

vii. 3. 188,189,332

xiii. 32 . . 225

V. 16 . .

. 322

iv. 17 . . 316

vii. 6 ... 188

XV. 10, 16 . 321

V. 17 .

. 322

V. 14 . . . 274

vii. 14 . 165, 168

xiv. 15 . . 234

V. 17, 18 .

• 45

vii. 21 ... 318

xiv. 30 . . 317

v. 20 . .

. 210

2 Thess. ii. I . . . 321

viii. 3 . . . 168

xvi. I . . 100

v. 21 . .

. 174

ii. 8 . . . 321

ix. 24 . . . 321

xvi. 4 . . 318

vi. 14, 15 .

. 38

ii. 16, 17 . 317

ix. 27 . . . 52

xvi. 25, 26,

X. I . . .

. 60

X. I . . . . 226

27. . . 322

xi. 2 . .

• 320

I Tim.i. 17 ... 165

X. 5 . . . . 169

xi. 8 . .

. 33

ii. 4 . . . . 272

x. 10 ... 230

1 Cor. i. I . . . . 317

xi. 28 . .

. 152

ii. 5, 6 . 187, 189

x. 19, 22 . . 167

i. 10 . . . 317

xi. 33 • •

• 251

ii. 5 . 190, 208, 327

X. 37 • • • 298

i, 12 . .113,138

xu. 9 . 2^

4.298

ji. I1-13 . , 229

X. 38 ... 298

INDEX OF TEXTS.


581


PAGE

Heb. xi. 37, 38 . . 273
xii. 2 ... 284
xii. 12, 13 . . 221
xii. 16 • . . 164
xiii.8. 201,233, 279
xiii. 12 . . . 226


Jas. i. 17 . ,
iv. 16


I Tet. i. I .
iii. 15
iv. I


PAGE

45
60


249
190
228


I Pet. iv. II .
V. 8 .

I John iv. 2, 3

V. I

V. 20 .


PAGE

39, 201
• 45


Rev. i. 5
i. 9


xvii. 14
xix. 16


PAGE
140
179
180
180


JEROME AND GENNADIUS,


ILLUSTRIOUS MEN.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Abila, church at, 383.

Abraxas, 363.

Acacius, chapter on, 380; Gelasius

against, 401.
Accusation and trial of our Lord

before Pontius Pilate, Maximus

on the, 393.
Acilius Severus, chapter on, 3S2.
Acts of the Apostles, written by

Luke, 364, 368; quoted, 362;

Heraclitus on the, 372.
Acts of the council, Cornelius on

the, 376.
Acts of Paul and Thecla, not by

Luke, 363.
.\cts of Peter, apocryphal, 361.
Aetius, 391.
Affection towards our neighbor, James

of Nisibis on, 386.
Agen, church at, 381.
Agriculture, Philo on, 365.
Agrippa Castor, chapter on, 368.
Albinus, 361.
Alexander, Philo on, 365.
Alexander, the Emperor, reign of

mentioned, 373, 375, 376.
Alexander of Jerusalem, cha]iter on,

375; Clemens A. to, 371 ; to

the Antiochians, 371; ordains

Origen, 373; imprisoned, 374.
Alexandria, 383 ; church at, 364,

365. 370, 371. 373. 375. 376,

377. 379, 381. 382, 395, 400,

401; theological school at, 371,

376.
AUruling wisdom, Josephus on, 366.
Almsgiving, Maximus on, 393.
Amastrina, church at, Dionysius to

the, 369.
Ambrose of Alexandria, chapter on,

383.

Ambrose of Milan, chapter on, 383;
mentioned, 401.

Ambrosius, the deacon, chapter on,
374; converted by Origen, 376.

Ambrosius, A New = Simplicianus,
392.

Ammon, Bishop of Bernice, Dionys-
ius of A. to, 376.

Ammonius, chaj)ter on, 374.

i\inphilochius, chapter on, 384.

Anaoletus, third bishop of Rome, 366.


Ananias, the high priest, 361.
Ananus, 361.

Anastasius, reign of mentioned, 401.
Anatolius of Alexander, chapter on,

377-
Ancyra, church at, 379, 395.

Andrew the apostle, 361, 367; re-
mains of transferred to Con-
stantinople, 364.

Anicetus, 367, 368.

Annianus, 364.

Anomians, 388.

Anthemius, reign of mentioned, 399.

Anthony the monk, chapter on, 379;
life of by Athanasius, 379;
friend of Serapion, 380; life of
by Evagrius, 383.

Anthropomorphites, The-
ophilus against the, 392.

Antichrist, 378, 386; Hippolytus on
.the, 375.

Antigonus Carystius, 359.

Antinoites, 375.

Antinous, 368.

Antioch, 367, 368, 378, 379; church
at, 361, 366, 369, 374, 376, 377,
378, 379, 382, 383, 388, 391,
394. 396.

Antiocheans, Alexander to the, 375.
Antiochus, chapter on, 390.

Antiquities by Josephus, 366.

Anticiuities against Appion, by Jose-
phus, 366.

Antoninus Caracalla, reign of men-
tioned, 370, 371, 373, 374.

Antoninus Pius, reign of mentioned,
365 ; Justin to, 368.

Apelles, discussion with Rhodo, 371.

Apocalypse of John, 364; Dionys-
ius of A. on the, 376; Melito
on the, 369; Hippolytus on the,
375; Victorinus on the, 377;
Gennadius on the, 492.

Apocryphal writings, 363.

Apollinarians, 388.

ApoUinaris, chapter on, 369; doc-
trine of the millennium, 367;
letters of, 372; Ambrose of A.
against, 383.

ApoUinarius, chapter on, 381;
against Eunomius, 383; against
Marcellus, 379.


ApoUonius, chapter on, 371 ; Ter-
tullian against, 371, 373.

ApoUonius, the Senator, 372.

Apology of Aristides, 368.

Apology of Eugenius, 402.

Apology of Justin Martyr, 368.

Apology of Miltiades, 371.

Apology of Tiberianus, 383.

Apostles the, and John the Baptist,
in praise of, by Maximus, 393.

Apostles' creed, exposition of by
Rufmus, 389.

Apostolical preaching, Irenaeus on,

370.

Apotheosis, by Prudentius, 388.

Appion, chapter on, 373.

Appion, Josephus against, 366.

Aquila, translation of O. T., 374.

Aquileia, church at, 380, 389.

Arabianus, chapter on, 373.

Arcadius, 389, 390, 394, 401.

Archelaus, chapter on, 377.

Arians, 379, 380, 382, 383, 386, 401,
402; persecutions of the, Atha-
nasius on the, 379; Marcellus,
against the, 379; Hilary against
the, 380 ; Didymus against the,
381 ; Phoebadius against the,
381 ; Faustinus against the,
389; Asclepius against the, 398;
Victor against the, 398; Faustus
against the, 400.

Ariminian council, 380, 389.

Aristides, chapter on, 368; Julius
Africanus to, 375.

Aristion, 367.

Aristobulus the Jew, 371.

Aristoxenus the Musician, 359.

Arius, 389; Victorinus against, 381.

Aries, church at, 397.

Armenians, Dionysius to the, 377.

Arnobius, chapter on, 378; teacher
of Lactantius, 378.

Arsenoites, Anthony to the, 379.

Artemon, doctrine of, 377.

Asceticism, Basil on, 382.

Asclepiades, ordination of, 37I;
Firmianus to, 378.

Asclepius, chapter on, 398.

Asterius, chapter on, 380; against
Marcellus, 379.

Athanasius, 380; chapter on, 379;


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


5S3


communes with Marcellus, 379;

life of Anthony, 379, 3^3 <

bishop of Arian party, 382;

Gregory in praise of, 382.
Athenians, Dionysius to the, 369.
Athenodorus, brother of Theodorus,

376.

Athens, church at, 367.

Attains, Noviatianus on, 377.

Atticus, chapter on, 394.

Audentius, chapter on, 388.

Augustine, 393, 395. chapter on,
392; JuUanus aganist, 394.

Aurelianus, reign of mentioned, 377.

Autolycus, Theophilus to, 369.

Autun, church at, 378.

Auxentius, Hilary against, 380;
teacher of Heliodius, 391.

Avarice, Antiochus against, 390;
Maximus on, 393, Salvianus
against, 397.

Avitus, the emperor, reign of men-
tioned, 396.

Avitus, the presbyter, chapter on,

394-

Babylas, imprisoned, 374; put to

death, 375.
Babylon, a figure of Rome, 364.
Bacchylus, chapter on, 372
Bachiarius, chapter on, 390.
Baetica, 381, 383.
Bagais, 398.

Banquet, of Firmianus, 378.
Banquet of the ten Virgins, by

Methodius, 378.
Baptism, Melito on, 369.
Baptism and the feast of Epiphany,

Severianus on, 390.
Baptism, grace of, MaAmius on the,

393-
Barcabbas, 368.
Barcelona, church at, 381
Barchob, 368.

Bardesanes, chapter on, 370.
Bardesanes, The New == Paulonas,

386-
Barnabas, chapter on, 363, joins

Paul, 362; author of the epistle

to the Hebrews, 363
Bartholomew in India, 370
Basil of Ancyra, chapter on, 379
Basil of Csesarea, chapter on, 382;

against Eunomius, 383.
Basilides, 383, refuted by Agrippa

Castor, 368, Dionysius of A to,

377; death of, 368
Basilius, 398.
ISau, a monastery, 387
Hernice, 377.

Beroea, church at (362), 379
Beryllus, bishop of Bostra, chapter

on, 375.
Berytus, 376.
Bethlehem, Sophronius in praise of,

384.
Bethsaida, 361.
Beziers, Synod of, 380,
Bible, commentaries on, by Pantae-

nus, 370 , by Justus of Tiberias,

366.
Blastus, Irenseus to, 370.
Bologna, church at, 393


Bonosiacians, 388.
Bostra, church at, 381.
Brutus, the, of Cicero, 359.

CreciHus and Cyprian, 370.

Cselestinus, chapter on, 395.

Caslestius, chapter on, 393.

Cajsarea in Palestine, 375, 376, 377,
382; church at, 372, 373, 377,
378. 380, 3^3 > Library at, 362,
377.382. , . , ,

Ccesarea in Cappadocia, church at,
382.

Csesarius, Gregory on the death of,
382.

Cagliari, church at, 380.

Calamity, by Acilius Severus, 382.

Caligula, reign of mentioned, 365.

Callistion, Rhodo to, 371.

Calumny, Clemens of Alexandria on,

371-
Candidus, chapter on, 372.

Cannatse, 399.

Canon of prayer, Cassianus on, 396.

Captive monk, Jerome on the, 384.

Caricus, Serapion to, 371.

Carinus or Caricus, 371 (note).

Carnal foes, Maximus on having no

fear of, 393.

Cartenna, church at, 398.

Carthage, 373; church at, 376, 401.

Carus, reign of mentioned, 377.

Cassianus, chapter on, 395 ; chronog-

raphy mentioned, 371; works

epitomized by Eucherius, 396;

mentioned, 399.
Castellanum, church at, 398.
Cataphrygians (or Phrygians), 371

(and note;) ApoUinaris against,

369.
<fatechetes of Alexandria, 371, 373.
'.Catechetical lectures, by Cyril, 382.
^Catechetical school at Alexandria,

376.
Cathari, 377.
Catholic epistles, two by Peter, 361 ;

epistle of James, 361 ; Jude, 362.
Celsus the heretic, 359; Paulinus to,

394-

Cenobites, 388.

Cenobites and hermits, Cassianus on
the object of, 396.

Cerealis, chapter on, 401.

Cerinthus the heretic, 364.

Chalcedon, Council of, 397, 399.

Charity, Gregory on, 382.

Charity toward all, James of Nisibis
on, 386.

Chastity, Cassianus on, 396, James
of Nisibis on, 386.

Christ, the son of God and consub-
stantial with the Father, by
James of Nisibis, 386; account
of by Josephus, 366, appears to
Peter, 366; miracles of, 368;
generation of, Melito on the,
369, prophecy of, Melito on
the, 369; incarnation of, Pros-
per on, 399.

Christian life, Fastidius on the, 395.

Christians, named after Christ, 366.

Christians, persecution of, James of
Nisibis on, 3S6.


Chronicle, of James of Nisibis, 386.
Chronicle, of Jerome, 386.
Chronicle, of Prosper, 399.
Chronicle, of Severus, 390.
Chronography, of Cassianus, 371.
Chronography, of Judas, 373.
Chronological tables, of Hyppolytus,

375-
Chronology, Julius Africanus on, 375.

Chrysophora, Dionysius to, 369.

Chrysostom (bishop John), 390;
(John of Antioch), chapter on,
383; (John of Constantinople),
chapter on, 391.

Church, Melito on the, 368.

Church history, of Eusebius, 378;
translated by Rufinus, 3S9.

Cicero, Brutus of, 359.

Circumcision, Novatianus on, 377;
James of Nisibis on, 386.

Claudianus, chapter on, 399.

Claudius, the Emperor, reign of men-
tioned, 361; Philo and, 365.

Claudius of Vienne, Salvianus to,

397-

Clemens of Alexandria, 375; chapter
on, 371; Hypotyposes (out-
lines) of, 361, 364; succeeded
by Demetrius, 373.

Clement of Rome, 366; chapter on,
366; author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, 363; church of, at
Rome, 366.

Cochebas, 368.

Colossians, Paul to the, 363.

Commodianus, chapter on, 388.

Commodus, Lucius Aurelius, Justin
to, 368; reign of mentioned,

367. 369. 370. 371. 372-
Compunction of soul, Chrysostom on,

391-
Condition and substance of the soul,

Claudianus on the, 399.
Conferences of Cassianus, 396.
Confessors and virgins, Macrobius to,

387-

Confusion of tongues, Philo con-
cerning the, 365.

Consolatory letters by Eutropius,

394-

Constans, Emperor, 379 ; reign of
mentioned, 386.

Constantia, 398.

Constantina, church at, 401.

Constantine the Great, reign of men-
tioned, 378, 379, 380, 400; puts
Crispus to death, 378; vicen-
naliaof, 379; mentioned, 386.

Constantinople, 364, 380, 383, 390,
395. 399i church at. 391, 394,
397. 400.

Constantius, 380, 394; reign of men-
tioned, 364, 378, 379, 380, 381,
386 j Hilary to, 380; Lucifer
against, 380.

Contempt of the world and of transi-
tory things, Pomerius on, 402.

Contempt for the world and worldly
philosophy, Eucherius on, 396.

Contempt of the world, Paulinus on,

394-
Controversy of Luciferianus and Or-
thodoxus, by Jerome, 384.


584


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Conversation of the nations, James

of Nisibis on the, 386.
Cordova, 365.

Corinth, church at, 369, 372.
Corinthians, Paul to the, 363;

Clement to the, 366.
Cornelius of Rome, 377 ; chapter on,

376; put to death, 376.
Cornelius, Abbot, by Pachomius, 387.
Corporeality of God, Melito on the,

369-
Corsica, 401.
Councils, Hilary on, 3S0.
Covenants, Philo on, 365.
Creation of man, Firmianus on the,

378.
Creed by Pastor, 398.
Creed of Gennadius, 492.
Creed, Niceas on the, 390.
Crescens the cynic, 368.
Cretans, Dionysius to the, 369.
Crisp us Caesar, tutored by Lactan-

tius, 378; put to death, 378.
Croesus, 377.
Cross of our Lord, Maximus on the,

393-
Cross of our Lord, mystery of, Euse-

bius of Milan on the, 392.
Cyprian, 377, 393; chapter on, 376;

opinion of Tertullian, 373;

letters to Cornelius, 376; life

of, by Pontius, 376; work

wrongly ascribed to, 377;

Gregory in praise of, 382;

Maximus on, 393.
Cyprus, 362, 3S2.
Cyril of Alexandria, 401 ; chapter on,

395-
Cyril of Jerusalem, chapter on, 382.

Cyrus king of the Persians, 400.

Cyrus, chapter on, 399.

Cyrus, church at, 400.

Cyzicus, church at, 383.

Daniel, Hippolytus on, 375; exposi-
tion of, by Vigilantius, 392; ex-
position of, by Gennadius, 400.

Damascus, 362.

Damusus, bishop of Rome, 389;
chapter on, 381.

Daphnitic gate, at Antioch, 367.

Death of a Christian and baptized
child, Paulinus on the, 394.

Death of a daughter, Jerome on the,

384-
Death of a son, Victor of Cartenna

on the, 398.

Decius, reign of mentioned, 379;
persecution of, 374, 375; ])erse-
cution of, Dionysius of A. on
the, 376.

Deer, the, l)y Pacianus, 381.

Demetrius of Alexandria, 371; sends
Panta;nus to India, 370; suc-
cessor of Clement, 373; testifies
against Alexander, 375; epistles
to, by Firmianus, 378.

Devil, Melito on the, 369,

Dexter, 359; chapter on, 384.

Didymus, 383; chapter on, 381;
Dionysius of A. to, 376; against
Eunomius, 383; work on the
Holy Spirit, by Jerome, 384.


Diocletian, reign of mentioned, 377,

378.
Diodorus, 383; chapter on, 382.
Dionysius of Alexandria, chapter on,

376.
Dionysius, bishop of Corinth, 369;
chapter on, 369; Pinytus to,
369; Dionysius of A. to, 376,

377-
Dionysius and Didymus, Dionysms

of A. to, 376.
Dionysius and Maximus, epistle of

Klalchion to, 377.
Dioscurus, Hilary against, 380; The-

odoretus against, 400.
Discipline, Irenaeus on, 370.
Discrepancies between the Gospels,

Eusebius on, 378.
Discretion, Cassianus on, 396.
Discussion between virginity and

marriage, Gregory on a, 382.
Discussions of Eugenius, 402.
Dispersion, the, 361.
Disputation between Peter and Ap-

pion, ascribed to Clement of

Rome, 366.
Divine graces, Cassianus on the,

. .396.
Divine institutes against the nations,

by Firmianus, 378.
Divine life, Philo, on those who

practise the, 365.
Divinity, Prudentius on, 388.
Divisions of equals and contraries,

Philo on the, 365.
Doctrine, Christian, works of Ara-

bianus on, 373.
Doctrines, Ambrose on, 383; Didy-
mus on, 381.
Domitian, persecution of, 364; put

to death, 364.
Domnus, Serapion to, 372.
Donatian party, 381 ; Optatus against

the, 381.
Donatians=Donatists, 380, 386,387.
Donatists, Asclepius against the, 398;

see also Donatians.
Donatist schism, 386.
Donatus, chapter on, 380.
Dreams are sent by God, That, work

by Philo, 365.
Dress, Cassianus on, 396.
Drunkenness, Philo on, 365.
Dumb beasts have right reason, That,

work by Philo, 365.

Ebionite heresy, 381.

Ebionites, doctrine of, 364.

Ecclesiastes, Hippolytus on, 375;
Theodorus on, 376; Victorinus
on, 377; Acaciuson,3So; Jerome
on, 384; Salvianus on, 397.

Ecclesiastical canons. On, and against
those who follow the error of the
Jews, work by Clemens of Alex-
andria, 371.

Ecclesiastical procedure, Vitellius on,
386.

Eclipse of the moon, Maximus on
the, 393.

Eclogues of Melito, 369.

Ecstasy, Tertullian on, 371, 373.

Edessa, 398 ; church at, 382, 399.


Eight principal sins, suggestions
against, by Evagrius, 387.

Eleusinian mysteries, 367.

Elutherius, Bisnop of Rome, 368,
370.

Elvira, church at, 381.

Emesa, church at, 379.

Emmaus restored, 375.

Encratites, Musanus to the, 369.

Enemies of the church, Jews,
Arians, etc., Voconius against,
398,

Enoch, book of, 362.

Ephesians, Ignatius to the, 366.

Ephesians, Paul to the, 363 ; Jerome
on, 384.

Ephesus, 364, 372, 395.

Ephraim Syrus, 382, 3S6, 398; chap-
ter on, 382.

Epiphanius, chapter on, 382.

Epiphany, Maximus on, 393.

Epistle of Barnabas, 363.

Epistle of John, 364.

Epistles, Diodorus on the, 382; Her-
aclitus on the, 372 ; Theodorus
on the, 379; Victorinus on, 381.

Epistles of Acilius Severus, 382.

Epistles of Lucianus, 378.

Epistles of Hilary, 380.

Epistles of Paul. See Paul.

Epistles of Paul to Seneca and of
Seneca to Paul, 365,

Epistles of Salvianus, 397.

Epistles of Serapion, 380.

Epistles of Theodorus, 387.

Epitome, by Eusebius, 378.

Epitome, by Firmianus, 378.

Etherius, son of Victorinus, 395.

Eucherius, chapter on, 396.

Enchrotia, 3S3.

Eugenius, chapter on, 401.

Eumenia, 372.

Eunomius, 391; chapter on, 383;
Basil against, 382; Gregory of
Nazianzin against, 382; Greg-
ory of Nyssa against, 383.

Euphranor, Dionysius of A. to, 377.

Eupolemus the Jew, 371.

Eusebius of Cccsarea, chapter on,
378; apology for Origen, 377;
church history, 359, 366, 374,
400; Paschal cycle of, 375, 400;
follows Ammonian canons, 374.

Eusebius and Pamphilus, 377.

Eusebius of Emesa, 382, 383; chap-
ter on, 379.

Eusebius father of Eusebius, 384.

Eusebius of Milan, chapter on, 392.

Eusebius of Vercelli, chapter on,
380; life of, by Maximus, 393.

Eustathius of Antioch, chapter on,

379- . ,

Eustathius of Sebaste, associated

with Basil, 379; Mus;«us to,

398- „ ,

Eustochius, Jerome to, 384; Sophro-

nius to, 384.
Eutropius, chapter on, 394.
Eutyches, 397; Gennadius against,

402; Leo against, 399; Mochi-

mus against, 397.
Eutyches and Dioscorus, Theodore-

tus against, 400.


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


585


Eutyches and Nestorius, Gelasius

against, 401.
Eutychian heresy, 386.
Eutychians, 396; Samuel against,

399-
Euzoius, 383; chapter on, 382.
Evagrius of Antioch, chapter on,

3^3-
Evagrius the Monk, chapter on,

387- , ^

Evagrius (another), chapter on, 394.

Evangelists, the four, 364.

Excesses and ill reputation, Chrysos-

tom on, 391.
Exile, Dionysius of A. on, 376.
Exodus, questions and answers on,

by Philo, 365 ; Hippolytus on,

375; Victorinus on, 377.
positions of various causes, by

Tichonius, 389.
Ezekiel, Victorinus on, 377.

Fabianus, bishop of Rome, put to
death, 374.

Fabius, Cornelius to, 376; Dionys-
ius to, 376.

Faith, Bachiarius on, 390; Gregory
on, 381; James of Nisibis on,
386; Lucianus on, 378; Maxi-
mus on, 383; Melito on, 369;
Olympius on, 390; Sabbatius
on, 390; Syagrius on, 396;
Theophilus on, 392.

Faith against heretics, Audentius on,
388; Cyril on, 395.

Faith and the rules of Faith, Sya-
grius on, 396.

Faith and virginity, Atticus on, 394.

Faith in one sovereign, Niceas on,

390-
Fallen virgin, Niceas to the, 390.
Familiar letters, of Philip, 396.
Fastday, That there should be no

jesting on, by Maximus, 393.
Fastidius, chapter on, 395.
Fasting, Clemens of Alexandria on,

371; James of Nisibis on, 386;

Maximus on, 393 ; TertulHan

on. 373-
Fate, Bardesanes on, 370; Minucius

Felix on, 374.
Fathers, lives of, by Petronius, 393.
Faustinus, chapter on, 389.
Faustus, of Riez, chapter on, 399.
Felicissimus, 383.
Felix of Rome, 380 ; succeeded by

Festus, 362.
Felix, the Praetorian Prefect, 400.
Festal epistles, of Athanasius, 379,
Festal epistles on the passover, by

Dionysius of A., 376.
Festus of Judea, 361; succeeds

FeHx, 362.
Fickleness of mind, Cassianus on,

396.
Firmianus Lactantius, chapter on,

378.
Firmilianus, Bishop of Cresarea, en-
tertains Origen, 373.
Flacilla, Queen, 389.
P"lavianus, letter of Leo to, 397.
Flavius the Grammarian, poem on

medicine, 378.


Florinus, Irenoeus to, 370.

Food of the Jews, Novatianus on the,

377-
Fortunatianus, chapter on, 380.

Fool, that every fool should be a

slave, by Philo, 365.

Free will, Methodius on, 378.

Friendship, Cassianus on, 396.

Fronto the orator, 368.

Gabala, church at, 390.
Gaius, chapter on, 374.
Galatians, Paul to the, 362, 363;
Jerome on, 384; Severianus on,

390.
Gallienus, reign of mentioned, 376,

377-
Gallogrsecia, church at, 38 1.

Gallus, reign of mentioned, 374, 376.

Gamaliel, teacher of Paul, 362.

Garadius, 390.

Gelasius of Caesarea, chapter on,

383.
Gelasius of Rome, 402; chapter on,

401.
Geminus, chapter on, 376.
Genealogy, Niceas against, 390,
Generation of Christ, MeUto on the,

369.

Genesis, Hippolytus on, 375; Me-
thodius on, 378; Victorinus on,
377> 395; Hebrew questions
on, by Jerome, 384.

Gennadius of Constantinople, chap-
ter on, 400.

Gennadius of Marseilles, chapter on,
402.

Genseric, king, 398, 401; taking of
Rome by, 399.

Giants, Philo concerning, 365.

Giscalis in Judea, 362.

Gnosians, Dionysius to the, 369.

Gnosticism, 383.

Gnostics, arose from Basilides, 368.

Gnosus, church at, 369.

God not the author of evil, Irenceus
on, 370.

Gordianus, reign of mentioned, 375.

Gortina, a city of Crete, 369.

Gospel, demonstrations of the, by
Eusebius, 378.

Gospel, preparations for, by Euse-
bius, 378.

Gospel according to the Hebrews,
362, 366.

Gospel of Mark, 361.

Gospel of Luke, 363.

Gospel of John, 364.

Gospel of Peter, apocryphal, 361;
Serapion on the, 372.

Gospel canons, of Ammonius, 374.

Gospels, Asterius on the, 380; Euse-
bius on the, 379; Fortunatianus
on the, 380; Juvencus on the,
379; Theophilus on the, 369.

Grace of God, through which we are
saved, Faustus on the, 399.

Grjecus, the deacon, 400.

Grammarian, the, by Firmianus, 378.

Grapes blessed, James of Nisibis on
the, 386.

Gratianus, reign of mentioned, 382,
383-


Gregory of Elvira, chapter on, 381.
Gregory, bishop of Nazianzan, 382,

383; against Eunomius, 383.
Gregory of Neocoesarea = Theodorus,

376.
Gregory of Nyssa, chapter on, 383;

against Eunomius, 383.
Gymnasium, Dionysius of A. on the,

376; chapter on, 382.

Habakkuk, Jerome on, 384; Victo-
rinus on, 377.

Hadrian, Apologies of Aristides and
Quadratus to, 368; passes win-
ter at Athens, 367; initiated into
the mysteries, 367; reign of
mentioned, 362, 368.

Hadrian and Antinous, 368.

Haggai, Jerome on, 384.

Halves, Trypho on the, 374.

Hamartigenia by Prudentius, 388.

Harmony of divine Scripture, Theod-
ulus on the, 400.

Harmony of Moses and Jesus, Am-
monius on the, 374.

Healing of the blind man, Antiochus
on the, 390.

Hebrew names, by Jerome, 384.

Hebrews, epistle to the, not by Paul,
3^3> 36S, 375 ; written by Clem-
ent, 366.

Hebrews, Gospel of, 362.

Hegesippus, 361 ; chapter on, 368.

Heir of divine things, Philo on the,

365-
Helenopolis, 378.
Heliodorus of Antioch, chapter on,

387-

Heliodorus, the presbyter, chapter
on, 391; exhortation of Jerome
to, 384.

Helvidius, chapter on, 391; Jerome
against, 384.

Heraclas, 376; assistant to Origen,
378; ordained Pontiff, 376.

Heraclea, church at, 379.

Heraclitus, chapter on, 372.

Heresies, Epiphanius against, 382;
Gennadius against, 402; Hip-
polytus against, 375; Irenanis
against, 370; James of Nisibis
against, 386; Justin M. against,
368; Victorinus against, 377.

Hermammon, Dionysius of A. to,

376.
Hermas, 365; chapter on, 365.
Hermes, 365.

Hermippus the peripatetic, 359.
Hermogenes, heresy of, Theophilus

against, 369.
Herod, 364.
Herona, pseudonym for Gregory

Naz., 382.
Hexaemeron, of Salvianus, 397.
Hierapolis, 372; church at, 367,

369-
Hierax, Dionysius of A. to, 376.
Hieronymus = Jerome, 386,
Hilarion, life of, by Jerome, 384;

life of, by Sophionius tr., 384.
Hilary of Aries, chapter on, 397.
Hilary of Poitiers, 389 ; against the

Arians, 379; chapter on, 380.


586


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Hilary " of Rome," 380, 400.

Hippolytus, chapter on, 375; com-
mentaries of, 375; paschal cycle
of, 400.

Hipporegensis, church at,

Histor)', chronicle of, by Eusebius,

378.
History, chronicle of, by Jerome,

384-
History of the church, by Hegesip-

pus, 368,
History, Universal, by Dexter, 384.
Holy Spirit, Amphilochius on the,

384; Basil on the, 382; Didymus

on the, 381; Donatus on the,

380; Ephraim on the, 382;

Faustus on the, 399; Gregory

on the, 382.
Homilies of Origen on Jeremiah and

Ezekiel, by Jerome, 384.
HomiHes of Salvianus, 397.
Homilies of Victor of Cartenna, 398.
Hoini'iousia, 386.
Homoousian, 401.
Ilonoratus, chapter on, 401 ; life of,

by Hilary, 397.
Honorius, reign of mentioned, 393,

394. 398-
Hopes of the faithful, Tertullian on

the, 367.
Hosea, Didymus on, 381; Pierius

on, 378.
Hospitality, Maximus on, 393; Melito

on, 369.
Humility, James of Nisibis on, 386.
Iluneric, 401, 402.
I lydatius, 383.
Hyginus, 359.
Ilymnal, by Paulinus, 394.
Hymns and mvsteries, by Hilary,

380.
Hymns, of Gelasius, 401.
Hymns, of Peter of Edessa, 398.
Hymns, of Prudentius, 388.
Hyppolytus. See Hippolytus.

Iconium, church at, 384.

Ignatius, chapter on, 366.

Incarnation of our Lord, Augustine
on the, 392 ; Cassianus on the,
396; Isaac on the, 391; Julius
on the, 386; Nestorius on the,
395; Prosper on, 399; Theo-
dorctus on the, 400; Theodorus
on the, 388.

Innocentius, chapter on, 393.

Internal war, Tichonius on, 389.

Institutes of arithmetic, Anatolius on
the, 377.

Institutes of Cassianus, 396.

Instruction for neophytes by Niceas,
390.

Irenacus, 383; chapter on, 370;
Commentary on the Apocalypse,
364; doctrine of the millennium,
367; against heresies, 368.

Isaac, chapter on, 391.

Isaac of Antioch, chapter on, 396.

Isaiah, Didymus on, 38I; Eusebius
on, 378; Hippolytus on, 375;
Victorinus on, 377.

Isaiah, saying in, James of Nisibis on
the, 386.


Isaiah's saying Your wine-dealers
mix wine with water, Maximus
on, 393.

Ithacius, 383.

Itinerary of Firmianus, 378.


James the apostle, 364, 367; chap-
ter on, 361 ; ordains Paul, 362;
murder of, 366.

James the Wise, of Nisibis, chapter
on, 386.

Jerome, 383, 392, 393; chapter on,
384; translates Origen, 389.

Jerome and Philip, 396.

Jerusalem, 362, 375 ; church at, 361,
362, 364, 374,382,391-

Jesus, 364.

Jewish affairs, History of, by Justus
of Tiberias, 366.

Jews, dialogue against, by Justin M.,
368; Miltiades against, 371;
Philo on the, 365.

Jews, captivity of the, Josephus on,
366.

Jews, Gentiles, and Novatians, Euse-
bius against, 379.

Job, Ambrose on, 383; Didymus on,
381 ; Hilary on, 380; Philip on,

396.

John the apostle, 367, 372 ; chapter
on, 364; Gospel of, 361 ; or-
dains Paul, 362; ordains Poly-
carp, 367.

John of Antioch, 401 ; ( = Chrysos-
tom) , chapter on, 383.

John (Chrysostom) of Constanti-
nople, chapter on, 391.

John of Jerusalem, chapter on, 391.

John or Mark, a disciple, 363.

John the Baptist, 366.

John the Presbyter, 364, 367.

Joseph, the husband of Mary, 361.

Joseph the Levite, another name for
Barnabas, 363.

Josephus, chapter on, 366; quoted,
362, 371; antiquities of, 361;
convicts Justus of falsehood,

. 366.
Jovian, 386; reign of mentioned,

379-
Jovinian the heretic, 393; chapter

on, 381.
Judas, chapter on, 373; Maximus on,

393-

Jude, brother of James, chapter on,
362.

Judea, places in, Jerome on, 384.

Judgment of Peter, Apocryphal, 361.

Julian, 359, 3S1, 386; reign of men-
tioned, 380.

Julian, the Emperor, Gregory against,
382.

Julianus, 383 ( ?) ; chapter on, 394.

Julius Africanus, chapter on, 375.

Julius of Rome, 379; chapter on,
386.

Justin Martyr, chapter on, 368;
commentary on the Apocalypse,

364-
Justin Martyr andTatian, 369.
Justus, chapter on, 366.
Juvencus, chapter on, 379,


Kalends of January, Maximus on

the, 393-
Key, work by Melito, 369.
Knowledge '^f spiritual things, Cassi-
anus on the, 396.

Lacedremonians, Dionysius to the,

369-

Lactanlius, 388; chapter on (see
Firmianus); follows Papias,
367; mentions Minucius, 374.

Laodicea, 372; church at, 377, 381.

Laodiceans, Dionysius to, 377.

Laodiceans, Epistle of Paul to the.
Apocryphal, 363.

Latronianus, chapter on, 383.

Learning, Philo on, 365.

Ledra or Leucotheon = Luteon,
church at, 379.

Leo, the Emperor, reign of men-
tioned, 396, 397, 398, 400, 401 ;
Timotheus to, 397; Leo, Bishop
of Rome, 396; chapter on, 397;
Epistles of, against Eutyches,

399-
Leonidas, father of Origen, 373.
Leporius, chapter on, 395.
Lerins, Monastery of, 396, 399.
Letter of Macarius, 387.
Letters of Eustathius, 379.
Letters of Jerome, 384.
Letters of Severus, 390.
Letters of Sidonius, 401.
Letters to Severus, by Paulinus, 394.
Leucotheon = Ledra, 379.
Levi, surname of Matthew, 362.
Leviticus, Victorinus on, 377.
Liberius of Rome, 380.
Library at CfEsarea, 362, 377, 382.
Life after death, James of Nisibis on

the, 386.
Life of a wise man, Philo on the,

365-
Linus, second bishop of Rome (?).

Lives of the Christians, Philo on the,

365-
Lives of the fathers, by Evagrius, 387.
Lord's day, Melito on the, 368.
Lucan, the poet, 365.
Lucianus of Antioch, chapter on,

378; put to death, 378.
Lucianus, the presbyter, chapter on,

394-
Lucifer, chapter on, 380.

Luciferian schism, 389.

Lucius, the Arian, chapter on, 382.

Lucius of Rome succeeds Cornelius,

376.
Luke, chapter on, 363; author of

Epistle to the Hebrews, 363;

Gospel of, 392, 364; homilies

on by Jerome, 384.
Lyons, 370; church at, 396.

Macarius the monk, chapter on, 387;

teacher of Evagrius, 387.
Macarius of Rome,, chapter on, 391.
Maccabeans, 366.
Maccabees, Gregory in praise of the,

382.
Macedonians, Faustus against the,

389, 400-
Macrinus, 375.


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


587


Macrobius, chapter on, 386.
Magnesians, Ignatius to the, 366.
Magnus the consul, 400.
Majorianus, reign of mentioned, 396,

397» 398.
Malchion, chapter on, 377.
Mamertus, bishop of Vienne, 399.
Mammoea, mother of the Emperor

Alexander, 373, 375.
Manichjeus, discussion with Arche-

laus, 377.
Manicheans, 388; Titus against, 381 ;

Serapion against the, 380.
Manner of one's life, Philo on the,

365.
Marcella, epistles to by Jerome, 304.
Marcellinus the presbyter, 389.
Marcellus of Ancyra, 381; chapter

on, 379; Basil against, and on

virginity, 379.
Marcellus, the presbyter, Salvianus

to, 397-

Marcianus, Irenseus to, 370.

Marcion, 367, 390; heresy of, 375;
Hippolytus against, 375; Justin
against, 368, Modestus against,
370; Philip against, 369; Rhodo
against, 370 ; Theophilus of An-
tioch against, 369.

Marcionites, differ from one another,

370-
Marcus Antoninus. See Marctis

Aurelius A.

Marcus Antoninus Verus. See Mar-
cus Aurelius A.

Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Verus,
reign of mentioned, 369, 370,
37'> 375; Bardesanes to, 370.

Mark, chapter on, 364; at Alexan-
dria, 365, 370; Gospel of, 361,

364-
Mark = Basilides, 383.
Mark or John Mark, 363.
Marseilles, 395, 396 ; church at, 395,

397. 402.
Martianus, reign of mentioned, 396,

397-
Martin bishop of Tours, 390; life

of, by Severus, 390.
Martyrdom, Ambrosius on, 374;

Dionysius of A. on, 377; Origen

on, 374.
Martyrs, Eusebius on the, 378; Max-

imus on the, 393; Phileas in

praise of, 378; Prudentius, in

praise of, 388; VigiHus, in praise

of, 392.
Mary, sister of the mother of our

lord, 361.
Mathematicians, Macarius against

the, 391; Minucius Felbc against

the, 374; Pamphilus against,

translated by Rutinus, 389.
Matter made by God (?), work by

Maximus, 372.
Matthew and John, Didymus on,

381 ; Theodorus on, 379.
Matthias, 366.
Maximilla, 369, 371.
Matthew, 364, 367; chapter on, 362;

Gospel of in Hebrew, 370;

Hilary on, 380.
Maximus, reign of mentioned, 375,


386; Persecution of, 377, 378;

puts Priscillianus to death, 3S3.
Maximus of Constantinople, chapter

on, 383.
Maximus of Jerusalem, chapter on,

372-
Maximus of Turin, chapter on, 398.
Maximus the Arian, 401.
Maximus the Philosopher, Gregory

in praise of, 382.
Mazaca^CffisareainCappndocia, 3S2.
Medicine, Flavius on, 378.
Melito, 372 ; chapter on, 368.
Melodius, 390.
Mesopotamia, 370, 377.
Methodius, chapter on, 378.
Micah, explanations on, by Jerome,

384.

Milan, 383; church at, 383.

Milevis, church at, 381.

Millennium, the, by Papias, 367;
Gennadius on the, 402.

Miltiades, chapter on, 371.

Minucius Felix, chapter on, 374.

Miscellaneous propositions by Lu-
cius, 382.

Miscellaneous questions by Acacius,
380.

Mochimus, chapter on, 397.

Modestus, chapter on, 370.

Modesty, TertuUian on, 378.

Monarchy, Irenceus on, 370.

Monasteries, Egyptian, 387.

Monasteries, heads of, Pachomius to
the, 387.

Monastic life, Cselestius on, 394.

Monk, aim and creed of a, Cassia-
nus on the, 396.

Monks, three ancient kinds of, etc.,
Cassianus on, 396.

Monogamy, TertuUian on, 378.

Montanists or Donatians, 387.

Montanus, 369, 371; Appollonius
against, 371; heresy of, Sera-
pion on, 371; Rhodo against,
371; teacher of Proculus, 374;
TertuUian and, 373.

Montanus, Prisca and Maximilla,
Appollonius against, 371.

Mortality, Dionysius of A. on, 376.

Mortification, Cassianus on, 396.

Moses, 371 ; the five books of, Philo
on, 365.

Musreus, chapter on, 393.

Musanus, chapter on, 369.

Nahum, Jerome on, 384.
Narcissus, bishop of Jerusalem, 371,

372, 375-

Nations, ApoUinaris against the, 369 ;
Arnobius against the, 378;
Athanasius against the, 379;
Clemens of Alexandria against
the, 371; Irenreus against the,
370; Photinus against the, 38 1;
James of Nisibis against the,
386; Justin Martyr against the,
368; Tatian against the, 369,
371 ; ViteUius against the, 386.

Nations and the Jews, Miltiades
against the, 371.

Nativity of our Lord, Maximus on
the, 393; Timotheus on the, 395.


Nature, Dionysius of A. on, 377.
Nature and invention, Philo on, 365.
Nature of all sins, Cassianus on the,

396.

Nature of things, introductory trea-
tise on the, by Heliodorus, 387.

Nazarenes, 362.

Neapolis, 368.

Neocsesarea, 376.

Neophytes, Paulinus on, 397.

Nepos, 359.

Nepos the bishop, Dionysius of A.
against, 376.

Nero, reign of mentioned, 361, 362,
363. 364, 367; and Paul, 363;
appoints Albinus, 361 ; cruelty
of, 363 ; puts Peter and Paul to
death, 365; tutored by Seneca,

365-
Nerva (?) reign of mentioned, 365.

Nestorian doctrine, 394.

Nestorian impiety, 400.

Nestorians, 397, 398; Samuel against
the, 399.

Nestorius, 395; chapter on, 394;
Cassianus against, 396 ; Cyril of
A. against, 395, 401 ; Cyrus
against, 399; Gelasius against,
401 ; Gennadius against, 402.

New Testament, translated by Jerome,

384.
Nicean council, 386.
Niceas, chapter on, 390.
Nicomedia, 378, 396.
Nicomedians, Dionysius to the, 369.
Nicopolis, formerly Emmaus, 375.
Ninevites, repentance of, Maximus

on, 393.
Nisibis, 386; church at, 386.
Nocturnal illusions, Cassianus on,

396-

Nola, church at, 394.

Novatian heresy, 376.

Novatians, 377, 389.

Novatians, Pacianus agamst the,
381.

Novatianus, chapter on, 377 ; Diony-
sius of A. to, 376; Reticius
against, 378.

Novatianus and those who had
fallen from the faith, Cornelius
on, 376.

Novatus, 377.

Nyssa, church at, 2,?>2-

Obedience, Paulinus on, 397.

Oceanus, 393.

Octava or Ogdoad. 370 (note).

Octavms, of Minucuis, Felix, 374.

Ogdoad, the, IreuKus on, 370.

Old Testament, translated by Jerome,

384.
Ohvet, Mount, 362.
Olympius, chapter on, 390.
Olympus, church at, 378.
Optatus, 386; chapter on, 381.
Order of discipline, by Pachomius,

387-
Ordering of life, or the correction of
morals, by Paul the presbyter,

398-
Ordination of bishops, Petronius on,

the, 393.


588


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Oresiesis, chapter on, 367.

Origen, surnamed Adamantius, chap-
ter on, 373; Alexander in be-
half of, 375; and Ambrosius,
374; and Theodorus, 376;
apology for, by Eusebius, 378 ;
apology for, by Pamiihilus, 377 ;
Alexander to, 375 ; Beryllus to,
375; Eustathius against, 379;
collects library at Ca'sarea, 382;
corrects Beryllus, 375; letters
of, to Beryllus, 375 ; Dionysius
^^t 377; imitated by Hilary,
380; Julius Africanus to, 375;
listens to Hippolytus, 375 ; made
presbyter by Alexander, 375;
Methodius against, 378; pupil
of Clemens, 371; teacher of
Trypho, 374; teacher of Diony-
sius, 376; Theophilus against,
392; translated by Rutinus, 389;
uses Gospel of the Hebrews,
362; works transcribed, 377.

Origen Junior, name for Pierius, 377.

Origin, nature, and remedies for the
eight principal sins, Cassianus
on the, 396.

Origin of evil, Maximus on, 372.

Origin of sin, Prudentius on the,
3S8.

Orosius, 394; chapter on, 393.

Osanna, Jerome on, 384.

Ostian way, 363.

Pachomius, chapter on, 387 ; col-
league of Oresiesis, 387.

Pacianus, 384; chapter on, 381.

Pagans, Commodianus against the,
388.

Pamphilus, chapter on, 377; and
Eusebius, 378; collects library
at Ctesarea, 362, 3S2; life of,
by Eusebius, 378.

Pancratius, 380.

Panegyric, by Paulinus, 394.

Panegyric of all the martyrs, Ijy
Paulinus, 394.

Pantcenus, chapter on, 370; teacher
of Clemens, 371.

Papias, 364, 388; chapter on, 367;
disciple of John, 364.

Papyrus, 372.

Paschal controversy, Irenteus on the,
370; Victor on the, 370.

Paschal cycle of Victorius, 400.

Paschal feast, 400; reckoning of the,
by Hyppolytus, 375.

Passion of our Lord, hymn on, by
Claudianus, 399; Maximus on
the, 393.

Passover, Anatolius on the, 377;
Bacchylus on the, 372; cele-
bration of, 372; Clemens of
Alexandria on the, 371; Diony-
sius of A. on the 376; Hip-
polytus on the, 375; Lucius
on the, 382; Maximus on the,
393; Melito on the, 368; Nova-
tianus on the, 377.

Passover, day of, questions concern-
ing, 367.

Passover Sabbath, Paulinus on the,

397-


Pastor, the bishop, chapter on, 398.

Pastor, work by Hermas, 365.

Patmos, 364.

Patrobas, 365.

Paul the apostle, chapter on, 362.

Paul, 368; author of Hebrews (?),
366; Chrysostom in praise of,
391; epistles of, 375; "gospel
of" means Luke, 364; martyr-
dom of, 365 ; mentions Hermas,

365-

Paul to Seneca, 365.

Paul to the Phihppians, 366.

Paul of Concordia, secretary to Cy-
prian, 373.

Paul of Samosta, Dionysius against,
377; discussion with Malchion,

377- .

Paul the bishop, chapter on, 391.
Paul the monk, life of, by Jerome,

384-
Paul the presbyter, chapter on, 398.
Paula, Jerome to, 374; and Eusto-

chius, Jerome to, 384.
Paulinus of Nola, 390; chapter on,

394-
Paulinus (not Nolanus), chapter on,

397-
Paulonas, chapter on, 386.
Peace of the church, Alexander on

the, 375.
Pedagogy, Clemens of Alexandria

on, 371,
Pelagian doctrine, 395.
Pelagians, 390, 398; decree against

by Innocentius, 393.
Pelagius, chapter on, 394, 398;

Gennadius against, 402.
Penitence, Dionysius of A. on, 376,

377; James of Nisibis on, 386;

Paul the bishop on, 391; Paul-
inus on, 397.
Pentecost, Maximus on, 393.
Peregrinus against heretics, by Vin-

centius, 396.
Perfection, Cassianus on, 396.
Perpetual virginity of Mary, Jerome

on the, 384.
Persecution, Bardesanes on, 370;

Firmianus on, 378; James of

Nisibis on, 386; Tertullian on,

378- , ...
Persian kingdom, James of Nisibis

on the, 386.

Pertinax, reign of mentioned, 365.

Peter, Simon, 367; chapter on, 361 ;
and Mark, 364; apocryphal
Acts, Gospel, Preaching, Revela-
tion and Judgment, 361 ; ap-
pearance of Christ to, 366;
beheaded, 363; bishop of Rome,
366; first bishop of Antioch,
366; friend of Philo, 365;
Gospel of Serapion on, 372;
martyrdom of, 365; ordains
Paul, 362.

Peter and Acacius, epistles against,
by Gelasius, 401.

Peter and Appion, disputation be-
tween (apocryphal), by Clem-
ent of R., 366.

Peter of Edessa, chapter on, 398.

Petronius, father of Petronius, 398.


Petronius of Bologna, chapter on,
398.

Philadelphians, Ignatius to the, 366.

Phileas, chr^jter on, 378.

Philemon, Paul to, 363; Jerome on,
384; Paul to, 384.

Philemon and Dionysius, Dionysius
of A. to, 376.

Philip, 367, 372, 374; slain by
Decius, 374; chapter on, 369.

Philip the emperor, 378.

Philip the presbyter, chapter on, 396.

Philippians, Paul to the, 363; Poly-
carp to the, 367.

Philo, chapter on, 365; on the first
church at Alexandria, 364.

Phlegon, 365.

Phoebadius, chapter on, 381.

Photinians, 388.

Photinus, chapter on, 381.

Phrygians or Cataphrygians, 371;
Rhodo against the, 371.

Pierius, chapter on, 377.

Pilate, 368.

Pinytus of Crete, chapter on, 369;
Dionysius to, 369.

Plato and Philo, 365.

Poitiers, church at, 380.

Polycarp of Smyrna, 366, 372; chap-
ter on, 367; Ignatius to, 366;
teacher of Irenreus, 370.

Polycrates, chapter on, 372.

Pomerius, chapter on, 402.

Ponticus the Proselyte, Translation
ofO.T., 374.

Pontius the deacon, chapter on, 376.

Pontius, Serapion to, 371.

Pontus, churches of, Dionysius to the,

369-
Porphyry, 359; accuses Ammonius,

374; Apollinarius against, 381 ;

Eusebius against, 378; Metho-
dius against, 378.
Postumianus and Gallus, conference

between, by Severus, 390.
Pothinus, 370.
Praise of our Lord and Saviour,

Hippolytus on the, 375.
Prayer, James of Nisibis on, 386;

Novatianus on, 377.
Prayer, duration of, Cassianus on the,

396.
Prayer, nature of, Cassianus on the,

396.
Preaching of Peter, Apocryphal, 361.
Present judgment, Salvianus on the,

397-

Priesthood, John on the, 383; Nova-
tianus on the, 377.

Principalities, Cassianus on, 396.

Principius, 402.

Prisca, 369, 371.

Priscillians, 398.

Priscillianus, 383 ; chapter on, 383.

Priscus Bacchius, 368.

Proba, 389.

Probus, reign of mentioned, 377.

Prolans, epistles to, by Firmianus,

378.

Proculus, Gains agamst, 374.

Prophets, lives of the, Melilo on the,
368 : Jerome on the, 384 ; tr. of
Jerome on, by Sophionius, 384.


JEROME AND GENNADIUS.


5S9


Propositions, of Marcellus, 379.
Prosper, chapter on, 399; Paschal

cycle of, 4CXD.
Protection of God, Cassianus on the,

396.

Proterius, 397.

Protoctetus, Origen to, 374.

Proverbs, Hippolytus on the, 375;
Theophilus on the, 369.

Providence, Philo on, 365.

Prudent and the prodigal sons, Je-
rome on the, 384.

Prudentius, chapter on, 388.

Psalms, Asterius on the, 380; Didy-
mus on the, 381; Eusebius on
the, 380; Eusebius on one
hundred and fifty, 378; Hilary
on the, 380; Hippolytus on
the, 375; Jerome on Ps. 10-
16, 3S4; MeHto on the, 369;
reading of, Cassianus on, 396;
titles of, Athanasius on, 379;
Serapion on, 380 ; Vincentius on
the, 399.

Psalter, by Sophronius, 384; Theo-
dorus on the, 379.

Psaltes, work by Justin M., 368.

Psychomachia by Prudentius, 388.

Publius, Martyrdom of, 367.

Pulcheria, 394.

Punishment according to desert, Sal-
vianus on, 397.

Pyrenees, 381.

Pythonissa, Hippolytus on the, 375;
Methodius on the, 378.

Quadragesimal fast, Maximus on the,
393; Paulinus on the, 397.

Quadratus, chapter on, 367.

Questions of Cyril, 395.

Questions of Nestorius, 395.

Questions of Simplicianus, 392.

Questions of the ancient law, Jerome
on, 384.

Quinquagesimal fast, remission of,
Cassianus on the, 396.

Rebaptism of heretics, 376, 391 ;
Ursinus against, 391.

Recognitions of Clement, translated
by Rufinus, 389.

Red heifer, Trypho on the, 374.

Refutation, a work by Justin M.,
368.

Refutation, by Cyril, 395.

Repentance, Paulinus on, 394.

Repentance of the publican, Victor
of Cartenna on the, 398.

Resurrection, Hippolytus on the,
375; James of Nisibis on the,
386; Maximus on the, 393;
Methodius on the, 378; Pome-
rius on the, 402; Sextus on
the, 378.

FvCticius, chapter on, 378.

Retraction of Leporius, 395.

Revelation of Peter, Apocryphal, 361.

Rhodo, chapter on, 370; against
Montanus, 371.

Rhosenses, church of the, 372.

Riez, church at, 399.

Roman, Italian, and African coun-
cils, Cornelius on, 376.


Romans, Dionysius of A. to the,
376; Dionysius of Corinth to
the, 369; Ignatius to the, 366.

Romans, Paul to the, 363, 365; As-
terius on, 380.

Romatia, church at, 390.

Rome, 361, 365, 366, 370, 380, 381,

386, 39 1 » 393; church at, 366,

373, 374. 376, 377' 379. 380.
381, 386, 393, 397, 400,401.

Rufinus, chapter on, 389.

Rule for monks, by Vigilius, 394.

Rules for investigating the Scrip-
tures, by Tichonius, 389.

Sabbath, Dionysius of A, on the,

376; Novatianus on the, 377.
Sabbatius, chapter on, 390.
Sabellianism, 379.
Sabellians, 388.
Sabellius, Dionysius of A. against,

376.
Sacramentary, by Musseus, 398; by

Paulinus, 394.
Sacraments, juvencus on, 379; Vo-

conius on the, 398; Salvianus

on the, 397.
Sacrifice of the Paschal lamb Ni-

ceas on the, 390.
Sagaris, 372.
Salamina, church at, 382.
Sallust the prefect, Hilary to, 380.
Salonius, 396; Salvianus to, 397.
Salvianus, chapter on, 397.
Samuel, chapter on, 399.
Santra, 359.
Sardinia, 380, 401.
Sardis, 368.
Satisfaction, James of Nisibis on,

386.
Satisfaction in repentance, Cassia-
nus on, 396.
Saturninus, bishop of Aries, 380.
Satyrus, 359.
Saul, name for Paul, 362.
Saul, Hippolytus on, 375.
Saying of the apostles, " For the

good which I would do " etc.,

Cassianus on the, 396.
Scriptures, obscure passages in, Eu-

cherius on, 396.
Second coming of Our Lord, by

Papias, 367.
Secunda, 390.
Selections from Holy Scriptures

bearing on the Christian life,

by Pelagius, 393.
Selucian Council, 380.
Senate, ApoUonius to the, 372.
Seneca, Lucius Annseus, chapter on,

365.

Seneca, epistles of, to Paul, 365.

Senses, Melito on the, 369.

Sentences of Evagrius, translated by
Rufinus, 389.

Sentences of Xystus, translated by
Rufinus, 389.

Sentiments, fifty, of Evagrius, 388.

Sentiments, one hundred, of Evag-
rius, 388.

Septuagint, 362, 374.

Sepulchre of our Lord, Maximus on
the, 393.


Seraphim, Jerome on the, 384.
Serapion of Antioch, chapter on, 371.
Serapion of Thmuis, chapter on,

3.80.
Serapis, overthrow of, Sophronius

on the, 384.
Sergius Paulus, converted by Paul,

362.
Servants of God, why hated by the

world (?), Vitellius on, 386.
Severians or Encratites, 369.
Severianus, chapter on, 390.
Severus, reign of mentioned, 370,

371. 372, 373-
Severus, leader of the Severians,

369-
Severus, Sulpitius, chapter on, 389.
Severus, epistles to, by Firmianus,

378.

Servus Dei, chapter on, 400.

Sextus, chapter on, 373.

Schism, Irenseus on, 370.

Scythopolis, 380.

Sicca, 378.

Sicily, 378.

Side, 379.

Sidonius, chapter on, 401.

Simon the Jew and Theophilus the
Christian, discussion between,
Evagrius (another) on, 394.

Simon Magus, 361.

Simplicianus, chapter on, 392.

Sirmium, church at, 381.

Six days of creation, Appion on the,
373; Basil on the, 382; Candi-
duson, 372; Hippolytus on the,
375; Prudentius on the, 388;
Rhodo on the, 371.

Slaughter of the Saints, Cassianus
on the, 396.

Smyrna, 366, 367, 372.

Smyrneans, Ignatius to the, 366.

Solomon, Proverbs of, Theophilus
on, 369.

Song of Songs, Hilary on the, 380;
Hippolytus on the, 375 ; Metho-
dius on the, 378; Reticius on
the, 378; Triphylius on, 379;
Victorinus on the, 377; Jerome
on the, 384,

Sophronius, chapter on, 384.

Soter, bishop of Rome, 369.

Sotion, the Stoic, 365.

Soul, Eustathius on the, 379; Justin
M. on the, 368.

Soul and body, Melito on the, 369.

Soul and its properties, Pomerius on
the, 402.

Sovereignty of God, Justin M. on
the, 368.

Spiritual conflict, Prudentius on, 388

Stephen the Protomartyr, 362; re
mains of, 393, 394.

Strido, 384.

Stromata, of Clemens of Alexandria,

371.
Susanna, question of, Julianus Africa

nus on the, 375.
Syagrius, chapter on, 396.
Symmachus, 391 ; Prudentius against,

386.
Symmachus, Translation of O T.

374-


590


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


Synagogue, downfall of, Cyril on the,

395-
Synodical letter of Theophilus of C,
372; Polycrates against Victor,

372-
Synodites, 388.
Syrus, Abbot, Pachomius to the, 387.

Tabernacle and the Decalogue, Philo

on the, 365.
Tabernacle, construction of the,

James of Nisibis on the, 386.
Tactius, reign of mentioned, 377.
Tanais, 393.

Tarsus, 362; church at, 382,
Tatian, chapter on, 369; teacher of

Rhodo, 370, 371; work against

the Nations, 371.
Teaching of the Twelve, 361 (note).
Telesphorus, Dionysius of A. to, 377.
Temptation, Dionysius of A., 377.
Tertullian, 388; chapter on, 373;

ascribes Hebrews to Barnabas,

363; in behalf of Montanus,

369; on authorship of Acts of

Paul and Thecla, 363; on the

hope of the faithful, 367 ; on the

Trinity, 377.
Thanks after meat, Maximus on, 393.
That no one is injured except by

himself, by Chrysostom, 391.
Theoctistus of Cxsarea ordains Ori-

gen, 373.
Theodoretus, chapter on, 400.
Theodorus of Antioch, chapter on,

388; colleague of Oresiesis, 3S7.
Theodorus of Ileraclea, cliapter on,

379-
Theodorus or Gregory of Neo Cae-

sarea, chapter on, 376.
Theodorus successor to Pachomius,

chapter on, 387.
Theodosian, reign of mentioned, 381,

382.
Theodosius, reign of mentioned, 359,

381, 3S2, 384,389,394; Pauli-

nus to, 394.
Theodosius the younger, reign of

mentioned, 390, 393, 395, 396.
Theodotian the Ebonite, Translation

of O. T.,374.
Theodotus, chajiter on, 395.
Theodulus, chapter on, 400.
Theonas, 377.

Thcopliany, \)y Kusebius, 378.
Theophilus of Alexandria, chapter

on, 392.
Theo])hilus of Antioch, chapter on,

369-
Theophilus of Cacsarea, chapter on,

372; Paschal cycle of (?),40o.
" hespesius the rhetorician, 382.
Thessalonians, Paul to the, 363.
Theotimus, chapter on, 383.
Things which our senses desire and

we detest, I'hilo on the, 365.
Thmuis, 378; church at, 380.
Thomas, 367.

Thraseas of Eumenia, 372.
Tiberianus, chapter on, 383.
Tiberias, 366.
Tichonius, chapter on, 389.
Timothean doctrine, 399.


Timothean heresy, 386.
Timotheans, 401 ; Samuel against the,

399-
Timotheus of Alexandria, chapter on,

397-
Timotheus the bishop, chapter on,

395-
Timothy, Paul to, 363.

Timothy (?), Dionysius to, 377.

Titus, Bishop of Bostra, chapter on,

381.
Titus (disciple), Paul to, 363; Jerome

on Epistle to, 384.
Titus, the Emperor, 366; Siege of,

362.
Tomi, 383.

Topics of Eusebius, 378.
Trajan, reign of mentioned, 365, 367;

persecution of, 366.
Trajanapolis, 379.
Trallians, Ignatius to the, 366.
Tranquillus, Sectonius, 359.
Transgression, order of, Dionysius of

A. on the, 377.
Treatises of Gelasius.
Treatises of Peter of Edessa, 398.
Treatises of Irenceus, 370.
Treves, 383.

Trial, by Acilius Severus, 382.
Trinity, Augustine on the, 392;

Isaac on the, 391 ; Noviatianus

on the, 377; Pelagius on belief

in the, 393.
Triphylius, chapter on, 379.
Trocheum, by Prudentius, 388-
Truth, Apollinaris on, 369; Melito

on, 369.
Trypho, 368; chapter on, 374.
Turin, church at, 393.
Turris Stratonis or Caesarea, 372,
Twelve prophets, Origen on the, 377.
Tyre, 374; church at, 378.

Ursacius, Athanasius against, 379;

Hilary against, 380.
Ursinus, chapter on, 391.

Valens, reign of mentioned, 379, 380,
381, 382.

Valens and Ursacius, Hilary against,
380; Athanasius against, 379.

Valentinianus I., reign of mentioned,
380, 381, 382; expels Photinus,
381; Photinus to, 381.

Valentinianus II., 389.

Valentinianus III., reign of men-
tioned, 393, 394, 395, 396, 397,

399-
Valentinus, 367, 390, 391; teacher
and opponent of Bardesanes,

370-
Valerianus, 396; reign of mentioned,

376, 379-
Vandals, 399, 401.
Varro, 359; Jerome against, 374.
Venerius, 398.

Ventriloquism, Eustathius on, 379.
Veranius, 396.
Vercelli, church at, 380.
Verus, Marcus Aurelius Antoninus,

reign of mentioned, 369, 370 ;

Melito to, 368; Justin to, 368.

See, also, Aurelit(s Antoninus.


Vespasian, 366,

Vicennalia of ("onstantine, 400.

Vices and virtues, Pomerius on, 402.

Victim J and promises or curses, Philo
on, 365.

Victor of Cartenna, chapter on, 398.

Victor of Rome, 373; chapter on,
370; Irenceus to, 370; Poly-
crates to, 372.

Victorinus the African, chapter on,
381.

Victorinus of Marseilles, chapter on,

395-
Victorinus of Pettau, chapter on, 377;

follows Papias, 367.
Victorius, chapter on, 400.
Victory over tyrants, Paulinus on,

394-

Vienne, church at, 397, 399.

Vigilantius, chapter on, 392.

Vigilius, chapter on, 392.

Vigilius the deacon, chapter on, 394.

Vincentius the Gaul, chapter on, 396.

Vincentius the presbyter, chapter on,
398.

Virginity, Basil on, 379; Athanasius
o"> 379; excellence of, Salvia-
nus on the, 397; Fastidius on,
395 ; Heliodorus on, 391 ; James
of Nisibis on, 386; maintaining
of, by Jerome, 3S4; Sophronius
on, 384.

Virginity and contempt for the world,
Paul the presbyter on, 398.

Virtues, the three, Philo on, 365.

ViteUius, chapter on, 386.

Vocations to the service of God,
Cassianus on, 396.

Voconius, chapter on, 398.

Volusianus, reign of mentioned, 374,
376.

Warfare of the flesh against the
spirit and the spirit against the
flesh, Cassianus on the, 396.

What rich man is saved ?, by Clemens
of Alexandria, 371.

Whether to define or not to define,
Cassianus on, 396.

Why in Scripture the names of many
persons are changed, Philo on,

365-

Words of our Lord, Papias' exposi-
tion of the, 367,

Work of God or the creation of
man, Firmianus on the, 378.

Worth of the soul, James of Nisibis
on the, 386.

Wrath of God, Firmianus on the,
378-

Xystus, 395; Dionysius of A. to,
376.

Zeal, Novatianus on, 377.
Zebedee, 364.
Zebennus, Bishop, 376.
Zechariah, Didymus on, 381; Hip-

polytus on, 375.
Zeno, reign of mentioned, 401 .
Zephaniah, Jerome on, 384.
Zephyrinus, 373, 374.
Zosimus, Pope, 393.


LIFH AND WORKS OF RUFINUS.


INDEX OF SUBJECTS.


.^sculapius, 458.
Alaric, 409, 410.
Albina, 407.
Alexandria, 430, 502.
Ambrose, 484.

Defamed by Jerome, 470,
480.
Anastasius, 407 n., 409, 487, 513.

Letter to John of Jeru-
salem, 432,509,529.

.537-
Opinions on Origen,

433-

Rufinus' Apology to,
410, 430, 501.

Rufinus on, 433.
Anthropomorphism, 443, 531,
Apocrypha, 558.
ApoUinarius, 426.
Apostles' Creed, 541-63.
Apronianus, 407, 480, 564, 566.
Aquila, 467, 517.
Aquileia, 405, 409, 431, 432, 502.
— —— Creed of, 437, 541.
Ariminum, Council of, 410, 512.
Aristotle, 452.
Arius, 558.
Aterbius, 407, 435.
Augustin, 409.

Bacurius, 406.

Barabbas, or Baranina, Jerome's

Jewish teacher, 466, 476, 489.
Barcochebas, 535.
Basil, 412.

Belief, Nature of, 543, 557.
Bibliography of Rufinus' Works,

413-
Body, The, a prison, 456.
Bonosus, 405.
Bribing of Rufinus' Secretary, 520.

Canon of Scripture, 557-8.

Cerealis, 418.

Christ, Meaning of, 545; Birth of,
54^8.

Chromatins, 407, 409, 411, 430, 514.

Chronicle of Jerome, 407.

Chrysogonus, 500.

Church, opposed to heretical assem-
blies, 558.

Clement of Alexandria, 423, 510.

Clement of Rome, 409, 412, 417,
422-3.

Recognitions of, 409, 412,

422, 510, 563.

Commentator, Duty of, 490, 567-8.

Concordia, 405, 406.

Controversy may be friendly, 520,

523-4, 539-40-


Creation, 546.

Creed, The, 556.

Cross, The, a triumph, 549.

Cyprian, 425, 512.

Cyril, 406.

Damasus, 426.

Daniel, Jerome's views of, 516-7.

Demetrias, 413.

Devil, Question of salvability of,

431, 442, 454, 503.
Snared by Christ's death,

550.
Didymus, 458, 466, 471, 486, 510,

03-

Dionysius, 423, 510.
Donatus, 568.

Ebion, 558.

Ecclesiastical History by Rufinus,

410, 465.
Edena, 406.
Epiphanius, 406, 407, 426 n., 434,

442, 514, 522, 534, 535.
Eugenia, 413.
Eusebius of Aquileia, 436.
Eusebius of Cresarea, 409, 411, 412,

488, 565.
Eusebius of Cremona, 407, 444, 445,

487, 515. 521,532.
Eustochium, Jerome's letter to, 462,

465-
Evagrius Ponticus, 412.

Fabiola, 407.
Fall of men, 448.

the world, 448.

Fontanini on Life and Works of

Rufinus, 412.
Forgiveness, ridiculed by Pagans,

559-
Frumentius, 406.

Gaudenlius, 409.
Gelasius, 410.
Gennadius, 410, 412, 413.
God, as Father, 543-4; Unity of,
544; Invisible and Impassible,

545-
Greek, Knowledge of, 417, 522, 532,

537-
Gregory Nazianzen, 412, 458.

Hebrew Scriptures quoted by Christ,

517-
Heraclius, 566-7.
Hexapla of Origen, 477.
Hilary, 405,425,475, 512.
Homilies of Origen, 411, 412.
Homoousion, 422.


Huillus, 490.
Hylas, 405.

Incarnation, its consequences, 555.

James, the Lord's brother, 564.
Jerome, 405, 406.

Anti-Ciceronian Dream, 462,

498.
Apology against Rufinus,

408, 410, 411,412, 4S2-

541.
Commentary on Ephesians,

446-458, 493-8-
Defamation of Christians,

462-498.
Departure from Rome for

the East, 530.
Friendly letter to Rufinus,

489.
Prefaces to the Vulgate, 515.
Reading profane literature,,

464-5, 489, 498.
Relations with Origen, 434,

445. 450, 467-470, 533-
Story of, 426, 513.

Supposed letter to African

Bishops, 515, 532.

Translation of Old Test.,

475-
Translator of Origen, 427,

428, 525, 536.
Jesus, Meaning of, 545.
John of Jerusalem, 406, 407, 421,

431. 432-
Jovinian, 464, 47S.
fovinus, 436.
Josephus, 413.
Judas, Prophecies of, 551,

Lactantius, 431.
Laurentius, 542.
Letters, composition and carriage of,

515, 520, 524, 532, 537.
Lightfoot on Eusebius, 41 1.
Logical puzzles, 498-9.

Macarius, 407, 411, 420, 421, 427,

434, 439. 444-
Manich;-eus, 558.
Marcella, 409, 430, 444.
Marcion, 424, 425, 485, 558.
Melanin, 405, 406, 407, 471.
Middle Ages, 412.
Migne's Patrologia, 413,
Milan, Rufinus at, 444.
Minerva's Birth, 547.
Monks, Rufinus' History of, 411,
Morbus rej^ius, 466,


592


RUFINUS.


Origen, 405, 407, 408, 418, 433, 500.
Condemned by the Emperurs,

433- .
Corruption of his works,

410, 421, 510.
His opinions summarized,

508.
Letter to his friends, 423.
Number of his works, 427,

514.
Praised by Jerome, 460-9.
Story of, 468.
Translated by Jerome, 427,

428.
Translated by Rutinus, 405,

409, 411, 412, 427, 429,

434-

Palladius, 406, 409, 411.
Pammachius, 407, 430, 434, 476,

480, 485.
Pamphilus, 407, 410, 411, 420, 421,

434, 439, 473. 4^7, 509, SH-

525-
Patriarchs, Benedictions on, 410,

417-420.
Paula, 465.
Paul, Bishop, 527-28.
Paulinus of Nola, 407, 409, 410, 417.
Paulinian, 493, 532.
Paulinus of Antioch, 426 n.
ilEfu 'A/J,V'^'', Translated by Rufinus,

407, 41 1, 420, 427, 429, 441, 474,

484, 489, 506, 509, 524, 525-6,

^536, 537.
nepl 'A/3;i'(Jr, translated by Jerome,

486.
Perjury said to be sanctioned l)y

Origenism, 460, 492.


Peroration on Ep. to Romans, 411.

Petronius, 409, 411.

Phoenix, The, 547.

Pinetum, 407, 411, 419, 421, 427.

Pinianus, 409, 568.

Porphyry, 452, 464, 467, 517.

Pre-Arian opinions, 511.

Prefaces by Rulinus, 411, 563-8.

Proba, 413.

Proverbs, quotations from, 540-1.

Publication of Rufinus' Works, 521-

2, 529, 536.
Publicola, 407, 409.
Pythagoras, 537-9.

Reconciliation of Jerome and Ru-
finus, 434, 483-4, 535-
Restoration, Universal, 452-458, 496.
Resurrection of the body, 421, 431,

437-439, 440, 442, 447. 503,
527, 559-62.

of Christ, 554.
Rufinus, Birth and personal history,
405-10, 500, 502, 532.
Confession of his faith, 421,

430, 436. 502.

Connexion with the Her-
mits, 466.

Controversy with Jerome,
408, 410, 420, 434.

His letters, 413.

His parents, 502.

His works described, 410-

413-

Threatens to destroy Je-
rome, 519, 539.

Translated parts of the
LXX, 536.
Rufinus the Syrian, 532.


Sabellius, 423.

Schoenemann, 413.

Septuagint, Jerome's relation to, 475,

5 '7, 532.
Story of, 475.
Seraphim, Vision of, 472, 48 1, 545.
Simplicianus, 407.
Siricius, 407, 529.
Socrates, 405.
Souls, origin of, 431, 450, 503-506,

533-
Fall of, 449, 494.
Sozomen, 405.

Symbol um, used for Creed, 542.
Symmachus, 493, 517,

Tertullian, 425, 431, 534.
Theodotion, 517.

Theophilus, 406, 407, 487, 513, 527.
Tomes of Origen, 428.
Translation, Method of, 408, 428,
486, 506, 534.

Ursacius, 568.
Urseius, 407.

Valentinus, 443, 512, 558.
Valerian of Aquileia, 436.
Vallarsi, 413.
Venerius, 409,433, 514.
Victorinus, 475, 484.
Vigilantius, 407, 445, 446, 528.
Vincentius, 532.
Vision and knowledge, 443.

Water and blood, Meaning of, 552.

Xenium, 552.

Xystus, Sentences of, 412, 564.


LIFE AND WORKS OF RUFINUS.


INDEX OF TEXTS.


PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

PAGE

Gen. i. 27 . • .

• 447

Ps. Ixxxviii. 4, 5 .

554

Isa. xxvii. 1 1 .

• 555

Matt, Ibid., 20 . ,

461

iii. I , . .

• 495

ixxxix. 2 . .

555

xxix. I . . .

• 490

X, 25 . , . .

435

Ibid., 17, 18

• 552

xc

490

xxxii. 5

. 519

Ibid., 28 . ,

556

viii. 21 . .

• 455

Ibid., I, 2 . . .

449

xlvi. 24

• 490

xi. 19. . . .

435

xlix. 9

• 553

xciii. 2 . . . .

555

xlvii. 14, 15 .

• 504

Ibid., 27 . 43

6,443

Ibid., 1 1 .

. 418

civ. 52 . , .

535

1. 6 . . .

• 551

xii. 37 , , .

420

Deut. iv. 24

• 504

ex. I . . . .

555

Iii. 15 . .

• 551

xiii, 25 . , .

5'5

xvii. 6

• 5'5

cxii. 5 . . .

556

liii. I , .

• 551

//';V., 33 . ,

546

xxviii. 66

• 552

cxix. 46 . . 0

471

Ibid., 7, 8 .

506,552

//'/(/., 43 . .

562

xxxii. 6 .

• 553

Ibid., 67 . .44

9,494

Ibid., 9 . .

• 553

Ibid., 47 . .

546

Ibid., 8 .

• 549

//;/./., 73 . . .

455

Ivii. I . .

• 553

xiv. 16 . . .

565

Ibid., 32

• 553

cxx. 3, 4 . .

504

Ibid., 4 .

• 552

Ibid., 31 . .

502

Ibid., 35

• 500

Ibid., 5 . 44

8,494

Ibid., 21 .

• • 553

XV, 19 . ,

504

Job xii. 24 . .

• 552

cxli. 3, 4 . .

500

Iviii. II

• 517

xvii. 5 , ,

544

xiv. 7-10; 14

. 561

cxliii. 2 . . .

494

Ixi. I . .

• 545

xviii, 7 . ,

519

XXV. 5 , .

. 455

Prov. iii. 29, 30 .

540

Ixiii. 1-3 .

■ • 553

xxii. 29, 30 . 4(,

8,560

xxvi. 26, 27

• 561

iv. 24

540

Ixiv. 4 . .

. . 5'6

//;/V/., xxii. 43-4

5.556

xxxi. 26, 28

• 493

vi. iS . . .

540

Ixv. 2 . .

• • 549

xxiii. 37 . .

497

xli. I . .

• 514

X. 14, 18

540

Jer. i. 11, 13 .

• . 470

xxiv. 15 . ,

556

Ibid., 9-12

• 504

xii. 13, 15, 16

iv. 22 . .

. . 511

Ibid., 23, 24

Ps. iii. 5 . . .

• 554

22 . . .

540

xi. 19 . .

• • 552

27 . , .

55/

xii. 5 . .

• 555

xiii. 3, 16

540

xii. 7, S .

• • 552

XXV. 32 . .

• 557

XV. 5 . .

• 500

xiv. 3 . . .

519

XV. 10 . .

• 515

xxvi. 49 ,

• 551

xvi. 10 . .

• 554

Ibid., 6, 14, 16

xviii. 4 . .

• • 554

//W.,63. ,

552

xviii. 9 . .

. 461

29,31- •

540

Ii. 26 . .

• . 504

Ibid., 64 ,

556

Ibid., 10 .

■ • 554

XV. 2, 18 . .

540

Lam. iii. 53

• • 553

xxvii. 3-5 ,

• 55«

Ibid., II .

. 461

xvi, 5, 17, 18

iv. 20

• • 551

Ibid., 52, 53

• 554

xix. 2 . .

. 461

30 . . .

540

Ezek. xiii. 4

• . 523

xxviii. 19 .

559

Ibid., 12, 13

• 504

xviii. 2 . .

519

xxix. 4, 5

• • 550

Mark ix. 42 . .

519

xxii. 15 . .

• 553

Ibid., 4 . .51

6,5^7

XXX. 9

■ • 549

xii. 26, 27 .

560

Ibid., 18 .

• • 553

Ibid., 6, 7 .

540

xxxvii. 12

. . 561

XV. 37 . .

553

Ibid., 27 .

• • 455

xix. I . . .

540

xliv. 2

• • 547

Luke 1. 31, 34, 35

547

xxiv. 3 . .

• • 500

XX. 3, 13, 17

540

Dan. vii. 13, 14

. . 556

//'/(/., 44

472

Ibid.,^ . .

• • 555

xxi. 6 . . .

540

ix. 23 . .

420, 515

iv. 18 . .

5^5

xxvi. 5 . .

• 558

xxiii. 9 . .

540

X. II . .

420, 509

VI. 44 .

461

xxvii. 3, 4 .

. . 485

XXV, 18 . .

541

xii. 2 .

560, 562

//'/r/.,45 .51

5.519

XXX. 3 . .

• 554

xxvi. 2, 4, 5, 19

Ibid., 1 0 .

. . 543

vii. 20 . .

553

Ibid., 9 . .

• 553

21, 24, 25.

541

IIos. vi. 2 . .

• . 555

X. 19 . . .

549

xxxi, 5 . .

• 553

xxvii. 3, 4, 14

54t

X. 6 . .

• ■ 552

xu. 49 . .

504

XXXV. 15

• 551

xxviii. 25, 26

541

xi. I . .

. . 516

xvi, 8 , .

495

xxxviii. 13, 14

500, 552

xxix. II.

541

Amos viii. 9

• • 553

xvii. 5, 6

502

xxxix. I, 2 .

• 500

XXX. 14 . .

541

Micah vii. 5

• 5"

xxii. 48 . .

551

xli. 9 . .

• 551

Eccles. X. 4 . , ,

504

Zech. iii. 2 . .

. 512

Ibid., 69 .

556

xlii. 9, 10 .

• 504

The Song of Solomon

vi. 12

• • 457

xxiii. 6, 7, 12

xlv. 10 . .

• 465

i. 4 . . . . 42

7.467

xi. 12, I J

■ • 550

21 . . .

552

xlviii. 5 . .

• 555

iii. 1,4 . . .

555

xii. 10

. S16

John i. 16 . . .

457

1.18. . .

• 508

Ibid., ii. . . .

552

xiv. 6, 7 .

• 553

Ibid., 18 . .

443

Ibid., 20 .

• 500

v. I

• 553

Wisdom i. 4, 5

. 492

Ibid., 30 . .

457

Iv. 21 . .

• 551

vi. 9 . . . .

558

Baruch iii. 35-J7

• 545

ii. 19 . , .

531

Ivii. 4 . .

• 435

Isa. iii. 9, 14 . .

551

Matt, i. 21 . .

• 547

V. 43 • • •

556

Iviii. 3-8, 10, 1

I . 541

V. I, 4, 7 . .

552

ii> 15. 23

. 516

vi. 9 . . ,

565

Ixiv, 8 . .

• 485

Ibid., 20 . .

528

iii. 13 .

• 556

vii. 12 . . .

435

Ixviii. 18 .

• 555

vi

472

v. 8 . .

• 443

Ibid., 24 . . .

480

Ibid., 23 .

• 483

vii. 9 , . .

• 543

Ihid., II, I.

^ • 435

//>/</., 38 .51

6,517

Ixix. 2, 21 .

• 553

Ibid., 14 . .

547

Ibid., 1 4,

y:>^

.552

IxxL 10 . .

• 554

X. 22, 23 . .

542

34 . .

, 461

viii. 9 . , . ,

459

Ixxiv. 14 . .

• 550

xi. I ...

516

vii. 1,2.

• 464

Ibid., II? , .

447

Ixxvii. 7

. 568

XXV. 6 . . .

551

Ibid., 1 5

. 461

X. 30 . . , .

544

Ixxx. 13

• 515

xxvi. 19 . ,

560

Ibid., 17

• 515

xi, 16 , , , .

471

VOL. III.

0

a

594


RUFINUS.


Jahn xii. 3c .
^iii 1/ .
xiv. 6 .
Ji'id , o
XV. ij .
x\i. 2i
xvii. C .
//'/'</., 21
xviii. 23
//>id., 40
xix. 34
//'/v., 37
XX. 13
.Vets X. 38 .
xix. 9 .
xxvi. 24
Koin. i. 8 .

ii. I .

//>it/., 15, 16

y/'/'c/., 17-24

IlnJ.,2V .

vi. 9 . . .

vii. 14 . .

Jbid., 24 .
494, 496

viii. 9

J bid., 22

ix. 21

]bid , 28
x. 10 .
xii. 19,
xiv. 4
/^/c/., 23
XV. 21


449


20


I'AOli

554
504

464

544
480

544
506

457
5«9
466

552
5'6
555
545
4«3
491

454
446

557
464

471

56>

54J

.455.

457
456

450
542

4.''.o

5'9

439

4^^3

551


1 Cor. i. 18, 23, 24 . 550

ii. 4 . . . . 491

Ibid., 6 . . . 461

//'/(/, 9 . . . 516

J bid., 10 . . 436
vi. 9 . .499,512

//'/(/., 10 . . 423

viii. 2 ... 457

Ibid., 6 . . . 546

ix. 16 . . . 426

xi. 3 . . . . 506

Ibid., 16 . . 427

xii. 13 , . . 425

Jbid^, 2^ . . 516

xiii. 12 . . . 457

xiv. 32 ... 423
XV. 13, 14; 20-

24 .... 561

Ibid, 20, 23 . 437

/bid., 25 . . 455

Jbid., 32 . . 502

/bid., 36-38 . 560

/bid., 42-44 . 437

/bid., 44 . . 562
/bid, c^o .438,440
/bid., 51, 52,

53 • • • • 561

2 Cur. V. 10 . . . 557

xi. 2 . . . . 466

/bid., 6 . . 470

( '.a\. ii. 2 .... 520

iii. 27, 28 . . . 498

iv. 23 . . . . 554

V. 10 ... . 445


Cal. /bid., 15
vi. I

/bid., 16
//'/(/., 17

Kph. i. 4

/bid., 12
/bid., 17
/bid., 18
/bid., 19, 20
/bid., 20, 21
/bid., 22
ii. 3 .
/bid., 6
/bid., 7
/bid., 17
iii. I .
/bid., 18
iv. 3 .
/bid., 1 1
/bid., 13
/bid., 16
/bid., 25
V. 28, 29
vi. 20 .

Phil. i. 18 .
/bi'd., 23
ii. 3 .
/bid., 5
/bid, 6, 7
//^/^., 8 .
/bid., 10, 1 1

455. 549
iii. 21
562


TAGE

• 499

. 477
421,440

• 502

• 494

• 451

• 455
. 54^

• 556
454. 495
454. 455

• 455
554. 562
453. 495

• 455
496, 502

. 548

• 457
. 516

• 457
457. 496
461, 492

447. 497

• 457

• 453
449. 494

. 471

• 549

• 508
549. 550

• 452,
555
437. 455.


PAGE


Col. i. 15 . . ,

443

//'/,/., 16 . .

545

/bid., 18 .

437

/bid., 20 . .

455

ii. 14, 15 .

549

iii. 21 . . .

457

I Thess. V. 21, 22

421

,440

iv. 13-17,

561

,562

2 Thess. ii. 1-3 ,

424

/bid., 3, 4

8.' 9 556

//'/(/., 1 1 ,

2

557

I Tim. i.4 . .

476

/bid.,iy

546

/bid., 20

504

iv. 13 .

476

vi. 8 . .

500

2 Tim. iii. 16 .

557

iv. 7, 17

502

rhilem. 23 . .

457

Ileb. i. 2 . .

545

ii. 10 . .

554

iv. 8 . .

545

xi. ID . .

543

/bid., 39, 40

456

xii. 29

504

xiii. 20 .

555

James iii. 2 . .

444

. 522

I Pet. iii. 10-20

554

/bid., 22

556

Jude 8 . . .

512

9 . . .

5"

Rev. i. 5 . .

437

i>:. 7, 17 .

535

printc^ b'e parhcr an^ Co., Crown 12ar^, ©jforO,


WELLESLEY COLLEGE LIBRARY


3 5002 03044 4272


BR 60 . S42 1890 3


A Select library of Nicene
and poet -Nicene fathers of


J^iL
